Lifestyle improvement is essential for preventing and managing many of the current most common medical conditions. For example, lifestyle modification alone is considered appropriate as initial management of diabetes in motivated patients with an A1c below 7%.

Behavior modification interventions for lifestyle improvement must be personalized and consider an individual’s characteristics and circumstances. Patients with different social, economic, and physical environments should not be expected to benefit from the same approach, even when they share a similar risk factor.

Healthcare teams should engage in a patient-centered discussion that identifies potential barriers (such as cost, time constraints, or limited access to resources) and facilitators (e.g., enjoyment and social support) to develop a realistic and sustainable plan for lifestyle improvement.

Patient-centered discussions can be enhanced through strategies such as those included in motivational interviewing (MI), which has shown to be an effective counseling strategy for resolving ambivalence and eliciting behavior change through identifying and discussing patient values and goals.

Studies in the clinical setting have shown MI to be effective in improving cardiovascular health, diet quality, weight loss, and glycemic control. For successful motivational interviewing, healthcare teams must ask non-judgmental, respectful, and compassionate questions to help the patient identify motives, barriers, and strategies for overcoming obstacles for change. Essential components of motivational interviewing include asking open-ended questions and providing affirmations, reflections, and summaries (OARS).