There are no laboratory tests or diagnostic procedures to definitively diagnose placental abruption. However, some studies may be conducted in the effort to eliminate other conditions as well as to provide baseline data.

An ultrasound examination is useful in determining the placental location and eliminating the diagnosis of placenta previa. However, the sensitivity of ultrasound in visualizing placental abruption is low. During the acute phase of placental abruption, the hemorrhage is isoechoic or similar to the surrounding placental tissue. Therefore, visualization and differentiation of the concealed hemorrhage associated with placental abruption from the surrounding placental tissue are difficult.

A biophysical profile may be used in the management of patients with marginal placental abruption who are being conservatively treated. A score of 6 or below is an indicator of compromised fetal status.

Blood work, including a CBC, clotting studies (fibrinogen and PT/a-PTT), and BUN provide baseline parameters to evaluate changes in the patient’s status. A type and Rh have been obtained if a blood transfusion is necessary.

A Kleihauer-Betke test, which detects fetal blood cells in maternal circulation may be ordered. A Kleihauer-Betke test does not diagnose the presence of placental abruption but quantifies the presence of fetal blood into the maternal circulation. This knowledge is important in women who are Rh-negative, because the mixing of fetal blood in the maternal circulation may lead to isoimmunization. Therefore, if a significant fetal-maternal bleed is present, the Kleihauer-Betke test results will help to determine the needed dose of Rh (D) immune globulin to prevent isoimmunization.