**Effectiveness**

Research has shown that group therapy is an effective method to treat a myriad of psychiatric and behavioral disorders. Patients often report a reduction in symptoms after receiving group therapy treatment. Additionally, group therapy is found to affect patients positively through Yalom Therapeutic Factors. These factors do reduce symptoms of diagnoses while also providing patients with beneficial skills to learn, develop, and live with their symptoms. As long as patients are subject to proper screening before group therapy sessions, they will receive benefits.

**Concurrent Treatment**

Although group therapy is an effective method of treatment in itself, providers may also choose to incorporate other treatment methods to treat patients further.

- Conjoint therapy: When performed conjointly, the provider treating the patient in the group differs from the provider treating the patient individually. Doing so provides patients with different therapeutic settings, allowing them to learn as an individual and apply those teachings in a group setting.

- Combined therapy, on the other hand, occurs when the provider treating in the group setting also treats the patient individually. This method of concurrent treatment allows providers to thoroughly assess patients and provide individual coaching, which is applicable in the group setting. When placing a patient into a group, special care should be used to ensure the patient gets put into a group homogenous for symptoms and diagnosis.

**Cost-efficiency**

Group therapy provides a cost-efficient method of treatment, as fewer trained professionals are required to provide treatment to a larger number of patients. A reduction in cost can increase the accessibility of therapy, as costs are often covered by insurance plans.

**Flexibility**

Treatment in a group setting allows providers to be more flexible with their sessions. Doing so can increase attendance to therapy sessions since providers can schedule sessions during after work and after school hours. Additionally, the inclusion of multiple sessions throughout the day allows providers to treat a larger volume of patients throughout the day, further reducing wait times in high-volume areas.

**Training Opportunities**

The group format can be used as an avenue to train medical students, residents, and other healthcare professionals by allowing them to serve as co-therapists. The provider can oversee the less experienced professionals as they work with patients, effectively creating on-the-job coaching; this can be especially useful in low resource areas where access to trained professionals is limited.