The muscles that make direct contact with TMJ are four: masseter, temporal, and two pterygoids.

- The masseter muscle with its perimysium has direct contact with the articular disc on the front edge. It originates from the zygomatic arch with several muscular layers and inserts on the branch of the mandible (lateral surface) and the coronoid process (lateral surface).

- Its primary task is to elevate the jaw. The innervation of the muscle is through the masseteric branch of the trigeminal cranial nerve). The temporalis muscle originates from the temporal fossa of the skull and the medial face of the zygomatic process; it inserts on the coronoid mandibular process. Like the previous muscle, the temporalis sometimes makes contact with the articular disc anteriorly. It elevates the mandible. It receives innervation by the branches of the trigeminal, third branch (deep temporal nerves).

- The lateral or external pterygoid muscle consists of an upper head and a lower head. The upper bundle originates from the extracranial face of the large sphenoid wing to be inserted anteromedially to the joint capsule and/or the anteromedial face of the condyle neck in the upper portion of the pterygoid fovea. It contacts the disc at the anteromedial aspect. The inferior head originates from the lateral aspect of the lateral lamina of the pterygoid process of the sphenoid and inserts itself on the pterygoid fovea. Bilateral activation of the external pterygoid, protrudes the mandible, while, if activated unilaterally, causes contralateral lateral deviation of the mandibular bone. The external pterygoid muscle pulls the condyle forward in the opening phase of the mouth; anteromedially it pulls the disc in the closing phase. The two upper and lower bundles are active in the early stages of opening and in the first stages of closing the mouth. The internal or medial pterygoid muscle originates from the pterygoid fossa, from the pyramidal process of the palatine, and from the maxillary tuberosity, to terminate on the medial face of the angle and of the mandibular branch. Like the external pterygoid, the internal pterygoid is innervated by the mandibular branch of the trigeminal nerve. The internal pterygoid muscle elevates and protrudes the mandible.