Complications of HTN impact the vasculature, heart, brain, kidneys, and eyes. Specific complications include atherosclerotic vascular disease, CAD, cerebrovascular disease, renal disease including ESRD, and retinal hemorrhages.

**Congestive Heart Failure**

HTN is the most common cause of heart failure.

**Stroke**

Risk factors for perioperative stroke are the same as those for non-operative stroke, that is, HTN, diabetes, older age, kidney disease, coronary artery disease, CHF, and AFIB. In noncardiac surgery, the reported incidence of overt stroke is 0.7%.

A recent study reported covert stroke in 10% of patients undergoing non-surgery and that covert stroke was associated with cognitive decline, delirium, and subsequent stroke or transient ischemic attack within one year.

Many elderly patients are receiving anticoagulants and/or platelet inhibitors, which are held pre-operatively to minimize the risk of bleeding. Both thrombosis and bleeding are causes of stroke, but there are no specific guidelines when to withhold and when to re-institute these agents in order to minimize the risk of stroke. At present, these decisions should be at the recommendation of the physician who prescribed these agents, as the decision to withhold might impact the occurrence of complications they are intended to prevent. Depending on the indication for the anticoagulant and/or antiplatelet agent, these physicians might include a cardiologist, neurologist, cardiac surgeon, vascular surgeon, or primary care provider.

**Acute Kidney Injury**

The literature contains numerous definitions of kidney injury. In 2004, the RIFLE classification was proposed to distinguish between different levels of kidney injury and to facilitate comparison of studies of AKI.

Acute kidney injury (AKI) and renal replacement therapy are serious complications after surgery. Both increase morbidity and mortality. Shortened lifespan has been documented after AKI with permanently increased sCr. Furthermore, shortened lifespan has also been reported in patients with AKI whose serum creatinine returns to baseline.