The ability of the cornea to remain in a dehydrated state determines its transparency. The epithelium and endothelium act as a barrier to water and electrolytes due to their semipermeable membrane property. The NaKATPase pump located in the lateral cell membrane of the endothelium prevents corneal hydration. The endothelial cells pump the fluid out of the corneal stroma and help in maintaining transparency.

Any damage to endothelial cells will hamper corneal transparency when aqueous entering the cornea cannot be pumped out due to fewer viable endothelial cells. Approximately 700 cells/ mm square are required to maintain transparency. The endothelium lacks mitotic activity. At birth, the endothelial cell count is 7500 cells/mm^2, and it reduces to 2500 to 2700 cells/mm^2 by adulthood. The average cell loss per year is 0.5% after the age of 20. Surgically induced trauma, persistent inflammation, hereditary conditions like Fuch’s, and congenital hereditary endothelial dystrophy can promote this cell loss.

When the cell density reaches around 300-500 cells/ mm^2, it is called critically low cell density, resulting in the development of PBK. It results in increased polymegathism (irregular small and large cells) and pleomorphism (abnormal cell shape, increase non-hexagonality). There is abnormal production of the Descemet membrane; the pump fails and manifests as stromal edema.

The corneal anterior stromal has a high ratio of dermatan to keratan sulfate, making the posterior stroma swell more whenever there is an endothelial failure. This edema can change in response to a change in intraocular pressure (IOP). Imbibition pressure = IOP - swelling pressure. The aqueous can migrate from stroma to epithelium resulting in epithelial edema, blisters, and bullae formation. Early morning edema is seen due to lack of evaporation and hypertonic environment overnight.