C. trachomatis can lead to many urogenital infections, including cervicitis, pelvic inflammatory disease, urethritis, epididymitis, prostatitis, and lymphogranuloma venereum. Extragenital infections caused by C. trachomatis include conjunctivitis, perihepatitis, pharyngitis, reactive arthritis, and proctitis.

More frequently, patients remain asymptomatic reservoirs of the disease. In the minority of patients who become symptomatic, clinical signs depend on the location of the infection. Below are the common signs and symptoms associated with C. trachomatis urogenital infections.

- **Cervicitis:**Approximately 70% of women will be asymptomatic or have mild symptoms such as vaginal discharge, bleeding, abdominal pain, and dysuria.

- **Pelvic Inflammatory Disease:**This occurs whenC. trachomatis ascends to the upper reproductive tract. Most commonly, these patients will have abdominal or pelvic pain with or without signs and symptoms of cervicitis. Other symptoms include nausea, vomiting, fevers, chills, low back pain, pain with intercourse, dysuria, or postcoital bleeding.

- **Urethritis:**It is most commonly seen in men. There are subtle clinical differences between gonococcal urethritis and chlamydial urethritis, but making a reliable distinction without testing is not possible. It presents with dysuria and urethral discharge, which is typically white, gray, or sometimes clear, and may only be evident after penile "stripping" or during morning hours. Women with urethritis may complain of frequency or dysuria and may mistake their symptoms for a urinary tract infection. Urinalysis will reveal pyuria, but neither bacterial culture nor gram stain will reveal organisms.

- **Perihepatitis:**Also called Fitz-Hugh-Curtis syndrome, this syndrome occurs when chlamydia infection leads to inflammation of the liver capsule and the peritoneal surfaces nearby. This syndrome is most commonly seen in patients who have a pelvic inflammatory disease, and it is associated with right upper quadrant or pleuritic pain. Unlike other conditions that may affect the liver or cause right upper quadrant pain, abnormalities in liver enzymes are not typically found.

- **Epididymitis:**Typically, men will present with unilateral testicular pain and tenderness, possible hydrocele, palpable swelling of the epididymis, and fever.

- **Proctitis:**Rectal infection with chlamydia can be asymptomatic if caused by genital serovars D through K. However, if LGV serovars L1-L3 are the cause of proctitis, patients may complain of rectal pain, discharge, and bleeding in the setting of receptive anal intercourse. Patients may also present with a fever or malaise. This is seen almost exclusively in males who have sex with males; however, anal intercourse is not uncommon in heterosexual intercourse.

- **Prostatitis:**Symptoms include dysuria, urinary dysfunction, pelvic pain, and pain with ejaculation. Expressed secretions from the prostate may show increased leukocytes on microscopy.

- **Reactive Arthritis:**Approximately 1% of men who have urethritis from chlamydial infection also develop reactive arthritis, and a third will have the reactive arthritis triad (formerly known as Reiter syndrome).

- **Conjunctivitis:**Direct inoculation with genital secretions infected with genitalChlamydia trachomatis serovars can lead to conjunctival infection. Symptoms typically include non-purulent conjunctivitis (erythematous injection of the surface epithelium). The conjunctiva may have a cobbled appearance. Conjunctivitis is the most common manifestation of chlamydial infection in newborns.

- **Pneumonia:**Infants born to mothers who have a cervical infection withChlamydia trachomatis may develop pneumonia 5-30% of the time.

- **Pharyngitis:**While not considered a significant cause of pharyngitis,C. trachomatis can be detected in the pharynx with nucleic acid amplified tests.

- **Lymphogranuloma Venereum:**Patients will present with painless genital ulcers. The ulcers typically have a small, stellate appearance. The development of inguinal lymphadenopathy typically follows the appearance of ulcers.