In many cases, it can be difficult to perform a comprehensive physical examination because of the patient's mental status after trauma. Many patients are admitted to the intensive care unit sedated and intubated. While skeletal deformities, lacerations, ecchymosis, hemotympana, and otorrhea can be appreciated without patient cooperation, facial nerve function and hearing assessment are difficult to perform with an unconscious patient. Ideally, some measure of facial function evaluation should be obtained prior to initiation of sedation, but it is often difficult to perform a complete and systematic examination in the acute setting.

While only about one in ten patients with a temporal bone fracture will suffer facial paralysis, it is important to attempt to determine whether the facial function was normal immediately after the injury or not. If there is complete paralysis immediately after the blow to the head, it is possible that the facial nerve was transected. If paralysis evolves slowly over the course of hours, days, or weeks after the injury, the paralysis is likely caused by edema of the facial nerve and may be managed medically. When the time course of the paralysis onset is unknown, it should be treated as a case of immediate onset. Facial paralysis can be classified in myriad different ways; however, the most common system is that of House and Brackmann, summarized below:

- Grade I: normal function

- Grade II: mild dysfunction, symmetric at rest, slight asymmetry with movement but complete eye closure with gentle effort

- Grade III: moderate dysfunction, symmetric at rest, moderate asymmetry with movement but complete eye closure with full effort

- Grade IV: moderate dysfunction, symmetric at rest, moderate asymmetry with movement, and incomplete eye closure with full effort

- Grade V: severe dysfunction, grossly asymmetric at rest, marked asymmetry with movement, and incomplete eye closure with full effort

- Grade VI: severe dysfunction, grossly asymmetric at rest, no movement at all

In patients with facial paralysis after an ipsilateral temporal bone fracture, it is critical to determine two things by history and physical examination: whether the paralysis was immediate or delayed and whether it was complete (House-Brackmann VI) or incomplete (House-Brackmann II-V). With immediate, complete paralysis ipsilateral to the temporal bone fracture, the index of suspicion for nerve transection should be high; fortunately, this presentation is uncommon. When the paralysis is delayed and/or incomplete, it is unlikely that the nerve has been transected, and the patient can usually be managed conservatively. Patients with complete and immediate paralysis generally require additional evaluation (see below), and patients whose paralyzes progress to House-Brackmann grade VI palsy may also be candidates for further evaluation. When performing a physical examination to determine the House-Brackmann grade of the facial paralysis, it is essential to realize that gravity-driven complete eye closure may be preserved for several hours or even a few days after injury.

For this reason, systematically examining the rest of the face (raise eyebrows, wrinkle nose, smile, pucker lips, depress lower lip) is critical to determining the severity of the paralysis. If none of the other mimetic muscles is moving on the side of the injury, but eye closure is complete, particularly if the closure is slow and asynchronous with the other side, the patient is still graded House-Brackmann VI, and eye closure should be expected to worsen in the near future. While most patients will demonstrate some degree of recovery of facial function over time, it is easy to cause a corneal abrasion or an exposure keratopathy in the setting of paralytic lagophthalmos while facial movement slowly recovers; for this reason, it is critical to assess the cornea frequently until the ability to close the eye returns. A patient with an intact Bell's phenomenon (the globe rolls superiorly as the eyelid closes) is less likely to suffer corneal injuries than one without; patients tend to lose this protective reflex with advanced age.

Examination of the external auditory canal should focus on identifying step-offs or lacerations that could indicate a fracture, and the presence or absence of otorrhea should be noted. If otorrhea is present, the tympanic membrane is likely perforated, and consideration should be given to testing the fluid to determine whether CSF is present. Packing the external auditory canal is unnecessary unless it is required to control significant hemorrhage. If profuse hemorrhage cannot be controlled with packing, the patient may need to be taken to the operating room for carotid artery ligation or angiography for balloon occlusion. Examination of the tympanic membrane should determine if it is intact or perforated. Bloody otorrhea and hemotympanum are the two most common signs of temporal bone fracture. Generally, hemotympanum is self-resolving within 4 to 6 weeks. Traumatic tympanic membrane perforations may heal spontaneously, depending on their overall size.

Hearing is initially assessed at the bedside via tuning fork examination with a 512 Hz tuning fork. Both Weber and Rinne tests are helpful to determine if a conductive or sensorineural hearing loss is present. Preoperative audiometry is essential in the presence of facial paralysis or CSF fistula where operative management is indicated.

The vestibular system is contained within the temporal bone and should also be routinely evaluated in the presence of a temporal bone injury. Neurologic injuries such as concussions, contusions, and other injuries to the brainstem and cerebellar pathways may coexist with otic capsule disrupting fractures. A bedside vestibular evaluation should be performed in addition to a neurological assessment. The presence of a cervical spine injury must be excluded before any vestibular evaluation can be performed, however. Vestibular evaluation should include examination for spontaneous and gaze-evoked nystagmus, head thrust nystagmus for refixation saccades, and assessment of post-head-shake nystagmus. Gait abnormalities should be evaluated, and a Dix-Hallpike test should be performed to look for benign paroxysmal positional vertigo (BPPV). The most common injuries to the vestibular system are BPPV and vestibular hypofunction.

Lastly, palpation of the cranium to assess any deformities or flail segments is important. Most temporal bone fractures are not displaced and do not require any reduction or fixation.