Rhinoplasty can be performed for functional issues, aesthetic issues, or both. It is important to emphasize that patients initially seeking functional improvement solely, often raise complaints about the aesthetics of the nose during the interview, and, postoperatively, they give more importance to the aesthetic results than to their ability to breathe properly.

Although much has been written about the difficulty of finding the ideal candidate for surgery, there is no proven way of accurately detecting the high-risk patients that will probably be unhappy regardless of the outcome. In consequence, the surgeon must evaluate other non-visible aspects of the patients and use his/her instinct to try to determine whether the surgery will be beneficial or not.

In the first consults, interrogation is paramount to know if the patient’s expectations are achievable, as patient satisfaction postoperatively is determinant for the success of the surgery.

The acronym **SIMON**(single, immature, male, over-expectant, narcissistic) is commonly used to describe patients that should be considered as being unsuited for surgery, and**SYLVIA**(secure, young, listens, verbal, intelligent, attractive) has been used to describe the ideal candidate.

After a global analysis, it is important to discuss the specific features they dislike about their nose (dorsal hump, nasal deviation, tip issues, etc.) and explain step by step what can be improved and how. This can be done by employing computer simulation. This is a helpful tool that helps to identify patients with unrealistic expectations by using real images of the person and simulate an approximate surgical result.

The functional analysis includes anterior rhinoscopy to search for common causes of obstruction like turbinate hypertrophy and septal deviations. In patients with airway obstruction with no visible cause, a nasal endoscopy might be helpful to diagnose other causes of obstruction like polyps. Nasal valves can be studied using the Cottle maneuver, which consists of gently pulling off the cheek laterally by using two fingers in order to open the ipsilateral valve. If the airflow improves, there might be a valve collapse that is impairing the nasal function.

Breathing problems in the past, history of sinusitis, obstructive sleep apnea, previous hospital admissions, use of medications or cocaine, and history of mental illness should also be recorded.

Preoperative photos have to be taken for previous analysis and planning and for medico-legal purposes. Frontal, both profiles, and a basal view are the minimum requirements. They should be taken using a dark background with good lighting settings.

Informed consent, as in every surgical procedure, has to be discussed in a serious manner with the patient in order that he/she fully understands every step of the operation with its risks and benefits, alternatives, and possible outcomes.

Agewise, this surgery is usually performed when nasal structures have developed completely, and nasal form will not continue to change greatly. This is approximately 15 years old for females and 17 years old for males.