Healthcare Providers must apply and receive certification in the Clozapine REMS program to prescribe clozapine for outpatient use. To receive treatment, a patient must be enrolled in the clozapine REMS registry by a certified clinician. In addition, pharmacies and pharmacists must obtain certification through Clozapine REMS to receive clozapine and dispense it to patients. All of these actions can be done online through the website www.clozapineREMS.com.

Clozapine is available as oral tablets, oral disintegrating tablets, and oral suspension in the following strength. Choice of dosage form depends on patient acceptability and tolerability.

- Oral tablet dosages of 25 mg, 50 mg, 100 mg, and 200 mg

- Orally disintegrating tablet dosages of 12.5 mg, 25 mg, 100 mg, 150 mg, and 200 mg

- Oral suspension dosage of 50 mg/mL (100 mL)

According to the FDA, clozapine's maximum recommended dosage is up to 900 mg per day. The average dose is 300 mg per day for women and 400 mg per day for men. Slow titration is essential for reducing many side effects associated with clozapine.

Clozapine is metabolized to norclozapine and other metabolites by the cytochrome P450 enzymes (CYP1A2, CYP3A4, CYP2C19, with some influence from CYP2C9 and CYP2D6).

**Specific Population**

**Hepatic Impairment:**The manufacturer's labeling provides no dosage adjustment recommendation; however, it suggests dose reductions in patients with significant hepatic impairment.

**Renal Impairment:**The manufacturer's labeling provides no dosage adjustment recommendation; however, it suggests dose reductions in patients with significant renal impairment.

**Pregnancy:**Women between 18 to 45 years of age and exposed to clozapine during pregnancy should be enrolled in the Atypical Antipsychotics Pregnancy Registry by their health care providers. (website  womensmentalhealth.org/pregnancyregistry). Clozapine is an FDA pregnancy category B medicine.

**Breastfeeding Women:**Since clozapine use is not studied during breastfeeding, and some case reports of sedation and adverse hematologic effects in breastfed infants in literature, alternative medicine is advised. If the infant is exposed to clozapine via breastfeeding, closely monitor the infant for excessive sedation and white blood cell count. Some expert panel recommends against breastfeeding if women require clozapine while lactating.