Previously, in the critical care environment, training methods for skills teaching commonly utilized an apprenticeship technique. With this approach, an experienced teacher modeled the correct technique for performing a specific skill and then evaluated the trainee, also known as "see one, do one, teach one." This model is now obsolete. The constructivist learning theory suggests learners gain knowledge based on their personalized experiences. Trainees’ clinical knowledge becomes solidified, and instructors can highlight key learning points during the simulation.  Participants should be made to feel supported and respected, with the instructor encouraging nonjudgmental and open discussion. In addition to constructing and effectively executing simulation scenarios, debriefing is crucial to help learners identify gaps in knowledge, pre-conceived attitudes, and emotional reactivity that can contribute to performance deficiencies. Scaffolding refers to an effective debriefing session that guides learners to think through their actions and reactions, allowing the integration of simulation sessions with previous experiences.

The Kirkpatrick model for evaluating the effectiveness of training programs can be utilized to ascertain the utility of simulation for learner assessment and ongoing quality improvement (QI) of intensive care practice. Kirkpatrick’s hierarchy serves as a classification tool to communicate the level of learning outcome for each trainee.reaction and refers to participants’ perception of an educational intervention. Level two is known as learning, and measures participants’ acquisition of skills, knowledge, and change of attitudes in a non-clinical setting. Evaluation during such training should demonstrate knowledge. Level three is behavior, which measures a learner’s behavioral changes, attitudes, skills, and knowledge from the training setting to a professional practice setting. Level four, referred to as results, measures the effect of learners’ skill acquisition through training on patient outcomes.