The radius and ulna serve as insertion sites for several muscles originating more proximally in the arm:

- Biceps brachii – inserts on the radial tuberosity, a bony prominence on the medial aspect of the proximal end of the radius; allows for flexion and supination of the forearm.

- Brachialis – inserts on the coronoid process of the ulna and the ulnar tuberosity; allows for forearm flexion.

- Triceps and anconeus – insert on the olecranon process of the ulna allowing for the forearm extension.

Within the forearm, muscles are classically grouped into anterior and posterior compartments:

**Anterior Compartment**

- Flexor carpi radialis, palmaris longus, and the humeral heads of the pronator teres and flexor carpi ulnaris - originate from the common flexor origin. The ulnar head of the pronator teres originates from the coronoid process. The ulnar head of the flexor carpi ulnaris arises from the olecranon. The pronator teres inserts to the lateral surface of the radius and is responsible for pronation and flexion of the forearm. Each of the other muscles inserts in the wrist or hand; these are responsible for more distal movements.

- Flexor digitorum superficialis - arises from the anterior border of the radius, the medial epicondyle of the humerus, and the coronoid process and inserts on the middle phalanges of the medial four digits.

- Flexor digitorum profundus - arises from the ulna and interosseous membrane and inserts on the distal phalanges.

- Flexor pollicis longus - originates from the radius and the interosseous membrane and inserts on the distal phalanx of the thumb.

- Pronator quadratus - originates from the distal end of the ulna and inserts on the distal end of the radius. Responsible for forearm pronation.

**Posterior Compartment**

- Brachioradialis, extensor carpi radialis longus, extensor carpi radialis brevis, extensor digitorum, extensor digiti minimi, and extensor carpi ulnaris - originate from the distal lateral edge of the humerus. The brachioradialis inserts just proximal to the styloid process of the radius and is responsible for flexion of the forearm, especially in pronation. The remainder of the muscles originating from this area insert distally and are responsible for movements within the wrist and hand.

- Supinator - originates from the lateral epicondyle, radial collateral and annular ligaments, supinator fossa, and the crest of the ulna with insertion on the lateral side of the radius. It is responsible for forearm supination.

- Abductor pollicis longus and extensor pollicis longus - originate from the posterior surface of the ulna and interosseous membrane with attachments in the hand.

- Extensor indicis - originates from the posterior surface of the distal third of the ulna and the interosseous membrane with attachment in the hand.

- Extensor pollicis brevis - originates from the posterior surface of the distal third of the radius and the interosseous membrane with attachment in the hand.