It is essential to consider uncommon secondary causes of obesity and medical conditions associated with obesity. [American Academy of Pediatrics Clinical Practice Guidelines for Obesity 2023]

- Attenuated height growth velocity suggests endocrine causes like hypothyroidism, hypothalamic tumor, growth hormone deficiency, and Cushing syndrome.

- A history of significant head trauma requires ruling out CNS injury as the cause of hypothalamic obesity. In such cases, there is usually an abrupt change in the weight gain trajectory following the inciting event.

- The presence of hyperphagia, atypical facial features, and neurodevelopmental delays may indicate genetic disorders accompanied by obesity. DNA methylation studies can confirm Prader-Willi syndrome. Ocular abnormalities like retinal dystrophy and nystagmus are associated with Bardet- Beidl syndrome and Alstrom syndrome and warrant further investigation.

- Developmental delays in the presence of severe obesity should raise suspicion for rare conditions such as congenital leptin or PCSK1 deficiencies

- Idiopathic intracranial hypertension (IIH), also known as pseudotumor cerebri, is a rare but serious neurological condition most commonly affecting overweight or obese young women. Obesity does not cause IIH but is a typical association. Initial symptoms include vision changes and headaches. Papilledema may be present on physical examination. CT and MRI of the brain can be performed, but the definitive diagnostic test measures the CSF opening pressure upon lumbar puncture.