Complications occur in 15 to 28% of patients.

**Frequent Side Effects**

- Nausea; is the most frequent side effect

- Dose-dependent.
- Early-onset nausea usually resolves without dose alteration

- Fever

- Fatigue

- Arthralgias/myalgia

- Bone marrow suppression causing pancytopenia, thrombocytopenia, leukopenia - there are reports of dose-dependent, life-threatening cases.

- This complication correlates with the 6-TGN level
- There is a higher risk of myelosuppression in patients who take allopurinol or ACEI and in renal insufficiency
- An increase in the mean corpuscular volume of the red blood cells is also an expected side effect

- Rash

- Hepatotoxicity: Hepatic injury correlates with a 6-MMP level of more than 5700 pmol/8 x 10^8 RBC.

- Hepatotoxicity categorizes into two groups.

- Acute idiosyncratic liver injury happens in the early course and resolves with stopping the medication.  
- Nodular regenerative hyperplasia occurs in IBD and organ transplant patients several years after therapy.

- Infections (7.4%): Concomitant use of AZA and steroids will increase the risk of PCP in leukopenic patients.

- Hypersensitivity: symptoms including fever, chills, arthralgia/myalgia, liver abnormalities, erythema nodosum

- Kidney damage

**Rare Side Effects**

- Diarrhea

- Carcinogenesis: cutaneous hyperkeratosis and nonmelanoma skin cancer (SCC) in myasthenia gravis (most likely due to increased risk of photosensitivity), solid-organ transplant and IBD patients/ lymphoma in transplant and IBD patients

- Pancreatitis (3.3%): more in females with Crohn disease

- Dose-dependent
- Usually happens in the first six weeks
- In the case of pancreatitis, discontinue AZA

- Alopecia including telogen effluvium, anagen effluvium, and plica neuropathica

- Macrocytic anemia

- Sweet syndrome (acute febrile neutrophilic dermatosis)

- Pneumonitis: in IBD and renal transplant patients

- Upper airway edema

- Tremor: in transplant and Crohn patient: dose-dependent