Prior to the beginning of any hyperbaric intervention, all workers get introduced to the work involved at the specific site, the potential hazards of the work required, the compression and decompression profiles, potential adverse events associated with working under pressure and those surrounding the decompression phase of work.  This process is conducted in a semi-formal, educational, classroom-type atmosphere and precedes the physical examination and health screen performed by the hyperbaric physician and tunnel medical team. The plan and the importance of not deviating from the plan are discussed.  Consequences of deviation of the approved hyperbaric intervention plan can have both legal and health-related consequences.  As mentioned, a state-approved variance is usually necessary and requires approval for hyperbaric interventions occurring in the United States; this is primarily due to the outdated OSHA regulations as they apply towards compressed air occupational health and safety and compression and decompression protocols. The decompression schedules currently in use need to be updated to support modern-day hyperbaric interventions properly. Oxygen decompression schedules have been used effectively for CAW decompression since the 1960s.  Despite this, modern air/oxygen decompression schedules are not part of OSHA's outdated regulations and policies. Dr. Eric Kindwall initially brought this deficit to the medical communities attention in an article published years ago, and unfortunately, OSHA did not implement his updated oxygen decompression schedules.