Once the patient, supplies, and team have been properly prepared, induction agents can be administered to the patient first, followed by paralytic agents. The bag valve mask should be utilized to pre-oxygenate the patient as much as possible. The clinician performing the rapid sequence intubation should ensure a tight seal of the bag valve mask to the patient's face.

After allowing the paralytic agents to take effect after 60 seconds, the patient's mouth should be opened with the scissoring technique. The scissoring technique involves placing the right thumb on the right middle finger and inserting the right hand into the patient's mouth. The clinician then "scissors" the patient's mouth open, crossing the thumb and middle finger. The laryngoscope should then be inserted into the patient's mouth with a sweeping motion from right to left, moving the tongue out of view.

The clinician should then locate the epiglottis and place the laryngoscope in the vallecula. A ventral and inferior motion should be performed with a rigid wrist without abduction or "rocking" of the wrist. Suctioning can be performed to obtain a better view and clear debris, and pressure can be applied to the thyroid cartilage to manipulate the glottis into view. Once the clinician has located the glottis, the endotracheal tube can be passed through the vocal cords. Once passed, the stilette can be removed from the endotracheal tube. The tube should be advanced based on the Chula formula, which is ETT tube depth=0.1 (Height in CM) + 4. This equation will give the depth that the endotracheal tube should be advanced when measured at the patient's teeth.

After the tube is advanced to the proper distance, the cuff should then be inflated. The end-tidal capnography, condensation on the endotracheal tube, bilateral lung sounds should all be used to verify placement initially. A chest X-ray should be performed to assure adequate placement.