The clinician should make a diagnosis of bulimia nervosa after excluding all other medical causes of vomiting and excessive bowel activity, particularly if the patient states that binging or purging behavior is involuntary. Generally, these medical conditions are not associated with a pattern of binge eating or an excessive preoccupation with weight or body image. These medical conditions include the following:

- Biliary disease can cause nausea and vomiting, and it will frequently present with abnormal transaminases or bilirubin on a comprehensive metabolic profile.

- Irritable bowel syndrome****can increase the frequency of bowel movements but is usually not associated with episodes of binge eating.

- Neurological conditions, a thorough evaluation should include a neurological examination to rule out a neurological origin for vomiting.

General medical conditions involving increased food intake include the following:

- Prader-Willi syndrome- This is a genetic disorder that can present with hyperphagia and obesity. It is usually associated with mental disability and hypogonadism, angry outbursts, and oppositional behavior. Compensatory purging behavior is typically absent.

- Klein-Levin syndrome- This is a disorder that primarily affects adolescent males and also causes increased appetite, hypersomnia, and behavioral disturbances. As with Prader-Willi syndrome, compensatory purging behavior is not present in this condition.

- Diabetes mellitus- This is a well-established cause of polyphagia. A complete medical workup should check blood glucose.

- Anorexia nervosa- It is essential to distinguish bulimia nervosa from anorexia nervosa because the complications, management, and prognosis of each condition are different. The patient has anorexia nervosa and not bulimia nervosa if binging or purging occurs exclusively during episodes of anorexia nervosa, which includes a binge-eating/purging type. An important distinction is that a diagnosis of anorexia nervosa requires low body weight; BMI<18, whereas this is not a diagnostic criterion for bulimia nervosa. Studies have shown minimal benefits of psychotropic medication for the treatment of anorexia nervosa.

- Binge eating disorder- It is also characterized by episodes of binge eating. However, binge eating disorder does not have the purging behavior, as seen in bulimia nervosa. Patients with bulimia nervosa typically restrict their diet between binge eating episodes to influence their body shape. In contrast, those with binge eating disorder do not limit their intake in between events.

- Major depressive disorder and borderline personality disorder- These may also present with episodes of overeating and with suicidal ideations. However, these conditions do not feature the inappropriate compensatory purging behavior of bulimia nervosa, although both of these conditions can be comorbid with bulimia nervosa.