**Final “pearls” of potential questions and areas of inquiry:**

- Have a very clear vision and specific plan (including financial viability and sustainability) for the future of your simulation center

- Be conversant not only on the strengths of your simulation center but self-identified areas that would benefit from improvement/modification/augmentation. Be able to outline specific plans for future development and refinement of your simulation center.

- Be prepared to discuss plans and capabilities for simulation site emergencies (e.g., massive power failures during simulation events, catastrophic loss of computer/networking/technology capabilities, etc.).

- Be prepared to discuss the credentials and qualifications of simulation center personnel (e.g., directors, managers, simulation operations, specialists/technicians, etc.).  Be able to outline resources earmarked for staff continuing education, development, and advancement.

- Be able to discuss specific requirements and qualifications for all facilitators in the simulation center. Have specific tools for ongoing evaluation of and feedback to all facilitators (e.g., regular DASH tool evaluations, specific feedback frequency, and techniques utilized in the center, etc.). Be prepared to answer questions regarding actions taken when facilitators are found to have significant deficiencies, recurrent learner complaints, etc.)

- Accreditors are consistently interested in the annual review of all simulation center personnel. In many large institutions with general templates for regular employee review, it is clear that skills, areas of expertise, and accomplishments specific to medical simulation education may not be specifically addressed. (Some institutions, for example, have created a simulation-specific review template that we utilize, in conjunction with our larger institution’s evaluation form, in the annual review of our simulation center’s staff).

- Demonstrate how the simulation center leadership participates in and encourages staff wellness, healthy work-life balance, comradery, and effective team interaction.