Cheiralgia paresthetica is a relatively common disorder that is underdiagnosed. The diagnosis is often confused with other wrist disorders. Successful management of cheiralgia paresthetica encompasses an interprofessional team approach. Clinicians, including the primary care provider and nurse practitioner who first see the patient, must be familiar with this disease and its presentation to diagnose it correctly. Having a high index of suspicion will lead to prompt diagnosis and initiation of treatment. Radiologists and neurologists can further verify the disease and identify the location of compression through imaging and electrodiagnostic tests.

Treatment initially consists of multifactoral conservative management with the removal of compression and avoidance of provocative activities. Brace therapy may be an initial approach with input from orthotists. NSAIDs and other nerve medications may also be options; the pharmacist should verify appropriate agent selection, dosing, perform medication reconciliation, and counsel the patient regarding optimal use of NSAID to avoid complications such as gastric upset, reporting any issues to the nurse or physician. If patients fail to improve with conservative management, a surgeon can remove anatomic nerve compression through a variety of techniques.  Postoperatively, the patient will benefit from physical therapy and occupational therapy focusing on early range of motion, nerve gliding exercises, and avoiding activities that exacerbate the condition. Specialty-trained nurses can monitor progress and provide patient education at follow-up visits and also watch for adverse medication effects, and let the treating physician know if there are any concerns. Open discussion and communication with the patient and between all of the health care providers on the interprofessional healthcare team is key to the successful treatment of this disease. [Level V]