Under normal circumstances, muscle stretch reflexes are mediated by the muscle spindle apparatus and Golgi tendon organs to protect the muscle from excessive stretch and effort injury. The spinal cord simultaneously manages somatic efferent and afferent stimulation, as well as visceral afferent input at the same segmental level via the autonomic nervous system. There is a high degree of subsequent somatic and visceral convergence within lamina I of its grey matter. Somatic and visceral C fibers both synapse on lamina I interneurons. Excitation of these interneurons initiates sympathetic output back to the dysfunctional viscus/viscera in addition to alpha and gamma motor neurons that project to segmentally-related skeletal muscles. This interaction is the origin of the somatic component of a muscle stretch reflex and, therefore, a viscerosomatic reflex.

Additionally, the current belief is that visceral and somatic pain are both carried to the thalamus for processing in the brain via the anterolateral system, meaning that both types of pain arrive in the cerebral cortex via the same route. When the CNS cannot delineate these signals, a maladaptive reflex materializes. In the presence of visceral dysfunction, the CNS confuses afferent input arising from viscera as originating from somatic structures. If the CNS is unable to distinguish between the sensory signals, it misconstrues the information as originating from both structures simultaneously. This misapprehended activity creates a feed-forward loop of muscle spasm and sustained hypertonicity that relays somatic afferent signals along the same CNS pathway as the dysfunctional viscera, known as segmental facilitation.

Viscerosomatic reflexes may be better understood by way of example. A familiar presentation of a viscerosomatic reflex is myocardial infarction that presents with pain radiating to the upper arm, shoulder, or jaw. The viscerosomatic reflex arc initiates following visceral dysfunction (i.e., ischemia of the myocardium), which increases the propagation of action potentials along visceral afferent fibers that terminate within the dorsal gray matter of the spinal cord. Within the dorsal horn, segmental facilitation lowers the threshold of inhibitory interneuron signaling, known as central sensitization. Consequently, nervous system activity in the setting of facilitation results in an exaggerated efferent response within segmentally-related somatic structures (i.e., pain in the shoulder or upper extremity in the setting of an MI) via increased somatic, sympathetic, and motor efferent firing. The clinical response to these efferent signals is a constellation of tissue texture changes, asymmetry, restriction within the tissues, and/or tenderness on palpation.

Another common example of an easily recognizable and clinically relevant viscerosomatic reflex is the sensation of upper shoulder pain in the setting of hepatobiliary disease. Most often a complication of biliary obstruction (e.g., cholelithiases), gallbladder inflammation (e.g., cholecystitis), infection (e.g., ascending cholangitis), or neoplasm (e.g., cholangiocarcinoma), irritation of the gallbladder epithelium activates visceral afferent receptors, increasing the transmission of abnormal sensory input into the dorsal horn of the spinal cord. This input from the gallbladder facilitates regional interneurons from spinal levels T5 to T9. Normal input to the interneurons at these segmental levels then becomes amplified, causing excessive motor, sensory, and autonomic efferent responses. Therefore, a patient with gallbladder dysfunction may present with contracture of the paraspinal musculature surrounding T5 to T9 (via motor efferents), pain and/or tenderness in the right upper quadrant (via somatic efferents), and/or warmth and erythema of the skin (due to local ischemia and autonomic efferent signaling) in the same region.