**Bone fracture healing:**is an intricate and fluent regenerative process that aims at restoring the damaged bone to its pre-injury state and cellular composition.

- Hematoma formation

- Granulation tissue formation

- Bony callus formation

- Bone remodeling

The type of fracture healing is governed by the achieved mechanical stability at the fracture site and, consequently, the strain. An appropriate mechanical stimulation, such as strain, facilitates tissue formation at the bony ends. The amount of the involved strain dictates the biological behavior of the cells involved in the healing process and, consequently, the type of bone healing.

There are two main modes of bone healing; **primary bone healing**is dictated by absolute stability constructs that achieve a mechanical strain below 2%. It is an**intramembranous**bone healing that occurs through**Haversian remodeling**. The other type is**secondary bone healing**which occurs in non-rigid fixation modalities such as braces, external fixation, plates in bridging mode, intramedullary nailing, ..etc. These fixation modalities achieve a mechanical strain between 2-10%. And it occurs via**endochondral**bone healing. Bone healing can involve a combination of primary and secondary processes based on the stability throughout the construct.

Failed or delayed healing can affect up to 10% of all fractures and can result from factors such as comminution, infection, tumor, and disrupted vascular supply. During this article, we will work through each of these steps in order and detail before touching on primary healing, factors affecting fracture healing, and methods of stimulation of fracture healing.