Prompt identification and diagnosis are critical to obviate patient morbidity and mortality following aortic rupture. The initial diagnostic evaluation for patients with suspected traumatic aortic injury is a chest radiograph. Although it lacks reliable sensitivity, its availability and ease of use make chest radiography a useful diagnostic tool in patients who are too unstable to receive computed tomography. Features on plain chest radiography that suggest aortic injury and can help guide the further use of angiography include; an abnormal aortic arch contour, left apical cap, loss of the aorticopulmonary window, rightward deviation of the trachea, depression of the left main stem bronchus, and a wide left paravertebral pleural stripe. Also, widening of the mediastinum (greater than 8 cm) has a reported sensitivity of 81% to 100% and a specificity of 60%.

A normal chest x-ray, however, does not exclude rupture, as studies have shown patients with blunt aortic injury may present with a normal mediastinum on chest radiography. For this reason, other imagining modalities with greater diagnostic sensitivity are commonly used. Computed tomography angiography (CTA) has replaced traditional angiography and transesophageal echocardiography as the diagnostic test of choice for blunt thoracic aortic injury. This highly sensitive (86% to 100%) and specific (40% to 100%) imaging modality is widely available as well as both time and cost effective. CTA findings indicative of an aortic rupture include active extravasation of intravenous contrast dye from the aorta, pseudo-aneurysm formation, an intimal flap, luminal filling defects, periaortic hematoma formation, as well as aortic contour abnormalities.

Transesophageal echocardiography is another imaging modality used to evaluate and diagnose damage to the aorta. This method is most useful in patients who are hemodynamically unstable since it can be performed quickly at the bedside in the emergency room or the operating theater by a skilled operator. Other less frequently used options for the identification of aortic transection include intravascular ultrasonography and magnetic resonance imaging.