Women should be counseled during child-bearing age to take folic acid supplementation to prevent NTDs. As discussed, women planning pregnancy should take 0.4mg daily and those with a family history or previous child with NTD should take 4mg daily.

In the early stages of the conditions, caretakers require the most education to empower them to be effective advocates for the patient during childhood. Throughout growth, patients should be provided with increasing autonomy as appropriate based on their cognitive development. It is important for patients and their caretakers to feel as though they are part of the medical team.

Families must be trained during their child’s therapy so they may be able to effectively care for their children as they age. Important considerations include mobilization of the patient, appropriate use of orthotics and assistive devices, and proper body mechanics. They must also be educated on the signs and symptoms of the serious conditions that may develop including UTI, hydrocephalus, or seizures.

Once children are old enough to understand their condition and needs, they should be included in the decision-making process providing them with education on their self-care. Patients with spina bifida occulta may not have many comorbidities but those with open dysraphisms may require closer monitoring. Patients may need to be taught to self-catheterize or provide their own bowel program.

Many patients will express concern regarding ambulation as they age. As mentioned above, most patients will obtain functional ambulation with only 7% requiring wheelchair level ambulation.

Psychosocial aspects of the patient’s health must also be addressed to improve patient participation in their healthcare and reach improved outcomes. A randomized controlled trial revealed cognitive behavioral therapy in a high-intensity rehabilitation program provided improved outcomes in self-care, cognition and mood, and independence.