Emphysema is a pathological diagnosis. Accordingly, routine laboratory and radiographic studies are not indicated.

Pulmonary function testing (PFT), particularly spirometry, is the mainstay of diagnosis. A post-bronchodilator test may be done in those with abnormal values. COPD is only partially reversible or irreversible with a bronchodilator, and post-bronchodilator FEV1/FVC is less than 0.07, which is diagnostic.

GOLD staging based on the severity of airflow limitation is as follows:

- Mild with FEV1 greater or equal to 80% predicted

- Moderate with FEV1 less than 80% predicted

- Severe with FEV1 less than 50% predicted

- Very severe with FEV1 less than 30% predicted

The lung volume measurements indicative of air trapping in emphysema reveal increased residual volume and total lung capacity. Diffusing capacity for carbon monoxide is reduced due to the emphysematous destruction of the alveolar-capillary pulmonary membrane.

A chest x-ray is only helpful in diagnosis if emphysema is severe, but it is usually the first step when suspecting COPD to rule out other causes. Destruction of alveoli and air trapping causes hyperinflation of the lungs with flattening of the diaphragm, and the heart appears elongated and tubular in shape.

Arterial blood gases are usually not required in mild to moderate COPD. It is done when oxygen saturation goes below 92% or when an assessment of hypercapnia is needed in severe airflow obstruction.

A young person with symptoms of emphysema should be tested for alpha 1 antitrypsin deficiency (AATD).