Successful management will involve the coordination of nurses, emergency physicians and other clinicians, intensivists, pulmonologists, pharmacists, toxicologists, and nurses, operating as an interprofessional healthcare team. Coordination with nursing staff is critical to obtain timely analyses and identify any clinical deterioration. Nurses can monitor the patient, letting the clinicians know if they note any deterioration in the patient's status. While drug therapy plays a minor role in managing phosgene toxicity, pharmacists can provide the needed medications to manage the case and perform medication reconciliation.

Though insidious, phosgene pneumonitis can become emergent quickly, so timely gathering of critical data points by nursing staff can ensure providers are prepared for a failing airway. Intensivists will be involved with phosgene toxicity with associated respiratory failure and should be consulted early in the disease. Emergency clinicians should recognize progressive hypoxia and maintain ABCs while consulting toxicologists for accurate diagnosis and proper management. All interprofessional team members must exercise open communication and keep updated and accurate patient records, so that all caregivers have the same information on which to base clinical decisions.

All interprofessional team members should be open to inclusivity concepts, both regarding the patients and fellow team members. This approach, combined with interprofessional care, will yield optimal patient results. [Level 5]