Nicks procedure provides a solution to the challenging nature of small aorta. While the principle of patient prosthesis mismatch is an area of debate, the recent development in the transcatheter valve in valve implantation has reignited the interest for the bigger valve. It is always advisable to discuss these complex cases in interprofessional team meetings, including cardiac surgeons, cardiologists, and anesthesiologists, for improved decision making. Good preoperative preparation comes along with diagnosing the small aorta and calculating the patient's body surface area and establishing the target valve size.

To achieve better outcomes intraoperatively, the surgical steps have to be outlined before beginning the case to the whole team. Thus saving time on intraoperative decision making and to account for extra steps such as patch preparation, especially if autologous pericardium is needed or in cases where the assistant will begin the case. Also, the surgical nurse can prepare the patch, glutaraldehyde if needed, 4-0 polypropylene sutures, and extra hemostatic agents for the anastomotic line. Discussion with the perfusionist regarding longer cross-clamp time can affect factors such as type of cardioplegia and degree of hypothermia for optimal myocardial protection.

In the postoperative period, a clear plan with the intensive care unit must be established. The strict control of blood pressure after weaning of sedation will avoid increased tension over the anastomotic line and the risk of postoperative bleeding. Monitoring the heart rhythm for possible conduction complications postoperatively is required. The nurse in charge will monitor the pain and provide adequate pain relief. Thus, further emphasizing the need for an interprofessional approach to the management of aortic root enlargement must be taken into account. The need for meticulous planning and discussion with other professionals involved in the management of the patient is highly recommended to lower the morbidity and improve outcomes.