Patients present with sudden painless loss of vision and physical examination vary depending on the part of the nerve involved and its mechanism.

**AAION**

It usually occurs in old patients with the mean age being 70 years, and the majority of cases are linked to vasculitis, Giant cell arteritis (GCA) being the most common. Vision loss is severe being less than 20/200 in 70% of cases, and it goes to no perception of light in 20% of patients.

It is very important to inquire about symptoms of GCA as, without treatment, about half of patients will have vision loss in their fellow eye, sometimes within days, and there are other life-threatening complications related to this disease, including stroke, aortic dissection, and myocardial infarction which could be prevented.

Systemic symptoms of GCA include temporal headache, scalp tenderness, jaw claudication due to ischemia of masseter muscle. Other less specific findings include weight loss, fever, night sweats, malaise, and depression. The majority of patients with GCA have polymyalgia rheumatica at diagnosis. It is characterized by pain and stiffness in proximal muscle groups like the shoulders and thigh muscles.

American College of Rheumatology Criteria for Giant Cell Arteritis (1990) states that there should be at least three of the following:

- Age at onset 50 years or more.

- New headache or altered location/type of pain.

- Temporal artery tenderness or decreased pulsation to palpation.

- Elevated erythrocyte sedimentation rate greater than 50 mm/h using the Westergren method.

- Biopsy evidence of vasculitis with a predominance of mononuclear-cell infiltration or granulomatous inflammation, usually with multinucleated giant cells.

On examination, pupil reaction is sluggish, and there is a relative afferent pupillary deficit except when both eyes are involved simultaneously. The fundus examination shows chalky white optic disc edema, cotton wool spots (a sign of ischemia of nerve fiber layer) away from optic edema.

**NAION**

Vision loss can be acute, subacute, or stepwise and is not associated with pain usually. Vision loss is less severe than AAION, and about half of patients see 20/60 or better.

Fundus examination shows:

- The affected side in the acute stage shows diffuse or segmental (usually superior or inferior) optic disc edema, typically with increased perfusion (hyperemia).

- Small hemorrhages may be seen near the optic nerve head.

- The fellow eye will usually show a small or no cup (cup to disc ratio of 0.2 or less) called a disc at risk.

Gradually optic edema settles, crowding of nerve fibers decreases, and atrophy sets in with enlargement of the optic cup. The involvement of the second eye over some time is common, and it gives the clinical appearance of pseudo-Foster Kennedy syndrome in which the previously involved eye is atrophic in contrast to hyperemia and swelling in the acute eye. In true Foster Kennedy syndrome, there is optic disc atrophy in one eye due to compression of the optic nerve by intracranial mass and optic disc edema in the contralateral eye due to raised intracranial pressure.

**PION**

Vision loss can be unilateral or bilateral with an absence of optic disc edema in acute stages; however, optic atrophy settles after a few months. It is a rare disease and is mainly considered a diagnosis of exclusion.