For AF patients, percutaneous LAAC has emerged as a valid alternative to OAC. Although randomized control trials have mostly been restricted to patients who can tolerate short-term OAC, registries have shown some benefit in patients at high risk of stroke and intolerance and/or contraindications to OAC, with consistent safety improvements as long-term efficacy of the procedure. Current recommendations from professional societies support the use of percutaneous LAAC in AF patients with high stroke risk and contraindication for long-term anticoagulation.[Level 1] Guidelines recommend 6 weeks of oral anticoagulation plus aspirin followed by aspirin plus clopidogrel up to 6 months post-procedure. Aspirin will subsequently be continued for the lifetime of the patient.

However, the post-procedural antithrombotic regimens are sometimes modified in select patients(especially in patients with recurrent bleeding after LAAC) to balance the risk of bleeding and device-associated thrombus. Patients undergo a transesophageal echocardiogram at 6 weeks to confirm adequate sealing of LAA and rule out device-related thrombus, as this might change the duration of oral anticoagulation. An interprofessional team including an interventional cardiologist, non-invasive cardiologist specialized in multimodality imaging, cardiac anesthesiologist, nurses, and catheterization laboratory technologists work together to provide an integrated and holistic approach to pre-procedural planning, intra-procedural support, and post-procedural care to ensure an optimal outcome for the patient. Communication, shared decision-making, and collaboration between the interprofessional team members are key elements for excellent outcomes. Interprofessional care also helps identify early and late complications of percutaneous LAAC and, therefore, improves patients' prognosis and improves patient outcomes while reducing adverse events. [Level 5]