Several laboratory tests have been developed to screen and diagnose thalassemia:

**Complete blood count (CBC):**CBC is often the first investigation in a suspected case of thalassemia. A CBC showing low hemoglobin and low MCV is the first indication of thalassemia, after ruling out iron deficiency as the cause of anemia. The calculation of theMentzer index (mean corpuscular volume divided by red cell count) is useful. A Mentzer lower than 13 suggests that the patient has thalassemia, and an index of more than 13 suggests that the patient has anemia due to iron deficiency.

**Peripheral blood smear:**A blood smear (also called peripheral smear and manual differential) is next, to assess additional red cell properties. Thalassemia can present with the following findings on the peripheral blood smear:

- Microcytic cells (low MCV)

- Hypochromic cells

- Variation in size and shape (anisocytosis and poikilocytosis)

- Increased percentage of reticulocytes

- Target cells

- Heinz bodies

**Iron studies**(serum iron, ferritin, unsaturated iron-binding capacity (UIBC), total iron-binding capacity (TIBC), and percent saturation of transferrin) are also done to rule out iron deficiency anemia as the underlying cause.

**Erythrocyte porphyrin levels**may be checked to distinguish an unclear beta-thalassemia minor diagnosis from iron deficiency or lead poisoning. Individuals with beta-thalassemia will have normal porphyrin levels, but those with the latter conditions will have elevated porphyrin levels.

**Hemoglobin electrophoresis:**Hemoglobinopathy (Hb) evaluation assesses the type and relative amounts of hemoglobin present in red blood cells. Hemoglobin A (HbA), composed of both alpha and beta-globin chains, is the type of hemoglobin that typically makes up 95% to 98% of hemoglobin for adults. Hemoglobin A2 (HbA2) is normally 2% to 3% of hemoglobin, while hemoglobin F usually makes up less than 2% of hemoglobin in adults.

Beta thalassemia disturbs the balance of beta and alpha hemoglobin chain formation. Patients with the beta-thalassemia major usually have larger percentages of HbF and HbA2 and absent or very low HbA. Those with beta-thalassemia minor usually have a mild elevation of HbA2 and mild decrease of HbA. HbH is a less common form of hemoglobin that may be seen in some cases of alpha thalassemia. HbS is the hemoglobin prevalent in people with sickle cell disease.

Hemoglobinopathy (Hb) assessment is used for prenatal screening when parents are at high risk for hemoglobin abnormalities and state-mandated newborn hemoglobin screening.

**DNA analysis:**These tests serve to help confirm mutations in the alpha and beta globin-producing genes. DNA testing is not a routine procedure but can be used to help diagnose thalassemia and to determine carrier status if needed.

Since having relatives carrying mutations for thalassemia increases a person's risk of carrying the same mutant gene, family studies may be necessary to assess carrier status and the types of mutations present in other family members.

**Genetic testing of amniotic fluid**is useful in those rare instances where a fetus has an increased risk for thalassemia. This is particularly important if both parents likely carry a mutation because that increases the risk that their child may inherit a combination of abnormal genes, causing a more severe form of thalassemia. Prenatal diagnosis with chorionic villi sampling at 8 to 10 weeks or by amniocentesis at 14 to 20 weeks’ gestation can be carried out in high-risk families.

**Multisystem evaluation:**Evaluation of all related systems should be done on a regular basis due to their frequent involvement in the disease progression. Biliary tract and gall bladder imaging, abdominal ultrasonography, cardiac MRI, serum hormone measurements are a few examples that can be done or repeated depending on the clinical suspicion and case description.