In 2000, the American College of Chest Physicians (ACCP) published clinical practice guidelines on the medical and surgical approach effusions and empyema. The risk of poor outcome was directly related to the following three variables: pleural space anatomy, pleural fluid bacteriology, and pleural fluid chemistry. Per ACCP consensus, categories 1 and 2 involve effusions in the exudative stage, are free-flowing, and carry the lowest risk for adverse outcomes. Category 3 defines complicated effusions in the fibrinopurulent stage and can be larger, free-flowing or loculated, and carry a moderate risk for poor outcomes. Empyema, category 4, carries the highest risk for poor outcome.

**Antimicrobials**

For most patients with suspected or confirmed empyema, empiric broad-spectrum antibiotics are necessary. Initiation should not delay pending diagnostic procedures. Antimicrobials should be tailored to target pathogens based on geographic epidemiology, antibiotic resistance patterns, mode of acquisition (aspiration, trauma), and whether the affected patient presents from a community versus a healthcare setting.

- Community-acquired empyema - Antibiotic regimen should target common pathogens of the oropharynx, including aerobic Staphylococcus and Streptococcus species and anaerobes. Appropriate antibiotics would include third-generation cephalosporins plus metronidazole or a beta-lactam/beta-lactamase inhibitor combination.

- Hospital-acquired empyema - As well as covering for typical organisms and anaerobes, antimicrobial therapy should be directed at providing coverage for MRSA and Pseudomonas. Reasonable options include Vancomycin plus Metronidazole and an antipseudomonal cephalosporin. Vancomycin plus piperacillin/tazobactam, a broad spectrum beta-lactam/beta-lactamase inhibitor, provides both anaerobic and antipseudomonal activity.

Caution should be taken with the use of aminoglycosides due to poor pleural penetration and therefore are not the recommendation in the treatment of empyema.

**Tube Thoracostomy**

Chest tube placement, under radiologic guidance, is the least invasive and most common non-surgical modality for empyema. Optimal thoracostomy tube size has been a controversial topic amongst chest physicians. The traditional dogma was a large bore (greater than 22 French) thoracostomy tube was more suitable for draining the viscous purulent fluid of empyemas. However, recent literature has shown no significant mortality benefit or delay in surgery between large bore (greater than 20 French) versus small-bore chest tubes (less than 20 French).

The use of adjunctive intrapleural medications is controversial. The data regarding isolated use of fibrinolytic drugs (streptokinase, tissue plasminogen activator (TPA), and urokinase) has been underwhelming and has shown no profound benefit in patient outcomes or need for surgical intervention. In contrast, combination therapy of fibrinolytic agents and mucolytics, particularly TPA–DNase therapy, improved fluid drainage for patients with pleural infection and reduced the frequency of surgical referral and the duration of the hospital stay. Despite such positive outcomes, there was no change in mortality.

Recently, a new intrapleural irrigation approach using saline lavage has reported benefits for patients with empyema. The Pleural Irrigation Trial (PIT) found radiographic improvement after three days in empyema patients receiving saline irrigation via tube thoracostomy vs. standard of care. A smaller retrospective study comparing saline flushes plus urokinase versus saline alone found decreased chest tube duration and use of fibrinolytics. Although researchers noted no mortality benefit, more extensive randomized studies are needed to confirm the benefits of this inexpensive, well-tolerated therapy.

**VATS**

Surgical consultation should be a consideration when drainage via tube thoracostomy fails or in multi-loculated empyema. Video-assisted thoracoscopic surgery (VATS) is a minimally invasive surgical technique that allows for direct visualization and evacuation of the infected pleural space. Although appropriate timing of VATS is unclear, it has been documented to have superior outcomes when compared to tube thoracostomy for the treatment of advanced stage empyema in terms of postoperative morbidity, complications, and length of hospital stay.

**Open Thoracostomy & Decortication**

Persistent empyema refractory to standard therapies, including VATS, should be considered for open window thoracostomy (OWT) with prolonged chest tube drainage or decortication. Acute empyema can have long term consequences despite adequate therapeutic interventions. Pleural scarring and fibrosis can lead to adhesions, decreased lung compliance, and a restrictive lung disease pattern. A decortication is an option for lung re-expansion if symptoms persistent 6 months after empyema resolution.