Pentoxifylline and its metabolites decrease blood viscosity and improve blood flow and peripheral tissue oxygenation. The precise mechanism of action by which it leads to symptom improvement remains yet to be determined. However, several pathways are likely involved.

- Pentoxifylline increases red blood cell flexibility by increasing erythrocyte ATP and cyclic nucleotide levels.

- Pentoxifylline is a phosphodiesterase (PDE) inhibitor. By blocking the membrane-bound phosphodiesterase, it increases the concentration of cyclic AMP. It also inhibits thromboxane synthesis and increases prostacyclin synthesis. These actions result in reduced platelet aggregation. Further, pentoxifylline has demonstrated decreased adhesion of platelets to the vessel wall in patients with circulatory disorders.

- Pentoxifylline exerts vasodilation in the skeletal muscle vascular bed by inhibiting PDE and increasing the cAMP.

- Pentoxifylline inhibits the leukocyte-derived free radicals generated during peripheral ischemia in patients with peripheral vascular disease. It has been shown to reduce the impairment of the filterability rate of unfractionated leucocytes, limiting ischemia-related tissue damage.

- Pentoxifylline has immunomodulatory effects. The drug improves leukocyte deformability and chemotaxis. It depresses neutrophil degranulation, decreases endothelial leukocyte adhesion, and lowers the sensitivity of leukocytes to cytokines. Besides, pentoxifylline can inhibit the production of inflammatory cytokines.

Several animal studies have demonstrated the role of pentoxifylline in attenuating ischemia-reperfusion injury, drug-induced nephrotoxicity, infection, and inflammation.

- Pentoxifylline minimized the ischemia-related tissue damage to the intestinal mucosa during reperfusion in Wistar rats.

- Treatment with pentoxifylline attenuated methotrexate-induced renal tissue injury cell death and suppressed the elevation of blood urea nitrogen and creatinine levels in Wistar rats.

- Pentoxifylline exerts a beneficial, gastroprotective effect against stress-induced gastric lesions by improving gastric microcirculation in Wistar rats. This effect is likely due to the enhanced NOS (nitric oxide synthase) activity, local action of the nitric oxide, and attenuation of oxidative metabolism and proinflammatory cytokines.

- In a murine macrophage cell line model, pentoxifylline reduced TNF protein levels by inhibiting TNF mRNA transcription in response to bacterial infection.

- Pentoxifylline minimized liver damage induced by ischemia-reperfusion in albino rats.

Multiple clinical studies have demonstrated the role of anti-inflammatory, anti-fibrotic, and hemorheological properties of pentoxifylline in various disease states.

- In a prospective randomized study, pentoxifylline demonstrated a statistically significant reduction in hemolysis during cardiopulmonary bypass compared to the control sample of patients.

- In a prospective, placebo-controlled, randomized clinical trial of coronary artery bypass graft candidates with an ejection fraction lower or equal to 30%, pretreatment with pentoxifylline for three days before the procedure was associated with reduced tumor necrosis factor-α level, interleukin-6 level, improved left ventricular ejection fraction, decreased intensive care unit stay, ventilation time, and need for inotropic agents and blood transfusion.

- In patients with type-2 diabetic nephropathy on ACE inhibitors or angiotensin receptor blockers (ARBs) for more than six months and on conventional treatment, the addition of pentoxifylline therapy reduced proteinuria and improved glucose control and insulin resistance without a significant change of serum TNF-α in patients.

- Oral administration of pentoxifylline can improve cerebral blood flow in patients with cerebrovascular disease.

- In a double-blind placebo-controlled trial, the administration of pentoxifylline to patients with multi-infarct dementia showed intellectual and cognitive function improvements.