An impairment that causes disability is an injury that extends beyond the physical body part. Patients who become disabled are transitioning into life with a different set of circumstances. The patients are affected personally, socially, professionally, and spiritually. Fortunately, due to progressive movements and increased awareness, the amount of funding and resources available to these patients has increased astronomically.  The recent legislation approved mandates accessibility to all public spaces and appropriate accommodation in workplaces so that these individuals can continue to participate in the community in ways similar to how they had previously.

It is paramount for the physician and all providers participating in the care of a patient with a disability to understand and be familiar with the resources available. The care team should include, but not be limited to, the physician, physical therapist, and/or occupational therapist, and/or speech therapist, psychologist, and case manager. Further, when a patient is on disability from work, it should be the care team's responsibility to return the patient to work as quickly and as safely as possible.

Studies presented by the  American College of Occupational and Environmental Medicine and the Canadia Institue for Work and Health have identified factors that promote a patient's return to work and further discuss the consequences of prolonged time off from work. [Level 5] For these reasons, it is important to have an interprofessional team approach to patients with disabilities.