Regarding dental emergencies, patient education is specific to the diagnosis and category being discussed.****

**Traumatic Dental Emergencies**

While dental trauma may be difficult to foresee in many circumstances, such as accidental falls, motor vehicle accidents, and physical violence, however, using custom mouthguards in contact sports has been shown to decrease traumatic dental injuries in this specific setting. Patients, parents, school teachers, sports coaches, and first responders should be educated on basic first aid for traumatized teeth. Seeking early medical care is also crucial for successful treatment.

**Infectious Dental Emergencies**

Patients should be educated about the serious sequelae of dental infections and the effectiveness of preventative measures. It is important to counsel patients regarding proper oral hygiene with daily toothbrushing and flossing in addition to scheduling regular dentist visits. This will help prevent dental infections and help dental practitioners recognize and treat dental infections early before complications develop. Furthermore, patients need to be educated on the importance of risk mitigation, including smoking cessation and diabetes control, as these factors can make patients more prone to infectious dental emergencies.

**Post-procedural Dental Emergencies**

In many cases, post-extraction or postoperative bleeding can be anticipated, and patients should be educated on applying pressure to assist in augmenting hemostasis. Patients with known congenital coagulopathies, a systemic illness that increases bleeding, or anticoagulant use should be informed of their increased risk of bleeding, even with minor dental procedures. Patients with congenital coagulopathy will benefit from having their dental care being managed in conjunction with a hematologist. Dental care should be provided in conjunction with a primary care physician for those patients with cirrhosis, end-stage renal failure, or who are on anticoagulant therapy.

Patients undergoing exodontia should be educated regarding the possibility of alveolar osteitis occurring, especially if they possess a known risk factor associated with an increased incidence, such as tobacco or oral contraceptive use. If the patient is considered to be high risk, prophylactic measures with chlorhexidine treatments can be taken. Patients should be given strict return precautions if they experience symptoms consistent with alveolar osteitis, and dental professionals should assist with expedited follow-up in these situations.