Echocardiography uses high-frequency sound waves, essentially ultrasound, to penetrate the body and bounce off structures of interest to produce an image. Transducers emit sound waves that are sensed by the receiver up to one hundred frames per second making it possible to generate moving images in real time. Fluid or blood appears black. Reflective surfaces such as calcified structures appear white while muscle tissue appears gray. Transthoracic echocardiography involves the combination of multiple images from various scanning locations on the chest wall. A variation of transthoracic echo is the transesophageal echo in which the transducer is placed on an endoscope that is inserted into the esophagus. This allows for better visualization of cardiac structures with less obstruction from the chest wall, muscles, and ribs. The need for less penetration allows for better image quality and spatial resolution of various cardiac structures. Transesophageal echocardiography requires both topical anesthetics of the oropharynx and sedation of the patient. The procedure is usually performed under conscious sedation. Consent is required, and the patient needs continuous monitoring during as well as following the procedure in the recovery period.

In addition to imaging, echocardiography can determine the velocity of blood flow through the heart and vessels via its Doppler function. Pressure differences between chambers and even valves can be determined using the velocity. Doppler helps visualize not only blood flow but also identifies turbulent regions of accelerated flow. This can be used to determine valvular insufficiency. Stress (either exercise or pharmacologic) echocardiography is routinely used to evaluate cardiac function in the setting of exercise. Three-dimensional echocardiography is a newer echocardiographic technique that allows for the acquisition of three-dimensional datasets that can be analyzed and can specifically assess chamber volumes, valvular abnormalities, and other structural pathology. Additionally, strain rate imaging is a method used for measuring a regional or global deformation of the heart muscle to assess the change in shape and dimensions during the cardiac cycle.

Classical echocardiographic equipment has been large and confined to special rooms dedicated to performing tests. Over the last several years, smaller portable ultrasound equipment has become available to be used at the bedside and can even be carried during medical rounds. Although most handheld devices lack all the functionality of their larger counterparts, they are often able to provide crucial information rapidly and efficiently.

Nuclear imaging involves the injection of intravenous radioactive tracers that become trapped in the myocytes after traveling through the vasculature surrounding the myocardium. Various tracers are used depending on their half-life and the diagnostic purpose of the study.  These radioactive tracers emit radioactive rays that can be detected by specialized scanners that can convert the rays into perfusion images of the heart. Like with echocardiography, nuclear imaging can be performed during stress (either exercise or pharmacologic) to assess for evidence of ischemia.

Cardiac computed tomography uses multiple x-ray beams from a CT scanner at various angles to create cross-sectional images. The x-ray beams pass through the body and are collected by a detector array that can generate an image. Depending on the path of the beam through tissues of varying densities, a gray scale is created. Bone appears white; the air is black, blood and muscle are various shades of gray. To better differentiate the cardiac chambers from the vascular structures, contrast is often used. These images can also be used to produce a three-dimensional image of the heart. CT coronary angiography uses contrast dye to produce a three-dimensional image of the heart vasculature without the need for invasive coronary catheterization.

Cardiac magnetic resonance imaging (CMR) takes advantage of protons in hydrogen molecules to create an image. The human body is made up of a majority of water. Therefore hydrogen molecules are plentiful. An MRI machine creates a magnetic field and alters the spin of the protons. Depending on the surroundings, the frequencies of the spins change. These frequencies are detected, and an image is reconstructed. The cardiac structure is very well-visualized with MRI. The contrast between tissue and vasculature is more pronounced than cardiac CT.

Invasive cardiac catheterization is an invasive technique utilizing a fluoroscopic technique that allows for the assessment of coronary anatomy and remains the gold standard in cardiac imaging. It involves gaining direct access to the coronary arteries via the peripheral anatomy usually through the wrist or the groin vessels. Percutaneous access is gained with a flexible sheath inserted into the vessel that allows for catheters to be advanced towards the heart. The catheter has diagnostic value and can be used to measure hemodynamic pressure changes in the right and left ventricle. The main diagnostic value of catheterization remains with its use for coronary angiography. With the use of contrast agents, direct visualization of the coronaries in real time during the cardiac cycle is possible. Cardiac catheterization is both diagnostic as well as therapeutic with options available for reperfusion of the myocardium with the use of balloon angioplasty and stent placement.