# Continuing Education Activity

Paraneoplastic pemphigus (PNP) is a rare autoimmune disease that is almost always associated with confirmed or occult malignancy. Patients typically present with painful and extensive mucosal and cutaneous involvement, with an overall poor prognosis. No formal diagnostic or treatment protocols currently exist for PNP. This activity reviews the epidemiology, pathophysiology, clinical presentation, differential diagnosis, and management of patients with PNP while emphasizing the role of an interprofessional team in improving care for these patients.

**Objectives:**
- Outline the clinical presentation of a patient with paraneoplastic pemphigus, reviewing the five major clinical subtypes that can present and the most common early presenting symptom.

- Identify the potential complications of paraneoplastic pemphigus.
- Summarize histopathological, clinical, and immunological criteria used to diagnose paraneoplastic pemphigus.
- Review the importance of coordination of care among interprofessional team members to improve outcomes for patients affected by paraneoplastic pemphigus.

# Introduction

Paraneoplastic pemphigus (PNP) is a rare, autoimmune-mediated mucocutaneous disease that is almost always associated with an underlying neoplasm. Pemphigus comprises a group of IgG-mediated autoimmune bullous diseases in which autoantibodies react with desmosomes, the cell-to-cell adhesion structures between keratinocytes, resulting in painful skin erosions and blisters. Researchers have identified three significant forms of pemphigus: pemphigus foliaceus, pemphigus vulgaris (most common type), and paraneoplastic pemphigus.

Paraneoplastic pemphigus typically presents with painful mucosal erosions and dusky patches on the skin that later desquamate. A variety of lesions with differing morphologies, ranging from flaccid blisters to widespread lichenoid eruptions, have been seen in paraneoplastic pemphigus patients. However, shared by all patients is the presence of widespread, and often severe, mucosal lesions that can be the earliest presenting symptom of the disease.

# Etiology

Lymphoproliferative neoplasms are the most commonly identified underlying diseases in paraneoplastic pemphigus development, accounting for up to 84% of cases.

In adults, non-Hodgkin lymphoma is the most frequent underlying neoplasm (38.6%), followed by chronic lymphocytic leukemia (18.4%), and Castleman disease (18.4%).

Recently, researchers have identified increased susceptibility to paraneoplastic pemphigus development in patients with HLA Class II Drb1*03 allele

# Epidemiology

The exact incidence of paraneoplastic pemphigus (PNP) is unknown. It is much less common than pemphigus vulgaris or pemphigus foliaceus, comprising only 3 to 5% of all pemphigus cases.

Paraneoplastic pemphigus typically develops in adults 45 to 70 years old.

In a study of 496 patients with internal malignancy, 25 of these patients developed pemphigus (5%). The mean age of PNP patients was 64.7 years and PNP development correlated with increasing age.

# Pathophysiology

The following proteins, among others, are targeted by autoantibodies in paraneoplastic pemphigus:

- Desmoglein types 1 (160 kD) and 3 (130 kD) – Desmosome, extracellular (Dsg1, Dsg3)

- Desmoplakin 1 (250 kD) and 2 (210 kD) – Desmosome, intracellular

- Bullous pemphigoid antigen 1 (230 kD)– Hemidesmosome/lamina lucida (BP230)

- Envoplakin (210 kD) – Desmosome, intracellular

- Epiplakin (more than 700 kD) - Desmosome, intracellular

- Periplakin (190 kD) – Desmosome, intracellular

- Alpha-2-macroglobulin-like-1 antigen (170 kD) (A2ML1) - protease inhibitor

Autoantibodies against plakin proteins are characteristic of PNP and not typically found in other forms of pemphigus.

# Histopathology

Histologic features of paraneoplastic pemphigus (PNP) include epidermal acantholysis and clefting, necrotic keratinocytes, vacuolization of the basal layer, and lymphocyte exocytosis.

Paraneoplastic pemphigus may mimic erythema multiforme both clinically and histologically, particularly if lesions are characterized by predominant interface dermatitis with necrotic keratinocytes. Therefore direct immunofluorescence and indirect immunofluorescence are imperative for correct diagnosis. Similarly, the characteristic suprabasal acantholysis and blister formation seen in paraneoplastic pemphigus are essentially identical to that observed in pemphigus vulgaris, although other vulgaris features are typically absent.

Histological findings of interface dermatitis, vacuolar changes, and dyskeratotic keratinocytes should raise suspicion for PNP, as these features are not present in classic pemphigus.

# History and Physical

Paraneoplastic pemphigus (PNP) almost always presents with early mucosal involvement, typically with vesicles or bullae that result in painful mucocutaneous erosions and severe stomatitis, similar in morphology to pemphigus vulgaris.

Cutaneous involvement in paraneoplastic pemphigus is typically diffuse and can exhibit considerable variation in appearance and morphology.

**Clinical Presentations of Paraneoplastic Pemphigus**

- **Pemphigus-like**
- Clinical: superficial vesicles, flaccid blisters, crusted erosions
- Histopathology: intraepidermal and or suprabasal acantholysis with surrounding mononuclear cells

- **Pemphigoid-like**
- Clinical: scaling erythematous papules and tense blisters
- Histopathology: dyskeratosis with subepidermal splitting, with or without basal cell vacuolization; sparse mononuclear infiltrate at the dermal-epidermal junction

- **Erythema Multiforme-like**
- Clinical: Scaling erythematous papules; severe, polymorphic cutaneous or mucosal lesions
- Histopathology: Dyskeratosis with or without accompanying epidermal acantholysis; perivascular infiltrates

- **Graft-versus-Host Disease-like**
- Clinical: Diffuse red, scaly, sometimes dusky, papules
- Histopathology: hyper-ortho/parakeratosis and variable dyskeratosis with or without vacuolar interface change

- **Lichen Planus- like**
- Clinical: small red to violaceous flat-topped scaly papules
- Histopathology: hyperkeratosis with a lichenoid infiltrate at the dermal-epidermal junction

In a study of 104 patients, an erythema multiforme-like presentation was most common (56%), followed by PV-like (41%), lichen planus-like (13%), and bullous pemphigoid-like (3%).

An individual patient may have various forms of coexisting cutaneous lesions and have lesions that transform to a different morphology. Blisters and erythema multiforme-like lesions affecting the palms and soles can help differentiate PNP from pemphigus vulgaris, which typically does not involve these surfaces.

**Extracutaneous Involvement**

Paraneoplastic pemphigus can affect other types of epithelia. Thus internal organ involvement is common, particularly in the eyes, lungs, gastrointestinal tract, thyroid, kidney.

Respiratory involvement can present as dyspnea, dry cough, obstructive lung disease, or secondary pneumonia, with potential for rapid progression to bronchiolitis obliterans.

In a study of 58 PNP patients, 39% experienced significant muscle weakness. Myasthenia gravis was ultimately diagnosed in 35% of these patients as they exhibited high titers of anti-acetylcholine receptor or anti-acetylcholinesterase antibodies.

# Evaluation

No formally accepted diagnostic criteria exist for paraneoplastic pemphigus.

Anhalt’s et al. original PNP diagnostic criteria have as their basis on five immunological, histological, and clinical features:

**Clinical**

Painful mucosal erosions with or without accompanying polymorphous cutaneous lesions in the setting of an underlying malignancy

**Histopathology**

Suprabasal (intraepidermal) acantholysis, interface dermatitis, and keratinocyte necrosis

**DIF (Direct Immunofluorescence)**

IgG and complement (C3) deposition within the intercellular spaces of the epidermis, often with linear, granular basement membrane zone deposition

**IIF (Indirect Immunofluorescence)**

Detection of autoantibodies targeting intercellular proteins found in transitional or stratified squamous epithelia

**Immunoprecipitation**

Precipitation of a characteristic proteins desmoplakin 1 (250 kD), bullous pemphigoid antigen (230 kD), desmoplakin 2 (210 kD), periplakin (190kD), alpha-2-macroglobulin-like-1 antigen (170 kD)

Joly et al. evaluated these diagnostic criteria and identified three features with both high specificity (84%-100%) and sensitivity (82-86%).

- Presence of an underlying lymphoproliferative disorder

- An IIF positive for autoantibodies on rat bladder

- Detection of autoantibodies against periplakin and envoplakin on immunoblot

As more atypical presentations and disease manifestations of PNP get reported, researchers continue to propose variants to the classic diagnostic criteria. For instance, Camisa and Helm created diagnostic guidelines that classify criteria as either major or minor. PNP diagnosis requires three major criteria, or two major and two minor criteria.

**Major Criteria**

- Polymorphic mucocutaneous eruptions

- Concomitant internal neoplasm

- Serum antibodies with a specific immunoprecipitation pattern

**Minor Criteria**

- Acantholysis observed histologically

- DIF displaying intercellular and basement membrane staining

-  IIF staining positive on rat bladder epithelium

**Diagnosis of PNP**

**Histopathology:**Dyskeratosis with suprabasal acantholysis with possible basilar vacuolization are classic histological features of PNP.

**Direct Immunofluorescence (DIF):**Typically reveals intercellular IgG and C3 in the epidermis, often in a net-like pattern between cells. Granular or linear IgG and C3 deposits along the basement membrane zone at the dermal-epidermal junction may also be present - a characteristic unique to PNP compared to other forms of pemphigus.****However, DIF can be negative in up to 50% of cases.

**Indirect Immunofluorescence (IIF):**The presence of circulating antibodies targeting the intercellular proteins of cells within stratified squamous or transitional epithelia are characteristic of PNP.

**Immunoprecipitation and Immunoblot:**Serologic detection of autoantibodies against the 210-kD band of envoplakin and the 190-kD band of periplakin is both sensitive and specific for the diagnosis of PNP.

**Additional Work-Up**

Upon diagnosis of PNP, evaluation for an underlying malignancy is mandatory. Suggested studies and labs include CBC, LDH, flow cytometry, and imaging of the chest, abdomen, and pelvis.

# Treatment / Management

Overall, the treatment of paraneoplastic pemphigus remains controversial and undefined.

Medical treatment should aim at reducing inflammation, suppressing the immune response, and providing proper wound care. High-dose corticosteroids are considered first-line therapy. Additional systemic immunosuppressants (such as azathioprine or mycophenolate mofetil) may be required if the disease continues to progress or is refractory to treatment with steroids alone.

While cutaneous lesions may improve within 12 weeks, mucosal involvement can be poorly responsive to treatment.

It is essential to recognize and address extracutaneous manifestations and secondary infections promptly. Loss of epidermal integrity places patients at significant risk of infection, dehydration, and electrolyte imbalances. Ideally, PNP patients should receive treatment at a certified burn center for optimal wound care.

Occlusive, hydrating dressings should be used to prevent further fluid and electrolyte loss while promoting healing.

Anti-septic baths and topical antimicrobials are preferable to systemic medications.

Also, prophylaxis for side effects of prolonged corticosteroid and other immunosuppressive therapies merits provider focus.

# Differential Diagnosis

Differential diagnoses for paraneoplastic pemphigus (PNP) include:

- Stevens-Johnson syndrome/erythema multiforme

- Toxic epidermal necrolysis

- Lichen planus

- Graft-versus-host disease

- Herpes simplex virus

- Drug-induced pemphigus

- Pemphigus vulgaris

- Mucous membrane pemphigoid

- Major aphthous or chemotherapy-induced stomatitis

- Staphylococcal scalded skin syndrome

- Bullous pemphigoid

Correct diagnosis relies on a combination of clinical presentation, histopathology, DIF/IIF, and immunoblot or immunoprecipitation studies.

# Prognosis

Even with treatment, paraneoplastic pemphigus (PNP) outcomes are often poor, with mortality rates up to 90%.

The presence of keratinocyte necrosis and cutaneous lesions resembling erythema multiforme, especially when accompanied by extensive mucosal and cutaneous lesions at presentation, are two factors associated with a worse prognosis.

Concentrations of serum IgG autoantibodies against Dsg1 and Dsg3 may parallel the clinical symptoms. Thus Dsg-ELISA can be a serological marker of disease activity in pemphigus.

# Complications

Ocular involvement in paraneoplastic pemphigus is common and thus should be closely monitored. Early ophthalmology referral is key to prevent vision loss and blindness. Ocular therapy may include the use of topical corticosteroid drops, artificial tears, and 10% N-acetylcysteine, and sometimes requires surgical intervention in cases of extensive scarring.

Bronchiolitis obliterans, presenting with a dry cough, dyspnea, and hypoxemia, affects an estimated 30% to 90% of PNP patients.

Epidermal erosions and blister rupture may cause significant fluid, protein, and electrolyte losses resulting in dehydration and electrolyte imbalances. Breaching and subsequent loss of the skin barrier also predispose patients to infection and sepsis, compounded by the effect of immunosuppressive therapies used to treat PNP and the underlying malignancy. Mucosal lesions are often resistant and persistent even after intensive treatment.

Dehydration and malnutrition secondary to painful oropharyngeal erosions may occur. Thus a nasogastric tube may be required in some patients.

# Deterrence and Patient Education

Diffuse blistering may lead to the development of contractures. Physical therapy and rehabilitation may be warranted in such patients to regain function and movement. Ulcerated skin and mucosal lesions should be cleaned with sterile warm water compresses twice daily, and kept moist with emollients and low adhesive wound dressings, such as petroleum jelly-impregnated gauze. The use of silver dressings is advantageous as they reduce the incidence of infection and also require less frequent dressing changes.

# Enhancing Healthcare Team Outcomes

There is not much high-quality evidence for the treatment and diagnosis of paraneoplastic pemphigus (PNP), both due to difficulty in diagnosis with various clinical presentations and low disease incidence.

Healthcare staff with adequate knowledge of wound care are essential for effective treatment of paraneoplastic pemphigus, which is managed similarly to toxic epidermal necrolysis and burn patients. A wound care nurse should be involved in the care of these patients, and keep the concerned provider apprised of all progress. The patient requires education by the nurse on the different occlusive dressings and the importance of antiseptic baths. The nurse has to monitor the wounds for superinfection and report any changes to the provider. A mental health nurse should also be involved in the care of these patients as the disorder can cause severe distress, anxiety, and depression. A specialty-trained pharmacist must be involved to verify agent selection and dosing when medication is part of the therapy plan, and as always, check for drug-drug interactions. Dieticians aid in the development of dietary plans and nutrient supplementation, especially if the patient requires tube feeds secondary to oropharyngeal involvement.

With comprehensive management by the interprofessional healthcare team, the quality of life of these patients with paraneoplastic pemphigus can be improved. [Level 5]