Currently, in the United States, physicians perform about one million total hip and knee arthroplasties, but this number is expected to quadruple over the next one to two decades. With an increasing number of surgeries, it is expected there will be more infections. The current rate of prosthetic joint infection varies from one center to another but typically range between 0.5% to 1.0% for hip and shoulder replacements, and 0.5% to 2% for knee replacements

Infection rates are higher in the first 2 years compared to after two years following surgery. This is due to the periprosthetic tissue being highly vascular which makes it susceptible to high risk of hematogenous spread in the early years after the primary procedure

**The Risk Factors for Infection Include**

**Preoperative factors:**local active or previous infection, previous local surgery, systemic septicemia.

**Host factors:**

- Lifestyle modifiable factors such as obesity, smoking, excess alcohol, IV drug use, and poor oral hygiene.

- Medical conditions or medications that compromise immunity such as poorly controlled diabetes, acute hepatic failure, chronic kidney disease, malnutrition, HIV, and immunosuppressant drugs. e.g corticosteroids, antimetabolites, anti-TNF agents.

- Inflammatory arthropathies e.g rheumatoid arthritis, ankylosis spondylitis, and psoriasis.

**Surgery-related factors:**including complexity and increased surgical time.

**Postoperative factors:**such as the development of a hematoma, seroma, and wound dehiscence.