Glatiramer acetate is to be administered by subcutaneous injection.

- Sites approved for injection include arms, abdomen, hips, and thighs

- Glatiramer acetate comes in two dosing schedules: 20 mg per mL per day or 40 mg per mL three times per week with doses given at least 48 hours apart

- Glatiramer acetate 20 mg per ml and 40 mg per ml are not interchangeable

- Recommended to rotate injection sites to minimize the occurrence of lipoatrophy

- Do not administer intravenously or intramuscularly

- It is recommended to allow the solution to warm to room temperature before administration

**Adult Dosing**

Glatiramer is indicated to treat relapsing forms of multiple sclerosis (MS), including clinically isolated syndrome, relapsing-remitting disease, and/or active secondary progressive disease in adults. The dose for glatiramer acetate is 20 mg SQ once daily or 40 mg SQ three times a week (e.g., Mon, Wed, Fri) administered at least 48 hours apart.

Given the positive results in reducing relapse rates with the implementation of glatiramer acetate in multiple sclerosis patients, curiosity emerged regarding the effects of using the drug at a higher dosage. In 2007 researchers performed a phase II clinical trial comparing a high dosage of 40 mg glatiramer acetate to the standard dosage of 20 mg, encompassing 38 RRMS patients over nine months. The efficacy assessment was the number of gadolinium-enhancing lesions on MRI. Results showed increased efficacy in the patients on the higher dosage of glatiramer acetate 40 mg as they demonstrated 2.26 lesions on MRI compared to 3.62 lesions seen on MRI in those patients on a standard dosage of 20 mg. In addition, safety profiles were comparable between the two groups.

The results prompted a phase III, randomized, double-blind, parallel-group trial that embodied over 1155 patients in over 136 sites across 20 different countries to compare daily administration of subQ 40 mg versus 20 mg glatiramer acetate in one year. Primary outcome efficacy was assessed by the relapse rate in the first year, while secondary outcome efficacy was deemed by MRI findings. At the end of one year, no statistically significant difference was found between the two groups; The standard 20 mg group had a 0.28 mean relapse rate, and the higher dosed 40 mg group had a 0.27 mean relapse rate. Additionally, the mean number of new T2 lesions and percentage of brain volume changes were similar between the two groups.

In 2013, Khan et al. performed a phase III, randomized, double-blind study trial including over 1404 patients with RRMS in over 142 sites in 17 countries compared a high dose of 40 mg glatiramer acetate three times per week to placebo over one year. This study revealed a 34% reduction in risk of confirmed relapses in those receiving treatment compared to those receiving placebo, 0.331 vs. 0.501, p=0.0001.

**Specific Patient Population**

**Patients with Renal Impairment**

There is no information provided/studied on dose adjustments by the manufacturer.

**Patients with Hepatic Impairment**

There is no information provided/studied on dose adjustments by the manufacturer.

**Pregnancy Considerations**

The American Academy of Neurology (AAN) recommends against starting disease-modifying therapies for MS during pregnancy, and an exception is females at high risk of MS activity. Therefore, patients should be instructed if they are pregnant or plan to become pregnant while using glatiramer, immediately they should consult their health care provider. It is considered Pregnancy Category B medicine.

**Breastfee****ding Considerations**

Most experts usually consider glatiramer acetate safe, and it appears to be one of the preferred disease-modifying agents to treat MS during breastfeeding.