Several potential treatment courses have been tried with varying success ranging from the non-invasive application of antibiotics and high dose steroids to surgical interventions.

Current options for treatment include:

- Systemic antibiotics

- Topical antibiotics

- Topical steroids

- Dilute antiseptic washes/swabs

- Manual swabbing to reduce bacterial load

- Subconjunctival Antibiotic Injections

- Antimicrobial solution rinse

- Autologous serum eye drops

- Hypochlorous acid treatment of eyelashes

- Surgical resection

In the first retrospective study describing the existence of an unknown disease, now defined as GFS, twelve patients were treated with various systemic, high dose topical antibiotics and high dose topical steroids. All 12 saw a marked reduction in symptoms. Eight of the twelve needed daily treatment with topical combined antibiotic/steroid eye drops to avoid recurrence of symptoms. The remaining four saw the complete resolution of most GFS-related symptoms. Several had persistent ptosis, but the severity lessened after treatment of the underlying disease.

In a 97-year-old female, sweeping the superior conjunctival fornices with a cotton swab soaked in 10% povidone-iodine was noted to cure giant fornix syndrome after several attempts at medical treatment failed to stop a relapse. Her initial six-month treatment regimen of topical polymyxin–trimethoprim eyedrops and several fluoroquinolone eyedrops removed P. aeruginosa from her eye but could not clear the remaining MRSA infection. The treatment was switched to a tobramycin and vancomycin eyedrop regimen with worsening symptoms. The patient was unable to tolerate systemic antibiotics. The drug regimen was shifted to a combined vancomycin and prednisone eye drops, including subconjunctival injections of vancomycin and triamcinolone, which led to marked improvement. However, after another relapse, more aggressive treatment with 10% Povidone-Iodine forniceal swab was completed six times within ten days. She was considered clinically cured and remained infection-free while in contact with the clinic.

Several surgical resection techniques have been used to reduce the depth of the superior fornices and close the large space harboring bacteria. One retrospective case series involved the resection of the superior and inferior conjunctiva ranging from 4-10mm (subjective, estimated by the surgeon) along with subconjunctival antibiotic injections and electrocautery of the conjunctival bed resulted in positive outcomes. Within one week, several symptoms, including redness, conjunctival injection, purulent discharge, and corneal punctate epitheliopathy, saw marked improvement on physical examination. Complete resolution of most symptoms occurred within three months, and no recurrent infections were reported within nine months.

Another retrospective study compared the depth of resection to surgical outcomes. Ten patients were assigned to the "limited" or "maximal "resection group based on their reduction during Müller's muscle conjunctival resection (MMCR) procedures. Limited MMCR was defined as 6 to 8 mm, and maximal MMCR was defined as 10 to 12 mm resection. Results indicated that maximal MMCR was more successful than limited MMCR. Maximal MMCR led to complete symptom reduction without any additional surgeries within an average of 2.06 months. All three limited MMCR patients required additional resections to resolve their symptoms. These data suggest that more extensive resections correlate with better procedure outcomes. The authors did not suggest an upper limit to resection. They expressed concern over the upper lid and lacrimal gland function impairment, but none of the ten patients had observable or reported problems with post-operative tear production.