The differential diagnosis for second and third trimester vaginal bleeding in the setting of acute abdominal pain includes spontaneous abortion, bloody show associated with normal labor, placenta previa, placental abruption, and uterine rupture.

A spontaneous abortion (also referred to as an early pregnancy loss or a miscarriage) can be diagnosed by finding fetal tissue in the cervical canal either by palpation or visualization during the speculum exam within the first 20 weeks of gestation.

Bloody show refers to mucus mixed with blood that is discharged prior to the onset of labor. Bloody show may precede labor by as much as three days. The blood loss associated with bloody show is small, and patients remain hemodynamically stable.

Placenta previa refers to the placenta attaching to the uterus over the cervical opening. A placenta previa is one of the more common causes of second and third trimester bleeding.

A placental abruption refers to the placenta separating from the uterus before delivery. Most placental abruptions occur around 25 weeks.

Uterine rupture occurs rarely but must be ruled out in all cases of 2 and 3 trimester vaginal bleeding. The biggest risk factor for a uterine rupture is TOLAC. Most uterine ruptures occur during labor. A uterine rupture should be considered in all women undergoing a TOLAC who present with any of the following: hypotension, a sudden change in contraction pattern, fetal bradycardia, sudden abdominal pain, hematuria, loss of fetal station, or vaginal bleeding.