Osteoblasts are a significant contributor to the physiological homeostasis of bone, and researchers have postulated their dysregulation as a potential factor in a broad spectrum of pathologic conditions, particularly conditions affecting the structural integrity of bone. Understanding osteoblasts requires a comparable concurrent cognizance of osteoclasts, their oppugnant cell, and the interactions between the cell types.

**Osteoblast Markers**

Many serum biomarkers of osteoblast function exist. These include osteoprotegerin (OPG), receptor activator of nuclear factor kappa B ligand (RANKL), alkaline phosphatase (ALP), bone alkaline phosphatase (B-ALP), osteocalcin, procollagen type 1 carboxy-terminal propeptide (P1CP) and procollagen type 1 amino-terminal propeptide (P1NP).

**Alkaline Phosphatase**

Serum alkaline phosphatases (ALPs) are probably the most common clinically encountered marker for osteoblastic activity. ALPs classify as either tissue-specific (intestine, placenta, and germinal tissue) or tissue-nonspecific (live, bone, and kidney). The tissue nonspecific ALPs are encoded by a single gene and are isoenzymes located on cell membranes that catalyze the hydrolysis of organic phosphate esters.

The clinical value of ALP, as a marker for osteoblastic activity, on CMP is dictated by clinical context. While the most commonly encountered elevation of serum ALP is cholestatic liver disease, osteoblastic diseases of bone are also associated with increased serum ALP -such as metastatic adenocarcinoma of the prostate, osteogenic osteosarcoma, and early multiple myeloma.

Decreased levels of serum alkaline phosphatase are observable in conditions affecting osteoblastic activity such as hypophosphatasia and cleidocranial dysplasia.

Alkaline phosphatase immunohistochemistry is also utilized in pathology to demonstrate osteoblastic activity. ALP IHC staining contributes to aid in diagnosing osteosarcoma and other primary bone tumors, such as giant cell tumor of bone.

**Development & Peak Bone Mass**

Osseous development follows a predictable, stepwise progression of formation, beginning in the sixth to seventh week of embryonic development until adulthood.

Patients need to understand that bone is a living organ, continually remodeling. The importance of remodeling includes replacing damaged bone to maintain mechanical strength and calcium homeostasis. Wolff's law states that bone adapts and remodels as a response to stress from mechanical forces, changing its architecture.

**Aging**

As humans age, various factors such as reduced mechanical loading and endocrine dysfunction contribute to an imbalance between bone formation and bone resorption. This dysfunction results in an alteration of bone quantity and quality. The importance of cortical remodeling also increases as cancellous bone is lost; remodeling in both compartments increases.

Waning vitamin D production and decreasing calcium absorption exacerbate the incongruity between preserving bone strength and providing the body with calcium, which manifests as secondary hyperparathyroidism, maintaining serum calcium levels at the expense of bone resorption.

Postmenopausal women and older men are particularly at-risk populations. The balance between resorption and formation becomes negative, leading to irreversible trabecular thinning and loss, as well as cortical thinning.

**Osteoporosis**

Osteoporosis is the most common disease of bone and a major public health concern. Osteoporotic bone exhibits decreased mass, deteriorated tissue, and disrupted architecture that results in compromised strength.

The diagnosis is by measuring bone mineral density (BMD) with a dual-energy X-ray absorptiometry (DEXA) scan or after a vertebral or hip fragility fracture in the absence of significant trauma. Two methods serve to calculate BMD.

- T-score:

- Comparison to healthy, young, sex-matched individuals
- A score of less than -2.5 standard deviations (SDs) below average defines osteoporosis, as defined by the WHO

- Z-score:

- Comparison to persons of same age and sex
- A score of less than -2.5 SDs is suspicious for a secondary cause of osteoporosis

Osteoporosis divides into two types:

- Primary Osteoporosis

- Postmenopausal (involutional osteoporosis Type I): deficiency of estrogen, primarily affecting trabecular bone
- Senile (involutional osteoporosis Type II): decrease bone mass secondary to the aging of both cortical and trabecular bone

- Secondary Osteoporosis

- Due to an extensive array of factors including but not limited to: lifestyle, genetics, autoimmune disease, rheumatologic disease, endocrine, gastrointestinal, hematological, or neurological disorder.

Estrogen insufficiency especially predisposes postmenopausal women and older men to osteoporosis through a variety of mechanisms, including increasing osteocyte apoptosis. While incompletely understood, this has been postulated to be partially due to dysregulation between receptor activator of nuclear factor-κB ligand (RANKL), receptor activator of nuclear factor-κB (RANK) and osteoprotegerin (OPG), a decoy receptor the neutralizes RANKL. The RANK/RANKL/OPG pathway is pivotal in osteoclast activation, and the dysregulation between osteoclastic and osteoblastic activity partially stems from the biological effect of estrogen on this mechanism.

Specifically, estrogen has demonstrated to modulate RANKL, a membrane-bound protein secreted by osteoblasts, critical for osteoclast differentiation (through its binding to RANK), activation, and survival. Estrogen also upregulates OPG expression, which inhibits osteoclastogenesis. RANK and M-CSF, a factor that increases bone resorption, have been demonstrated to be downregulated by estrogen. Estrogen directly protects bone by preventing: osteocyte apoptosis, osteoclast survival (through TGF-B), and osteoblast apoptosis (through the Fas ligand). This is in opposition to 1,25(OH)2D3, PTH/PGE2, and interleukin (IL)-11, which induce RANKL expression.

The North American Menopause Society recommends that all postmenopausal women, regardless of BMD, observe the following recommendations

- Recommended daily allowance calcium (female)

- 1,000 mg/d - age 19 to 50
- 1,200 mg/d - 50+

- Recommended daily allowance calcium (male)

- 1,000 mg/d - age 19 to 70
- 1,200 mg/d - 70+

- Recommended daily allowance vitamin D (male and female)

- 600 IU/d - age 19 to 70
- 800 IU/d - 70+

Commonly prescribed medications for osteoporotic bone disease includes recombinant parathyroid hormone [PTH(1-34)] to stimulate osteoblasts and antiresorptive agents.

**Osteoarthritis**

Recent evidence from Maruotti et al. suggests that while the pathogenesis of osteoarthritis (OA) is still poorly understood, osteoblastic dysregulation could play a substantial role. Abnormal expression of OPG and RANKL has been observed in osteoblasts from patients with osteoarthritic changes. Various transcription factors, growth factors, PGE2, and IL-6, have also been demonstrated to be produced in aberrant quantities by osteoarthritis osteoblasts, possibly contributing to the pathogenesis of OA.

**PTHrP and Malignancy**

PTHrP is a known mediator of malignancy-induced hypercalcemia (or humoral hypercalcemia of malignancy - HHM).

**Medications**

Medications such as calcitonin, recombinant PTH, selective estrogen receptor modulators, and human monoclonal antibodies that bind RANKL can either directly or indirectly modulate osteoblast function. These medications are frequently used in the management of osteoporosis and other conditions.

**Glucocorticosteroids**

Glucocorticoid excess has been established to decrease bone mineral density by reducing bone formation and increasing resorption. Glucocorticoids inhibit osteoblastogenesis, increase osteoblast apoptosis, and decrease osteoclast apoptosis.