Cyclobenzaprine is structurally and pharmacologically related to tricyclic antidepressants. Among the most dreaded toxicities linked with cyclical antidepressants, overdoses affect fast-acting sodium channels in the cardiac conduction system. Cyclical antidepressants block the cardiac sodium channel and cause prolongation of cardiac depolarization, which manifests as QRS widening on electrocardiograms. There is also evidence that cyclical antidepressants may decrease the seizure threshold by interfering with chloride conductance on the GABA receptor.

One study retrospectively looked at 750 charts at five regional poison centers between the years 1989 to 1993. Based on their retrospective study, the authors concluded that cyclobenzaprine in toxic doses less than 1000 mg does not appear to produce the life-threatening neurotoxicity and cardiotoxic dysrhythmias associated with traditional tricyclic antidepressants. The case report of cyclobenzaprine toxicity describes ileus and simultaneous ST segment elevations on EKG.

Other case reports, however, have implicated cyclobenzaprine in acute overdose as the culprit leading to fatalities. For example, there were two reported cases of overdoses in which elevated levels of cyclobenzaprine were found in postmortem evaluations of the patients. The authors, therefore, document an association linking elevated cyclobenzaprine levels with two examples of presumed fatal overdoses.

The most common effects associated with cyclobenzaprine overdose are drowsiness and tachycardia. Rare but potentially critical manifestations of overdose are cardiac arrest, cardiac dysrhythmias, severe hypotension, seizures, and neuroleptic malignant syndrome. Changes in the electrocardiogram, particularly in the QRS axis or width, are clinically significant indicators of cyclobenzaprine toxicity.

To summarize, treatment beyond GI decontamination is unnecessary for less than 100 mg ingestions. Cyclobenzaprine does not appear to produce life-threatening cardiovascular or neurologic effects in doses less than 1000 mg, and serious toxicity such as arrhythmias, hypotension, and seizures occur at doses greater than 1000 mg.

Although rare, deaths may occur from overdosage(>1000 mg) with cyclobenzaprine. As management of overdose is complex, the clinician should contact a poison control center for the latest information on treatment.

**Management of Toxicity**

- General measures include airway breathing and circulation

- To protect against potentially critical arrhythmias, obtain an EKG and quickly initiate cardiac monitoring

- Protect the patient’s airway, and establish an intravenous line

- Gastrointestinal Decontamination by large volume gastric lavage followed by activated charcoal

- Serum alkalinization using sodium bicarbonate if EKG exhibits QRS prolongation

- Dysrhythmias unresponsive to sodium bicarbonate and hyperventilation may respond to phenytoin, lidocaine, or bretylium

- In patients with CNS depression, early intubation because of the potential for sudden collapse

- Seizures control with benzodiazepines or, if these are ineffective, other anticonvulsants (e.g., phenobarbital, phenytoin)

- Physostigmine administration should be in close consultation with a poison control center