Three reports from the American Academy of Ophthalmology (AAO) in 2002, 2011, and 2016 have provided clinicians with evidence-based guidelines for screening patients on CQ/HCQ therapy.

The guidelines recommend starting annual screening after 5 years unless additional risk factors are present that include small stature, obesity, liver or kidney disease, and retinal disease.  In these cases, test on an annual basis from the start.  Since mf-ERG, is the most sensitive test but not as readily available, some protocols recommend introducing it at a later stage.

**Interpretation of Results**

- Visual field: defects are most likely to occur at 5 degrees from the center, except in Asian patients where the defect may be over 10 degrees from the center.  Use statistical analysis to determine the significance of the data.

- SD-OCT: will reveal parafoveal thinning of the photoreceptor integrity line and the outer nuclear layer of the retina; this results in a "flattening" of the foveal depression and the "flying saucer sign" where the outer nuclear layer in the fovea's center is unaffected, and just around it this layer is much thinner (the edge of the saucer).

- FAF: reveals in early maculopathy, a ring of hyperfluorescence (caused by the accumulation of lipofuscin) and in later stages, a ring of hypofluoresence (caused by the loss of photoreceptor and retinal pigment epithelial layers).

- mf-ERG: amplitude reduction is most common in ring 2, followed by ring 3, 4 and 1.  Delayed implicit times are less common.

- The dilated fundus exam: 2016 recommendations indicate that with better dosing guidelines and earlier detection, end-stage bull's eye maculopathy presents less often.  However, the clinician should have familiarity with the fundus appearance of irregularity in the macular pigmentation in the early phase, a ring of macular pigment dropout in the advanced stage, and peripheral bone spicule formation, vascular attenuation, and optic disc pallor in the end-stage.