Lymphatic filariasis is caused by three species of parasitic worm, Wuchereria bancrofti, Brugia malayi, and B. timori. However, it is Wuchereria bancrofti that is most commonly linked to the chronic disease manifestation of hydrocele.

In the human body, adult worms (male and female) live in lymph nodes and, after mating, produce numerous larvae called microfilariae, which migrate between the lymph system and blood channels to reach the peripheral blood vessels. When female mosquitoes, Culex, Aedes, and Anopheles (depending on the region of the world), ingest a blood meal from an actively infected person, they consume microfilariae with the blood. The larvae grow and molt repeatedly in the mosquito to produce the highly active infective larvae in about 10 to 12 days. The infective larvae then migrate and collect in the mosquito’s proboscis. The next time the mosquito bites a human host, larvae are deposited on the skin and find their way into the bloodstream through the bite wound. They develop further as they migrate through the human body to the lymphatic vessels and lymph nodes, where they develop into adult worms.

Eventually, some adult worms make their way to the scrotal lymph vessels, causing acute filarial lymphangitis, lymphangiectasia, and acute hydrocele. This may produce transient symptoms in the form of pain or nodularity. Repeated cycles of inflammation over time will lead to chronic hydrocele. Thus, a majority of men with lymphatic filariasis will eventually develop symptomatic hydroceles.