Two staging systems are used in primary bone cancer, the TNM and Enneking systems.

**TNM system - American Joint Committee on Cancer (AJCC)**

This refers to the extent of tumor (T), spread to local lymph nodes (N), metastatic spread (M), and histological grade (G).

**Stage IA (T1 N0 M0 G1/GX)**

- ≤8cm in size, with no lymph node or metastatic spread. Low grade.

**Stage IB (T2 N0 M0 G1/GX, or T3 N0 M0 G1/GX)**

- >8cm in size (T2), with no lymph node or metastatic spread. Low grade.

- Cancer at more than one location in the same bone (T3), with no lymph node or metastatic spread. Low grade.

**Stage IIA (T1 N0 M0 G2/G3)**

- ≤8cm in size, with no lymph node or metastatic spread. High grade.

**Stage IIB (T2 N0 M0 G2/G3)**

- >8cm in size, with no lymph node or metastatic spread. High grade

**Stage III (T3 N0 M0 G2/G3)**

- Cancer at more than one location in the same bone, with no lymph node or metastatic spread. High grade.

**Stage IVA (Any T N0 M1a Any G)**

- Any size and maybe in more than one location in the same bone, with no lymph node involvement. Metastatic spread to the lungs (M1a). Any grade.

**Stage IVB (Any T, N1, Any M, Any G, or Any T, Any N, M1b, Any G)**

- Any size and maybe in more than one location in the same bone. It has spread to local lymph nodes (N1). It may or may not have metastasized to distant organs. Any grade.

- Any size and maybe in more than one location in the same bone. It may or may not have spread to local lymph nodes. Metastatic spread to distant sites like other bones, liver, or brain (M1b). Any grade.

**Enneking System**

Refers to the histological grade (G), the extent of the tumor in relation to the anatomical compartments of the body (T), and metastatic spread (M)

**Stage IA (G1 T1 M0)**

- Low grade, intra-compartmental, no metastasis.

**Stage IB (G1 T2 M0)**

- Low grade, extra compartmental, no metastasis.

**Stage IIA (G2 T1 M0)**

- High grade, intra-compartmental, no metastasis.

**Stage IIB (G2 T2 M0)**

- High grade, extra compartmental, no metastasis.

**Stage III (Any G, Any T, M1)**

- Any grade, any location, regional, or distant metastatic spread.