Pure red cell aplasia is a rare disorder. The inherited form is usually detected at birth, although many patients can also present in adolescent age or as young adults. It is imperative to maintain a broad outlook of the disease and investigate thoroughly starting with obtaining a good history, performing a thorough physical exam, and using appropriate clinical and genetic tests to determine the etiology.

Nurses, transfusion medicine, hematology, bone marrow transplant unit, and geneticist should work in close harmony with all clinicians as an interprofessional team to maximize the benefit to the patient. Patients managed with corticosteroids should be followed by the pharmacist to ensure that they are not developing complications. If there is any suspicion of osteoporosis, a bone scan is necessary. A pharmacist should examine the patient's medication record to look for drugs that may cause PCRA, as well as assist the clinician in any medication therapy undertaken in the management of the condition. These patients should also be followed by an infectious disease nurse, as they are prone to infections due to steroid therapy; the nurse can also monitor patient compliance and assess the effectiveness of the current treatment. Chronic blood transfusions can also result in iron overload, and hence the patient requires vigilant monitoring by the hematologist. These are examples of the interprofessional team approach to case management that optimizes positive patient outcomes. [Level V]

Due to the rarity of the pathology, no large randomized trials are possible, and the evidence of treatment comes from case series, retrospective studies of international registries, and few small prospective trials. [Level III to Level IV]