After the history and physical, the evaluation continues with an electrocardiogram, arterial blood gas, blood lactate, and chest x-ray.  Blood work should include markers of end-organ function (renal and hepatic panel) to assess severity. A D-Dimer is useful in the diagnostic workup of suspected PE. There are no biomarkers specific for RVF, however B-type natriuretic peptide and cardiac troponin are highly sensitive for early detection of RVF and myocardial injury. When elevated, these are associated with poor prognosis in RVF due to PAH.

**Noninvasive Measures**

**Echocardiography**

The assessment of RV function can be challenging because of its location, shape and afterload dependence. Two-dimensional echocardiography (2DE) is the first-line and most commonly used non-invasive imaging modality to assess RV size, hemodynamics, and function.  Images are acquired in multiple cross-sectional planes, and and the following measurements obtained:

- Quantification of RV enlargement (RVE) and right atrial enlargement (RAE): Because of its shape, quantitative assessment of RV function is difficult and is often described qualitatively in comparison with LV function. A normal RV should not be more than two-thirds the size of the LV. RVE is a strong prognostic indicator.

- TAPSE: Used to quantify the movement of tricuspid annulus toward the apex and estimates RV function. This has been a good predictor in patients with PAH and LVF, however, in patients with congenital heart disease or after cardiac surgery, it is less reliable.

- Right ventricular strain: Another useful tool to assess RV function. The strain is a composite measurement of RV loading and dysfunction- abnormal strain patterns have been associated with disease progression, higher diuretic doses, and mortality in PAH.   The strain has also been shown to predict RVF after implantation with a left ventricular assist device (LVAD) and predicts clinical outcomes in those referred for heart transplantation.

- Fractional area of change (FAC): An important quantitative measurement of RV systolic function derived either by 2DE or magnetic resonance imaging (MRI). It has been shown to be an independent predictor of HF, sudden death, stroke and mortality in PE and in myocardial infarction.

- Myocardial performance index (MPI): Estimates global ventricular function and is calculated by adding the isovolumic contraction and relaxation times divided by the ejection time. In RVF, MPI increases as the isovolumic times increase and contraction times decrease. MPI has been shown to predict PAH in connective tissue disease and is an independent prognostic indicator in PAH.

- Eccentricity index: A useful measurement of RVE. Acquired in the short-axis view, at end-systole and end-diastole, the eccentricity index is a ratio of the length of two perpendicular minor-axis diameters, one of which bisects and is perpendicular to the interventricular septum. This allows for a quantitative measurement of septal-flattening and distinguishes between pressure and volume overload.

- All of the hemodynamic variables measured during invasive right heart catheterization (RHC) may be estimated using echocardiography. For example, the diameter and collapsibility of the inferior vena cava (IVC) in the subcostal view may be used to estimate RA filling pressure. A normal IVC collapses more than 50% with inspiration and is associated with a RA pressure less than 10 mmHg. By measuring the maximum TR velocity and using a modified Bernoulli equation, the systolic PAP may be estimated. The diastolic PAP may be estimated by using the  same equation on the pulmonic regurgitant jet or by transposing the pulmonary opening time on the tricuspid regurgitant velocity curve and calculating the pressure gradient between the RA and the RV.

Three-dimensional echocardiography has also been used more recently to quantify RV volumes and ejection fraction using a modified Simpson’s method (summation of disks). This has been validated to correlate well with the gold standard MRI, but is time-consuming and less feasible given the proximity of the RV to the sternum and its trabeculations.

**Nuclear Angiography**

First-pass radionuclide ventriculography was for a long time the gold standard to measure RV ejection fraction (RVEF). A bolus of the 99m-Tc tracer is injected, and a sequence of cardiac cycles is acquired as the bolus passes through the heart. A normal RVEF is 52% plus or minus 6% with 40% considered the lower limit of normal. Nuclear angiography is limited by its inability to measure RV volumes and sensitivity to cardiac arrhythmia.

**Magnetic Resonance Imaging**

Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI), as mentioned previously, is now the gold-standard for the measure of RV volumes and function. In addition to measuring RV mass, volumes and chamber dimensions, MRI can calculate and quantify regurgitant volumes, delayed enhancement, scar burden, strain, perfusion, and pulmonary pulsatility. Also, changes in the global function of the RV after medical therapy have been shown to have a direct correlation to the functional class and survival in patients with PAH.

MRI is limited by its temporal resolution, its contraindication in those with implantable cardiac devices, and the time required for data acquisition and analysis.

**64-Slice Computed Tomography**

Computed tomography (CT) may be used to measure RVEF and RV volumes. However, acquisition of RV parameters cannot be obtained simultaneously with LV parameters or CT angiography. This results in the need for additional radiation exposure which is not negligible, and therefore CT is not routinely used for this purpose.

**Invasive Hemodynamic Measurement**

Right heart catheterization (RHC) or pulmonary artery catheterization (PAC) is often very useful in making the diagnosis and tailoring management in RVF. Though it is an invasive procedure, RHC is considered safe with a low complication rate, especially in experienced centers. Current practice guidelines recommend the use of RHC for unexplained diagnostic or treatment-resistant cases, for the continuous and accurate measurement of right and left-sided filling pressures, cardiac output, and PVR.

The hemodynamic variables obtained in a RHC have important prognostic significance. A high RA pressure and low cardiac output have repeatedly been shown to be associated with poor outcomes in PAH. In addition, a PVR greater than three Woods units and pulmonary vascular compliance (SV/pulmonary pulse pressure) have both been associated with poor outcomes in LVF as well as PAH.