Afferently, the mandibular nerve serves the lower face and its cutaneous tissues between the lower lip and the base of the mandible. Efferently, the mandibular branch serves the muscles of mastication, the tensor veli palatini - muscle of the soft palate, and tensor veli tympani of the middle ear along with the mylohyoid and anterior digastric muscles.

The meningeal branch of the nerve provides sensory supply to the dura mater of the middle cranial fossa and a part of the anterior cranial fossa. The nerve to tensor veli palatini supplies motor innervation to the tensor veli palatini which tenses and elevates the soft palate to close and prevent food from entering the nasopharyngeal space during swallowing. The nerve to tensor tympani provides motor innervation to its respective muscle in the middle ear space which is responsible for dampening the noise produced by chewing, which helps to prevent ear ossicle damage. The auriculotemporal nerve provides sensory innervation to the temporomandibular joint (branches of temporalis and masseter nerve also provide sensory innervation to the temporomandibular joint). The buccal nerve branch provides sensory innervation to the lower buccal gingiva, lower buccal sulcus, and the mucosa of the cheeks.

The following branches of the mandibular nerve efferently serve the muscles of mastication which include the medial and lateral pterygoids, masseter, and the temporalis. The nerve to the medial pterygoid provides innervation to its respective muscle which is responsible for the elevation of the mandible (closes the jaw). The nerve to temporalis provides innervation to the temporalis muscle which is responsible for elevation and retrusion of the mandible (closes and retracts the jaw). The masseteric nerve supplies the masseter muscle which elevates and protrudes the jaw. The nerve to the lateral pterygoid provides innervation to the lateral pterygoid muscle which depresses the mandible.

The posterior trunk of the mandibular nerve splits into two branches known as the inferior alveolar nerve and the lingual nerve. The inferior alveolar nerve carries both motor and sensory fibers and travels along the medial aspect of the lateral pterygoid muscle. Before entering the mandibular foramen, it gives rise to branches that provide motor innervation to the mylohyoid and anterior belly of the digastric muscle which is responsible for elevating the hyoid and complex movements of the jaw (speaking, swallowing, chewing, and breathing).  Once the nerve enters the mandibular foramen, it provides innervation to the mandibular teeth and the lower alveolar ridge. A branch of the nerve exits via the mental foramen to become the mental nerve which provides sensory innervation to the dermis of the chin and lower lip and the remaining nerve fibers continue anteriorly to provides innervation to the canines and incisors. The lingual nerve innervated the anterior two-thirds of the tongue and mucous membrane for sense but does not innervate taste fibers.