There are significant clinical sequelae involving each the median, ulnar, and radial nerves. DIscussion of some follows, but it is important to note that there are relevant clinical consequences from almost every aspect of medicine.

**General**

- **Brachial Plexopathy:**The brachial plexus is a major anatomical landmark residing just lateral to the caudal cervical vertebrae. Originating from the spinal levels C5 to T1, it supplies the nerve fibers of the cutaneous innervation of the hand. Any damage to the brachial plexus will have a downstream motor and sensory impairment. These injuries usually present with numbness, tingling, or pain of the digits, as well as muscle weakness of the regions corresponding to their cervical spinal origin. Damage to the brachial plexus can come from any source, including trauma, iatrogenic, malignancy, compression, and ischemia.

- **Cervical Stenosis:**In this clinical correlation, the transverse foramina of the cervical spine vertebrae become narrowed from osteoblastic changes. This narrowing can result in compression of the cervical spinal roots as they exit and, in severe cases, ischemia of these roots. Alteration to the conduction of these nerve roots via compression or ischemia leads to impaired sensory and strength of the corresponding upper extremity. Other presenting symptoms include neck pain, clumsiness of the ipsilateral upper extremity, burning, tingling, or numbness of the extremity.

- **Wrist Fractures:**Any trauma to the wrist involving the displacement of the distal ulna or radius can lead to compression, trauma, or ischemia of their corresponding nerves. In this clinical correlation, the sensory and motor deficits are most often limited to the trauma's location and the distal aspects from there. This clinical picture, combined with a good history, should increase clinical suspicion of secondary neurovascular damage.

**Median**

- **Carpal Tunnel Syndrome:**This syndrome occurs when compression of the median nerve occurs while it traverses the narrow corridor of the carpal tunnel. This compression can occur secondary to swelling, trauma, and synovial thickening. Symptoms include numbness, tingling, burning, or pain, which primarily localizes to the thumb, index, middle, and ring fingers. Weakness and fine motor control deficits may be present, as well. Risk factors include a hereditary component, repetitive hand use, improper hand or wrist positioning, pregnancy, and various health conditions such as diabetes, rheumatoid arthritis, and non-euthyroid states. Mild carpal tunnel syndrome is treatable with splinting, rest, and exercises, while more severe forms require surgery.

**Radial**

- **Wartenberg Syndrome:**This is an entrapment syndrome involving the superficial branch of the radial nerve, also called cheiralgia paresthetica. Compression is thought to primarily occur at the posterior border of the brachioradialis where the superficial radial nerves transition from superficial to deep, and it is at greatest risk of compression from repeated muscle use. Other etiologies include trauma, clothing that is too tight, and nerve stretch injuries. Presentation is primarily sensory deficits of the dorsal aspect of the thumb and dorsal first webspace. Other symptoms include burning, tingling, and clumsiness of this region.

**Ulnar**

- **Cubital Tunnel Syndrome:**This is entrapment of the ulnar nerve as it passes through the cubital tunnel at the medial aspect of the elbow. This condition commonly occurs due to maintaining a flexed elbow for prolonged periods where the nerve is stretched and becomes inflamed. Also, if the ulnar nerve slides in and out of the tunnel during flexion, this repetitive motion can also be a source of inflammation and compression. Other causes of note are anything that leads to fluid buildup within the elbow, which can either be from a traumatic source of secondary to another underlying illness. The presentation usually involves an early sensation of pain at the level of the elbow, but often, the syndrome does not present until it affects the hand. In this case, it is most common to find burning, tingling, clumsiness, or numbness of the pinky and ring fingers.