The initial diagnosis is made clinically, although this can be challenging as the presentation is variable, and is easy to misdiagnose, with 45% of general practitioners making an incorrect initial diagnosis.

Torsion of either testicular appendage commonly produces pain similar to that experienced with testicular torsion, although the onset is usually more gradual. Often, the pain is more localized to the upper pole of the testis or epididymis and does not usually correlate with any urinary symptoms nor with systemic signs such as fever, nausea, or vomiting.

On initial physical examination of the condition, tenderness can often be localized to the upper pole of the testis or epididymis. There may be a palpable, localized mass in the area of maximum tenderness. The scrotum usually appears normal, and the cremasteric reflex is typically intact. With a normal cremasteric reflex, there would not be any "angel wing or bell clapper deformity" of the opposite testicle. The "angel wing deformity" is formed when a testicle lies horizontally rather than the usual vertical position, which widens the scrotum inferiorly creating the "angel wing" appearance. This is typically caused by inadequate fixation by the gubernaculum of the inferior pole of the testicle to the tunica vaginalis which predisposes to testicular torsion.

A "blue dot sign" may also be present as a para-testicular nodule noted on the superior aspect of the testicle; this can be identified by stretching the scrotal skin overlying the superior pole of the testicle and is representative of an ischemic testicular appendage. While worth knowing, the "blue dot sign" is only present in about 21% (0 to 52%) of all torsed testicular appendages, and a false positive "blue dot sign" has been reported in the literature in a patient with testicular torsion.

As the condition progresses, worsening inflammation may make physical exam findings less specific. These findings can include scrotal erythema and edema, as well as nonspecific tenderness of the entire testicle and epididymis.