# Continuing Education Activity

Millipedes are arthropods from the class Diplopoda that consists of more than 12,000 species. Millipedes are unable to inject venom instead employ defensive mechanisms by curling up in a ball and secreting irritating chemicals from micropores along their sides to deter predators. This activity reviews millipede envenomation and the identification and evaluation of exposure by an interprofessional team. It discusses the management of millipede exposure and highlights the role of ophthalmologists in managing patients with eye exposure.

**Objectives:**
- Identify the pathophysiology of millipede envenomation.
- Review the evaluation of millipede envenomation.
- Outline the management options available for millipede envenomation.
- Summarize when the interprofessional team should include ophthalmology consultation with millipede envenomation to improve outcomes.

# Introduction

Millipedes are arthropods from the class Diplopoda that consists of more than 12,000 species.

# Etiology

As mentioned previously, millipedes lack the ability to bite, sting, or inject venom. Their primary defense mechanisms consist of coiling up and secreting toxins from the sides of their body. Within these secretions, a variety of irritating chemicals have been identified, some of which include hydrogen cyanide, hydrochloric acid, hydroquinones, benzoquinones, alkaloids, and phenols.

# Epidemiology

Epidemiological information is limited and comes primarily from case reports. Children appear to be more commonly affected, and exposure primarily occurs on the face, eyes, and skin, or extremities. The frequency of harmful exposure appears to be greater in tropical regions of the world.

# Pathophysiology

Most interactions with humans are harmless and are limited to minor skin irritation or hyperpigmentation that lasts for a few days to a month.

# History and Physical

Exposure most commonly occurs in children.

# Evaluation

The diagnosis of millipede exposure is typically made clinically. A thorough history and physical examination, as always, are useful in narrowing down the differential. History should include the timing of symptom onset and progression, duration, travel history, environmental exposures, occupational risk factors, and any dermatological disorders, to name a few. No additional laboratory or radiographic testing is typically needed.

# Treatment / Management

Treatment is primarily supportive and consists of rinsing the affected area with soap and water until any residual odor disappears or for up to twenty minutes. The use of topical corticosteroids and analgesics should be considered, and a 1% hydrocortisone cream can be applied to affected areas three times daily in appropriate cases. There is anecdotal evidence suggesting the use of topical alcohols, which may break down any remaining chemicals on the skin; however, clinical studies regarding the efficacy of adjunctive treatment with alcohols are lacking.

# Differential Diagnosis

Case studies on millipede are primarily localized to tropical environments, and exposure is unlikely outside of warm, humid environments. Serious consideration should be given to the setting and likelihood of exposure. More common presenting causes of skin discoloration or hyperpigmentation in a clinical setting include burns, chemical exposure, traumatic injuries, non-accidental abuse, and other arthropod bites and exposure.

# Prognosis

Exposure is typically self-limited. Skin discoloration tends to resolve within weeks, with other signs of local irritation limited to several days. Eye exposure can portend a worse outcome, and literature expounding on prognosis is limited to rare case reports of blindness in less developed areas.

# Complications

Symptoms are well controlled with topical treatments, and there is little evidence to suggest post-exposure infections or other complications except for eye exposure. A number of case reports note complications of corneal ulceration and even blindness.

# Deterrence and Patient Education

Efforts to prevent recurrence should include the following: teaching children to check socks and shoes before placing them on their feet, wearing gloves if occupational exposure is likely, and strict instructions to avoid handling millipedes are suggested. Home exposure may be more commonly associated with damp areas, and prevention includes the removal of all damp and decaying organic material. In many circumstances, chemical pest control is not needed, but many readily available pesticides are effective in eliminating larger infestations.

# Pearls and Other Issues

Millipedes species are widely distributed throughout the world and often confused with centipedes. They can be distinguished by the absence of fangs to inject venom and instead employ a defensive mechanism of secreting chemicals from their sides. These chemicals often only cause local skin discoloration or irritation that is self-limited and treated by washing the affected area with soap and water. Eye exposure can be more severe and should be followed closely by ophthalmology. Most patients can be discharged home with instructions to prevent reexposure. Care should be taken not to mistake exposure with more common causes of the noted skin changes.

# Enhancing Healthcare Team Outcomes

Exposure and symptoms are typically self-limiting and management can be followed by a dermatologist or primary care provider. Exceptions to this include following up with ophthalmology for any cases of eye exposure. [Level 5]