Classification of bronchial carcinoid tumors is dependent on the observation of mitosis found within the histology of the specimen.  Typical carcinoids lack abnormalities in the expression of common tumor suppressor genes and are defined as observing less than 2 mitoses under microscopy of a 2 mm portion of a viable tumor.  In contrast, atypical carcinoids not only have known mutations or abnormalities in gene expression but consist of 2-10 mitoses, necrosis, or pleomorphism of the biopsied sample. Since changing the guidelines for typical carcinoid tumor classification in 1998, the 10-year survival rate of confirmed typical carcinoid tumors has increased to 87% compared to 73% previously observed [13]. TNM staging system and mitosis criteria again updated by the World Health Organization in 2015 are listed below in table 1.

The common TNM staging classification is used for BCTs as it is used for various other lung cancers.  Primary carcinoids of the pulmonary symptoms account from 0.4-3% of all resected tumors of the lung and roughly 25% of all carcinoid tumors. All carcinoid tumors of the lung have the potential to invade local structures and metastasize and thus are classified as malignant lesions.   Although other cancers of the lung, such as small cell lung cancer, can have neuroendocrine granules, there is no relationship between these and bronchial carcinoid tumors as based on genetic analysis of these separate lesions.

Bronchial carcinoid tumors are classified under the World Health Organization (WHO) criteria, updated in 2015. These tumors range from typical carcinoids (TC), which are considered low grade, to high-grade tumors, which are very aggressive.