Individuals with this disease are asymptomatic at birth with normal prenatal growth and development. Although hyperuricemia is typically present at birth, the only clinical presentation in the early days of life could be orange-colored crystals in the diapers. Eventually, hyperuricemia leads to crystalluria, urolithiasis, nephrolithiasis, gout, and juvenile arthritis. Since hyperuricemia is present in all variants of HPRT deficiency independent of severity, the likelihood of neurodevelopmental abnormalities cannot be predicted unless enzyme activity is tested.

Neurological features become noticeable by the age of 4 months. Hypotonia and developmental delay are common early signs. Infants may also have nonspecific symptoms like recurrent vomiting or difficulty managing secretions. Extrapyramidal signs begin to appear at around 8 to 12 months of age. The most common extrapyramidal sign is dystonia. Motor symptoms in Lesch Nyhan syndrome are, in fact, hypotonia superimposed by severe action dystonia. In almost all cases, dystonia progresses to a point where individuals cannot attain milestones like crawling, walking, and in due course, end up dependent on a wheelchair and become completely on others even for activities of daily living. Involuntary movements such as choreoathetosis, ballismus develop within the first few years. Features like dysarthria, dysphagia, and opisthotonus have also been frequently reported. Pyramidal signs (spasticity, hyperreflexia) can develop in the initial years or may not be apparent until later years.

Even though cognitive impairment is present, the degree of impairment cannot be estimated with confidence as the test scores may be affected by the motor disability of the patient. Involuntary movements, dysarthric speech affect verbal intelligence, but non-verbal intelligence in most patients is well preserved.

Self-injurious behavior is the hallmark of Lesch Nyhan syndrome. Self-mutilation is not seen in the variants of Lesch Nyhan syndrome. The most commonly noted behavior is self-mutilation from biting of lips, fingers, cheeks, causing profound disfigurement. This behavior usually begins with the eruption of teeth in infants. Contrary to the thought that patients continue with self-mutilation due to sensory deficits, all sensations, including pain, are intact.

Megaloblastic anemia is a common feature of HPRT deficient patients. It is noted in 81 to 92% of patients with Lesch Nyhan syndrome, and the absence of megaloblastic anemia should prompt investigation for coexisting disorders like iron deficiency, thalassemia, chronic diseases, which may falsely normalize the finding.