For laboratory tests to accurately diagnose Zollinger-Ellison syndrome, patients must stop using PPIs for at least one week and/or cease using H2-receptor antagonists for 48 hours.

Basal acid output test has 98% sensitivity and a level greater than 5 mEq per hour if the patient had gastrinoma resection or greater than 15 mEq per hour for those who did not. Gastric pH would be less than equal to 2. One can perform a secretin stimulation test which measures fasting serum gastrin level at 2 to 15 minutes after intravenous secretin administration. A level greater than or equal to 200 pg/ml indicates ZES and has 85% to 87% sensitivity.

If the clinician suspects Zollinger-Ellison syndrome, screening for MEN1 needs to be performed by ordering serum calcium, parathyroid hormone level, prolactin, and pancreatic polypeptide.

Imaging studies are recommended to localize gastrinoma or to evaluate any metastases. Usually, noninvasive imaging is done to assess the extent of the primary tumor or metastases. Imaging can locate the tumors before the surgery. CT and MRI detect up to 3 cm of mass but are unreliable if the mass is less than 3 cm. Somatostatin receptor scintigraphy (SRS) is known to be more sensitive than conventional imaging studies, including CT and MRI, and has higher specificity to detect extrahepatic gastrinoma. SRS  involves using indium-labeled octreotide with a strong affinity for type 2 somatostatin receptors expressed on gastrinoma cells. Positron emission tomography is used to assess metastasis to other body organs. Invasive modalities include an endoscopic ultrasound to evaluate the pancreas more closely and an esophagogastroduodenoscopy (EGD) to visually assess any abnormalities.