The success of mipomersen therapy depends on the patient's medication adherence, which may lower the effectiveness of mipomersen and promote the adverse effects of hypercholesterolemia. Some barriers exist to successful mipomersen therapy, such as a lack of understanding of the importance of low-density lipoprotein (LDL)-lowering therapy, experience with adverse effects, frequency of therapy, and treatment cost. These factors may present a strong barrier against the patients, which may cause the patient to forgo mipomersen therapy.

As mentioned previously, lifestyle changes are significant to the success of therapy and the patient's overall health. Therefore, healthcare professionals and clinicians (such as allopathic medical doctors (MDs), doctors of osteopathic medicine (DOs), doctors of podiatric medicine (DPMs), and advanced practice providers) must emphasize the importance of modifications to the patient's lifestyle.

Clinicians must provide valuable advice and guidance to the patients regarding diet choices, exercise, or decreasing weight if necessary. If the clinicians are facing difficulties observing such changes, they may refer the patient to registered dieticians (RDs) who can oversee these lifestyle changes for the patients over a more extended period.

The healthcare professional must also understand that the patient may face these barriers to therapy and must help the patient recognize and combat them. Furthermore, the patient needs to receive support from clinicians, allied health professionals, and nurses who can counsel patients on how they are advised to receive therapy and check their adherence to the treatment.

Pharmacists also play a crucial role in the patient's health as they can counsel the patient on optimization strategies for therapy and ensure that the patient does not suffer from adverse drug-drug interactions.