The guideline treatment of inferior vena cava syndrome (IVCS) has not been clearly described. Therefore, treatment and management are determined by the etiology of the causative lesion and tailored to a patient’s condition. If the lesion is thrombotic, immediate treatment is focused on the prevention of propagation of the clot, causing a pulmonary embolism, and management of pain, edema, and the resulting hypotension. Either medical or surgical intervention can accomplish this. Medical treatments include anticoagulation using either low-molecular-weight heparin (LMWH), fondaparinux, or direct thrombin inhibitors. These medications reduce the buildup and propagation of the thrombosis but do not eliminate the primary thrombosis.

Endovascular procedures can subsequently be utilized to facilitate the introduction of thrombolytics to lyse the clot. These can include catheter-directed thrombolysis, pulse-spray pharmaco-mechanical thrombolysis, and then angioplasty with or without inserting stents, which increases patency of the IVC. Performing such procedures is required within a short period (within 14 days) of the onset of symptoms to minimize complications and decrease mortality rates. Surgical modalities such as thrombectomy, bypass, reconstruction/replacement, and ligation are used as a last resort due to the high invasive and significant intervention nature.

If the stent placing is not advisable, placing IVC filters can alleviate symptoms for some time.

If lesions are due to non-thrombotic etiologies such as malignancy, then the treatment is directed to manage the underlying cause of the compression. This may include surgery, chemotherapy, radiation, or combination. Resection is a surgical option to remove tumor compression. However, resection is not possible to be done in unstable patients, thus, palliative care is provided. Another option is to place an intravascular stent or surgical bypass grafting, which increases the patency of the IVC to alleviate symptoms.

IVCS patients of intrahepatic obstruction due to malignant hepatic enlargement are usually treated using strip radiotherapy to the intrahepatic IVC, with or without a hepatic arterial infusion of chemotherapy.

In some mild compression etiologies like pregnancy, physical maneuvers to move the uterus away from the IVC can be applied.