The adverse effects of adenosine are secondary to the activation of adenosine receptors found on vascular tissue, causing vasodilation. Symptoms of skin flushing, lightheadedness, nausea, sweating, nervousness, numbness, and feeling of impending doom have all been described; however, these effects are very transient and short-lived secondary to adenosine’s short half-life.

More severe symptoms are cardiac-related and include the development of cardiac arrhythmia, including premature atrial contractions and premature ventricular contractions, development of AV block, cardiac ischemia, hypotension, and prolonged asystole. Before any administration, the clinician should communicate information to the patient regarding these possible effects. A 68-year-old man with possible coronary artery stenosis was undergoing fractional flow reserve measurement using adenosine administered via intracoronary injection, which immediately caused atrial fibrillation.

Although presenting a lesser adverse effect, it is essential to review specific drug-drug interactions involving adenosine. The effects of adenosine can be blocked by caffeine and theophylline, which fall under a class of drugs called methylxanthines. Methylxanthines derive from another purine base, xanthine, which has a chemical structure sufficiently similar to that of adenine, that they can bind to adenosine receptors acting as a competitive antagonist to adenosine. Patients on these drugs may require larger doses.

Other drug-drug interactions to consider when administering adenosine is the simultaneous use of carbamazepine and dipyridamole. Both these drugs may enhance the adverse effects of adenosine; the clinician should use a decreased initial dose.