Performing NTI properly requires knowledge of the anatomy of the nasal vestibule, nasal cavity, nasopharynx, oropharynx, hypopharynx, and larynx.

The nasal cavity begins at the nares and ends at the posterior end of the nasal septum, where it channels into the nasopharynx via the posterior nasal apertures (choanae). The nasal cavity sits above the oral cavity and hard palate and rests below the skull base.

The hard palate constitutes the floor of the cavity that runs horizontally back behind the nares. The ceiling of the nasal cavity is formed by the ethmoid bone, with the cribriform plate at its center. Lastly, the left and right lateral walls are made up of the medial walls of the orbit superiorly and the maxillary sinus inferiorly.

The lateral nasal walls contain the turbinates, which project into the nasal passages as ridges of bone covered by soft tissue and mucosa; these are responsible for maintaining humidity and warmth in the nasal cavity.

The inferior turbinate is the largest of the three and projects along the entire lateral nasal wall. The inferior turbinates are often responsible for obstructing nasal airflow when they are enlarged or inflamed. The middle turbinate projects into the central nasal cavity superior and posterior to the anterior face, or head, of the inferior turbinate. The superior turbinate, ordinarily the smallest of the three, attaches to the skull base superiorly and the nasal wall laterally. In some cases, patients may have a fourth pair of turbinates located superior to the superior turbinates; these structures are known as supreme turbinates, but they have minimal clinical significance. The middle, superior, and supreme turbinates are all processes of the ethmoid bone, whereas the inferior conchae are separate bones altogether that articulate with the maxillae as well as the palatine, lacrimal and ethmoid bones.

The nasal cavity is separated by a nasal septum consisting of a cartilaginous part that sits anteriorly (the quadrangular cartilage) and a bony portion located posterosuperiorly (the vomer and perpendicular plate of the ethmoid bone). This septum separates the nasal passages into left and right sides; the two cavities eventually coalesce to form a single continuous cavity in the back of the nose (the nasopharynx).

The nasal cavity is lined by respiratory mucosa, histologically described as ciliated pseudostratified columnar epithelium, lying on a highly vascular stroma. These cells produce serous secretions that aid in the humidification of inspired air. The cilia help to prevent unwanted debris from entering the lungs.

Due to the high vascularity of the nasal cavity, minor trauma to any part of the tissue can cause bleeding to occur (epistaxis). The anterior nasal septum is particularly susceptible to developing epistaxis owing to the superficial location of the arterial plexus. This confluence is known as Kiesselbach’s plexus and is supplied by branches of the anterior and posterior ethmoid, superior labial, sphenopalatine, and greater palatine arteries.

While considering normal nasal cavity anatomy, it is also important to understand that anomalies do often exist. Septal deviation is the most common abnormality involving the nasal septum. The deviation is most often due to trauma but can also be congenital or iatrogenic in nature. Other anatomical variations include conditions that result in unilateral obstruction, such as nasal polyps, concha bullosa, septal spurs, stenosis, and choanal atresia. It is important to consider these possibilities during pre-anesthetic evaluation to minimize any complications, as most of these variations will result in changes to airflow dynamics inside the nasal cavity. Nasal polyps or spurs may be unilateral, which may dictate which side of the nose is more amenable to NTI.