When evaluating a patient with suspected keloids, the differential diagnosis is narrow. However, it is important to note key features to determine which lesions warrant skin biopsy. As discussed above, hypertrophic scars can appear very similar to keloids and occur after skin trauma. Hypertrophic scars tend to be smaller and, as a rule, are confined to the area of injury as opposed to keloids which can continue to grow and involve the surrounding skin. Dermatofibroma is another aberrant scar response that typically results in flesh-colored or hyperpigmented papule or nodule. The classic clinical feature of these lesions is central depression when applying lateral pressure, which is known as the “dimple sign.” Dermatofibrosarcoma protuberans is a rare, locally aggressive spindle cell tumor that arises on the trunk and proximal extremities of young adults. In contrast to keloids, these lesions have no preceding trauma and have more irregular borders. Keloidal variants include morphea and scleroderma. These patients would have progressive disease in the absence of a known inciting event and may also show other signs of connective tissue disease. Xanthoma disseminatum is rare, histiocytic proliferation with skin lesions that may resemble keloids. Lesions present acutely in a diffuse symmetric pattern, and systemic involvement may result in the development of diabetes insipidus. Finally, lobomycosis is a deep fungal infection caused by the organism Lacazia loboi. It presents as a slow-growing keloid-like nodule on distal extremities and is associated with exposure to dolphins or rural soil in Central and South America.