BVN ablation is performed in an outpatient setting by properly trained physicians and surgeons. This procedure has technical similarities with vertebra augmentation as it uses a transpedicular approach, although an extrapedicular approach has been described, and with lumbar radiofrequency ablation, as it uses an ablative lesion to the BVN to interrupt nociceptive signaling from damaged vertebral endplates. The first step in this procedure is to position the patient in a prone position under general anesthesia or MAC with continuous cardiac monitoring, pulse oximetry, and blood pressure. Second, utilizing a standardized sterile technique, the patient is prepped, and the target level and location of entry are marked and confirmed with C-arm fluoroscopy or CT guidance. Obtaining perfect image guidance is essential for this procedure, so the first step should be to rotate the C-arm to obtain a true anterior-posterior (AP) view of the pedicles at the level of entry to optimize a transpedicular approach.

The skin entry point and angle are marked with a sterile marker, and the skin is anesthetized with 1% lidocaine anesthetic, and a small incision is made with a scalpel. Next, a 22-gauge spinal needle may be used at the target entry position to anesthetize the pathway towards the periosteum. An introducer trocar is placed along the same trajectory and advanced through the pedicle, starting at the superior lateral aspect until it passes the posterior vertebral body wall. It is important to maintain a trajectory superior to the inferior cortex and lateral to the medial cortex of the pedicle to prevent trocar entry into the spinal canal or near neural elements. As the trocar is slowly advanced using a mallet, multiple AP and lateral C-arm views are obtained to ensure a safe trajectory.

Once the vertebra body is breached, the trocar is removed from the introducer cannula, and a curved cannula assembly (curved cannula and curved stylet) is that facilitates the creation of a curved channel toward the target site at the BVN terminus found midline, approximately 30% to 50% across the vertebral body width from posterior to anterior (Figure 3). Once the target site is confirmed with AP and lateral C-arm views, the curved stylet is removed, and a bipolar radiofrequency probe is inserted. The probe is connected to a radiofrequency generator, and radiofrequency energy is used to create approximately a 1 cm spherical lesion (85 degrees C for 15 minutes) at the BVN terminus. Upon completion, the radiofrequency probe and the introducer cannula are removed, and the subcutaneous tissue and skin are closed in a standard sterile fashion with a pressure dressing and skin glue or steri-strips. Sutures or staples are usually not necessary.

Patients are transferred to a post-anesthesia care unit (PACU) for monitoring.  Vital signs and neurological function are reassessed after the procedure. Patients should be discharged the same day. Post-discharge, patients should be instructed to monitor the surgical site and be educated on signs of infection, activity restrictions (no lifting greater than 15 lbs, twisting, bending of the spine), and to not submerge themselves in water for at least 48 hours after the procedure. Follow-up post-procedure visits and full return to activity are based on each clinician's discretion.