Placental abruption occurs when the maternal vessels tear away from the placenta and bleeding occurs between the uterine lining and the maternal side of the placenta. As the blood accumulates, it pushes the uterine wall and placenta apart. The placenta is the fetus’ source of oxygen and nutrients as well as the way the fetus excretes waste products. Diffusion to and from the maternal circulatory system is essential to maintaining these life-sustaining functions of the placenta. When accumulating blood causes separation of the placenta from the maternal vascular network, these vital functions of the placenta are interrupted. If the fetus does not receive enough oxygen and nutrients, it dies.

The clinical implications of a placental abruption vary based on the extent of the separation and the location of the separation. Placental abruption can be complete or partial and marginal or central. The classification of placental abruption is based on the following clinical findings:

**Class 0: Asymptomatic**

- Discovery of a blood clot on the maternal side of a delivered placenta

- Diagnosis is made retrospectively

**Class 1: Mild**

- No sign of vaginal bleeding or a small amount of vaginal bleeding.

- Slight uterine tenderness

- Maternal blood pressure and heart rate WNL

- No signs of fetal distress

**Class 2: Moderate**

- No sign of vaginal bleeding to a moderate amount of vaginal bleeding

- Significant uterine tenderness with tetanic contractions

- Change in vital signs: maternal tachycardia, orthostatic changes in blood pressure.

- Evidence of fetal distress

- Clotting profile alteration: hypofibrinogenemia

**Class 3: Severe**

- No sign of vaginal bleeding to heavy vaginal bleeding

- Tetanic uterus/ board-like consistency on palpation

- Maternal shock

- Clotting profile alteration: hypofibrinogenemia and coagulopathy

- Fetal death

Classification of 0 or 1 is usually associated with a partial, marginal separation; whereas, classification of 2 or 3 is associated with complete or central separation.