Management of achondroplasia involves an interprofessional team approach, and anticipatory care is essential. Multiple versions of health supervision and treatment guidelines exist for those with achondroplasia, with most including detailed examinations and specific anticipatory guidance for each separate age group.

**Macrocephaly**

- It is crucial to distinguish between a “normal” amount of macrocephaly (large ventricles under normal pressure) and clinically significant hydrocephalus. Therefore, head circumference measurements should be performed at every health care contact and plotted on achondroplasia-specific standards for surveillance.

- Due to the delay in skull sutural maturation in achondroplasia, measurements of cranial circumference should continue until six years of age. Hydrocephalus requiring treatment occurs in approximately 5%.

- The foramen magnum stenosis may contribute to significant hydrocephalus in these children. This can be surgically corrected by endoscopic third ventriculostomy, ventricular shunt, or by posterior fossa decompression.

**Foramen Magnum Stenosis**

- For those patients with FMS, the American Academy of Pediatrics recommends obtaining a sleep study (polysomnography) first, and then if positive, obtaining a CT scan or MRI to evaluate the cervicomedullary area for compressive myelopathy. If either study returns abnormal, prompt evaluation by neurosurgery should be arranged for possible surgical treatment.

- MRIs in those with FMS will likely show a relatively large cranial vault with a small, contracted appearing skull base (in addition to the narrowed foramen magnum), with a prominent forehead and depressed nasal bridge. There may be visible “cervicomedullary kink” in those with severe FMS.

- The condition is usually treated in the first two years of life. However, affected patients may become symptomatic later in life.

- Treatment is surgical with foramen magnum decompression and upper cervical laminectomy with or without duraplasty.

- Complete resolution or partial improvement in the preoperative symptoms is usually obtained. Children with FMS identified on imaging studies should avoid activities that place them at risk of head or neck injury.

**Hearing impairment**

- Referral to a pediatric otolaryngologist should be obtained for those who develop frequent otitis media and/or hearing problems. Long-lasting tympanostomy tubes may be necessary and are frequently required until the age of 8 years.

- In addition to newborn screening, infants should have an audiometric evaluation by one year of age. Audiology evaluations should be performed each year until school age and should continue on an annual basis if tympanic tubes were placed.

- Speech therapy should also be offered if there are concerns about hearing loss.

- Obstructive sleep apnea (OSA) from a non-central etiology needs to be ruled out and treated by a pediatric otolaryngologist specialist. Children with severe OSA may require weight reduction, adenotonsillectomy, positive airway pressure at night, and/or tracheostomy for very severe cases.

**Thoracolumbar Kyphosis (TLK)**

- TLK often presents in the newborn and usually resolves spontaneously by 18 months of age in approximately 90% of the affected children, paralleling the child’s ability to ambulate as the trunk muscles strengthen.

- It is recommended that unsupported sitting should be limited in achondroplastic children less than one year of age to help prevent the progression of kyphosis.

- Bracing may be indicated if TLK progresses to a fixed deformity > 30 degrees (measured when prone) and when there is anterior vertebral wedging or posterior displacement of vertebrae at the apex of deformity.

- Continuation of bracing is recommended until the child is walking independently, the anterior corners of the vertebrae reconstitute, and the fixed component of the curve shows no further improvement. As bracing in these children may be poorly tolerated, an anterior and posterior fusion can be performed for a residual sagittal deformity greater than 60 degrees by age 5.

- Surgery should be reserved for those with neurologic deficits or fixed kyphosis measuring > 50 degrees.

- Treatment indications of the hyperlordosis are poorly defined, usually consisting of nonoperative modalities and observation throughout childhood.

**Lumbar Spinal Stenosis**

- Lumbar spinal stenosis is the most likely cause of disability later in life. Evaluation for stenosis with x-rays should be considered in all patients wishing to play contact sports or participate in high-risk activities.

- Lumbar stenosis may first be treated nonoperatively with modalities such as weight loss, physical therapy, and corticosteroid injections.

- Operative intervention is indicated when there are progressive symptoms such as severe claudication, urinary retention, and/or neurologic symptoms while at rest.

- Surgical treatment includes multi-level laminectomy, including lateral recess decompression with instrumented posterior spinal fusion to avoid post-laminectomy kyphotic deformity.

**Bowed Legs**

- Examination for bowing and/or internal tibial torsion must be part of each physical assessment of these children, with an immediate orthopedic referral for any concerns.

- It is often difficult to define indications for surgery in these children, but they may include the onset of knee or leg pain, changes in ambulation (lateral thrust), and/or severe alignment.

- Those with progressive and symptomatic leg bowing can benefit from either hemiepiphysiodesis or tibial/fibular osteotomies with or without femoral osteotomies.

- Options for limb lengthening include callodiastasis (lengthening through a metaphyseal corticotomy). However, these procedures are controversial due to high rates of complications.

**Pharmacological Therapy:**There are a few ongoing clinical trials. One therapeutic drug called vosoritide, a biologic analog of a potent stimulator of endochondral ossification, recently cleared Phase III of its clinical trial with promising results.