Loperamide is available in different formulations, most commonly as tablets, capsules, and orodispersible tablets that melt on the tongue. It is available as 2 mg tablets, capsules, and oral solution of 1 mg / 7.5 ml and 2 mg / 15 ml strengths. The oral solution needs to be shaken well before measuring to administer to the patient. Consider administering loperamide with plenty of fluids to prevent dehydration.

**Adult Dosing**

The usual initial recommended dose for acute diarrhea, such as traveler’s diarrhea, is 4 mg starting dose, followed by 2 mg dosing after each unformed stool but not to exceed 8 mg per day for over-the-counter use and 16 mg per day with prescription use. For chronic use, the suggested dose is 2 mg BID. Consider administering loperamide 30 minutes before food four times per day for patients with cancer-induced diarrhea to slow colic reflex.

- According to the Infectious Disease Society of America, use loperamide as adjuvant therapy with close monitoring and concomitant antibiotics in patients with suspected or known dysentery.C. difficile infection; however, some experts approve the use with close monitoring and concomitant antibiotics if the patient has major fluid losses and no contraindications (ileus/colonic distention).

Chemotherapy-induced diarrhea (off-labeled use): Initially administer 4 mg, followed by 2 mg every two to four hours or after each loose stool. For diarrhea persisting more than 24 hours, administer 2 mg every two hours (or 4 mg every four hours). Continue until 12 hours are passed without a loose bowel movement. Experts consider recommending alternative therapy for diarrhea persisting more than 48 hours, and doses more than 16 mg per day might not provide benefit.

**Specific Patient Population**

**Pediatric Patients**

According to the Infectious Disease Society of America, loperamide is not recommended for the management of infectious diarrhea in pediatric patients.

- 13 kg - 21 kg: 1 mg when first loose stool followed by 1 mg per dose after each subsequent unformed stool, but not more than 3 mg per day.

- 21 kg - 27 kg:  2 mg when first loose stool followed by 1 mg per dose after each subsequent unformed stool, but not more than 4 mg per day.

- 27.1 kg - 43 kg: 2 mg when first loose stool followed by 1 mg per dose after each subsequent unformed stool, but not more than 6 mg per day.

- Children 12 years and older: 4 mg when first loose stool followed by 2 mg per dose after each subsequent unformed stool, but not more than 8 mg per day.

**Pregnancy Considerations**

There are no adverse effects observed in animal studies. There is a lack of data on loperamide use in pregnant women, and the information is conflicting.

**Breastfeeding Considerations**

Loperamide may be excreted into breast milk. The study on loperamide oxide (prodrug of loperamide) was conducted in breastfeeding women and found variable concentrations of loperamide and loperamide oxide into breastmilk.

**Patients with Renal Impairment**

According to manufacturer labeling, no dose adjustment is required in patients with mild to severe renal impairment. In addition, since it is highly protein-bound, no dose adjustment is needed for dialysis.

**Patient with Hepatic Impairment**

There is no dose adjustment provided in the product label; hence, use caution in patients with liver impairment.