Obesity and overweight are considered significant health problems and have become a global challenge due to their high prevalence in almost all countries. The most appropriate mechanism to treat overweight conditions is the reduction of body weight. Weight loss is associated with metabolic changes, mostly favorable to improving the overall health of an individual. A direct link is shown between weight loss and improvement in metabolic diseases such as hypertension, blood glucose, lipid profiles, sleep apnea, and comorbidities such as non-alcoholic fatty liver disease, polycystic ovarian syndrome, infertility, type 2 diabetes, etc. This activity will discuss the metabolic mediators and effectors of weight management after weight loss. It also highlights the role of the interprofessional team that includes doctors, nurses, laboratory staff, nutritionists, physiotherapists, exercise physiologists, and trainers towards helping individuals with weight maintenance after a healthy weight is achieved.

**Objectives:**
- Describe weight loss and weight loss maintenance as complex metabolic processes impacting major metabolic pathways.
- Explain calorie restriction and dietary modifications for weight loss and its metabolic consequences.
- Summarize maintaining energy balance to resist regain of lost weight.
- Summarize the metabolic adaptation of weight loss management as advised by the interprofessional team through physical activity, exercise training, pharmacological or surgical interventions.