Basal ganglia calcifications occur in several other familial and non-familial conditions that are required to be excluded before making a diagnosis of primary familial basal ganglia calcification.

1. **Endocrine Disorders**

Parathyroid hormone (PTH) disturbances are the most common cause of bilateral basal ganglia calcifications. Reduced levels of actions of PTH cause hyperphosphatemia and hypocalcemia, which promotes calcification. In a review of 150 cases of Fahr syndrome, 35 (23.3%) had idiopathic hypoparathyroidism, and 23 (15.3%) had secondary (post-thyroidectomy) hypoparathyroidism.

Hypoparathyroidism: Idiopathic (absence, fatty replacement or atrophy of parathyroid gland) or secondary (due to inadvertent removal during thyroidectomy)

Pseudohypoparathyroidism (PHP) and Pseudo-pseudohypoparathyroidism (PPHP): Both are phenotypic variants with autosomal dominant inheritance with mutation of the GNAS gene. Both have clinical features of Albright hereditary osteodystrophy. In PHP, there is resistance to the action of parathyroid hormone with hypocalcemia, hyperphosphatemia, and elevated PTH levels, but PPHP has no biochemical abnormality with normal calcium and phosphorus levels and a normal response to PTH secretion.

Kenny Caffey syndrome type 1

It is a rare skeletal disorder with a mutation in the TBCE gene and is characterized by dwarfism, cortical thickening and medullary stenosis of long bones, facial dysmorphism, hypocalcemia due to congenital hypoparathyroidism and basal ganglia calcifications.

2. **Mitochondrial Myopathy**

Basal ganglia calcification is a recognized finding in mitochondriopathy due to abnormal calcium homeostasis.

3. **Infectious Diseases**

Intrauterine and perinatal infections: Herpes, CMV, rubella, and toxoplasmosis may cause basal ganglia and intracerebral calcification in the newborn and may present with microcephaly, seizures, chorioretinitis, or other CNS features.

Brucellosis: A study by Mousa AM et al. showed 9 (13.8%) out of 65 cases of CNS brucellosis (neuropsychiatric manifestations) had radiologic evidence of basal ganglia calcifications. Three cases had unilateral, 4 cases had bilaterally symmetric, and 2 cases had bilaterally asymmetric calcifications.

Toxoplasmosis: The most commonly affected region (75% cases) is basal ganglia showing multiple ring-enhancing lesions with edema and sometimes calcifications.

Neurocysticercosis: Larval cyst may sometimes occur in basal ganglia and gets calcified.

HIV/AIDS: In a study done for reporting neuropathology in 52 HIV patients, three were found to have basal ganglia calcifications.

4. **Congenital Disorders**

Cockayne syndrome (CS)/Neill-Dingwall Syndrome

It is an autosomal recessive disorder with an underlying defect in DNA repair. CS type 1 is the classic variant in which there is normal development initially, and features develop after first two years of life, such as hearing and visual impairment, CNS and PNS degradation with bilateral basal ganglia calcifications. CS type 2 is a more severe congenital variant, also known as cerebro-oculofacial syndrome or Pena Shokeir type 2 syndrome. There is no postnatal neurological development with associated eye and skeletal anomalies.

Aicardi-Gouteres Syndrome

It is a neurodevelopmental disorder characterized by microcephaly, neonatal seizures, cerebral atrophy, encephalopathy, cerebral calcifications typically bilateral, and in basal ganglia, especially putamen and globus pallidus.

Tuberous Sclerosis Complex

It is an autosomal dominant neurocutaneous syndrome with a mutation in TSC1 and TSC2 genes. It exhibits features involving the skin (ash-leaf macules, shagreen patch, adenoma sebacum, angiofibroma), kidneys (angiomyolipoma), cardiac (rhabdomyosarcoma) and CNS (subependymal nodules, hamartomas, cortical and subcortical tubers which can get calcified). The frequency of calcifications increases with age.

Coats plus syndrome (CRMCC-Cerebroretinal microangiopathy with calcifications and cysts)

Coats disease is a congenital nonhereditary eye disorder characterized by abnormal development of blood vessels behind the retina with resultant complete or partial blindness. Coats plus disease has associated neurologic features with intracerebral calcifications and formation of parenchymal cysts, bone, and gastrointestinal abnormalities.

Down Syndrome: In a study by Takashima et al. in 33 patients of down syndrome, 45% had basal ganglia calcifications, especially located in globus pallidus, and it increased with age.

Others: Immunodeficiency 38 with basal ganglia calcification, PKAN (Pantothenate kinase-associated neurodegeneration)

5. **Adult-Onset Disorders**

Neuroferritinopathy: Autosomal dominant disease, a variant of NBIA (neurodegeneration with brain iron accumulation), which presents with adult-onset dystonia, cognitive and behavioral changes with radiographic evidence of excessive iron storage and cystic degeneration of putamen.

Spinocerebellar ataxia type 20: Autosomal dominant disease with marked calcifications in the cerebellum (especially dentate nucleus).

Polycystic lipomembranous osteodysplasia with sclerosing leukoencephalopathy (PLOSL, Nasu-hakola disease): Autosomal recessive disease which presents with fractures, dementia, and bilateral basal ganglia (esp putamen) calcifications.

Others: DNTC-Diffuse neurofibrillary tangles with calcification (Kosaka- Shibayama disease),

6. **Dermatological Conditions**

Lipoid proteinosis: It is a rare genodermatosis in which amorphous hyaline material accumulates intracellularly in the skin, mucous membranes, and internal organs. Manifestations include alopecia, photosensitivity, dwarfism, seizures, and dementia. Selective brain parenchymal calcifications occur in the amygdala, corpus striatum, hippocampus, and parahippocampal gyrus.

Dyskeratosis Congenita: It is a disorder with a classic triad of dysplastic nails, lacy reticular pigmentation of the upper chest, and oral leukoplakia. Intracranial calcifications have been reported in the Revesz syndrome variant.

7. **Toxins**

Neural necrosis has been reported with excess vitamin D, lead, mercury, ionizing radiation, and methotrexate therapy.

8. **Normal Aging**

0.3-1.5 % of brain CT scans are incidentally found to have basal ganglia calcifications. In a study done by Forstl et al., about 70% of autopsies had microscopic calcifications in globus pallidus and the dentate nucleus, but patients were usually asymptomatic.

9. **Others**

Some other reported conditions with brain calcifications include biotinidase deficiency, hereditary folate malabsorption, carbonic anhydrase deficiency, celiac disease, cerebral lupus, and tetrahydrobiopterin-deficient hyperphenylalaninemia.