Three main pathophysiologic mechanisms of intraocular hemorrhage include

- Bleeding from normal vessels(secondary to trauma)

- Bleeding from abnormal vessels(associated with systemic hypertension and uveitis)

- Bleeding from new formed immature vessels (fibrovascular membranes and neoplasia)

**Hyphema**

- In blunt trauma, the coup-countercoup forces exert shearing stress on the blood vessels of the iris, ciliary body, and trabecular meshwork, resulting in rupture of the vessels and bleeding inside the anterior chamber.

- In penetrating trauma, direct injury to the ocular structures and their vasculature may lead to bleeding inside the eye.

- Post-operative /post-procedural hyphema- Performing any ocular surgery in the presence of inflammation and infection increases the probability of developing hyphema. Iatrogenic injury to the iris, trabecular meshwork, or ciliary body can lead to intraoperative or early post-operative bleed. An anterior chamber intraocular lens is known to cause chronic irritation of the iris and can increase the chance of bleeding inside the eye. Scleral fixated intraocular lens implantation can lead to injury of the ciliary body and the posterior surface of the iris and can lead to intraocular bleed. Iris claw lens can also acutely rupture iris vessels leading to intra-operative or early post-operative bleed. Procedures like Nd-YAG laser iridotomy or posterior capsulotomy can lead to hyphema.

- UGH, Syndrome- It was first described by a scientist named Ellingson in 1978. It is a triad of uveitis, glaucoma, and hyphema, seen in patients having intraocular lens implantation (most commonly anterior chamber IOL), in which there is continuous iris chafing because of the IOL which leads to chronic inflammation with iris transillumination defects, pigment dispersion, and hyphema obstructing the trabecular meshwork leading to glaucoma.

- In spontaneous hyphema cases, either the normal vessels become fragile secondary to some local or systemic causes, or there is bleeding from the neovessels.

**Vitreous hemorrhage:**

- Vitreous bleeding settles inferiorly.

- Vitreous bleeding clots rapidly.

- There is very poor initial polymorphonuclear lymphocyte response leading to a mild inflammatory reaction in the initial phase allowing the eye to limit inflammatory damage to the adnexal structures.

- According to a study by Sanders et al., blood from the vitreous cavity clears at the rate of 1% per day.

- As the RBC degenerates, the color of the hemorrhage changes from red to yellow.

**Suprachoroidal hemorrhage:**Two hypotheses have been proposed for explaining the pathophysiology of suprachoroidal hemorrhage.

- One histopathologically proven hypothesis is that sudden hypotony leads to choroidal effusion, which is significant enough to stretch the walls of the long or short ciliary arteries leading to their rupture and bleeding into the suprachoroidal space.

- Another hypothesis states that when sudden hypotony occurs, patients who already have damaged or weak posterior ciliary arteries have chances of rupture and bleeding into the suprachoroidal space.

**Retinal hemorrhages:**Retinal hemorrhages are classified depending on the site of bleeding- Sub RPE hemorrhage(between the RPE and Bruch's membrane), Sub-retinal hemorrhage(Between the RPE and neurosensory retina), Intraretinal hemorrhage (Dot and Blot hemorrhages), and RNFL hemorrhage (Flame- shaped hemorrhage, Roth spots, splinter hemorrhages ). Sub ILM hemorrhage is considered a part of the pre-retinal type of vitreous hemorrhage. Hemorrhages in the various layers of the retina are either due to some systemic predisposing factors or due to sudden shearing stress over the vessels and very rarely spontaneously.

**Optic Disc hemorrhage:**

**Shaken baby syndrome:**It is a result of child abuse where the child is subjected to severe trauma leading to subdural and retinal hemorrhages.