**Congenital**

Hearing loss is the most common congenital sensory disorder, often requiring pediatricians' expertise in conjunction with medical geneticists and pediatric otolaryngologists.

**Genetic Non-syndromic**

Of the nonsyndromic causes, the most common inheritance pattern is autosomal recessive, followed by autosomal dominant. More than 60 autosomal recessive genes have been identified, the most common being the gap junction beta 2 (GJB2) gene, which accounts for half of nonsyndromic hearing loss cases.

**Genetic Syndromic**

In children who have hearing loss due to syndrome, determining the underlying cause is often more important as the other clinical features can be severe.

- Waardenburg syndrome is the most common, with SNHL being a significant feature found in over two-thirds of patients.

- Usher syndrome is one of the most common autosomal recessive causes of syndromic hearing loss. This condition is characterized by hearing loss and visual loss due to a progressive SNHL and retinitis pigmentosa.

- Pendred syndrome classically presents with a varying degree of SNHL, vestibular dysfunction, and a thyroid goiter. Along with Usher syndrome, it is another one of the most common autosomal recessive causes of syndromic hearing loss. A specific mutation in SLC26A4 occurs in around half of the affected patients.

- Jervell and Lange-Nielsen syndrome is also inherited with an autosomal recessive pattern. The key feature, along with SNHL, is a prolonged QT interval seen on the ECG. These patients can suffer from or have a family history of syncope, sudden death, or long QT syndrome.

- Alport syndrome is inherited in an X-linked manner and occurs due to a defect in type IV collagen. It classically presents with glomerulonephritis, end-stage kidney disease, eye abnormalities,  and a bilateral SNHL. The hearing loss is initially in high frequency, but the lower frequencies begin to get affected as it worsens. Hematuria and proteinuria are key signs as the condition progresses.

**Environmental**

- Intrauterine infection (toxoplasmosis, cytomegalovirus, herpes, rubella)

- Alcohol, smoking

- Ototoxic drugs

- Premature births, hypoxia, neonatal jaundice

**Sensorineural Hearing Loss**

Acute sensorineural hearing loss is defined as a hearing loss greater than 30 dB in at least three consecutive audiometric frequencies over 72 hours.

**Presbycusis**

Presbycusis or age-related hearing loss can be defined as a progressive bilateral SNHL of mid to late adult-onset. The diagnosis of presbycusis is one of exclusion, and primary causes such as otosclerosis, Meniere's disease, and cytotoxicity, amongst many others, must be excluded first. It is commonly associated with degeneration of cochlear hair cells, mainly OHCs in the cochlea's basal portion, and the changes begin in the basal end of the cochlea and spread towards the apex as the condition worsens. Patients typically present with a slowly deteriorating hearing loss, especially in the presence of background noise. It is often a lack of clarity rather than a loss of volume that the patient describes. Tinnitus is frequently an accompanying symptom and can be the most challenging aspect for the patient.

A typical PTA will show a gradual downsloping hearing loss towards higher frequencies. It has been shown that once a certain amount of hearing loss has occurred (roughly 70-80 dB), further progression is slow, especially in the higher frequencies.****In terms of management options, hearing aids often benefit patients and prevent social isolation and depression.

**Noise-induced Hearing Loss**

This condition occurs when a patient experiences hearing loss due to excessive noise exposure, either recreational or occupational. Occupational noise exposure is one of the most prevalent, potentially preventable health conditions. It has a slight male predominance and usually affects the middle-aged population. The symptoms present similar to most SNHL conditions, with the insidious progression of worsening hearing loss over many years, often accompanied by tinnitus. Hyperacusis is found in 40% of tinnitus sufferers, and its severity can be determined using a hyperacusis questionnaire.

**Others**

Meniere's disease is characterized by a triad of spontaneous episodic vertigo, hearing loss, and tinnitus. Patients may also experience aural fullness. Their PTA usually shows an up sloping curve indicating a low-frequency moderate SNHL. PTA remains the most useful investigation, but a brain MRI is done to rule out lesions such as a vestibular schwannoma. Treatment ranges from conservative such as alcohol, coffee, and salt restriction, to treatments targeted at the symptoms most affecting the patients.

Autoimmune SNHL was first described in 1979 by McCabe as a rapidly progressive bilateral SNHL that responded to steroid therapy.

A head injury that results in a temporal bone fracture can lead to conductive hearing loss or mixed SNHL. Otic capsule fractures cause a severe SNHL through various mechanisms, including disruption of the membranous labyrinth, hemorrhage into the cochlea, perilymph fistula, and avulsion or trauma of the cochlear nerve. In those cases that result in bilateral deafness, a cochlear implant is a treatment option.

Ototoxic agents can cause SNHL in many ways. Aminoglycosides such as gentamicin cause hair cell death resulting in permanent hearing loss and balance dysfunction. This can occur after repeated administration of systemic therapy. The hearing loss initially affects the higher frequencies but continues progressively to the lower frequencies as more hair cells are damaged.