The common causes of ischemic stroke can also cause infarction in the basal artery territory. Interruption to the blood supply due to atherosclerosis or from an embolus anywhere from the heart to the basilar artery can cause the obliteration of flow through the basilar artery leading to an infarct of the brainstem (mainly pons) or brain region supplied by the basilar artery and its branches. The most commonly involved segments are the proximal and middle segments of the basilar artery.

Atherosclerosis is the phenomenon by which factors such as dyslipoproteinemia, diabetes, cigarette smoking, and hypertension lead to injury to the intimal side of blood vessels, exposing collagen and releasing factors leading to platelet adhesion to the surface and forming a thrombus or plaque. Fatty streak is formed by the uptake of oxidized lipids and the transformation of macrophages into lipid-laden foam cells. When the plaque ruptures, it can occlude the vessel causing high-grade vessel stenosis, or the organizing thrombus can further disintegrate and throw the emboli into the cerebral circulation.

Alternatively, a small part of the thrombus can detach and cause the occlusion of small vessels distally. Both mechanical symptoms can eventually cause the occlusion of several vessels leading to an infarct in the corresponding cerebral territories. Another mechanism is cardioembolism from the heart, where a clot in the heart, mainly composed of fibrinogen, usually forms due to dysrhythmias like atrial fibrillation, metallic valve, severe mitral stenosis, significant myocardial infarction (MI), acute heart failure and wall motion abnormalities, etc. Rarely, external compression of the vertebral artery (bow hunter syndrome or vertebrobasilar insufficiency) can cause posterior circulation stroke, which needs either endovascular deconstruction or reconstruction, external surgical decompression, or surgical bypass techniques.

COVID-19 infection has been shown to worsen the prothrombotic state associated with pregnancy and produce BAO.