The administration of rosuvastatin is via capsule or tablet. The capsule can be administered orally or via a nasogastric tube. The oral route can be taken with or without food, at any time of the day, and should be swallowed whole. The capsule should never be crushed or chewed. If opening the capsule, it is recommended to empty the contents into one teaspoonful of applesauce and then swallowed immediately without chewing.

For administration with a nasogastric tube, the capsule can be opened, emptied into a 60 ml catheter-tipped syringe. The recommendation is to add 40 milliliters of water, replace the plunge, shake the syringe for 15 seconds. Then attach the syringe to at least a 16 French nasogastric tube and administer with an additional flush of the tube with 20 milliliters of water. The mixture needs to be used promptly after preparation.

Dosage for the oral tablet is the same for the generic and trade name:

- 5 mg, 10 mg, 20 mg, 40 mg

Dosage recommendations: Dosing is individualized based on the low-density lipoprotein (LDL) levels at baseline and the goal of therapy. The patient’s response and medication adherence is an important determinant of therapeutic success. Adjustments should be made at a regular interval of four weeks or more depending on the underlying pathology of the disease and whether the treatment is for primary versus secondary prevention. Due to the risk of significant drug-drug interactions, the adjustment in dosing should be part of medication reconciliation with the current literature and a pharmacist. In renal impairment, if the creatinine clearance is greater or equal to 30 ml/minute, then no dosage adjustment is necessary; however, if lower than this cutoff, the recommendation is to start the lowest possible dose of 5 mg once daily with a maximum dosage of 10 mg per day.