Empiric treatment for urethritis should be started at the time of diagnosis, before results of testing for a specific etiology. Treatment should be based on whether the gonococcal infection has been evaluated by microscope:

**Presumptive Treatment of NGU with Microscope**

**Recommended Regimens
**

- Azithromycin 1 g orally in a single dose, or

- Doxycycline 100 mg orally twice a day for 7 days

Azithromycin and doxycycline are both highly effective for the treatment for chlamydial urethritis. Urethritis associated with M. genitalium responds better to azithromycin, although azithromycin resistance is increasing.

**Presumptive Treatment of NGU without Microscope**

When Gram stain is not available gonorrheal infection cannot be ruled out. These patients should be treated with a drug regimen effective against both chlamydia and gonorrhea.

**Recommended Regimens
**

- Ceftriaxone 250 mg IM

PLUS

- Azithromycin 1 g orally in a single dose, or

- Doxycycline 100 mg orally twice a day for 7 days

**Recurrent or Persistent NGU**

Recurrent or persistent symptoms can be common following treatment for NGU with the recommended regimen. Patients should first be evaluated for adherence to prior treatment and re-exposure to disease. If they continue to have evidence of urethritis (discharge on exam, elevated WBC on a microscope, or leukocyte esterase on urinalysis) therapy should be directed towards M. genitalium.
M. genitalium is the most common cause of persistent or recurrent NGU.

**Recommended Regimens
**

- If azithromycin was not used for initial exposure:

- 
              
- Azithromycin 1 g orally once

- If azithromycin was used for initial exposure

- 
              
- Moxifloxacin 400 mg orally daily for 7 days

- In either instance, metronidazole 2 g orally once should be given in areas where T. vaginalis is prevalent.