The optimal management of gastric varices remains unclear due to the lack of high-quality large clinical trials. However, there is consensus that the management of GOV1 varices is similar to that of esophageal varices. Nevertheless, based on the 2016 AASLD guidelines, the management of gastric varices (GOV2/IGV1) depends on the acuity of presentation and is classified into three categories: primary prophylaxis, management of acute variceal bleeding, and secondary prophylaxis.

- **Primary Prophylaxis**
- Beta-blockers have been used as a long-term prophylactic treatment for portal hypertension. The 2016 AASLD guidelines recommend non-selective beta-blockers (NSBBs) therapy such as propranolol or nadolol as primary prophylaxis of acute variceal hemorrhage from gastric varices, especially GOV2 or IGV1 that have not bled. The primary prophylaxis of GOV1 varices is similar to that of esophageal varices.

- **Management of Acute Gastric Variceal Bleeding**
- The most crucial step in managing patients presenting with acute gastric variceal bleed is admitting the patient to the ICU for initial resuscitation with packed red blood cells (PRBCs) transfusion and respiratory status protection.
- PRBCs transfusion should be limited to a target hemoglobin of approximately 8 g/dL
- Associated coagulopathy and thrombocytopenia should be corrected.
- The patient should be maintained on empiric broad-spectrum antibiotics, especially in patients with cirrhosis, to decrease the risk of bacterial infections, which is associated with increased rates of mortality.
- The role of vasoactive agents such as octreotide, vasopressin, terlipressin, and somatostatin in gastric variceal bleeding management is not clear. Nevertheless, they are still utilized because of their safety and potential benefits.
- Urgent upper endoscopy must be performed for diagnosis and treatment.

- 
**Endoscopic Therapies**

Data regarding the role of endoscopic therapy for the treatment of bleeding gastric varices is limited. However, endoscopic hemostasis is the mainstay in the management of patients presenting with acute gastric variceal bleeding. Current available endoscopic interventions include endoscopic injection sclerotherapy, tissue adhesives such as cyanoacrylate-based tissue adhesives, thrombin, and endoscopic variceal ligation (EVL).

- **Endoscopic injection sclerotherapy (EIS)**with sclerosing agents such as alcohol, polidocanol, or tetradecyl sulfate is associated with increased complications and rebleeding rates. It hence is not recommended in the management of acute gastric variceal bleeding, especially GOV2.

- **Direct injection of thrombin or fibrin glue**appears to be a promising therapeutic intervention, but their role has not been adequately evaluated in managing acute gastric variceal bleeding.

- **Cyanoacrylate (CYA) glue**is a class of synthetic glue mixed with lipiodol, an oily contrast agent before injection into varix that rapidly polymerizes into a hard-acrylic plastic upon exposure to water or blood, leading to hemostasis.

- **Endoscopic Ultrasound(EUS)-guided therapy**: EUS-guided CYA glue injection that precisely identifies gastric varix by color Doppler and delivers the CYA into varix leading to variceal obliteration and EUS guided coiling that utilizes the insertion of micro-coils into varix leading to variceal obliteration are emerging techniques that have been employed in the management of gastric varices. The benefit of the EUS guided approach is that it precisely identifies the actual degree of variceal obliteration. A single-center retrospective study involving 152 patients with high-risk gastric fundal varices treated with EUS-guided combined coil and CYA glue injection reported that the combination therapy was highly effective for hemostasis in active bleeding and also when used for primary and secondary bleeding prophylaxis of gastric varices. A multicenter meta-analysis by McCarty et al. concluded that EUS-guided therapies were safe, effective, and technically feasible for the treatment of GV. This study also noted that among different types of EUS-guided therapies, EUS combination therapy with coil embolization + CYA injection is a preferred approach for managing GV over EUS-based monotherapy (coil alone or CYA alone).

- **TIPS and BRTO: **If acute gastric variceal bleeding is not amenable to be controlled with endoscopic intervention, then transjugular intrahepatic portosystemic shunt (TIPS) or Balloon occluded retrograde transvenous obliteration (BRTO) should be performed
- **TIPS**is an invasive technique that involves creating an intrahepatic connection between the hepatic and the portal venous system resulting in the diversion of the portal venous flow into the systemic circulation, thereby reducing portal pressure. It is the treatment of choice in acute gastric variceal bleeding, especially GOV2 and IGV1. Randomized control trials have shown that TIPS has been more effective than cyanoacrylate injection in preventing rebleeding from gastric varices, with similar survival rates and frequency of associated complications.
- **BRTO**has emerged as a safe and clinically effective treatment option in managing gastric variceal bleeding and should be considered an alternative option, especially if patients with associated refractory hepatic encephalopathy. BRTO is an invasive technique that involves the retrograde injection of a sclerosing agent into gastric varix after occluding the portosystemic shunt with an occlusion balloon under fluoroscopic guidance. However, the performance of BRTO requires the presence of a spontaneous portosystemic shunt such as a gastro-renal shunt or a gastro-caval which is present in 60 to 85 % of cases and should be predetermined by computed tomography or magnetic resonance imaging prior to the performance of this procedure. A meta-analysis of 24 studies involving 1,016 patients by Park et al. reported the technical success rate for BRTO is 96.4%, and the clinical success rate was 97.3%.

- **Balloon Tamponade**

- Although data regarding the use of balloon tamponade in gastric variceal bleeding is limited, balloon tamponade with Sengstaken-Blakemore tube or Lintone-Nachlas tube should be considered in patients with massive acute gastric variceal not amenable to endoscopic intervention as a bridge to more definite treatments.

- **Surgical Approach**

- With the advent of newer minimally invasive and improved diagnostic and therapeutic techniques via endoscopy and interventional radiology, the role of surgery in managing acute gastric variceal bleeding is limited and should be considered a last resort when the above measures fail. However, splenectomy or splenic artery embolization should be considered a means of definitive therapy in patients presenting with acute gastric variceal bleeding secondary to sinistral or left-sided portal hypertension caused by splenic vein thrombosis (SVT). Splenectomy eliminates collateral venous flow and prevents future gastric variceal bleeding secondary to splenic vein thrombosis.

- **Secondary Prophylaxis**
- Nonselective beta-blockers in combination with endoscopy evaluation therapy (EVL or cyanoacrylate injection) are recommended as first-line therapy to prevent rebleeding in patients who recover from GOV1 hemorrhage.
- TIPS or BRTO are indicated as first-line therapy in patients of recover from gastric variceal hemorrhage secondary to GOV2 or IGV1 type of gastric varices. 
- EUS guided cyanoacrylate glue injection, or EUS guided coil embolization, is a secondary prophylactic option for patients in whom the performance of TIPS or BRTO is not technically feasible.