**Pitfalls of the Circle System**

Although highly functional, the circle circuit breathing system commonly used in modern anesthesia is very complex and prone to leaks that can inhibit its optimal use. To minimize leaks, many of the components are internalized to prevent disruption related to human error. The beauty of its nature is that it allows for low-flow delivery of anesthesia which minimizes the costs associated with expensive inhalational anesthetics and minimizes pollution of the operating room. Low fresh gas flows utilize less volatile anesthetics in the vaporizers, and volatile anesthetics are more effectively recycled. Low-flow anesthesia is defined as the delivery of anesthesia utilizing a flow of gases that is less than alveolar ventilation.

- Poor mask seal

- Dislodged endotracheal tube

- Circuit discontinuity - i.e., Inspiratory/expiratory limb disconnection, open filling tank on a variable bypass vaporizer, etc

- A poorly attached/detached carbon dioxide absorbent canister

When a leak occurs, prompt recognition and tracing of the leak are essential to prevent respiratory decompensation due to ventilator failure or loss of patient anesthesia, creating awareness. Common methods of tracing the leak include listening for a "hissing" sound and smelling for the source of volatile anesthetic. If the patient begins to decompensate (such as with desaturation), it is essential to call for assistance early to aid in identifying the leak to restore proper anesthesia machine function. It is advisable to utilize an alternate means of ventilation such as with a bag valve mask and an alternate means of anesthesia such as with IV anesthetics until the anesthesia machine can be restored to proper functioning when machine failure occurs.

The circle breathing circuit is efficient but still may leak volatile anesthetics into the operating room environment. Thus a scavenging system was created to minimize exposure to volatile anesthetics leaking into the operating room.  Exposure of volatile anesthetics to operating room personnel is a potential occupational health hazard. In addition to potential nephrotoxicity, hepatoxicity, and neurotoxicity, long-term exposure to volatile anesthetics has been correlated with genotoxic and mutagenic events such as chromosomal aberration and sister chromatid exchange.

Prior to using the anesthesia machine, a thorough checklist to ensure proper working of all the machine components helps prevent equipment failure resulting in awareness during anesthesia, hypoxic gas mixtures, excessive concentrations of inhalational anesthetics, and inability to ventilate the patient after administering anesthesia.  Modern machines typically incorporate an automatic machine check that is performed at least once per day.  Automated leakage tests have also been incorporated to allow for quicker checks of circuit discontinuity between cases during the day.  However, the anesthesia provider must be aware that although the automated tests are designed to reduce incidences of user error when preparing the machine, a manual test of all the components can be performed, albeit more labor-intensive. Routine servicing and checking of machines help to prevent clinically adverse events.  When a proper machine check does not identify equipment malfunction, rapid early detection of issues and prompt addressing of concerns helps to minimize possible adverse events.