As discussed in the previous section, the extrinsic pathway of apoptosis is critical for the eradication of infected or potentially cancerous cells. Concerning virally infected cells, the extrinsic apoptotic pathway is essential for eradicating the reservoir of viral infections. Although antibodies are effective at neutralizing extracellular viruses and preventing an inhaled virus from initiating an infection, they are not as effective at eliminating intracellular viruses that have already established infection. The extrinsic apoptotic pathway is thus crucial for eradicating cells that are harboring an intracellular infection or are transformed and potentially malignant. Furthermore, by inducing apoptosis in virally infected cells, the dying cell does not lyse and release its contents into surrounding tissues, including intact infective virions that would be capable of infecting neighboring cells.

Both the extrinsic and intrinsic pathways of apoptosis cooperate to maintain T cell homeostasis. Antigen-specific lymphocytes are rapidly clonally expanded in response to the presence of a foreign antigen. Yet, after clearing an infection, the majority of clonally expanded lymphocytes die by apoptosis, leaving a small percentage of cells that function as memory or effector lymphocytes. Both death receptors of the extrinsic pathway and mitochondrial proteins of the intrinsic pathway contribute to the contraction phase of lymphocytes after successful clearance of a pathogen, thus preventing additional host damage induced by cytokines, and also permitting more energy expenditure if a subsequent pathogen is encountered.

The elimination of self-reactive thymocytes in the thymus is essential to achieve central tolerance and prevent autoimmune disease. Developing thymocytes that bind too strongly to MHC molecules presenting self-antigens in the thymus are eliminated in a process called negative selection. Negative selection requires the actions of caspases to initiate apoptosis in self-reactive thymocytes.

Negative selection is an imperfect process, and some self-reactive T lymphocytes will escape to the periphery. Peripheral tolerance occurs via multiple mechanisms, including the induction of apoptosis in self-reactive T cells in a process termed activation-induced cell death (AICD).

Immunological privilege is a physiological mechanism of self-tolerance functioning to exclude certain peripheral tissues such as the eye, brain, and testes from the damaging effects of the immune system. However, physical barriers protecting these sites can be compromised, leading to exposure of the sites to lymphocytes. Yet the constitutive expression of FasL on privileged tissues represents a backup mechanism to protect privileged tissues from lymphocyte destruction, as the FasL initiates the extrinsic pathway of apoptosis in infiltrating lymphocytes expressing the Fas receptor.