After ten years from diagnosis, there is a high risk with rapid eye movement behavior disorder for developing alpha-synucleinopathy pathology.

There are currently no guidelines on counseling and management regarding potential phenoconversion of RBD to alpha-synucleinopathy. The approach may include a discussion with the patient to understand this risk. The patient should be recommended to seek consultation from their primary care provider, sleep specialist, and/or neurologist if associated symptoms manifest, such as memory issues, constipation, gait abnormalities, orthostatic hypotension, or neurological deficits.

Prodromal alpha-synucleinopathy is possible in younger patients less than 50 years old, but nondegenerative disorders should be considered, including autoimmunity, narcolepsy, and REM-suppressing medication use.

There is a lack of controlled, randomized, double-blind studies for RBD treatment. However, injury prevention is critical in the management of RBD. Clonazepam is highly effective in treating RBD to reduce injury risks.

Low risk for adverse reaction favors melatonin over clonazepam as initial pharmacological therapy for RBD.

Other etiology may resemble RBD symptoms and behaviors, necessitating evaluation with a formal PSG to rule out malingering, psychogenic movement disorder, NREM parasomnias, sleep-related epilepsy syndrome, and obstructive sleep apnea. As physicians may be called upon for legal proceedings, this becomes more paramount when an illegal act is presented to occur during sleep.