# Introduction

The musculoskeletal system comprises one of the body's major tissue/organ systems. The three main types of muscle tissue are skeletal, cardiac, and smooth muscle groups.

# Structure and Function

Skeletal muscle is one of the three significant muscle tissues in the human body. Each skeletal muscle consists of thousands of muscle fibers wrapped together by connective tissue sheaths. The individual bundles of muscle fibers in a skeletal muscle are known as fasciculi. The outermost connective tissue sheath surrounding the entire muscle is known as epimysium. The connective tissue sheath covering each fasciculus is known as perimysium, and the innermost sheath surrounding individual muscle fiber is known as endomysium.

When bundled together, all the myofibrils get arranged in a unique striated pattern forming sarcomeres which are the fundamental contractile unit of a skeletal muscle. The two most significant myofilaments are actin and myosin filaments arranged distinctively to form various bands on the skeletal muscle. The stem cells which differentiate into mature muscle fibers are known as satellite cells which can be found between the basement membrane and the sarcolemma (the cell membrane surrounding the striated muscle fiber cell).

The primary functions of the skeletal muscle take place via its intrinsic excitation-contraction coupling process. As the muscle is attached to the bone tendons, the contraction of the muscle leads to movement of that bone that allows for the performance of specific movements. The skeletal muscle also provides structural support and helps in maintaining the posture of the body. The skeletal muscle also acts as a storage source for amino acids that different organs of the body can use for synthesizing organ-specific proteins.

# Embryology

Distinct transcriptional mechanisms and specific gene regulatory activity control the differentiation of muscle fibers.

The myotome then differentiates to form the skeletal muscles in the body after receiving stimulation from the Sonic Hedgehog (Shh) signaling molecule from the notochord, resulting in the Myf5 expression and subsequent differentiation.

Several signaling molecules like the Wnt and the BMP and some transcription factors like sine oculis homeobox are responsible for this differentiation. The development of skeletal muscles in the limb and the trunk depends on the expression of MyoD and Myf5 and their effects on the different myoblasts.

# Blood Supply and Lymphatics

The primary artery supplying blood to a particular skeletal muscle generally courses parallel to the longitudinal axis of the muscle fiber.

Lymph capillaries originate in skeletal muscle in the microvascular unit within the endomysium near the main capillary bed and drain the tissue fluid. These capillaries merge to form the lymphatic vessels as they drain the tissue fluid. These lymphatic vessels go through the perimysium and join with the larger lymphatic vessels. Unlike the blood vessels, the wall of the lymph vessels within the muscle does not have contractile property due to a lack of smooth muscles(in the wall), so they depend on the muscle movement and arteriolar pulsations to drain the lymph out.

# Nerves

The neuronal innervation of a skeletal muscle typically comprises sensory nerve fibers, motor nerve fibers, and the neuromuscular junction. The nerve fibers are composed of myelinated as well as non-myelinated nerve fibers. The cell bodies of the neurons give rise to large axons, which are generally unbranched and travel to the target muscles for innervation. Near the target muscle, the axons divide into multiple smaller branches to innervate multiple muscle fibers. The motor nerve terminal has abundant mitochondria, endoplasmic reticulum, and numerous membrane-bound synaptic vesicles containing neurotransmitter- acetylcholine.

The postsynaptic membrane of the muscle fibers has a massive concentration of neurotransmitters (AchR) receptors. These receptors are transmembrane ligand-gated ion channels.

# Muscles

Each muscle comprises multiple tissues, including blood vessels, lymphatics, contractile muscle fibers, and connective tissue sheaths. The outermost sheath of connective tissue covering each muscle is called epimysium. Each muscle is made up of groups of muscle fibers called fascicles surrounded by a connective tissue layer called perimysium. Multiple units of individual muscle fibers within each fascicle are surrounded by endomysium, a connective tissue sheath. The two most essential myofilaments that make up the contractile elements of the muscle fiber are actin and myosin. They are arranged distinctively in a striated pattern to form the dark A band, the light I band, and the fundamental unit of contraction, also referred to as a sarcomere.

The sarcomere consists of a central M line, and attached to it on either side are the thick myofilaments of myosin. This forms the dark A band. The sarcomere is bordered by the Z-line, which serves as the site of origin of the thin myofilaments of actin that project towards each other as they partially overlap the myosin filaments.

# Clinical Significance

Skeletal muscles enable humans to move and perform daily activities. They play an essential role in respiratory mechanics and help maintain posture and balance. They also protect the vital organs in the body.

Various medical conditions result from abnormalities in the skeletal muscles' function. These diseases include myopathy, paralysis, myasthenia gravis, urinary and/or bowel incontinence, ataxia, weakness, tremors, and others. Disorders of the nerves can cause neuropathy and cause disturbances in the functionality of the skeletal muscles. In addition, skeletal muscle/tendon ruptures can occur acutely in high-level athletes or recreational sports participants and generate significant disability in all patients regardless of activity status.

**Muscle Cramps**

Muscle cramps result in continuous, involuntary, painful, and localized contraction of an entire muscle group, individual single muscle, or select muscle fibers.

Exercise-associated muscle cramps are the most frequent condition requiring medical/therapeutic intervention during sports.

In specific clinical scenarios, the underlying etiology may relate to persistent, spastic muscle contractions that can significantly impact human function. A typical example of this condition manifests in the sternocleidomastoid muscle. Clinically, this is recognized in congenital torticollis or spasmodic torticollis.

Other relevant conditions in this realm include, but are not limited to the following:

- Exercise-induced and heat-related muscle cramping

- Piriformis syndrome

- Thoracic outlet syndrome (scalene muscle hypertrophy/spasticity)

**Palsy/Compression Neuropathy**

At the opposite end of the spectrum, various muscle palsies exist secondary to the long-term, downstream effects of various nerve conditions and neuropathies, potentially resulting in flaccid conditions (which may be permanent or temporary). These syndromes and conditions include but are not limited to the following:

- Bell's palsy

- Guyon canal syndrome

- AIN syndrome or PIN syndrome

- Carpal tunnel syndrome (secondary to compression neuropathy of the median nerve at the carpal tunnel)

- Supraspinatus and/or infraspinatus atrophy

- Klumpke palsy