Before starting the procedure, informed consent from the patient should be obtained. The benefits and risks involved with the procedure should be explained to the patient. The healthcare team should know about the patient's history of allergies. In cases with a history of hypersensitivity to fluorescein, premedication with antihistamines or corticosteroids should be considered. Fasting of a minimum duration of 2 to 4 hours on the day of the procedure is recommended. There are no reports suggestive of a difference between the volume of fluorescein injected and the rate of adverse reactions.

For children, based on age and weight, 7.7 mg/kg of fluorescein can be injected up to a maximum dose of 500 mg. Studies using FFA for retina imaging in preterm neonates report an injection of 20% sodium fluorescein as a bolus dose of 0.04 mL/kg (8 mg/kg) followed by a saline flush.

The pupil should be well dilated before starting the procedure. The patient should be primed about the risk of nausea so that initial images are properly acquired. The emergency cart with the equipment should be available. The lens of the camera should be checked for clarity, and alignment and focusing should be cross-verified. A few control images should be taken to check for pseudo-fluorescence and autofluorescence. The patient's arm should be placed comfortably on the armrest, and the patient should be comfortably seated. The chin should be placed on the chin rest. Explaining to the patient that the images will be taken in primary gaze and then in different gazes (for a usual fundus camera) makes the procedure swift. The scalp vein set is to be placed in the patient's arm, and some blood is drawn into the tubing to confirm the position of the needle.

The eye of concern and the exact location of the lesion should be confirmed before starting to capture the images. The color photographs are taken initially, then the dye should be injected, and the timer should be started simultaneously. When initiating the injection of dye, any extravasation of the dye should be carefully monitored. While taking the photographs, special consideration should be given to any specific area of pathology if marked by the ophthalmologist. The healthcare team should be alert to notice early signs of syncope or anaphylaxis in the patient. It is better to reassure the patient throughout the procedure and keep them informed about its progress. After the initial few images of one eye, the camera is moved to the other eye to capture images.

Oral FFA can be done after off-label oral administration of sodium fluorescein.