Volkmann contracture typically presents as a classical picture, making the diagnosis easy and justifiable with the help of history and physical examination. In fact, most cases do not even require lab investigations for reaching a diagnosis. However, if needed, acute compartment syndrome may be investigated with creatine phosphokinase (CPK), blood urea nitrogen (BUN), creatinine, serum electrolytes, serum calcium, urinalysis, and urine myoglobin. Abnormalities in any of the above investigations can suggest compartment syndrome. Coagulation studies may also be warranted if a bleeding disorder is considered a potential cause of compartment syndrome. A complete blood picture will also help rule out anemia, which can potentiate anoxia in the osteofascial compartment.

Measuring the intracompartmental pressure of the osteofascial compartment is the standard of diagnosis when the history and physical examination is nonconclusive. It may also help confirm the findings of clinical assessment. Nevertheless, care must be taken not to exclude compartment syndrome based on a single normal reading.

Imaging studies such as x-rays, magnetic resonance imaging scans (MRIs), and computed tomography (CT) scans may prove to be supportive in the diagnosis of Volkmann ischemic contracture but are not considered first-line investigations. X-rays may especially be helpful in identifying displaced supracondylar fractures of the humerus. CT scan and MRI may also have a role in narrowing down the differential diagnosis of compartment syndrome unrelated to fractures of the upper limb. An ultrasound may also help exclude the differential diagnosis of acute compartment syndrome.