All the suprahyoid muscles are thin and slender muscles (except the mylohyoid) which connect the hyoid bone to the base of the mandible and the skull and help in the hanging of the hyoid bone from above. Whenever the base of the mandible is stabilized, then these muscles help in elevating the hyoid bone upwards and in turn in elevating the floor of the mouth for deglutition. Whenever the infrahyoid muscles stabilize the hyoid bone, then the suprahyoid muscles help in the depression of the mandible and thus help in wide opening of the mouth. The suprahyoid muscles participate in improving the flexion movement of the neck. They are located on three levels: a deep plane formed by the geniohyoid muscle, a medium plane consisting of the mylohyoid muscle and a surface plane formed by the digastric and styloid muscles. Some literature includes the hyoglossus muscle as part of the suprahyoid muscles; however, in most bibliographies, it is treated as an extrinsic tongue muscle, since it does not insert into any upper bone structure as do the rest of the suprahyoid muscles.

If we study the function of each muscle, it differs slightly in nature. Digastric muscle helps in depressing and retracting the chin, thus helping in the opening of the mouth. Digastric pulls the hyoid bone and the floor of the oral cavity upwards, thus helping in deglutition. The mylohyoid muscle also helps in elevating the floor of mouth and tongue, thus helping in deglutition and speaking. It also helps in the depression of the mandible when the hyoid bone is in a fixed position. The stylohyoid helps in drawing the hyoid bone upward and backward, elevating the tongue and elongates floor of the mouth. The geniohyoid muscle helps in bringing the hyoid bone upwards and forwards and also in the widening of the airway passage.

The geniohyoid muscle is under the genioglossus muscle; it is a small and short muscle that has a cylindrical shape located above the digastric muscle and the mylohyoid muscle.

The mylohyoid muscle has a square morphology that forms the muscular floor of the mouth; it connects superficially to the digastric muscles. The mylohyoid muscle participates in the formation of the Pirogoff triangle, created by the posterior edge of the mylohyoid muscle, the middle tendon of the digastric, and the hypoglossal nerve. This triangle contains the lingual artery.

The digastric muscle has this name because it has the characteristic of being one of the few muscles in the human body that has two muscular bellies, one anterior and one posterior, joined by an intermediate tendon. It connects from its posterior belly to the sternocleidomastoid muscle and to the splenius muscle of the head, which also inserts on the mastoid process. It also has similar linkages to the internal jugular vein, internal carotid artery, and the parotid gland.

The digastric muscle's posterior belly participates in the formation of the Beclard triangle, shaped by the posterior edge of the hyoglossus muscle, by the greater horn of the hyoid bone and by the posterior edge of the posterior belly of the digastric muscle. This triangle contains the hypoglossal nerve and the lingual artery. The anterior belly is related to its contralateral counterpart, with the submandibular gland and the superficial face of the mylohyoid muscle.

The stylohyoid is a thin and elongated muscle; it connects to the posterior belly of the digastric muscle in its path. Medially it is related to the external carotid artery.

In the complexity of these muscles, studies reveal that the geniohyoid muscle is stronger in moving the hyoid bone forward, while the mylohyoid muscle expresses greater force in moving the hyoid bone in a cranial direction.