Serotonin is a biogenic monoamine; its production occurs in two steps. The essential amino acid tryptophan is hydroxylated to 5-hydroxytryptophan (5-HTP) by tryptophan hydroxylase. In a second step, 5-HTP undergoes decarboxylation to form 5-HT. Early studies have shown that hydroxylation and decarboxylation occur almost instantaneously in the presence of tryptophan.

Serotonin is synthesized and stored within the central nervous system (CNS) in the presynaptic neurons (serotonergic neurons, pineal gland, and catecholaminergic neurons). Serotonin is present in nine groups of cell bodies isolated to the pons and midbrain. The raphe nuclei are the major nuclei, possessing both ascending serotonergic fibers that project to the forebrain as well as descending fibers extending to the medulla and spinal cord. A small number of serotonergic nuclei also reside in reticular formation with fibers that remain within the medulla.

In the CNS, serotonin processing occurs in several ways. Upon neuronal depolarization, there is a release of serotonin into the synaptic cleft. It can bind to either postsynaptic serotonin receptors (5-HT receptors) or presynaptic serotonin autoreceptors.

Serotonin binding to the autoreceptor acts as negative feedback against the further release of serotonin into the synaptic cleft. The highly selective serotonin transporter (SERT), which is located on the presynaptic membrane, functions to remove serotonin from the synaptic cleft.

Serotonin originating from enterochromaffin cells is released into the portal circulation and undergoes rapid elimination from the plasma by way of uptake into platelets and liver metabolism. Serotonin transporters on the platelet membrane, and enterochromaffin cells function to uptake serotonin into those cells. Serotonin escapes uptake, and liver metabolism reaches the lung, where it then undergoes metabolism.