The common peroneal nerve, also known as the common fibular nerve,  is a major nerve that innervates the lower extremity. As one of the two major branches off the sciatic nerve, it receives fibers from the posterior divisions of L4 through S2. Specifically, it originates from the sciatic nerve and separates from it proximal to the popliteal fossa, and courses its way along the posterolateral aspect of the leg deep to the long head of the biceps femoris and through the popliteal fossa before passing behind the proximal fibular head. Just inferior and lateral to the fibular head, it divides into two nerves at the fibular neck–the superficial and deep fibular nerves. The superficial fibular nerve courses anterolaterally between the fibularis longus muscle and extensor digitorum longus muscle within the lateral compartment.

As it moves distally, it terminates within the lateral compartment before reaching the ankle and foot. The deep fibular nerve courses anteriorly and runs adjacent to the anterior tibial artery between the extensor digitorum longus muscle and the tibialis anterior muscle. As the deep fibular nerve travels distally, it runs within the anterior compartment of the leg between two muscles. These muscles include the extensor hallucis longus muscle and the tibialis anterior muscle. As the nerve approaches the foot just anterior to the talus, it divides into medial and lateral branches. The medial branch travels alongside the dorsalis pedis artery and terminates in between the first two metatarsals. The lateral branch travels alongside the lateral tarsal artery and terminates near the fifth metatarsal.