Zileuton is only available in a tablet dosage form. The tablets are available as single-strength, 600 mg white, oval, and film-coated tablets. Zileuton should be stored at room temperature 20C to 25C (68F to 77F).

Administer two 600 mg extended-release tablets twice daily. Administer immediate-release tablets of 600 mg four times daily.

**Use in Specific Patient Populations**

**Patients with Renal Impairment:**Dose adjustment in patients with renal impairment or hemodialysis is not required.

**Patients with Hepatic Impairment:**Zileuton is contraindicated in patients with active liver disease or constant ALT elevations ≥3 upper limits of normal. Hepatic injury due to zileuton has been self-limited, but the possibility of severe injury and hepatic failure must be evaluated, especially if the medication is not stopped.

**Pregnancy Considerations:**Severe asthma exacerbations, particularly during the first trimester of pregnancy, are associated with an increased risk of congenital malformations. According to Global Strategy for Asthma (GINA) guidelines, pregnant patients should be suggested that poorly controlled asthma and exacerbations expose their infants to a much greater risk than pharmacological treatments. Zileuton is a former FDA pregnancy category C drug. Zileuton should be used during pregnancy only after carefully considering the risk-benefit analysis. Other agents are preferred as controller and reliever medications.

**Breastfeeding Considerations:**No medical information is available on using zileuton during breastfeeding; however, the manufacturer's data indicate that the concentration of zileuton in maternal milk is low. As there is no published experience with zileuton during breastfeeding, an alternate drug should be used, particularly while nursing a newborn or preterm infant.