The canonical pathway of the extrinsic pathway of apoptosis begins with the binding of members of the tumor necrosis factor receptor superfamily (TNFRSF) to cognate trimeric ligands of the tumor necrosis factor superfamily (TNFSF), which can be either soluble or expressed on the surface of another cell such as a CTL. TNFRSF members oligomerize in response to trimeric ligand binding, although some TNFRSF members exist as oligomers in the absence of ligand. TNFRSF members that induce apoptosis in response to ligand binding contain a “death domain” that is approximately 80 amino acids long. The death domain serves as a docking site for other pro-apoptotic proteins such as Fadd, forming a membrane-bound death-inducing signaling complex (DISC), which ultimately leads to the activation of caspases. Caspases are cysteine-rich proteases that naturally exist as zymogens, and when activated, possess proteolytic activity that functions to cleave other intracellular proteins, ultimately achieving the orderly disassembly of the cell.

Caspase-8, an initiator caspase, is recruited to the DISC complex and is subsequently activated upon binding to the DISC. Activated caspase-8 cleaves several substrates, including caspase-3, resulting in activation of the executioner caspase. Activated caspase-3 cleaves actin, nuclear laminins, and the inhibitor of a DNase, thus promoting DNA degradation. The cleavage of actin disrupts cell division and cell migration, while cleavage of DNA and nuclear laminins prevents nuclear function and expression of survival genes. There are many variations of the canonical pathway; for example, in response to binding by TNF-a, the receptor TNFR1 can activate either apoptosis via the canonical pathway described, or can activate the pro-survival transcription factor NF-kB, which acts as a master regulator of inflammatory cytokine production.

The most relevant TNFSF members expressed by NK cells and CTLs express are Fas ligand and TRAIL. Fas ligand expression is fairly exclusive to NK cells and CTLs, and it initiates apoptosis by binding the TNFRSF member Fas (CD95), which can express in a variety of tissues. In addition to inducing apoptosis through TNFSF ligands, NK cells and CTLs can also induce apoptosis in altered host cells by releasing granzymes and perforin onto the target cell. These cytotoxic substances are synthesized and stored in granules in activated CTLs and NK cells, and recognition of altered cells promotes exocytosis of the granules, releasing the contents onto the target cell.

Perforin functions to promote uptake of the cytotoxic substances into the target cell. Granzyme B is a protease; once released inside the target cell, it promotes apoptosis of the target cell by activating caspases and other proteins. It is important to note that the extrinsic and intrinsic pathways are not distinct, and both granzymes and caspases activated by TNFRSF members can cleave the protein Bid, which subsequently initiates apoptosis by the intrinsic, mitochondrial pathway.

Regardless of how an apoptotic pathway becomes initiated, there are also profound changes induced in the plasma membrane. Phosphatidylserine is normally restricted to the inner leaflet of the plasma membrane. Upon initiation of apoptosis, phospholipid scramblase activity results in phosphatidylserine exposure on the outer leaflet of the cell, serving as a marker for engulfment by phagocytes. Mutations that interfere with the engulfment of apoptotic cells have been implicated in a variety of autoimmune diseases such as lupus (SLE).