The causes of CKD vary globally, and the most common primary diseases causing CKD and ultimately end-stage renal disease (ESRD) are as follows

- Diabetes mellitus type 2 (30% to 50%)

- Diabetes mellitus type 1 (3.9%)

- Hypertension (27.2%)

- Primary glomerulonephritis (8.2%)

- Chronic Tubulointerstitial nephritis (3.6%)

- Hereditary or cystic diseases (3.1%)

- Secondary glomerulonephritis or vasculitis (2.1%)

- Plasma cell dyscrasias or neoplasm (2.1)

- Sickle Cell Nephropathy (SCN) which accounts for less than 1% of ESRD patients in the United States

CKD may result from disease processes in any of the three categories: prerenal (decreased renal perfusion pressure), intrinsic renal (pathology of the vessels, glomeruli, or tubules-interstitium), or postrenal (obstructive).

**Prerenal Disease**

Chronic prerenal disease occurs in patients with chronic heart failure or cirrhosis with persistently decreased renal perfusion, which increases the propensity for multiple episodes of an intrinsic kidney injury, such as acute tubular necrosis (ATN). This leads to progressive loss of renal function over time.

**Intrinsic Renal Vascular Disease**

The most common chronic renal vascular disease is nephrosclerosis, which causes chronic damage to blood vessels, glomeruli, and tubulointerstitium.

The other renal vascular diseases are renal artery stenosis from atherosclerosis or fibro-muscular dysplasia which over months or years, cause ischemic nephropathy, characterized by glomerulosclerosis and tubulointerstitial fibrosis.

**Intrinsic Glomerular Disease (Nephritic or Nephrotic)**

A nephritic pattern is suggested by abnormal urine microscopy with red blood cell (RBC) casts and dysmorphic red cells, occasionally white blood cells (WBCs), and a variable degree of proteinuria.

A nephrotic pattern is associated with proteinuria, usually in the nephrotic range (greater than 3.5 gm per 24 hours), and an inactive urine microscopic analysis with few cells or casts. It is commonly caused by minimal change disease, focal segmental glomerulosclerosis, membranous GN, membranoproliferative GN (Type 1 and 2 and associated with cryoglobulinemia), diabetic nephropathy, and amyloidosis.

Some patients may be assigned to one of these two categories.

**Intrinsic Tubular and Interstitial Disease**

The most common chronic tubulointerstitial disease is polycystic kidney disease (PKD). Other etiologies include nephrocalcinosis (most often due to hypercalcemia and hypercalciuria), sarcoidosis, Sjogren syndrome, reflux nephropathy in children and young adults,

There is increased recognition of the relatively high prevalence of CKD of unknown cause among agricultural workers from Central America and parts of Southeast Asia called Mesoamerican nephropathy,

**Postrenal (Obstructive Nephropathy)**

Chronic obstruction may be due to prostatic disease, nephrolithiasis or abdominal/pelvic tumor with mass effect on ureter(s) are the common causes. Retroperitoneal fibrosis is a rare cause of chronic ureteral obstruction.