Drowning leads to 372,000 deaths annually worldwide and severe morbidity secondary to asphyxiation or aspiration. A total of 12,529 weighted patients presented to emergency departments (ED) or submersion injury in 2013 yielding a rate of 9.29 per 100,000 ED visits.

**End Organ Effects of Drowning**

Fluid aspiration results in varying degrees of hypoxemia, and the water can wash out surfactant, effectively producing pulmonary edema and acute respiratory distress syndrome (ARDS). The hypoxemia causes anoxic brain injury and neuronal damage. In non-fatal drownings, arrhythmias can be seen secondary to hypoxemia. Sinus tachycardia, sinus bradycardia, and atrial fibrillation are the most common arrhythmias seen in this setting. Metabolic and respiratory acidosis is often seen initially in nonfatal drowning patients.

**Management**

Upon presentation to the emergency department, resuscitative efforts should be made. In those patients who do not require intubation, supplemental oxygen should be applied. If necessary, positive pressure ventilation should be applied. A trauma evaluation should be performed when necessary and appropriate imaging studies should be considered.

Diving and jumping into pools provides an additional risk. Caregivers should always advise no running on a pool deck, and no jumping or diving where the depth of the water is unknown. One-third of diving injuries occur in swimming pools. This risk is especially high in above-ground pools. Patients who participate in competitive diving also put themselves at risk. A diver from a 10-meter board hits the water at a 64-kilometer-per-hour speed. Without proper training and supervision, this could cause significant injury.