There are multiple strategies to treat chronic groin pain.

**A) Conservative treatment****:**

Lifestyle modification:

- Walking, stooping, or hyperextension of the hip joint exacerbates chronic groin pain - the recumbent position and flexion of the hip joint and thigh relieves pain.

Painkillers:

- Includes non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs), opioids, antiepileptics, and antidepressants

Rehabilitation:

- Transcutaneous electric nerve stimulation, myofascial release, and acupuncture can control symptoms of the ilioinguinal neuralgia.

**B) Ultrasound-guided n**erve block****

Aim:  interruption of the neuronal transmission leading to temporary pain relief.

Substances injected:  local anesthetics (with or without steroids) or neurolytic agents.

Principal: injection of these chemicals prevent neuronal transmission through ilioinguinal nerve fibers either by blocking membrane ion channels or by denaturation of axon proteins.

Technique:

- Patient position: supine

- Use a linear probe with a frequency ranging from 5 to 10 MHz

- Place the probe transversely and start scanning from the anterior superior iliac spine.

The nerve lies between transversus abdominis and internal oblique muscles lateral to the inferior epigastric artery and the iliohypogastric nerve. Operators introduce a needle from lateral to medial using an in-plane approach to place the injectate accurately around the nerve.

**C)**Surgical treatment********:****

Indications: Persistent, intractable pain after the failure of conservative measures.

Principal: Neurectomy involves identifying and dissecting the nerve proximal to the area of trauma, or if possible, the entire length of the nerve.

The approach can be open or laparoscopic.