When the presentation is consistent with acute proctitis in patients with receptive anal intercourse, therapy should be initiated while awaiting results of laboratory tests. Partners of patients with STI’s should be evaluated and patients should refrain from sexual intercourse until they are treated. Gonococcal proctitis is treated with ceftriaxone 250 mg intramuscular one time plus azithromycin 1 gram oral one time. An alternative regimen is cefixime 400 mg oral one time plus doxycycline 100 mg oral twice daily for seven days. Chlamydia is treated with azithromycin. Doxycycline, erythromycin, ofloxacin or Levofloxacin may be used as an alternative regimen. LGV is treated with doxycycline 100 mg twice daily for 21 days. Erythromycin or azithromycin may be used as alternative regimens for the same period of 21 days. Herpes proctitis is treated with acyclovir 400 mg oral three times daily or valacyclovir 1 gram twice daily or famciclovir 250 mg three times daily for 7 to 10 days. The course of treatment may be extended if no complete healing is achieved by the end of the 10-day course of treatment.

For patients with mild to moderate UP, guidelines from American College of Gastroenterology (ACG) and American Gastroenterological Association (AGA) recommend using rectal 5-Aminosalicylic Acid (5-ASA) mesalamine rather than oral mesalamine. Suppositories are more effective than enemas. For induction of remission, the dose is 1 g/day and this is to be continued at the same dose to maintain remission.  In cases of intolerance, refractoriness, hypersensitivity to mesalamine suppositories, inability to retain rectal therapy, rectal corticosteroid therapy is suggested for induction of remission rather than no therapy, despite the superiority of rectal 5-ASA over rectal steroids.  Corticosteroids are not recommended and are not effective in maintenance of remission secondary to side effects and long-term complications. Up to 46% of patients with UP may develop extensive colitis. This should be especially suspected in patients refractory to topical treatment and follow-up is recommended.

UP is treated with topical mesalazine in the form of suppositories, enemas, foams and gels and in severe cases combined with oral mesalazine with topical steroids or systemic corticosteroids in more severe cases. In steroid resistant cases, the addition of cyclosporine or immunomodulators; thiopurines as azathioprine (AZA) and 6-mercaptopurine (6-MP) is considered. Other options include anti TNF-α (infliximab, adalimumab, and golimumab), anti-integrin antibodies as vedolizumab and etrolizumab, or oral tacrolimus.

For CRP, topical sucralfate enema is the best available treatment. For DP, topical short-chain fatty acids (SCFAs) enemas, topical 5-ASA, or topical steroids are used. In patients with intractable symptoms despite intensive therapy or complications including strictures, fistulas, and persistent bleeding, colostomy, ileostomy, proctectomy or proctocolectomy with ileal pouch–anal anastomosis (IPAA) may be considered. The application of a cold retaining probe to the anal canal may give relief to anusitis patients as well as diet change and better handling of stress.