Lactational mastitis is a common condition among breastfeeding women. There are several modifiable risk factors discussed in this article, such as feeding too infrequently, the use of certain nipple creams, poor latching techniques, and tight-fitting bras, that predispose women to this disease. Education soon after delivery to raise maternal awareness on these risk factors could potentially lead to decreased incidence of mastitis. An interprofessional team approach should be taken when educating these women. Input from the physician, nursing staff, and lactation consultant should be incorporated in a consolidated effort to help decrease the incidence of this disease.

While patients with lactational mastitis may seek care from their obstetrician, it is not uncommon for these patients to present to urgent care facilities, emergency departments, or family practice physicians for evaluation. For this reason, it is important for physicians in each of these settings to be aware of the appropriate management of this condition. All medical staff caring for patients with mastitis should be aware of the recommendation that these patients continue to breastfeed, and that sudden cessation of breastfeeding increases the risk of abscess formation.[Level 3]

For patients seeking care in the emergency department, there are often long wait times, and during this time, pumping or nursing may be necessary. Some hospitals have pumps that are able to be checked out to patients while in the emergency department. Emergency physicians should be aware of their hospital policy to obtain a pump if one is needed. This can often be coordinated with either the lactation consulting team or the obstetrics team.

If a physician is unsure whether or not an antibiotic they are prescribing is safe to take while breastfeeding, they may recruit the expertise of a pharmacist to ensure that the patient is getting a medication that will allow her to continue to breastfeed her child.