In any healthcare scenario, the primary responsibility for healthcare professionals is to ensure the patient receives the best possible care. Refusal of care does not indicate the end of that responsibility. Healthcare providers still need to advocate for the decisions and wellbeing of their patients even when those patients have refused care.

If a patient has been determined to have the capacity and has refused care, healthcare providers still play an important role. In addition to assessing capacity, it is also the healthcare professional's responsibility to share their knowledge, experience, and advice regarding the medical decision at hand. The goal of this effort may not be to change the patient's mind, or pressure the patient into accepting care, but rather to ensure the patient is making an informed decision, knows their options, and has their concerns addressed. Sometimes filling gaps in knowledge or reassuring a patient about the risks of a procedure can positively influence patient decisions and facilitate better patient care.

In this spirit, it is important not to consider a patient refusing care as an adversary. While they may be perceived as uncooperative, these patients typically are making these decisions in an unfamiliar, stressful environment, and sometimes the best care a healthcare professional can provide in those situations is to allow the patient to maintain their autonomy.

These strategies, along with a willingness to discuss medical decision making with patients, are necessary and applicable for all members at any training level of the healthcare team. From the first encounter, a patient has within a healthcare system, whether involving an emergency medical technician in the field, a nurse in the emergency department or a physician in a clinic, the patient is required to make decisions regarding their care. Providers across disciplines must communicate with each other regarding a patient's capacity, their preferences or directives, and any proxy decision-makers to ensure proper, efficient care. This communication can have crucial effects on a patient's healthcare course and make a tremendous difference in a patient's ultimate physical and emotional wellbeing.