Biliary anatomy and its vascular supply can be variable, which may lead to inadvertent injury or confusion during reconstruction.

**Normal Biliary Anatomy**

Extra-hepatic right and left hepatic bile ducts join at the hilar plate anterior to the right portal vein to form the common hepatic duct (CHD) which is 1 to 4 cm long and approximately 4 mm in diameter. It becomes the common bile duct (7 to 11 cm long and 5 to 10 mm in diameter) after giving off the cystic duct to the gallbladder. The common bile duct enters the second portion of the duodenum through the sphincter of Oddi, a muscular structure that controls the flow of bile into the duodenum.

The common bile duct most commonly joins the main pancreatic duct outside the duodenal wall and traverses it as a single duct.

**Cystic Duct Anatomy**

Variations occur in as many as 40% of patients, and it is important to recognize these as they may predispose to a bile duct injury during surgery. Important variations include the cystic duct circling anterior or posterior to the common hepatic duct prior to its insertion (occurs in 5% of patients), cystic duct draining into a right posterior hepatic duct (occurs in 0.6% to 2.3% of patients), and accessory ducts of Luschka (occurs in 15 to 30% of patients).

**Right Hepatic Ductal System**

Normal anatomy is present in 57% of patients. The right hepatic duct is a union of the right anterior and posterior sectoral ducts in normal patients. Common variations include drainage of the right posterior sectoral duct into the left hepatic duct (occurs in 20% of patients); drainage of the right anterior sectoral duct into the left hepatic duct (occurs in 6% of patients); and low insertion of the right hepatic or right sectoral duct into the common hepatic or cystic duct (known to increase iatrogenic risk of common bile duct injury during laparoscopic cholecystectomy).

**Left Hepatic Ductal System**

Normal anatomy is present in 67% of the population and is described as the junction of the left lateral and medial sectoral ducts to form the left hepatic duct.

**Biliary Blood Supply**

The blood supply to the common bile duct and the common hepatic duct is provided by 2 small arteries that travel along the lateral borders of the ducts at the 9 and 3 o'clock positions. These are branches of the right hepatic and cystic arteries superiorly and the posterior superior pancreaticoduodenal and gastroduodenal arteries inferiorly. The 2 arteries unite and form a plexus on the surface of the bile ducts. The supra-duodenal common bile duct is the most prone to ischemia due to the relatively poor blood supply when compared to the distal common bile duct. Arterial variants are common, and consist of a replaced right hepatic artery from the superior mesenteric artery and a replaced left hepatic artery from the left gastric artery.