# Learning Outcome

- List causes of allergic rhinitis

- Describe the management of allergic rhinitis

- Summarize the role of the nurse in managing allergic rhinitis

- Describe ways to reduce the risk of allergic rhinitis

# Introduction

Allergic rhinitis (AR) is an atopic disease characterized by symptoms of nasal congestion, clear rhinorrhea, sneezing, and nasal pruritis. It can affect one in every six individuals and has associations with significant morbidity, loss of productivity, and health-care costs. Historically, the belief was that AR was a condition of the nasal passages only. Still, the treatment of AR is now a systemic disease due to its close association with asthma and atopic dermatitis.

# Nursing Diagnosis

- Runny nose

- Congested nose

- Postnasal drip

- Sneezing

- Itching

# Causes

Allergic rhinitis is an immunoglobulin (Ig)E-mediated response against inhaled allergens that cause inflammation driven by type 2 helper (Th2) cells. There is a considerable genetic component to the allergic reaction, classified into early and late phase reactions.

In long-standing AR, due to eosinophilic infiltration and nasal mucosa obliteration, a non-IgE mediated hyperresponsiveness develops. The nasal mucosa now becomes hyperreactive to normal stimuli (such as tobacco smoke, cold air) and causes symptoms of sneezing, rhinorrhea, and nasal pruritis.

There are data to suggest there may be a genetic component to the development of allergic rhinitis, but studies are generally lacking. Monozygotic twins show 45% to 60% concordance, and dizygotic twins have a concordance rate of approximately 25% in the development of AR. Specific regions on chromosomes 3 and 4 also correlate with allergic responses.

# Risk Factors

The prevalence of allergic rhinitis based on physician diagnosis is approximately 15%; however, the prevalence is estimated to be as high as 30% based on patients with nasal symptoms. AR is known to peak in the second to fourth decades of life and then gradually decline.

A systematic review from 2018 estimated that 3.6% of adults had missed work and 36% had impaired work performance due to allergic rhinitis. Economic evaluations have shown that indirect costs associated with lost work productivity account for the majority of the cost-burden for AR.

Risk factors for developing AR include a family history of atopy, male sex, a presence of allergen-specific IgE, a serum IgE greater than 100 IU/mL before age 6, and/or higher socioeconomic status.

# Assessment

Taking a thorough, detailed history is an essential part of AR evaluation, so questions should focus on the types of symptoms, the time, duration, and frequency of symptoms, suspected exposures, and exacerbating factors.

On physical examination, clinicians may notice mouth breathing, frequent sniffling and/or throat clearing, transverse supra-tip nasal crease, and dark circles under the eyes (allergic shiners). Otoscopic examination of the nose typically reveals swelling of the nasal mucosa and thin, clear secretions. Whenever possible, an internal endoscopic examination of the nasal cavity should be conducted to assess nasal polyps and structural abnormalities. Pneumatic otoscopy can be used to assess for eustachian tube dysfunction, which can be a common finding in patients with allergic rhinitis. Palpation of sinuses may elicit tenderness in patients with chronic symptoms. These patients should also undergo careful examination for signs of asthma or dermatitis.

# Evaluation

Allergic rhinitis is largely a clinical diagnosis made based on a thorough history and physical. A positive response to empiric treatment with a nasal glucocorticoid can help clinch the diagnosis. A formal diagnosis is possible with either serum testing for allergen-specific IgE or allergy skin testing.

Radiographic imaging is not routinely recommended for the diagnosis of AR and is mostly used to rule out other conditions such as rhinosinusitis.

# Medical Management

Avoidance of triggers, especially in those with seasonal symptoms, is encouraged, although it is not always practical, such as in the case of allergy to pollens. Precautions can be taken to avoid dust mites, animal dander, and upholstery. If removal of a pet from home is not feasible, isolating the pet to a single room in the house may be an option. It is important to note that it may take up to 20 weeks to completely eliminate cat dander from home even after removal.  It is also recommended to use allergen-impermeable bedding covers, wash sheets in hot water, and use a vacuum cleaner with high-efficiency particulate air (HEPA) filters.

Pharmacological options include antihistamines, intranasal steroids, leukotriene receptor antagonists (LTRAs), and immunotherapy. First-generation antihistamines include diphenhydramine, chlorpheniramine, and hydroxyzine; whereas, fexofenadine, loratadine, desloratadine, and cetirizine are examples of second-generation antihistamines. Both first- and second-generation antihistamines are effective at controlling symptoms of AR, but first-generation antihistamines can be quite sedating due to their ability to cross the blood-brain barrier. These agents also act on muscarinic receptors, causing side effects of dry mouth, urinary retention, constipation, and/or tachycardia. Second-generation antihistamines have improved H1 selectivity, are less sedating, and have longer half-lives (12 to 24 hours) compared to those of the first-generation. Fexofenadine has no sedating effects, but loratadine and desloratadine may be sedating at higher doses. Cetirizine has the most potential for sedation of all second-generation antihistamines. In terms of symptom relief, there is no one agent recommended over others.

Intranasal corticosteroid therapy can be as monotherapy or in combination with oral antihistamines in patients in patients with mild, moderate, or severe symptoms. Studies have shown intranasal corticosteroids are superior to antihistamines in effectively reducing nasal inflammation and improving mucosal pathology.

Leukotriene receptor antagonists (LTRAs) such as montelukast and zafirlukast can be beneficial in patients with AR, but they are not as efficacious as intranasal corticosteroids.

Oral decongestants such as pseudoephedrine are useful in relieving symptoms but are not recommended for extended daily use due to their side-effect profile. Intranasal decongestants such as xylometazoline are alpha-agonists that are delivered directly to nasal tissue to produce vasoconstriction. Prolonged use of intranasal decongestants have a risk of causing rebound nasal congestion (rhinitis medicamentosa) and, therefore, should not be used for more than a week.

# Nursing Management

- Obtain a thorough history of allergy and seasonal variation

- Understand the triggers

- Teach the patient how to use a nasal spray

- Encourage medication compliance

- Encourage avoiding triggers

- Counsel about how to quit smoking

# When To Seek Help

- Fever

- Headache

- Mental status changes

- Productive cough

- Dyspnea

# Outcome Identification

- Able to breathe through the nose

- No nasal discharge

- Able to sleep

# Monitoring

- Environmental control

- Education about avoiding allergens

- Medication compliance

# Coordination of Care

According to the "ecology of medical care" model, only a minority of patients seek medical care for their symptoms; and most of these are managed by their primary care physician/provider (PCP). Therefore, it is crucial to provide patients with information on self-management and when to contact their PCP. The involvement of community pharmacists and nurse practitioners can play a vital role in achieving these goals. PCPs and allergy specialists often work closely in co-managing patients with AR. Access to healthcare and specialists varies globally, but PCPs, pediatricians, allergists, and/or ENT specialists may be involved in caring for these patients when available.

# Health Teaching and Health Promotion

Patients often underestimate the severity of this condition and fail to seek medical therapy. It is important to get rhinitis under control, especially due to the link between AR and asthma, and poor control of rhinitis typically predicts poor control of asthma.

# Discharge Planning

Avoid triggers

Do not smoke

Follow up if symptoms worsen

The of as-needed inhalers

# Pearls and Other issues

- Avoidance of triggers, especially in those with seasonal symptoms, is encouraged, although it is not always practical, such as in the case of allergy to pollens.

- Precautions can be taken to avoid dust mites, animal dander, and upholstery.

- If removal of a pet from the home is not feasible, isolating the pet to a single room in the house may be an option. It is important to note that it may take up to 20 weeks to completely eliminate cat dander from a home even after removal.

- It is also recommended to use allergen-impermeable bedding covers, wash sheets in hot water, and use a vacuum cleaner with high-efficiency particulate air (HEPA) filters.