There are several treatment options available for punctal stenosis. The basic principle is to create a patent punctal opening and improve the drainage of tears whilst maintaining the function of the lacrimal pump. However, no gold standard treatment has yet been decided upon.

- Perforated punctal plug placement: The perforated plugs are placed following dilation and are left in place for 2 months. The underlying principle is that the longstanding dilation of the punctum occurs and prevents restenosis. The success rate for improvement of symptoms such as epiphora following the placement of perforated punctal plugs is 87% according to one study.

- Simple punctoplasty: Punctoplasty is a technique used to widen the punctal opening to enhance tear drainage. It involves dilatation of the punctum with increasing sizes of a dilator. This generally fails over time.

- One-snip punctoplasty: One-snip punctoplasty was a procedure developed to facilitate tear drainage by making a vertical incision along the canaliculus with a canaliculus knife, opening the posterior aspect of both the canaliculus and the punctum.

- Three-snip punctoplasty:****Three-snip punctoplasty is a technique widely favored by general ophthalmologists and oculoplastic surgeons alike due to its success rates. It involves a vertical incision along the ampullae, horizontal incision along the canaliculus, and a final incision along the base of the free flap creating a triangular shape on the posterior part of the punctum and canaliculus.
- In one study, the primary three snip punctoplasty showed an 86% success rate with complete resolution of excessive lacrimation.
- One problem that arises as a result of the three snip punctoplasty is a poor functional outcome, due to distortion of the natural canalicular system, thereby causing persistent epiphora in some patients despite a patent lacrimal system.
- A solution proposed to solve this problem is the rectangular three snip punctoplasty, where vertical incisions are made on the medial and lateral borders of the vertical canaliculus. This modification of the traditional triangular three-snip to the rectangular three-snip punctoplasty helps to preserve the natural anatomy of the horizontal canaliculus and the punctum. Functional success has been shown to improve to 94%.

- Stent cannulation:****Another intervention available is the mini-Monoka punctocanaliculoplasty. A mini monocanalicular stent is inserted after dilatation of the punctum. A study determined that 82% of eyes showed an improvement of symptoms following the procedure. This procedure is more effective for combined punctal and canalicular stenosis.

- Wedge punctoplasty: A wedge-shaped removal of the punctum and vertical canaliculus has been used to treat punctal stenosis with promising results. This is a variation on the three-snip procedure. 95% of patients showed a patent punctum, and 92% of patients had symptomatic relief at follow-up.

- Punch punctoplasty:****This is similar to the wedge punctoplasty, where a punch like a glaucoma punch is used to remove a segment of the punctal border and vertical component of the canaliculus. Punch punctoplasty gave a 94% anatomical success rate and a 92% functional success rate.

- Adjunct mitomycin C use after punctal dilatation or punctoplasty:****Preoperative and postoperative topical mitomycin C has also been proven to be an effective adjunct therapy for punctal stenosis.

- Balloon dilation:****Balloon dilation rendered half the patients symptom-free according to one study. However, this technique is more suited to constriction of the nasolacrimal system in the nasolacrimal duct, usually in congenital nasolacrimal duct obstruction. The exact advantage in acquired punctal stenosis still remains to be elucidated.