There are a variety of methods aimed at specimen collection to diagnose a UTI. Some of the factors that dictate the method used include patient comfort, the ability to void, and reducing the small risk of iatrogenic infection. Sterile collection methods can be employed, such as a suprapubic puncture or urethral catheterization, in an effort to reduce overdiagnosis and subsequent overtreatment.

**Specimen Collection **

There are a variety of collection techniques for urine culture, including suprapubic aspiration, straight catheter technique, and mid-stream catch with or without cleansing. In pediatric patients who are not toilet trained, diaper collection, and sterile bag, urine collection methods are used. Suprapubic collection is the best method to avoid specimen contamination with bacteria, particularly in the distal urethra. Owing to patient discomfort, invasiveness, lack of indication (except in rare instances), and inappropriate resource use, this method is rarely deployed. Urine collection with a single catheter (straight catheter technique) is the next best option. Still, due to labor intensiveness as well as the possibility of introducing bacteria into the bladder, potentially causing a UTI, this technique is seldom used and only when indicated. The previously aforementioned methods of specimen collection are therefore reserved for those patients who are unable to self-collect. Hence, the most common method a urine sample is obtained for urine culture is via a clean-catch midstream technique, which is neither invasive nor uncomfortable. Colony counts from these samples correlate reasonably well compared to suprapubic aspiration and single catheter technique.

The current standards for self-collection include mid-stream clean-catch technique, mid-stream catch without prior cleansing, and random sampling delivered without instruction. There are no clinically significant differences seen between the various self-collection techniques.

**Specimen Transportation**

Owing to the probable increase risk of growth of colony-forming units (CFU) non-indicative of the patient's true sample, urine specimens must be plated within two hours of collection, unless refrigerated or placed in a preservative.