The first line of therapy for weight management is a lifestyle change and behavior modification which may also involve cognitive behavioral therapy. It is important to identify adverse risk factors contributing to a change in weight or appetite. It is important to consider patients' food preferences, cultural influences, resources for healthy food procuring, and whether a food reward mechanism is involved. Interrogating a person's daily routine and dietary habits gives clues to weight gain risk factors, including food choices, physical activity, psychosocial stressors, work environment, and sleep pattern. Risk factors can be addressed, or risk mitigation can be planned once risk factors are identified. Patients can benefit from a referral to a dietitian for nutritional counseling and/or a psychologist for cognitive behavioral therapy for behavioral change.

Pharmacotherapy for weight management is based on our understanding of the physiology of energy balance. The field of obesity medicine is evolving as we get more insights into the pathophysiology of obesity. Medications that target separate pathways help in weight management. For example, phentermine works through the sympathetic nervous system by increasing energy expenditure; topiramate, on the other hand, suppresses appetite by working in the hypothalamus. GLP-1 agonists (e.g., liraglutide and semaglutide) achieve weight loss by suppressing appetite and decreasing food intake; they are particularly promising in patients with coexisting diabetes mellitus. Orlistat decreases absorption of fat by inhibiting gastric and pancreatic lipase. Leptin is central to the pathophysiology of obesity.****Its use for the treatment of obesity has not shown promising weight loss results, owing to leptin resistance in obese individuals. There is considerable interest in the development of future therapies for weight management.

Surgical options are available when lifestyle modification and pharmacotherapy don't achieve desired weight loss. Metabolic surgeries for weight loss include a vertical gastric sleeve, Roux-en-Y gastric bypass, and adjustable gastric banding. The weight loss mechanism from the vertical gastric sleeve includes decreased food intake because of smaller stomach size and decreased ghrelin secretion, leading to appetite suppression. Roux-en-Y gastric bypass procedure achieves the highest weight benefit because of multiple mechanisms, including decreased nutrient absorption and nutrient bypassing of the upper small intestine, leading to increased GLP-1 secretion. Patients also achieve immediate improvement in glycemic control after the Roux-en-Y gastric bypass procedure. Finally, the adjustable gastric band helps in weight management by decreasing the size of the stomach.

Appetite and maintenance of body mass are essential to the survival of every organism throughout evolution. We have realized that the 'calorie in and calorie out ' theory of weight maintenance is a mere oversimplification. Complex central and peripheral neuronal networks, hormones, and interactions among multiple organ systems like nervous, endocrine, and gastrointestinal systems maintain a setpoint for adiposity and body weight.

This homeostatic control is challenged by the obesogenic environment in the modern world, with an abundant supply of energy-dense food,pleasure-seeking food intake, sedentary lifestyle, and chronic psychosocial stress. Therefore, the fight against obesity needs to be multifaceted, including lifestyle modification, dietary interventions, pharmacotherapeutics, and, when all options are exhausted, metabolic surgery. The development of targeted pharmacotherapy and metabolic surgery for weight loss is thanks to the discovery and understanding of neuronal pathways and hormones regulating appetite and weight.