As previously mentioned, documentation of Whipple’s triad is a potential indicator of hypoglycemia, and any initial laboratory evaluation should confirm hypoglycemia. Other pertinent labs to consider include insulin, proinsulin, and C-peptide levels during any episode of suspected hypoglycemia. If C-peptide levels are low in the presence of high insulin levels, the patient has received exogenous insulin. The pro-form of insulin created within the body is attached to C peptide. The body then cleaves C peptide from the pro-form of the molecule to create active insulin. Elevated C-peptide levels and insulin levels can be seen with secretagogue agents such as sulfonylureas or insulin secretagogues since both classes of agents stimulate endogenous insulin secretion.

Once the use of exogenous insulin administration is ruled out, sources of endogenous hyperinsulinemia need to be considered. Localization is usually performed via abdominal computed tomography (CT) with MRI.

Further nursing responsibilities while working with the interdisciplinary team in the evaluation of hypoglycemia, include monitoring blood glucose levels at fasting and postprandial. It is important to monitor these levels and to be aware of the hypoglycemic episodes are reactive, occurring after meals. These parameters are also important to monitor, as they may guide the provider in determining if there is a possible presence of insulinoma or extra-pancreatic tumor and if biochemical testing should be performed.