CHS is a relatively new disorder that is not only difficult to diagnose but to manage. To lower the morbidity, CHS is best managed by an interprofessional team.

As CHS is a relatively recently recognized and studied phenomenon easily confused with other diseases, there is a paucity of sizeable randomized control studies. Most resources and recommendations come from case studies and expert opinions. In addition to appropriate antiemetic therapy, fluid resuscitation, and management of the patient's symptoms, patients must recognize behaviors and exposures that place them at risk for their pathology. For supportive care, a clinician should work together with the pharmacist to see if any medications could contribute to the patient's presentation. If administering antiemetics, the nursing staff should be familiar with the adverse event profile so they can report any concerns that may arise.

Health care provider and clinician education, such as this activity, as crucial to the advancement of care in this condition because it is not usually at the top of the differential list because of the lack of research and familiarity in the healthcare community. The same factors apply to clinicians, specialists, nurses, and pharmacists, as well as other healthcare personnel, to consider the diagnosis in any chronic vomiting disorder, and to better inform themselves regarding the condition. They should also have the freedom and empowerment to speak up to other team members if they feel that this may be getting overlooked in the diagnostic picture. Since the only treatment is the removal of the offending agent, accurate diagnosis is the only portal to actual management.

Appropriate primary care follow-up and substance abuse counseling, in addition to a non-judgmental environment, all through an interprofessional team, will allow patients to come to terms with their pathology work best for these patients. [Level V.]