A high index of suspicion is important for all clinicians to have when evaluating patients for inhalation injury. It is important to elucidate whether the exposure was to smoke, flames, and/or possible chemicals (both industrial and household). Duration of exposure, the location of exposure (such as if it was in an enclosed space), and any loss of consciousness are all important as well. Patients may be unconscious at presentation and interviewing first responders/rescuers may be required. Duration of exposure is often greater for pediatric and elderly patients as often they will have longer exposure due to disorientation or mobility issues. Children also often hide from smoke or fires thus increasing time exposed. Pediatric patients also have increased minute ventilation with a higher respiratory rate when compared to adults, thus, increasing the amount of exposure.

History taking should be complete and thorough. Burn patients may have extensive external injuries, but smoke inhalation may affect those with no outward signs of burns. Patients suffering from smoke inhalation may have symptoms of burning sensation in the nose or throat (which is often caused by an irritant chemical toxin), a cough with increased sputum production, stridor, and dyspnea with rhonchi or wheezing. Symptoms of odynophagia after smoke exposure should also raise suspicion for a possible inhalation injury. Patients may have systemic symptoms like a headache, delirium, hallucinations, and may even be comatose. Many different etiologies may cause changes in mental status including hypoxia, hypercarbia, or asphyxiant exposure (carbon monoxide, hydrogen cyanide). In cases where history is limited, some physical examination findings may cue the examiner into possible inhalation injury.

Physical examination should include looking for facial burns, such as loss of facial and intranasal hair as well as carbonaceous material or soot in the mouth or sputum. There may be accessory muscle usage, tachypnea, cyanosis, stridor, and rhonchi/rales/wheezing. Findings of stridor or upper airway turbulence/noise are often a sign of impending airway compromise, and prompt intubation should be strongly considered.

A delay in the onset of symptoms is not uncommon, and clinicians should educate patients on the possibility of delayed symptom onset post-exposure. The delayed symptoms occur in the lower respiratory airways as it is caused by chemical toxin exposure, which may bypass the upper airways. For example, nitric oxide is often produced by the burning of certain fabrics or cellulose. It is highly water-insoluble, and damage onset has been seen up to 72 hours post-exposure.