Osteogenesis imperfecta (OI) type I can be confused with some Ehlers-Danlos syndrome subtypes due to significant morbidity following minor trauma and joint hypermobility. However, a combination of symptomatology, in addition to genetic testing, can distinguish the two disease processes. Many patients with non-deforming OI (OI type I) present with blue sclerae, sensorineural deafness, wormian bones, and/or dentinogenesis imperfecta. It bears mentioning that patients with either disorder may present with the blue sclera. Also, mutations can be present in the COL1A1 and COL1A2 genes. Other OI subtypes are not part of the differential.

Marfan syndrome shares many similar characteristics with different subtypes of Ehlers-Danlos syndrome (specifically the hypermobility subtype); however, the overall diagnosis of Marfan syndrome can be clinically and genetically separated.

Loeys-Deitz Syndrome can be confused with Ehlers-Danlos syndrome due to its autosomal dominant inheritance pattern and early diagnosis of aortic pathology, specifically aneurysms. However, there is a clinical triad that is characteristic of LDS that helps the clinician guide diagnosis. The triad includes bifid uvula/cleft palate, hypertelorism, and aortic aneurysm. More specifically, the aneurysms discovered in a patient with LDS can be detected throughout the arterial system rather than clustered around the aortic root, as is more commonly seen in certain EDS subtypes.

Cutis laxa may be mistaken for Ehlers-Danlos syndrome on the initial exam. However, a distinction is possible from the integumentary exam. While many patients with EDS possess hyperextensible skin, their skin will almost immediately return to its original form following blunt manipulation or palpation. The skin of cutis laxa patients is characteristically known to return to its original form from distention slowly. Heart valve, vascular involvement, and hernia formation are three characteristics with significant overlap between the two disease processes. Genetic analysis of patients with cutis laxa will often identify mutations in the fibulin-5 gene.

Patients with EDS, especially those with EDS hypermobility type, are often misdiagnosed with conditions such as fibromyalgia, chronic fatigue syndrome, or depression, given the overlap of symptoms and the psychosocial impact they have on the patient.