For asymptomatic children, who are at increased risk for an intracranial aneurysm, a CT-angiogram or an MR-angiogram is a useful and reasonable first screening tool. As discussed earlier, children with a strong family history of aneurysms, Ehlers-Danlos syndrome, FMD, polycystic kidney disease, and other high-risk conditions are good candidates for MR angiography. MR imaging and angiography can visualize larger lesions of the circle of Willis, but cerebral angiography remains the gold standard for localization of cerebral aneurysms.

For asymptomatic children, who are at increased risk for an intracranial aneurysm, a CT-angiogram or an MR-angiogram is a useful and reasonable first screening tool. As discussed earlier (see Associated Conditions), children with a strong family history of aneurysms, Ehlers-Danlos syndrome, FMD, polycystic kidney disease, and other high-risk conditions are good candidates for MR angiography. MR imaging and angiography are able to visualize larger lesions of the circle of Willis, but cerebral angiography remains the gold standard for localization of cerebral aneurysms and should be utilized in any case where MRI and/or CT is indeterminate in the potential clinical setting of an aneurysm.

For ruptured aneurysms, lumbar puncture (LP) and CT/MR imaging remain the mainstay in the initial evaluation of SAH. Eighty-five percent of children with subarachnoid blood can be accurately identified with a non-contrast CT scan when performed within the first 2 days after hemorrhage becoming less reliable 5 days.

CT or MR angiography is extremely useful in localizing larger cerebral aneurysms. For such cases, detection of the mass lesion may be quite easy, even on non-contrast screening studies. Contrast studies can provide additional clues to the rupture site. In very young infants, intracranial ultrasound has also been successfully used to diagnose large cerebral aneurysms. Ultrasonography can also show hydrocephalus, hematoma, shift, and cerebral edema.

Due to the high incidence of increased intracranial pressures in these children, we recommend deferring LP until the exclusion of the presence of a mass lesion (e.g., the aneurysm), hematoma, cerebral edema, and hydrocephalus from imaging studies. An apparent SAH on a head CT scan obviates the need for LP. If the imaging study results are negative for SAH and there is no radiographic or clinical evidence of increased intracranial pressure, CSF can be safely obtained to confirm suspicious cases.

Once the presence of SAH has been established in a child, a standard, four-vessel cerebral angiogram should be obtained. For children under the 6 years of age, general anesthesia is often required, with careful attention paid to fluid balance, contrast load, blood pressure control, and neural protection. Although controversy exists about the best timing of the angiogram, studies have demonstrated no increased morbidity of early studies (performed within a few hours after SAH) over delayed studies. Indeed, some large series have actually shown lower morbidity with early studies.

Overall, cerebral angiography can demonstrate a structural cause for SAH in 50 to 70% of cases. Of the negative studies, another 10 to 20% will subsequently be positive for an aneurysm on a repeat study at 2weeks’ time. Focal arterial spasm and thrombosis within the aneurysmal neck and some may prevent filling of the lesion during angiography resulting in negative studies.

When no aneurysm can is identifiable in a confirmed case of a traumatic SAH, the rest of the differential diagnosis should then be considered. Systemic childhood causes of SAH include leukemia, idiopathic thrombocytopenic purpura, hemorrhagic disease of the newborn, various hemophilia disorders, and other hemorrhagic diatheses.