The four major components of treatment include trigger avoidance, daily skin care, anti-inflammatory therapy, and other complementary modalities.

Daily skin care includes the application of emollients twice daily, with the application within three minutes of exiting lukewarm shower or bath to prevent skin drying. Ointments are the most occlusive but may be more greasy. Topical steroids, which should be applied before emollients to "lock-in" their effect, are first-line agents for acute flares. The potency should be strong enough to control a flare quickly, and consideration should be given for tapering every other day and for maintenance therapy twice weekly (e.g., weekends) in the usual areas of involvement. Reversible side effects of steroid use include skin atrophy and telangiectasia.

Sensitive areas (including the intertriginous areas of the axilla and groin, in addition to the face) may require topical nonsteroidal agents including calcineurin inhibitors such as tacrolimus and pimecrolimus. Newer non-steroidal agents include crisaborole, which exerts its effect by blocking PDE-4. When atopic dermatitis is not controlled with topical agents, systemic agents include phototherapy (ultraviolet (UV) A, UVB, and narrow-band UVB), cyclosporine, azathioprine, mycophenolate mofetil, and methotrexate.

A newly FDA-approved biologic therapy is dupilumab, which is a monoclonal antibody that blocks the IL-4 receptor and thus the effect of IL-4 and IL-13.  Other complementary therapies include bleach baths (0.5 cup bleach in full 40 gallon tub) one to two times weekly to decrease S. aureus colonization, low allergen maternal diets during breastfeeding, and probiotic and prebiotic use in pregnant mothers and at-risk infants which has shown 50% decreased frequency of atopic dermatitis at ages 1 to 4 years old compared to placebo.

Recently Crisaborole topic ointment was approved for mild to moderate AD. The drug is a phosphodiesterase inhibitor and shown to improve skin symptoms.

Some patients may benefit from probiotics; it is believed that the bacterial products may enhance the immune system and prevent the development of allergic IgE antibody response. Further, probiotics are recommended during pregnancy and in breast feeding women.

Numerous studies show that bleach baths may help relieve the symptoms of AD by lowering the risk of superinfection with bacteria.