The primary goal is to prevent pressure ulcers through various means including the use of air-fluidized or foam mattresses, improving the nutritional status of the patients, proper placing of patients in bed, changing position frequently, and treatment of the underlying diseases. A treatment plan involves the removal of all devitalized tissue that may serve as a reservoir for bacterial contamination (debridement). Also, it involves dressing by utilizing hydrogels, hydrocolloids, or saline-moistened gauze to enable granulation tissue to grow and the wound to heal. Treatment of underlying infection by topical or systemic antibiotic medications might be needed to help in the healing process, but tissue culture should be obtained before selecting the accurate drug. Pain and discomfort can be controlled by analgesics. A dietary consult should be made to ensure that the patient is receiving adequate calories. When possible, the patient should be out of bed to chair, and physical therapy should be consulted for ambulation and/or exercise. Wound care specialty trained nurses should assist in dressing changes, debridement of wounds, and provide close followup care. The nurses should also assist the clinician in the education of the patient and family. Pressure ulcers are very difficult to treat, it is crucial that the nurses and clinicians work together as an interprofessional team to provide the very best care including treatment, monitoring, and followup care.

**Outcomes**

Pressure injuries are common and often result in a prolonged hospital stay and increased healthcare costs. Each year nearly 60,000 people die because of complications associated with pressure wounds. The two most common causes of death linked to pressure injuries are amyloidosis and renal failure. Infection is another major complication of pressure injuries, which often lead to osteomyelitis and chronic non-healing wounds. Unfortunately, despite awareness of the problem, the rates of pressure wounds remain high in long-term care facilities and nursing homes, where a lack of staff and optimal care is not always possible.