Although generally well-tolerated, administration of monoclonal antibodies is associated with the risk of immune-mediated reactions, including anaphylaxis, serum sickness, and antibody generation. Besides these immune-mediated reactions, the adverse effects of monoclonal antibodies are also related to their specific targets and are largely unknown due to the limited availability of published literature. Safety data from clinical trials evaluating monoclonal antibodies reported are summarized below.

- The most frequently reported adverse effects of sotrovimab therapy were infusion-related immediate hypersensitivity reactions manifesting as pruritus, flushing, rash, and facial swelling.

- Clinical worsening of COVID-19 after monoclonal antibody administration may include but is not limited to fever, fatigue, hypoxia or increased respiratory difficulty, arrhythmias, and altered mental status.

Based on the fact sheet by FDA EUA for sotrovimab, it is not authorized for use in patients hospitalized with COVID-19, or who require supplemental oxygen therapy due to COVID-19, or who require increasing baseline oxygen therapy due to COVID-19 in those who were previously on chronic oxygen therapy at baseline due to non-COVID-19 related comorbidity. It must not be administered to patients with known hypersensitivity to sotrovimab.

The FDA also cautions against the use of sotrovimab in hospitalized patients with COVID-19 requiring high flow oxygen or mechanical ventilation as it may be associated with worse clinical outcomes.

Patients treated with monoclonal antibody therapies should continue self-isolation measures and follow infection control measures such as wearing masks, practicing social distancing, cleaning and disinfecting surfaces and washing hands frequently according to CDC guidelines.