The sinoatrial (SA) node is composed of a collection of atrial myocytes that are specialized into two different functional cells. Pacemaker “P cells” with intrinsic pacemaker function and transitional “T cells” which are responsible for propagating the impulse into the right atrium. Dysfunction of these cells leads to the several arrhythmias:

- Abrupt, inappropriate, severe sinus bradycardia.

- Sinus pause or arrest where there are pauses of 3 seconds or more without atrial activity. This is often rescued by an escape rhythm which can be atrial, junctional and ventricular in origin. It usually reflects a failure of P cells to generate the action potential.

- Sinoatrial (SA) exit block which is caused by the failure of the T cells to transmit the impulse. Three degrees of sinoatrial (SA) block parallel atrioventricular (AV) block: (1) **First-degree**SA block is usually subclinical and undetectable on the surface electrocardiogram (ECG); (2)**Second-degree-type 1**SA block is characterized by progressive shortening of PP interval prior to the dropped P wave,and **Second-degree-type 2**SA block refers to a dropped P wave without any preceding change in the PP interval; (3)**Third-degree**SA block refers to complete failure of the SA node to conduct impulses to the atrial tissue and is reflected by the absence of P waves on surface ECG. Third-degree SA exit block is clinically identical to sinus arrest.

- Tachy-brady syndrome is identified by bradycardia alternating with paroxysmal supraventricular arrhythmias, most frequently atrial fibrillation (AF). This results from abnormal automaticity and conduction within the atrial tissue. It affects at least 50% of patients with SND.

- Failure to resume sinus rhythm after cardioversion, manifesting as a prolonged sinus pause.

- Atrial fibrillation with slow ventricular response in the absence of AV node blocking agents. This is likely due to the simultaneous degeneration in the AV node. In these patients, spontaneous or therapeutic termination of AF (cardioversion) results in a sinus pause due to concomitant SND. The annual incidence of complete AV block ranges from (0% to 4.5% with a median of 0.6%

- Chronotropic incompetence is defined as inappropriate bradycardia resulting in an inability to meet the metabolic demands. It is estimated to occur in 20% to 60% of patients.