Adverse drug reactions (ADRs) are classically classified into five subcategories (A-E) in pharmacology. Type A reactions (augmented) are expected, dose-dependent reactions, and due to the pharmacology of the respective agent. Type B (bizarre) reactions are not related to the pharmacology of the respective medication and, thus, are not predictable. They are not dose-dependent and may range from immune-mediated ADRs to hypersensitivity reactions. Type C (chronic) reactions are dependant on drug metabolism and are continuous. Type D (delayed) reactions are typically challenging to identify from a diagnostic perspective and encompass ADRs that can occur with prolonged (years) use of medications. Type E (end of treatment) reactions occur after withdrawal of medication from a treatment regimen. This classification scheme works well to encompass most drugs that are chemical compounds (xenobiotics) but may prove insufficient to classify mAb associated ADRs.

As outlined above, mAbs are proteins that have been engineered to closely reflect the structure of naturally produced human proteins, and thus, are similarly handled by the body (i.e., not metabolized like drugs). A review article by Pichler et al. (2006) published a classification system to better classify the ADRs associated with the use of mAbs.

As evidenced by the classification system by Pichler et al. (2006), adverse events are still possible despite the advancements from murine antibodies to human/ humanized mAbs and the associated reduction in immunogenicity. Recombinant mAbs do not harbor the infectious concerns associated with human donor blood-type products, yet they are associated with their own unique risks as biologic products. This unique class of medications is also associated with its own subset of additional considerations during prescribing. For example, the use of TNF-a inhibitors such as Adalimumab warrants the additional step of ensuring that the patient does not have underlying latent tuberculosis (TB). The granulomas formed in TB infections contain the bacteria in a localized area and are kept by TNF-a signaling. Once inhibition of TNF-a occurs (for example, by administration of mAbs), the bacteria’s confinement is compromised, and reactivation of latent infection occurs. By the same token, biologics act by inhibiting the host's immune function and thereby lower the body’s defense mechanisms, potentially predisposing recipients to opportunistic infections, atypical infections (i.e., fungal), and sepsis. With these implications in mind, it is important for prescribers to be aware of and prepared to address adverse events that may occur with these agents.

Infusion-related reactions typically occur during administration or within hours of administration of mAb infusions but may occur later. These reactions are acute and are related to the pharmacologic activity (intended), immunogenicity, or host immune response. Exact mechanisms are poorly understood for these reactions and are thought to involve the release of pro-inflammatory cytokines as well as complement cascade activation. Infusion-related reactions can be classified into Type alpha reactions and can feature localized injection site reactions, cytokine release syndromes (tachycardia, fever, dyspnea, nausea in mild cases), and, in extreme cases, cytokine storm. As with other infusion-related reactions, the severity of reactions will dictate management options. In severe reactions with multiple organ failure, cessation of the offending medication and commencement of supportive measures (i.e., mechanical ventilation, IV fluids, vasopressors, HD, etc.) is necessary.

Anaphylaxis is an immediate hypersensitivity reaction (type 1) that can also occur when using mAbs. Anaphylaxis occurs due to the development of IgE antibodies against mAbs and is generally not expected to occur on the first exposure of the recipient to any given mAb. This is because sensitization to the mAb cannot occur without prior exposure, but cases of host IgE cross-reactivity have been documented. Anaphylaxis is classified as a type beta reaction per the classification scheme proposed by Pichler et al. (2006).

As with all other medications, there may be unintended adverse effects related directly to the intended mechanism of action of any given mAb (type A reactions). An example applicable to mAbs would be the use of Abciximab (a mAb against the glycoprotein (GP) IIb/IIIa) in patients undergoing percutaneous coronary intervention (PCI) causing major bleeding events.

Unfortunately, the pathophysiology for many of the conditions in which mAbs are applied tends to be complex and not mediated by a single mechanism or molecule.

The main areas described in the literature for the development of bsmAbs include inhibition of multiple cell surface receptors, multiple ligand blockade, receptor cross-linkage, and recruitment of Fc receptor absent T-cells (which would normally not be active with antibody stimulation due to the absence of Fc receptors. The design and implementation of bsmAbs have proven to be challenging despite the conceptually sound nature of the propositions. For example, catumaxomab was one such agent that was initially approved for malignant ascites (2009) but withdrawn from the market in 2017 despite its success due to adverse events. The mechanism of action has been described as trifunctional. There are two antigen-binding regions and an Fc region present on the molecule. The first antigen-binding region targets a trans-membrane glycoprotein named EpCAM, which can be found on malignant cells. The second antigen-binding region binds CD3 antigens on T-cells of the immune system. The Fc region functions to activate and recruit immune cells, including macrophages and natural killer cells, to act against malignant cells. Overall, catumaxomab activates multiple pathways for immune-mediated cell destruction (i.e., ADCC, ADCP, etc.) and cytokine-mediated cytotoxicity.