**Manual Keratometers**

**Helmholtz Keratometer**

This consists of two plates. The image is displaced half of its length by both the plates, and total changes in distance or displacement give the size of the image. This doubling of the image helps with the necessity of not moving the living eye. If there is eye movement, the image will also move together during the process. Therefore, any difficulty in the adjustment of the eye is avoided. The plates used are made of glass and are a known thickness and refractive index. These plates are placed adjacent to each other so that each plate cover half of the object of a short telescope. The prime necessity is that the cylinder axis should coincide with the plane of separation of the glass plates. The glass plates can be inclined at an angle, and the angle of incident light can be varied and measured from a point in front.

**Bausch and Lomb Keratometer**

This keratometer is based on the principle of constant object size and image size variability.

**Optics and Parts**

**Object:**This is a circular mire with two plus and two minus signs. A bulb or a lamp is used to illuminate the mires with the help of mirrors placed diagonally. When light from the mire strikes the patient cornea, it produces a diminished image behind it. The image acts as an object for the rest of the optical system.

**Objective lens:**helps focus the light from the image of the mire (that acts as an object) along the central axis.

**Diaphragm and doubling prisms:**A four aperture diaphragm is placed near the objective lens. Two doubling prisms are placed beyond the diaphragm, one having a base up and another a base out prism. The prisms can move independently and parallel to the central axis of the instrument. When light passes through the left diaphragmatic aperture, it is made to deviate by the base-up prism above the main optical axis. Similarly, when the light passes through the right diaphragmatic aperture, it is made to deviate by the base out prism, thus placing the second image to the right of the central axis. When light passes through the upper and lower aperture, it doesn't pass through the prism, and an image is produced on the axis.

The total area of combined upper and lower apertures is the sum of each aperture separately, but the brightness of the image is equal. The upper and lower apertures act as Scheiner's disc, doubling the image size. Hence this helps in continuous monitoring of the correct focus. The image doubling phenomenon is a unique phenomenon for Bausch and Lomb keratometer. Double images are produced adjacent as well as 90 degrees to each other; this helps in calculating the power of the cornea in two different meridians without any rotation of the instrument. Hence, this is also labeled as one position keratometer.

**Eyepiece:**This lens helps get a magnified view of the doubled image.

**Keratometry Procedure**

**Instrument Calibration:**The keratometer is calibrated with steel balls. A whiteboard is placed in front of the objective piece, and a black line is seen sharply focussed on it. The steel ball of the particular radius of curvature is used, the ball is placed in front of the keratometer, and the value is set on the scale. The mires are focussed on the hit and trial method by the anticlockwise and clockwise movement of the eyepiece. When the mires are focused, the instrument is said to be calibrated.

**Patient Adjustment:**To obtain perfect keratometry, patient positioning is of utmost importance. The head should be against the headrest, and the chin should rest on the chin rest. An occluder should cover the other eye which is not being examined. This is followed by chin adjustment till the patient's pupil and the projective knob are at the same level.

**Mire Focusing**

After instrument calibration, alignment, and positioning of the patient, the mires are focused in the corneal center.

**Corneal Curvature Assessment**

The keratometer is focused on the corneal image so that there is no doubling of the central corneal image. To assess the curvature in the horizontal meridian, the plus sign of the central and left image is superimposed, taking into account the horizontal measuring control. Similarly, the central and upper images are taken into account for assessing the curvature in the vertical meridian. If there is oblique astigmatism, the two-plus signs will not be aligned. The instrument has to be then rotated till both plus signs are aligned.

**Javal Schiotz Keratometer**

This instrument is based on variable object size and the constant image size principle.

**Optical and Parts**

**Object**- This consists of two mires mounted on the arc which can be moved synchronously. The two mires combinedly form the object; hence the variable size is obtained by the movement. The first mire is stepped and has a green filter, and the other mire is rectangular and has a red filter. The mires are split in the center horizontally and are illuminated by a lamp. The first image obtained from the mires acts as an object for the rest of the optical axis.

**The objective lens and doubling prisms**

They form a doubled image of the new object (mires images created by the cornea). It uses a Wollaston prism which is a type of doubling prism. There is a fixed image doubling by the birefringent, also known as double refracting).

**Eyepiece Lens**

It helps to obtain a magnified view of the doubled image.

The keratometry procedure of the Javal Schiotz keratometer is more or less similar to Bausch and Lomb keratometer.

**Automated Keratometers**

They are similar to manual keratometers. In this, the image reflected off the target is focused on the photodetector, which assesses the image size, and hence the radius of curvature is calculated. The mire is illuminated with the IR rays, and an infrared photodetector is used. The various advantages of automated keratometers are that they are compact, less time-consuming, and require less skill to operate.

The majority of the previous studies have found good accuracy using autokeratometry. In the market, the autokeratometers are available as isolated or autorefractometers of autokeratorefractometers. The various types of automated keratometers available are the IOL master, Pentacam, Orbscan, and corneal topographer.

**Surgical Keratometer**

In this, the keratometers are attached to the microscope**.**The surgical keratometer helps in monitoring astigmatism while performing corneal and limbal procedures. However, the instrument has limited accuracy due to varied factors such as:

- It is challenging to align the visual axis of the patient with the optical axis of the keratometer.

- Anterior chamber air creates a second target reflection.

- The external compression on the globe results in a change in the corneal curvature.

- The calibrations for keratometers are for a fixed distance from the anterior corneal surface. Hence the different microscope lenses result in different working distances.

**Parts of Keratometer**

- Headrest

- Chinrest

- Anteroposterior rotation axis scale

- Eyepiece

- Horizontal knob

- Vertical knob

- Focusing knob

- Locking knob

- Elevating knob

- Chin height knob

- Keratometer height knob

- Occluding shield

- Leveling sight

- Horizontal measuring drum

- Vertical measuring drum

- Axis scale