The comprehensive history and physical examination components hinge on critically detailed documentation of the entire vaginal delivery. A comprehensive maternal history should be obtained. Documentation of the delivery process should be thorough and focused on all potential elements that would be considered consistent with a shoulder dystocia presentation. Shoulder dystocia is, by definition, a mechanical problem occurring during a vaginal delivery characterized by one of the following parameters:

- Failure to deliver the fetal shoulders using solely gentle downward traction

- The requirement of additional delivery maneuvers are needed to deliver the baby successfully

- A documented head-to-body interval of greater than 1 minute

Retraction of the fetal head toward the perineum may be noted following the delivery of the fetal head. This is called the "turtle sign." The latter is a risk factor for shoulder dystocia.

In the evaluation of obstetric plexopathies, a full neurovascular examination is warranted. Upper lesions result in a classic "waiter's tip" palsy, with the extremity adducted, internally rotated at the shoulder, extended at the elbow, and pronated at the forearm secondary to deficiencies of the axillary, suprascapular, musculocutaneous, and radial nerves (C5-C6 innervation).

Lower lesions result in a classic "claw hand" palsy, with the wrist in extreme extension, hyperextension of the metacarpophalangeal joints, and flexion of the interphalangeal joints. This plexopathy has a high association with Horner's syndrome, and therefore evaluation for ipsilateral miosis, ptosis, and anhidrosis is an important component of the physical evaluation.

Total plexus palsies result in a flaccid extremity with both motor and sensory deficits. These injuries have the lowest chance of recovery and the highest incidence of associated phrenic nerve injuries.

All children with a suspected brachial plexopathies should undergo evaluation for Horner syndrome as mentioned above and pulmonary examination with chest radiograph in evaluation for phrenic nerve injury, as these disorders frequently present concomitantly with obstetric plexopathies.