Many institutions have created protocols for massive transfusion using knowledge from interprofessional teams. These institution-specific protocols facilitate ordering blood products and receiving them expeditiously from the blood bank. While these protocols vary between institutions, many massive transfusion protocols focus on delivering PRBCs in addition to platelets and fresh frozen plasma (FFP).

While unfeasible for the general population, there is strong evidence from medical, military experience demonstrating positive outcomes when fresh whole blood is transfused to trauma patients. This has led to the concept of mimicking whole blood during massive transfusion by transfusing packed red blood cells (PRBCs), platelets, and fresh frozen plasma (FFP), with fresh frozen plasma supplying the coagulation factors. There is still controversy regarding the best ratio of these 3 components in the setting of massive transfusion. Many experts advocate for a 1:1:1 ratio of FFP, platelets, and PRBCs. Lower ratios of platelets and FFP have been used without evidence of inferiority, and the vast majority of massive transfusion protocols at trauma centers target lower ratios of plasma to PRBCs (80% trauma centers in a study of MTPs have greater than a 1:2 ratio of plasma to packed reds). The use of cryoprecipitate, fibrinogen concentrate, and recombinant factor VIIIa have been used with mixed results.

There is also strong evidence from the military that the use of tranexamic acid (TXA) can reduce coagulopathy and increase survival in patients with combat injuries, and further evidence that the addition of TXA in civilian bleeding trauma patients can reduce death. TXA works by inhibiting fibrinolysis or clot breakdown. Given its good safety profile and overwhelmingly positive results, it has been incorporated into many massive transfusion protocols.

Targets of resuscitation in the setting of massive transfusion include:

- Mean arterial pressure (MAP) of 60 to 65 mm Hg

- Hemoglobin 7 to 9 g/dL

- INR less than  1.5

- Fibrinogen  greater than 1.5 to 2 g/L

- Platelets greater than 50 times 10/L

- pH 7.35 to 7.45

- Core temperature greater than 35 C