The lymphatic system, or lymphoid system, is a part of the circulatory system and the immune system. It consists of the primary lymphoid organs and the secondary lymphoid organs. The thymus and the bone marrow constitute the primary lymphoid organs. Both of them are involved in the production and early clonal selection of lymphocytes. Bone marrow is responsible for the production and maturation of B cells and the production of T cells. B cells travel from the bone marrow to the secondary lymphoid organs in search of pathogens. T cells, on the other hand, travel from the bone marrow to the thymus, where their maturation takes place. The thymus, as mentioned earlier, is a primary lymphoid organ. It provides an environment for the development and maturation of T cells. In addition, one of the most important roles of the thymus is the induction of central tolerance.

Thymic stromal cells allow the self-tolerance of T cells. The secondary lymphoid organs include lymph nodes, spleen, and mucosa-associated lymphoid tissues. The spleen consists of red and white pulp. In the red pulp are stored half of the body’s monocytes. On the other hand, antibodies are synthesized in the white pulp. The spleen removes antibody-coated bacteria and antibody-coated blood cells from circulation. Lymph nodes consist of the afferent and efferent lymph vessels, capsule, sinus, nodule, and cortex. Lymph nodes allow antigens to interact with the lymphocytes. As mentioned above, mucosa-associated lymphoid tissues are secondary lymphoid structures. These are present within the mucosal surfaces of almost any organ, but especially those of the digestive, genitourinary, and respiratory tracts. For example, Peyer’s patches, which are mucosa-associated lymphoid tissues of the small intestine, sample passing antigens and expose them to underlying B and T cells.

The lymphatic vessels are thin-walled vessels that conduct lymph between different parts of the body. The lymph capillaries are responsible for the absorption of interstitial fluid from the tissues. Lymph vessels propel the absorbed fluid into larger collecting ducts, and it finally returns to the bloodstream via one of the subclavian veins.

The lymphatic system has many functions. First of all, it collects fluid that drains from cells and tissues and returns it to the bloodstream. Secondly, it absorbs fats from the digestive tract: lymph includes fluids from the intestines that contain fats and proteins and transports it back to the bloodstream, and finally, it protects against foreign antigens.