The adenohypophysis produces and secretes a majority of the hormones of the pituitary gland. The following section enumerates the major hormones that are secreted.

These hormones are secreted in response to the prohormones that are secreted by the hypothalamus.

The adenohypophysis is characterized by well-demarcated acini. These acini are composed of a mixture of different hormone-producing cells. The different cells can be differentiated via hemotoxin and eosin (H and E) stains and the PAS-OG preparations. There are three distinct cell types seen based on these stains.

- Acidophils: The cytoplasm of these cells stain red or orange. Acidophils usually contain polypeptide hormones. The cells that are acidophils are somatotrophs and lactotrophs. These cells have the largest size granules.

- Basophils: These cells have cytoplasm that stains a bluish or purple color. Basophils contain glycoprotein hormones. The basophils that secrete glycoprotein hormones are thyrotrophs, gonadotrophs, and corticotrophs.

- Chromophobes: These cells do not stain because they have very minimal or no hormonal content. Many of the chromophobes may have been acidophils and basophils that have degranulated and have released their hormones. Some of the chromophobes are thought to be stem cells that have not differentiated into hormone-producing cells.

**Adrenocorticotropic hormone (ACTH)**

ACTH hormone is secreted in response from corticotropin-releasing hormone (CRH) from the hypothalamus gland. The CRH would travel from the hypothalamus to its portal system. Upon reaching the adenohypophysis, it stimulates the cleavage of the proopiomelanocortin (POMC) into several molecules. The three major ones are ACTH, melanocyte-stimulating hormone (MSH), and beta-endorphins. ACTH would travel via the bloodstream to stimulate the adrenal cortex to help stimulate the production of cortisol. Cortisol also exerts negative feedback to inhibit the release of CRH and ACTH.

**Prolactin (PRL)**

The control of prolactin is primarily under the control of the hypothalamus. Dopamine is the predominant hormone in inhibiting the secretion of prolactin. When the hypothalamus receives afferent sensory nerve cell input from the nipple stimulation of lactating women, it will cause the feedback loop of inhibition of prolactin to reverse. Due to the suckling, there would be inhibition of dopamine release. This would allow an unopposed release of prolactin. Prolactin helps with the growth and development of the breasts and the maintenance of lactation in women.

**Luteinizing Hormone/Follicle Stimulating Hormone (LH/FSH)**

These two hormones are produced by the gonadotrophin cells in the adenohypophysis.

In women: LH acts on the ovaries to stimulate steroid hormone production. FSH stimulates the follicular development of the ovary in women, more specifically the granulosa cells.

In men: LH acts by stimulating the Leydig cells in the testes to secrete testosterone. FSH stimulates the Sertoli cells to secrete androgen-binding proteins to initiate spermatogenesis.

In both males and females, these hormones help stimulate the maturation of primordial germ cells.

The control of LH and FSH is under the control of gonadotropin-releasing hormone (GnRH) produced by the hypothalamus. There is a negative feedback loop for LH and FSH from steroid sex hormones. Inhibin allows for more specific feedback for FSH.

**Growth Hormone (GH)/Somatotropin**

The growth hormone exerts its effects on many tissues. Growth hormone promotes linear growth via:

- The stimulation of protein synthesis

- Increasing the transport of amino acid through the cells

GH stimulates the many tissues and the liver to produce somatomedins.  Somatomedin helps stimulates cell division and cell proliferation.  Somatomedins have the following effects:

- Enhance T-cell proliferation

- Increase in the absorption of calcium from the intestines and decreases the loss from urinary excretion

- Stimulates hepatic glycogenolysis to raise levels of glucose in the blood

- Increase in the growth of soft and skeletal tissues

- Increase uptake of non-esterified fatty acids by the muscle.

Growth hormone-releasing hormone (GHRH) is released by the hypothalamus, on which it reacts with the cells in the anterior pituitary. There is negative feedback on GH from the increase in the circulating concentrations of GH and IGF-1.

**Thyroid-Stimulating Hormone (TSH)**

The purpose of TSH is to stimulate the thyroid gland to help in the production and the release of T3 and T4.

Thyrotropin-releasing hormone (TRH) is released via the hypothalamus to the adenohypophysis. The TRH stimulates thyrotrophic cells to secrete TSH.