The pectoralis major constitutes the bulk of the chest muscles, lying underneath the breast. It is thick, fan-shaped, and originates from multiple places along the medial and superior chest: anterior sternum, clavicular head, sternal end of rib 6, superior six costal cartilages, and from the aponeurosis of the external oblique. All the fibers converge and end in a flat tendon, inserting into the lateral lip of the bicipital groove of the humerus. The actions of the pectoralis major are dependent on which parts of the muscle are activated. The fibers attaching to the clavicular head allow for the flexion of the humerus, seen as in lifting a glass for a toast. However, the muscle fibers attaching to the sternocostal head permit the horizontal and vertical adduction, extension, and internal rotation of the upper extremity. Among these motions specific to the shoulder is the muscle's contraction as it depresses and abducts the scapula concomitantly.

There is a fascial continuation between the fascia of the pectoralis major muscle, the brachial fascia up to involving the bands of the radial and flexor muscles of the elbow and wrist. The tension of the pectoralis major muscle can affect the tone and function of the muscle parts of the upper limb and vice versa.

Compared to the pectoralis major, the pectoralis minor is much thinner and triangular in shape and resides below the major. It originates from the margins of the third to fifth ribs adjacent to the costochondral junction. The fibers consequently pass upward and laterally to insert into the medial border and superior surface of the coracoid process. It is crucial in stabilizing the scapula by pulling it downward and anteriorly against the thoracic wall.

The serratus anterior is a thin muscular sheet originating from the outer surface of the first to eighth ribs and then inserting into the costal aspect of the medial margin of the scapula. All parts of the muscle help pull the scapula forward around the thorax, permitting anteversion of the upper extremity. An example is when someone throws a punch, occasionally calling the muscle the "big swing muscle" or "boxer's muscle."

The subclavius, anatomically, is a tiny triangular muscle originating from the first rib and its respective cartilage anterior to the costoclavicular ligament. It then inserts into the subclavian groove of the clavicle. In other words, the inferior surface of the middle one-third of the bone. The muscle helps in depressing the shoulder as well as in elevating the first rib. These actions instinctively help protect the brachial plexus running underneath, along with the subclavian vessels, during the injury from a broken clavicle.