Locked-in syndrome may have a variety of presenting symptoms. The three-tier categorization of the forms of LIS (classical, incomplete, and total immobility) made by Bauer (1979) presents a basic framework in elucidating patient presentation given the severity of the condition. Many common symptoms of the locked-in syndrome are a function of  the disruption of the neuronal tracts that pass through the ventral brainstem:

- Functions lost

- 
              
- Paralysis of the voluntary muscles of the limbs and torso
              
              
- Bulbar palsy including anarthria and dysphagia
              
              
- Difficulty with voluntary breathing, apnea, ataxia, hyperpnea
              
              
- Dizziness
              
              
- Vertigo

- Functions retained

- 
              
- Retention of consciousness, language comprehension, orientation
              
              
- Retention of hearing
              
              
- Vertical eye movement and blinking ability

**History**

Providers should be steadfast in obtaining interviews from surrounding family members. It is imperative to evaluate the symptom onset and whether there have been fluctuations or progress of symptoms over time. Acute symptom onset should suggest a rapidly progressing etiology, such as in the case of strokes, trauma, or metabolic demyelination.

**Physical Exam**

Patients with the locked-in syndrome may either have a causative agent that primarily affects the brainstem or diffusely affects the CNS.

The physical and neurologic examination of cranial nerves can show impairment of the horizontal eye movement and sparing of the vertical eye movements. There is also the involvement of cranial nerves 5, 7, 9, 10, 11, and 12, which presents as a bilateral sensory deficit to the face, bilateral peripheral facial palsy, absent gag reflex, weak tongue movement, and neck weakness. Hearing is often preserved in LIS; however, patients often do not have the means to communicate due to the paralysis. In this case, hearing and the integrity of the cranial nerve 8 may be tested by a patient's response to verbal communication with vertical eye motions in the form of  "yes and no" responses. Both the pupillary reflex and the vestibulocochlear reflex may be preserved in LIS.

Testing of motor strength, sensory deficits, and reflexes should all be done to localize the site of the lesion as well as to monitor for progress or improvement. Locked-in syndrome presents with bilateral weakness and sensory deficits that may be variable. Complete quadriplegia is reported in almost all patients, while proprioception, light touch, temperature, pain sensation is greatly decreased if not completely diminished. Examination of the reflexes can point to an upper motor neuron involvement like in hyperreflexia or of lower motor neuron involvement in hyporeflexia or areflexia. A positive Babinski reflex indicates corticospinal damage, usually located in ventral structures of the brainstem.

It is important to note that patients suffering from a brainstem stroke or large brainstem lesions may initially fall into a comatose state. From here, it may take weeks before the patient transitions into a locked-in state, or a member of the practicing team successfully identifies intact cognition and sudden movement. According to León-Carrión et al. (2002), the average time to diagnosis was two months after the onset of the inciting event.

The early recognition of the symptoms of LIS may mitigate the considerable lag time between injury onset and the time of formal diagnosis. Serial monitoring of patients should be standard, assessment of alertness by eye movement, spontaneous or voluntary limb movements, withdrawal to noxious stimuli, and reflexes.