# Continuing Education Activity

Photorefractive keratectomy (PRK) is a laser refractive procedure used to ablate the corneal stroma to correct refractive errors. Though not performed as often as laser in situ keratomileusis (LASIK), there are select situations in which PRK may be the preferred option. This article reviews the surgical technique, complications, and visual outcomes associated with PRK, and highlights the role of the healthcare team in evaluating and treating patients who undergo PRK.

**Objectives:**
- Summarize the indications and contraindications for photorefractive keratectomy (PRK) and when PRK may be preferred over laser in situ keratomileusis (LASIK).
- Describe intraoperative techniques during photorefractive keratectomy (PRK) that may reduce the likelihood of postoperative complications.
- Explain the standard regimen to manage postoperative pain following photorefractive keratectomy (PRK).
- Identify the importance of improving care coordination amongst the interprofessional team to maximize visual outcomes and satisfaction of patients undergoing photorefractive keratectomy (PRK).

# Introduction

Photorefractive keratectomy (PRK) is a laser eye surgery for the correction of visual refractive errors such as myopia, hyperopia, and astigmatism. PRK was developed in 1983 by Dr. Steven Trokel and colleagues and first performed in 1987 by Dr. Theo Seiler in Berlin.

# Anatomy and Physiology

Laser refractive surgeries act upon the surface of the cornea, the transparent, dome-shaped, outermost layer that covers the front of the eye. The first step of PRK requires complete removal of the superficial corneal epithelium down to Bowman’s layer. The excimer laser then ablates the stroma, thereby remodeling the corneal surface. Further information regarding the excimer laser follows below. Following the procedure, re-epithelialization occurs via the migration of fibroblasts and collagen synthesis.

# Indications

PRK is an option in patients with myopia up to -12 diopter (D), astigmatism up to 6 D, and hyperopia up to 5 D.

Several reasons exist why PRK may be desirable over other surgical options for the correction of visual refractive errors:

- First, patients may be reluctant to undergo procedures that require flap formation due to fear of related complications such as incomplete flap, free flap, buttonhole, flap dislocation, epithelial ingrowth, folds, and wrinkles.

- PRK may also be preferable in pilots, professional athletes, or other individuals in whom there is a higher risk of flap dislocation.

- Some ophthalmologists who rarely perform refractive surgery may elect to perform PRK over LASIK, which is generally considered a more complex procedure.

- PRK may be an option in select patients in whom LASIK is contraindicated, such as those with thin corneas, epithelial anterior basement membrane dystrophy (due to risk of epithelial ingrowth), history of recurrent erosions, anteriorly placed scleral buckles, or very flat or very steep corneas.

- PRK may be performed as an enhancement procedure to correct residual refractive errors following corneal transplantation, penetrating keratoplasty, LASIK, cataract surgery, or other surgeries of the eye. Studies on the use of PRK as an enhancement procedure have demonstrated excellent safety and efficacy.

# Contraindications

There are many absolute and relative contraindications for laser refractive surgery, as proposed by the FDA and the American Academy of Ophthalmology (AAO). Patients should have stable refraction between +/- 0.5 D for at least one year before PRK.

**Absolute Contraindications:**

PRK is not a desirable therapy in patients with significant cataract, unstable glaucoma, and/or uncontrolled external disease such as blepharitis, dry eye syndrome, and atopy/allergy. Keratoconus and other abnormalities of the cornea such as corneal ectasias, thinning, edema, interstitial or neurotrophic keratitis, and extensive vascularization are considered absolute contraindications. However, one study found that PRK in patients with keratoconus who had predicted central corneal thickness over 450 micrometers resulted in improvement in visual outcomes and did not lead to keratoconus progression.

**Relative Contraindications:**

PRK is relatively contraindicated in pregnant women or nursing mothers as hormonal influences may result in changes in refractive error; furthermore, medications received postoperatively may be transmitted indirectly to the fetus or nursing infant. Caution is also necessary for patients with functional monocularity, ocular conditions that limit visual function, excessively steep or flat corneas, abnormal corneal topography, significant irregular astigmatism, inadequately controlled dry eye, uveitis, and glaucoma. History of herpes simplex keratitis (HSK) may be considered a relative contraindication, though preoperative treatment with systemic antivirals for several months postoperatively will minimize the risk of HSK reactivation. Patients with uncontrolled diabetes are at higher risk of refractive instability or poor wound healing. Patients taking medications with a high risk of ocular side effects (amiodarone, isotretinoin, sumatriptan, etc.) are generally advised to avoid refractive surgeries.

# Equipment

PRK employs a 193 nm argon fluoride excimer laser to ablate the anterior corneal stroma. At 193 nm, a single photon can break the carbon-carbon and carbon-nitrogen bonds that form the peptide backbone of the corneal collagen molecules. With each pulse, the collagen polymer is broken into smaller fragments, and a discrete amount of corneal tissue is expelled from the surface.

# Preparation

Careful patient selection and a thorough review of risks and benefits with patients are essential to maximizing good visual outcomes and patient satisfaction. Patients should receive information about the excimer laser and postoperative evaluation requirements through information sheets, patient counselors, and/or the ophthalmic surgeon. Patients should also understand the sequence of events during surgery and what they might expect to feel, see, smell, or hear; this will serve to reduce patients’ anxiety. Patients’ medical history and medication list should be screened for any contraindications, as listed above. Most importantly, patients should only be selected if they have realistic expectations of visual outcomes. Patients should be made aware that the goal of refractive surgery is to allow for less of a reliance on glasses and contact lenses rather than achieve the complete absence of refractive error.

As part of the preoperative evaluation, the clinician must obtain the patient’s refraction. Also, the patient’s refractive stability, degree of refractive error, and astigmatism require documentation. Both manifest and cycloplegic refraction should take place. Any disparity between these two values greater than 1 D of sphere warrants reevaluation. Discrepancies may occur due to accommodative spasm, which is relatively common in middle-aged patients. Patients with a high degree of refractive error should know that outcomes are less predictable and that there remains an increased risk of scar formation and degradation of the optical performance.

There remain several other components of the preoperative evaluation that are necessary to ensure appropriate patient selection. The cornea must undergo evaluation for scars, vessels, or previous inflammation. Pupil size should be measured with the commercial pupillometer as large pupils may contribute to glare and haloes postoperatively. Slit-lamp examination is necessary to rule out significant corneal abnormalities such as neovascularization, keratoconus, scarring, or the presence of a cataract. Corneal pachymetry allows for the determination of corneal thickness and will detect keratoconus or other types of corneal ectasia. Eyelids and tear film require an examination for signs of blepharitis or dry eyes. Computed corneal topography allows for the detection of irregular astigmatism and keratoconus. Notably, soft contact lenses should not be worn for three days and hard contact lenses for two weeks before preoperative evaluation as they cause corneal warpage, which subsequently interferes with the accuracy of preoperative refractive measurements. Intraocular pressure should be measured to identify glaucoma. Fundoscopy is performed to rule out a retinal hole, degenerative retina, and other types of macular disease. Lastly, computed videokeratography may be conducted to rule out early keratoconus, corneal warpage, and asymmetrical or irregular astigmatism.

Preoperative medications are generally given in the 20 minutes immediately before refractive surgery. To reduce post-operative pain, instill non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drops such as ketorolac tromethamine 0.5% or diclofenac 0.1%, one drop given three times every ten minutes. Topical anesthetic drops such as proparacaine hydrochloride 0.5% are also placed onto the eye immediately before surgery. Topical fluoroquinolones such as moxifloxacin 0.5% and gatifloxacin 0.3% are given to reduce the chance of infection. Sedation may be a consideration if the surgeon plans on holding the eye during ablation but is generally not recommended if the patient maintains self-fixation.

# Technique or Treatment

**Patient Positioning:**

Patient positioning should be for comfort. To allow for minimal head or body movements, legs should remain uncrossed, the neck not twisted, and patients should receive instruction to take shallow breaths. The head should be aligned such that when inserting the wire speculum, an equal amount of sclera is visible on the superior and inferior aspect of the globe. In unilateral surgeries, the nonoperative eye should be covered or taped closed while the operative eye gets identified with an adhesive label or temporary mark on the forehead. Patient skin prep is usually with alcohol wipes or povidone-iodine. A gauze pad may be placed between the operative eye and ear to absorb any fluid run-off.

**Excimer Laser:**

The excimer laser should be calibrated on the day of surgery and checked for an adequate homogenous beam profile, alignment, and power output. Relevant data input includes the patient’s name, refraction, intended correction, epithelial removal technique, keratometry values, optical zone, and transition zone.

**Pupil fixation:**

Various techniques exist to ensure proper fixation of the pupil, which is essential to avoid complications such as decentration. Self-fixation, in which patients focus on a target light, is the most popular method as it produces more accurate centration than globe immobilization by the ophthalmic surgeon.

Communication to the patient is essential as they are expected to maintain fixation and remain motionless throughout the procedure. Surgeons should regularly encourage the patient to relax and inform the patient when their vision will blur. Other distractions should be minimal, as both the patient and surgeon may become distracted by any level of background conversation.

**PRK technique**

**Removal of superficial epithelial cells:**

- The first step of PRK is the removal of the superficial epithelial cells, which may be through a variety of methods. Each of these techniques should be performed quickly to avoid desiccation and skillfully to avoid nicking Bowman’s layer.

- The first technique, mechanical debridement, involves using a blunt spatula to scrape off epithelium from the periphery toward the center. The next step is wiping a sponge hydrated with balanced salt solution (BSS) or carboxymethylcellulose 0.5% across the cornea. This technique benefits from not depending on laser optics; however, mechanical debridement tends to be a lengthy process in inexperienced surgeons, which subsequently increases patient anxiety and reduces stromal hydration.

- The “laser-scrape” technique removes 38 to 45 um of epithelial cells, and then residual debris is mechanically removed with a spatula.

- The transepithelial technique similarly uses a blue fluorescent light to demonstrate when ablation is complete but does not require manual scraping with a spatula to remove cellular debris.

- Epithelial cells may alternatively be removed with a dilute solution of 20% alcohol. The alcohol solution is dropped onto a 6 or 7 mm optical marker placed on the cornea.

- Lastly, the surgeon may opt to use a rotary brush that contains fine hairs that remove the epithelium without injuring the underlying Bowman’s layer. This technique allows for the epithelium to be easily removed and provides a smooth corneal surface. However, patients may lose fixation when the pupil becomes occluded with the brush, with an increased risk of the surgeon removing too much epithelium.

**Laser**

After exposing the stroma, the laser is centered and focused according to the manufacturer’s recommendations. Correction of myopia involves placing a large number of laser pulses centrally and fewer pulses in the periphery of the optical zone, thereby flattening the natural arc of the cornea. In contrast, the correction of hyperopia involves delivering the largest number of laser pulses in the periphery to steepen the corneal arc.

**Use of collagen cross-linking:**

There has been a trend to combine photorefractive keratectomy with collagen cross-linking (CXL) in patients with keratoconus and post-LASIK ectasia.

**Application of topical mitomycin-C:**

Topical mitomycin-C (MMC) is often applied as a soaked pledget on the ablated surface to 1 minute or less immediately after laser ablation to reduce the incidence of primary or recurrent haze.

**Post-treatment management:**

After laser ablation is complete, topical nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drops, antibiotic drops, and steroid drops get instilled. The ocular surface gets irrigated with chilled BSS, which is believed to reduce postoperative haze formation

Patients should be advised that their vision will likely remain blurry while re-epithelialization of the corneal surface occurs. This change in vision may hinder their ability to participate in work, hobbies, or travel; patients should allow for the healing process to complete before resuming activities that require critical vision. Ghosting, glare, and shadows in the vision are common, transient occurrences in the immediate postoperative period; these phenomena tend to be worse at night and more prevalent in young patients with myopia and large pupillary diameters. Patients should also be instructed to maintain good ocular hygiene due to the increased risk of infection while the epithelium is regenerating.

**Post-treatment discomfort:**

90% of patients experience no postoperative pain; the other 10% typically only experience mild to moderate pain or discomfort in the 24 to 36 hours following the procedures.

**Post-treatment medications:**

Other medications included in the postoperative management include topical fluoroquinolones used four to five times daily for five to seven days or until re-epithelialization is complete.

Topical corticosteroids are often used in order to avoid significant regression and postoperative haze. However, no consensus remains on the most appropriate duration of treatment. Among all topical steroids, prednisolone acetate, loteprednol, and fluorometholone are the most commonly used following PRK. Steroids may be administered four times daily for a week and tapered off over the following three weeks or five times daily for a month and tapered off over four months; the latter regimen is typically only administered in patients with high levels of myopia.

**Post-treatment course:**

Re-epithelialization is complete in most patients by postoperative day 3; BSCL, antibiotic drops, and NSAID drops may be discontinued at this time. Corneal videokeratoscopy should take place at one month following refractive surgery to demonstrated when the ablation was centered correctly.

# Complications

**Pain:**

The most common complications following refractive surgery are mild pain or discomfort and keratoconjunctivitis sicca, or “dry eye.” Discomfort and pain may be described as the sensation of having “sand in my eye” and should be managed with medications as listed above. Dry eye is one of the most common complications in patients receiving refractive surgery and a major cause of patient dissatisfaction. Risk factors for dry eye development after refractive surgery include older age and female gender.

**Infection:**

Corneal infection and sterile infiltrates are rare early complications of laser refractive surgery. A 2017 study found that approximately 0.0013% of cases resulted in definite or probable microbial keratitis.

Re-epithelialization is typically complete by postoperative day 3; delayed epithelial healing will present as persistent blurred vision symptomatically and epithelial defects with well-defined borders on slit-lamp examination. If the surface remains not intact by postoperative day 4, discontinue all medications except for the topical antibiotic, and replace the BSCL. Topical steroids may restart once epithelialization is complete.

Pseudodendrites are considered a normal part of the healing response and should not be confused with dendrites seen in herpes simplex keratitis (HSK). Pseudodendrites typically appear on postoperative day 3 or 4 and may cause blurring of vision if present in the visual axis. As they are part of the normal healing pattern and generally self-resolve within a matter of days, no changes in treatment are warranted.

**"Halo effect":**

Patients may experience a “halo effect” during the first 4 to 6 weeks following PRK as the epithelium continues to heal. This phenomenon is more likely to occur at night when pupillary dilation allows for the transmission of light at the edge of the ablation zone. This symptom tends to diminish with time and generally does not warrant a change in treatment. Pilocarpine drops may be administered to promote pupillary constriction, but many patients do not tolerate these drops well.

**Central corneal islands:**

The formation of central islands along the cornea is an incompletely understood and likely multifactorial complication that may result in blurred vision. Central islands may be visible as small central shadows on retinoscopy, and the diagnostic confirmation is by computed videokeratography showing elevations within the central or pericentral zone. Theorized causes of central island formation include emission of debris during laser ablation that interferes with laser pulses, uneven intraoperative corneal surface hydration that reduces central corneal ablation rate, and a higher degree of postoperative epithelial hyperplasia in the central cornea. Notably, the incidence of central islands following PRK has significantly decreased with the advent of new technology specifically designed to prevent their formation.

**Ectasia:**

Ectasia is a very rare complication in the modern era due to strict adherence to the inclusion criteria, technical improvements in the excimer laser, and increased ability to interpret and assess preoperative surface data.

**Decentration:**

Decentration may occur due to poor pupil fixation and significant eye movements. Decentration may result in increased astigmatism, glare, haloes, and worse visual outcomes. Decentration tends to occur more often in eyes with higher attempted corrections due to the longer period required for fixation.

**Corneal erosion:**

Persistent corneal erosion is an early complication that presents as pain, tearing, and photophobia upon awakening. Corneal erosion tends to occur outside the area of ablation. Symptoms are manageable with hypertonic drops and ointment. If these do not succeed in reducing symptoms, placement of a BSCL or phototherapeutic keratectomy (PTK) is another option.

**Corneal haze:**

Corneal haze is a late complication that typically peaks in intensity at 1 to 2 months following laser refractive surgery and disappears within 6 to 12 months. Histological studies from animals and humans have demonstrated that haze is likely due to migration of keratocytes and deposition of abnormal glycosaminoglycans and nonlamellar collagen in the anterior stroma during the wound healing response.

**Persistent refractive errors:**

Persistent refractive errors may occur following laser refractive surgery due to under-correction, overcorrection, or regression. Refractive errors are more likely to occur at higher corrections. Undercorrection may arise from insufficient initial treatment, significant myopic regression, or an excessively moist cornea during refractive surgery. Factors that promote regression include preoperative flat keratometry, small optical zones, steep wound edge, and secondary UV exposure.

Options for treatment of persistent refractive errors include further surface ablation, LASIK, and PTK depending on the amount of desired correction, corneal thickness, and the amount of corneal haze. These enhancement procedures generally get delayed until achieving stable refraction for at least 3 to 6 months.

# Clinical Significance

Long-term visual outcomes for patients who undergo PRK are generally very good. One study of patients with a 15-year follow-up found 55% of eyes to be within +/- 1 D and 85% within +/- 2 D.

In comparing LASIK and PRK, systematic reviews have demonstrated no differences in long-term efficacy, accuracy, or adverse outcomes in patients with low to moderate myopia

# Enhancing Healthcare Team Outcomes

an interprofessional team of ophthalmic surgeons, nurses, optometrists, and technicians may be involved in the preoperative evaluation, surgery, and postoperative management of patients who undergo PRK. Ensuring appropriate patient selection per FDA and AAO guidelines and maintaining adequate follow-up is essential for maximizing long-term visual outcomes and patient satisfaction. Nurses have to make sure that patient consent is signed. If surgery is being done on one eye, the eye should be marked by the nurse prior to surgery. The nurse will also assist during the procedure and provide post-operative care, reporting all status changes to the surgeon. Before any anesthesia, a timeout should be called to verify the patient ID, name, and location of the surgery. All members of the team should be aware of clinical signs and symptoms suggestive of major postoperative complications, and prompt referral to a cornea specialist is warranted should any of these complications arise. Close communication between members of the interprofessional team is vital if one wants to improve outcomes.[Level 5]

# Nursing, Allied Health, and Interprofessional Team Interventions

- Set up the instrument tray

- Ensure the patient has provided consent

- Mar the eye on which surgery will

- occurEducate the patient on postoperative course

- Develop a relationship with the patient to ease anxiety

# Nursing, Allied Health, and Interprofessional Team Monitoring

- Teach patient about eye protection after surgery

- Educate patient on how to apply eyedrops

- Follow the patient in outpatient clinic and assess visual acuity