Carsirivimab is not authorized to be used alone. The authorized dosage is a combination of casirivimab 600 mg + imdevimab 600 mg (was previously casirivimab 1200 mg + imdevimab 1200 mg) administered as a single IV infusion. There is an option for SQ administration as an alternative route if awaiting IV infusion would result in treatment delay though IV infusion is still preferred. The pediatric dose of the drug combination for age ≥ 12 years and weight ≥ 40 kg is the same as the adult dose.

For post-exposure prophylaxis, casirivimab 600 mg + imdevimab 600 mg is administered together as a single IV infusion (or SQ) as soon as possible following exposure to SARS-CoV-2. In case of ongoing exposure to SARS-CoV-2 for >4 weeks who are determined appropriate and vaccinated patient not expected to mount an adequate immune response, a subsequent dose of casirivimab 300 mg + imdevimab 300 mg once every 4 weeks can be repeated for the duration of ongoing exposure.

Casirivimab and imdevimab each come in individual single-use vials or co-formulated single vials. If individual vials are used, the drugs need to be diluted and mixed prior to infusion by qualified healthcare professionals using an aseptic technique.

The infusion should only occur in settings where health care providers have immediate access to medication to treat infusion-related reactions, such as anaphylaxis. In cases of renal impairment, no dose adjustment is needed. Casirivimab and imdevimab are not eliminated intact in the urine, so renal impairment should not affect the exposure to the drugs. The effect on the pharmacokinetics of casirivimab in the presence of hepatic impairment is still unknown.