There are limited therapeutic options for chylous ascites. Therefore managing the underlying cause and applying conservative measures to improve patient comfort, reducing recurrence, and optimizing outcomes are the cornerstones in managing chylous ascites (CA).

**Diet**

A special diet is recommended that is low in fat, containing mainly medium-chain TGs, and high in protein. Medium-chain triglycerides spare the lymphatic system through absorption by enterocytes and being transported directly into the liver as free fatty acids and glycerol. When these dietary changes are insufficient, bowel rest and total parenteral nutrition (TPN) should be considered. This approach helps reduce lymphatic flow and bypasses the intestine. Nutritional consultation should be considered to help manage the TPN and select the ideal lipid formulation.

**Medical Therapy**

Medical therapy includes different medications that may help decrease the accumulation of CA:

- Orlistat reduces the availability of fatty acids and their absorption by reversibly inhibiting the release of lipase from the stomach and pancreas.

- Somatostatin and the synthetic analog octreotide have been used in the treatment of CA. The exact mechanism of action is not completely understood. It can decrease the portal pressure (by inhibiting splanchnic vasodilation), peristalsis, intestinal absorption of fats, triglyceride concentration in the thoracic duct, and the lymph flow in the major channels. The route of administration and the half-life are different between somatostatin and octreotide. Somatostatins are administered intravenously and have a half-life of 1 to 3 minutes, while octreotide is administered subcutaneously and has a half-life of about 2 hours.

- Etilefrine (adrenergic agonist) is used in treating postural hypotension due to its sympathomimetic effect. It has also been used in those who undergo esophagectomy and develop CA due to thoracic duct injury. It reduces the chyle flow by contracting the thoracic duct's smooth muscles.

**Therapeutic Interventions**

- Lymphangiography with embolization can be used in the management of CA. This is achieved by injecting glue percutaneously into a lymph node.

- Abdominal paracentesis may be a suitable temporary option. It can be complicated by electrolyte imbalance, malnutrition, and infection due to repetitive drainage. In patients with cirrhosis, albumin replacement, depending on the volume status, is recommended. Paracentesis should be used in conjunction with other conservative treatment options due to decreased efficacy when used alone.

- Transjugular intrahepatic portosystemic shunt (TIPS) is reported to be a successful measure in treating cirrhotic patients who do not respond to conservative measures.

- Peritoneovenous shunts can be considered in patients who do not respond to medical therapy or cannot undergo surgery. The shunt returns the chylous fluid to the blood, and by doing so, it achieves hemostasis again. Serious complications can be associated with these shunts, such as electrolyte abnormalities, septic shock, obstruction of the small intestine, disseminated intravascular coagulation (DIC), and air embolism. Also, it can be complicated by shunt occlusion due to the increased viscosity of chyle.

**Surgical Therapy**

Surgical interventions may be beneficial if all the conservative measures fail in treating CA. This should be considered if CA was due to congenital causes or as a result of surgery or malignancy. Laparotomy is usually performed to insert a shunt, close a fistula, or resect a malignancy.