There is no specific therapy for atheroembolic renal disease and treatment is mostly symptomatic and supportive. Dialysis may be appropriate if there is no evidence of continued embolic events. Anticoagulation should be discontinued, and performance of more invasive diagnostic/therapeutic vascular procedures or surgery should be avoided or delayed, if possible. Treatment with aspirin and statins, smoking cessation, blood pressure control, and glycemic control should be provided for the management of atherosclerosis. Distal protection vascular devices are being used in interventional procedures to prevent embolic material from lodging in distal sites.

The aim of treatment is to slow or halt the progression of ischemia of the tissues and more showering of cholesterol crystals and provide supportive management in the event of renal dysfunction.

**Corticosteroid**

The purpose of corticosteroid use is to decrease the inflammatory response with atheroembolization. However, the effects of steroids stay controversial. Some studies demonstrate that the administration of oral prednisolone at a dose of 1 mg/kg/day results in overall clinical improvement and better renal outcomes.

**Lipid-lowering Therapies**

Statins may have a positive effect on AERD by contributing to the stabilization of plaque and its regression through their anti-inflammatory and lipid-lowering properties.

**Dialysis and Other Therapies**

Patients with acute kidney injury may need renal replacement therapy. Both peritoneal dialysis and hemodialysis are useful means of treating renal failure in such patients.