The approved management for trinucleotide repeat disorders is mainly conservative and varies due to the varying presenting features in every disorder. The following is a summary of the treatment:

**Friedrich's ataxia:**Antioxidants are biological and chemical compounds that reduce oxidative damage. The following are the antioxidants commonly used in Friedrich's patients- Coenzyme Q, Vitamin E, High dose ascorbic acid, Idebenone a synthetic coenzyme Q, N-acetylcysteine, selegiline, Dehydroepiandrosterone, Pioglitazone, a peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor-gamma (PPARϒ) and induces the expression of enzymes involved in mitochondrial metabolism, including superoxide dismutase, which is an important antioxidant defense in nearly all cells exposed to oxygen.

**Fragile X syndrome**: Careful medical follow up, and sometimes intervention is required as the physical and behavioral problems of fragile X patients are related to their stage of development.

Neuropsychiatric manifestations: Seizures are observed in approximately 20% of males and 5% of females and necessitate a timely diagnosis and treatment. Influencing behavioral problems is difficult, although behavioral therapy and avoidance of overwhelming stimuli may alleviate some of the symptoms. Some physicians recommend pharmacological intervention for behavioral problems. The need for special education and training, especially in younger children, is of primary importance. Speech therapists and physiotherapists can help with language and motor development.

Connective tissue manifestations: During infancy, associated connective tissue abnormalities may present as congenital hip dislocations and inguinal hernia, that need surgical correction. Some children fail to thrive because of gastro-oesophageal reflux, tactile defensiveness, or difficulties in sucking. The latter of these problems requires attention from a specialized speech therapist or physiotherapist, while the gastro-oesophageal reflux can be treated by dietary advice or medication or both.

Other: The frequent otitis media and sinusitis in approximately 50% of affected children require adequate intervention (antibiotics or polyethylene tubes or both). Approximately 30-50% of cases need ophthalmological help for strabismus, myopia, or hyperopia.

**Spinocerebellar ataxia:**No current FDA approved treatment exists for SCA. However, gene testing can confirm the diagnosis. Although incurable, establishing a specific diagnosis can put an end to the quest for the etiology, permit a discussion of the prognosis, and facilitate discussions of genetic risk to other family members. The psychological lift of simply putting a name to a previously mysterious disease, even if there is no cure, should not be underestimated for some patients. Further advancements in treatment are currently in the pipeline.

**Huntington's chorea:**The current management of Huntington's mainly aims at managing each symptom rather than the basic pathogenesis. More recently, however, clinicians have tended first to use newer atypical antipsychotic drugs in persons who experience severe chorea, especially when it is accompanied by psychiatric symptoms warranting antipsychotic use, such as delusions. Depression, which commonly accompanies Huntington's Disease, is treated with newer antidepressants. Thus far, limited trials of cognitive-enhancing agents used primarily in patients with AD, such as memantine, rivastigmine, and donepezil, have shown only modest benefit. Bradykinesia and rigidity in younger-onset individuals can respond to dopaminergic agents used in parkinsonism.

**Muscular dystrophy:**The management of DM is based on genetic counseling, preserving function and independence, and preventing complications. In DM1, the combined effects of disordered breathing and weakness of the diaphragm and oropharyngeal muscles often lead to respiratory impairment and nocturnal hypoventilation. It is useful to monitor FVC and FEV1 changes from sitting to a supine position at clinic visits. Many patients will progress to the point of requiring non-invasive nighttime ventilatory support. Placement of a pacemaker or cardiac defibrillator can be lifesaving in DM1. The ECG should be monitored annually.