**Evolution of Cardiac Risk Indices**

In 1977, Goldman et al. published the landmark article on cardiac risk index (CRI) which used clinical risk factors to quantify the risk of developing perioperative cardiac complications. These factors include:

- Preoperative third heart sound or jugular venous distention indicating active heart failure

- Myocardial infarction in the past six months

- Premature ventricular complexes/min before surgery

- Cardiac rhythm other than sinus

- Age of greater than or equal to 70 years

- Emergency surgery, significant aortic stenosis

- Intraperitoneal, intrathoracic, or aortic surgery

- Markers of a poor general medical condition such as renal dysfunction, liver disease, lung disease, and electrolyte imbalance

Each of these factors was assigned a point value, and a point system was developed to determine the risk of developing a MACE.

In 1986, Detsky et al. proposed a modified CRI, updating Goldman’s approach by modifying the risk factors and adding angina.

In 1996, the ACC/AHA Taskforce published Practice Guidelines for Perioperative Cardiovascular Evaluation for Noncardiac Surgery and then came out with an update in 2002.

According to the guidelines,  there are currently three acceptable risk calculators for assessment of the perioperative risk of MACE: the Revised Cardiac Risk Index (RCRI), the National Surgical Quality Improvement Program Myocardial Infarction and Cardiac Arrest (NSQIP MICA) calculator and the National Surgical Quality Improvement Program risk calculator).

**RCRI**

The Revised Cardiac Risk Index (RCRI) is developed by Lee et al. in 1999 as a revision of Goldman’s cardiac risk index. It is the most commonly used tool in clinical practice due to its ease of use and reliability. The RCRI uses six clinical risk predictors, each of which are assigned equal weight. These predictors include

- Coronary heart disease

- Congestive heart failure

- Cerebrovascular disease

- Insulin-dependent diabetes mellitus

- Renal insufficiency with serum creatinine measuring greater than 2 mg/dL

- High-risk surgery (suprainguinal vascular, intraperitoneal, or intrathoracic)

The previously determined risks of MACE determined by Lee, were found to under report it's occurrence. Multiple studies systematically reviewed the data and determined new values. As of January 2019, patients with a score of 0= 3.9% risk of MACE, a score of 1= 6.0% risk of MACE, a score of 2=10.1% risk of MACE and a score of 3 or greater indicate a greater than 15% risk of MACE.

**NSQIP MICA**

In 2007, Gupta and colleagues used data collected by the National Surgical Quality Improvement Program to create a risk-prediction model using data from 525 US hospitals to predict the risk of MI and cardiac arrest.

**NSQI Surgical Risk Calculator**

In 2013, the NSQIP Surgical Risk Calculator was created to provide procedure-specific risk. It is an online calculator which uses 21 patient-specific variables and calculates the risk of developing MI or cardiac arrest.