A family history of mental health disorders, chronic pain disorders, or substance abuse puts patients at higher risk of developing chronic pain.

An overlooked aspect of the management of pain is the influence of sleep hygiene, stress, exercise, and diet play in the recovery of an injury.

Catastrophizing about pain can be a symptom of severe and debilitating pain. There is real fear associated with pain that can be all-consuming for a patient. Ironically, this hyperfocus on pain often makes the subjective experience of pain worse, not better.

Underserved communities are at increased risk for the development of chronic pain, substance abuse, and opioid dependence. When assessing a patient's pain, it is essential to be mindful of the area of your practice. Multiple factors contribute to the increased risk, including limited access to care and socioeconomic status. Local culture in specific geographic regions has a much higher percentage of the population on chronic opioids. The approach to assessing pain also changes for adults, children, the disabled, and the elderly.

Failure to complete physical therapy after only attending two sessions for shoulder pain is not the failure of treatment — moreover, its noncompliance. This is why it is critical to assess the effect of therapy. Stopping therapy because a patient does not wish to go to their appointments is very different than completing all sessions and continuing to have persistent pain. It is a complication of a poorly obtained pain assessment.

Observational assessment underestimates self-reported pain scores.

Hunger and stress levels also impact pain severity.