KSHV is a large enveloped, linear double-stranded DNA virus belonging to the subfamily, gammaherpesvirus, genera-rhadinovirus. It has an icosahedral capsid, a tegument (containing proteins and RNAs). The DNA virus produces several proteins that enable the virus to evade the host’s immunity, replicates in the nucleus, and produces its potential oncogenic effects. These proteins interact with the various metabolic pathways of the cell such as the nuclear factor-kappaB (NF-kappaB), phosphoinositide 3-kinase (PI3K), replication and transcription activator (RTA), Janus kinase/signal transducer, and activator of transcription (JAK/STAT) and mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK). The most expressed protein is Latency-associated nuclear antigen-1 (LANA), which is important for latency and oncogenesis. Also, Viral cyclin is known to inhibit the tumor suppressor genes (p53 and retinoblastoma (RB) prevent apoptosis by controlling the cell cycle.

Several other viral lytic proteins are significant in cancer formation to include the viral G protein-coupled receptor (vGPCR), K1, K15, and viral IL-6, are known to increase the activity of cellular growth factors such as vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF) and platelet-derived growth factor (PDGF). These play significant roles in angiogenesis and oncogenesis. The knowledge of these various pathogenic processes of KSHV has improved the production of medications to treat several of the HHV-8 related diseases and malignancies.

**Major KSHV Proteins and Functions**The HHV-8 has several viral products that are important for infecting, establish latency, and cancer formation, including:

- Latency-associated nuclear antigen-1 (LANA) - which is the major latency antigen.

- Kaposins - these are latent proteins with A, B, and C subtypes, the B subtype is the most important for tumorigenesis.

- Rta protein (ORF50) - it is a major initiator of viral reactivation.

- Viral IL-6 (vIL-6) - a major blocker of interferon signaling by binding to gp130

- Viral cyclin (v-cyclin)

- Viral Fas ligand ICE inhibitory protein (v-FLIP)

- Viral IL-6 (vIL-6) - a protein known to block interferon signaling by directly binding to gp130.