Start with a set of numbers with a total of n members. That is, there are n numbers in our set of numbers. Once the set of numbers is sorted (either ascending or descending), then the median can be calculated as follows:

For sets with an odd number of members, n is odd:

- Median = value of the ((n+1)/2)th item in the sorted set

For sets with an even number of members, n is even:

- Median = value of the [(n/2)th item + (n/2 + 1)th item] / 2 in the sorted set

Use our simple sets from above to work out an example for both cases.

For a set where n is odd, we use or first set (8, 6, 9, 5, 8, 23, 4).

The set once sorted is (4, 5, 6, 8, 8, 9, 23).

In this set n = 7.

- Median = value of the ((n+1)/2)th item in the sorted set

-  = value of ((7+1)/2)th item in sorted set

- = value of ((8)/2)th item in sorted set

- = value of 4th item in sorted set

For a set where n is even, use the second set (7, 3, 10, 2, 9, 2, 1, 4).

The set once sorted is (1, 2, 2, 3, 4, 7, 9, 10).

In this set, n = 8.

- Median =  value of the [(n/2)th item + (n/2 + 1)th item] / 2 in the sorted set

- = value of the [(8/2)th item + (8/2 + 1)th item] / 2 in the sorted set

- = value of the [4th item + (4+1)th item] / 2 in the sorted set

- = value of the [ 4th item + 5th item] / 2 in the sorted set = value of [3 + 4] / 2

- = value of [7] / 2

- = 3.5

The most common mistake is distinguishing between the mean, median, and mode. The mean is the "average" of the numbers in the set. The sample mean is calculated by adding all of the numbers in the set together then dividing by the number of items in the set.

The median is the topic of this discussion and is calculated as stated above in the function section.

The mode is the most common element in the set or the value that happens the most often. In the first data set (4, 5, 6, 8, 8, 9, 23), the number 8 occurs twice, which is more common than any of the other numbers, so the mode of the data set is 8. One can have more than one mode as well as no mode for a dataset. In the data set (2, 3, 3, 5, 5, 7, 7), there are three modes as 3, 5, and seven all appear twice, which is more than two, which only appears once. This dataset would be said to be trimodal. If there were two modes, the dataset would be bimodal, and if there were more than three modes to the dataset, then the dataset would be multimodal. In a different dataset of (6, 7, 8, 9), no number appears more frequently than the others, so there is no mode to the data set.

Median, mode, and mean are very similar if the dataset follows a relatively normal (bell-curve") distribution but are vastly different in other distributions (for example, see "clinical significance").