Amoxicillin is one of the most commonly used antibiotics in the primary care setting. It is an amino-penicillin, created by adding an extra amino group to penicillin to battle antimicrobial resistance. Amoxicillin covers a wide variety of gram-positive bacteria, with some added gram-negative coverage compared to penicillin. Like penicillin, it covers most Streptococcus species and is also effective against Listeria monocytogenes and Enterococcus species. It also covers Haemophilus influenza, some Escherichia coli, Actinomyces species, Clostridium species, Salmonella species, Shigella species, and Corynebacteria species.

**FDA-approved Indications**

- Amoxicillin is indicated in treating infections due to susceptible (only beta-lactamase–negative) isolates of the selected bacteria in the conditions listed below.

- Ear, nose, and throat infections: Treatment of tonsillitis, pharyngitis, and otitis media in adults and pediatric patients ≥12 years of age. The microbiological spectrum is infections due to beta-lactamase-negative Streptococcus species (alpha- and beta-hemolytic isolates only), Streptococcus pneumoniae, Staphylococcus species, or Haemophilus influenza.

- Helicobacter pylori eradication: Triple therapy for Helicobacter pylori with clarithromycin, amoxicillin, and lansoprazole to eradicate Helicobacter pylori reduces the risk of duodenal ulcer recurrence. Dual treatment with amoxicillin and lansoprazole is also FDA approved to eradicate Helicobacter pylori infection.

- Lower respiratory tract infections: Treatment of lower respiratory tract infection due to beta-lactamase-negative Streptococcus species (alpha- and beta-hemolytic strains only), pneumococcus, Staphylococcus species, or Haemophilus influenzae. For community-acquired pneumonia, IDSA recommends a combination of amoxicillin and macrolide.

- Acute Bacterial Sinusitis: Treating infections due to beta-lactamase-negative Streptococcus species (alpha- and beta-hemolytic isolates only), Streptococcus pneumoniae, Staphylococcus species, or Haemophilus influenzae.

- Skin and skin structure infections: Immediate release: Treatment of skin and skin structure infections due to beta-lactamase-negative Streptococcus species (alpha and beta-hemolytic strains only), Staphylococcus species, or Escherichia coli.

- Urinary tract infection: Treatment of the genitourinary tract infections. Organisms include beta-lactamase-negative Escherichia coli, Proteus mirabilis, or Enterococcus faecalis.

- The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) recommends using amoxicillin for post-exposure prophylaxis for anthrax(second-line agent).

**Off-label Clinical Uses**

- Lyme disease (if doxycycline contraindications are present)

- Infectious endocarditis prophylaxis(cardiac conditions associated with the high risk such as the presence of prosthetic cardiac valve or congenital heart disease)

- Periodontitis in combination with metronidazole

- Actinomycosis