Androgenic-anabolic steroids are mainly used for their effects on athletic performance and muscle size. An increase in muscle mass and strength were seen after administration of testosterone for six weeks in young, healthy males, average 19 years old.

Interestingly, low levels of testosterone in geriatric males correlate with an increased risk of atrial fibrillation (AF).

Additionally, studies have demonstrated that testosterone supplementation decreased the risk of developing T2DM.  Testosterone increased metabolism and lipolysis. Evidence from multiple cohort studies shows that reduced levels of testosterone are seen in patients with obesity. Testosterone supplementation of 3 intramuscular injections significantly decreased the patient’s BMI by 1.3 in 30 weeks. Data on testosterone's effect on lipid balance is conflicted and needs to be studied further. Testosterone supplementation, however, has been shown to decrease prolonged QT and ST intervals, often seen with aging and Cushing disease.

Patients with congestive heart failure (CHF) due to activation of endocrine and inflammatory pathways also have low testosterone levels. Decreasing testosterone levels have been recently shown to be associated with progressive worsening of CHF. Administration of testosterone to CHF patients, however, did not change left ventricular ejection fraction. Levels of total testosterone and free testosterone remain a good predictor of CHF. Testosterone has also been shown to be effective in increasing exercise tolerance in a patient with CHF and chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD). Testosterone supplementation improved the 6-minute walk distance in patients with COPD.  It is likely that testosterone causes the skeletal muscle to have more Type I fibers, thus increasing exercise tolerance.

Low levels of testosterone correlate with chronic liver disease (CLD). Up to 90% of males considered for a liver transplant show marked a reduction in free testosterone. The severity of CLD has an inverse correlation to testosterone levels. Mortality secondary to CLD was also inversely tied to free testosterone levels. An 8% increase in mortality is associated with a 1 nmol/L drop of free testosterone.