Dosing options for milrinone include:

**Intravenous Administration**

- Loading doses: 25 to 50 mcg/kg (loading dose given over 10 minutes)

- Infusion rates: ranging between 0.375 and 0.75 mcg/kg/min

- The infusion rate should be modified according to hemodynamic and clinical response.

**Inhalation Administration**

- Not an FDA-approved use; there is no consensus on the dosing via this route

**Pediatric Home Administration**

- Infusion rate: 0.3mcg/kg/min to 1mcg/kg/min

The infusion rate should be modified according to hemodynamic and clinical response.

**Use in Specific Patient Population**

**Patients with Hepatic Impairment:**There is no information regarding the use of milrinone in patients with hepatic impairment in the manufacturer's labeling.

**Patients with Renal Impairment:**Renal impairment increases the terminal elimination half-life of milrinone. Therefore, reductions in infusion rate may be necessary for patients with renal impairment. However, according to ACC/AHA 2022 guidelines, accumulation of milrinone may occur in the setting of renal failure.

- creatinine clearance 50(mL/min/1.73 m^2) - infusion rate 0.43 mcg/kg/min

- creatinine clearance 40(mL/min/1.73 m^2) - infusion rate 0.38 mcg/kg/min

- creatinine clearance 30(mL/min/1.73 m^2) - infusion rate 0.33 mcg/kg/min

- creatinine clearance 10(mL/min/1.73 m^2) - infusion rate 0.23 mcg/kg/min

**Pregnancy Considerations:**There are no adequate studies regarding the use of milrinone in pregnant women. Milrinone should be used during pregnancy only after careful risk-benefit evaluation.

**Breastfeeding Considerations:**It is unknown whether milrinone is excreted in human milk. Hence, clinicians should exercise caution when milrinone is administered to nursing women.