The packaging and shipment of infectious substances are critical as possible exposure can have devastating consequences. Different labs across the world, including research, diagnostic, hospital, and national laboratories, must be equipped to handle a variety of substances to maintain safety. Previous studies have shown that laboratories have not always been prepared to handle infectious substances, resulting in unintentional exposures.

For example, mishandling and improper containment of Salmonella samples resulted in community outbreaks in 2013 that were traced back to certain teaching laboratories across the U.S. . Investigation of these incidents unveiled that the involved labs lacked consistent biosafety practices and emergency response procedures.

Furthermore, the proper handling of infectious substances has increased in importance in recent years due to the emergence of viruses that have devastated countries worldwide. Some examples include the Ebola epidemic, Zika epidemic, and current COVID-19 pandemic. During these public health crises, contaminated specimens are frequently shipped to the CDC in Atlanta, Georgia, for confirmatory diagnosis and have also been shipped across the world for research purposes. Therefore, laboratories must be prepared to handle these substances before a devastating outbreak.

After the Ebola epidemic from 2014 to 2016, research showed that many medical laboratories in the U.S. were ill-prepared to handle Ebola specimens and other Category A infectious substances. Many facilities did not have the protocols and skills to handle and transport these substances nor workers who were properly trained to handle the infectious waste.

Previous laboratory outbreaks and epidemics like the Ebola virus have exposed gaps in knowledge and training that increase the risk of environmental exposure. Such missteps have forced labs to improve biosafety guidelines and ultimately resulted in safer practices. These advances are even more important amid the current COVID-19 pandemic, which has caused hospitals to develop protocols for the proper disposal of COVID waste.