The management of splenic trauma must be with an interprofessional team that includes physicians, nurses, radiologists, intensivists, and laboratory personnel. One must always be aware of the physiological and immunological derangements that may occur with splenic trauma. While most patients are now managed conservatively with observation, close monitoring is vital. ICU nurses play a vital role in the monitoring of splenic injury. The abdomen must be examined carefully, and a serial CBC must follow. Any signs of hemodynamic stability should be reported to the surgeon.

Besides regular physical exams, the patient's hematocrit requires monitoring, and serial CT scans may be required. If the patient is monitored in an outpatient setting, they should be educated on the symptoms of bleeding and the need to urgently go to the nearest emergency room. For those who undergo splenectomy, there is always the risk of sepsis. Hence, the pharmacist should educate the patient on post-splenectomy sepsis. Also, the patient must be told to seek immediate assistance if they spike a fever. Finally, these individuals must be told to avoid traveling to areas where mosquito bites are endemic because, without a spleen, even a minor infection can quickly become life-threatening. Patients who have had their spleen removed must wear a medical alert bracelet.

**Outcomes**

Today, splenectomy after trauma is rare; it is even rare to perform a splenectomy 24 hours later. After the initial observation of 24 hours, the patient may still require close observation as an inpatient or outpatient for two weeks. The majority of these patients have an excellent outcome in the long run. Further, even in patients who bleed later, selective arterial embolization has replaced splenectomy because it has a very high success rate.