If an infectious agent has been identified as a trigger for reactive arthritis, antimicrobial therapy is strongly recommended, often for a long term of 3 to 6 months. It can significantly shorten the time to remission.Chlamydia-positive patients by PCR were treated for 6 months with a combination of doxycycline and rifampin or azithromycin and rifampin. The treatment arm achieved statistically significant symptom remission and PCR negativity, although the study was underpowered for the identification of the preferred combination of antibiotics.

The goal of therapy in reactive arthritis is to provide symptomatic relief and prevent chronic complications. Non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs are the initial treatment of choice in the acute phase. Intra-articular or local glucocorticoids, as in cases of enthesitis or bursitis, can be used if the patient has mono/oligoarthritis. Mechanical devices like orthotics and insoles can be useful. Systemic use of glucocorticoids is limited to severe polyarthritis, cardiac and ocular manifestations.  Disease-modifying antirheumatic drugs (DMARDs), mainly sulphasalazine, are effective in both acute and chronic ReA. Other agents such as methotrexate and azathioprine have shown to be useful in chronic arthritis. They are indicated in patients who have failed Nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drug (NSAID) therapy. Biologicals such as tumor necrosis factor (TNF) blocking agents (e.g., infliximab and etanercept have been suggested in the treatment of reactive arthritis. However, further studies are needed to determine their definitive indications.

All patients should be urged to become physically active. Strengthening exercises are a key component of long term therapy to prevent muscle wasting.