Sucralfate is a unique anti-ulcer drug. It is a basic aluminum salt of sucrose octasulfate. The labeled use of sucralfate is as below:

Treatment of duodenal ulcer: Sucralfate is FDA approved for the treatment of duodenal ulcers up to 8 weeks (short term). Duodenal ulcers are treated with 1g four times daily for eight weeks, followed by 1 g twice daily for maintenance therapy. The efficacy of sucralfate in the treatment of duodenal ulcers is shown to be comparable to that of cimetidine and intensive antacid therapy.

As outlined below, sucralfate has also been used to treat various off-label (non-FDA approved) conditions.

- **Dyspepsia:**It is shown to reduce the frequency and intensity of dyspeptic symptoms and gastric erosion during NSAID therapy, and the efficacy is similar to that of an H-2 receptor blocker.

- **Treatment of epithelial wounds:**Sucralfate has also been used as a topical drug in treating various epithelial wounds such as ulcers, inflammatory dermatitis, mucositis, and burns wounds. Several studies have been conducted to study the efficacy of sucralfate in the treatment of epithelial wounds. A study done by Tsakayannis et al. showed that the venous ulcer that failed conventional therapy responded to treatment with topical sucralfate.

- **Treatment of chemotherapy-induced mucositis:**A study done by McCullough showed that high potency sucralfate accelerates the activation of growth factor and is useful in treating chemotherapy-induced mucositis of the oropharynx and alimentary tract. This resulted from administering 1.5 g of sucralfate three times daily at the onset of mucositis for two days, followed by 1.5 g two times daily throughout the course of cancer therapy and two weeks after the completion of treatment.

- **Treatment of radiation proctitis:**Sucralfate paste enema has shown clinical improvement in hemorrhagic radiation proctitis treatment. This therapy uses a low volume paste in an enema applicator, and pre and post-treatment improvements were assessed using clinical proctitis scores with a positive outcome.

- **Prevention of ulceration of diversion colitis:**The use of enemas containing sucralfate is shown to preserve the mucus layer covering the epithelium, thereby reducing inflammation in diversion colitis. The concentration of sucralfate used in the enema is 2 g/kg/day.

- **Stress ulcer prophylaxis in ventilated patients:**Research has shown that sucralfate is better for stress ulcer prophylaxis when compared to H-2 blockers or antacids in patients receiving ventilation therapy as the latter increases the pH of gastric contents causing stagnation of gram-negative bacilli and subsequently increasing the risk of nosocomial pneumonia.

- **Behcet Disease:**Topical sucralfate 1 g/5mL four times daily alone or in combination with topical corticosteroids reduces pain and promotes the healing of oral ulcers in Behcet disease. Sucralfate suspension is the dosage form for treating oral ulcers in Behcet disease.