The right and left external iliac arteries extend from the mid-pelvis to the inguinal ligament as the distal continuation of the common iliac arteries. The common iliac arteries arise from the aortic bifurcation and bifurcate into the external and internal iliac arteries anterior to the sacroiliac joint. The external iliac arteries begin at the common iliac bifurcation and take an anterior course along the medial border of the psoas major muscles before exiting the pelvic girdle posterior to the inguinal ligament. The exit point of the external iliac arteries is lateral to the insertion point of the inguinal ligament on the pubic tubercle, approximately one-third the distance from the pubic tubercle to the anterior superior iliac spine. Distal to the inguinal ligament, the external iliac artery becomes the common femoral artery.

The external iliac arteries function as a short conduit for blood flow between the common iliac and common femoral arteries. Although they do not directly supply a muscle or tissue, the external iliac arteries give rise to two arterial branches that perfuse surrounding muscles: the inferior epigastric artery and the deep circumflex iliac artery. The inferior epigastric artery originates from the medial side of the distal external iliac artery. It travels superiorly along the posterior surface of the inferior rectus abdominis muscle. The deep circumflex iliac artery originates from the lateral side of the distal external iliac artery and travels laterally along the superior border of the iliac crest. The common femoral artery is the distal continuation of the external iliac artery as it passes posteriorly and inferiorly to the inguinal ligament.