According to a survey in 2019, epilepsy affects approximately 3.5 million patients in the United States. Hence the study was carried out with the primary aim of the outcomes of an interprofessional telehealth program for rural-dwelling individuals. The results were encouraging, and the telehealth pilot program effectively served patients with epilepsy, suggested solutions to medication-related problems, and demonstrated the value of pharmacists in an interprofessional team. However, further research is warranted.

Patient participation is crucial for the management of epilepsy; encourage the pregnant patient to enroll in the North American Antiepileptic Drug [NAAED] Pregnancy Registry, which can provide insights into the safety and efficacy data of antiepileptic agents and evaluate pregnancy-related outcomes. The levetiracetam registry expert panel did not find evidence of a teratogenic relationship with prenatal exposure to levetiracetam.

An interprofessional team involving the clinician, nurse, and pharmacist assisting and educating the patient with the administration and regular dosing of the drug will result in the best patient outcome. The prescriber would diagnose and treat the patient according to the type of epilepsy. The pharmacist plays a vital role in educating the patient about the adverse drug reactions of levetiracetam and performs medication reconciliation. Nurses can conduct initial screening, monitor disease progression, and assist with epilepsy management with levetiracetam therapy.

Collaboration and communication across these various disciplines in an interprofessional team approach can achieve the best patient outcomes. All interprofessional team members need to monitor the patient's response to treatment and report any changes in their clinical status, documenting their observations in the patient's health record and communicating these findings to other team members to take corrective action. The team approach using evidence-based medicine and patient-centered care reduces healthcare costs and helps achieve better clinical results. [Level 1]