The pathology report in a placenta specimen examines the gross and microscopic findings, significatively helping providers involved in patient's care. The report has three main functions: provide information that fills the gap in the clinicopathological events that resulted in complications during pregnancy, provides information that may help for immediate therapy such as unrecognized antepartum infection, and gives information that may be precious for a future pregnancy. The placental pathology report includes a gross and microscopic description with a final diagnosis. The provider can review the pathological diagnosis with the pathologist if needed.

It is of paramount importance the recognition of the source of the inflammatory response: it can be either maternal or fetal. When the inflammatory response is fetal, there are associations with neurological impairment in the offspring. Fetal inflammation of the umbilical cord is a strong marker of fetal infection.

The location and characteristics of inflammation should be documented. The topography is essential to determine if the inflammatory response is maternal or fetal. Chorioamnionitis, deciduitis, and inflammation of the chorionic plate is a maternal inflammatory response. In contrast, choriositis and inflammation of the umbilical cord and the chorionic vessels (on the chorionic plate of the placenta) is of fetal origin. As previously said, there is evidence that fetal sequelae are associated with fetal inflammation.

The gross examination may reveal the opacification of the membranes (loss of the shiny surface of the amnion), and the color may change from transparent to off-white, yellowish, or greenish. The site of membrane rupture is the most important to check microscopically because it is where the inflammation process is usually more prominent, as well as around the site of insertion into the placental plate. White spots can suggest Candida spp. infection.

There are specific grading and staging systems for the maternal and fetal inflammatory response (Amsterdam

- Stage 1: the presence of neutrophils in the chorion or subchorionic space; 2: the presence of neutrophils in the chorionic connective tissue or amnion; 3: necrotizing chorioamnionitis and epithelial necrosis of the amnion

- Grade 1: small clusters of maternal neutrophils, found in chorion laeve, chorionic plate, subchorionic fibrin, amnion; 2: three or more confluent groups of 10-20 neutrophils (microabscesses)

**Subchorial Inflammation: It**is the earliest form of inflammation and is defined by the presence of neutrophils between the decidua and chorion levae; it does not necessarily imply the presence of chorioamnionitis. In the early phases, there is a patchy accumulation of leukocytes, accumulation of fibrin at the choriodecidual interface in the decidua. Extension of the infiltrate into the chorionic layer is called chorionitis and can be followed by the involvement of the amniotic layer (chorioamnionitis).

**Chorioamnionitis**refers to the presence of inflammation in the chorion and amnion, and it is the result of ascending microbial infection from the lower genital tract to the sterile amniotic cavity potentially endangering the fetus.

**Acute Villitis:**It is a specific gross and histologic feature of acute inflammation of the placental villi. It is diagnosed histologically with the presence of neutrophilic abscesses in the placental parenchyma, often associated with neutrophilic chorioamnionitis. Acute villitis is a typical feature of a bacterial infection, such as listeria or streptococcal infection.

**Funisitis**is the inflammatory response occurring in the umbilical cord. Acute funisitis, along with acute chorionic vasculitis, represent the fetal inflammatory response syndrome. Topographically it can present with neutrophils into the umbilical vein (or acute phlebitis), the umbilical arteries (or acute arteritis), or infiltration into the Wharton jelly. Acute funisitis usually begins with inflammation of the umbilical vein (phlebitis), followed by arteritis. The latter is evidence of an advanced inflammatory response.

Microbial colonization of the amniotic cavity can result in fetal invasion by the respiratory tract, gastrointestinal tract, the skin, the ear through the auditory canal to the middle ear. The fetal examination can reveal severe dermatitis, pneumonitis, and encephalitis. The progression of the microbial agent to fetal circulation could lead to systemic disease. The rate of congenital neonatal sepsis is higher in preterm neonates than in term neonates, probably due to bacterial infection following a preterm rupture of membranes.