Overall, it cannot be stressed enough that proper care of each cleft lip patient takes a collaborative effort between multiple specialties. The techniques and timing of medical interventions and surgeries mentioned here are a consensus in the current practice, but there is a wide variation based on geographic location and resources. Ultimately, treatment must always be tailored to the individual. In all cases, treatment of cleft lip requires an interprofessional team from many disciplines; and often these children need to be followed for many years.

Nurses who look after these infants should be fully aware of the risk of aspiration, airway obstruction, and difficulties with feeding. There is no single method of feeding that works in all children and the mother should be educated on the different techniques to help the infant latch on the nipple. Similarly, there is no one ideal bottle or nipple that can help infants with cleft lip suck.  In general, the recommendations are a soft nipple that may need to be angled.

As the child grows, he or she may require training from a speech therapist. A nurse practitioner should follow the child as an outpatient and if any issues come up, the interprofessional team should be notified. Most children need countless dental visits to assess dental growth and alignment.

Because of the cost of cleft lip repair easily runs into 6 figures, a social worker should be involved to ensure that no child is denied care and is provided with all support necessary.

Since facial aesthetics are compromised, most children need some type of emotional support; hence a mental health nurse should provide counseling.

Finally, the mother should be taught about the potential for aspiration and choking. If the infant fails to gain weight, a visit to the pediatrician is highly recommended.

This is one condition where no one should make unilateral decisions about treatment; all issues should be discussed with the interprofessional team first.