HSV-1 and HSV-2 are members of the human herpesvirus family, which also includes varicella-zoster virus (VZV; HHV-3), Epstein-Barr virus (HHV4), cytomegalovirus (HHV-5), HHV-6, HHV-7, and HHV-8 (Kaposi sarcoma-associated herpesvirus). All human herpes viruses except HHV-8 are known to cause encephalitides, though herpes simplex viruses, especially HSV-1 cause the vast majority of herpes encephalitis.

In adults, viral factors, along with host immune responses, determine virulence and invasiveness. After initial infection, the virus establishes latent lifelong infection in the host and remains dormant until reactivated.

The brain gets affected via local spread from a peripheral site or possible viremia. There are presumably three routes by which the HSV-1 is thought to enter the brain from the initial peripheral site of infection. The first path is from the site of primary oro-pharyngeal infection to the brain via trigeminal or olfactory nerves. The second mechanism involves the same neuronal pathways from the reactivation of an initial infection at the periphery. The last mechanism is purely due to the reactivation of the latent in-situ HSV -1 in the brain. Viremia is well-documented in neonates and immunocompromised patients. The primary infection causes encephalitis in most children. Neonatal encephalitis could be either due to primary infection or secondary infection due to viremia and multisystem involvement. In neonates, primary infection is almost always acquired due to perinatal exposure during labor or post-delivery.

Increased susceptibility to herpes infections is seen with defective molecular signaling in Toll-like receptors-3 (TLR-3) pathways, alteration in MHC class 1 allotype, and the high-affinity receptor/ligand pair KIR2DL2/HLA-C1 and the CD16A-158V/F dimorphism.