In gestationally more mature infants, conservative management of a PDA may be sufficient to support the infant while awaiting spontaneous closure. Conservative management includes careful fluid restriction (110 to 130ml/kg/d while monitoring urine output) and increasing peak end-expiratory pressure (PEEP) to treat pulmonary edema. Diuretics are controversial due to lack of evidence that they improve outcomes in very premature infants, may prevent PDA closure, and cause electrolyte derangements which can be difficult to manage in the extremely premature infant.

Pharmacologic treatment with indomethacin, ibuprofen, or acetaminophen/paracetamol should be considered for preterm infants with a symptomatic PDA. Infants who are born weighing greater than 1000 grams are unlikely to require pharmacologic therapy to close the ductus. Although the ductus in a preterm infant > 1000g at birth does not close as quickly as in a healthy term infant (median time for closure is 7 days in infants >1000g), the vast majority close spontaneously prior to hospital discharge and do not require medication.

For those infants who are symptomatic despite conservative management (increasing PEEP and restricting fluid), there are three choices for pharmacologic treatment: indomethacin, ibuprofen, and acetaminophen/paracetamol. Indomethacin typically is given in 3 doses, 12 hours apart. A fourth dose can be given 24 hours after the third to ensure closure. Ibuprofen typically is given in 3 doses, 24 hours apart. Indomethacin and ibuprofen have a fairly equivalent efficacy (around 66% to 70%). In resistant cases, a second course of medication may be considered, but cumulative effects on renal function should be evaluated before embarking on a second course. The side effects of indomethacin and ibuprofen are similar, but indomethacin has been associated with more concerns for gut perfusion and necrotizing enterocolitis. However, in a large multi-center randomized controlled trial, no increase in necrotizing enterocolitis in infants fed small (15ml/kg/d) amounts of milk during treatment with indomethacin when compared with infants who were fasted.

Acetaminophen/paracetamol shows promise for treating a patent ductus arterious. Multiple small studies show close equivalence to indomethacin and ibuprofen, although it may be less effective in infants previously treated with indomethacin or ibuprofen or in the smallest infants. It is administered intravenously 15mg/kg/dose every 6 hours for 3 to 8 days, and most studies were 3 days, continuing to 6 days if closure was not achieved. Liver enzymes should be monitored for toxicity.

If the PDA is hemodynamically significant despite pharmacologic therapy and results in increased respiratory support, renal impairment, or if there are contraindications to use of pharmacologic therapy, surgical ligation can be performed.