Signs of Alexander disease can be demonstrated on CT and MRI, with MRI being the preferred imaging modality because of its sensitivity. Findings usually demonstrate cerebral white matter changes and swelling. The disease begins anteriorly and extends posteriorly. The subcortical U-fibers are generally spared early on in the course.

**MRI - typical features:**Demonstrates abnormal signal in the following locations (enhancement may be seen in the same areas):

- Symmetric bifrontal white matter

- Periventricular rim

- Caudate head and less commonly globus pallidus, thalamus, and brain stem

Of note, there is relative sparing of the temporal and occipital lobe white matter.

MRI criteria for diagnosis: Four out of five required to make a diagnosis.

- White matter changes more pronounced in the front.

- Periventricular rim abnormalities

- Basal ganglia and thalami abnormalities

- Brainstem abnormalities

- Contest enhancement of one of the following structures (ventricular lining, frontal white matter, optic chiasm, basal ganglia, thalamus, fornix, dentate nucleus, brainstem)

**MRI- atypical features:**Demonstrates abnormal signal in the following locations:

- Upper cervical cord and medulla

- Pons, superior/middle cerebellar peduncle

- Ventricular garlands

**Magnetic resonance spectroscopy:**

- Increased choline in the basal ganglia

- Reduce N-acetylaspartylglutamate (NAAG) in the frontal white matter

- Elevated lactate in the frontal white matter

The diagnosis of Alexander disease is primarily based on imaging features and clinical presentation. The diagnosis is typically confirmed genetically because of the variability of this disease. When children with Alexander disease present with typical clinical symptoms, the diagnosis can be made if four out of the five MRI criteria are met. The MRI findings are also invaluable when genetic testing is equivocal. But in children with atypical imaging features, the imaging findings cannot exclude the diagnosis. Thus, genetic testing is necessary to confirm the diagnosis in children with atypical imaging findings. In this regard, tests for the most frequent mutations (exons 1,4,8) are available in the clinical setting, and it is possible to resort to the sequencing of the entire gene in the case of recurrent mutations. The genetic study is also practicable in the field of prenatal diagnosis.