Multiple side effects are associated with CAR T-cell therapy. The most common two are cytokine-release syndrome(CRS) and neurologic toxicities, also known as CAR-related encephalopathy syndrome (CRES).

Cytokine-release syndrome is the most common adverse effect of CAR T-cell therapy. It presents with high fever, low blood pressure, hypoxia, with or without multi-organ toxicities including cardiovascular, gastrointestinal, respiratory, renal, hematological, and nervous system. The trigger for this condition is the activation of T-cells on the engagement of their T-cell receptors or CARs with cognate antigens expressed by the tumor cell. It typically occurs within the first week after CAR T-cell therapy and generally peaks within one to two weeks of cell administration. The management of cytokine-release syndrome has as its basis the grade which includes components of temperature, systolic blood pressure, oxygen saturation, and possible toxicity to other organs. The primary points for management include supportive care (ie, acetaminophen and hypothermia blanket for fever; intravenous fluid for dehydration or hypotension; supplemental oxygen for hypoxia), corticosteroids and Interleukin-6 antagonists.

CAR-related encephalopathy syndrome is characterized by typical manifestations similar to toxic encephalopathy with early signs of diminished attention, language disturbance and impaired handwriting. Other symptoms and signs include confusion, disorientation, agitation, aphasia, somnolence and tremors. The pathogenesis of CRES is unclear for now. It typically happens within the first five days after administration. The management of CRES is also based on the grade with components of neurological assessment score by CARTOX-10 (CAR-T-cell-therapy-associated toxicity 10-point neurological assessment), intracranial pressure and presence of seizure or motor weakness. The managements of CRES are similar to CRS which are primarily supportive care, corticosteroids and Interleukin-6 antagonists. To minimize the risk of aspiration and increase cerebral venous flow, the head of the patient’s bed is recommended to be elevated. Neurology consultation and evaluation are also warranted.

Other reported adverse effects are summarized as below based on system.

- Constitutional: Fever, rigor, malaise, fatigue, anorexia, arthralgia.

- Neurological: Headache, change in the level of consciousness, delirium, aphasia, apraxia, ataxia, hallucination, tremor, dysmetria, myoclonus, facial nerve palsy, seizure.

- Hepatic: Transaminitis, hyperbilirubinemia.

- Hematologic: Anemia, thrombocytopenia, neutropenia, febrile neutropenia, lymphocytopenia, B-cell aplasia, prolonged prothrombin time, prolonged activated partial thromboplastin time, elevated d-dimer, hypofibrinogenemia, disseminated intravascular coagulation, hemophagocytic lymphohistiocytosis.

- Cardiovascular: Tachycardia, widened pulse pressure, hypotension, arrhythmia, decreased left ventricular ejection fraction, troponinemia, QT prolongation.

- Pulmonary: Tachypnea, hypoxia.

- Renal: Acute kidney injury, hyponatremia, hypokalemia, hypophosphatemia, tumor lysis syndrome.

- Gastrointestinal: Nausea, emesis, diarrhea.

- Musculoskeletal: Myalgia, elevated creatine kinase, weakness.