Retinoblastoma management is complex and requires an interprofessional team approach that includes an ophthalmologist, pediatric oncologist, ocular pathologist, geneticist, allied health professionals, and parents. In almost every case, the patient first presents to the nurse practitioner or primary care provider. Since this is a rare disorder that needs urgent attention, the patient should immediately obtain a referral to an ophthalmologist.

The cornerstone of long term retinoblastoma management is strict adherence to the treatment plan, and a careful follow up at repeated intervals is required after treatment for early diagnosis of recurrence or development of new tumor especially in patients with inherited disease.

Patients require education about the type of treatment, including chemotherapy, surgery, and radiation. The primary care providers should be familiar with the postoperative follow up of these patients and when to refer the patient back to the ophthalmologist.

Since chemotherapy is the mainstay of treatment, the involvement of a pharmacist with experience in oncologic treatment is essential. The pharmacist can verify agent selection, dosing, and perform medication reconciliation, reporting any concerns back to the healthcare team. Since nursing is most likely to be in charge of administering the chemo, a close rapport and open communication between pharmacy and nursing staff are crucial.

All patient management is best in consultation with an experienced ophthalmologist who will be able to provide appropriate support. For patients who adhere and to treatment plan and proper follow up, the prognosis is good.

Retinoblastoma is a challenging diagnosis to manage, and as such, requires an interprofessional team approach, including physicians, specialists, specialty-trained nurses, and pharmacists, all collaborating across disciplines to achieve optimal patient results. [Level 5]