Transplant surgery always involves two surgeries, the donor and the recipient. The approach can be performed in a minimally invasive fashion or, less commonly nowadays, via open surgery for the living donor. Implantation in the recipient is performed in an open fashion, where the kidney is placed heterotopically in the pelvis, anastomosing the vessels to the external iliac vessels and the ureter to the bladder. The iliac vessels are preferentially exposed retroperitoneally as the peritoneum is retracted medially. However, intra-peritoneal placement is also acceptable.

Laparoscopic and/or robotic surgery are both considered minimally invasive and can be used to procure either kidney. Access is gained to the intraperitoneal space for port placement. For the left kidney, the ureter and gonadal vein are identified at the pelvic brim after the left colon is freed from its peritoneal attachments and traced cephalad to identify and isolate the renal vein and artery. The adrenal gland is separated from the upper pole of the kidney, and the adrenal vein is divided. Once the kidney is fully mobilized and only attached via the artery, vein, and ureter, a slightly larger incision (often the Pfannenstiel) is made to prepare for expedient extraction. The distal ureter is divided between clips, and the hilar vessels are divided with a laparoscopic vascular-load stapler. Some differences in dissection exist depending on which kidney is procured. For the right kidney, the liver is retracted, and the right colon and duodenum are partially mobilized to access the kidney. Following extraction, the organ is then passed off of the field and prepared for implantation on the back-table.

In the open surgical technique for living donor procurement, a subcostal incision is made, and the retroperitoneal space is exposed. The ureter is followed down to the iliac vessels and ultimately divided there before extraction. The kidney is isolated on its vascular pedicle, and once the recipient team is ready, the renal artery and vein are transected, and the organ is delivered to the back-bench. The tributary stumps are then ligated or oversewn. Any residual perinephric fat is pruned as the kidney is prepared for implantation.

**Organ Preservation**

Once the kidneys are procured, they must be preserved before eventual implantation. During this process (and as soon as the heart stops beating in the donor and normal circulatory perfusion is halted), the kidneys experience ischemia. Cold ischemia time begins as soon as normal perfusion stops and ends when the kidney is reperfused in its recipient – the kidney should be on the ice for as much of this time as possible to diminish metabolic demand and minimize injury.  Warm ischemia time is considered more harmful to the organ. It is classically described as the “sew-in” time when the organ is removed from cold storage until it is ultimately reperfused following vascular anastomosis.  It is important to remember that there is also a period of upfront warm ischemia involved in the DCD donation process between when the patient experiences circulatory arrest and the aorta is cannulated and flushed with the preservative solution and the organs are topically cooled with ice.

During cold ischemia, the organ is stored in a static cold solution commonly used in the United States known as the University of Wisconsin Preservation Solution.

Organs can also be placed on machine perfusion for preservation. This is a newer technology, and studies suggest an improved risk of delayed graft function with the use of pulsatile machine perfusion.