In addition to histopathological examination of a skin biopsy, diagnostic tools for trichodysplasia spinulosa may include polymerase chain reaction or electron microscopy. Serologic tests are not necessary to establish the diagnosis of trichodysplasia spinulosa. Still, they may be indicated if an underlying immune-compromising condition has not previously been identified for any patient presenting with trichodysplasia spinulosa.

**Polymerase chain reaction**: PCR is considered the “gold standard” diagnostic test for trichodysplasia spinulosa when used in concert with clinical observation and histology. Utilizing a tissue sample of the affected skin or spicules removed from the affected skin, quantitative PCR demonstrates high copy numbers of the TSPyV genome. Low copy numbers and samples from unaffected areas are not diagnostically useful as TSPyV has been identified in various tissues types, stated previously, to include individuals with no clinical evidence of trichodysplasia spinulosa.

**Electron microscopy**: On transmission electron microscopy, the affected tissue will have intranuclear clusters of icosahedral viral inclusions with a “bumpy” appearance, around 40 nanometers in size.

**Serology**: For diagnostic purposes, serology does not have significant utility based on the ubiquitous nature of this virus, as discussed previously. However, given the clear correlation between compromised immunity and this condition, any patient without a prior diagnosis should undergo a thorough history and physical. Further testing for immunodeficiency should be guided by clinical judgment but may include a complete blood count, HIV test, peripheral blood smear, or antibody titers.