The initial approach to management is the stabilization of the airway and breathing with oxygen and oral mechanical ventilation when needed. Peripheral IV or intraosseous infusion (IO) access should be obtained. Central venous access may be required in the setting of shock if there is difficulty securing peripheral venous access, or the patient needs prolonged vasopressor therapy or large-volume resuscitation. Immediate treatment with intravenous (IV) fluid should be initiated, followed by vasopressor therapy, if needed, to maintain tissue perfusion. Depending on the underlying etiology of shock, specific therapies might also be needed.

Septic shock - initial aggressive fluid resuscitation with IV isotonic crystalloids 30 mL/kg within 3 hrs with additional fluid based on frequent reassessment, empiric antibiotic therapy within one hr.

Anaphylactic shock - aggressive IV fluid resuscitation with 4 to 6 L of IV crystalloids. Stop the offending agent, intramuscular epinephrine, antihistamines, corticosteroids, nebulized albuterol.

In adrenal crisis - judicious fluid resuscitation, IV dexamethasone.

Hypovolemic shock - obtain two large-bore IVs or central line. Place the patient in the Trendelenburg position. Aggressive IV fluid resuscitation with 2 to 4 L of isotonic crystalloids. PRBC transfusion if ongoing bleed. Appropriate medical or interventional strategies to treat the underlying etiology. Continue with isotonic crystalloids and use vasopressors if needed

Obstructive shock - the judicious use of IV crystalloids. If shock persists, early initiation of vasopressors-norepinephrine is the first choice and add vasopressin if refractory. Continue IV fluids but monitor very closely.

If acute massive pulmonary embolism -thrombolysis. Judicious use of IV fluids has a paradoxical worsening of hypotension; it may develop due to severe right ventricular dilatation and septal bowing compromising left ventricle filling.

If tension pneumothorax - needle thoracotomy followed by tube thoracotomy. If cardiac tamponade-pericardiocentesis, significant clinical improvement is possible, even with minimal fluid removal).

Cardiogenic shock - if unstable tachyarrhythmia or bradyarrhythmias, initiate ACLS protocol and cardioversion. Judicious use of IV fluids in the absence of pulmonary edema. Consider inotropes (dobutamine is the most commonly used agent) or intra-aortic balloon pump (IABP), if refractory shock, and vasopressor (norepinephrine) with inotropes.

If STEMI - consider thrombolysis or coronary revascularization procedures and or IABP.