The nasal cavity, and the turbinates, in particular, are innervated by the autonomic nervous system; competition between sympathetic and parasympathetic stimulation determines the amounts of secretomotor and vasodilatory activity that occur. The parasympathetic neurons arise within the superior salivary nucleus of the midbrain. From there, the parasympathetic fibers follow the facial nerve, separating from the main motor tract at the geniculate ganglion to become the greater superficial petrosal nerve (GSPN). The GSPN synapses in the sphenopalatine ganglion then proceed through the sphenopalatine foramen. The postganglionic parasympathetic fibers then ramify into the turbinate mucosa and submucosa. These fibers secrete acetylcholine, secretoneurin, and vasoactive intestinal peptide, leading to mucus production, vasodilation, and nasal congestion.

The sympathetic neurons originate in the hypothalamus, exit the cranium within the cervical spine, and travel via the first four cervical nerves to synapse within the superior cervical ganglion. From there, the sympathetic fibers travel to the carotid plexus and thence form the deep petrosal nerve, which in turn joins the GSPN to form the Vidian nerve, also known as the nerve of the pterygoid canal. Postsynaptic sympathetic neurons enter the mucosa and submucosa of the turbinates, secreting norepinephrine and neuropeptide Y, which cause vasoconstriction and decreased airway resistance.

Beyond the autonomic innervation, however, somatic and sensation in the turbinates is critically important as well. The olfactory neuroepithelium of the superior, supreme, and middle turbinates allows dissolved particulate odorants to bind with olfactory receptors and transmit signals through the cribriform plate of the skull base via the olfactory projections of the first cranial nerve back to the olfactory cortex of the ventral forebrain, which also accounts for a substantial amount of the human sense of taste.