Sexual abuse of children is the involvement of children or adolescents in sexual activities that he or she does not fully comprehend and can include exhibitionism, fondling, oral-genital contact, and rectal or vaginal penetration. By adulthood, 26% of girls and 5% of boys experience sexual abuse. It is the healthcare provider's responsibility to advise the parents and enlist help from other medical specialists or child protective services. A variety of nonspecific presenting symptoms including but not limited to pain, anogenital bleeding, vaginal/urethral discharge, dysuria, urinary tract infection, sexualized behavior, and suicidality are possible. It is also common for the initial presentation to be suspected of sexual abuse in the absence of any physical symptoms. In such cases, it is important to be mindful that the assailant is often an individual that is close to the victim, such as a close relative or even the parent. All patients presenting within 72 hours of the suspected abuse or presenting with any concerning symptoms should be evaluated emergently, preferably by a sexual assault nurse examiner or child abuse pediatrician if available. This activity highlights the role of the interprofessional team in caring for these children that have experienced child sexual abuse and neglect.

**Objectives:**
- Review the factors that increase the risk of child abuse.
- Describe the history and physical exam of a child with suspected abuse.
- Summarize the legal and medical management of child abuse.
- Identify the role of the interprofessional team in caring for children that have experienced child sexual abuse and neglect.