Cardioembolic stroke is a devastating disease with a high risk of recurrence and complications if it is not identified and treated properly. The treatment involves multiple levels of evaluation, drugs, and therapy to optimize patient recovery. An interprofessional team of clinicians, nurses, pharmacists, and physical therapists is needed to treat these patients effectively.

Most hospitals have an interprofessional team dedicated to the management of patients with stroke. This stroke team consisting of a cardiologist, a neurologist, a dedicated radiologist (potentially an interventional neuro-radiologist if thrombectomy is warranted), and an internal medicine physician, is vital in improving outcomes. The clinicians need to maintain a high degree of suspicion for underlying arrhythmias or cardiac diseases that can lead to an embolic etiology of the stroke. Due diligence with thorough evaluation is warranted to rule out this disease.

In addition, a stroke nurse is needed to monitor the patient's neurologic status during the hospital stay and to assist the medical team in educating the patient to prevent a recurrence. The clinical pharmacist is needed to assist the team in educating the patient on drug compliance and to adjust medications to minimize adverse outcomes. An integrative and collaborative interprofessional team can greatly improve outcomes for patients with this disease. [Level V]

Current evidence regarding when to initiate treatment is still sketchy. Trials such as the TIMING study are likely to add valuable information to the existing knowledge base.