Cerebral salt wasting often occurs after significant CNS pathology such as aneurysmal subarachnoid hemorrhage. Care for such patients must be coordinated between multiple specialties as the treatment of cerebral salt wasting may include additional fluid volume which can exacerbate issues including cerebral edema, pulmonary edema, heart failure, and renal dysfunction. Additional attention should be paid to the carrier fluids for the other medications and to avoid infusing too much free water to the patient. Patients can require continued management of their hyponatremia for weeks to months or more after the original insult. During treatment, the patient's GCS and neurological exam must be continually assessed. The outcomes for most patients with cerebral salt wasting not due to a subarachnoid hemorrhage are good. However, some patients may continue to have mild neurological deficits despite optimal treatment.

Outcomes can be improved with the participation of an interprofessional team. Primary care providers, emergency department physicians, neurologists, neurosurgeons, specialty care nurses, and pharmacists can all be involved. Critical care and neuroscience nurses caring out treatments, monitor patients, provide education to patients and their families, and provide updates on the patient's condition to the team. Pharmacists assist the team by reviewing medications prescribed and drug-drug interactions that can exacerbate the condition, and reporting to the clinician team if any therapy changes are necessary. [Level 5]