# Continuing Education Activity

Jejunoileal atresia (JIA) is one of the common causes of intestinal obstruction in neonates. It has been generally reported that JIA occurs due to a vascular accident involving mesenteric blood supply in-utero. The atresia can be found anywhere on the small bowel, either as solitary or multiple lesions. Advancement in pediatric surgical techniques, pediatric anesthesia, intensive care unit (ICU) care, and nutritional supports over the years has led to better overall survival in patients with intestinal atresia. This activity highlights the role of the interprofessional team in the treatment of jejunoileal atresia, including improvement in surgical approaches, nutritional support, and postoperative care.

**Objectives:**
- Identify the etiology of jejunoileal atresia.
- Review the appropriate evaluation of jejunoileal atresia.
- Outline the management options available for jejunoileal atresia.
- Summarize and explain the role of an interprofessional team involving the surgeons, anesthetists, nutritionists, neonatologists, and cardiologists for patients with cardiac anomalies in improving care coordination and communication to advance the overall patients outcomes in patients with jejunoileal atresia.

# Introduction

Ileal and jejunal atresias are usually described together as jejunoileal atresia (JIA). JIA is a common cause of intestinal obstruction in neonates.

Evaluation can be initiated before birth with prenatal diagnosis using ultrasound findings of evidence of intestinal obstruction reported in 29% to 50% of cases.

Advances in pediatric anesthesia, pediatric surgery, intensive care unit (ICU) care, and nutritional supports over the years have led to better overall survival in patients with intestinal atresia.

# Etiology

The cause of jejunoileal atresia (JIA) has been attributed to an intrauterine vascular accident involving branches of mesenteric vessels in the midgut.

Grosfeld classification systems have described four types of intestinal atresia.

# Epidemiology

The estimated prevalence of jejunoileal atresia (JIA) ranges from 1 in 5000 to 1 in 14,000 live births. About 33% of the affected children are born prematurely, and JIA occurs equally in both sex.

# Pathophysiology

Structural and functional abnormalities have been reported as part of the sequelae of the ischemic changes from the vascular accident seen in patients with jejunoileal atresia (JIA) in addition to the gross changes in the anatomy of the intestine.

The extent of JIA has been shown to depend on the location and size of vascular compromise, as demonstrated by a complete separation of the atretic ends of the bowel and the accompanying mesenteric defect between the ends seen when mesenteric vessels are disrupted close to the origin. In situations of incomplete vascular compromise, intestinal stenosis has been reported instead. Studies have shown that JIA is mostly due to local vascular events that can occur in situations that favor occlusion or kinking of blood supply to the intestine, such as internal hernias, volvuli, intussusceptions, different from duodenal atresia, which is usually seen in cases with associated malformation of other systems thereby implicating general factors such as fetal hypoxia instead of local factors as responsible.

Historically, type II and type III JIA with blind ends have high mortality due to functional obstruction from defective peristalsis after direct anastomosis of proximal and distal blind ends.

# Histopathology

The histopathology for jejunoileal atresia (JIA) is a proximal distended hypertrophied blind loop of the intestine with normal-appearing villi but has defective peristalsis.

# History and Physical

A complete history and physical examination are needed for the diagnosis of jejunoileal atresia. History includes gestational age at birth, complications during pregnancy, family history, co-morbidities, illicit drug use, the result of prenatal screening such as ultrasound evidence of obstruction like polyhydramnios, dilated bowel, and congenital anomalies such as down syndrome. Perinatal history, including problems with the delivery, feeding history, onset of abdominal distension, bilious or non-bilious emesis, and passage of meconium, should be documented. Physical examination should include a general assessment of the severity of illness, abdominal distension, evidence of peritonitis, respiratory compromise from aspiration or splitting of the diaphragm, signs of dehydration, jaundice, and congenital anomalies down syndrome, congenital heart disease, and anorectal malformation.

# Evaluation

Intestinal atresia may be suspected in-utero with suspicious prenatal ultrasound findings, and in a neonate, obstructive symptoms such as abdominal distension, bilious emesis are usually the presenting symptoms.

Prenatal detection of jejunoileal atresia (JIA) on ultrasound, based on the evidence of intestinal obstruction, has been documented in some series, with the rate of detection ranging from 29% to 50%.

Postnatally, JIA presents with signs and symptoms of intestinal obstruction such as abdominal distension, emesis, and in some cases, delayed passage of meconium. Normal appearing meconium may be seen, but most often, light-colored plugs are passed from the rectum. As seen in type IIIb, blood may be seen in the rectum in cases of distal bowel ischemic.

Radiographic examination of the abdomen with plain abdominal X-ray using swallowed air as a contrast is a useful diagnostic tool. For proximal JIA, there are presences of a few dilated proximal bowel with no distal gas. Intraperitoneal calcification can be seen in prenatal bowel perforation or meconium peritonitis. Malrotation is ruled out using an upper gastrointestinal series contrast study. A contrast enema is used to reveal the atypical appearance of the colon, as may be seen in meconium ileus or Hirschsprung disease. If the contrast passes into the dilated loop of the bowel, then atresia is ruled out. Other studies such as an echocardiogram, renal ultrasound, rectal biopsy, and cystic fibrosis screening may be used to evaluate patients for associated congenital anomalies such as cardiac malformation, renal anomalies, Hirschsprung disease, and cystic fibrosis.

# Treatment / Management

Following confirmation or suspicion of the diagnosis of jejunoileal atresia, preoperative management includes decompression with a nasogastric tube, fluid and electrolyte resuscitation, and intravenous broad-spectrum antibiotics in the event of perforation or evidence of infection.

The surgical approach depends on the location of the lesion, the anatomy, intraoperative condition, and the remaining bowel length.

Two specific caveats are the child with multiple segmental atresias and the child with the atretic lesions separated by a short segment. Primary surgical repair is usually performed for multiple atresias to preserve bowel length (generally with a proximal protective diversion to allow the numerous distal anastomosis time to heal). In patients with the atresia separated by a concise segment, resection of the short atresia with primary anastomosis is advocated to decrease the number of intestinal anastomoses, provided the patient has sufficiently normal intestinal length.

# Differential Diagnosis

Conditions such as intestinal malrotation with midgut volvulus, internal hernia, congenital small left colon syndrome, Hirschsprung disease, meconium ileus, colonic atresia present with signs and symptoms of bowel obstruction similar to jejunoileal (JIA). Many patients with malrotation may be asymptomatic but are at increased risk of midgut volvulus. Volvulus can present at any age but are seen in 30% of children less than one month old.

# Prognosis

The mortality for patients with jejunoileal atresia (JIA) has approached zero over the past several years.

In type IIIb JIA, poor outcomes are associated with prematurity, low birth weight, and associated anomalies.

# Complications

Postoperative complications include sepsis and anatomic leak with the varying rate among studies and the reported rate of 5% to 8% and 5% to 7%, respectively, in two of the retrospective studies.

# Postoperative and Rehabilitation Care

While awaiting the return of bowel function, intravenous hydration and decompression with a nasogastric or orogastric tube are continued. Enteral feeding is started with the return of bowel function, and the feeding rate is advanced as tolerated until the goal feed rate is achieved. Oral intake is resumed when the patient is awake and able to suck. In some select patients, parental nutrition is started in the immediate postoperative period, while some patients will require parenteral nutrition later in the postoperative course due to prolonged ileus.

# Deterrence and Patient Education

Jejunoileal atresia (JIA) is a condition where there is no opening or passage through a segment of the small intestine (jejunum and atresia). It occurs in 1 in 5000 to 1 in 14000 live births and equally in males and females. It is generally accepted that jejunoileal atresia is caused by an in-utero vascular accident during fetal development. It may be associated with other anomalies such as cystic fibrosis and cardiac abnormalities.

Prenatal screening with ultrasound demonstrates evidence of intestinal obstruction in 29% to 50% of cases. At delivery, the infant will not be fed if this diagnosis is suspected prenatally. However, if the infant is fed, there will be episodes of emesis and abdominal distension.

Diagnosis is made using an abdominal radiograph, which showed air in the proximal small intestine and no air distally. Upper gastrointestinal series and contrast enema are done to exclude other conditions such as malrotation and Hirschsprung disease. Conditions that mimic this condition are malrotation with midgut volvulus, internal hernia, meconium ileus, Hirschsprung’s disease.

Treatment is with surgical intervention. Following surgical intervention, the infant is first stabilized by rehydration and correction of electrolytes and placement of nasogastric or orogastric tubes to remove fluid from the obstructed stomach and small intestine. The procedure is performed either through a laparoscopic-assisted approach or through an open surgical approach with a single incision on the abdomen. The blockage in the small intestine is identified, and the abnormal part of the intestine is resected and removed, after which the proximal and distal ends are joined together.

Postoperatively, nasogastric tube drainage is continued, along with nothing to eat by month. It will take the bowel days or even weeks to begin normal function. Oral feeding is started when there is a small fluid coming out through the nasogastric tube.  Pain is controlled with acetaminophen or ibuprofen, or opioids for more intense pain. The risk associated with surgical anastomosis is a leak at the bowel anastomosis, wound infection, prolonged recovery of the bowel, and shortened intestinal length.

At home, the child continues a normal diet for age, unrestricted activity, and the incisions can be washed with water and soap. Do not submerge under water until at least a week after surgery, when the wound must have healed. Give pain medication as needed for pain control. Call your doctor or bring your child to the hospital if you notice redness, warmth, or drainage from the incision, vomiting, and fever. Follow up with your surgeon in 2 to 4 weeks after surgery for wound checks.

# Pearls and Other Issues

Historically, jejunoileal atresia is associated with high mortality and morbidity. However, advances in pediatric anesthesia, surgical technique, intensive care unit (ICU) care, and nutritional supports over the years have led to better overall survival in patients with intestinal atresia. Resection of the dilated proximal intestine with end-to-end anastomosis with or without tapering of the proximal intestine is one of the advances in surgical techniques that have been found to prevent the high mortality associated with the dysmotility of the proximal dilated bowel and the resultant chronic obstruction. Understanding the proximal bowel dysfunction followed with the improvement in the surgical technique, along with total parenteral nutrition, has been vital in improving the prognosis of jejunoileal atresia.

Prevention of jejunoileal atresia might not be possible. Still, close monitoring of high-risk pregnancy and prenatal screening with ultrasound would be helpful for the early diagnosis and prevention of complications.

# Enhancing Healthcare Team Outcomes

Jejunoileal atresia (JIA) is the most common cause of intestinal obstruction in neonates. It has been generally reported that JIA occurs due to a vascular accident involving mesenteric blood supply in-utero. The atresia can be found anywhere in the small bowel, either as solitary or multiple lesions. Advancement in pediatric surgical techniques, pediatric anesthesia, intensive care unit (ICU) care, and nutritional supports over the years has led to better overall survival in patients with intestinal atresia.

While the surgeon may have the primary responsibility for the patient's care, other members of the interprofessional team include neonatologists, pediatric anesthesiologists, nutritionists, pediatric nurses, other consultants like cardiologists or pulmonologists for patients with associated cardiac anomalies and respiratory problems from cystic fibrosis. Each member of the team contributes to the overall care of the patients. Nurses closely monitor the patient's vital signs and provide nursing care. Neonatologists provide neonatal care, especially for patients admitted to neonatal intensive care units. Pharmacists are an important team member to ensure that patient is on the appropriate analgesics, and maintain antibiotics stewardship. Nutritionists determine the nutritional requirement of each patient and make an appropriate recommendation. Consultants such as cardiologists and pulmonologists are tasked with managing cardiac and pulmonary complications from associated anomalies.