Embryonic development of the pelvis is complex, and it begins around day 28 of intra-embryonic life. Initially, after fertilization of the egg, blastula formation, and its implantation into the uterine wall, three germ layers are formed: the endoderm (the inner layer), the mesoderm (the middle layer), and the ectoderm (the outer layer). Subsequently, mesoderm differentiates into three components on each side of the midline: paraxial mesoderm (most medial), intermediate mesoderm, and lateral plates (most lateral). The paraxial mesoderm develops into the axial skeleton, muscles, tendons, cartilage, and dermis. Intermediate mesoderm gives rise to female reproductive organs and the urogenital system. Lateral plates develop into visceral and parietal pleura, appendicular skeleton (limbs, shoulder, and pelvic girdles), and blood vessels.

By approximately the third week of development, the paraxial mesoderm begins organizing into segments, or somitomeres in the head, and somites from occiput caudally. By the fifth week, there are a total of 42-44 pairs of somites arranged symmetrically on both sides of the neural tube. Ventral and medial wall cells of somites move more medially and surround the neural tube, eventually forming the vertebral bodies and ribs. Dorsal and lateral wall cells of somites develop into muscle precursor cells. Other cells of somites move beneath the ectoderm and form the dermis of the back. Muscle precursor cells create connective tissue called the mesenchyme.

Towards the end of the fourth week of development, the lateral plate mesoderm protrudes through the lateral body wall, creating four limb buds covered by the ectoderm (the outer germ layer). The limbs grow in proximal to distal orientation. Intermediate mesoderm grows from cranial to caudal in paired structures, the mesonephric ducts with nephrogenic cords (and paramesonephric ducts). Even though sex is determined at fertilization, morphological characteristics start appearing only by the 7th week of intrauterine life. The gender of the developing fetus is determined primarily by the Y chromosome, which consists of testis-determining gene/factor, which is known as SRY (sex-determining region) on the short arm of the Y chromosome (Yp11).

Initially, gonads appear as ridges on the nephrogenic cords. Primordial germ cells primarily originate in epiblast but migrate to endoderm cells within the yolk sac close to allantois approximately the 3rd week. Then migrate along the dorsal mesentery of the hindgut. Epithelial germ cells invade gonadal ridges causing proliferation and development of the primitive sex cords (medullary and cortical) at the 6th week of the development. It is important to note that if the germ cells fail to reach the ridges, there will be no development of gonads in the developing fetus. The cortical sex cords become the ovaries, while medullary sex cords eventually disintegrate. Mesonephric ducts degenerate in females in the absence of the Y chromosome. Paramesonephric ducts give rise to fallopian tubes (with its distal parts remaining open to the abdominal cavity with fimbriae), and the uterine cavity after distal portions of the bilateral paramesonephric ducts fuse around week 9. The tip of the fused ducts invades the urogenital sinus forming the sinovaginal bulb, which eventually cannulates, creating the distal part of the vagina by week 20. Therefore, the proximal part of the vagina (the fornices) is derived from the distal part of the fused paramesonephric ducts.

When paramesonephric ducts fail to fuse, a didelphic uterus is formed with paired uterine bodies and cervices. A relatively common condition is uterus bicornis, resulting from incomplete obliteration of the uterine septum after fusion of the paramesonephric ducts during embryological development. Septate uterus results from incomplete disintegration of the septum between 2 paramesonephric ducts.

The mesonephric duct (Wolffian duct) totally disappears in a female and its remnant is the Gartner’s duct. Some of the components of the mesonephric duct remain what are seen as epoophoron & paroophoron. A tiny caudal portion of this Gartner’s duct is found in the wall of the uterus or vagina in the form of Gartner’s cysts.