- Idiopathic autoimmune adrenocortical insufficiency is the most common cause of Addison disease.

- Symptoms of Addison disease can be non-specific and, therefore, can be difficult to recognize. A high index of suspicion is required to make this diagnosis.

- Plasma cortisol < 3 mcg/dL at 8  with a simultaneous elevation of the plasma ACTH level >200 pg/mL establishes the diagnosis.

- Primary adrenal insufficiency diagnosis should be considered in acutely ill patients presenting volume depletion, hypotension, hyponatremia, and hyperkalemia.

- It is important to consider the possibility of adrenal insufficiency in critically ill patients who failed to improve with resuscitation with fluid administration, particularly in the presence of hyperpigmentation, hyponatremia, or hyperkalemia.

- In an Addisonian crisis, treatment is a priority and should not be delayed for diagnostic confirmation; a delayed treatment can be fatal.

- The treatment of choice for adrenal crisis is hydrocortisone; this has both glucocorticoid and mineralocorticoid properties.

- Glucocorticoid doses should be increased in the presence of fever, infection, or other stresses.

- Titrate the glucocorticoid dose to the lowest possible dose, which can control symptoms and minimize the adverse effects.

- Thyroid hormone treatment can precipitate an adrenal crisis since the thyroid hormone can increase the hepatic clearance of cortisol.

- Serum cortisol, plasma ACTH, plasma aldosterone, and plasma renin levels should all be obtained before performing the ACTH stimulation test.

- Addison disease due to autoimmune adrenalitis can develop another autoimmune disorder.