PPS has been proposed to cause this characteristic maculopathy by direct toxicity to the retinal pigment epithelium (RPE) or choroid, although other mechanisms have been proposed. The former is thought to be due to PPS interfering with the interaction of the retina's extracellular matrix (ECM) or its regulators, notably fibroblast growth factor (FGF). The second is postulated to be due to changes in the choroidal vasculature, specifically the choriocapillaris. These findings are perhaps best supported by imaging which consistently finds a primary abnormality in these layers, as well as the finding of progression despite drug cessation.

The ECM in the retina includes a specific area, the interphotoreceptor matrix (IPM), which, especially via its large glycosylated proteins, including chondroitin sulfate, dermatan sulfate, SPACR, and SPACRCAN, is responsible for intracellular communication, the delivery of signaling molecules, nutrients and metabolism, maintenance of retina adhesion, photoreceptor alignment, and the transport regulation of oxygen.

PPS has been shown to interact with cartilage proteoglycans in experimental animal models of arthritis to the extent that it was approved as a disease-modifying antirheumatic agent for veterinarians.

One additional component of the ECM and IPM is the FGFs which bind to heparin and heparan sulfate.

When FGF signaling is inhibited in transgenic zebrafish, there is a significant thickening of the RPE layer as the cells grow to contact the outer segments of the photoreceptors.

The differences between FGFR inhibition via chemotherapeutic targeting and the effects of PPS include that the SRF from the former starts an average of 21 days after starting the medication, the SRF will often resolve without discontinuation of the medicine, and there were no changes (in one case report) to choroidal vasculature.

More recent research using optical coherence tomography–angiography (OCT-A) to characterize choroidal vasculature in PPS-exposed patients who have no other findings of PPSM has shown increased vascular flow deficits within the choriocapillaris and decreased choroidal stroma in the deeper Haller and Sattler layers, leading to an increased choroidal vascular index (CVI = choroidal luminal area / luminal + stromal area). As the authors point out, this could be due to the choriocapillaris being a secondary target of PPSM or a secondary effect of the disrupted RPE.

The fact that these flow voids are detectable in patients without other stigmata of the disease lends credence to the choriocapillaris being a primary site of injury, as ischemic changes would only be expected to progress. Further, the evidence that visual acuity is spared despite these changes in the choriocapillaris flow may support this argument as well.

Other proposals for the pathogenesis of PPSM include mitochondrial dysfunction (based on phenotypic similarity) and that there may be an undefined common cause of interstitial cystitis, making the maculopathy unrelated to PPS exposure.

In sum, the ECM of the RPE and the choroidal vasculature contain numerous constituents that either have been shown to be affected by PPS or have theoretical interactions based on the structure of PPS. Therefore, the pathogenesis of PPSM is likely located in this area.