If the PEG tube is not completely dislodged but has been clogged or malfunctioning, the old tube needs to be removed. If the old tube is an endoscopically placed tube with an internal mushroom tip, then gentle traction is applied to the external portion of the tube to remove the internal mushroom. This has to be done with very gentle traction, and excessive force should be avoided at all costs as it can lead to disruption of even a well-formed track. If unusual resistance is felt during the attempted removal of the tube by gentle traction, it is best to remove the tube after endoscopic cutting of the internal bumper/mushroom cap and removal of the rest of the tube through external puling. If the old G-tube has an internal balloon, the balloon is deflated by aspirating fluid through the balloon port which usually consists of 8 to 10 mL of fluid. After this step, once the tube is removed, a similar size PEG tube is prepared to be inserted.

For replacement G-tube, tubes with the balloon tip are usually preferred to minimize the risk of disruption of the old track. A similar diameter PEG tube as the prior tube should be used as a replacement tube. First, the balloon functioning is confirmed outside the body by injecting 8 to 10 mL of saline in the balloon port. Once confirmed, the balloon is then deflated again. The balloon tip G-tube is either inserted into the track blindly or via the use of a guidewire with or without fluoroscopy and is advanced within the track. Once fully inside, the balloon is inflated with 8 to 10 mL of saline or distilled water. The tube is slowly retracted till gentle resistance is encountered due to the internal balloon opposing the gastric wall. At this point, the external portion of the tube is secured with a dressing. Both ports of a traditional G-tube (feeding port and med port) are flushed and then capped. A dressing is then applied based on institutional policy. It is vital to apply a protective dressing to avoid accidental pulling or dislodgement in patients with altered mentation.

The final step in PEG tube replacement is to confirm the placement. There are certain ways gastric placement can be confirmed. The simplest method is the bedside method of flushing air through the tube and auscultating for gastric gurgle. However, this method is quite unreliable. The most accurate way of confirming internal balloon placement is with an endoscope. However, this might not be cost-effective. The most commonly used technique in most practices is to place water-soluble contrast through the replacement tube and obtain a post-contrast-enhanced abdominal x-ray to confirm placement in the stomach.