The initial evaluation of the patient with facial burns starts with a good history and physical. In unconscious patients, one must rely on bystanders or EMS personnel. While the physical exam can direct care of burns to the face, information on the mechanism of injury can prompt the search for associated occult trauma or suggest potential inhalation injury or impending airway compromise.

The evaluation in the field starts with scene safety, limiting further injury, and stabilization of the patient. Considerations could include shutting down power for electrical hazards or decontaminating the patient. The extent of airway compromise and tissue injury is determined by the duration of exposure and whether the patient was in an enclosed versus open space. Clothing must be removed without peeling from adherent tissue to decrease further damage.

In the emergency department, the initial evaluation should follow the Advanced Trauma Life Support (ATLS) guidelines.

The most important initial consideration of the patient with facial burns is the airway exam. Mucosal edema can develop rapidly and unexpectedly and take the provider by surprise. Typical indications for intubation are patients' failure to oxygenate, ventilate, or ability to protect their airway. For burns, there is a concern for rapid edema, and the decision to intubate should occur before this occurring. Advanced burn life support (ABLS) recommends the following criteria as indications for early intubations:

- Signs of airway obstruction: hoarseness, stridor, accessory respiratory muscle use, sternal retraction

- Extent of the burn (TBSA burn > 40 to 50%)

- Extensive and deep facial burns

- Burns inside the mouth

- Significant edema or risk for edema

- Difficulty swallowing

- Signs of respiratory compromise: inability to clear secretions, respiratory fatigue, poor oxygenation or ventilation

- Decreased level of consciousness where airway protective reflexes are impaired

- Anticipated patient transfer of large burn with airway issue without qualified personnel to intubate en route

Some burn centers have taken note that intubations have risks and can lead to unnecessary complications and questioned the predictive value of the traditional intubation criteria, in particular the presence of facial burns, carbonaceous sputum, and singed nasal hair.

Another study used flexible fiberoptic laryngoscopy to evaluate all burn patients meeting criteria for intubations using these traditional criteria over five years.

A group from Denver, U.S.A., retrospectively reviewed 218 intubated burn patients.

- Full-thickness facial burns

- Stridor

- Respiratory distress

- Swelling on laryngoscopy

- Upper airway trauma

- Altered mentation

- Hypoxia/hypercarbia

- Hemodynamic instability

- Suspected smoke inhalation

- Singed facial hair

A complete explanation of inhalation injury is beyond the scope of this topic, but as severe facial burns have an association with airway and breathing compromise, a brief mention of important considerations is appropriate. Inhalation injury can affect the upper airways from direct thermal injury, the tracheobronchial tree secondary to particulate matter, and systemically from the absorption of poisonous gases.

Special considerations during the physical exam include a focus on sensitive facial areas. In any patient with a burn involving the face, it is important to assess the cornea. Contact lenses should be removed, the eye rinsed with copious fluids, and the cornea examined with fluorescein. If any eyelid or eye involvement is found, early ophthalmologic evaluation is recommended. The ears should be examined for cartilaginous involvement, and the tympanic membrane should be checked, especially with any type of blast injury.

During the physical exam, it is important to assess the total body surface area (TBSA) to guide your initial fluid resuscitation. Different methods for calculating TBSA exist. The rule of nines is conventional, practical, and efficient for quickly determining an initial estimate. If the burn area is smaller, the patient's hand (fingers included) represents approximately 1% TSBA. The Lund and Browder chart has been shown to be more accurate in assessing TBSA, but new technology-aided models have shown promise in more reliable and accurate assessments.

Burns are classified by their depth of injury and are designated as superficial, superficial, and deep partial-thickness, and full-thickness. Superficial burns involve the epidermal layer only, are red, blanch with pressure, and are painful. Partial-thickness burns involve epidermal and dermal layers. Superficial partial-thickness burns are red, blanch, are painful, and blister. Deep partial-thickness burns are mottled, painful to pressures, and are wet and blistered. Full-thickness burns involve all layers of the dermis and extend into the subcutaneous tissue or deeper. They are differentiated by burn eschar and painless.