Leiomyosarcoma is a tumor with complex and unbalanced karyotypes, characterized by severe genomic instability, which results in multiple genetic aberrations. As a result, LMS is considered moderately sensitive to chemotherapy.

**Adjuvant Chemotherapy after Surgery**

After surgery, adjuvant chemotherapy for a patient diagnosed with STS has been primarily tested in patients with extremity and truncal STS.

The Italian sarcoma group (ISG) conducted a randomized trial evaluating the role of adjuvant chemotherapy in high-risk patients with spindle cell STS of extremities or pelvis. The group receiving adjuvant chemotherapy (epirubicin/ifosfamide with mesna) showed a better distant metastasis recurrence rate (45% versus 28%) and a better OS at four years (69% versus 50%). However, the statistical significance was lost at a 7-year follow-up, and the local and distant relapse rates also became similar (44 versus 45%).

Current guidelines suggest that in patients with high-grade or intermediate-grade STS, which is more than 5 cm in size, doxorubicin and ifosfamide based adjuvant chemotherapy can be considered as a viable option (Category 2B, NCCN Version 4.2019)

**Neoadjuvant Chemotherapy**

In theory, neoadjuvant chemotherapy can help shrink the tumor, hence improving resectability, achieving negative margins, and earlier control of microscopic disease, both local and distant). In addition to this, it can also provide an essential clue in terms of the responsiveness of the tumor to chemotherapy. Multiple trials In a retrospective study examining both STS and bone sarcoma, neoadjuvant chemotherapy was not associated with worse outcomes.

The ISG enrolled 252 patients to receive neoadjuvant chemotherapy, followed by surgery and then randomized them to receive two more postoperative cycles (epirubicin and ifosfamide). The patients who had a positive or a negative margin on surgery had a similar OS. Those patients who had a positive surgical margin and received adjuvant RT along with neoadjuvant chemotherapy had a cumulative local recurrence rate of zero. This study concluded that neoadjuvant chemotherapy could offset the negative impact of positive margin upon surgical resection and improve local control and survival.

Histology tailored approach underwent evaluation in a multicenter study, including the Italian, Spanish, French, and Polish sarcoma groups. The standard regimen of epirubicin and ifosfamide was compared to histology-tailored neoadjuvant treatment. The trial was stopped early due to overwhelming evidence in favor of standard chemotherapy with epirubicin and ifosfamide. The DFS (62% vs. 38%) and OS (89% vs. 64%) favored the standard chemotherapy. Barring the myxoid liposarcoma subgroup, where trabectedin showed equal efficacy compared with standard chemotherapy, all other disease subgroups performed poorly with histology tailored therapy. This trial showed that a histology tailored approach is not needed when considering neoadjuvant chemotherapy.

**Chemotherapy in Metastatic or Unresectable STS**

**First-line Treatment**

There is no established 'best' first-line chemotherapy regimen in metastatic LMS. In a patient diagnosed with unresectable metastatic disease, the goal of therapy is to palliate the symptoms and to improve the quality of life.

**Anthracycline Based Regimens**

Anthracyclines are usually the first choice of treatment for patients with metastatic STS. A response rate of 12 to 24% has been reported in the literature, although cardiotoxicity is a limiting factor in the use of doxorubicin.

The drug olaratumab, a 'platelet-derived growth factor receptor alpha' blocking antibody, was granted accelerated approval by the FDA in June 2016 based on the results of phase II JGDG study that included patients with locally advanced unresectable or metastatic STS. However, the phase III trial (ANNOUNCE trial) reported at ASCO 2018 did not demonstrate the same OS benefit, which led to the suspension of the drug by the FDA.

**Gemcitabine Based Regimens**

Gemcitabine has shown activity in STS both as a single agent and in combination with other chemotherapy agents. The infusion rate, fixed at 10mg/m^2/min, is superior to the 30-min infusion, which is more common.

**Ifosfamide Monotherapy**

Ifosfamide monotherapy is also active in patients with metastatic STS, yielding a response rate of 25% and a median overall survival of 1 year. The drug has a dose-response relationship, where higher doses yield a better response rate, albeit at the cost of higher toxicity. However, this has never translated into a better survival rate. Ifosfamide should be given at 9-10gm/m2 with each cycle, repeated every three weeks. A dose beyond 12gm/m^2 saturates the enzymes and only adds to toxicity. Hemorrhagic cystitis, myelotoxicity, nephrotoxicity, and neurotoxicity are the limiting toxicities with ifosfamide.

A phase III randomized trial evaluated using a high dose of ifosfamide with stem cell rescue in patients with STS. No OS benefit was demonstrated in the trial.

**Second-line Treatment**

Multiple drugs have undergone an evaluation as a second-line treatment for STS/LMS. A gemcitabine-based regimen or an anthracycline-based regimen is an option in the second line based on the agents used as the first-line treatment. However, new targeted agents have provided a lot of options. Monotherapy with trabectedin is the most promising of these and has been approved by the FDA for patients with LMS and liposarcoma. Pazopanib, eribulin, liposomal doxorubicin, dacarbazine, and hormonal therapy (only for uterine LMS) are also active in LMS.

**Trabectedin (YONDELIS, ET-743)**

Trabectedin has approval in the United States and European Union to treat patients with unresectable or metastatic liposarcoma or leiomyosarcoma who have progressed after first-line anthracycline-based regimen or were ineligible for such a regimen. The approval basis was the PFS benefit (4.2 versus 1.5 months, CI, 0.44 to 0.70, P< 0.01) demonstrated in the phase III trial, where trabectedin was compared with dacarbazine. Although no OS benefit was observed in the trial, the patients in the trabectedin arm had stable disease for a significantly longer time (6.01 versus 4.17 months, P <0.001) and had a higher clinical benefit ratio (34% versus 19%, HR- 2.3, CI: 1.45 to 3.7, P-< .001) compared to those on the dacarbazine arm. The adverse effect profile is quite manageable with myelosuppression, and hepatic toxicity was the most common grade 3/4 toxicity reported in the phase III trial.

**Pazopanib (VOTRIENT)**

Multiple anti-angiogenic agents (bevacizumab, sorafenib, sunitinib, pazopanib, vandetanib, DC-101, and TNP-470)  have shown anti-sarcoma activity in mouse models. Few of these drugs showed clinical activity in phase I trials; however, the success of most of these drugs could not be replicated in phase II trials.

Pazopanib (VOTRIENT) is an oral multitarget tyrosine kinase inhibitor approved for use in advanced STS, regardless of histology, who had previously received chemotherapy. It is administered at 800mg orally every day. It is an inhibitor of vascular endothelial growth factor receptor (VEGF)-mediated angiogenesis and blocks the growth-promoting receptor tyrosine kinase (RTKs), including platelet-derived growth factor receptor, fibroblast growth factor receptor, and KIT-1. The FDA approved the drug based on the PFS benefit (4.6 months versus 1.6 months, HR - 0.35, CI 95%: 0.26-.48; P <.001) observed in the phase III trial (PALETTE) where the study compared pazopanib to placebo. There was no observable OS benefit in the pazopanib arm compared to the placebo arm. Of note, liposarcoma was excluded from the phase III trial due to poor response in the phase II trial.

**Eribulin (HALAVEN, E7389)**

Eribulin mesylate (HALAVEN, E7389) is an analog of halichondrin B approved for metastatic breast cancer. It blocks the G2 phase and the M phase of the cell cycle via tubulin based antimitotic mechanism, which blocks the spindle formation in the cell cycle and leads to apoptosis of the cancer cell.

**Immunotherapy**

In general, immunotherapy has not shown much promise in the STS subgroup overall. Barring a few case-reports, there is a scarcity of evidence of immunotherapy working for patients diagnosed with STS. Two trials evaluating nivolumab and pembrolizumab did not demonstrate any benefit in the subgroup of LMS.

**Tumors that Exhibit Specific Gene Mutations**

**Microsatellite Instability High (MSI-H**)

- The FDA granted accelerated approval to Pembrolizumab in May of 2017 for adult and pediatric patients with unresectable or metastatic solid tumors that exhibit MSI-H or mismatch repair deficiency (dMMR). The eligible patients included those whose tumors progressed after prior treatment and those with no satisfactory alternative treatment options.

**Neurotrophic Tyrosine Kinase (NTRK) Inhibitor - Entrectinib (ROZYLTREK)**

- Entrectinib has approval for patients who have a solid tumor that harbors the NTRK gene fusion without a known acquired resistance mutation, are metastatic, or where surgical resection is likely to result in severe morbidity, and have progressed following treatment or have no satisfactory alternative therapy. The FDA approved entrectinib in April 2019 based on an integrated analysis of phase II STARTRK-2, phase I STARTRK-1, and the phase I ALKA-372-001 trials, which researchers conducted across 15 countries and 150 clinical trial sites. Entrectinib demonstrated an ORR of 57%.

**Dacarbazine**

Dacarbazine is an alkylating agent that has activity in STS. It has shown a response rate of 30% in combination with doxorubicin versus doxorubicin alone and a response rate of 49% in combination with gemcitabine versus dacarbazine alone.

**Pegylated Liposomal Doxorubicin (DOXIL)**

Pegylated liposomal doxorubicin (PLD) is a formulation of doxorubicin in poly(ethylene glycol)-coated (stealth) liposomes. It has a prolonged circulation time and does not cause cardiotoxicity like doxorubicin. Dermatologic toxicity is the main adverse effect of PLD.

**Hormonal Therapy**

As with other gynecological malignancies, uterine LMS also exhibits estrogen receptor (7 to 70% patients) and progesterone receptor (17 to 60%). Retrospective studies have shown aromatase inhibitor activity (letrozole, anastrozole, or exemestane)  in uterine LMS, with partial response reported in 9 to 12% of patients.