The incidence of blunt and penetrating injuries is hard to account for due to the uncommon presentation as well as the survivability of innominate artery injury. The incidence of blunt thoracic trauma is estimated at 7,500 to 8,000 cases per year, with an associated mortality of greater than 80%. The current data implies 4% of patients die during transport to the hospital, while 19% die during the initial trauma evaluation when suffering from a blunt thoracic aortic injury. The innominate artery ranks second among the thoracic vessel injuries during blunt trauma to the chest. Aortic disruption at the base of the innominate artery is the second most common location for trauma to the thoracic aorta.

One of the most common findings is the disruption of the intima and media with the formation of a pseudoaneurysm. A review of meta-analysis from 2011 showed that in-hospital mortality of patients who underwent non-operative management was as high as 46%; however, when comparing endovascular treatment and open repair of the innominate artery, mortality measured 9% and 19%, respectively. Patients presenting with penetrating injury were often more unstable than those patients experiencing blunt injury of the innominate artery, as they usually require a much higher volume of fluid resuscitation and blood product administration.

Tracheoinnominate fistula creation occurs in less than 0.7% of post tracheostomies and usually occurs within two to three weeks after the placement of the tracheostomy in 72 percent of patients. Arterial injury after central line placement, specifically innominate artery injury, is infrequent with less than 1 percent occurrence. Overall, regardless of the mechanism of injury, whether it be blunt or penetrating trauma, patients presenting with other various injuries often had higher mortalities.