**Rheumatoid Arthritis**

While both osteoarthritis and rheumatoid arthritis can affect the MCP joint, rheumatoid arthritis (RA) is classically associated with a predilection for MCP involvement. RA is a chronic systemic autoimmune disease characterized by polyarthropathy and resultant cartilage and bone destruction.

Over time, the chronic synovitis of RA leads to the deposition of granulation tissue resulting in the formation of a pannus. Progressively, the myofibroblasts within the pannus contract, distorting the natural joint alignment. This process is classically seen in the MCP joint as an ulnar deviation and in the PIP joint as the swan neck deformity. For RA patients presenting with ulnar deviation at the MCP joint, treatment consists of several operative options including:

- Small joint synovectomy is indicated for early joint disease

- MCP arthroplasty is indicated for advanced joint disease

- MCP joint arthrodesis is indicated if the thumb MCP joint is affected without interphalangeal joint (IP) involvement

**MCP Joint Dislocation**

Dislocations of the MCP joint can occur on either the volar or dorsal aspect of the joint and are classified as either simple or complex. Dorsal dislocations are more common, and occur secondary to hyperextension of the joint, most commonly from a fall on an outstretched hand.

Physical exam findings vary depending on whether the dislocation is volar or dorsal. For dorsal dislocations, the joint will appear somewhat hyperextended due to damage to both the palmar plate and joint capsule. Upon inspection, complex dislocations counterintuitively may appear to have less displacement because the proximal phalanx can be seen resting on the dorsal aspect of the metacarpal head.

**Ulnar Collateral Ligament Injury of the Thumb**

Injury to the ulnar collateral ligament (UCL) of the MCP joint of the thumb is commonly referred to as gamekeeper’s or skier’s thumb. Gamekeeper’s thumb is the result of chronic and repeated injuries to the UCL that results in UCL attenuation. Over time this results in chronic joint instability of the MCP of the thumb. Skier’s thumb refers to an acute UCL injury such as when a skier falls on a ski pole causing a radial deviation or hyperabduction of the thumb at the MCP joint.

On physical examination of a patient with a UCL tear, the torn ligament may present as a mass on the ulnar aspect of the MCP joint. The instability of the joint may be noted by applying radially-directed pressure to the joint. If instability is noted with the thumb in a neutral position, this is indicative of damage to only the proper UCL. Upon the application of valgus stress while holding the MCP joint in extension, if greater than 35 degrees of radial deviation is present or there is more than a 20-degree difference from the uninjured thumb, then a complete UCL tear is likely.