Unfortunately, symptomatic management is the main treatment in patients with amyotrophic lateral sclerosis, and it is recommended that their care team be interprofessional, with caregivers from neurology, physical therapy, occupational therapy, respiratory therapy, dietary, social work and nursing.

Patients with ALS commonly suffer from chronic respiratory failure due to weakness of the diaphragmatic and intercostal muscles. As this weakness is progressive, it is recommended to have an early, careful discussion regarding respiratory management and future options such as tracheostomy, chronic ventilatory support, and noninvasive positive pressure ventilation (NIV). This discussion should be continuous, as it is expected that patients will change their opinion during their disease. Noninvasive ventilation is considered when orthopnea, nocturnal hypoxia, or a forced vital capacity (FVC) <50% present. Invasive ventilation is considered when NIV is not tolerated, or when the patient remains hypoxic and/or hypercarbic despite NIV. It is also important to offer appropriate information about terminal stage ALS when dyspnea and nocturnal hypoventilation begin, or when vital capacity (VC)<50% of predicted values. Patients should be made aware of palliative options for symptom control like anxiolytics, opiates, and/or sedation, as fears of “choking to death” are common.

Progressive weakening of the muscles of mastication and swallowing results in dysphagia, which should be managed initially with diet modifications. As weight loss (particularly within the first two years after diagnosis) is associated with worse prognosis, emphasis should be placed on the intake of calorically dense foods and supplemental nutritional beverages.

As the disease progresses, there will be increased dysarthria and the eventual impossibility of communication. As this can be frustrating to patients, with limited benefits found in speech therapy, the patient should choose an appropriate alternative communication method (writing, alphabet boards, electronic assistive communication devices).

Frequent and painful muscle spasms can be treated with mexiletine, which was well-tolerated and demonstrated good symptomatic response at a dose of 150 mg BID. in a small sample study.

Sialorrhea is very common and can be treated with atropine (0.4 mg q4-6h), hyoscyamine, amitriptyline (10 to 150 mg QHS), glycopyrrolate (1 mg TID), botulinum toxin injections into salivary glands, and even low-dose radiation therapy in those with refractory symptoms.

Pseudobulbar affect (episodes of uncontrollable laughter or crying) can affect up to 50% of patients with ALS, especially those with the bulbar form. In these patients, AVP-923 (dextromethorphan-quinidine 20mg/10mg) has proven to be effective in a multicenter, randomized, double-blind, controlled clinical trial.

Riluzole (50mg bid) is thought to reduce glutamate-induced excitotoxicity and is the only drug that has proven improved overall survival (74% vs. 58% placebo at 12 months) and survival without tracheostomy (57% vs. 50% at 18 months) in two multicenter randomized trials done in the late 90s. Similar to these studies exclusion criteria, AAN guidelines recommended using it in patients with definite or probable ALS by El Escorial criteria in whom other causes of progressive muscle atrophy have been ruled out, symptoms have been present less than 5 years, VC >60% of predicted, and who do not have a tracheostomy. Expert opinion has also suggested a potential benefit in patients who do not meet these criteria, specifically limited to aspiration prevention. Since the original trials, multiple class I trials have shown a modest effect with prolonged survival of 2-3 months, and multiple other lower-class trials showed that riluzole might be associated with prolonged survival from 6 to even 21 months. Overall, it is considered a safe medication, and AAN guidelines recommend offering it to patients.

Edaravone is a free radical scavenger that is thought to reduce oxidative stress and has proven to be beneficial on a subset of patients with early-stage (less than two years of symptoms, independently living, VC >80% and scores of 2 or more in all items of ALSFRS-R) probable or definite ALS. One study showed approximately 33% slower functional decline in patients at 24 weeks follow up.

Pain is a commonly reported symptom of patients with ALS, arising from numerous causes including muscle cramping, spasticity, and as a result of decreased mobility. Spasticity should be treated specifically, as outlined above. Assistive devices such as special mattresses, pillows, and wheelchairs may help to prevent pain. Ultimately many patients require nonopioid analgesics and anti-inflammatory drugs, and when these fail, opioids become the mainstay of pain treatment.

Depression has a significant effect on the quality of life in patients with ALS, and studies have shown that treatment can improve quality of life. While no controlled trials have evaluated the treatment of depression in patients with ALS, Amitriptyline is commonly used as it can also treat other symptoms such as insomnia, sialorrhea, and pseudobulbar affect.

The issue of end-of-life care, and advanced directives, should be broached soon after diagnosis. One of the most important discussions revolves around tracheostomy placement and mechanical ventilation. Due to increased caregiver burden and significant associated costs, very few patients with ALS in the united states (less than 10%) opt for invasive ventilation. Hospice care can provide many resources that are not available, or as readily available in the home and can increase the likelihood of a peaceful death.