Surgical excision is the gold standard for basal cell carcinoma treatment. Mohs micrographic surgery (MMS) for basal cell carcinoma has the highest cure rate with a 2.5% 5-year recurrence rate. MMS is most appropriate in infiltrative basal cell carcinoma, recurrent lesions, tumors with poorly-defined borders, or in anatomical areas in need of tissue conservation. For tumors that do not meet MMS-appropriate criteria, surgical excision with 4-mm margins is recommended, which portends a 4.1% 5-year recurrence rate. Curettage with electrodesiccation for nodular or superficial basal cell carcinoma is a common treatment option at the time of biopsy when clinical suspicion is high. This method has a 5-year recurrence rate of 7.7%.

Chemotherapy creams, including imiquimod 5% cream and 5-fluorouracil 5% cream, are FDA approved to treat superficial basal cell carcinoma. Imiquimod stimulates toll-like receptor 7, which modifies the local innate and adaptive immune response. 5-fluorouracil is a thymidylate synthase inhibitor, and application leads to a local decrease in thymidine formation. Thymidine is a purine that is necessary for DNA replication. Treatment regimens vary, but on average, both creams require application over multiple weeks. A major benefit of this approach over surgical intervention is that they can be used in cosmetically sensitive areas as they are less likely to cause scarring.

Vismodegib was approved by the Food and Drug Administration (FDA) in 2012 for locally advanced and metastatic lesions of basal cell carcinoma. Vismodegib works on the Sonic Hedgehog pathway by acting as a smoothened inhibitor, decreasing unregulated cell growth in both sporadic and syndromic basal cell carcinoma lesions.

Radiation therapy is a curative, standard treatment option in cases where surgery is not feasible or not preferred. It can also be used adjunctively in high-risk postoperative settings (e.g., with positive margins or extensive perineural invasion). In non-curative cases, it can be offered as palliation for local symptoms such as pain, ulceration or bleeding.