**Laboratory Studies**

Elevated ESR is a common feature in polymyalgia rheumatica. ESR higher than 40 mm has been considered significant by the majority of authors.

Normocytic anemia and thrombocytosis can occur. Liver enzymes and especially alkaline phosphatase are occasionally elevated. Serologic tests, such as antinuclear antibody (ANA), rheumatoid factor (RF), and anti-citrullinated protein antibodies (Anti-CCP AB) are negative. Creatine phosphokinase (CPK) value is within the normal range.

**Imaging Studies**

Ultrasound:

Ultrasound is useful in the diagnosis and monitoring of treatment by assessing degrees of subacromial/subdeltoid bursitis, long head biceps tenosynovitis, and glenohumeral synovitis. In one study power Doppler (PD) signal at subacromial/subdeltoid bursae was observed in a third of PMR patients. The positive PD signal at diagnosis correlated with the increased frequency of relapses but the persistence of PD findings did not correlate with relapses/recurrences.

Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI):

MRI helps depict bursitis, synovitis, and tenosynovitis in a similar way the ultrasound does, however, it is more sensitive for hip and pelvic girdle findings.

Positron emission tomography (PET):

PET scan shows FDG uptake in shoulders, ischial tuberosities, greater trochanters, glenohumeral and sternoclavicular joints in patients with PMR.

**2012 Provisional classification criteria for polymyalgia rheumatica: A European League Against Rheumatism/American College of Rheumatology collaborative initiative**

Patients aged 50 years or older with bilateral shoulder aching and abnormal C-reactive protein concentrations or ESR, plus at least four points (without ultrasonography) or five points or more (with ultrasonography) from

- Morning stiffness in excess of 45 minutes duration (two points)

- Hip pain or restricted range of motion (one point)

- Absence of rheumatoid factor or anti-citrullinated protein antibodies (two points)

- Absence of other joint involvement (one point)

- If ultrasonography is available, at least one shoulder with subdeltoid bursitis, biceps tenosynovitis or glenohumeral synovitis (either posterior or axillary); and at least one hip with synovitis or trochanteric bursitis (one point)

- If ultrasonography is available, both shoulders with subdeltoid bursitis, biceps tenosynovitis, or glenohumeral synovitis (one point)

"A score=4 had 68% sensitivity and 78% specificity for discriminating all comparison subjects from PMR. The specificity was higher (88%) for discriminating shoulder conditions from PMR and lower (65%) for discriminating RA from PMR. Adding ultrasound, a score=5 had increased sensitivity to 66% and specificity to 81%. These criteria are not meant for diagnostic purposes."

**PMR and GCA**

PMR and GCA  frequently overlap, and 20% of patients with PMR will get diagnosed with GCA later. In biopsy-proven GCA, PMR features are present in up to 50% of cases.

In a study, among patients with PMR with the persistence of classic symptoms but no cranial GCA like symptoms, a PET/CT scan was positive for large vessel vasculitis in 60.7%.  Inflammatory low back pain, pelvic girdle, and diffuse lower limb pain were also predictors of positive PET/CT scan these patients.

In a study where a random sample of 68 patients with "pure" PMR, histological examinations of biopsy specimens of the temporal artery revealed inflammatory changes in three patients only (4.4%).

Patients with PMR should undergo evaluation for features suggestive of GCA at every visit. A routine biopsy of the temporal artery is not a recommendation. Features like the development of a new headache, vision and jaw symptoms, tenderness and lack of pulses in the temporal artery, lack of pulses in the periphery, the persistence of inflammatory markers, high-grade fever, and refractoriness of classic symptoms are the red flags that should prompt an urgent evaluation for GCA.