When first assessing these patients, the physician must act quickly and determine whether the patient is stable or unstable. It is critical to first evaluate the patient’s ABCs (airway, breathing, circulation), which will guide your management. Patients who are unstable due to WCT present with a myriad of symptoms such as altered mental status, hypotension, pulmonary edema, or other signs of low end-organ perfusion (i.e., pallor, cyanosis, decreased body temperature). Once a patient is deemed stable, a focused history and physical exam should be made quickly as a patient’s clinical status can deteriorate suddenly. During an episode of WCT, patients will typically present with persistent chest pain that may be accompanied by one or more of the following symptoms, such as shortness of breath, diaphoresis, dizziness, and nausea.

A patient’s medical history provides significant information that can help the physician to determine the potential cause of a WCT. Having a history of cardiovascular disease (i.e., myocardial infarction, coronary artery disease, congestive heart failure) will predispose patients to have WCTs secondary to ventricular etiologies. A small retrospective study concluded that there is a greater than 95% positive predictive value of VT for patients who had a history of previous myocardial infarction, congestive heart failure, or a recent episode of chest pain.

Although subtle, a careful and scrupulous physical exam can strongly suggest the diagnosis of VT. During the physical exam, the physician should focus on signs of atrioventricular dissociation, which includes: irregular cannon A waves, changes in S1 heart sound, and labile systolic blood pressure with respect to heartbeats. All of these exam findings occur during VT because they indicate that the atria and ventricles are functioning independently of one another. It is important to know that the absence of these exam findings does not exclude VT as the cause of WCT, nor does it confirm SVT as an etiology. Some physical exam maneuvers can be helpful in distinguishing between SVT and VT. These are known as vagal maneuvers, which include: carotid sinus massage, Valsalva, coughing, breath holding, squatting, water immersion, and many others. SVT responds to vagal maneuvers by slowing down the heart rate and allowing atrial activity (p waves) to be easily seen. VT will typically not respond at all these maneuvers.