Lymphoscintigraphy is a diagnostic imaging modality that uses radiotracers to identify lymph node extent of neoplasm as well as lymphatic system flow issues. With limited complications, including extravasation of radiotracer during injection and allergic reaction, the most effective way to enhance healthcare team outcomes occurs through coordination of care to smoothly execute the examination. Prior to the patient arriving at the imaging facility for their examination, the following items should be completed:

- Accurate and appropriate scheduling should occur for optimal patient satisfaction.

- Screening for patient history should be done, including interrogation for recent surgeries, recent imaging with radiotracers, allergies, and personal medical history. If a history of prior radiotracer reaction is present, the radiologist should oversee the appropriate pre-scan medication preparation and/or cancellation of the examination.

- Quality control on the scintillation camera should be performed by the nuclear medicine technician according to the general guidelines by the Society of Nuclear Medicine.

- Image and chart review should be performed by the radiologist for a better understanding of the case and ensuring that the examination will answer the desired questions of the consulting physician.

- The chosen radiotracers should be prepared (and shipped if necessary) within the appropriate timeframe to avoid radioactive decay.

- The surgeon should be informed of the schedule for the examination in case they would like to take the patient to surgery for immediate post-examination sentinel lymph node biopsy.

When all the steps and scheduling has taken place with all involved parties appropriately, high-value care is provided. The patient, as well as the entire healthcare team, will have an overall better experience with more associated positive outcomes. Current Oxford CEBM levels of evidence would be at level 1.