The standard of care treatment of acute stroke within the first 4.5 hours remains IV thrombolysis with recombinant tissue plasminogen activator (rtPA)  in patients with no contraindication regardless of the underlying etiology. Emergency imaging of the brain with a nonenhanced CT scan is mandatory to rule out intracranial bleed.

Emboli may result in large vessel occlusion and cause severe strokes. Such patients may benefit from mechanical thrombectomy, which can be done within the first 6 hours as demonstrated in five different randomized controlled clinical trials including MR CLEAN, ESCAPE, REVASCAT, SWIFT PRIME, and EXTEND-1A, and up to 24 hours from symptoms onset in selected patients to save the viable brain tissues at risk as demonstrated in the DAWN and DEFUSE 3 trials. If endovascular therapy is contemplated, a noninvasive intracranial vascular study such as CT angiogram of the head and neck is strongly recommended but should not delay intravenous rtPA for patients who qualify, according to guidelines from professional medical societies. In patients presenting beyond 6 hours from symptoms onset, a CT perfusion scan of the head is mandatory to guide the selection of mechanical thrombectomy candidates.

If there is evidence of AF during hospitalization or in continuous Holter monitoring at home following discharge, patients should be started on full anticoagulation therapy, as demonstrated in the SPAF1 study. Anticoagulation decreased the risk of embolization by almost 70% in AF patients. Warfarin remains superior to use in patients with valvular heart disease, but new direct thrombin and factor Xa inhibitors such as dabigatran, apixaban, and rivaroxaban should be considered in nonvalvular AF patients.

Patients with PFO and younger than 60 years of age should be evaluated for the risk of paradoxical embolism. The Risk of Paradoxical Embolism (RoPE) score can be used, and it depends on the patients' age and the absence of other vascular risk factors for stroke. PFO closure may be beneficial in such patients based on three randomized clinical trials that demonstrated decreased stroke risk by almost 60 % in the PFO closure group compared to medical therapy alone.

Two large multicenter randomized trials were done to compare antiplatelet therapy versus anticoagulation in ESUS patients. The Dabigatran Etexilate for Secondary Stroke Prevention in Patients with Embolic Stroke of Undetermined Source (RE-SPECT ESUS) published in 2019 showed no difference in stroke recurrence in patients taking dabigatran 150 mg twice daily compared to patients taking aspirin 100 mg daily. The same was concluded from the prior New Approach Rivaroxaban Inhibition of Factor Xa in a Global Trial versus Aspirin(ASA) to Prevent Embolism in Embolic Stroke of Undetermined Source (NAVIGATE-ESUS), which compared Rivaroxaban 15 mg to aspirin 100 mg. Therefore, based on these 2 trials, single antiplatelet therapy is recommended for secondary stroke prevention in patients with ESUS.

It’s hypothesized that left atrial cardiopathy without AF may cause embolic strokes. Ongoing trials such as ARCADIA (Atrial Cardiopathy and Antithrombotic Drugs in Prevention After Cryptogenic Stroke) are evaluating whether anticoagulation is beneficial in such patients.