Non-specific low back pain is one of the leading causes of disease burden globally—estimates of indirect costs in the US range from 18.5 to 28.2 billion dollars. Low back pain can be triggered by physical factors (i.e., poor lifting mechanics) and psychosocial factors. Often a specific trigger is not identified. Low back pain is a symptom of several different disease processes. Triage is necessary to rule out specific disorders that may require urgent/emergent workup and treatment. ‘Red flags’ for the lumbar spine include trauma, age >70, unexplained weight loss, history of cancer, constitutional symptoms, night pain, saddle anesthesia, and impaired bowel or bladder function. Red flags are associated with vertebral fracture, malignancy, infection (osteomyelitis/discitis), and conus medullaris/cauda equina syndrome (reviewed below).

The termination of the spinal cord, termed the conus medullaris, occurs at the L1-L2 vertebrae. This structure is clinically significant for procedures in this area, most notably the lumbar puncture. A lumbar puncture (spinal tap) is performed by inserting a needle between the vertebral lamina to obtain a cerebrospinal fluid sample. This procedure must occur below the level of L2, between L3-L4 or L4-L5 laminae, to avoid the spinal cord. Conus medullaris syndrome results from severe compression or injury of the conus medullaris. The most common etiologies for this condition include trauma, disc herniations, and epidural abscesses.

Signs/symptoms of conus medullaris syndrome include severe/sudden onset low back pain, symmetrical weakness of both legs, and sudden loss of bowel and bladder function. Immediate treatment is necessary to prevent permanent damage and to preserve lower extremity neurologic function. Caudal to the conus medullaris in the spinal canal is the cauda equina. The cauda equina is a collection of spinal nerves located from L1-L5 in the spinal canal. The spinal nerves that comprise the cauda equina are the L2-L5, S1-S5, and the coccygeal nerve. Compression of the cauda equina is also a surgical emergency. The most common signs and symptoms include urinary retention, saddle anesthesia (numbness of the perineum/inner thighs), as well as radicular leg pain.

There are several plausible pathoanatomical disorders of the lumbar spine. The surrounding musculature, intervertebral disc, facet joints, and spinal nerves may each serve as potential pain generators. However, most low back pain is ‘non-specific and does not have a pathoanatomical explanation. Diagnostic investigations are typically not indicated in the initial management of low back pain unless a specific disease process would be managed differently due to the investigation. Immediate imaging may be indicated when red flags are present. Plain film radiography followed by MRI of the lumbar spine is the commonly performed sequence as the initial diagnostic workup. In some cases, CT scanning may still play a role.

Lumbar spondylosis (osteoarthritis) results from a degenerative cascade involving the lumbar intervertebral disc and the facet joints. The cascade progresses with age, thought to be initiated by an insult or injury. The cascade is also heavily influenced by genetic factors. The lumbar disc initially develops circumferential annular tears leading to internal disc disruption; this is followed by disc resorption, which leads to loss of disc height and eventual osteophyte (bone spur) development. Degeneration begins with a synovial reaction leading to cartilage disruption within the facet joints, which progresses to the formation of osteophytes, joint capsular laxity, and joint subluxation. The combination of these conditions can lead to segmental spinal instability, referred to as spondylolisthesis (slippage of one vertebra on another). Progressive spondylosis can lead to structural narrowing around the lumbar nerve roots, resulting in radiculopathy and/or spinal stenosis in the lumbar spine. Lumbar spondylosis is a widespread condition that is often asymptomatic, most commonly occurring at the L4-5 segment.

Compression, injury, or irritation of the lumbar spinal nerve roots can occur from multiple potential sources. Most commonly, this occurs as a consequence of the degenerative cascade or an acute disc herniation. Lumbar radiculopathy (aka sciatica) describes the constellation of symptoms resulting from lumbar nerve compression. Individuals present with variable degrees of radiating pain, paresthesia (numbness/tingling), and weakness in the lower extremities. Lumbar stenosis is a condition in which the narrowing of the spinal canal occurs. This narrowing is usually secondary to degenerative spondylosis and spondylolisthesis. Classically individuals present with low back and/or lower extremity pain/paresthesias, which worsen with lumbar extension, prolonged standing, and ambulation. The pathophysiology appears to be due to mechanical compression of the lumbosacral spinal nerve roots resulting in ischemia.

Treatment of low back pain is targeted depending on the diagnosis established. Treatment is initially conservative, incorporating a multidisciplinary approach with a combination of pharmacologic and non-pharmacologic therapies. Non-pharmacological therapies include physical therapy, manual therapy, home exercise, acupuncture, cognitive behavioral therapy, etc. Clinicians can implement interventional treatments such as epidural steroid injections to manage recalcitrant lumbar radicular pain. Pain emanating from the facet joints can be treated with medial branch radiofrequency ablation.