The clinical definition of dyslipidemia is total cholesterol, LDL, or triglyceride levels above the 90th percentile or HDL levels below the 10percentile for the general population. Dyslipidemia, especially elevated LDL-C, is strongly associated with ASCVD, and the prevalence is in the 75 to 85% compared to 40 to 48% of age-matched controls.

ASCVD is among the leading causes of death in the United States. Hyperlipidemia is a significant risk factor for the development of ASCVD, and medications that target lipoproteins and their constituents are critical in disease management and prevention. Recently the American Heart Association/American College of Cardiology published new guidelines for managing cholesterol levels. As primary prevention of ASCVD, a healthy lifestyle, including weight loss, diet, smoking cessation, and aerobic activity, is emphasized. Among the lipid-lowering medications, statins are by far the most commonly prescribed and utilized. High-intensity statins are indicated in persons aged 20 to 75 years with LDL over 190 mg/dl. Type 2 diabetics, who are 40 to 75 years, should begin moderate-intensity statins unless they have additional risk factors.

Statins have an indirect effect on the metabolism of lipoproteins. The mechanism of action involves competitive inhibition of HMG CoA reductase, the rate-limiting enzyme in the cholesterol biosynthesis pathway in the liver. As the liver senses a decrease in cholesterol production, it attempts to compensate by increasing the number of LDL receptors on the surface of its cells, which leads to increased uptake of two lipoproteins, LDL and VLDL, into the liver, which then metabolizes into cholesterol and other molecules. Statins effectively decrease the number of circulating LDL molecules and VLDL in the serum, leading to the desired decrease in cholesterol deposition into tissues.