**Non-Surgical Treatment**

In traumatic shoulder subluxation, the immediate treatments include ice packing to reduce soft tissue swelling, avoiding postures leading to recurrent subluxation, and wearing a protective arm sling. Narcotics or non-steroid anti-inflammatory drugs can be used for pain control. The passive or active assistive range of motion exercise of the upper limb and scapular stabilization exercise can start as early as possible, followed by strengthening of shoulder girdle muscles and glenohumeral joint proprioceptive training to improve dynamic shoulder stability.

In the atraumatic group, the goal of treatment is to restore shoulder function. The rehabilitation should emphasize the progressive strengthening of the rotator cuff, deltoid, and scapular stabilization muscles. Exercises to improve shoulder coordination with lifestyle modification are also recommended.

Hemiplegic shoulder subluxation and functional electrical stimulation (FES) are effective in reducing subluxation in the acute stage. Shoulder support or orthoses such as Bobath, Rolyan humeral cuff, or standard hemi sling may reduce the subluxation. To prevent further subluxation in stroke patients, supporting the hemiplegic limb in the proper position is crucial.

The modalities for pain control include ice in an acute phase, ultrasound therapy, transcutaneous electrical nerve stimulation (TENS), electrical stimulation (ES), and moist heat.

**Surgical Treatment**

Surgical management is considered in younger patients or active individuals with chronic shoulder subluxations. The indications for the operation include failed non-operative treatment, recurrent dislocation in younger age, irreducible dislocation, open dislocation, unstable reduction, the first time in young adults with traumatic unilateral dislocations, high work demand, and bony Bankart lesion.

The surgical procedures are classified into arthroscopic and open surgeries. Open shoulder stabilization surgery is needed if there is a contraindication for arthroscopic management like Hill-Sachs lesions, glenoid defects of more than 30%, humeral avulsion glenohumeral ligament (HAGL) injury, shoulder instability with the bony fragment, shoulder deformity and previous surgery of shoulder stabilization. The operations commonly performed are the capsular-shift procedure to tighten the shoulder capsule, Bankart repair for labral tears, the Remplissage procedure for the Hill-Sach lesion, and the Latarjet procedure for the glenoid bone loss of more than 30%. The capsular shift, Bankart repair, and Rempissage procedure can be done with open or arthroscopic techniques. The Latarjet procedure should be performed openly.

When comparing the results of open and arthroscopic surgeries, arthroscopic management is as effective as open repair in improving shoulder stability. The advantages of arthroscopic surgery include shorter operative time and hospital stay, decreased morbidities, and complications, lower cost, and less surgical scar.