The type of treatment provided to binge eating disorder, treatment setting, and healthcare person involved in the therapy of patients with binge eating disorder depends upon treatment goals. Treatment goals may include working on:

1) Excessive body weight

2) Binge eating episodes

3) Extreme concern for body image

4) Comorbid psychiatric conditions (anxiety, substance use disorder, and depression)

Available treatment options for binge eating disorder include:

1) Psychotherapy

2) Pharmacotherapy

3) Weight loss treatment

**1) Psychotherapy:**

Psychotherapy is the first-line treatment option for binge eating disorder. According to several clinical trials, psychotherapy has a more significant clinical effect than pharmacotherapy. Common psychotherapy options are:

a) Cognitive-behavioral therapy

b) Interpersonal psychotherapy

c) Dialectical behavioral therapy

**A) Cognitive Behavioral Therapy (CBT):**

CBT is the psychotherapy of choice for binge eating disorder based on the results of several randomized controlled trials. The patient can receive CBT either from a clinician or through a self-help program without clinician involvement. Research shows that CBT has higher abstinence, is well-tolerated, and maintains remission for 1 or 2 years. A quick change in symptoms of patients with binge eating disorder is a good prognostic sign. Binge eating disorder patients with comorbid anorexia nervosa or bulimia nervosa do not respond well to CBT.

Self-help based CBT is as effective for treating binge eating disorder as clinician-led CBT. Treatment settings have an effect on self-help based CBT. Delivering self-help based CBT in specialty settings, for example, eating disorder clinics, is more effective than delivering in a primary care setting. A self-help program focuses upon creating a regular pattern of eating, monitoring eating habits, learning self-control techniques, and learning problem solving more effectively. Hardcopy, web-based content, workbook, or smartphone application can be used to implement this program.

i) Step by step approach to therapy

ii) Education regarding binge eating disorder.

**B) Interpersonal Psychotherapy:**

Interpersonal psychotherapy can take place in a group format or individual format. Psychotherapy does not focus on weight loss, but weight changes do occur due to stopping binge eating. It can also be provided in combination with CBT if the patient has complex psychopathology that may include interpersonal problems, low self-esteem, and perfectionism.

i) Identify the area (most probably interpersonal area) that links to binge eating disorder.

ii) Focus mainly on experimentation or constructive changes in the problematic relevant regions (interpersonal) with little focus on binge eating.

**C) Dialectical Behavioral Therapy:**

Dialectical behavioral therapy consists of educating patients about the skills which are needed to manage problematic behavior associated with emotional dysregulation.

i) Watchful eating

ii) Emotional balance

iii) Tolerance of unpleasant circumstances

iv) Prevention of relapses

**2) Pharmacotherapy:**

Pharmacotherapy should be used as first-line therapy in patients who:

i) Do not have access to psychotherapy

ii) Decline psychotherapy

iii) Prefer medications

Medications that can be useful for binge eating disorder include:

i) Selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors (SSRIs) - sertraline, fluoxetine, fluvoxamine, escitalopram, citalopram

ii) Antiepileptic drugs - zonisamide and topiramate

iii) Attention deficit hyperactivity disorder (ADHD) medications - lisdexamfetamine, and atomoxetine)

iv) Medication for shift work disorder - armodafinil

v)

Selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors (SSRIs) should be the first-line pharmacotherapy for binge eating disorder. Antiepileptic medications or medications used for ADHD are an option if a patient fails one or two courses of SSRI. Randomized controlled trials have reported a promising role of topiramate, lisdexamfetamine, and methylphenidate in causing abstinence from binge eating disorder as well as in weight reduction. Limitations for using these medications have been due to the side effects of these medications. Topiramate can cause somnolence, paraesthesias, and cognitive impairment. Lisdexamfetamine and methylphenidate may cause anorexia, gastrointestinal disorder, headache, insomnia, sympathetic nervous system arousal, as well as dependence, and potential misuse.

**3) Obesity or weight loss treatment:**Most of the patients with binge eating disorder seek treatment for weight reduction rather than binge eating. All obese patients should be evaluated closely for binge eating disorder.

i) Low and very low-calorie diet and exercise is the best option for losing weight. Behavioral weight loss therapy is a strategy designed to reduce binge eating as a result of weight loss indirectly. A randomized controlled trial concluded that behavioral weight loss therapy showed remission of binge eating disorder in 44 percent of patients. Moderate calorie restriction, exercise, and improved nutrition with nutritional counseling and rehabilitation are some of the specific components of behavioral weight loss therapy.

ii) Pharmacotherapy provides short-term weight loss in obese patients. Different classes of medications exert different clinical effects. Pharmacologic agents should be chosen based on patient preference, patient comorbidities, potential adverse effects, and insurance coverage, cost of medication of choice for obesity include:

a) Lorcaserin and liraglutide (daily injections)

b) Orlistat

c) Combination phentermine-extended release topiramate

d) Combination naltrexone-bupropion

e) Phenteramine

f) Benzphenteramine

g) Phendimetrazine

h) Diethylpropion

iii) Bariatric surgery can also be helpful for obese patients with binge eating disorder. Binge eating after bariatric surgery is associated with poor weight outcomes.

iv) Psychotherapy has no role in reducing weight in obese patients with binge eating disorder.