When a patient presents with leukocytosis on initial CBC, a careful history and physical examination should be performed, as well as an evaluation of prior CBCs for trends. In an acute setting, such as an urgent care facility or emergency department, prior CBCs may not be available for evaluation and interpretation. Targeted histories and physical examination may guide the clinician in the proper direction as to the underlying cause for the leukocytosis. In these settings, stress, trauma, and infection are likely the most common cause of leukocytosis. In a less acute setting, such as primary care appointment, a routine CBC may demonstrate leukocytosis, and this may require further investigation if the patient has not had recent stress (emotional or physical), surgery, or infection. Prior CBCs, if available, are extremely useful in determining if this is an acute lab elevation, or if this is a more persistent elevated trend that needs further consideration. In persistent elevations of certain lines, such as less common cell lines (basophils and monocytes), on multiple CBCs, should prompt the clinician to ask the patient targeted historical questions to evaluate for malignancy. Typical symptoms of an underlying malignancy can include fevers, chills, night sweats, unintended weight loss, fatigue, and/or easy bruising. In women, pregnancy can increase leukocytes greater than the upper limit of the normal reference range of 11x10^9. This must also be assessed on initial evaluation.

Significant elevations, such as leukocytosis close to 100x10^9, should always prompt immediate evaluation for leukemia or myeloproliferative disorders. Myeloproliferative disorders are a group of disease processes characterized by cell dysplasia. There are several categories, some involving leukocytes and some involving other cell lines. Regardless, malignant transformation is possible. A review of symptoms should focus on evaluation for shortness of breath, anemia, pallor, unusual bleeding, petechiae, frequent infections, and fatigue. Physical examination should look for pallor (indicative of possible underlying anemia), petechiae, bruises, tachycardia, palpable lymphadenopathy, and splenomegaly. Frequent follow-up with CBC collections should be arranged with the assistance of a hematology and oncology consultant to monitor for any sort of malignant transformation.

The past medical history should be reviewed, especially for the history of prior malignancies. Patients who have undergone chemotherapy and/or radiation therapy are at increased risk of leukemia or lymphoma.****

Lastly, social history is critical in the evaluation of leukocytosis. Smoking history and job exposure to chemicals, including benzene, pesticides, and industrial chemicals, have all been linked to higher chances of bone marrow malignancy.