Brain trauma has acute and longitudinal impacts.

In the acute setting, brain trauma commonly correlates with polytrauma, and there may be dysfunction or failure of other organs. Patients may experience cognitive impairment, sensory processing impairment, which may result in a comatose state in severe brain trauma. Patients may have cerebrospinal fluid leakage and vascular or neuronal injuries. Seizures may present immediately or further down the line. There may be a transient or persistent increase in intracranial pressure due to acute hemorrhage or vasogenic edema, which can result in herniation. Brain death is the most severe consequence.

Many factors contribute to neuropsychiatric sequelae, and the post-concussive syndrome is common. Factors that contribute include a history of neurologic disorders, psychiatric diagnoses, substance abuse, poor social support, and the severity of the inciting injury. Post-concussive syndrome may consist of difficulty sleeping, difficulty concentrating, irritability, fatigue, memory problems, headaches, difficulty thinking, dizziness, vision changes, and light sensitivities. Psychiatric disorders for which patients are at increased risk include depression, bipolar disorder, anxiety, post-traumatic stress disorder, schizophrenia, and panic disorder. Patients may be at increased risk of substance abuse. Many cognitive difficulties may ensue as a result of brain trauma, particularly executive function impairment. Patients may experience irritability, aggressive behavior, and agitation. Problems with short-term memory and processing are not uncommon. Patients who have suffered traumatic brain injuries may also experience sleep dysfunction, which is often due to sleep-disordered breathing.