One should consider the following in the differential thrombocytopenias due to increased platelet destruction and those due to decreased platelet production.

**Thrombocytopenias due to increased platelet destruction include:**

Immune thrombocytopenia

- Idiopathic thrombocytopenic purpura

- Secondary autoimmune thrombocytopenias

- Drug-induced immune thrombocytopenias

- Posttransfusion purpura (PTP) is a transfusion-associated reaction occurring about a week after the transfusion. It is an amnestic response to platelet antigens resulting in the destruction of native and transfused platelets.

- Neonatal immune thrombocytopenias

- Viral infection often is the presage for thrombocytopenia. The HIV-associated disease is now the most common cause of thrombocytopenic purpura, especially in males between 20 and 50. Testing for HIV antibodies is a critical part of the assessment of ITP.

Consumptive thrombocytopenias

- Thrombotic thrombocytopenic purpura (TTP); Of special note is that TTP and ITP, though thought of as distinct hematopoietic maladies both subset autoimmune disorders

- Disseminated intravascular coagulation (DIC)

- Hemolytic-uremic syndrome (HUS)

Microangiopathic hemolytic anemias such as TTP, DIC, and HUS can manifest thrombocytopenias as blood flow is disrupted and erythrocytes are destroyed as platelets are consumed.

- Sepsis causes thrombocytopenia via various mechanisms, such as complement activation, histone release, and coagulation activation.

Hypersplenism; sequestration mechanism.

Thrombocytopenias, due to decreased platelet production, colloquially described as "the first to go and the last to grow back," platelet production and survival are affected by a myriad of factors, sometimes with long-term results.****

- Bone marrow suppression by drugs, alcohol, toxins, and infections

- Aplastic anemia; manifests as pancytopenia, typically from a damaged marrow manifesting marrow failure.

- Leukemias and other bone marrow cancers; the patient may present with thrombocytopenia within a myelophthisic picture or with leukoerythroblastocic.

- Megaloblastic anemia; thrombocytopenia can appear in B12 deficiency, especially as this disease can mimic TTP.

- Refractory anemias, preleukemia, and hematopoietic dysplasia; typically has cellular dysmorphism evident on bone marrow exam and often presents as bilineage cytopenias.