The differential diagnosis in a patient with stroke-like symptoms is extensive because there are a large number of stroke mimickers. A stroke must be ruled out in the acute setting as its management is highly time-sensitive. Once a stroke is ruled out, many other differentials must be considered. As described previously, MCA strokes typically present with the symptoms individuals associate most commonly with strokes, such as unilateral weakness and/or numbness, facial droop, and speech deficits ranging from mild dysarthria and mild aphasia to global aphasia.

Some dangerous central processes can be mistaken for stroke, such as subdural hematomas (SDH), intracranial hemorrhages (ICH), or masses, which also need to be recognized quickly. Masses, ICH, and SDH can cause stroke-like symptoms based on location or mass effect on the same structures in the brain that are supplied by the MCA. These may qualify for urgent surgical interventions, so it is important to identify these early. They would likely be diagnosed based on the CT or MRI that is performed in the acute setting when evaluating for stroke.

Seizures, particularly status epilepticus, can mimic stroke due to gaze deviation and loss of movement, as well as global aphasia due to loss of consciousness. This is important to diagnose acutely as well as it requires urgent treatment with benzodiazepines and antiepileptic drugs.

Demyelinating disorders such as multiple sclerosis may also be confused with stroke given presentations consistent with vision loss and numbness or weakness that typically will favor a particular extremity. This is something that will require an MRI with and without contrast to differentiate, as well as a thorough history and clarification of symptom onset, as it usually is not as acute and likely waxes and wanes.

Toxic, infectious, and metabolic differentials must be included as well, which is why several laboratory studies must be sent in the evaluation of acute stroke. Sepsis, uremia, hypo and hyperglycemia, hyponatremia, and hyperkalemia can all cause symptoms that resemble a stroke. Encephalopathic presentations due to these abnormalities and others can mimic stroke in that they can cause aphasia and apparent deficits in strength, which is why the assessment of laterality is so important in recognizing stroke versus some of its mimics. In these presentations, it can be more challenging to localize a possible central nervous system lesion as the deficits are usually more generalized. In these situations, in addition to the labs that are sent in the acute setting, there will need to be a more extensive laboratory workup, including an infectious workup.

Complex migraines can mimic stroke as well, as some migraines may present with unilateral weakness or numbness. This is something that imaging cannot help diagnose. Typically there will be a headache associated with the symptoms, and the patient will likely have a history of migraines and similar symptoms in the past. This is something that requires a thorough history to diagnose. Usually, treating the headache will result in symptom resolution.

Lastly, some psychiatric disorders may present with stroke-like symptoms, such as unilateral numbness or weakness. Examples of these are conversion disorder and panic attacks. These should be lower on the differential diagnosis, as other mimics need to be urgently diagnosed and treated, and can be dangerous and even fatal if misdiagnosed. These are typically diagnoses of exclusion and must be diagnosed based on a carefully obtained history.