Current treatments for angiofibromas include shave excision, cryotherapy, electrodessication, radiofrequency ablation, dermabrasion, lasers such as ablative fractional laser resurfacing (AFR) and pulsed dye laser (PDL), and topical podophyllotoxin. Although these treatments have proven to be successful, they can result in scarring, post-inflammatory hyperpigmentation, and pain. The recurrence rate can be up to 80%, necessitating follow-up treatments. Topical rapamycin, a mTOR inhibitor, seems to be a safe and effective treatment for angiofibromas however long-term studies still need to be conducted.  Combination treatments, such as fractional laser resurfacing and PDL laser, can be employed with topical medications, such as timolol or rapamycin, to effectively treat these lesions.

Rapamycin has recently gained popularity in the treatment of angiofibromas. After binding to mTOR, it inhibits its activity which downregulates cell proliferation. It also decreases VEGF production by downregulating VEGF- stimulated endothelial cell proliferation (Habib). Several case series, case reports, and one randomized controlled trial have been published verifying the effectiveness of topical rapamycin used as .1% once or twice daily, as well as .2%, used 5 times a week and .4% used 3 times a week. The angiofibromas cleared as long as the medication was being used. The longest reported follow up has been 3 years. Many have used crushed rapamycin tablets and mixed them in Vaseline to obtain the desired concentration which was not a standardized dose. DeKlotz et al. proposed a standardized formulation on how to make .1% topical rapamycin in 2011. Few if any side effects occur from the topical medication including mild irritation and erythema. Park et al. showed that topical rapamycin was enough to treat the lesions when they were small in size, that is less than 4 mm. However, if they were larger than 4 mm, ablative resurfacing was needed in conjunction with rapamycin. It can also be costly to use topical rapamycin in the treatment of angiofibromas due to the length of treatment that is necessary to obtain sufficient results costing several hundred to several thousand dollars out of pocket.

Beta-blockers have been used for many years now in the treatment of vascular lesions. Oral propranolol has been successful in the treatment of hemangiomas in the pediatric population. However, side effects such as hypoglycemia limit its use in certain patients. Topical timolol .5% solution or gel used 2 or 3 times a day has proven to be very successful in the treatment of superficial hemangiomas. The mechanism of action of beta-blockers is thought to be due to its role in blocking the formation of renin to angiotensin II. In doing so, angiotensin II does not form VEGF, which converts endothelial stem cells to endothelial cells, leading to decreased capillary development. Matrix metalloproteinase-9 is involved in angiogenesis, and its activity is thought to be inhibited by beta blockers. One other way beta- blockers work to decrease angiogenesis is by producing osteoprotegerin. This causes tumor necrosis factor apoptosis of mesenchymal and endothelial cells.