Clinical manifestations are traditionally broken up into three main syndromes: cutaneous, mucocutaneous, and visceral.

Diffuse cutaneous leishmaniasis also begins as a painless nodule but may progress to involve the entire cutaneous surface. It does have a predilection for face, ears, and extensor surfaces such as the knees and elbows. Invasion of the nasopharyngeal and oral mucosa may be seen in up to a third of patients. Progressive disease may result in leonine facies. Organisms most associated with diffuse cutaneous leishmaniasis are L. aethiopica in Old World and L. mexicana in New World disease. Skin lesions may further progress to diffuse hypopigmented plaques and patches.

Mucosal disease is due to either hematogenous or lymphatic spread and often occurs after resolution of cutaneous lesions. The onset of mucosal manifestations usually occurs within two years but may have be delayed decades. L. braziliensis accounts for the majority of mucocutaneous disease although other organisms can be implicated (table 1). The oral and nasal mucosa is preferentially affected although ulcerative involvement may extend to vocal cords and tracheal cartilage, but bony structures are uninvolved. Mucosal disease may be severe and life-threatening.

Visceral leishmaniasis is also known by the term kala-azar as initially described in India in the 1800’s.L. donovani, L. infantum, and L. chagasi.

Occasionally cutaneous involvement may manifest after treatment of the visceral disease as a papular rash on the face and upper extremities. A term "post-kala-azar dermal leishmaniasis" has been coined to describe this, and these skin lesions are nondisfiguring and self-limited.