The diagnosis of CSS is challenging because of a wide variety of possible etiologies. Studies of the orbit, sella, and parasellar region play a major role in making a diagnosis. Precontrast and postcontrast scans are advisable. Contrast-enhanced computed tomography (CT) scans give a better visualization of bone and calcium. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) provides better detail of all soft tissues contained in the sinuses. CT angiography (CTA), CT venography (CTV) magnetic resonance angiography (MRA), MR venography (MRV) and conventional digital subtraction angiography helps to visualize all vascular structures with details. Routine, cytologic, infectious, and/or inflammatory examinations of serum and cerebral spinal fluid (CSF) may be helpful as well.

**Cavernous Sinus Tumors
**

- To find out a source of mass. Is it primary, metastasis or local spread?

- CT, MRI and chest/abdomen/pelvic CT

- A lumbar puncture with cytologic examination

- A biopsy of the cavernous sinus tumors is rarely needed for diagnosis of primary tumors if no tumors are spreading from another primary source.

**Cavernous Sinus Vascular 
**

- Vascular etiologies can be seen on CTA, MRI, MRA and angiography.

- Conventional digital subtraction angiography is the gold-standard test for diagnosis of CCF. CCFs can be seen on an orbital or trans-cranial ultrasound as well.

- Intraocular pressure should be checked on patients with ocular sequelae.

- Infectious workup, D-dimer and MRV or CTV should be performed if there is a suspicion for CST.

- An aseptic thrombosis may be associated with hypercoagulable states as well as lymphoproliferative disorders. The patient may need further hematological workup.

**Infections
**

- To do further infectious workup with RPR, HIV, fluorescent treponemal antibody test, Lyme serology, Quantiferon-TB gold test, cultures for bacteria, fungi, and mycobacteria in serum.

- Order workup with protein, glucose, cell counts, cytology, Lyme and syphilis serology in cerebrospinal (CSF).

**Inflammation**

- Investigate additional systemic inflammatory and granulomatous processes after other common causes have been excluded such as those from a tumor or vascular etiology.

- Workup should include an erythrocyte sedimentation rate, C-reactive protein, angiotensin converting enzyme, antinuclear antibody, anti-dsDNA antibody, anti-Sm antibody, anti-neutrophil cytoplasmic antibody, serum protein electrophoresis with immunotyping from serum, CSF protein, glucose, cell counts, cytology, and angiotensin-converting enzyme.

- The specific diagnostic criteria of THS recommended by the International Headache Society are summarized. A unilateral headache localized around the ipsilateral brow and eye, oculomotor paresis for less than 2 weeks, granulomatous inflammation of the cavernous sinus, superior orbital fissure or orbit, established by MRI or biopsy, paresis of one or more of the ipsilateral CN III, IV, and/or VI and symptoms not accounted for by an alternative diagnosis.