The ear structures are classically divided into three parts: the external ear, middle ear, and inner ear. The middle ear consists of the tympanic membrane and the bony ossicles called the malleus, incus, and stapes. These three ossicles connect the tympanic membrane to the inner ear allowing for the transmission of sound waves.

The malleus is the first ossicle and attaches to and moves with the tympanic membrane. It is divided into four parts: the head, neck, short process, and handle. The handle of the malleus attaches loosely to the tympanic membrane. The head of the malleus attaches to the incus and forms the incudo-malleolar joint.

The main function of the middle ear is to transmit the sound waves from the external environment to the inner ear. The sound waves initially make contact with the external ear and tympanic membrane. The tympanic membrane vibrates, leading to the movement of the chain of ossicles. The attachment of the footplate of the stapes to the oval window allows the displacement of fluid within the inner ear.

On average, the malleus has a height of about 8.0 millimeters and about 2.7 millimeters in width; the incus has about a height of 6.8 millimeters and a width of about 5.3 millimeters; the stapes has a height of about 3.5 millimeters and a width of about 2.4 millimeters. The stapes has an angle of approximately 10.7 degrees to the surface of the tympanic membrane. Incudostapedial joint (ISJ) is organized as a synovial joint, with the presence of a meniscus and intra-articular fluids, a capsule; the joint has the typical characteristics of a viscoelastic joint. The incudomallear joint is a saddle joint, which starts to move with sounds starting at 2 kHz.

The ossicular chain is held in its position by the connections of the malleus handle with the tympanic membrane, the annular ligament of the stapes, and the ligaments of the malleus and incus.

There are two muscles of the ossicular chain, namely the tensor muscle of the tympanum or malleus and the stapedius or stapes muscle.