Clinicians can discern definitive diagnoses for the type of anemia based on the MCV value.

Microcytic anemia is a type of anemia where the average erythrocyte is smaller than normal and much smaller than a leukocyte. On the complete blood count (CBC), its measure is under 80 fL while normal MCV is between 80 to 100 fL. It is commonly seen in chronic iron-deficient anemia, anemia of chronic disease, sideroblastic anemia, and thalassemias but can also occur in other conditions. Microcytic cells can appear to have a larger area of central pallor, especially in the setting of iron-deficient anemia and anemia of chronic disease.

Macrocytic anemia is a type of anemia where the average red blood cell volume is larger than normal. On CBC, its MCV is over 100 fL. Macrocytic anemia further subcategorizes as megaloblastic or non-megaloblastic. Megaloblastic anemia is due to impaired DNA synthesis versus normal DNA synthesis in non-megaloblastic anemia. Megaloblastic anemia is commonly secondary to folate (also knowns as folic acid or vitamin B9) deficiency, cobalamin/vitamin B12 deficiency, and orotic aciduria, an autosomal recessive disorder that does not allow conversion of orotic acid to UMP.  Non-megaloblastic anemia is due to hepatic insufficiency, chronic alcoholism, or a rare congenital disease Diamond-Blackfan anemia.

Normocytic anemia is anemia with a low hemoglobin and hematocrit range but MCV in the normal range of 80 to 100 fL. This type of anemia can subclassify as hemolytic and non-hemolytic. Normocytic hemolytic can occur intravascularly and extravascularly and can be due to myriad causes. Other laboratory values on the CBC will further indicate the type of anemia.

Non-hemolytic normocytic anemias can present in early anemia of chronic disease, early iron deficiency anemia, aplastic anemia, microangiopathic hemolytic anemias, and even certain plasmodial infections.