Bilirubin metabolism involves uptake of bilirubin from circulation, intra-cellular storage, conjugation with glucuronic acid, and excretion into bile. Abnormalities in any of these processes lead to hyperbilirubinemia. The disease process that causes liver dysfunction or injury increases both conjugated and unconjugated bilirubin. However, there is an increased proportion of conjugated bilirubin in plasma. Isolated unconjugated hyperbilirubinemia commonly results from increased bilirubin production, as with hemolysis, and impaired bilirubin uptake or conjugation. Neonatal jaundice and Gilbert syndrome are common causes of unconjugated hyperbilirubinemia.

Crigler-Najjar syndrome is a rare autosomal recessive inherited disorder characterized by the absence or decreased activity of UDP-glucuronosyltransferase, an enzyme required for glucuronidation of unconjugated bilirubin in the liver. It is one of the major causes of congenital non-hemolytic jaundice. The increased concentration of unconjugated bilirubin is the sole cause of disease manifestation. The disease severity depends upon the number of enzymes produced required for the glucuronidation of bilirubin. Newborns may present with hyperbilirubinemia, but other signs progressively develop later in life.

Crigler-Najjar syndrome is of two types based on the clinical criteria such as molecular and functional features, the severity of clinical presentation, and phenobarbitol response. Type I is the most severe form with an almost complete absence of UDP-glucuronosyltransferase enzyme activity, whereas type II is less severe with a reduced level of enzyme activity. Central nervous system involvement complicated by kernicterus is seen mainly in Crigler-Najjar type I.