World Health Organisation defines disaster as an event that overwhelms the local capacity to respond and requires assistance from outside the affected community.

Disaster medicine is, therefore, concerned with the medical response to disasters. In the mid-20 century, Disaster medicine primarily focused on the surgical intervention of trauma and triaging of victims following armed conflicts and was viewed as a component of military medicine. Research in disaster medicine has shown overwhelming mortality and morbidity resulting from infectious disease epidemics, malnutrition, exposure, psychological effects as well as other effects related to forced migrations.

Disaster medicine has evolved to include components of emergency medicine, community health as well as disaster preparedness, response, and prevention. Professionals of disaster medicine, therefore, include medical as well as non-medical practitioners. The various medical disciplines include emergency medicine, critical care, community health, and all branches of surgery.

Simulation-based training in disaster medicine includes exercises that emulate a scenario or process, enabling the subject to develop knowledge and skills that will be put to use in real-life events. The participants are placed under the same stresses, including time constraints, patient surge as well as other characteristics, in their actual working environment, to develop the cognition, skills, and attitude leading to better outcomes.

Skill assessment is the evaluation of the performance and competency of an individual, based on pre-defined criteria. Skill assessment in simulation-based training needs to be objective and standardized. Some methods include evaluation through questionnaires and surveys, structured assessments, as well as video recording.