Current guidelines regarding antibiotic prophylaxis before dental procedures have been influenced by two main issues: transient bacteremia's nature and the efficacy of antibiotics in reducing bacteremia and infective endocarditis.

**Transient Bacteremia**

Bacteremia refers to the presence of bacteria in the bloodstream.

As transient bacteremia occurs for many due to normal activities of daily living, this argues against the widespread use of antimicrobial prophylaxis in the general population. Furthermore, despite transient bacteremia, endocarditis remains a relatively rare diagnosis and has an incidence of 3 to 10 per 100,000 people.

Advancements in cardiology have paved the way for prosthetic and bioprosthetic cardiac valves and other prosthetics, allowing for the correction of valvulopathy and congenital heart disease. Increased rates of endocarditis have also been noted in this population.

**Efficacy of Antimicrobial Prophylaxis in the Prevention of Bacteremia**

Antimicrobial prophylaxis before dental procedures is not 100% effective at preventing transient bacteremia. A systemic review of twelve studies revealed that antimicrobial prophylaxis before tooth extraction reduced the risk of bacteremia by 50%.

**Efficacy of Antimicrobial Prophylaxis in the Prevention of Infective Endocarditis**

Infective endocarditis is the infection of the innermost layer of the heart, known as the endocardium. It typically affects the cardiac or prosthetic valves and cardiac devices.

To date, there has not been a randomized-controlled trial regarding antimicrobial prophylaxis before dental procedures to inform clinical decision-making. However, several studies have evaluated the incidence of infective endocarditis before and after changes in treatment guidelines from prominent medical organizations. In other words, much of the data informing on this topic are epidemiological studies before and after changes in recommendations.

Many epidemiological studies before and after the publication of antimicrobial prophylaxis recommendations have shown no change. A study in Olmstead County, Minnesota, in 2007 evaluated the incidence of infective endocarditis caused by viridans group streptococci before and after the change in the joint American Heart Association/American Dental Association guidelines (AHA/ADA), which narrowed recommendations for antimicrobial prophylaxis before dental procedures and did not reveal any change in the incidence of infective endocarditis.

However, some studies did reveal increased rates of endocarditis after the publication of guideline changes. Another US study revealed that the rate of streptococcal infective endocarditis has increased since the 2007 joint AHA/ADA guidelines but did not note an increase in valvular replacement.

A study conducted on the incidence of infective endocarditis in Englandrevealedl an increase in the incidence of infective endocarditis after the guidelines in 2008 by the National Institute of Health and Clinical Excellence that did not recommend antimicrobial prophylaxis in any population.

These guidelines were updated in 2016 to indicate that the organization does not generally recommend antimicrobial prophylaxis before dental procedures.