The muscles of the pelvis can be divided into 3 groups. Some muscles attach to the trunk and provide postural support. Other muscles attach to the hip and thigh and allow for movement. Finally, the muscles of the pelvic floor and perineum are involved in support of the pelvic floor as well as urogenital and gastrointestinal functions.

The iliopsoas muscle attaches the spine to the pelvis at the iliac fossa and the spine to the femur at the lesser trochanter. It flexes the hip, which is the action performed during a “sit-up.” The gluteus maximus muscle is the primary hip extensor and composes most of the mass of the buttocks. It originates at the ilium and sacrum and attaches to the gluteal tuberosity of the femur as well as the iliotibial band. The iliotibial band is a band of connective tissue on the lateral thigh running from the iliac crest to the proximal anterolateral tibia. The gluteus medius, located deep to the gluteus maximus, runs from the ilium to the greater trochanter of the femur. It serves to externally rotate and abduct the hip as well as balance the pelvis during ambulation. Weakness of this muscle, as can be found with superior gluteal nerve injuries, will result in a Trendelenburg gait, where the contralateral hip drops while walking. Like the gluteus maximus, it also attaches to the iliotibial band. The superior portion of the iliotibial band blends with the muscle fibers of the tensor fascia lata, which aids with stabilization and hip abduction. This “IT” band can be a source of discomfort for runners, known as iliotibial band syndrome.

Another group of six muscles works to externally rotate the hip: the piriformis, gemellus superior, gemellus inferior, obturator internus, obturator externus, and quadratus femoris. Due to their shared function, this group of muscles is known as the lateral rotator group. The piriformis originates on the sacrum and inserts on the greater trochanter.  The gemellus (Latin for “twin”) superior and inferior muscles originate on the ischium and insert indirectly onto the greater trochanter by blending with the tendon of the obturator internus originating from the obturator membrane. The obturator externus also functions as a hip adductor and originates on the ischiopubic ramus and inserts into the trochanteric fossa. Finally, the quadratus femoris originates on the ischium and inserts on the intertrochanteric crest.

Other muscles assisting with external rotation outside of these include the lower fibers of the gluteus maximus, the gluteus medius, and gluteus minimus when the hip is extended (if flexed they internally rotate the hip,) the psoas, and sartorius muscles. The sartorius originates on the anterior superior iliac spine and inserts on the pes anserinus in the tibia. It has four functions: flexion, abduction, and lateral rotation of the hip as well as flexion of the knee. The name comes from the Latin word for tailor, and all four actions can be performed to look at the sole of one’s shoe.

The hip adductors are large muscles on the medial thigh that adduct the leg and share a common innervation in the obturator nerve. They include the adductor longus, adductor brevis, adductor magnus, gracilis, pectineus, and obturator externus muscles. The adductor longus, brevis, and magnus muscles originate on the pubic bone and insert on the linea aspera of the femur. The adductor magnus also has some fibers originating on the ischial tuberosity and additional insertions on the adductor tubercle, as well as some innervation from the tibial nerve. The gracilis originates on the pubic bone and inserts on the pes anserinus of the tibia along with the sartorius. The pectineus originates on the pectineal line of the pubic bone and inserts on the pectineal line of the femur. While it has occasional innervation from the obturator nerve, it commonly is innervated by the femoral nerve.

The hamstrings are a group of muscles on the posterior aspect of the thigh that flexes the leg composed of the semitendinosus, semimembranosus, and biceps femoris. They originate on the ischial tuberosity and insert around the knee on the tibia and fibula. They are innervated by the tibial branch of the sciatic nerve. Occasionally, the adductor magnus is considered a hamstring as it shares many of these characteristics.

There are 3 layers of the pelvic floor musculature. From caudal (superficial) to cephalad (deep), they are the urogenital triangle, the urogenital diaphragm, and the pelvic diaphragm.

The urogenital triangle consists of several muscles. The superficial transverse perineal muscle originates at the ischial tuberosity and extends to the central tendinous perineal body, which lies immediately ventral to the anus. It is involved primarily with the support of the pelvic floor. The ischiocavernosus muscle extends from the ischial tuberosity to the ischiopubic rami and is involved in supporting the erect male penis, the female vagina, as well as flexing the anus. The bulbocavernosus (bulbospongiosus in men) muscle is located in the midline of the pelvis and describes a dorsal to ventral path starting at the tendinous body and coursing to the ischiocavernosus and contributes to erections. In females, the fibers are divided and course laterally around the vaginal introitus. The final muscle in the urogenital triangle is the anal sphincter. It is attached to the dorsal central tendinous end of the perineal body and its fibers spread to the levator ani posteriorly. This muscle regulates defecation.

Deeper (more cephalad) into the pelvis is the urogenital diaphragm. It is a triangular ligament with a strong muscular component that stretches from the pubic symphysis to the ischial tuberosities. It occupies the ventral side of the pelvic outlet and is composed of several muscles. The urethral sphincter is an autonomic smooth muscle internal sphincter located at the urethro-vesicular junction. In males, the external sphincter is located just caudal to the prostate, and in females, it is located just caudal to the internal sphincter. The external sphincter is skeletal muscle and is under voluntary control. Both the internal and external sphincters are involved in regulating urination. The deep transverse perineal muscle extends from the inferior rami of the ischium and inserts into the tendinous median plane and aids in the support of the pelvis. The caudal and cephalad borders of this muscular-tendinous plane are embedded in a layer of fascia. The caudal layer of fascia is known as the perineal membrane.

The third, most cephalad (deep) layer is the pelvic diaphragm, a thin and muscular layer that extends from the pubic ramus to the coccyx and inserts laterally into the arcus tendinous fascia, a condensation of the membrane of the obturator internus muscle. It is a funnel-shaped sling and represents the inferior (caudal) border of the internal pelvic cavity. The diaphragm is composed of several muscles and endopelvic fascia, the largest of which is the levator ani muscle. This muscle is composed of 3 parts: the puborectalis muscle, pubococcygeus muscle, and the iliococcygeus muscle. The levator ani's ventral border is the posterior surface of the superior pubic rami. It courses bilaterally around the pelvis and inserts at the arcus tendinous fascia. Between the left and right levator pass the urethra, anal canal, and vagina in females.