Management of the microtic ear occurs along a spectrum, escalating from an observational approach to prosthetic ear placement to surgical reconstruction with a high-density porous polyethylene implant or autologous costal cartilage reconstruction. A minor abnormality of the auricle may not need correction, and intervention is typically sought by parents when there is a desire for cosmetic and functional improvements, such as wearing glasses or hearing aids.

A prosthetic auricle is an excellent option and can be affixed to the head with adhesive or osteointegrated clips or magnets. A prosthetic specialist will match the skin color and appearance of the contralateral ear to design a realistic appearing prosthesis. Downsides include prohibitive cost and the risk of a young child losing the prosthesis accidentally. Patients with fair skin may require two prostheses, as their skin color changes between winter and summer months, and prosthetics will show wear and tear after a few years of use.

One method of surgical reconstruction is performed with a high-density porous polyethylene implant, a newer technique that is becoming more popular, largely due to the difficulty of achieving consistently excellent cosmetic results with autologous costal cartilage reconstruction.

Advantages to this reconstruction method include reliably natural-appearing contours of the ear, no need for cartilage harvest (with the elimination of the risk of cartilage calcification and pneumothorax), and decreased operative time and patient morbidity. Potentially, the reconstructive surgery can be performed earlier, as there is no need to wait for costal cartilage maturation with this method.

Tanzer first described autologous rib cartilage grafting at Dartmouth in 1959, and subsequent differences in technique were then reported by Tanzer's pupil, Brent, and later by Satoru Nagata. The concept of the operation is consistent, however: an auricular framework is created from rib cartilage, which is shaped with scalpels, osteotomes, or biopsy punches, and then fixated together with permanent suture or steel wire. The construct is subsequently covered with overlying scalp tissue in a 2 to 4-staged surgical procedure. The differences lie in technique, laterality, and staging. Additionally, multiple donor sites are required during these complex procedures, including skin grafting from the groin, scalp, or contralateral ear, as well as the harvesting of costal cartilage.

Brent's method differed slightly in that the first stage would include the harvest, carving, and placement of the cartilaginous framework in a subcutaneous pocket at the site of the microtic ear. The second stage would then include the transposition of the lobule, reversing the order of Tanzer's first two stages. His 3rd and 4th stages again elevated the construct and created a tragus while excavating the conchal bowl.

Nagata's technique is novel in that he performs his autologous ear reconstruction in only two stages. In his first stage, he harvests and implants the cartilage framework in a similar fashion to Tanzer and Brent; however, he simultaneously transposes the lobule and fashions the tragus in this stage because the tragus is part of the cartilaginous construct rather than a separate piece. Nagata's second stage elevates the construct and covers the exposed areas with a TPF flap and a skin graft. Another difference in technique is that Nagata harvests ipsilateral rib cartilage, rather than contralateral, as Brent and Tanzer described.

When considering surgical repair, caution is warranted if the patient has had surgery or trauma to the area, as a robust blood supply is critical to avoid failure of the reconstruction. The surgeon should not feel pressured to perform the operation until the child is of an age when there is suitable costal cartilage available and sufficient patient motivation to participate in post-operative care. Patients with collagen or vascular diseases and those who may not tolerate long, staged surgical procedures are also not good candidates for autologous reconstruction and might be better candidates for prosthetic use.