# Definition/Introduction

Treating trauma patients require stringent planning and therapeutic resource allocation to provide optimal levels of care for injured patients.

Application of the TS

Multiple studies found few disadvantages associated with the inclusions of capillary refill and respiratory expansion within the scoring system.

Numerous studies demonstrated the benefits of utilizing the RTS. Researchers found that after implementation of the RTS, there was no difference in the error rate for diagnosis and investigation compared to not utilizing the RTS; however, there was a statistically significant improvement concerned with the appropriateness of the formulated treatments.

When using the RTS to predict geriatric trauma mortality, the recommended cutoff value was identified as 7.108 with a sensitivity of 97% and a specificity of 80%.

# Issues of Concern

While the merits of the RTS have been clearly demonstrated, other assessment tools may also be useful.

# Clinical Significance

According to the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC), unintentional injuries were the leading cause of death in people from birth through 44 years of age in the United States. With the prevalence rates of injuries being so high, a simple and standardized assessment tool to identify injury severity is critical for clinicians. There are various metrics to evaluate the severity of a patient’s injuries. ISS, NISS, and TRISS have retrospectively measured indexes, whereas TS and RTS have their basis on patient characteristics at the time of initial evaluation.

# Nursing, Allied Health, and Interprofessional Team Interventions

The RTS is an assessment tool that can be utilized by multiple medical professionals with a variety of experience levels to help triage patients or to predict mortalities. Junior residents can assess trauma patients, using the RTS, despite their inexperience making complex medical decisions, to identify severe injuries that may require additional support from a senior resident or attending physician.

# Nursing, Allied Health, and Interprofessional Team Monitoring

As previously discussed, the RTS is a tool for triaging patients.