Coordination and communication between the interprofessional health care team members are crucial to ensuring safety and maximum outcomes in cesarean delivery. Two-thirds of sentinel events have a root cause of failure to communicate.

The Patient Safety Checklist for planned cesarean delivery created by the American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists is one example of using a checklist to improve safety. This checklist involves all members of the team, including the surgeon, the nurses, the anesthesia team, and the patient, all working together in an interprofessional approach. It includes the following:

- Does the patient have a complete medical history and physical exam?

- Identification of known allergies
- Medical factors affecting anesthetic choices

- Has the patient been counseled about risks, benefits, indications, and alternatives?

- Ensure the consent form is signed

- Are appropriate laboratory results available?

- Has appropriate antibiotic prophylaxis been given?

- Is appropriate deep vein thrombosis prophylaxis being utilized?

- Have the fetal heart tones been confirmed?

- Are there any additional risk factors identified?

- Bleeding risk
- Airway
- Allergies
- Need for neonatal or pediatric departments

- Has a time-out been conducted, including identification of the patient, allergies, consent, the surgical procedure, and all members of the team and their roles?

- Have surgical counts been performed prior to incision?

TeamSTEPPS, which stands for “Team Strategies & Tools to Enhance Performance & Patient Safety,” is a nationally recognized crew resource management curriculum utilized by multiple health systems.

Simulation training is often utilized to practice the team dynamic and to identify areas for improvement. An emergency cesarean section, or a postpartum hemorrhage that leads to a cesarean section, are two scenarios that are targeted by simulation. Via simulation, roles can be clarified and communication streamlined.

Debriefing amongst the healthcare team is yet another tool to ensure adequate communication regarding the procedure that has just occurred.

Using the above framework for teamwork and communication requires an interprofessional team approach, including physicians, specialists, specialty-trained nurses, and pharmacists, all collaborating across disciplines to achieve optimal patient results. [Level V]