It is important to discuss with the patient's family the duration of onset, nature of the progression of reduced vision, to take thorough maternal history regarding exposure to teratogens, alcohol intake, or any history of infection, and examine the eyes of parents and siblings for central corneal opacity.

**Systemic and Ocular Examination**

Generally, pediatricians first notice a central corneal opacity with abnormal red reflex. The central corneal opacity can vary in density and size with a relatively clear periphery and iridocorneal adhesion. In Peters anomaly type II, central corneal opacity and iridocorneal adhesion, lens abnormalities like cataracts are also present. In the bilateral cases of the Peters anomaly, the incidence of strabismus is higher.

Peters anomaly may have nystagmus, microcornea, cornea plana, and glaucoma due to dysgenesis of the angle. Iris abnormalities, chorioretinal coloboma, retinal dysplasia, persistent hyperplastic primary vitreous, optic nerve hypoplasia, coloboma, and ptosis have also been associated.

In the Peters anomaly, congenital glaucoma is present in 50 to 70% of cases. Raised intraocular pressure in peters anomaly is due to maldevelopment of trabecular meshwork and Schlemm's canal.

Screening for systemic abnormalities is also important. Systemic anomalies such as developmental delay, seizures disorder, central nervous system abnormalities, craniofacial abnormalities like cleft lip, cardiac malformation, and skeletal deformities may also be associated. Wilms tumor and linear skin defect are rare systemic associations that can present with the Peters anomaly.

An abnormal corpus callosum and malformation of cortical development are common findings in brain imaging in patients with the Peters anomaly. In some cases, hypoplasia of the cerebellar vermis, cerebral calcification, and malformation of the hippocampus can be associated with the Peters anomaly.