# Continuing Education Activity

Annular pancreas (AP) is a rare congenital anomaly characterized by encasement of the duodenum by a band of pancreatic tissue. AP is not commonly encountered in clinical practice and affects both children and adults. Prompt diagnosis and treatment of this condition can improve the morbidity and mortality associated with this condition. This activity reviews the evaluation and treatment of AP and highlights the role of the interprofessional team in the care of patients with this condition.

**Objectives:**
- Describe the etiology of annular pancreas.
- Summarize the diagnostic evaluation of annular pancreas.
- Outline the currently available treatment options in the management of annular pancreas.
- Summarize the interprofessional team strategies for improving care coordination and communication to advance and improve outcomes in patients diagnosed with annular pancreas.

# Introduction

Annular pancreas (AP) is a rare congenital anomaly characterized by partial or complete circumferential encasement of the second part of the duodenum by a band of pancreatic tissue during embryogenesis.

Based on the morphologic distribution of pancreatic tissue, AP has been classified into a complete or incomplete type. Complete type AP shows pancreatic parenchyma or annular duct completely encircling the second part of the duodenum confirmed by macroscopic inspection, and incomplete type AP demonstrates partial circumferential encasement of the duodenum by pancreatic tissue confirmed by endoscopic retrograde cholangiopancreatography (ERCP) or surgical evaluation.

# Etiology

Given the rarity of this congenital condition, a precise etiology implicating the development of annular pancreas is not well defined, but AP is considered to be an embryopathy.

Several theories, some dating back to the 1900s, have been proposed to explain the formation of AP, but none of them have convincingly been able to explain the same in all cases of AP. However, immunohistochemistry studies have shown the origin of AP to be of the ventral pancreatic anlage.

# Epidemiology

The true prevalence of annular pancreas is currently unknown owing to the rarity and infrequent reporting of this congenital anomaly. Before the availability of contemporary imaging, this anomaly was noted incidentally in 3 of 20,000 autopsies and in 3 of 24,519 individuals who underwent abdominal surgeries.

# Pathophysiology

The pathophysiology of annular pancreas is explained by the direct impact of the migratory defect during embryogenesis. Duodenal obstruction is secondary to a mechanical defect, which can be extrinsic from the encasement of the duodenum or intrinsic from scarring, stenosis, or the presence of duodenal webs. The pathogenesis of pancreatitis in AP is unclear. Pancreatitis, when it occurs, is usually confined to the annulus and the adjoining pancreatic head sparing the body and tail of the gland which is likely secondary to fibrosis resulting in the inability of the pancreatic secretions to pass through the annular duct and increased intrinsic susceptibility of the annular pancreatic tissue to damage.

# Histopathology

Microscopic examination of the annular pancreatic tissue demonstrates the presence of many pancreatic polypeptide (PP) cells of the ventral pancreatic anlage arranged in irregularly shaped islets.

# History and Physical

Clinical manifestations of annular pancreas can occur at any age, from infancy to adulthood, and considering its bimodal age distribution, it precisely depends on the age of presentation and the degree of duodenal constriction.

Many infants with AP also have various other associated congenital anomalies such as malrotation, tracheoesophageal fistula, esophageal atresia, duodenal atresia, renal anomalies, duodenal diverticulum, pancreas divisum, biliary atresia, anorectal malformations, and congenital heart disease.

# Evaluation

There is no biochemical test or genetic test available specific for annular pancreas (AP). The diagnosis of AP is radiologic and usually made incidentally or on the evaluation of clinical manifestations of AP. The diagnosis of AP can be made prenatally, preoperatively, or intraoperatively by many distinct non-invasive and invasive diagnostic techniques. Prenatally, AP can be diagnosed by prenatal ultrasonography.

Newer techniques of ultrasonography incorporating upper gastrointestinal (GI) saline-contrast have been studied to reduce the possibility of misdiagnosis of neonatal AP.

Other available imaging techniques to aid in the diagnosis of AP are magnetic resonance cholangiopancreatography (MRCP), endoscopic retrograde cholangiopancreatography (ERCP), or endoscopic ultrasonography (EUS).

# Treatment / Management

Best practice guidelines for the management of annular pancreas are lacking, and the treatment of AP is individualized based on presenting symptoms.

Division of the pancreatic annulus is not advised due to the increased incidence of postoperative complications like pancreatitis, pancreatic fistulas, and duodenal stenosis.

In contrast to children undergoing duodenal bypass procedures, Zyromski et al. highlighted the complex pancreaticobiliary pathology associated with AP in the adult population by describing that 20% of adult patients in their study group requiring surgical intervention underwent complex pancreaticobiliary surgical procedures which included pancreaticoduodenectomy, lateral pancreatojejunostomy, biliary/pancreatic sphincteroplasty, and bypass of the biliary system.

# Differential Diagnosis

As the clinical manifestations of annular pancreas exhibit a bimodal age distribution presenting either early during infancy or adulthood, the differential diagnosis of this anomaly is also based on the age of presentation. Infants commonly present with duodenal obstruction with the classic "double bubble sign" on imaging, and the differential diagnosis can be classified into either intrinsic or extrinsic causes.

Besides AP, the other notable extrinsic causes that need to be considered are malrotation of the gut or midgut volvulus. Peptic ulcer disease, pancreatic divisum, primary duodenal and pancreatic malignancies should be considered in the differential diagnosis of an adult patient suspected to have AP.

# Prognosis

The prognosis of annular pancreas in children is excellent with increased overall survival rates, despite the presence of associated congenital malformations and chromosomal anomalies.

# Complications

Complications of annular pancreas are secondary to the mechanical migratory effect of the pancreatic anlage and include acute and chronic pancreatitis, common bile duct obstruction, peptic ulcer disease, cholecystolithiasis, and pancreatitis.

# Deterrence and Patient Education

Annular pancreas is a rare congenital abnormality that causes the encasement of the duodenum by a band of pancreatic tissue. Previously, this anomaly was noted on autopsies and abdominal surgeries, but with the emergence of newer diagnostic modalities, it has been recognized more regularly. Most individuals with this abnormality are asymptomatic but can present with features of intestinal obstruction in infancy or abdominal pain, peptic ulcer disease, and pancreatitis during adulthood. This condition is often associated with chromosomal abnormalities, with the most common being trisomy 21. The management for symptomatic patients from AP is purely surgical with duodenal bypass procedures such as gastrojejunostomy, duodenoduodenostomy, or duodenojejunostomy in both adults and children.

# Enhancing Healthcare Team Outcomes

Annular pancreas is not commonly encountered in clinical practice and is primarily considered to be a disease of infancy, which is untrue as the diagnosis of AP is made with nearly equal frequency in children and adults. However, specific guidelines outlining the management of AP are lacking; therefore, the management must be individualized.

Timely identification and management of chromosomal anomalies and malformations associated with this condition are important to reduce morbidity and mortality. Prenatal diagnosis of this anomaly helps in preplanning and management at a center equipped with advanced neonatal care.