Cat scratch disease typically presents with cutaneous manifestations at the site of inoculation. Cutaneous manifestations begin within a week to ten days of being exposed and have vesicular, erythematous, and papular phases. The lymph nodes near the site of the inoculation become enlarged. Other features such as fever, malaise, and visceral organ involvement occur, but the frequency of the symptoms is low.

After the lymphatic system, the eye is the most frequently affected organ. Ocular involvement can be subclinical and visual symptoms may not be a common presenting complaint. Neuroretinitis is an optic neuropathy classically characterized by optic disc swelling in the presence of a partial or complete macular star. Its prevalence in CSD is unclear, possibly seen in 1% to 2% of cases. Typically, neuro retinitis presents unilaterally. Neuroretinitis suggests infection, whereas optic neuritis is an isolated inflammatory optic neuropathy secondary to demyelination.

Parinaud oculo-glandular syndrome that manifests as tender lymphadenopathy of pre-auricular, submandibular, and cervical lymph nodes with the infection of the conjunctiva, eyelid, and adjacent skin surface occurs in about 2-8% of affected patients.

The neurological manifestation that has been reported in patients diagnosed with cat scratch disease include encephalopathy, transverse myelitis, radiculitis, and cerebellar ataxia.

Another presentation of Bartonella infection includes negative culture endocarditis. Even though several species have been implicated in causing endocarditis Bartonella henselae and Bartonella quintana account for about 95% of endocarditis caused by Bartonella.

Severe, progressive, disseminated disease may occur in immunocompromised patients, especially those with HIV infection and organ transplants. Without therapy, the infection spreads systemically and can involve virtually any organ, and the outcome is sometimes fatal.

Bacillary angiomatosis is characterized by cutaneous lesions, subcutaneous masses, and bone lesions in AIDS patients.

Peliosis Hepatis is defined as a vascular proliferation of sinusoidal hepatic capillaries resulting in blood-filled spaces in the liver. This disease was first described in patients with tuberculosis and advanced cancers and correlated with the use of drugs such as anabolic steroids. B. henselae is now recognized as an infectious cause of PH in HIV-infected patients. PH has also been reported in organ transplant recipients. PH can occur simultaneously with peliosis of the spleen, and BA of the skin, in HIV-infected patients.

Trench fever caused by Bartonella quintana presents with clinical features of malaise, fever, headache, bone pain, and splenomegaly. The pattern of fever that occurs in trench fever is highly variable and ranges from a single episode to a persistent fever lasting for several days.

The clinical manifestations of infection caused by Bartonella bacilliformis include an acute phase (Oroya fever) characterized by fever, malaise, headache, and a chronic phase (Verruga Peruana) characterized by eruptive cutaneous lesions that appear about 2-8 weeks after the acute phase.

Chronic Bartonella infection can be associated with relapsing low-grade fever. Chronic eye problems include blurred vision, photophobia, and eye irritation. Bartonella commonly infects bone marrow with resulting bone pain, most commonly the shin bone. Another classic Bartonella symptom is a pain in the soles of feet upon waking in the morning. This is associated with trauma to blood vessels in the soles of the feet with walking. Anemia can occur from Bartonella scavenging nutrients from red blood cells. Neurological symptoms include poor balance, decreased cognition, memory impairment, insomnia, and restlessness.