Septic emboli have an extensive range of presentation from asymptomatic to severe with high mortality.

Right-sided endocarditis vegetations embolize to the lungs causing septic pulmonary emboli present with fever, dyspnea, pleuritic chest pain, cough, and occasionally hemoptysis. Left-sided endocarditis may result in systemic emboli in different organs with different clinical presentations**:**

**Septic cerebral emboli**: symptoms and signs of neurological deficits depending on the stroke location and the extent of infarcted/inflamed area, and the number of the affected areas. Embolism to the brain in a patient with infective endocarditis can be clinically silent. In one prospective study of 56 patients with left-sided endocarditis, embolization to the brain was detected on MRI scan in 80% of cases and was subclinical in 48%.

**Septic splenic emboli**resulting in splenic infarctions/hemorrhages/abscesses: The spleen is the most common abdominal site for systemic septic emboli that often complicate infective endocarditis.

**Septic coronary artery embolization**has been described after aortic valve endocarditis and successfully treated with aspiration thrombectomy.

**Septic mesenteric emboli**: Septic embolic occlusion of the superior mesenteric artery induced by mitral valve endocarditis has been described and successfully treated with resection of the affected bowel and mitral valve replacement.

Also, there is a case outlining infective endocarditis caused by Streptococcus bovis with complications including systemic septic emboli and superior mesenteric artery mycotic aneurysm in a patient with colon diverticulitis who received successful treatment with surgical resection of the mycotic aneurysm, removal of the mycotic thrombi, and mitral valve replacement.

**Pylephlebitis:**portal vein thrombosis due to intrabdominal infection such as ascending cholangitis or diverticulitis usually presents with non-specific symptomatology of fever and abdominal pain and diagnosed with CT abdomen with contrast and abdominal ultrasound, and the etiology is often polymicrobial.

**Pyogenic liver abscesses**could experience complications with metastatic infections, including septic embolism.

**Septic emboli of the extremities:**The presentation of peripheral vascular emboli is that of acute extremity ischemia complicating Infective endocarditis with varying severity, from transient ischemia treated with antibiotics and anticoagulants to severe ischemia necessitating limb amputation**.**Acute lower limb ischemia has also occurred after MRSA pneumonia.

**Septic emboli of the skin**: Septic microemboli were present in a Janeway lesion of bacterial endocarditis.

**Lemierre syndrome**is an acute oropharyngeal infection caused byFusobacterium necrophorum with secondary septic thrombophlebitis of the internal jugular vein (IVJ), first reported in the literature in 1936. It involves the progression of the disease from a focal suppurative peritonsillar infection to local septic thrombophlebitis with hematogenous progression to and distant septic emboli. (Jafri FN et al. 2018) Lemierre syndrome has correlations with septic emboli to the liver and lungs, often causing multiple abscesses.

Septic emboli have also been described from infected radial artery catheters causing Janeway lesions and splinter hemorrhages.

Recurrent **septic retinal emboli**have occurred following dental surgery.

**Renal septic emboli:**Renal infarction/hemorrhages may lead to renal failure if a significant portion of the renal parenchyma is involved. In the case of methicillin-resistantStaphylococcus aureus, bloodstream infection in an HIV-infected patient was complicated with septic pulmonary embolism, right renal abscess, and ipsilateral renal vein thrombosis.