The diagnosis of AIS carries a tremendous negative impact on the patients and their families. It is imperative to follow an interprofessional approach when treating patients with androgen insensitivity syndrome. It requires management by an interprofessional team of healthcare professionals, including an endocrinologist (pediatric or adult), urologist, gynecologist, primary care provider, clinical psychologist, neonatologist, clinical genetics, medical ethics, physician assistants, specialty-trained nurses, and social services. This interprofessional approach assists in appropriate and sensitive management of the condition and prepares the child and the family to overcome the challenges with additional support from patient advocacy groups. Pasterskietal et al. conducted a study to assess the clinical management of disorders of sex development (DSD) with the help of an online questionnaire and audit of DSD literature sent to pediatric endocrinologists from 60 medical centers representing 23 European countries. They studied the interprofessional team composition, psychological support services, and also the incidence of feminizing clitoroplasty. The study noted that 57% of centers regularly included the interprofessional approach utilizing the services of recommended pediatric subspecialists: pediatric endocrinologist, pediatric surgeon/urologist, plastic surgeon, pediatric psychiatrist/psychologist, gynecologist, clinical geneticist, histopathologist, and neonatologist. [Level 5]

The interprofessional approach is also beneficial in the education of healthcare professionals to interpret diagnostic tests accurately and avoid incorrect diagnoses and treatment of individuals from infancy to adulthood.

In order to care for this disease, an interprofessional approach will provide the best results. The pharmacist should assist the clinician in appropriate dosing and monitoring for untoward side effects of hormonal therapy. The specialty-trained nurses caring for patients with this disease must be familiar with the signs and symptoms as well as complications of their treatment. Nurses assisting with monitoring the disease must report abnormal findings to the clinician. Only through a coordinated interprofessional approach to the care of the patient and education of the family will the best outcomes be achieved. [Level 5]