The management of pain at the end of life includes nonpharmacological measures, pharmacological measures, and psychosocial measures.

**Pharmacological Management of Pain**

The World Health Organization (WHO) devised a cancer pain ladder to guide caregivers in selecting pharmacological agents in managing pain.

Nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) are the most commonly used initial pharmacological agents for pain. The mechanism of action of these drugs is based on the inhibition of the synthesis of prostaglandins. The cyclo-oxygenase enzyme COX-1 and COX-2 are inhibited by NSAIDs, with the COX-2 enzyme playing a key role in pain generated by inflammatory cells. Some NSAIDs can also inhibit the lipoxygenase pathway, which is responsible for producing some algogenic (pain-producing) metabolites. NSAIDs also interfere with G-protein mediated signal transduction aiding in analgesia. Increasing evidence suggests that NSAIDs also have a central effect in the CNS mediated by endogenous opioid peptides or blockade of the release of serotonin.

Acetaminophen is used frequently in divided doses equaling a maximal dose of 4000mg every 24 hours. However, it is frequently associated with hepatotoxicity, and lower dosages may be needed in patients with hepatic disease. Ibuprofen is another NSAID that the FDA has approved for mild to moderate pain; however, it is associated with gastrointestinal bleeding, renal impairment rashes, and hypertension.

Opioid analgesics are considered the gold standard of pain management at the end of life, providing the greatest analgesic relief. Opioids act by interacting with the mu, delta, or the kappa opioid receptors by mimicking endogenous opioid peptides. These receptors are coupled to G1 proteins and act in an inhibitory capacity. They cause the closure of N-type voltage-gated calcium channels and open calcium-dependent inwardly-rectifying potassium channels. This causes a reduction in neuronal hyperexcitability due to hyperpolarization. They also decrease the intracellular cAMP and thereby decrease the release of nociceptive neurotransmitters like substance P. The Mu receptors are key in mediating analgesia, euphoria, sedation, gastrointestinal dysmotility, and respiratory depression. Mu receptors can cause respiratory depression by a decreased response to hypoxia and hypercarbia, resulting in decreased stimulus to breathe. However, respiratory depression is preceded by sedation, and the clinicians should perform a constant assessment of mentation to avoid respiratory depression.

The pharmacokinetics of different opiates can be utilized in appropriate pain management at the end of life. The time to peak analgesic effect is important in choosing the right medication. Several routes of administration are available for opioids, including oral, intravenous, subcutaneous, intramuscular, transmucosal, nasal, transdermal, and rectal.  In general, the peak analgesic effect of oral opioids is close to 1 hour, whereas intravenous doses of opiates cause a peak effect around 10 minutes from the administration. Certain newer opiates using the trans-mucosal or intranasal mode of administration can have a faster onset of action and peak effect.

The doses of opiates need individualization and should be titrated per the analgesic effect. Patients who need repeated doses of short-acting opiates may need longer-acting opiates scheduled round the clock. The daily short-acting doses should be added up, and 50% to 75% of the dose should be converted to long-acting opiates.

The FDA approves morphine sulfate for acute or chronic pain with moderate to severe intensity. Morphine is metabolized in the liver and excreted by the kidneys. In patients with renal dysfunction, the active metabolites, namely 3-glucuronide and morphine-6-glucuronide, can accumulate, causing myoclonus and seizures. Oxycodone similarly is another potent opiate that is approved for use in moderate to severe pain. It is available in the immediate release as well as extended-release formulations. Its metabolism is similar to morphine. Hydromorphone is another potent opiate analgesic available in the oral, subcutaneous, or sublingual preparation. Fentanyl has gained popularity due to its several routes of administration and predictable analgesic effects. Apart from being used as an infusion for sedation and analgesia in mechanically ventilated patients, it can be used as a transdermal patch in patients who cannot take medications orally. Care is necessary when removing the used patch before placing a new patch to avoid an overdose. Fentanyl is stored in the adipose tissue and takes 12 to 24 hours to wash out of the system once the patch is removed.

Methadone is a long-acting pure mu-agonist with the advantages of having a long half-life and an inexpensive preparation available orally. Unfortunately, methadone has a curvilinear pharmacokinetic curve leading to exponential effect in higher doses exposing to potentially life-threatening overdoses. It can also lead to QT interval prolongation and should be used cautiously in patients with underlying cardiac conditions. Tramadol has a dual-action at the mu-opioid receptor as well as a weak action as a serotonin-norepinephrine reuptake inhibitor. Its use has been approved for moderate pain to moderately severe pain.

The selection of an opiate agent should take into account the individual needs of the patient. The mechanically ventilated patient can get fentanyl or hydromorphone due to the fast action and easy titration. Patients with renal and hepatic insufficiency should get IV Fentanyl with doses adjusted. Remifentanil can be used as well because its metabolism is not dependent on hepatic or renal function. It is metabolized by nonspecific plasma esterases located primarily within erythrocytes. Patients who require frequent neurological checks can also benefit from remifentanil due to its ultra-short duration of action. Patients with hemodynamic instability or bronchospasm should not receive morphine sulfate as it causes histamine release. Meperidine should be avoided in patients with renal and hepatic failure because of severe neurotoxicity from the accumulation of an active metabolite. Codeine is another medication with limited use at the end of life with a high incidence of constipation. Approximately 10% of the population lacks the enzyme necessary to convert codeine (a prodrug) to morphine, leading to insufficient analgesia.

Patient-controlled analgesia (PCA) via an infusion pump is a modality that can be utilized when the daily dosages required are high, or the patient is unable to tolerate oral analgesia. PCA pumps have a button that allows for a breakthrough dose when pressed by the patient. The pumps can be programmed to allow doses separated by a safety interval. The dose delivered on pressing the button is typically 50 % of the hourly dose. Monitoring for sedation in patients on a PCA pump is important to avoid respiratory depression. In patients with inability, debility, or cognitive decline, the PCA can be replaced with a Nurse controlled analgesia pump (NCA) where the nurse administers breakthrough doses prior to interventions or on observing objective signs of pain in the patient.

Nonopiate medications can be used as an adjunct to opiates or NSAIDs for pain management. Antiepileptic medications like gabapentin and pregabalin can be used for pain from neuropathy and bony metastasis. Both these medications require dose adjustments for renal impairment. Corticosteroids can be used in late disease as an adjunct and can aid in improving appetite and mood. However, severe interactions and adverse side effect profiles warrant a risk vs. benefit discussion with the patient.

**Non-Pharmacological Management of Pain**

The nonpharmacological measures for the management of pain include measures aimed at avoiding pain triggers and psychosocial assistance in managing the end of life. Proper head positioning and neck support can avoid spasms of the neck, artificial tears and lubricants can help avoid painful keratitis. The use of gel foam pads on the skin-appliance interface can help avoid ulceration, for example, nasal bridge gel pads for noninvasive ventilation. Oral care and proper hydration can avoid painful ulcerations and dental decay. Frequent repositioning and offloading the dependent areas of the body can help avoid decubitus ulcers. In case of skin breaks, non-bulky, non-stinging chemical dressings can be used to avoid pain.

Counseling for getting affairs in order and devising robust goals of care while the patient can still make decisions can help alleviate anxiety and improve interpersonal relations. Daily sponging and grooming, as tolerated, leads to better hygiene and preserves the patient’s dignity and sense of self-worth. Spiritual counseling and pastoral visits can help counter non–acceptance of impending death and help alleviate suffering. Alternative medicinal therapies like acupuncture and Reiki can be offered to support pharmacological measures in managing pain.