Vernix caseosa carries out various physiological functions to assist the fetal extra-uterine adaptation to the environment.

**Development of viscera in-utero**

The vernix is in direct communication with the amniotic fluid, many of its contents are detached and mixed, which works as a supply to the fetus, as the fetus swallows/breathes the amniotic fluid. Mainly, glutamine (>20% of the amino acids in vernix) functions as a trophic factor for high mitotic-rate cells (e.g., the gastrointestinal tract epithelium, lymphocytes, etc.) as it is needed.

**Skin formation**

There are embryological processes for the skin to be cornified (matured) from which desquamation and dehydration of the stratum corneum are facilitated by the decreased pH, as an increased enzymatic activity will initiate.

**Thermoregulation******

It has been documented in pre-term neonates with underdeveloped epidermis and a high trans-epidermal-water-loss rate (TEWL) to have a subnormal temperature, which could be unsafe for further development (i.e., an increase in the risk of fatality would be present especially and pre-term neonates). However, better prognostic differences are in neonates with the developed hydrophobic layer formed by the vernix were documented. That solidifies an inverse relationship observed between the amount of the vernix and TEWL, which hints to a possible secondary mechanism in thermoregulation.

**Antimicrobial defenses**

There are different immuno-peptides, enzymes, and lipids found within the vernix that work for the skin flora identification/suppression as the skin is developing, and opportunistic pathogens are trying to break these physical and innate barriers to reach a state of an eruption (disease).

The immunological molecules include

- [Alpha]- Defensins [human neutrophil peptide (1-3)]

- Cathelicidins (LL-37)

- Lysozyme

- Lactoferrin

- Psoriasin

- Palate lung nasal epithelial clone (PLUNC)

- Annexin 1

- Secretory leukocyte protease inhibitors

- Neutrophil gelatinase-associated lipocalin (NGAL)

- Ubiquitin

- Ribonuclease-7, etc

These molecules work in correspondence with the development of the stratum corneum and the acquired immune system. Alongside, the developmental acidic change in the stratum corneum has been showing a supportive, secondary antimicrobial environment for skin flora and pathogens.

**Resolution of wounds and burns**

The increase in water percentage, lipids, enzymes, and peptides (e.g., glutamine as a trophic agent) aids in the neonatal wound and burns healing. Therefore, researchers are testing the possibility of applying similar methods to adult wounds and skin-grafting of burns with associate layers of a similar structure as the vernix; moreover, vernix-based topical creams might demonstrate sufficient potency in treating epidermal wounds and augmenting stratum corneum repair and maturation in infants.