**Polyene**antifungals (e.g., amphotericin B) bind to ergosterol, a steroid-alcohol unique to Fungi. The polyene-ergosterol complex creates pores in the fungal cell membrane, ultimately leading to electrolyte leakage, cell lysis, and cell death.

**Azole**(e.g., miconazole)antifungal compounds are non-competitive inhibitors of the fungal enzyme lanosterol 14-alpha-demethylase, which is a rate-limiting enzyme in the fungal biosynthetic pathway of ergosterol. This action destabilizes the fungal cell membrane, causing cell content leakage, lysis, and eventual death.

**Allylamines**(e.g., terbinafine) inhibit the rate-limiting enzyme squalene epoxidase, responsible for synthesizing precursors to ergosterol. This type of drug is another antifungal compound whose mechanism of action is the loss of cell membrane integrity.

**Echinocandins**(e.g., caspofungin) inhibit the fungal beta-(1,3)-D-glucan synthase, which is the enzyme responsible for synthesizing beta-(1,3)-D-glucan, a key component of fungal cell walls. Losing this cell wall component leads to osmotic instability and cell death.

**Griseofulvin**is a mitotic inhibitor, which binds to polymerized fungal microtubules, thereby inhibiting the de-polymerization and leading to the failure of the fungal cell replication.

**Flucytosine**is an antimetabolite compound absorbed into fungal cells via cytosine permease. Within the fungal cell, flucytosine gets converted to 5-fluorouracil, which interferes with fungal RNA biosynthesis.

**Ciclopirox**has a poorly understood mechanism of action but is believed to interfere with the structural integrity of the fungal cell membrane.

**Quinoline**antifungal (e.g., clioquinol) compound derivatives also have a poorly understood mechanism of action.

**Potassium Iodide**exerts its effects directly onSporothrix
spp., yet the exact mechanism of action remains unproven. Leading theories suggest that human polymorphonuclear cells convert potassium iodide to iodine via the action of myeloperoxidase. Iodine inhibits fungal germination and reduces structural integrity through the intracytosolic destruction of structural components.

**Zinc Pyrithione**has a poorly understood antifungal mechanism of action. Still, leading theories suggest this agent modifies fungal cellular membrane transport, leading to decreased concentrations of critical metabolic substrates, inhibiting protein synthesis, and limiting ATP production.