Capnography is a method of airway monitoring applicable in both controlled and spontaneously ventilating patients. The amount of infrared light absorbed by carbon dioxide in exhaled gas is measured and reported as a value of concentration. Waveform capnography can provide both qualitative data via waveform analysis and quantitative data via alveolar end-tidal carbon dioxide (ETCO2).

The waveform shows 4 phases of the respiratory cycle:

- Phase 1: The inspiratory baseline

- Phase 2: The expiratory upstroke

- Phase 3: The expiratory plateau

- Phase 4: The inspiratory downstroke

Changes in waveform morphology and amplitude can predict catastrophic events. Increases in ETCO2 may signify rebreathing or hypoventilation, malignant hyperthermia, sepsis, insufflation from laparoscopic surgery, or because of bicarbonate administration. Decreases in ETCO2 are noted during hyperventilation, hypothermia, low cardiac output states (e.g., pulmonary embolism or cardiac arrest), disconnection of the circuit, or accidental extubation. Morphology perturbations such as up-slanting of the expiratory upstroke or prolongation of the plateau phase can be evidence of airway obstruction seen in bronchospasm, asthma, pregnancy, chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD), or a kinked endotracheal tube (ETT). Waveform capnography is an essential monitor in all intubated patients, and its interpretation can guide ventilatory management.

Capnography has its limitations, especially when a patient is not intubated or no other secure airway is in place. Positive return of end-tidal carbon dioxide alone may or may not confirm endotracheal placement of ETT. A sustained greater than 30 mm Hg ETCO2 for 3 breaths minimum will confirm tracheal placement. Additionally, if a patient drank a bicarbonate solution or carbonated beverage before intubation, this may also alter ETCO2. Capnography requires cardiac output, and therefore its use is limited in pulseless patients. It may be used to target chest compressions where a sudden rise may indicate a return of spontaneous circulation.

The pulse oximeter is a non-invasive monitor used to detect changes in hemoglobin oxygenation saturation and heart rate. Pulse oximetry functions on spectrophotometry and photoplethysmography. Oxyhemoglobin absorbs infrared (IR) light at a wavelength of 940 nm, and deoxyhemoglobin absorbs red (R) light at a wavelength of 660 nm. When oxyhemoglobin absorbs emitted infrared light, it allows red light to be transmitted and received by the photodetector. The ratio of red light to infrared light is used to determine the percent of hemoglobin oxygen saturation. The pulsations occurring with each heartbeat are recorded as arterial blood and thus provide arterial blood oxygenation.

While there are many benefits to having a pulse oximeter to depict the quantity of blood oxygenation, this monitor has several limitations. One case is carbon monoxide poisoning resulting in carboxyhemoglobin, which, together with oxyhemoglobin have the same absorption wavelength of 660 nm and therefore, can demonstrate a falsely elevated oxygen saturation. Similarly, with methemoglobinemia, which has the same absorption coefficient at both red and infrared light (resulting in a 1:1 R/IR ratio), depicts a saturation of approximately 85%. This phenomenon results in a falsely low oxygen saturation when the saturation is greater than 85%, and falsely elevated saturation when the saturation is less than 85%. Additional considerations include accuracy of oxygen saturation in situations of acid-base disorders, severe hypoxemia less than 70% SaO2, dark blue, purple, or green nail polish. Likewise, conditions involving excessive motion, ambient light, low perfusion due to low cardiac output, hypothermia, increased systemic vascular resistance, profound anemia, methylene blue dye, and malpositioning may also alter readings and should be considered.