Biotin (B7) has a key role in cellular energy metabolism, including ATP production and regulation of oxidative stress, since it is a crucial cofactor for five carboxylases that works for mitochondrial metabolism of glucose, fatty acids, and amino acids. Holocarboxylase synthetase plays a vital role in protein biotinylation, and protein biotinidase is essential for the release of biotin from biotinylated peptides.

Current evidence shows a vital role of biotin in gene expression and chromatin structure. Approximately 2000 genes have been identified so far that are biotin-dependent. Biotin is attached to histones, and this histone biotinylation appears to work in transcriptional repression of genes and thus maintain genome stability.

Biotin also regulates immunological and inflammatory functions. Patients with multiple carboxylase deficiency, which has links with biotin deficiency, have shown defects in B-cell and T-cell immunity. Biotin plays a key role in the function of natural killer (NK) lymphocytes and the generation of cytotoxic T lymphocytes. It shows a role in the maturation and responsiveness of immune cells. Evidence shows increasing interleukin-1-beta (IL-1-beta) and proinflammatory cytokines TNF-alpha in biotin deficiency. Biotin levels also affect transcriptional factors, such as NF-kappa B.

In addition to the role biotin plays as a cofactor in various carboxylation reactions, recently, it has been observed that biotin plays important roles in gene expression and immune mechanisms.

Five biotin-dependent carboxylases exist as inactive apoforms.

- Pyruvate carboxylase (PC) - catalyzes an important step in the gluconeogenesis, TCA cycle, and lipogenesis

- Propionyl-CoA carboxylase (PCC) - important in the metabolism of amino acids and odd-chain fatty acids

- 3-Methylcrotonoyl-CoA carboxylase (MCC) - carries out the catabolism of leucine

- Acetyl-CoA carboxylase 1 (ACC 1) - converts acetyl CoA to malonyl CoA, which is a significant step in lipid synthesis

- Acetyl-CoA carboxylase 2 (ACC 2) - has a regulatory function in fatty acid oxidation

Biotin deficiency can also manifest clinically due to genetic disorders leading to a lack of the enzyme holocarboxylase synthetase, or the individual carboxylase enzymes can be deficient. Biotinylation of histones may have an important role in gene expression. Biotin has also been observed to affect gene expression via other mechanisms. Many biotin-dependent genes have been studied in human cells. Some of these genes encode enzymes involved in glucose metabolism, cytokines like interleukin-2 and insulin receptors.