The NOX family (NOX1-5) has conserved structural properties, which allow for catalytic activity. Each homolog comprises 6 to 7 transmembrane domains, with 2 heme units in the N-terminal region containing histidine residues and an NADPH binding site in the cytoplasmic C-terminal. The isoforms make a multimeric complex, characterized by a core catalytic subunit with 5 regulatory subunits. The NOX2 isoform is most commonly implicated in CGD.

Normally, phagocytes synthesize reactive oxygen species (ROS) by NADPH oxidase. Superoxide is a potent ROS and is generated within the phagosome that has engulfed a microorganism. NADPH oxidase comprises 5 subunits, 3 cytosolic (p47phox, p67phox and  p40phox), and 2 membranous units (gp91phox and p22phox). On activation, the cytosolic components migrate after recruiting Rac1/2 to gp91phox. Once all NADPH oxidase subunits and Rac 1/2 combine, they constitute the fully formed enzyme and become active.

The gp91phox subunit plays a pivotal role in transferring electrons from NADPH and coupling them to molecular oxygen inside the phagosome, via heme and flavin adenine dinucleotide (FAD). This forms an untimely superoxide anion which can then give rise to other ROS, including hydrogen peroxide via superoxide dismutase and hypochlorous acid (via myeloperoxidase), hydroxyl radicals, and secondary amines, which can efficiently kill microorganisms. The rapid oxygen consumption and production of superoxide and its metabolites are described as respiratory burst.

The external membrane of the phagocytic cell merging with bacteria leads to an intracellular vesicle formation, where superoxide and oxygen-derived products enable potassium influx and an increased pH within the phagosome. After that, activation of granule proteases such as elastase, proteinase 3, and cathepsin G leads to the destruction of ingested microorganisms. ROS can give rise to toxic intermediates with added reactivity. The reactive compounds and enzymes collectively form a highly toxic environment that can kill almost all pathogens. Consequentially, patients with CGD having defective ROS production cannot directly or indirectly kill certain pathogens effectively.

Studies report that CGD patients are unable to enhance neutrophil extracellular traps (NETs), which are involved in entangling and killing bacteria and fungi, due to the reduced hydrogen peroxide formation. Other research suggests that CGD results in reduced efferocytosis, a process where phagocytes remove apoptotic inflammatory cells, and, consequentially, these defects may contribute to the granulomatous inflammation often observed in CGD.

CGD arises from mutations resulting in loss or functional inactivation of the NADPH oxidase complex subunits. There are various genes associated with the 5 components of NADPH oxidase and mutations to gp91phox, p22phox, p47phox, p67phox, or p40phox genes up the NADPH oxidase complex, account for most of the CGD phenotypes. Most mutations for CGD are autosomal recessive, but only the NOX2 variant is X-linked recessive.

The NOX2 (gp91phox) gene is encoded by CYBB (cytochrome b (-245), beta subunit), which is located on chromosome X. Approximately 70 percent of the CGD patients have the CYBB variant, which accounts for the greater prevalence of CGD in males. The p47phox gene, encoded by NCF1, accounts for 25% of cases due to a guanine-thymine deletion in exon 2. The other mutations account for the remaining 10% of cases.

In some cases, the mutations still render the NADPH oxidase partially intact, and consequentially, the disease phenotype is less severe. However, this depends largely on the gene mutated, the type of mutation, and the position of the mutation within the gene. In general, the NCF1 gene mutations lead to milder forms of the disease.