The generation of BCR/ABL1 results in the constitutive activation of tyrosine kinase. It results in continued cell proliferation, inhibiting cell differentiation, and cell death. There are numerous pathways associated with the pathogenesis of BCR-ABL1 gene, including:

- **JAK2/STAT pathway:**The activation of Janus Kinase (JAK) and Signal Transducers and Activation of Transcription (STAT) has been reported in P190 and P210positive leukemias. The JAK2/STAT activation in BCR/ABL1 leads to uncontrolled cell growth as well as cell survival.

- **PI3K****-****AKT****-****mTOR pathway**: The PI3K-AKT-mammalian target of the rapamycin (mTOR) pathway activates the c-kit positive hematopoietic stem cells; this leads to a proliferative state in CML.

- **MAPK/ERK (RAS/RAF/MEK/ERK) pathway**: This pathway is involved in signal transmission from cell surface receptors to nuclear factors involved in transcription. Osteopontin (OPN), which overexpresses in BCR/ABL1, uses this pathway to maintain a leukemic microenvironment. It, in turn, promotes and maintains the proliferation and survival of leukemic cells as well as plays a role in cell differentiation and apoptosis.

- **TRAIL-induced apoptosis**: Tumor necrosis factor (TNF)- related apoptosis-inducing ligand- TNFSF10 (TRAIL) is a death receptor ligand that normally plays a role in apoptosis. BCR/ABL1 oncogene results in the downregulation of TRAIL, hence leading to decreased apoptosis.

- **C/EBP****-mediated differentiation**: CCAAT/enhancer-binding proteins (C/EBPs) are a type of transcription factors that are involved in the regulation of normal maturation of common myeloid cells to granulocyte-monocyte progenitor cells. This pathway is suppressed by the BCR/ABL1 oncogene.

**CONCURRENT GENETIC ABNORMALITIES**:

In addition to the leukemogenic effect, evidence suggests that BCR/ABL1 oncogene independently leads to genomic instability.

Common genes that are reportedly deleted in Philadelphia positive leukemias include

- IKZF1 (7q12.2)

- PAX5 (9p13)

- EBF1 (5q34)

- CDKN2A/B (9p13-p23.1)

- IG (14q32.33)

- TCR (14q11.2)

- BTG1 (12q21.33)

Studies have shown that primary or acquired resistance to treatment as well as relapse, can be attributed to different mutations. Rearrangements in the BCR gene can help in the prediction of response to therapy.