Many important nerves in this region innervate local structures and other structures in the head and neck.

**Various Functions of Cranial Nerves**

Of note, this area houses sections of major cranial nerves. For instance, branches of the glossopharyngeal (CN IX) and vagus nerves (CV X) innervate the carotid body and carotid sinus, both of which are key structures in homeostasis. These are involved in blood pressure regulation and measuring blood oxygen levels, respectively.

Additionally, the vagus nerve runs between the carotid artery and the internal jugular vein in the carotid sheath. Its pharyngeal branches supply motor input to the internal muscles of the pharynx. One of its major branches, the superior laryngeal nerve branches into the internal and external laryngeal nerves, which supply sensation to the larynx superior to the vocal cords and innervation to the cricothyroid muscle, respectively.

Another important cranial nerve, hypoglossal (CN XII) nerve, can be found in this region descending posterior to the internal carotid artery as it crosses into the carotid triangle at the lateral surfaces of the bifurcated carotid arteries. It will course deep into the submandibular triangle to innervate intrinsic tongue muscles.

**Ansa Cervicalis Nerves**

A major loop of nerves in the anterior triangle is part of the ansa cervicalis in the cervical plexus. The superior root from the anterior ramus travels with CN XII and descends the anterior surface of the carotid sheath. The nerve for the thyrohyoid is a branch of the superior root that travels with the hypoglossal to innervate this muscle. The inferior root originates from the anterior rami of the C2-C3 spinal nerves and descends. These two loops then join around C5 vertebrae and give off branches to innervate the omohyoid, sternohyoid, and sternothyroid muscles.