# Continuing Education Activity

This activity reviews the principles behind refractive errors in children and the effects these uncorrected errors have on ocular visual development. It looks at the special procedures, testing requirements, and instrumentation required to examine a child properly. Suppression and amblyopia affect the developing visual system due to uncorrected refractive error. The activity also highlights the role of the family and interprofessional team in the process of prescribing glasses for children and in proper management and follow-up.

**Objectives:**
- Explain the optical basis for refractive errors.
- Describe the progression of different types of refractive errors in children.
- Summarize the modified ocular examination techniques needed for children.
- Review several factors affecting prescribing glasses for children.

# Introduction

Refractive errors are common in children.

Refractive errors result from the inability of the ocular refractive apparatus to sufficiently and accurately bend rays of light to a point focused on the retina. The prevalence of blurred vision precipitated by refractive errors amongst school-age children may reduce attention to detail, create a lack of interest in classwork and result in poor academic performance.

In some cases, significant refractive errors and spectacle use in parents may increase the likelihood of refractive errors in children being picked up earlier.

Children possess an active and malleable accommodation, which is attributable to the elasticity of the crystalline lens, intact extrinsic properties of the crystalline lens fibers, and degree of aggregated lens fibers. Consequently, children are more prone to vergence and accommodative dysfunctions, giving rise to binocular vision anomalies. The amplitude of accommodation tends to gradually and progressively recede in flexibility and magnitude with age.

The higher amounts of the amplitude of accommodation in children provided by the crystalline lens elasticity can mask a refractive error and bring parallel rays of light traveling from a distant object into focus on the retinal. This may grant the eye a pseudo-emmetropic status. This compensatory mechanism may break down with time resulting in fatigue and expressed symptoms. Children may have difficulty understanding their experience and relating their visual complaints and associated ocular discomfort to their parents and guardians.

This necessitates visual screening. A thorough evaluation can identify potential vision problems and eye disorders. Visual screening of children and teenagers, which can be done formally and informally, can help identify refractive errors, thus, enabling prompt medical attention.

In regions with limited resources, teachers can be trained to conduct vision screening.

Vision is commonly measured and recorded as visual acuity. Visual acuity is a measure of the resolving power of the human eye.

# Function

Uncorrected refractive error constitutes a leading cause of preventable visual impairment and blindness, creating a significant public health burden with enormous economic implications. The overall public health impact of uncorrected refractive error and other causes of preventable visual impairment has increased appreciably as the population increases and ages thus, forms an important basis of eye care advocacy in public health policies.

These policies tend to be targeted at facilitating early diagnosis and providing adequate management of refractive error. Various options are available for the management of refractive errors. However, spectacle correction is the most common option used in managing refractive errors in children. The prescribing philosophy of spectacle prescription in children is determined by the age of onset, magnitude and type of refractive error, accommodative anomalies, and the presence of latent and manifest deviation. Although most children have similar amounts of refractive errors in both eyes, anisometropia remains the most common cause of amblyopia among this group.

Myopia is more prevalent in children who frequently engage in indoor activities and near work when compared to those children that tend to spend more time outdoors.

Hyperopia is a refractive abnormality in which parallel rays of light incident on the eye are brought to focus behind the retina.

Astigmatism is commonly encountered in prescription glasses for first-grade children.

Special charts may be needed for screening children for refractive errors before prescribing lenses.

Several pharmaceutical cycloplegic agents are available for cycloplegic refraction. Atropine drops provide the strongest cycloplegia, with effects that may last up to fourteen days. The cycloplegic effect of homatropine and scopolamine closely approximates each other and may last up to three days. Other drops like cyclopentolate and tropicamide may last from several hours to one day.

Although tropicamide exacts a more mydriatic effect, it's primarily used when weak cycloplegia is required, as in older children. Due to the sympathomimetic effects of cycloplegic agents, efficacy and safety must be considered before use. Studies based on efficacy and safety suggest using tropicamide 0.5% combined with phenylephrine 0.5% in older children.

# Issues of Concern

Suppression is usually a manifest secondary adaptation used by the visual system to overcome diplopia in children. Suppression is usually detected using first or second-degree fusion tests such as the Maddox rod and Worth four-dot test. This test accesses the presence or absence of suppression via the temporary disruption of fusion. Clinically, this is achieved by presenting dissimilar images or objects of contrasting characteristics to each eye. Uncorrected refractive error in children may therefore be a risk for suppression as unequal amounts of ametropia may result in dissimilar images reaching the retina.

Individuals with significant differences in refractive error between both eyes may also suffer unequal retinal images due to the magnification (or minification) properties of spectacles. The amount of anisometropia that may trigger a breakdown of binocular vision is still up for debate.

Aniseikonia can be corrected by dispensing iseikonic lenses. However, these spectacles tend to be very expensive and are not easily available. Contact lenses have also shown promise in mitigating the occurrence of aniseikonia.

Strabismus is easily identified by an inward (eso) or outward (exo) turning of one or both eyes. Refractive amblyopia, a term used to describe vision loss secondary to uncorrected refractive error, is most commonly associated with anisometropia.

# Clinical Significance

The development of the visual system during the age of active neural plasticity depends on several factors, including the quality of the visual stimulus, the integrity of the visual pathway, and the child's general health status.

The quality of the visual stimulus sent to the cortex is further determined by the accurate bending of rays of light entering the eye to focus on the retina. In the presence of a refractive abnormality, parallel rays of light incident on the anterior refractive apparatus of the eye are refracted incorrectly. Therefore, the refracted light rays fall in front of or behind the retina. In astigmatism, refracted rays form a two-point focus due to the meridional difference in the refractive structures of the eye.

Accommodation is the ability of the eye to exact a given dioptric change in power with respect to a change in viewing distance to keep the retinal image clear. The stimulus to accommodation is a blurred retinal image. The increased crystalline elasticity and amplitude of accommodation, which is common in this young age group, tend to predispose children to slightly overestimated myopia when objective refraction is done without cycloplegia.

Refractive error determined by Mohindra retinoscopy is comparable to static retinoscopy when the accommodative tonus is eliminated by a cycloplegic agent.

# Other Issues

**Stigmatization of Glasses Among Children**

There is still considerable stigmatization of children wearing glasses, especially in public, among children with big or high-powered lenses.

Older children are more likely to be embarrassed among peers when compared to younger age groups.

Economic shortages, beliefs that children will "outgrow" the need for glasses, and reduced staff are a few factors responsible for the disparity in screening rates.

**Cosmesis and Frame/Lens Materials**

The selection of spectacle frames for a child involves standard measurements similar to those for adults. With children, however, it is essential to assess the fit and stability of the spectacles on the child's face. It is important to address the child's preferences when choosing the right glasses, which can help accept and collaborate the regular spectacle use. Red-colored plastic frames were found to be a favorite among children.

Rectangular glasses and spectacles with straight earpieces are also popular choices.

# Enhancing Healthcare Team Outcomes

Prescribing glasses for children is a responsibility that starts at the homefront, even before it gets to the clinic. Parents must be observant of tell-tale signs of poor vision. Children with visual problems tend to sit relatively close to the television or hold books close to their eyes to read. Some children may complain of asthenopic symptoms, while preverbal toddlers may have difficulty reaching for objects. These signs may be helpful to parents in seeking early vision testing to screen for uncorrected refractive errors. When spectacles are prescribed for children, parents can also be influenced by the price, quality, and type of frames (Level 3).

It is advisable to book children for morning appointments at the clinic when they will be more alert compared to evenings. Weekend appointments may also be better compared to weekdays, considering that school can make children tired and less collaborative. Numerous clinics have a child-friendly section that helps children relax during eye examinations and improves cooperation. The clinician must be efficient and thorough when examining children, considering that these age groups tend to bore easily and be less cooperative if not properly stimulated.