**Cardiovascular**

Sevoflurane induces a dose-dependent reduction in blood pressure and cardiac output primarily by reducing systemic vascular resistance.

**Respiratory**

Like all volatile anesthetic agents, sevoflurane is an airway irritant and may precipitate coughing, apnea, and laryngospasm. These reactions are less likely to be seen with sevoflurane than desflurane and isoflurane due to the sweet smell and low pungency of sevoflurane. Respiratory side effects are more common in patients with pre-existing lung pathology such as asthma, chronic obstructive pulmonary disease, and cystic fibrosis. Sevoflurane and other inhaled anesthetics also result in bronchodilation, blunting of the hypoxia/hypercapnia ventilatory response, and reverse hypoxic pulmonary vasoconstriction.

**Central Nervous System**

Sevoflurane causes dose-dependent vasodilation of cerebral vasculature, thereby increasing cerebral blood flow and intracranial pressure. Sevoflurane reduces the cerebral metabolic rate.

Pregnancy and Neurodevelopmental deficits: While several observational studies have found an increased risk of neurodevelopmental deficits in children exposed to anesthesia, at this time, there is no compelling evidence to attribute this effect to the anesthesia directly. At this time, no specific anesthetic agent should be avoided during pregnancy, nor should any necessary surgery be delayed due to concerns regarding neurotoxicity. A very small study covering sevoflurane during caesarian sections did not show any adverse effects on the mother or fetus. At present, there are no controlled data regarding its use in pregnancy in human subjects, and until there is more definitive data, the use of this drug during pregnancy should be limited to when it is absolutely necessary.

**Adverse Reactions**

Less than 10%

- Dose-dependent cardiovascular collapse: Hypotension (4% to 11%)

- Central nervous system: Emergence delirium and agitation (7% to 15%)

- Gastrointestinal: Nausea (25%); vomiting (18%)

One to 10%

- Cardiovascular: Tachycardia, bradycardia, hypertension

- Respiratory: Laryngospasm (2 to 8%), breath-holding, apnea

Less than 1%

Anaphylaxis, anaphylactoid reaction, cardiac arrhythmias, QT prolongation, increased intracranial pressure, hepatotoxicity, electrolyte disturbances, malignant hyperthermia

**Drug Interactions**

Sevoflurane undergoes minimal hepatic metabolism. The small percentage, that is, acts as a substrate for multiple CYP enzymes (CYP2A6, CYP2B6, CYP3A4, CYP2E1). This metabolism creates the potential for many clinically relevant drug interactions secondary to the large percentage of drugs metabolized by these hepatic enzymes.