Patients with Hoffa pad impingement syndrome report a "burning" or "aching" sensation to the anterior knee localized deep to and on either side of the patellar tendon adjacent to the inferior pole of the patella. This most commonly occurs with the knee at full extension, dynamic extension, or prolonged flexion. The pain usually occurs over a prolonged period and may be associated with a previous knee injury or may be idiopathic.

Physical examination reveals discomfort and tenderness around the patellar tendon, typically located close to the inferior pole of the patella. All patients have some degree of range of motion restriction, and one study reported severe limiting at 20 degrees of flexion. Pain at the end of the extension is also common in patients with fat pad impingement.

The patient's symptoms can be reproduced with the Hoffa test, which is performed by applying firm pressure with the thumb inferior to the patella just outside the margin of the patellar tendon with the knee in 30 degrees of flexion. With steady pressure, the knee is fully extended. Increased pain with this maneuver is a positive test. The test is then repeated on the medial or lateral side of the tendon.

Care must be taken to differentiate this anterior knee pain from joint line pain secondary to anterior meniscal pathology.

The arthroscopic release has been devised for anterior interval release followed by rehabilitation, which focuses on preventing re-scarring with extension exercises and patellar mobilization.