Acute abdominal pain frequently poses a diagnostic dilemma. These patients may exhibit non-specific signs and symptoms such as vomiting, nausea, and leukocytosis. The cause of acute abdominal pain may be due to a myriad of diagnosis including gynecological, obstetrical, gastrointestinal, urological, metabolic and vascular etiologies. While the physical exam may reveal that the patient has a surgical abdomen, the cause is difficult to know without proper imaging studies.

**An Interprofessional Approach and Outcomes**

While the general surgeon is almost always involved in the care of patients with an acute abdomen, it is important to consult with an interprofessional team of specialists that include an obstetrician, gynecologist, and a vascular surgeon. The nurses are also a vital member of the interprofessional group as they will monitor the patient's vital signs. In the postoperative period for pain, wound infection and ileus; the pharmacist will ensure that the patient is on the right analgesics, antiemetics, and appropriate antibiotics. The radiologist also plays a vital role in determining the cause. Without providing a proper history, the radiologist may not be sure what to look for or what additional radiologic exams may be needed. This problem gets even more complex when women of childbearing age present with an acute abdomen. The American College of Radiology Appropriateness Criteria® are evidence-based guidelines for specific clinical disorders that are reviewed by an interprofessional expert committee every three years. The current guidelines have been developed after an exhaustive review of current medical literature from peer-reviewed journals to determine the appropriateness of radiological imaging and treatment procedures by the committee. In cases where evidence is not definitive or minimal, expert opinion from the specialist may be utilized to recommend the type of imaging or treatment.

The outcomes of an acute abdomen depend on the cause. However, to improve outcomes, prompt consultation with an interprofessional group of specialists is recommended.