The primary blood supply to the face derives from the external carotid artery and the branches of the external carotid artery. As the common carotid artery ascends cranially, it branches into the internal and external carotid arteries. The external carotid artery further branches into superior thyroid, lingual, facial, ascending pharyngeal, occipital, posterior auricular, maxillary, and superficial temporal arteries. The facial, superficial temporal, and maxillary arteries are the main vessels that will provide perfusion to the face. The superficial temporal artery travels toward the temporal and forehead region. The superficial temporal artery perfuses the structures mainly in the temporal and forehead territories. The facial artery is responsible for perfusing the majority of the face. The facial artery travels toward the nose and lips, while the maxillary artery provides some perfusion to the cheek region. The maxillary artery travels toward the deep structures and perfusing the deeper facial structures.

The lymphatic drainage of the face is dependent on the location on the face. The nasal region contains facial lymph nodes, while the region closer to the ears and angle of the mandible contain preauricular lymph nodes. The lymph in the face tends to drain to submental, submandibular, and cervical lymph nodes depending on which is closer. The right side of the face will eventually drain into the right lymphatic duct while the left side will drain into the thoracic duct. The right lymphatic duct and the thoracic duct then drain back into the central circulation.