Basidiobolomycosis presents as a disc-shaped, rubbery, mobile mass that may be large, and these lesions are usually located in the thorax, back, or thighs. Lesions are painless and firm, but the inflammation results in skin erythema and warmth. These patients might present with significant nonpitting edema of the area involved, skin ulceration, and lymph node enlargement. It is a slowly progressive disease and is rarely life-threatening.

Uncommon presentations include extracutaneous involvement, primarily gastrointestinal and systemic dissemination. Gastrointestinal basidiobolomycosis (GIB) can present with abdominal pain, mass, fever, nausea, vomiting, diarrhea, constipation, bloody mucus discharge, and weight loss. The symptoms can mimic that of colon cancer and inflammatory bowel disease. We need to consider GIB as a differential in tropical and subtropical regions for patients presenting with any gastrointestinal mass with subacute onset of abdominal pain, weight loss, and fever with labs showing eosinophilia.

Conidiobolomycosis usually presents with nasal drainage and obstruction along with paranasal sinus pain. This condition is often confined to the rhinofacial area, and medical care is not sought until there is substantial swelling of the upper lip or face. Swelling is usually firm and painless. It may slowly extend into the nasal bridge and upper and lower face, including orbit. There is no angioinvasion, and intracranial extension is uncommon. There are case reports of invasive forms of the disease in the immunocompromised host where the organism act as an opportunistic pathogen. Endocarditis and fatal dissemination have also been seen.