Baro-challenge-induced Eustachian tube dysfunction describes the failure of the Eustachian tube to open with the surrounding pressure changes, thereby inhibiting the regulation of middle-ear pressure. Patients will have normal otoscopy and tympanometry findings, as the failure of tube opening is situation-specific and arise with increased atmospheric pressure, e.g., deep-sea diving or descent from altitude. The stress imposed on the mucosal surfaces of the Eustachian tube by repetitive equalization maneuvers from the increased atmospheric pressure leads to localized inflammation and mucosal edema. This affects the ability for subsequent attempts at opening and clearance. By applying oral or topical decongestants for the treatment of baro-challenge induced ETD, it is thought that mucosal edema and local tissue hyperemia is reduced, thereby shrinking the nasopharyngeal mucosa and improving Eustachian tube patency.

Patulous ETD is caused by an overtly patent Eustachian tube, whereby the failed tube closure at rest provides continuous communication between the nasopharynx and the middle ear. This creates the reported symptom of autophony, with habitual ‘sniffing’ to help alleviate self-vocalization.

Physiological causes of dilatory ETD involve the development of inflammation and mucosal edema, caused by episodes of rhinitis, upper respiratory tract infection, or gastro-oesophageal reflux disease, which leads to blockage of the orifice and dysfunction. Malignancy such as nasopharyngeal carcinoma can present with unilateral obstruction and must be excluded, with benign causes of obstruction including adenoidal hypertrophy and sequelae following adenoidectomy. Aural fullness is a common symptom due to the build-up of negative middle ear pressure.