Disruption of the biliary tree and subsequent bile leakage is the cause of most bilomas. Encapsulation of the bile leak is thought to be via two mechanisms, depending on the rate of bile leakage. Most commonly, slow bile leakage causes mild inflammation in the surrounding abdominal tissues or liver parenchyma, resulting in fibrosis and encapsulation. Bile acids produce low-grade inflammation in surrounding tissues because of their detergent and tissue destroying properties.

Biliary peritonitis can be present in large volume, rapid bile leaks. This may present with encapsulation; however, patients may present acutely before encapsulation has occurred. Intraperitoneally, the omentum and mesentery can form inflammatory adhesions aiding encapsulation.

Extravasated bile follows abdominal anatomy with its shape often demarcated by the diaphragm, liver margins, mesentery, and transverse mesocolon. It is not uncommon for patients to have multiple bilomas. Extrahepatic bilomas predominantly form in the right upper quadrant of the abdomen. However, in about 40% of cases, bile migrates over the anterior part of the liver to the left subphrenic or left subhepatic spaces.

Biloma content is typically greenish-yellow bile. However, they can contain blood or exudate, especially in the context of infection. Secondary infection can lead to a systemic inflammatory response, sepsis, and abscess formation. The natural history of abdominal bile collections from injured bile ducts is the progression from sterile bile collection to infection.