Ventilation management is an ever-growing and changing environment in which medical professionals, through positive patient outcomes can determine the best approach to patient care. This activity discusses the use of pressure support ventilation and its role in assisting the spontaneous breathing patient population. Evidence-based practice will also be referenced regarding the pressure support mode and its role in liberating patients from mechanical ventilation. Pressure support breathing is a mode of ventilation that is made up of patient-triggered, pressure-limited, flow-cycled breaths. Each patient's breath is supplemented with a set amount of positive pressure. Low levels of pressure support less than 5 cm H2O are often utilized to decrease resistance by overcoming ventilator accessory dead space such as the circuitry and its components. Higher levels of pressure support are introduced to alleviate the work of breathing by introducing positive pressure to compliment the patient's spontaneous effort. If pressure support levels of 10 to 12 mL/kg are utilized, all of the work of breathing is being assumed by the ventilator. It is valuable to note that the patient has consistent control over breath frequency, breath duration, and flow while in a pressure support ventilation environment. The volume of each breath is a direct result of set pressures, patient effort, and potentially other mechanical settings that may oppose ventilation. This activity describes the indications, contraindications, and clinical benefits of pressure support in ventilated patients.

**Objectives:**
- Review the indications for pressure support in ventilated patients.
- Summarize the contraindications of pressure support in ventilated patients.
- Describe the clinical benefits of pressure support on ventilated patients.
- Outline the importance of improving care coordination amongst the interprofessional team to enhance the delivery of care for patients on the ventilator.