Uncorrected refractive error constitutes a leading cause of preventable visual impairment and blindness, creating a significant public health burden with enormous economic implications. The overall public health impact of uncorrected refractive error and other causes of preventable visual impairment has increased appreciably as the population increases and ages thus, forms an important basis of eye care advocacy in public health policies.

These policies tend to be targeted at facilitating early diagnosis and providing adequate management of refractive error. Various options are available for the management of refractive errors. However, spectacle correction is the most common option used in managing refractive errors in children. The prescribing philosophy of spectacle prescription in children is determined by the age of onset, magnitude and type of refractive error, accommodative anomalies, and the presence of latent and manifest deviation. Although most children have similar amounts of refractive errors in both eyes, anisometropia remains the most common cause of amblyopia among this group.

Myopia is more prevalent in children who frequently engage in indoor activities and near work when compared to those children that tend to spend more time outdoors.

Hyperopia is a refractive abnormality in which parallel rays of light incident on the eye are brought to focus behind the retina.

Astigmatism is commonly encountered in prescription glasses for first-grade children.

Special charts may be needed for screening children for refractive errors before prescribing lenses.

Several pharmaceutical cycloplegic agents are available for cycloplegic refraction. Atropine drops provide the strongest cycloplegia, with effects that may last up to fourteen days. The cycloplegic effect of homatropine and scopolamine closely approximates each other and may last up to three days. Other drops like cyclopentolate and tropicamide may last from several hours to one day.

Although tropicamide exacts a more mydriatic effect, it's primarily used when weak cycloplegia is required, as in older children. Due to the sympathomimetic effects of cycloplegic agents, efficacy and safety must be considered before use. Studies based on efficacy and safety suggest using tropicamide 0.5% combined with phenylephrine 0.5% in older children.