It is essential to obtain a thorough history and mechanism of injury when evaluating a patient with a foot injury. The mechanism alone can help clue the clinician into potential injuries of the foot. Patients will often not be able to weight-bear following the injury, which will help clue the examiner in on a possible dislocation or fracture being present.

On physical exam, one of the first things an examiner will notice upon the inspection are signs of bruising or if an obvious deformity is present. Lisfranc injuries typically present with a swelling in the midfoot, a foot locked in plantar flexion, and findings of ecchymosis on the plantar surface are pathognomonic.

- The piano key test, where the provider grasps the metatarsals of the affected foot and performs plantarflexion and dorsiflexion at the tarsometatarsal joint, noting any pain or subluxation.

- Compression of the midfoot with plantar flexion and dorsiflexion of the first metatarsal head relative to the second

- Compression along the wide-axis of the foot to induce stress between the first and second metatarsals, noting any pain or palpable clicks

- Stabilization of the hindfoot while the forefoot is passively pronated and abducted, noting any pain.

Visual clues for subtalar dislocation are dramatic and usually present. When a medial subtalar dislocation, the foot will be locked in supination, “acquired clubfoot.” When a lateral dislocation is present, the foot will be locked in pronation, “acquired flatfoot.” Lisfranc dislocations normally present with the foot locked in plantarflexion.

After inspection, palpation can clue the examiner in on swelling and tenderness of focal areas of the foot that is injured. Additionally, it is important to palpate and check for potential vascular compromise or any neurological injuries. The clinician performs this through the evaluation of the patient’s dorsalis pedis (DP) and posterior tibial (PT) pulses. Capillary refill should also be examined and documented before and following closed reduction.