The goal of therapy in primary biliary cholangitis is to prevent the disease progression and manage the symptoms and complications related to chronic cholestasis.

Ursodeoxycholic acid (UDCA) is approved by the food and drug administration (FDA) for the treatment of PBC. It is a hydrophilic bile salt, which stabilizes hepatocyte membranes against toxic bile salts and inhibits apoptosis and fibrosis. The recommended dose is 13 mg/kg to 15 mg/kg per day. Patients benefit most when UDCA is started at an earlier stage, which has been shown to delay the progression of the disease and the development of cirrhosis. UDCA also leads to histological improvement.

In patients who do not respond to UDCA, obeticholic acid (OBCA) an alternative FDA-approved medication with restriction use can be administered with UDCA. OBCA is a farnesoid X receptor agonist, that helps to reduce ALP, GGT, and transaminase levels due to its antifibrotic and choleretic properties. However, it does not improve survival or disease-related symptoms.

**Complications of chronic cholestasis**

**Bone disease:**Osteoporosis and pathologic fracture is the most common bone disease in cholestatic liver disease such as primary biliary cholangitis. Hence, it is recommended that the Dexa scan be obtained at the diagnosis of primary biliary cirrhosis. This can be prevented by daily oral vitamin D and calcium supplementation and daily exercise. Estrogen therapy is recommended in a postmenopausal patient with primary biliary cholangitis has been shown to prevent loss of bone mass or bone mineral density.

**Fat-soluble vitamin deficiency:**Deficiency of fat-soluble vitamins A, D, E, and K are secondary to malabsorption due to decreased amounts of bile salts in the intestinal lumen. Levels of these vitamins should be checked periodically and supplemented accordingly.

**Hyperlipidemia:**About 85% of patients with primary biliary cholangitis have a deranged lipid profile. As the disease progress, HDL decreases, and LDL increases. Statins are recommended and have not shown to have a deleterious effect on liver function. In addition, patients with primary biliary cirrhosis and abnormal lipid profile have not shown to have elevated risk for myocardial infarction and strokes.

**Pruritus:**The actual cause of pruritus is understood poorly in primary biliary cholangitis Nonetheless, various agents have been shown to provide symptomatic relief. These are cholestyramine, rifampin UDCA, naltrexone, and antihistamines like diphenhydramine and hydroxyzine.

**Steatorrhea:**The cause for steatorrhea in primary biliary cholangitis is thought to be secondary to a decreased level of bile acid in the small intestine. Patients who have other coexisting autoimmune diseases such as celiac disease and scleroderma, small intestinal bacterial overgrowth (SIBO) can be the cause for steatorrhea as well. It is essential to find out the cause of steatorrhea and treat it accordingly. In patients who do not have sufficient bile acids in the small intestine, the medium-chain triglycerides (TGs) should be substituted for long-chain TGs in the diet, and total fat intake should be reduced. In the case of SIBO, intermittent broad-spectrum antibiotics can be used.

**Liver transplant: Liver transplant is the standard gold treatment for primary biliary cholangitis.**Patients with primary biliary cholangitis will develop complications related to cirrhosis (hepatic encephalopathy, recurrent ascites, severe portal hypertensive gastropathy, bleeding, or hemorrhage secondary to gastric or esophageal varices). They will also have disabling symptoms such as fatigue, intractable pruritus, and severely deranged bilirubin level in the absence of liver cancer. These patients should be evaluated for a liver transplant.