Congestive heart failure (CHF) patients can benefit from metolazone's diuretic effect. In one trial, adding metolazone to a loop diuretic (furosemide) in treating edema associated with CHF showed an increase in diuresis, urinary output, and weight loss compared to furosemide or metolazone alone.

Effective treatment of edema associated with congestive heart failure and kidney disease requires the participation of every interprofessional healthcare team member. Metolazone is typically prescribed by clinicians (MDs, DOs, NPs, PAs) in patients with congestive heart failure with significant congestion and resistance to loop diuretics. Usually, heart failure specialist consultation is required to manage volume overload in acute decompensated heart failure. Nephrologist consultation is necessary for patients with edema due to kidney disease. Pharmacists should verify the dosing and check for potential drug interactions, reporting any concerns to the nursing staff or prescriber. Nursing should note any adverse events during metolazone therapy, monitor body weight and urine output, and reach out to the pharmacist if they have any questions. Both nursing and pharmacy have a significant responsibility in patient counseling.

In acute decompensated heart failure, close communication and collaboration between different team members are vital to optimize the outcomes related to metolazone therapy and minimize adverse drug reactions. According to  2022 AHA/ACC/HFSA guidelines, patients should receive treatment from multidisciplinary teams to facilitate the implementation of Goal-directed medical therapy (GDMT); hence; an interprofessional team approach and collaboration between cardiologists, HF specialists, nurses, pharmacists, dieticians, primary care clinicians, social workers, primary care clinicians, and additional specialists is crucial to optimize outcomes related to metolazone therapy with minimal adverse drug reactions.