Childhood disintegrative disorder under ASD is a very rare disease. The disorder is complex to manage and is best done with an interprofessional team that specializes in the management of childhood behavior disorders.

The main feature of this disease is that after achieving age-appropriate milestones, a child's previously acquired skills regress. Unlike autism, seizures are more frequently seen. The cause of this condition is not known, and there is no cure. It is important to recognize this disease and follow up with combined child pediatric and psychiatric assessments. Corticosteroid treatment seems to improve language, motor skills, and behavior in these children. It is important for primary care clinicians, including physician assistants, nurse practitioners, and physicians be familiar with this disease so that appropriate diagnosis and appropriate treatment can be obtained.

Because many clinicians are not aware of childhood disintegrative disorder, they should seek advice from the Autism Society of America. Besides providing educational information, the society also provides legal assistance.

The school nurse should be actively involved in the care of these children as they have severe developmental disabilities and are vulnerable to physical and sexual abuse. Parents need to be educated about this disorder and be trained to recognize sexual abuse. The social worker should be involved to ensure that the home environment is safe and prevents the child from wandering away. Additionally, parents need to advise teachers to watch over their children while in school.

Finally, there is a problem with informed consent. Unless the issue is life-threatening, everyone involved in the care of the child should first get consent from the parent if an intervention is required. Not doing so can lead to unnecessary legal troubles.

Pharmacists should review medications, check the dosage, and review usage and side effects with parents. [Level 5]

Outcomes

The outcomes for these children are guarded, and the quality of life is very poor. Many succumb to illness and die prematurely.