**Luteal phase deficiency:**

Luteal phase deficiency is defined as a decreased lifespan of the corpus luteum and thus causes the premature formation of the corpus albicans. Normally the corpus luteum has a lifespan of eleven to fourteen days, but in a luteal phase defect the corpus luteum functions for less than nine days. Typically this deficiency is caused by a lack of the proper progesterone levels that are responsible for maintenance of the corpus luteum. Clinically, this deficiency can be a cause for recurrent early pregnancy loss. The past diagnostic gold standard for a luteal phase defect was a luteal phase biopsy; however, the medical community has decided its imprecision makes it no longer clinically relevant. Treatment can include progesterone supplementation.

**Corpus Albicans calcification:**

The corpus albicans is infrequently visible on clinical imaging. However, in post-menopausal women, sometimes the corpus albicans can have an abnormal appearance due to the menopausal related hormonal changes. A decrease in estrogen and a decrease in both immune-mediated phagocytic and fibroblastic activity can lead to poor formation and regression of the corpus albicans; this can lead to ultrasound detection of these structures and possible confusion with ovarian neoplasms. Both hemosiderin and calcium deposition within the structure of the corpus albicans itself can lead to increased ultrasound detection. They appear as small echogenic foci without distal acoustic shadowing. In addition to ultrasound, these calcifications can also show up in plain film radiographs of the pelvis.