The visual pathway refers to the series of anatomic structures responsible for transporting visual information from the eye to the brain. Most visual information follows the same course throughout the visual pathway:

Retina -> optic nerve (cranial nerve II) -> optic chiasm -> optic tract -> lateral geniculate bodies (majority) + hypothalamus -> optic radiations -> visual cortex

After exiting the orbit, the right and left optic nerves travel posteriorly and intersect at the ventral midline to form the optic chiasm.

**Orientation of Fibers**

At the optic chiasm, a proportion of axons from the left and right optic nerves decussate (cross the midline) to join with uncrossed fibers of the contralateral optic nerve.

RGC axons remain grouped with other axons from the same retinal quadrant and exit the retina in the same position within the optic nerve; i.e., superior-temporal axons exit the eye within the superior-temporal optic nerve. Within the intracranial optic nerve, macular fibers migrate to the center of the nerve; all other axons remain grouped by quadrant. At the chiasm, decussating axons from the superior-nasal retina travel posteriorly within the chiasm, while those originating from the inferior-nasal retina travel anteriorly.

There has been extensive debate regarding the route of decussating nasal fibers within the chiasm and the existence of physiologic loops of fibers known as the knees of Wilbrand. There are four theoretical “knees”; two anteriorly and two posteriorly. The anterior knees are thought to be formed from inferior-nasal fibers after they cross within the anterior chiasm and travel approximately 4 mm into the contralateral optic nerve before looping back on course to join with the uncrossed temporal RGC axons. In contrast, the posterior knees are thought to result from the looping of superior-nasal fibers into the ipsilateral optic tracts prior to their decussation cross within the posterior aspect of the chiasm.

Some advocates argue that damage to the anterior knee of Wilbrand is the sole explanation for the existence of a junctional scotoma visual field defect. This theory has since been debunked (see Clinical Significance). Recent studies using more advanced neuroimaging techniques have failed to identify the presence of the knees of Wilbrand; much of the literature is shifting towards rejecting its presence in patients without pathology.

The proportion of decussating axons is directly related to the position of the eyes and thus varies amongst species. In most species (e.g., chicken), the eyes are positioned laterally with no overlap in the visual field; accordingly, all RGC axons project contralaterally at the chiasm.

In humans, the medial location of the eyes results in an overlap of approximately half of the visual field; thus, virtually all temporal nasal fibers decussate to and join the temporal fibers of the contralateral eye.

**Size**

Various studies have sought to estimate normal chiasmal size using magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) studies. Measurements are, to some degree, subjective and differ between radiologists; inconsistency amongst studies primarily results from interobserver variability of measurements. Table 1 lists measurements for mean anatomical width, height, and area of the optic chiasm obtained in recent studies.

**Table 1. Chiasmal Size Measurements Reported in Various Studies**

**Juenger et al. (2020)**

**Polat et al. (2020)**

**Mncube et al. (2019)**

**Wagner et al. (1997)**

**Parravano et al. (1993)**

**Mean Width (mm)**

**12.23**

**12.93**

**13.63**

**14.0**

**15.0**

**Mean Height (mm)**

**1.93**

**2.82**

**2.26**

**n/a**

**3.5**

**Mean Area (mm)**

**27.07**

**n/a**

**n/a**

**43.7**

**n/a**

Studies have found no statistically significant differences in chiasmal size based on gender. Clinically, chiasmal size may indicate pathology (see Clinical Significance).