The standard or majority configuration of the renal arterial vasculature usually begins with a single artery that divides into anterior and posterior branches.  All renal arteries are end arteries without significant collateral arteries supplying the same vascular bed.  The distal arterioles end where the anterior and posterior supply regions meet.  This area, typically located along the posterolateral aspect of the kidney and referred to as Hyrtl's or Brodel's line, is the theoretically safest place to obtain renal tissue samples for non-targeted biopsies.  This area of relative hypovascularity is not visible on medical imaging exams.

The normal native kidney is situated in the retroperitoneal space.  Biopsies of native kidneys should be performed when possible such that the needle only enters this space in an attempt to decrease complications.  Passing a needle through the central hilum of the kidney, where the larger arteries, veins, and calyces are located, should also be avoided.  For non-targeted biopsies, sampling the renal cortex is usually preferred oversampling the renal medulla because the majority of glomeruli used for evaluation are located there.

Prior to the procedure, imaging (ultrasound (US), computed tomography (CT), or magnetic resonance imaging (MRI)) is useful to assist with planning the needle tract that will be used to perform the procedure.  Renal variants, such as ectopic or horseshoe-shaped kidneys, may require an approach different than that taken for a person with typical anatomy.