In addition to physical examination, evaluation of postmenopausal bleeding is directed at either diagnosing or excluding hyperplasia or malignancy. The American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists recommend transvaginal ultrasound for initial evaluation.

Findings on ultrasound for which endometrial sampling are indicated include:

- A thickened endometrial lining greater than 4 mm

- Diffuse or focally increased echogenicity or heterogeneity

- The inability to visualize the endometrium adequately

Endometrial sampling should also be obtained in patients with persistent or recurrent bleeding, even in the setting of a thin endometrial echo.

The diagnostic accuracy of endometrial sampling correlates positively with the amount of tissue that is collected.

It is common for endometrial sampling to result in findings that are insufficient for diagnosis, with rates of sampling failure up to 54%.

A thickened endometrial echo may be caused, not by hyperplasia or malignancy, but by intracavitary lesions such as endometrial polyps. If ultrasound findings are suggestive of such lesions, or if there is a history-indicated suspicion (for example, prior polyps), additional imaging may help to identify if a polyp or other intracavitary lesion is present. Saline-infusion ultrasonography or hysterosalpingogram may be useful in these cases.

Blind sampling may miss focal lesions or intrauterine pathology, such as polyps. Mass lesions may deflect flexible endometrial sampling devices. For patients with insufficient sampling, or with persistent vaginal bleeding in whom focal lesions may have been missed, additional evaluation should be considered. Hysteroscopy with dilation and curettage or directed biopsy may be warranted in these patients.