To understand the etiology of benign paroxysmal positional vertigo, an understanding of normal semicircular canal (SCC) anatomy and physiology is essential. Each inner ear is comprised of three SCCs situated in three perpendicular planes. Each canal has a tubular arm (crura) sprouting from a large barrel-like compartment. At the end of each of these arms, a dilated (ampullary) end is situated closer to the top or front portion. This is where the crista ampullaris with nerve receptors are present. To detect the flow of liquid in SCC, each crista ampullaris contains a sail-like tower, the cupula. If there is a sudden movement in the right direction, the fluid in the right-sided horizontal canal lags behind, making the cupula get deflected left, ampullopetal flow. A nerve signal is generated from this deflection, confirming the rotation of the head to the right. In this way, the cupula works as a three-way system that appropriately informs the body of a sensation of motion. The neutral position presents no motion.

In the cases of vertigo, particles in the canal slow down and may even reverse the motion of the cupula switch, creating signals which are incoherent with the actual head movement. This discrepancy of sensory information leads to the sensation of vertigo.

With BPPV, otoconia (also known as "otoliths" or "canaliths") dislodge and settle within the endolymph of the semicircular canals. When the head remains static, there is no stimulus. With motion, however, the displaced otoconia shift within the fluid, and the subsequent stimulus is unbalanced with respect to the opposite ear, inappropriately causing symptoms of dizziness, spinning, and/or swaying. Hence, symptoms of BPPV are profound with movement.

Based on underlying pathophysiology, BPPV can be classified into two categories based on two different theories:

**Cupulolithiasis Theory**

In 1962, Harold Schuknecht proposed this 'heavy cupula' theory in an attempt to explain the underlying pathology of BPPV.

**Canalithiasis Theory**

In 1980, Epley proposed his theory based on canalithiasis.