# Continuing Education Activity

Simethicone is a medication used in the management and treatment of flatulence. This activity describes the indications, mechanism of action, and contraindications for simethicone as a valuable agent in the control of excess gas production. In addition, this activity will highlight the adverse event profile, dosing, and drug interactions pertinent to the interprofessional healthcare team members in the management of patients with flatulence and related conditions.

**Objectives:**
- Identify the mechanism of action of simethicone.
- Describe the adverse effects of simethicone.
- Review the appropriate monitoring of simethicone.
- Outline some interprofessional team strategies for improving care coordination and communication. This knowledge will enhance simethicone use and improve outcomes.

# Indications

Simethicone is a silicone compound used for the management of flatulence and bloating. It relieves the discomfort produced by the presence of excess gas in the gastrointestinal tract. It was FDA approved in 1952.

Bernstein and Kasich performed one of the earliest studies of simethicone in 1974. This study was a double-blind, randomized, placebo-controlled trial where they compared simethicone 50 mg to placebo. Placebo was identical in taste and appearance. Inclusion criteria included subjects ranging in age from 21 to 65 years, an outpatient setting, a minimum of two of the symptoms that were under evaluation. Subjects were enrolled alternately to simethicone or placebo. Forty-one patients were enrolled in the study, with twenty in the simethicone group and twenty-one in the placebo group. The assigned medication was given 10 minutes before each meal and at bedtime for ten days. Changes in symptoms were evaluated around day five and again around day 10. Symptoms evaluated included gas, heartburn, fullness, full feeling, distension, stuffiness, acid indigestion, bloating, pressure, upset stomach, sour stomach, and pain after eating. Symptoms were evaluated by frequency and severity. When comparing the simethicone group to placebo, researchers observed a significant improvement in all symptoms in the simethicone group at visits on day five and day 10.

# Mechanism of Action

Simethicone is a silicone compound that functions as a non-systemic surfactant, decreasing the surface tension of gas bubbles in the GI tract. This action results in coalescence and dispersion of the gas bubbles allowing their removal from the GI tract as flatulence or belching. Simethicone causes the gas bubbles to accumulate and therefore pass more easily either through the upper GI or lower GI opening. Simethicone does not appear to reduce the actual production of gas in the GI tract.

Simethicone does not inhibit conditions such as lactose intolerance or medication side effects that increase the production of gas bubbles in the gastrointestinal tract.

# Administration

Simethicone administration is via the oral route. It comes manufactured as tablets, capsules, chewable films, and liquid. Although it is an inert compound, simethicone should not be administered parenterally or through inhalation. It is presumed safe in infants.

Adults: 40 to 125 mg orally four times daily as needed after meals and at bedtime; the maximum daily dose is 500 mg.

Children ages 2 to 12 years: 40 mg orally four times daily as needed after meals and at bedtime; the maximum daily dose is 480 mg.

Children and infants less than two years of age: 20 mg orally four times daily as needed after meals and at bedtime; the maximum daily dose is 240 mg.

Simethicone is available "over the counter" (OTC) medicine. It is manufactured in combination with medications such as aluminum hydroxide, magnesium hydroxide, calcium carbonate, and loperamide.

# Adverse Effects

Simethicone does not have any serious side effects. There have been reports of mild diarrhea and nausea.

# Contraindications

Simethicone is contraindicated in patients with a simethicone allergy.

# Monitoring

Simethicone is not absorbed systemically, so serum simethicone levels would not be feasible. An abdominal x-ray or computed tomography can assist in monitoring outcomes. However, imaging is very rarely needed. Simethicone has no significant drug interactions. There is a case report of changed absorption of levothyroxine in a child when taking simethicone. However, the overall concern is minimal.

Another case report indicated that carbamazepine toxicity could result when administering carbamazepine with simethicone.

# Toxicity

Simethicone is not absorbed systemically, so it is safe in pregnancy and breastfeeding.

# Enhancing Healthcare Team Outcomes

Simethicone is a frequently prescribed drug by primary care providers, internists, nurse practitioners, physician assistants, and gastroenterologists to treat flatulence and bloating. A knowledgeable provider can utilize simethicone to improve the patient's symptoms. In the hospital setting, simethicone can be ordered before meals and at bedtime, scheduled four times a day as needed. Hospital workflow and patient cognition is a consideration in inpatient settings. It can be more beneficial to order simethicone as a scheduled regimen, so the patient receives multiple doses consistently. Simethicone is highly cost-effective in treating bloating and flatulence. It is an OTC product purchased without a prescription. Pharmacists can assist with proper dosing and administration. Nursing can help to improve patient's utilization of simethicone. A dietician can assist a patient in enhancing their eating habits to avoid carbonated beverages and foods that increase gastrointestinal gas formation. The interprofessional team approach is the best means by which optimal patient outcomes can be achieved when using simethicone therapeutically. Thus, simethicone can help to treat flatulence and bloating safely. [Level 2]