There are multiple complications of blood transfusions, including infections, hemolytic reactions, allergic reactions, transfusion-related lung injury (TRALI), transfusion-associated circulatory overload, and electrolyte imbalance.

According to the American Association of Blood Banks (AABB), febrile reactions are the most common, followed by transfusion-associated circulatory overload, allergic reaction, TRALI, hepatitis C viral infection, hepatitis B viral infection, human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) infection, and fatal hemolysis which is extremely rare, only occurring almost 1 in 2 million transfused units of RBC.

For comparison, the lifetime odds of dying from a lightning strike are about 1 in 161,000.

A list of approximate risk per unit transfusion of RBC (adapted from AABB clinical guidelines published JAMA November 15, 2016) will be discussed here.

**Adverse Event and Approximate Risk Per Unit Transfusion of RBC**

- Febrile reaction: 1:60

- Transfusion-associated circulatory overload: 1:100

- Allergic reaction: 1:250

- TRALI: 1:12,000

- Hepatitis C infection: 1:1,149,000

- Human immunodeficiency virus infection: 1:1,467,000

- Fatal hemolysis: 1:1,972,000

**Febrile Reactions**

Transfusing with leukocyte-reduced blood products, which most blood products in the United States are, may help reduce febrile reactions. If this occurs, the transfusion should be halted, and the patient evaluated, as a hemolytic reaction can initially appear similar and consider performing a hemolytic or infectious workup. The treatment is with acetaminophen and, if needed, diphenhydramine for symptomatic control. After treatment and exclusion of other causes, the transfusion can be resumed at a slower rate.

**Transfusion-associated Circulatory Overload**

It is characterized by respiratory distress secondary to cardiogenic pulmonary edema. This reaction is most common in patients already in a fluid-overloaded state, such as congestive heart failure or acute renal failure. Diagnosis is based on symptom onset within 6 to 12 hours of receiving a transfusion, clinical evidence of fluid overload, pulmonary edema, elevated brain natriuretic peptide, and response to diuretics.

Preventive efforts and treatment include limiting the number of transfusions to the lowest amount necessary, transfusing over the slowest possible time, and administering diuretics before or between transfusions.

**Allergic Reaction**

It often manifests as urticaria and pruritis and occurs in less than 1% of transfusions. More severe symptoms, such as bronchospasm, wheezing, and anaphylaxis, are rare. Allergic reactions may be seen in patients who are IgA deficient, as exposure to IgA in donor products can cause a severe anaphylactoid reaction. This can be avoided by washing the plasma from the cells prior to transfusion. Mild symptoms, such as pruritis and urticaria can be treated with antihistamines. More severe symptoms can be treated with bronchodilators, steroids, and epinephrine.

**Transfusion-related Lung Injury (TRALI)**

This is uncommon, occurring in about 1:12,000 transfusions. Patients will develop symptoms within 2 to 4 hours after receiving a transfusion. Patients will develop acute hypoxemic respiratory distress, similar to acute respiratory distress syndrome (ARDS). Patients will have pulmonary edema, normal CVP, without evidence of left heart failure CVP. Diagnosis is made based on a history of recent transfusion, chest x-ray with diffuse patchy infiltrates, and the exclusion of other etiologies. While there is a 10% mortality, the remaining 90% will resolve within 96 hours with supportive care only.

**Infections**

These are potential complications. However, the risk of infections has decreased due to the screening of potential donors, so hepatitis C and human immunodeficiency virus risk are less than 1 in a million.

**Fatal Hemolysis**

This is extremely rare, occurring only in 1 out of nearly 2 million transfusions. It results from ABO incompatibility, and the recipient’s antibodies recognize and induce hemolysis in the donor’s transfused cells. Patients will develop an acute onset of fevers and chills, low back pain, flushing, dyspnea as well as becoming tachycardic and going into shock. Treatment is to stop the transfusion, leave the IV in place, intravenous fluids with normal saline, and keep urine output greater than 100 mL/hour, diuretics may also be needed. Cardiorespiratory support may be provided as appropriate. A hemolytic workup should also be performed, including sending the donor blood and tubing and post-transfusion labs (see below for list) from the recipient to the blood bank.

- Retype and crossmatch

- Direct and indirect Coombs tests

- Complete blood count (CBC), creatinine, PT, and PTT (draw from the other arm)

- Peripheral smear

- Haptoglobin, indirect bilirubin, LDH, plasma-free hemoglobin

- Urinalysis for hemoglobin

**Electrolyte Abnormalities**

They can also occur, although these are rare and more likely associated with large volume transfusion.

- Hypocalcemia can result as citrate, an anticoagulant in blood products, binds with calcium.

- Hyperkalemia can occur from the release of potassium from cells during storage. Higher risk in neonates and patients with renal insufficiency.

- Hypokalemia can result as a result of alkalinization of the blood as citrate is converted to bicarbonate by the liver in patients with normal hepatic function.