**The Hyoid and its Relation to Blood Vessels**

The tip of the greater horn of the hyoid is a significant landmark for cervical surgery in the mid-neck region. The carotid bifurcation, the superior thyroid artery, and the lingual artery are closely related to the tip of the greater horn. The tip of the greater horn is a useful landmark in locating these arteries during cervical surgery. The carotid bifurcation is located inferior and posterior to the tip of the greater horn. Also, the origin of the superior thyroid artery which is the first branch of the internal carotid artery lies below the level of the greater horn. The lingual artery is one of the closely related structures to the hyoid, and it branches off the external carotid artery above the level of the greater horn.

**The Hyoid and its Relation to Nerves**

The hypoglossal and the superior laryngeal nerve are closely related to the tip of the greater horn of the hyoid. The tip of the greater horn aids the surgeon in locating these nerves during cervical surgery. The hypoglossal nerve lies superiorly to the tip of the greater horn of the hyoid. The superior laryngeal nerve divides into its external and internal branches as it passes behind the greater horn, with its external branch being deeper than the internal one.

**The Hyoid and Obstructive Sleep Apnea Syndrome**

Obstructive sleep apnea is a chronic sleep-related breathing disorder. It is best described by repeated narrowing and obstruction of the pharyngeal airway during sleep.