**Perioperative**

When combined with a local anesthetic, spinal opioids improve the block's quality and reduce the need for systemic opioids postoperatively. For procedures that begin rapidly after a spinal injection such as caesarian section, fentanyl (10 to 20 mcg) is often added due to its rapid onset to improve analgesia during surgery, while intrathecal morphine (ITM) is added to provide postop analgesia. During the caesarian section, the addition of spinal opioids to the local anesthetic helps block discomfort due to the manipulation of the uterus. For surgeries that require large incisions or median sternotomy, fentanyl may or may not be added, and ITM is added to provide postop analgesia.

**Chronic Pain Management**

Intrathecal (IT) opioids have a place in treating cancer pain refractory to systemic opioids, non-opioid analgesics, and other nonpharmacologic pain treatments. IT administration is preferred over the epidural route as drug doses required via epidural are approximately ten times higher and increase systemic side effects.

The decision to administer spinal opioids for chronic pain management should be made after confirmation that more conventional treatments are ineffective.

**Benefits**

Neuraxial blockade applied for surgery has been shown to reduce postoperative mortality and additional serious complications after surgery. These include deep vein thrombosis, pulmonary embolism, pneumonia, and respiratory depression, as well as transfusion requirements.

The addition of opioids to local anesthetic intensifies the quality of the sensory block produced by local anesthetic alone. When used properly, IT opioids provide analgesia that is often superior to that achieved via the epidural and intravenous (IV) routes. Furthermore, when used in appropriate (low) doses, IT opioids result in a side effect profile similar to that of systemic opioids with one exception; pruritus tends to occur more commonly with IT opioids. Finally, spinal is easier to perform than an epidural.