Schistosoma haematobium eggs are excreted from the human host via urine into freshwater. Each egg contains a mature ciliated form, known as a miracidium. Upon contacting freshwater, the egg hatches and releases the miracidium, which can penetrate the soft tissue of its intermediate host, the Bulinus snail.

In the intermediate snail host, the schistosome undergoes asexual reproduction through sporocyst stages and, after 4 to 6 weeks, sheds thousands of infectious cercariae into the water. Cercariae penetrate the skin of the mammalian host. The larvae (termed schistosomula at that point) then require approximately 10 to 12 weeks to reach maturation and produce eggs within the host. Unlike many other schistosome species, S. haematobium relies primarily on a human host, which aids in control efforts.

Adult worms of the species S. haematobium live within the urogenital venules, where they primarily digest erythrocytes. The involvement of the urogenital organs varies markedly and correlates with vascularity; with the bladder, lower ureters, urethra, seminal vesicles, uterus, vagina, and cervix most commonly affected. Unlike other schistosomes that live within the mesenteric venules and release their eggs into the host’s intestines, S. haematobium releases its eggs into the urinary tract. Therefore their eggs are excreted via the host’s urine.

Up to half of the thousands of eggs that are released throughout the adult trematodes average lifespan of 3 to 7 years (ranging from 20 to 290 eggs per day in S. haematobium) are not excreted, but instead, become lodged in the urogenital system.  This is the primary mechanism of chronic sequelae from infection as the eggs induce a granulomatous host response and subsequent tissue inflammation.