A thyroid function panel is the most appropriate initial evaluation in a patient with a thyroid nodule. A hyperthyroid state often correlates with a lower risk of malignancy; in such patients, a radionuclide uptake scan is indicated. If the nodule/nodules are identified as hyperfunctioning, fine-needle aspiration biopsy (FNAB) should generally be avoided. This is because these nodules are rarely malignant, and the FNAB results for hyperfunctioning nodules are often inaccurate.

Evaluation of the thyroid nodule when biochemically euthyroid or hypothyroid should begin with a high-resolution diagnostic thyroid ultrasound. This can help assess the nodules for high-risk features, detect additional nodules not felt on physical examination, evaluate for neck lymph nodes, and guide FNAB if warranted. High-risk features on ultrasound include a significant increase in size from prior imaging, hypoechogenicity, irregular margins, size taller than wide, microcalcifications, a solid internal structure, extra-thyroidal extension, and central vascularity. The features associated with a lower risk of malignancy are a purely cystic nodule, spongiform appearance, comet tail shadowing, and peripheral vascularity. The decision to subject a nodule for FNAB should be based on these radiological criteria with guidance from Thyroid Imaging Reporting and Data System (TIRADS) or American Thyroid Association (ATA) criteria, but importance should be given to clinical indications irrespective of imaging criteria.

**Limitations of FNAB**

Of note, the diagnostic accuracy of FNAB depends on the skill of the person performing the procedure as well as the pathologist interpreting the results, and it ranges between 70 to 97%. Approximately 17 to 20% of FNAB are classified as insufficient samples.

**Bethesda System for Reporting Thyroid Cytopathology**

The FNAB result is usually reported by the Bethesda Criteria for Reporting Thyroid Cytology, which stratifies the biopsy results based on the cytology, and recommends a further course of action.

Bethesda Category 1 is indicative of non-diagnostic FNAB; re-aspiration is indicated.

Bethesda Category 2 is suggestive of a benign nodule that can be followed clinically with periodic thyroid ultrasound as warranted.

Bethesda Categories 3 (Atypia of undetermined significance, AUS or Follicular lesion of undetermined significance, FLUS) and 4 (follicular neoplasm, FN or suspicious for follicular neoplasm) suggests that the inclusion or exclusion of thyroid cancer is not clear, and these patients may benefit from repeat FNAB (Category 3), molecular testing, or lobectomy (Categories 3 and 4).

Bethesda Categories 5 (Suspicious for malignancy) and 6 (Malignant) usually require surgery.

**Role of Molecular Testing in Thyroid Cancer**

Molecular testing is generally used in Bethesda categories 3 and 4, where cytology is indeterminate.

**Molecular Diagnostic Approaches**

- Gene mutation profiling panel- such as the 7-gene panel that detects multiple genes including BRAF V600E, HRAS codon 61, KRAS codons 12/13, and NRAS codon 61 point mutations, and RET/PTC1, PAX8/PPARγ, and RET/PTC3 translocations which account for approximately 70% of thyroid cancer.

- A 167-Gene expression classifier provides a strong negative predictive value, while its positive predictive value is only around 50%.

However, recently a large multi-gene panel of mutation markers has been introduced, further improving sensitivity and specificity.

While CT and MRI scans are not routine modalities in evaluating thyroid nodules for malignancies, their use may be appropriate in assessing local spread in more advanced diseases or those with enlarged cervical nodes in association with a suspicious mass.