The majority of cases of tetanus in the United States are reported in patients who are either unimmunized or partially immunized. The median period of incubation is 7 days and for the majority of cases, it is from 4 to 14 days. The patients sometimes recall the injury but more commonly the injury goes unnoticed.

The clinical features of tetanus include lockjaw, grimace facial expression (risus sardonicus), generalized muscle spasms associated with severe pains, drooling, uncontrolled urination and defecation, and back arching spasm (opisthotonus) that may cause respiratory distress. Most commonly, trismus appears as the first symptom, with the progression of spasms throughout the rest of the body. Reflex spasms occur in most patients and can be triggered by nominal external stimuli, such as noise, touch, or light.

There are four forms of tetanus based on clinical findings: generalized, neonatal, localized, and cerebral tetanus.

Generalized tetanus is the most common form of tetanus, occurring in approximately 80% of cases. Patients present with a descending pattern of muscle spasms, first presenting with lockjaw, and risus sardonicus (rigid smile because of sustained contraction of facial musculature). This can progress to a stiff neck, difficulty swallowing, and rigid pectoral and calf muscles. These spasms can occur for up to 4 weeks, with full recovery taking months. Autonomic instability can also occur in these patients with fever, dysrhythmia, labile blood pressure and heart rate, respiratory difficulties, catecholamine excretion, and even early death.

Neonatal tetanus is a generalized form of tetanus that occurs in newborns of unimmunized mothers or from infection through a contaminated instrument when cutting the umbilical cord. Infants of immunized mothers generally do not get tetanus due to passive immunity from the mother. Those who are infected, exhibit irritability, poor feeding, facial grimacing, rigidity, and severe spastic contractions triggered by touch. There have been case reports of long-term consequences in survivors of neurodevelopmental impairments, behavioral problems, and deficits in gross motor, speech, and language development.

Localized tetanus and cephalic tetanus are the rarest forms of tetanus. Localized tetanus is the persistent contraction of muscles at the site of injury that can persist for weeks. This type is uncommonly fatal; however, it can progress to the generalized form of tetanus, which is more life-threatening. Cephalic or cerebral tetanus is limited to the muscles and nerves of the head. Cephalic tetanus occurs most commonly after head trauma such as a skull fracture, head laceration, eye injury, dental procedures, otitis media, or from another injury site. It presents with neck stiffness, dysphagia, trismus, retracted eyelids, deviated gaze, and risus sardonicus. The facial nerve is most frequently involved. However, other cranial nerves can also be affected. These findings can lead to further complications such as broncho-aspiration, paralysis of respiratory and laryngeal muscles, and respiratory failure. This type can also progress to generalized tetanus.

Physical examination findings can vary significantly from one patient to another. Spatula test is one of the exam techniques that may provide a clue towards the diagnosis. It includes the stimulation of the posterior pharyngeal wall that elicits the reflex spasm of the masseter muscles causing the patient to bite down instead of gag.

Autonomic involvement leads to hypertension and tachycardia alternating with hypotension and bradycardia. In extreme cases, cardiac arrest may also occur.

Patients may also present with abdominal tenderness and guarding, and that may be mistaken for acute abdomen by the providers. Historically, exploratory laparotomies have been performed before making the correct diagnosis.

Cephalic tetanus, although a rare form of tetanus, may present with various cranial nerve palsies. The most commonly involved nerve is the 8th cranial nerve.