**Clinical Assessment**

**1. Adult Trauma Life Support Primary and Secondary Survey**

All trauma patients should be assessed according to trauma assessment principles. The primary ATLS survey should be completed in order from A to E to rule out any life-threatening injury:

- A: Airway management and cervical spine stabilization.

- B: Breathing

- C: Circulation and hamorrage control

- D: Disability to assess the  neurologic status

- E: Exposure

**2. Neurvascualr Assement**

A documented neurovascular assessment is mandatory to be performed before and after any attempt for ankle manipulation. Neurovascular assessment includes the color and temperature of the foot. Pale, cold foot indicates a critical vascular compromise. Dorsalis pedis posterior tibial pulses should be assessed and compared to the contralateral side. If there is any clinical concern for vascular compromise or skin tenting, urgent ankle reduction should be attempted immediately in an attempt to regain vascular flow followed by neurovascular reassessment s Hand doppler is a quick and non-invasive method to assess the vascular flow in the foot. Neurological assessment should include the motor and sensory function of deep peroneal, superficial peroneal, tibial, sural medial, and lateral plantar nerves.

**3. Soft Tissue Assessment**

Threatened skin of a deformed ankle necessitates urgent ankle reduction and splinting to reduce soft tissue stretching. Soft tissue integrity and the degree of swelling will affect the treatment choice and the timing of surgical fixation.

**4. Examination of the Proximal Fibula**

Examination of the proximal fibula and the knee joint is required to avoid missing any higher injury as Maisonneuve fracture injury.

**Ottawa Ankle Rules**

Ankle radiographs should be requested if there is pain or tenderness in either malleolus AND one of the following:

- Tenderness of the bone at the posterior edge or tip (within 6 cm) of either the lateral or medial malleolus

- Patient unable to bear weight at the time of injury AND on arrival to the emergency department. Weight-bearing is determined by the patient's ability to take four steps.

**Imaging Modalities**

**1. Plain Radiographs**

X-rays are the first line of investigation to assess ankle injury. Obtaining X-rays should not delay the urgent reduction of the clinically obvious deformed ankle. Recommended X-rays views to assess ankle injuries include; anteroposterior, lateral, and Mortise views.

Anteroposterior (AP) ankle view: assess for soft tissue swelling that may lead to the discovery of other more subtle fractures

Lateral view: assess posterior malleolus, talus dome relative to the distal mortise, e.g., if it is dislocated anteriorly or posteriorly.

Morise view is important to assess the ankle mortise(tibial plafond , medial malleus, lateral malleolus and talar dome).****Mortise view is an anteroposterior ankle X-ray with the leg internally rotated 15 to 20 degrees, and the ankle is dorsiflexed. This view evaluates talus positioning and syndesmosis widening. In a normal ankle, this should show a uniform width of space through the mortise joint space.

Weight-bearing and external rotation stress views are indicated to assess fracture stability and rule out deltoid ligament and syndesmotic injury. Full tibia and fibula length X-rays are valuable to rule out proximal fibula fracture in Maisonneuve injury.

**2. Computed Tomography (CT scan)**

Ankle CT scan is useful to assess the articular surface, fractures configurations, and the degree of bone comminution. CT scan is usually organized for operative planning in complex ankle fractures. CT scan is also useful to assess posterior malleolar fractures.

**3. Magnetic Resonance Imaging (MRI) Scan**

Ankle MRI is valuable to assess ligamentous injuries, e.g., deltoid ligament sprain, lateral ligament complex sprain, syndesmotic disruption, chondral lesions, and stress fractures.