**Endonasal**

**Preparation**

- The patient is positioned supine with the head tilted slightly towards the surgeon.

- Prominent nasal hairs are trimmed.

- Some surgeons prefer to decongest the nose with oxymetazoline or Moffatt's solution.

- Local anesthetic is infiltrated bilaterally in the sub-mucoperichondrial plane, using 1% lidocaine with epinephrine (1:100,000) until the mucosa is well blanched. This assists in the hydro-dissection of the planes in addition to analgesia and hemostasis.

**Raising Mucoperichondrial Flaps**

- A nasal speculum is used to expose the caudal edge of the cartilaginous septum. An incision is made using a #15 blade along this caudal edge to expose the cartilage. Typically, a hemi-transfixion (vertical incision through one side of the membranous septum) or Killian's incision (vertical incision more posteriorly, over the quadrangular cartilage) is used. If the septoplasty is performed in conjunction with an open rhinoplasty, the septum may be approached from above after the upper lateral cartilage is disarticulated from the dorsal quadrangular cartilage.

- Dissecting scissors and Freer or Cottle elevators are then used to develop a sub-mucoperichondrial plane and dissect posteriorly to reveal the quadrangular cartilage, PPE, and vomer. Exposure of the bare cartilage is very important to ensure a well-vascularized and robust mucoperichondrial flap is elevated; the quadrangular cartilage usually appears a pearly white/blue color. Care must be taken not to perforate the mucosa, especially if dissection over bony spurs or deviations is necessary. A second flap on the contralateral side may then be raised through the same incision.

**Septal Deviation Correction**

- Evaluation of the location, direction, and nature (cartilaginous/bony) of the deformity is made.

- Various instruments can be used to incise the septum, and sometimes these are used in combination. A blade, a Freer elevator, Jansen-Middleton forceps, or Takahashi forceps are used to remove the deviated piece of cartilage. To maintain nasal dorsum and tip stability, an "L-strut" shape of quadrangular cartilage is preserved (dorsal and caudal edges); the posterior aspect of the cartilage is, therefore, often the area that is removed. In the event that the deviation involves the L-strut, an extracorporeal septoplasty or an open approach with grafting may be required (see below). The dorsal and caudal limbs of the L-strut, as well as their attachments to bone, should remain 10 to 15 mm in width to guarantee sufficient support for the external nose. A twisting movement is often employed to remove sections of cartilage or bone; care must be taken not to twist too forcefully outside of the anterior-posterior axis as this can cause a fracture of the cribriform plate and potential leak of cerebrospinal fluid.

- Removed cartilage should be saved in normal saline or a surgical gauze sponge dampened with normal saline. Pieces of native cartilage can be reshaped and used to reinforce the L-strut if necessary or to contribute to grafts used in rhinoplasty.

**Closure**

- The mucoperichondrial flaps are laid back into position against the septum. Interrupted stitches using absorbable suture material (e.g., chromic gut) are used to close the incision.

- Running mattress, or "quilting," sutures are often made through and through the septum to close any dead space and reapproximate the flaps to avoid hematoma accumulation post-operatively. If the mucoperichondrial flaps remain completely intact at the end of the operation, some surgeons will place a small incision inferiorly in one flap to facilitate the egress of any fluid that may collect within the septum. Some surgeons prefer to use a septal stapler rather than placing a quilting suture by hand.

- Silastic splints are sometimes required. If necessary, these are cut to size, placed adjacent to the septum, and sutured transseptally for easy removal in the outpatient clinic. The splints aim to prevent adhesions to the turbinates if these are hypertrophied or if turbinoplasties have also been performed.

- An antibiotic cream can be applied intranasally.

**Post-operative Care**

- Patients are usually able to be discharged on the same day.

- Topical antibiotic cream and oral analgesia are prescribed.

- Oxymetazoline and saline sprays may also be useful for providing a clean intranasal environment during the healing process.

- The patient will need to be seen in 1 to 2 weeks for post-operative assessment and removal of splints if used.

- Antibiotics are not typically required. If gauze packing is placed to stabilize comminuted bone fragments, antibiotics to prevent staphylococcal toxic shock may be warranted.

**Endoscopic**

The various steps and techniques used are similar to the traditional endonasal method. Rather than a nasal speculum and headlight, however, a 0-degree Hopkins rod endoscope is used to visualize the nasal structures and septum. The endoscope can be placed between mucosal flaps to ensure adequate resection is achieved.

Endoscopic techniques enable enhanced visualization and a magnified view of the anatomy. This is particularly helpful when teaching more junior surgeons. Endonasal procedures are notoriously difficult to observe, which makes training challenging. In revision cases where scarring or adhesions are present, endoscopic visualization can also help identify the correct dissection planes.

However, endoscopic septoplasties may be technically more challenging than endonasal methods. It may take even senior surgeons trained in endonasal and FESS surgery approximately 60 procedures before achieving satisfactory operative times and an acceptable rate of complications.

**Extracorporeal**

Complex septal deformities in all three areas (quadrangular cartilage, PPE, and vomer) or previous comminuted fractures may make applying the aforementioned techniques very challenging or impossible.

Once the septum has been removed, several techniques may be used to straighten it. These include making partial-thickness scoring incisions on the concave side of the deviation, incising fracture lines and re-suturing component parts together, affixing grafts to overlap and splint the deviated cartilage, or drilling/filing sections of the septum. An alternative technique particularly useful when minimal cartilage remains within the septum involves suturing excised septal cartilage fragments to a polydioxanone scaffolding plate.

In cases with minimal cartilaginous septum remaining (due to previous surgery or necrosis), a neoseptum may be made from fragments of existing septal cartilage or autologous material, e.g., costal cartilage. Homologous grafts (homologous costal cartilage harvested from cadaveric donors) can also be used.