The diagnosis of inflammatory breast cancer is based upon the characteristic clinical presentation and core needle biopsy showing invasive carcinoma of the breast. A very high index of suspicion should be present when evaluating a patient who presents with rapidly progressive inflammatory skin changes of the breast with no improvement with antibiotics. Patients with suspected inflammatory breast cancer should undergo breast imaging and biopsy.

A mammogram is the first imaging test in the evaluation of inflammatory breast cancer. A diagnostic mammogram should be used on the affected side and a screening mammogram on the contralateral side. An ultrasonogram of both the breasts and regional lymph nodes should be done for suspected malignancy. Mammographic findings of inflammatory breast cancer may include an obvious mass, a large area of calcification, or parenchymal distortion with skin thickening. Mastitis and inflammatory breast cancer without an underlying mass may have a similar mammographic appearance. If there is no improvement after a short course of antibiotics (usually less than a week), a biopsy should be done to rule out underlying malignancy.

Ultrasonography might show thickened skin, interstitial fluid, and disruption of normal tissue planes of the involved breast. It may be useful to characterize the masses, guide in the percutaneous biopsy, and lymph node biopsies.

The imaging features of IBC on conventional imaging using mammography and ultrasound are nonspecific, likely secondary to the considerable edema and erythema that are hallmarks of this disease. The compression necessary for a good mammography examination may not be well tolerated by patients with IBC. Suboptimal tissue compression, in combination with diffuse skin and trabecular thickening, and tissue edema may obscure masses on mammography. Likewise, diffuse tissue edema and parenchymal architectural distortion may increase the challenge of identifying a primary breast lesion with ultrasound to facilitate core needle biopsy.

Multiple small, confluent, heterogeneously enhancing masses and global skin thickening are key magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) features of IBC that contribute to improved detection of primary breast cancer and delineation of disease extent compared with mammography.

Fluorodeoxyglucose positron emission tomography/computed tomography (FDG PET/CT) scan provides additional information regarding lymph nodes or distant metastases in the initial evaluation of IBC. PET scan is used to stage and differentiate between the curable and incurable state of cancer and assess response to therapy.

As with other invasive breast cancers, all IBC tumors should undergo testing for hormone receptors and human epidermal growth factor receptor 2 (HER2).