**Classification of Pulmonary Hypertension**

The complete pathophysiology of pulmonary hypertension (PH) is not entirely understood. The current etiologies of pulmonary hypertension are stratified into five groups.

- The first group is idiopathic PH, likely related to inheritable and intrinsic pulmonary arterial pathology.

- The second group is PH due to left heart disease, causing a build-up of volume and pressure in the pulmonary vasculature.

- The third group is PH due to pathology within or related to the lungs. This group includes several different diseases such as COPD, sleep apnea, inflammatory scarring resulting from interstitial lung disease, chronic exposure to a high altitude environment, and certain developmental abnormalities.

- The fourth group is associated with frequent occurrence of embolic deposition in the lung's vessels or thrombosis known as chronic thromboembolic pulmonary hypertension (CTEPH).

- The fifth group is designated for any remaining unclear or unestablished etiologies in addition to multifactorial causes. Examples of multifactorial processes that could contribute to or cause PH are metabolic disorders pertaining to the thyroid, hematological disorders, and systemic pathologies that involve the respiratory system, such as sarcoidosis.

**Idiopathic Pulmonary Hypertension**

Of these groups, idiopathic PH is the least understood. There are two prevailing concepts regarding the progression of idiopathic PH. The most prevalent understanding is related to a derangement in the production of local vasoconstrictors and dilators, denoted as the vasoconstriction theory. The vasodilators include prostacyclin and nitric oxide, and the vasoconstrictors include thromboxane and endothelin.

**Roles of Chemical and Molecular Agents in Idiopathic Pulmonary Hypertension**

In the vasoconstriction theory, nitric oxide (NO) plays a critical role in maintaining appropriate vascular tone. It is produced and regulated by two enzymes, nitric oxide synthase II and III. Patients with idiopathic pulmonary hypertension are found to have diminished levels of NO. Prostacyclin is a product of arachidonic acid metabolism. It is an effective vasodilator and exerts its effects on platelets as well. In patients experiencing pulmonary remodeling, there are decreased levels of prostacyclin and the enzyme prostacyclin synthase. On the contrary, endothelin 1, a systemic vasoconstrictor, is found in abnormally high quantities in idiopathic PH, which contradicts this theory.

**Recent Understanding of Idiopathic Pulmonary Hypertension**

A more recent understanding is centered on the concept of endothelial and smooth muscle cell activity in the context of arterial remodeling. Bone morphogenetic receptor type 2 (BMR2) is involved with cell growth, proliferation, and osteogenesis. It is believed that a mutation in BMR2 is directly involved in idiopathic PH. Another contributing factor may involve an inappropriately high sensitivity to depolarization in vascular smooth muscle cells. This alteration in the resting potential setpoint may be due to potassium channel irregularities that cause excess availability of calcium.

**Sleep Apnea and Pulmonary Hypertension**

A distinct relationship exists between obstructive sleep apnea (OSA) and the presence of pulmonary hypertension (PH). OSA is not accepted as a direct singular cause of PH; however, an association does exist. It is believed that OSA induces hypoxia during sleep, which creates a cycle of oxygen desaturation that leads to decreased nitric oxide synthase, endothelin derangements, and an increase in sympathetic tone.