Anterior inferior cerebellar arteries (AICA) and posterior inferior cerebellar arteries (PICA) are the major arteries involved in the vestibular system vascularization. The labyrinthine artery most commonly branches from the AICA, while it occasionally branches from the basilar artery and supplies the CN VIII (vestibulocochlear) and CN VII (facial) nerves. As the labyrinthine artery travels with the CN VIII and CN VII through an opening called the internal auditory meatus to enter the inner ear, it divides into the anterior vestibular, cochlear, and vestibulocochlear arteries. The anterior vestibular artery supplies most of the utricle, the vestibular nerve, and part of the semicircular canals. The cochlear artery is the main vasculature of the cochlea. The vestibulocochlear artery supplies the saccule and a portion of the cochlea and semicircular canals. The AICA supplies the flocculus of the cerebellum. An AICA infarction may result in multiple symptoms such as vertigo, hearing loss, facial weakness and sensory loss, Horner syndrome, and gait and limb ataxia.

The PICA arises from the vertebral arteries and supplies the inferior cerebellar peduncle, vestibular nuclei, spinal tract and nucleus of CN V, and posterior cerebellum. The PICA also supplies the nodulus of the cerebellum. Occlusion of the PICA may result in lateral medullary syndrome, which is also known as Wallenberg syndrome. Wallenberg syndrome will be discussed more in detail under the section of clinical significance.