The elbow joint receives its blood supply from peri-articular anastomoses. Specifically, the brachial, deep brachial, ulnar, and radial arteries have collateral and recurrent branches to provide continuous blood flow. Superior collateral branches include superior collateral, inferior ulnar, and radial collateral arteries. The inferior collateral branches include the anterior and posterior ulnar recurrent arteries, the recurrent interosseous artery, and the radial recurrent artery. The venous outflow is provided by the radial, ulnar, basilic, and brachial veins.

Specifically, the blood supply to the medial collateral ligament is unknown. A descriptive laboratory study utilizing 18 fresh-frozen male cadaveric elbows injected 60 mL of India ink into the brachial artery of each elbow. The proximal MCL consistently exhibited dense blood supply, while the distal MCL was hypovascular. The authors also found a possible contribution to the proximal MCL from the medial epicondyle. An artery from the flexor/pronator musculature also consistently provided blood to the proximal MCL. The average length of vascular penetration was 49% for the entire MCL. The study concluded there is a difference in vascular supply between the proximal and distal MCL. They suggested that the hypovascularity of the distal MCL may result in a lack of appropriate healing capacity, and MCL injuries may differ in a progression based on the location of the injury (proximal vs. distal).

Superficial cubital lymph nodes and deep cubital lymph nodes are located above the medial epicondyle at the elbow. The superficial cubital nodes receive lymph from the medial side of the hand and forearm, while the deep cubital nodes drain the elbow joint itself. The lymph from these nodes eventually reaches the axillary lymph nodes bilaterally. The lymph from the left will enter the thoracic duct and lymph from the right will enter the right lymphatic duct.