Obtaining a thorough and comprehensive history is imperative in the initial triage and management of facial trauma patients. Due to the nature of these injuries, patients may not have the capacity to provide this information themselves, making it essential for providers to gather data from family, friends, witnesses, and first responders. Per the Advanced Trauma Life Support (ATLS) protocol, the evaluation of trauma patients begins with an assessment of the patient's airway, respiratory capacity, and circulatory status. While assessing the extent of the patient's disabilities, a thorough neurologic exam should be performed to calculate a Glasgow Coma Scale Score, assessing for cranial nerve function as well as other focal deficits and bony injury to the calvarium. The physician should inspect the entire head and neck for any lesions, abrasions, contusions, or active bleeding. It is important to assess for lacerations superficial to any sinus fractures, indicating a requirement for IV antibiotics. The anterior table of the frontal sinus should be palpated to determine if there is any bony step-off, and any wounds or lacerations should be cleaned and explored. Examination of the ears can reveal a Battle sign, auricular hematomas, CSF otorrhea, or hemotympanum, suggesting a fracture of the skull base. A nasal examination should check for the mobility of the nasal bones, frank epistaxis, CSF rhinorrhea, septal hematomas, or active purulence. Examination of the orbit should include appropriate cranial nerve testing and inspection for raccoon eyes or retrobulbar hematoma.