Early diagnosis of CKTR is imperative for early and successful treatment. As discussed above, the diagnosis of CKTR starts with clinical evaluation. The Kidney Disease Improving Global Outcomes (KDIGO) guidelines recommend biweekly clinic visits 3 to 6 months post-transplant, monthly visits 7 to 12 months post-transplant, and every 2 to 3 months after that.

Laboratory tests can help differentiate different causes of allograft dysfunction. Kidney allograft function assessed by serum creatinine (Cr) and estimated glomerular filtration rate (eGFR) requires measurement at or before each visit. The eGFR is suggested to be a more accurate indicator and predictor of graft function and long-term graft loss, respectively.

DSA is typically measured in an HLA laboratory using flow cytometry and the single antigen bead technique. Positive DSA is a relatively good marker for CAAMR. A decrease or disappearance of DSA can be used to monitor response to treatment.

Doppler ultrasonography (US) is a non-invasive and relatively inexpensive tool to assess kidney allograft vasculature. Resistance indices over 0.8 at three months have links to deterioration in graft function.

A biopsy is imperative for diagnosing CKTR. Graft histology (as described previously) provides visual evidence of the underlying pathology of graft dysfunction. C4d complement fragment deposition in the peritubular capillaries is a marker for antibody-mediated tissue injury.

The Banff classification, originally founded in 1991 and later updated in 2007, 2009, 2013, and 2017 established specific criteria for the diagnosis of kidney allograft rejection.

I) CAAMR (all criteria must be present):

1. Histological evidence of chronic tissue injury (one or more of the following):

- Transplant glomerulopathy without evidence of thrombotic microangiopathy or glomerulonephritis

- Severe multilayering of the glomerular basement membrane on electron microscopy

- New-onset arterial intimal fibrosis

2.Evidence of antibody interaction with vascular endothelium (one or more of the following):

- Linear C4d deposition of peritubular capillaries

- Moderate or severe microvascular inflammation in the absence of glomerulonephritis

- Increased gene expression of gene transcripts strongly suggests antibody-mediated rejection

3. Positive DSA antibodies to HLA and non-HLA antigens.

II) CATMR is classified as follows (after ruling out other causes of IFTA):

- **Grade IA:**More than 25% interstitial inflammation of the cortex with “moderate tubulitis” in 1 or more tubules, excluding severely atrophic tubules.

- **Grade IB:**Greater than 25% interstitial inflammation of the cortex with “severe tubulitis” in 1 or more tubules, excluding severely atrophic tubules

- **Grade II:**Chronic allograft arteriopathy indicated by neointima formation, intimal arterial fibrosis, and mononuclear infiltration