The clinical differential diagnoses include:

- Other causes of vertigo, especially peripheral vertigo, such as acute labyrinthitis: the patient may be younger without any vascular risk factors. The nystagmus is peripheral and unidirectional or rotatory. There may be associated tinnitus without other brainstem signs. Head thrust test will be positive, which, if present, is most helpful in differentiating a central cause, such as Wallenberg syndrome, from a peripheral cause.

- Hemorrhagic stroke: much less common, and headache is much more prominent.

- Acute demyelination in multiple sclerosis: patients are generally much younger, more likely female, and have a known history of demyelinating disease

- Acute relapse/attack of neuromyelitis optica occurs, with the involvement of the area postrema. The patient is likely a young adult female, and the signs may suggest more than one central nervous system (CNS) lesion.

The diagnosis is usually made or suspected from a clinical exam and presentation history. MRI with diffusion-weighted imaging (DWI) is the best diagnostic test to confirm the infarct in the inferior cerebellar area or lateral medulla.

A CT or MR angiogram helps identify the site of vascular occlusion and rule out uncommon causes such as vertebral artery dissection.

An ECG is useful in excluding any underlying atrial fibrillation or unexpected acute coronary syndrome. Checking the serum electrolytes is essential. The speech pathologist must assess patients with dysphagia or dysarthria before oral intake.