The decision to treat is multifactorial and depends on the size, location, age, and comorbidities of the patient, as well as whether or not there is a rupture. The treatment can be divided into 2 categories: surgical and endovascular. The surgical approach is performed under general anesthesia in the operating room and includes placing a tiny metal clip across the neck of an aneurysm preventing blood from entering the aneurysmal sac, thus eliminating the risk of bleeding. The aneurysm is accessed by temporarily removing a small portion of the skull, dissection of the dura, and separation from other blood vessels using a microscope. The clip is then carefully applied, the skull is secured in place with thin metal plates and screws, and the wound is closed. Over time the aneurysm will shrink and scar; however, the clip will usually remain for life.

Endovascular coiling is a less invasive approach that can be used in certain situations. The possible complications include thromboembolism and intraprocedural aneurysm rupture. The procedure is performed by inserting a catheter through the femoral artery and passing it up into the artery containing the aneurysm. Then, a second microcatheter is inserted through the initial catheter, which contains the platinum coil. Electric current is used to detach the coil from the catheter within the lumen of the aneurysm. This promotes local clot formation and obliteration of the aneurysmal sac.

In the case of rupture, management also includes treating complications associated with SAH. This usually occurs within an intensive care unit (ICU) setting to monitor for signs of clinical deterioration caused by rebleeding, symptomatic vasospasm, hydrocephalus, seizures, and hyponatremia. Nimodipine, a calcium channel blocker, is frequently used to prevent cerebral ischemia due to vasospasm following SAH.