**Labs**

A baseline laboratory workup may be done during the evaluation of patients with epilepsia partialis continua (EPC) involving tests targeted at probable underlying pathology such as metabolic abnormalities, cerebrovascular, or oncologic conditions.

**Imaging**

MRI findings can help in delineating structural lesions. Focal cortical dysplasia and Rasmussen encephalitis, two common causes of EPC, are more likely to be identified on MRI because of the advancements in imaging quality and technology in recent years. SPECT scanning may be of use in identifying the epileptic focus, given that the facility and the technically trained staff is available. This imaging modality is mostly used for research and only sparingly in clinical settings. Standard imaging modalities used during neurological workups, such as computed tomography (CT) and MRI scanning, may show no pathology.

**Electroencephalogram (EEG)**

There are no known specific findings on EEG in patients with EPC and can take the form of spikes, sharp waves, and periodic lateralized epileptiform discharges (PLEDs) with slow-wave activity. Sometimes, asymmetrical background slowing is noted. A normal EEG cannot rule out EPC with certainty as the focus of the seizures may be subcortical.

**Somatosensory evoked potentials**

Somatosensory evoked potentials (SSEPs) have been of some help in localizing the focus of the seizures. Studies using SSEPs have shown hyperexcitability of the motor cortex and the subsequent exaggerated responses to peripheral stimuli.