If there is a concern for a peri-arrest scenario or if the patient is actively arresting, an interprofessional team must be consulted, including neonatology, and obstetrics and trauma surgery, if needed, and involved early. The physician performing the procedure should try to wear sterile attire if and when possible. The mother should remain in the supine position. A left lateral tilt can be employed but is not always necessary. Iodine solutions can be used to sterilize the skin before incision.

A few of the patients will require PMCS secondary to a traumatic cause. It is essential to keep in mind basic management principles in the setting of trauma. When faced with a pregnant trauma patient, it is crucial to understand that the focus of care should initially be on resuscitating the mother. Special considerations should also be given to the primary survey, airway, breathing, and circulation (ABCs). First, when managing the airway, it is important to realize that during the third trimester, there is a physiologic narrowing of the airway. Therefore, it is preferential to use an endotracheal tube that is 1 size smaller. Also, rapid sequence intubation is the recommended method of intubation given an increased risk for aspiration.

Regarding breathing, pregnant patients have a higher disposition of rapid decline in their PaO2 during apneic episodes. It is important to place all pregnant patients on supplemental oxygen (O2), regardless of their peripheral capillary oxygen saturation (SpO2). Given the sizeable circulating blood volume, hypovolemia must be considered in pregnant patients before the presentation of clinical signs and symptoms of hypovolemia, and shock. Aggressive fluid resuscitation should be initiated despite normal blood pressure readings.

In addition, while chest compressions are being performed, maneuvers must be employed to displace the gravid uterus from the inferior vena cava. Older teachings have recommended placing a board behind the back, with a 30-degree tilt to the left; however, this may make CPR more difficult and less effective. Newer models propose that the uterus be manually displaced with 2 hands to the left of the patient while CPR is actively being performed.