Skin is the largest organ in the body. It is composed of three main layers: epidermis, dermis, and subcutis. The epidermis is the outermost layer, and it is composed of five sublayers. The basal layer or stratum germinativum is formed of columnar cells which continuously divide to regenerate the skin. It also contains melanin-producing cells (melanocytes) and neuroendocrinal cells (Merkel cells). The prickle cell layer or stratum spinosum is formed of polyhedral cells, and it makes up most of the epidermis structure. It contains antigen-presenting cells, which are called Langerhans cells. The next sublayers are stratum granulosum and stratum lucidum, which are formed of big and flatter cells. These cells eventually die to form the outermost layer of the epidermis, which is the stratum corneum.

The dermis is the next layer of the skin. It accounts for 90% of the thickness of the skin. It is mainly formed of collagen and elastin and contains blood vessels, sweat glands, sebaceous glands, and hair follicles. It can be further subdivided into the papillary and reticular dermis. The innermost layer is the subcutis or hypodermis, which is mainly formed of fat and collagen. It acts as an insulator and a shock-absorbent.

The skin has four principal functions: protection against the external environment, including ultraviolet rays and infection, thermal regulation through blood vessels and sweat glands, the sensation of different nerve endings, and endocrine function by producing vitamin D.

Restoration of tissue integrity following an injury is a complex dynamic biological series of events. It can be categorized into four main phases: the hemostatic, inflammatory, proliferative, and remodeling phases. In the hemostasis phase, the body tries to form a coagulum by vasoconstriction, platelet aggregation, and activation of intrinsic and extrinsic coagulation pathways. While in the inflammatory phase, the polymorphonuclear leukocytes (PMNS) move from the bloodstream to the wound to clear any debris.

On days 3 to 4, macrophages predominate the wound and modulate angiogenesis and fibroblast activity by certain cytokines. Proliferation is the third phase of wound healing, mainly moderated by fibroblasts around days 5 to 7. Fibroblast controls new collagen deposition, mainly type III, angiogenesis, and epithelialization. This phase can last up to 4 weeks. Remodeling is the final phase of wound healing characterized by the replacement of collagen III by collagen I, and it may last for years. The wound exhibits its maximal tensile strength at 12 weeks. The final scar will exhibit only 80% of the tensile strength of the normal, pre-injury, skin.