Substance P is involved in various processes throughout the body, including pain perception, immune cell proliferation, chemotaxis, inflammation, and plays a role in the cardiovascular, respiratory, and gastrointestinal systems.

**Pain**

Substance P's earliest and most documented role is that of pain perception. Free nerve endings (C-fibers) in the skin contain nociceptors and thermoreceptors that sense pain and temperature, respectively. The pain signal from the free nerve ending travels along small, unmyelinated axons to synapse in the spinal cord. Contained in the presynaptic axon terminal are vesicles containing substance P and glutamate, which are released into the synaptic cleft of the dorsal horn. The hypothesis is that substance P helps sensitize the postsynaptic neurons to glutamate, aiding in the transmission of pain signals to the somatosensory area of the brain.

**Neurogenic Inflammation**

While pain signals travel along axons of the somatosensory area of the brain, sensory neurons also release neurosecretory products in the area of the damaged tissue.

**Immune Cells/Proliferation/Chemotaxis**

Substance P also appears to contribute to the attraction of immune cells to the site of inflammation. Research with NK1-R knockout mice showed impaired migration of neutrophils to the site of inflammation, showing the substance P is involved in the response of neutrophils to IL-1beta.

**Cardiovascular**

Substance P and NK1-R are involved in the regulation of heart rate, blood pressure, ischemia, reperfusion, cardiac response to stress, and angiogenesis. Substance P is best known as a potent vasodilator.

Substance P and NK1 receptors are found in cardiac muscle and may factor into the pathogenesis of myocardial infarction, myocarditis, and reperfusion injury. Interestingly, in a study using a capsaicin-treated heart (a substance that depletes substance P and calcitonin gene-related peptide), acute infarction resulted in more irreversible injury to myocardial tissue than a non-capsaicin treated heart. Therefore, the hypothesis is that substance P and calcitonin gene-related peptide are involved in the reduction of reperfusion injury through the vasodilation of coronary arteries acutely.

**Respiratory**

Substance P is implicated in the pathogenesis of asthma and chronic bronchitis. Substance P induces constriction of bronchial smooth muscle cells, which reduces the airway diameter and triggers mast cell degranulation in lung tissue.

**Gastrointestinal**

The gastrointestinal system also contains substance P and NK1 receptors. A well-known function of substance P is its role in the vomiting reflex. In the CNS, there are areas in the medulla called the area postrema and the nucleus solitarius. These two areas control the vomiting reflex and contain high levels of substance P. Emetogenic chemotherapies such as cisplatin, and other systemic chemotherapies cause the release of substance P, which binds to NK1 receptors triggering emesis. NK1R antagonists, such as aprepitant and its pro-drug fosaprepitant, block substance P from binding to the NK-1 receptor. This blockade prevents the signaling of the vomiting reflex, hopefully lessening the severity of chemotherapy-induced emesis.

Additionally, enteric motor neurons of the GI tract release acetylcholine and substance P onto smooth muscle, regulating gastric motility. It appears that substance P increases the sensitivity of GI tract smooth muscle to acetylcholine, which is the major neurotransmitter for GI smooth muscle contractions.

**Integument**

NK1 receptors are found on the surface of mast cells and contribute to the pathogenesis of eczema and psoriasis. Through neurogenic inflammation, substance P is released from sensory neurons of damaged tissue. Substance P leads to the production of inflammatory cytokines and the degranulation of mast cells. The release of histamine from granules causes increased capillary permeability and edema. These events lead to the five cardinal signs of inflammation: redness, heat, swelling, pain, and loss of function.