Osteoporosis secondary to spinal cord injury (SCI) presents a unique clinical subset of patients in the treatment of osteoporosis and at-risk patient populations. The care of these patients is optimized when a multifaceted and multi-phase approach is considered that involves nurses, pharmacists, and clinicians.

- **Acute SCI:**Initial presentation of the injured patient warrants diagnostic and treatment collaboration between the trauma team, spine surgeons (orthopedic surgery or neurosurgery), medical specialists, and intensive care physicians and nurses. The initial treatment phase should be given the utmost priority and will vary in terms of its complexity depending on the exact nature of the SCI.

- **Bone mineral density rapid progression phase:**During the initial 2 weeks following the acute SCI onset, physicians across all specialties must remain cognizant of the vulnerable period of rapid BMD loss. While knowledge of BMD losses over time in SCI-induced osteoporosis patients remains controversial, this acute phase would be a reasonable time to consult or refer the patient to a BMD-specialized clinic. Ideally, the clinic is experienced in initiating, managing, and following these patients over the long-term to combat the early onset of osteoporosis. The latter is especially imperative in younger patient populations.

- **Rehabilitation phases:**As these patients recover and rehabilitate over the long-term, equal attention should be given to the rehabilitation of the patient's overall mobility in addition to his or her overall bone health. This requires physical medicine and rehabilitation (PMR) clinicians, all physiotherapist-related personnel, and nurses caring for these patients to maintain a heightened clinical suspicion to avoid missed or delayed diagnosis of subtle fragility fractures. These fractures can occur without apparent mechanism (i.e., simple transfer of a patient from bed-to-chair).  In the event that anti-osteoporosis medication has not been implemented or at least considered for these patients, the appropriate referrals should be made to the appropriate physician or clinic. [Level II]