Adverse effects are extremely subjective, with significant variability and unpredictability. One patient may experience a positive effect filled with bright hallucinations, sights, and sensations, increased awareness owing to mind expansion, and marked euphoria. The positive spectrum of effects is colloquially called a "good trip." Another patient may experience the total opposite with an experience filled with increased anxiety becoming panic, fear, depression, despair, and disappointment. The negative spectrum is colloquially called a "bad trip." One patient can experience both the positive and negative spectrum at different times of use.

One of the more disturbing side effects of LSD is the flashback. Flashbacks can be induced by stress or fatigue and by using other drugs. Often a flashback of a "bad trip" can occur without warning, even if the patient was not currently under the influence of LSD. Eventually, long-term use leads to the patient developing tolerance to the drug. Abstinence for a few days allows the patient to return to baseline quickly, emotionally, physically, and mentally. Abstinence of the drug does not typically produce a craving. Debilitating flashbacks occurred in the patients compensated under the Danish LSD Damages law.

Daily ingestion is almost impossible because it produces an absurd "good trip" or high, making chronic daily misuse of LSD difficult. The dependence on LSD, therefore, is not from physical effects or cravings but psychological dependence or need. Patients want to keep re-experiencing the same good trips. There are concerns about increased antisocial behavior and abuse with unsupervised use of LSD. There also are concerns about the negative implications of increased suggestibility. There are possible dangers of creating false memories or instilling wrong beliefs.