Several factors influence the choice of EC. Most important is the timing of the presentation after UPSI. As mentioned earlier, the effectiveness of EC declines with time with Yuzpe and LNG only method, and they are recommended up to 3 days after UPSI. UPA is most effective for up to 5 days, provided ovulation has not already occurred. Cu- IUD may be the only effective method if ovulation has already occurred. Hormonal methods may have decreased efficacy in obese patients, and women on enzyme-inducing drugs and Cu-IUD should be recommended in those patients. Current UK guidelines recommend doubling the dose of LNG (3 mg) or use UPA instead among obese patients. ACOG recommends the use of Cu-IUD as the first-line in obese women and not to withheld oral EC for overweight or obese women because of a lack of adequately powered studies evaluating the threshold weight at which oral EC would be ineffective. Cost, need for a prescription, and the clinical appointment does influence the choice. LNG is cheaper and available OTC without prescription and age restriction in the US. UPA is more expensive and needs a prescription in the US while available OTC in European countries and Australia. Cu- IUD is the most effective method, unaffected by body weight or timing of the cycle, but it requires a trained provider and clinic appointment and costs more than oral methods.

Women who remain sexually active would require effective contraception to prevent pregnancy. As per guidelines, quick start hormonal contraception can be used immediately after LNG or combined estrogen-progestin EC, but women should follow abstinence or use a barrier method for 7 days. Based on limited evidence from pharmacodynamic studies on UPA, FDA labeling recommends delaying initiation of hormonal contraception to 5 days after taking UPA for EC. If women meet the criteria for IUD and desire long-term contraception, Cu-IUD would be the best option. LNG-IUD can be used immediately with LNG-EC and has a similar recommendation to use a barrier method for 14 days or abstinence until the patient's menses when UPA is used for EC.