The severity of venous gas embolism is dependent upon the rate of gas introduced into circulation as well as the volume of gas and patient position. Rapid gas entry and larger volumes of gas both increase the size of the venous gas embolism and increase the severity of symptoms. Assuming no right to left shunting is occurring, the venous gas embolus will lodge in the pulmonary artery in the lungs. This can cause pulmonary artery hypertension and subsequent right heart strain. Occasionally, the gas embolus can pass through the pulmonary artery and make its way to the left heart and into the systemic arterial circulation, possibly causing far more severe sequelae such as stroke. This can also happen with right-to-left shunts such as a fistulous tract or a patent foramen ovale which allows the embolus to travel to the systemic arterial circulation, thus bypassing the lungs. This is called an arterial gas embolus or paradoxical embolism.

In most cases, small amounts of air are broken down in the capillary bed and absorbed into the systemic circulation without any sequelae. To produce symptoms, it is estimated that more than 5 ml/kg of air has to be introduced into the venous system. However, complications can occur with even 20 ml of air. Sometimes even injection of 1 to 2 ml of air into the CNS can be fatal. Further, as little as 0.5 ml of air introduced into the coronary arteries can initiate ventricular fibrillation. The closer the air is injected to the right heart, the higher the risk of complications.

Large amounts of air introduced into the right ventricle can result in outflow tract obstruction, especially if the pulmonary artery pressures are high. When venous air embolism occurs, both tachy and bradyarrhythmias can occur. In patients with a right to left shunt (e.g., VSD, ASD, PFO), venous air embolism can prove to be even more dangerous as the air can enter the arterial system and induce a stroke, mesenteric ischemia, or death.