Treatment will vary based on the amount of metoprolol amount taken, comorbidities, age, and other co-investments. On arrival, assess ABCs and monitor appropriate blood work, including coingestants, ECG, large-bore IVs, and pregnancy status if female. Consult poison control/toxicology early in the course. Treatment choices include volume resuscitation, activated charcoal, whole bowel irrigation, nasogastric lavage, atropine, glucagon, calcium gluconate/calcium chloride, high-dose insulin, vasopressors, Intralipid, transcutaneous, or transvenous pacemaker. Cardiac status and a current fluid balance will guide volume resuscitation. Activated charcoal is typically given 1 g/kg and usually only has efficacy if dosed within 1 to 2 hours of ingestion.

Nasogastric lavage is usually ineffective, except for large quantity ingestions. The clinician may consider atropine use, although it is typically ineffective in moderate-to-severe overdoses. Calcium administration to increase intracellular calcium at a dose of 60 mg/kg over 5 to 10 minutes of calcium gluconate. Calcium chloride at a dose of 10 to 20 mL of a 10% solution is an option if central access is obtained. Glucagon dosing is 50 mcg/kg as a bolus with titration of drip. High-dose insulin at a dose of 1 unit per kilogram bolus followed by 1 unit per kilogram per hour drip.

Administration with dextrose with a drip titrating to euglycemia as well as potassium repletion as needed. Vasopressors with epinephrine or norepinephrine titrated rate and blood pressure. Intralipid IV lipid emulsion therapy can serve as a lipid sink that extracts the drug from the myocyte. It may also provide free fatty acids as a substrate. It should be noted that the use of this medication will affect some laboratory monitoring.