Orthopedic interventions of the arm primarily involve open reduction and internal fixation of humerus fractures. Because of the proximity of surrounding neurovascular structures, primarily the radial nerve, to the bone surface, each surgical approach has dangers that merit consideration.  Specific surgical approaches and their associated risks include

- Anterior approach – Provides a versatile approach providing ample exposure to the humeral shaft. Despite entering the anterior compartment of the arm, the radial nerve is in danger as it sits along the spiral groove on the back of the middle third of the humerus. This risk is particularly heightened when drilling or installing hardware in an anteroposterior axis where it is essential to not over-penetrate the posterior cortex. The radial nerve can also be damaged in the distal third of the arm as it crosses through the intermuscular septum and lies between the brachioradialis and brachialis muscles.  The anterior approach also poses a danger to the axillary nerve, which can be damaged as it runs along the undersurface of the deltoid muscle if there is an excessive retraction of the muscle.

- Posterior approach – Similar to the anterior approach, it provides ample exposure to the humeral shaft. It may be preferred when there is known damage or transection of the radial nerve as the nerve is directly visible in this approach. In patients with an intact radial nerve, it is at risk as it traverses the spiral groove along the posterior aspect of the humerus. The posterior cutaneous nerve is identifiable and traced proximally to identify the radial nerve.  When plating a fracture using the posterior approach, ensure the nerve does not get entrapped between the plate and bone.

- Distal humerus approach – The distal humerus can be approached through local incisions, both anterolaterally and medially. The anterolateral approach is useful for distal humerus fractures and exploration of the distal radial nerve. The radial nerve requires identification before incising through the brachialis muscle as it runs between the brachialis and brachioradialis. The medial approach is appropriate for isolated fractures of the medial column of the distal humerus and repair of the ulnar collateral ligament. The forearm's posterior branch of the medial cutaneous nerve should be preserved during superficial dissection. The ulnar nerve is identifiable as it runs behind the medial epicondyle.