While taking the history, it is crucial to explore the patient's potential exposures, risks of aspiration, host factors, and presenting symptoms.

Exposure: A detailed history of possible exposures should be sought as it can help in establishing the potential etiologies. The following are some associations of exposures and etiologies of bacterial pneumonia:

- Contaminated air-conditioning and water systems may cause Legionella pneumonia.

- Crowded places, such as jails, shelters, etc., expose a person to Streptococcus pneumonia, Mycobacteria, Mycoplasma, and Chlamydia.

- Exposures to several animals, such as cats, sheep, and cattle, may lead to infection with Coxiella burnetii

- Some birds, such as chickens, turkeys, and ducks, can expose a person to Chlamydia psittaci.

Risks of Aspiration: Patients with an increased risk of aspiration are more prone to develop pneumonia secondary to aspiration. Associated risks are:

- Altered mentation

- Drug abuse

- Dysphagia

- Gastroesophageal reflux disease (GERD)

- Alcoholism

- Seizure disorder

Host mechanisms: It is of utmost importance to explore a detailed history to find clues towards the etiology of pneumonia. For instance, a history of asthma, COPD, smoking, and immunocompromised status can be indicative of H. influenzae infection. H influenza most commonly appears in the winter season. Similarly, social, sexual, medication, and family history can all be useful in determining the cause of illness.

Features in the history of bacterial pneumonia may vary from indolent to fulminant. Clinical manifestation includes both constitutional findings and findings due to damage to the lung and related tissue. The following are significant history findings:

- Fever with tachycardia and/or chills and sweats.

- The cough may be either nonproductive or productive with mucoid, purulent, or blood-tinged sputum.

- Pleuritic chest pain if the pleura is involved.

- Shortness of breath with normal daily routine work.

- Other symptoms include fatigue, headache, myalgia, and arthralgia.

For unbeknownst reasons, the presence of rigors is more often indicative of pneumococcal pneumonia than other bacterial pathogens.

The presence of a productive cough is the most common and significant presenting symptom. Some bacterial causes have particular manifestations, such as:

- S. pneumoniae - Rust-colored sputum

- Pseudomonas, Hemophilus - Green sputum

- Klebsiella - Red currant-jelly sputum

- Anaerobes - foul-smelling and bad-tasting sputum

Atypical pneumonia presents with pulmonary and extra-pulmonary manifestations, such as Legionella pneumonia, which often presents with altered mentation and gastrointestinal symptoms.

Physical findings also vary from patient to patient and mainly depend on the severity of lung consolidation, the type of organism, the extent of the infection, host factors, and the existence or nonexistence of pleural effusion. The following are major clinical findings:

- Increased temperature (usually more than 38 C or 100.4 F)

- Decreased temperature (less than 35 C or 95 F)

- Increased respiratory rate (more than 18 breaths/min)

- Increased heart rate (more than 100/min)

- Bradycardia (less than 60/min)

- Cyanosis

- Percussion sounds vary from flat to dull.

- Tactile fremitus

- Crackles, rales, and bronchial breath sounds are heard during auscultation.

- Tracheal deviation

- Lymphadenopathy

- Pleural rub

- Egophony

Confusion manifests earlier in older patients. A critically ill patient may present with sepsis or multi-organ failure.

Some examination findings are specific for certain etiologies, such as:

- Bradycardia - Legionella

- Dental illnesses - Anaerobes

- Impaired gag reflex - Aspiration pneumonia

- Cutaneous nodules - Nocardiosis

- Bullous myringitis - Mycoplasma