When treating the thoracic spine with MET, the targetted segment of the spine must be localized and isolated. In the upper thoracic spine (T1-T4), it is common to use the head and neck as a lever. The lower thoracic spine segments (T5-T12) can be localized by manipulating the position of the patient's trunk. Localizing the dysfunctional segment involves monitoring the posterior transverse process for motion throughout the treatment through palpation. The following two treatment techniques will begin by engaging the restrictive barrier or, put another way, moving the patient in opposite directions to those of the somatic dysfunction of the targeted vertebral segment.

Post-Isometric Relaxation Muscle Energy

Example Osteopathic Diagnosis: T3 F RS Right

Step 1. Set Up. Stand behind the supine or seated patient with the left hand upon the head used to achieve the desired vector and the right hand upon the patient's spine monitoring for motion at the posterior transverse process of T3.

Step 2. Engage the barrier. Move the patient's head posterior to extend the spine until motion is felt at the transverse process of T3. Then, side bend the patient's head to the left until the motion is felt at the transverse process. Finally, rotate the patient's head to the left until motion is felt at the transverse process.

Step 3. Isometric contraction. Instruct the patient to gently, but continuously attempt to return her head to an upright, neutral position, while the physician applies an equal counterforce. Maintain this position for 3 to 5 seconds before instructing the patient to relax and remain in the position.

Step 4.  Engage the new restrictive barrier. Move the patient's head gently farther in the three planes of restricted motion to the new barrier.

Step 5. Repeat Steps 3 and 4 three to five times with a passive stretch into the restrictive barrier with no patient involvement following the final round of treatment. Passively return the patient to a neutral position.

Step 6. Reassess for improvement in symmetry of the treated segment by palpating the transverse processes of T3 for the example given.

Reciprocal Inhibition

If the treating physician chooses to perform Reciprocal Inhibition on the above patient, during Step 3, the patient would be instructed to direct a force towards the engaged barrier. In the example above, the patient would be instructed to rotate her head to the left, side bend left, and extend. Generally, the force of contraction required for Reciprocal Inhibition is of lesser magnitude than that of Post-Isometric Relaxation.