**Complications of Transcutaneous and Percutaneous Implants**

Intraoperative complications of bone-anchored hearing device surgery are rare but include damage to nearby structures, including the dura and sigmoid sinus, with associated risk for CSF leak and bleeding, respectively.

Complications in the postoperative period are most commonly associated with soft tissue-related issues. With technological improvements and innovations in operative technique, including smaller incisions and limited tissue dissection, the incidence of these complications has decreased. Soft tissue complications include infection, excess granulation tissue, and excess scar formation.

These complications are more common in children, as well as adults with comorbidities, including smoking, diabetes mellitus, and obesity. Bone-related complications occur less frequently, and are the most common failure is lack of osseointegration. Technical fractures, as well as patient factors including trauma, chronic soft tissue infections, and inadequate bony recipient site, account for the majority of bone-related issues. Osteomyelitis is an exceedingly rare complication of bone-anchored hearing surgery.

**Complications of Middle Ear Implantable Hearing Prostheses**

Risks include those associated with traditional mastoid surgery and facial recess approach, including hearing impairment, changes in taste, facial nerve weakness, spinal fluid leak, and vertigo. Due to the exposure necessary through the facial recess, there is an increased risk to the chorda-tympani and tympanic annulus compared to cochlear implant approaches.