**Odontogenic Tumors That Arise Only From Odontogenic Epithelium Without Odontogenic Ectomesenchyme**

**Ameloblastoma:**It may present as multicystic/ solid type, uni-cystic type, peripheral type, and metastasizing type, which has been recently removed from the malignant group.

**Multi-cystic or solid type:**It usually originates de novo, and it has many variants, including follicular subtype in which follicles of epithelial cells are present in connective tissue stroma. It is composed of loosely arranged stellate cells in the center and columnar cells in the periphery. These follicles are like the enamel organ seen in the early stages of tooth development. Cystic changes may be seen as well. Plexiform subtype: arranged in long anastomosing sheets of odontogenic epithelium. It may lack reverse polarization and may not resemble any stages of tooth development. It is called a “fishnet pattern.” Cystic changes are uncommon.

Acanthomatous subtype in which extensive squamous metaplasia of the central core is present. It is often associated with keratin formation. It may be confused as squamous cell carcinoma. Granular cell type is a clinically aggressive type in which tumor cells' cytoplasm shows abundant eosinophilic granules. The desmoplastic type is characterized by densely collagenized stroma. It is clinically more aggressive with a higher rate of recurrence. Finally, the basal cell type is the least common type with a nest of basaloid cells, which resemble basal cell carcinoma.

**Uni-cystic type:**It usually arises from the lining of a dentigerous cyst, and it can be associated with impacted molar.

**Peripheral type:**It usually arises from the remnants of the dental lamina or the basal layer of the surface epithelium.

**Malignant ameloblastoma:**The tumor cells have the typical features of benign ameloblastoma both in the primary lesion and secondaries. The 4th edition of the WHO classification removed this lesion from the malignant subcategory due to its bland histological features.

Other lesions are adenomatoid odontogenic tumor which is a well-defined lesion with a thick fibrous capsule. The center of the lesion is usually solid but may show areas of cystic changes. The epithelial cells are either a spindle or columnar and are arranged in sheets, whorled or ductal patterns. The latter pattern is characteristic of these tumors.

A calcifying epithelial odontogenic tumor (Pindborg tumor) also arises mainly from odontogenic epithelium. It usually originates from the remnants of the dental lamina or reduced enamel epithelium. Histologically, it appears as sheets of polygonal cells surrounded by fibrous stroma with areas of eosinophilic amyloid-like materials. Calcification is a distinctive feature and usually develops within the amyloid-like material and forms rings, known as Liesegang’s rings. The exact nature of the eosinophilic material is controversial as it does not stain as amyloid when exposed to Congo red. However, it exhibits apple-green birefringence when seen by polarized light. This material may represent enamel protein that is secreted by the tumor cells.

The last item in this category is squamous odontogenic tumors that usually show islands of stratified squamous epithelium with microcyst formation at the center. Spherical calcification can be seen as well.

**Odontogenic tumors that arise from both odontogenic epithelium and odontogenic ectomesenchyme, with or without dental hard tissue formation:**Odontogenic ghost cell tumor (calcifying odontogenic cyst) epithelium usually resembles ameloblastoma with an outer layer of palisaded columnar cells and an inner layer of stellate reticulum. Spherical calcification and hyalinized materials can also be seen. Some of the eosinophilic epithelial cells may lack nuclei, which are called “ghost cells.”

While ameloblastic fibroma contains thin strands of odontogenic epithelium in the background of embryonic connective tissue, it may also show focal areas of hyalinization and calcification.

**Odontogenic tumors that arise from ectomesenchyme with or without included odontogenic epithelium:**

Histological features of odontogenic fibroma show stellate fibroblast with islands of odontogenic epithelium. They may also show spherical or diffuse calcification. It may be central or peripheral.

Lastly, cementoblastoma resembles osteoblastoma and osteoid osteoma, except that it is usually in continuity with the cemental layer of the roots. Eosinophilic matrix rimmed by cementoblast cells. It is relatively acellular in the periphery with a more vascular and mineralized center. The center usually shows multinucleated giant cells with reversal lines which indicates extensive remodeling.

**Malignant odontogenic tumors:**In ameloblastic carcinoma, both primary lesion and metastases show cytological malignancy features, which is the main difference from metastasizing (malignant) ameloblastoma.

Primary intraosseous carcinoma usually has the features of high-grade squamous cell carcinoma. Ghost cell odontogenic carcinoma also shows features of ameloblastoma such as peripheral palisading and reverse polarization along with the presence of ghost cells. NOS Sclerosing odontogenic carcinoma shows extensive sclerosis within connective tissue stroma and bland epithelial cell that does not show keratin differentiation. Mitoses and nuclear pleomorphism are rare. However, perineural and perivascular invasion and the invasion of the surrounding musculature and cortical bones are quite common.

Diagnosis is challenging in small biopsies as it can mimic other head and neck tumors. Finally, odontogenic sarcoma and carcinosarcoma in which epithelial component is similar to ameloblastoma, or ameloblastic fibroma. However, the mesenchymal component shows malignant features. With recurrence, the stromal component increases, and the epithelial component diminishes. If dysplastic dentin is present in ameloblastic fibrosarcoma, then it is called ameloblastic fibrodentinosarcoma. While if it additionally shows foci of dysplastic enamel protein, it is called ameloblastic fibro-odontosarcoma. Moreover, if both carcinomatous and malignant spindle cell components are present, it is then odontogenic carcinosarcoma.