Acromegaly is associated with high mortality rates, chiefly due to malignancies and cardiovascular and respiratory disorders.

Multiple factors influence the prognosis of acromegaly. Patient factors such as age, biochemical factors such as how high GH/IGF-1 levels are at diagnosis, tumor factors including tumor granularity, receptor expression (SSTR2, SSTR5, and D2), markers such as Ki67 and p21, specific mutations, how the tumor behaves in terms of its size and invasion and the T2 intensity of the tumor on MRI. Using this information, a classification of acromegaly into three subtypes has been proposed, guiding prognosis, predicting treatment responsiveness, and thus patient outcomes.

- **Type 1 (best prognosis):**Older patients, fewer symptoms, and lower levels of IGF-1. They have densely granulated micro or macroadenomas that are less aggressive, as evidenced by lower Ki67 (a proliferation marker), high p21 (a marker of senescence), and very uncommonly have a suprasellar extension. Instead, they tend to exhibit extension laterally to the sphenoid sinuses, which are more accessible to surgery. Also, these tumors more frequently express SSTR2 predicting a better response to medical treatment.

- **Type 2 (intermediate prognosis):**These macroadenomas can be either dense or sparsely granulated but do not demonstrate invasive features. Compared with type 1, IGF-1 levels are higher at diagnosis.

- **Type 3 (worst prognosis):**These patients are young, experience severe symptoms, and have high levels of IGF-1 at diagnosis. Their tumors are macroadenomas and are sparsely granulated and more aggressive, as supported by low levels of p21. These tumors also extend to both the sphenoid sinus and the suprasellar region and frequently compress the optic chiasm. Low expression of SSTR2 may indicate poor response to medical therapy.