Pars interarticularis defects can pose both diagnostic and treatment challenges for healthcare providers. An interprofessional team may improve detection and outcomes. Diagnosis can be challenging because the typical patient is a child or adolescent who the clinician would prefer to spare from radiation exposure. Yet, confirmation of suspected pars defects relies on imaging support. Additionally, imaging, in conjunction with symptoms, should guide management.  No universal algorithm for workup exists for this pathology; therefore, workup must be approached in a case by case fashion. Primary care providers initiate an evaluation. Referal to orthopedists and sport medicine physicians is appropriate. Orthopedic nurses are involved with education, monitoring patients, and arrange to follow up. Physical therapists and nurses should report back to the team. Challenges arise when treating the pediatric population; providers would especially like to spare these patients from unnecessary radiation exposure and know that the majority of pars defects can be managed conservatively, so many patients undergo management without a full workup.  Generally, when pars defect is high on the differential, regardless of age, appropriate plain radiographs should be obtained. If initial imaging is equivocal, again, regardless of age, imaging should progress to MRI or CT depending on the clinical history and provider preference. Patients and families must be educated on the importance of appropriate workup (including imaging) given outcomes are improved with early detection. [Level 5]