Immunoglobulins are heterotetramers comprised of two heavy chains and two light chains linked together by covalent bonds. Immunoglobulins are Y-shaped molecules containing two Fab regions that recognize antigen and an Fc tailpiece that determine the biological activity of the antibody. In humans, the heavy chain locus is on chromosome 14, and two alternative light chain loci, known as kappa and lambda, are located on chromosomes 2 and 22, respectively. Immunoglobulins, or antibodies in the secreted form, are produced by somatic DNA recombination in B lymphocytes developing in the bone marrow, the primary lymphoid organ for B lymphocyte development. Somatic recombination is a strategy used by the adaptive immune system to generate trillions of different immunoglobulins and T-cell receptors by recombining different protein-encoding DNA segments together in a fairly random manner. Monomeric IgM and IgD serve as the BCRs for resting B lymphocytes that have not been stimulated by antigen recognition.

Upon recognizing antigen, pentameric IgM is the initial antibody secreted by B cells in response to an antigen challenge. The IgM secreted in a primary response tends to have a lower affinity for foreign antigen compared to isotypes secreted on subsequent encounters, or secondary responses, to a foreign antigen. However, due to its pentameric conformation, secreted IgM has higher avidity, or overall strength of binding to antigen, due to the presence of ten antigen-binding sites per pentameric IgM molecule. The increased avidity of IgM is important for binding pathogens with repetitive epitopes, such as on a bacterial capsule. IgM is present predominantly in the blood, although it can also appear in the lymph and can also be secreted across mucosal surfaces. Unlike IgG or IgE, multimeric IgM does not readily enter the tissues from the bloodstream due to its larger size. J chain is a small 15 kDa protein that is associated with secreted pentameric IgM and dimeric IgA. Pentameric IgM is stabilized by covalent, disulfide bonds between the Fc regions of IgM molecules, as well as disulfide bonds between the J chain and the Fc regions of IgM. Hexameric IgM in humans is less well characterized than pentameric IgM, and hexameric IgM assembles independently of the J chain. The presence of the J chain protects secreted IgM and IgA from proteases and also facilitates their transport across mucosal epithelia to provide immune protection to mucosal surfaces.