In the U.S., the primary system in use is ESI. The ESI, similar to the Canadian, Australian, and United Kingdom systems, is a five-level triage system focusing on the prioritization of patients who need help immediately and the urgency of the treatment of the patient’s conditions**.**The ESI system went through several revisions based on studies done at university-based emergency departments. These revisions were based on limitations shown in the study done by Tanabe et al., showing that many patients classified as level 2 patients would have benefited from being classified as level 1 to receive lifesaving interventions.

Unlike the Australian, Canadian, and U.K. systems, the ESI focuses more on the urgency and how severe the patient’s symptoms are, rather than evaluating how long the patient can wait before being seen. Another difference in the ESI system, is the requirement of nurses to also anticipate the needs of subacute patients, those who are deemed stable. This is so stable patients who are finally seen by physicians can properly and efficiently be placed in the appropriate care for their condition. Nurses and administrators also have seen benefits in the ESI system. A study by Wuerz et al. in 2001 showed improved communication of inpatient acuity compared to the three-tiered system. Communications between charge nurses and triage nurses were simplified for patient needs. Hospital administrators are also able to simply look at available resources in the hospital that would be needed for different levels of acuity based on ESI, and then make decisions on needing additional resources or needing to divert incoming patients to other hospitals. Overall, the ESI systems have improved quality in the assessment of patient care and improved the quality of communication and hospital resource applications by providers and hospital administrators.

In a 2019 study by Zhu et al., the validity was compared between the ATS and the CHT. The study found that both the ATS and CHT had similar validity in the categorization of higher acuity patients. Also, the ATS and CHT both had good reliability based on the Fleiss grade. The study concluded that both systems were adequate in identifying critically ill patients in the emergency department.