Lupus nephritis is a common manifestation of SLE. It is primarily caused by a type-3, hypersensitivity reaction, which results in the formation of immune complexes. Anti-double-stranded DNA (anti-dsDNA) binds to DNA, which forms an anti-dsDNA immune complex. These immune complexes deposit on the mesangium, subendothelial, and/or subepithelial space near the glomerular basement membrane of the kidney. This leads to an inflammatory response with the onset of lupus nephritis, in which the complement pathway is activated with a resultant influx of neutrophils and other inflammatory cells. While an autoimmune phenomenon causes lupus nephritis, there are also genetic components that may predispose an SLE patient to develop lupus nephritis. For instance, polymorphisms in the allele coding for the immunoglobulin receptors on macrophages and APOL1 gene variations found exclusively in African American populations with SLE were found to be associated with predisposition to lupus nephritis.

**Genetic Factors**

As with many other autoimmune diseases, genetic predilection plays a significant role in the occurrence of both SLE and lupus nephritis. It is considered to be a polygenic phenomenon that is yet to be completely understood. Following are some important genetic associations found in patients suffering from SLE or lupus nephritis:

- 
PTPN22 - Lymphoid-specific protein tyrosine phosphatase

- 
CRP

- 
FCGR3A, FCGR3B - FcγRIIIA (V176), FcγRIIIB

- 
FCGR2A, FCGR2B - FcγRIIA (R131), FcγRIIB

- 
C1QB - C1q deficiency

- 
STAT4 - Signal transducer and activator of transcription 4

- 
CTLA4 - Cytotoxic T-lymphocyte-associated protein 4 (CTLA-4)

- 
C2, C4A, C4B - C2, C4 deficiencies

- 
HLA-DRB1 - HLA-DRB1: DR2/1501, DR3/0301C1q deficiency

- 
TNF - TNF-a (promoter, -308)

- 
MBL2 - Mannose-binding lectin

SLE is more commonly observed in first-degree relatives of patients suffering from SLE (familial prevalence is 10-12%). Monozygotic twins are found to have higher concordance rates (24-58%) than dizygotic twins (2-5%). This supports the idea of significant genetic involvement in the development of SLE. However, the fact that the concordance rate is not 100% in monozygotic twins suggests that environmental factors also play an important role in the development of clinical disease. Some important genes that play a role in lupus nephritis are:

- C1Q, C1R, and C1S deficiencies are linked with SLE, lupus nephritis, and the appearance of anti-dsDNA

- C2 and C4 deficiencies are related to the development of SLE or a lupus-like syndrome

- FcγRIIa is associated with lupus nephritis in African Americans

**Immunologic Factors**

The initial response appears to be autoantibody-mediated against the nucleosome, from apoptotic cells.

Autoreactive B lymphocytes become activated in SLE because of a disordered response of normal homeostatic mechanisms, causing an escape from tolerance. This in turn results in the production of autoantibodies.

Other autoantibodies, such as anti-dsDNA antibodies appear through a process called epitope spreading. These autoantibodies appear gradually, in an orderly fashion, from months to years prior to the development of clinical SLE.