Simple urinalysis or urine dip can be used to identify those at risk of urogenital schistosomiasis. Diagnosis can be made by microscopic examination of urine for eggs, although this has low overall sensitivity due to daily fluctuation in egg output. Serology can be performed with variable sensitivity ranging from 41% to 78%. Serology and polymerase chain reaction (PCR) can be useful for symptomatic travelers or those presenting with symptoms of acute schistosomiasis, although it is less useful in endemic areas due to the inability to discriminate between active infection and prior exposure. Multimodal laboratory testing to include urine dipstick, complete blood count, and serology are more effective when utilized in tandem. There is no current laboratory gold standard to identify the worm burden, which makes cost-efficient treatment and management more difficult.

Microscopic examination of eggs will show a relatively large oval-shaped structure that measures 110 to 170 micrometers long by 40 to 70 micrometers wide. These eggs are notable for a terminal spine, and this is in contrast to S. mansoni and S. japonicum eggs, which exhibit a lateral spine and lateral knob, respectively.

Multiple imaging modalities can be useful in diagnosis, including ultrasonography, radiography, IV pyelogram, cystoscopy, and colposcopy. Ultrasound of the genitourinary tract is becoming the imaging gold standard in quantifying the burden of disease, although it is resource utilization heavy. It may show bladder wall irregularities due to underlying granulomas, as well as hydronephrosis, bladder polyps, and tumors. Radiographic imaging with a standard KUB view may show characteristic calcifications due to long-standing bladder wall fibrosis. Computed tomography can also be useful in identification.

Women with female genital schistosomiasis (FGS) often present with symptoms of STI or infertility and are incorrectly diagnosed and treated. Per the WHO, this is primarily due to a general lack of awareness of FGS by healthcare professionals. FGS can be diagnosed via speculum exam and visual inspection of the cervix and vagina for characteristics lesions such as “sandy patches,” hypervascularity, and tissue friability. Colposcopy and camera can improve visualization.

Evaluating the distribution of Bulinus snails and the prevalence of S. haematobium with PCR within these snails can be useful in mapping and monitoring areas of higher prevalence. Furthermore, this can be useful in monitoring transmission to areas of low prevalence.