Tendons play an extraordinary role in mechanics and movement. They transmit the force produced by the muscular contraction to the skeletal levers, thus allowing for movement and the maintenance of the body posture. The tendons allow the muscle to be at an optimal distance from the joint on which it acts without requiring an excessive muscle length between the origin and the insertion points. Tendons are stiffer than muscles, have greater tensile strength, and can withstand very large loads with minimal deformations. These properties of the tendons make the muscles capable of transmitting forces to the bones without energy loss due to tendon stretch. For example, the flexor tendons of the foot can bear more than eight times the body weight and store about 40% of this weight for an elastic hysteresis during walking.

**Tendon Sheaths**

Tendon sheaths are satellite structures whose main task is to facilitate the sliding of the tendon tissue surrounding anatomical structures and prevent the tendon from losing its course of action during muscle contraction.

**Fibrous Sheaths**

The fibrous sheaths or retinacula represent the sliding channels of the tendons, particularly the long ones. Without fibrous sheaths, the sliding action on the neighboring tissues could be considerably compromised by friction, especially at bone structures. In these regions, there are tunnels in which the tendons flow, surrounded by a synovial sheath. In particular, the showers and bone incisions are generally covered by a fibrocartilaginous floor on which a fibrous fabric roof passes over a bridge. This structure represents the fibrous sheath or retinaculum, a formation found at the extremities. Typical examples are the retinacula of the flexor and extensor tendons of the hand and foot at the level of the wrist and the instep.

**Synovial Sheaths**

The synovial sheaths facilitate the sliding of the tendon inside the fibrous sheath. Synovial sheaths consist of two thin serous sheets: the parietal sheet that covers the walls of the fibrous sheath and the visceral sheet that covers the surface of the tendon. The two sheets continue at the level of the two ends of the duct. The closed space delimited by the two sheets contains a thin veil of liquid, the peritendinous liquid, which has roughly the same composition as the synovial fluid and serves mainly as a lubricant. In addition, peduncles of loose tissue detach themselves from the walls of the osteo-fibrous canals and terminate on the tendinous belly leading to the vessels and nerves of the tendons. These structures constitute the mesotenonium, are also covered by the synovium, and may be more or less numerous depending on the length of the tendon itself. However, not all tendons possess true synovial sheaths; they are found only in areas where a sudden change in direction and increased friction require very efficient lubrication.

**Peritendon Sheaths (Paratenon)**

The peritendinous sheets have a function that can be superimposed on that of the synovial sheaths, although they present a different histological structure. Paratenon comprises type I and type III collagen fibrils and thin elastic fibers. The paratenon reduces friction and works as a sort of elastic sleeve that allows the free movement of the tendon with respect to the surrounding structures.

**Reflection Pulleys**

Reflection pulleys are circumscribed thickenings of dense fibrillar tissue located along the course of the fibrous sheaths. They contain the tendon inside the sliding bed, especially where there are curvatures along the course of the tendon.

**Tendon Bursae**

Tendon bursae help to minimize friction between the tendon and adjacent bony structures. These bursae are small serous vesicles located in the sites where a bony prominence can compress and then wear out the tendon; typical examples are subacromial, infrapatellar, and retrocalcaneal bursae.

Below the paratenon, the entire tendon is surrounded by a thin sheath of dense connective tissue called epitenonium. Together, the paratenon and epitenonium can be called peritenonium. Within the epitenonium, the collagen fibrils are oriented transversely, longitudinally, and obliquely. Occasionally the epitenonium fibrils appear to be fused with the superficial tendon fibrils.

On its external surface, the epitenonium is contiguous to the peritenonium. The inner surface is in continuity with the endotenonium, a thin membrane of loose connective tissue that covers the individual tendon fibers and groups them in larger units represented by bundles of fibers of various order. The function of endotenonium is to circumscribe, individualize the various orders of bundles, and allow the penetration and the capillary distribution of neurovascular structures inside the tendon.

The point where the muscle pierces in the tendon is called the musculotendinous junction. The point where the tendon inserts on the bone is called the osteotendinous junction.

**Cell Population and the Extracellular Matrix**

Two specialized fibroblasts co-exist in the tendinous tissue: tenocytes and tenoblasts. The tenocytes have an elongated shape, while the tenoblasts have an ovoid shape. Tenoblasts represent approximately 90% to 95% of tendon fibroblasts. When a tendon is injured, healing occurs via multiple overlapping phases. During the tendon healing phase, tenoblasts are involved in tissue repair, depositing collagen fibers. During the last phase of repair, the tenoblasts are transformed into tenocytes.

These specialized fibroblasts produce extracellular matrix containing collagen, proteoglycans, and other proteins. Collagen makes up approximately 65% to 80% of the extracellular matrix. The prevalent collagen in tendons is type I. Type III collagen is present in the epitenonium and the endotenonium. Type II is identifiable in the fibrocartilaginous areas of the osteotendinous junction. Elastin, proteoglycans, and glycoproteins constitute 4%, 4%, and 2%, respectively, of the extracellular matrix.

Within the tendon, the collagen fibers comprise a variable number of fibrils arranged in parallel and joined together in fibers, always parallel to each other and the tendon axis. The bundles of collagen fibers show a wavy pattern, with periodic changes of direction, known in the literature as crimps. Crimps differ in size and geometry within the same tendon, appearing as isosceles or scalene triangles of variable size. The single crimp, observed by scanning electron microscope, appears to consist of rectilinear fibrillary segments tightly packed together and joined by nodes or hinges, in correspondence of which all the fibrils of each fascicle change simultaneously direction. In changing their course, the fibrils do not describe a loop but are deformed as a hollow cylindrical structure would do. Collagen bends but does not break.

**Mechanical Properties**

The biomechanical behavior of a tendon is related to the magnitude of tension stress and the shape of the tendon itself. Muscles used to perform delicate and precise movements, such as the flexors of the fingers, possess long and thin tendons. In contrast, those that perform actions of power and endurance, such as the quadriceps femoris and the triceps surae, have shorter and more robust tendons. A short tendon has a greater tensile strength than a long tendon because the load required to produce the break is much more significant in a short tendon with the same diameter.

A long tendon can undergo a greater deformation than a short tendon before undergoing rupture. The strength and resistance of a tendon are two different properties and depend on the diameter and length of the tendon itself. The biomechanical properties of the tendon are related to the diameter and arrangement of collagen fibrils; tendons subjected to high stress are fibrils of a large diameter, less flexible than those of smaller caliber.

The ability of the tendons to amortize and transmit the force of muscle contraction is also closely related to the tendon crimp. Researchers observe that greater tendon load correlates with a greater angle at the base of the crimps. When a tendon is stretched, the crimps gradually flatten. They act as a shock absorber in the tendon during the early stages of pulling, allowing the tendon to recover its form at the cessation of the applied force. The crimps do not flatten simultaneously but gradually from the periphery to the center.

**Adaptation to Mechanical Stress**

Tendinous adaptations appear to differ between genetic sexes. When subjected to repeated mechanical stress, genetic females develop less tendon strength than genetic males. However, tendon lengthening is more pronounced in genetic females. The reasons for this are not well understood.

Tendinous tissue adapts itself to the surrounding mechanical environment. Adaptation is specific to the imposed stress. When subjected to mechanical tension (contraction and muscle release), collagen synthesis increases, increasing tendon diameter. With continued tension, tendon stiffness will increase, as will the Young modulus. The Young modulus is the ratio of tensile stress to tensile strain, expressed in pressure units. This ratio defines how easily the tendon can stretch and deform.

**Adaptation to Age**

Tendon adaption capacity decreases with age. Age brings alterations to cellular structure with a diminished capacity for regeneration. Additionally, the tendon is less able to adequately pilot the force expressed by the muscle toward the bone tissue. Collagen fibers are less organized, and calcification can occur. There are fewer fibroblasts and senescent cells, a decrease in the amount of water, and a decrease in the number of proteoglycans, all of which contribute to a reduction in viscoelastic properties. These changes weaken the tendon and increase susceptibility to trauma.

Decreasing estrogen levels accompanying normal aging in the genetic female loosens the tendinous tissue, making it more prone to traumatic injury and the resulting inflammatory response.