Diseases and anomalies of the thyroid gland and subsequent surgeries can result in various presentations and complications that bear clinical significance.

**Consequences of Ectopic Thyroid Tissue**

Ectopic thyroid tissue can present with varying symptomatology depending on its location. Lingual ectopic thyroid tissue may present with dysphagia, bleeding, dyspnea. Suprahyoid and infrahyoid thyroid tissue may present as a midline mass in the neck, similar to a thyroglossal duct cyst. Intratracheal or intralaryngeal thyroid tissue may present as a respiratory obstruction. Intraesophageal thyroid tissue may present as dysphagia. Typically, the presence of a pyramidal lobe is asymptomatic. Likewise, aortic, pericardial, and cardiac thyroid tissue are also asymptomatic.

**Surgical Consequences**

Various nerves are at potential risk for injury during thyroidectomies and other thyroid related surgeries including the recurrent laryngeal nerve, the superior laryngeal nerve, and the cervical sympathetic trunk. Injury to the recurrent laryngeal nerve can result in vocal cord paralysis. Injury to the superior laryngeal nerve can result in dysphonia (alteration of sound pitch). Horner syndrome may result from damage to the cervical sympathetic trunk.

Disruption to the parathyroid glands may result in transient or permanent hypoparathyroidism and consequential hypocalcemia.

Recurrence of a thyroglossal duct cyst may occur following failure to remove the cyst and its tract in its entirety. This may result in subsequent procedures.