Any damage or compression of the neuraxis anywhere along this pathway can potentially lead to foot drop and steppage gait. Frequent reasons include traumatic injuries, pelvic fractures, tibia or fibular head fractures, tight casts, prolonged positioning in lithotomy during surgical procedures, compression by a space-occupying lesion, vascular impairments as in conditions as lupus, or Waldenstrom macroglobulinemia which can lead to vasculitis causing nerve ischemia. Neuropathies affecting the nerves of the peripheral nervous system are referred to as peripheral neuropathies. These can be primarily demyelinating, primarily axonal, or mixed. Primary demyelinating neuropathies can be acquired or congenital. Examples of acquired neuropathies include acquired inflammatory demyelinating polyneuropathy (AIDP) and chronic inflammatory demyelinating polyneuropathy (CIDP). Hereditary neuropathies include Charcot-Marie Tooth (CMT), and hereditary preponderance to pressure palsies (HNPP). GNE (UDP-N-acetylglucosamine 2-epimerase/N-acetylmannosamine kinase) myopathy (Nonaka myopathy), GARS1 (Glycyl-TRNA Synthetase 1)-associated axonal neuropathy, and alkaptonuria are rare causes.

Predominantly axonal neuropathies are seen with exposure to toxins, viral or bacterial infections, chemotherapeutic agents as vincristine or vinblastin.

Diabetes, alcohol intoxication, and renal disease can lead to mixed peripheral polyneuropathies.

The primary causes of foot drop include cerebral vascular accident (CVA) and amyotrophic lateral sclerosis. CVA presents as hemiparesis or hemiplegia, associated with dysphagia, dysarthria, or aphasia.

Foot drop with a high steppage gait ("cock-walk gait") is of the upper motor neuron type.