For proper diagnosis of accommodative and vergence dysfunction, numerous tests and examinations should be performed to provide a proper diagnosis. Optimal correction of any existing refractive error is obligatory.

The NPC, for example, is useful in detecting the presence of convergence insufficiency together with AI.

Parameters representing the ability to stimulate accommodative responses optimally to presented stimuli are often reduced for individuals with AI. These patients tend to show reduced amplitudes of accommodation (AoA) beyond the minimum expected finding based on Hofstetter's formulae (15-0.25×age) or Donders table of age-expected diopters of accommodation.

Individuals who under-accommodate at near usually manifest a lag of accommodation, while patients who over-accommodate manifest an accommodative lead. Accommodative lag/lead can be determined either by the monocular estimated method (MEM) retinoscopy or by the fused cross-cylinder (FCC) test.

The FCC test is the more subjective option and tends to be tedious and less accurate, especially for young children. MEM retinoscopy is performed with fixation directed to a near target. An attempt is then made to swiftly neutralize the movement of the reflex with spherical lenses of appropriate power. The expected finding is a lag between +0.25 DS and +0.75 DS. A lag greater than +1.00 DS indicates the presence of AI.

Accommodative facility testing is another method to assess the subject's ability to stimulate and relax accommodative responses at a normal rate. It also tests the accuracy of repetitive alterations in demand on the accommodative system. This is often determined using +/-2.00diopter flipper lenses.

NRA/PRA values are indirect measurements of the fusional vergence abilities of the eye. The procedure for testing NRA involves adding plus lenses over the distance correction until the letters blur out. This same procedure is repeated for the PRA, with the only difference being that minus lenses are used in place of the plus lenses.

Horizontal fusional vergence amplitudes (both near and far) are measured using base-in (BI) and base-out prisms (BO). BI prisms are used for negative fusional vergence (NFV), and BO prisms for positive fusional vergence (PFV) amplitudes. Blur, break, and recovery findings are then compared to Morgan's expected ranges. Individuals with symptomatic AI will demonstrate suboptimal fusional vergence in reserve to meet certain accommodative demands.

The AC/A ratio is a key factor to consider in the proper diagnosis and management of accommodative and vergence dysfunction. The normal value is 4:1. Horizontal phoria findings at near can be used to determine the  AC/A ratio gradient. In determining the AC/A ratio gradient, +1.00D lenses are used to induce a prismatic effect (with the optimal near prescription in place) for esophoric findings, while -1.00D lenses are placed in the near prescription for exophoric findings. The difference between phorias with and without the gradient lens is then taken as a fractional value of the lens power used.