**Initial Management**

Initial management of RPF depends on the patient’s clinical status. Patient’s with signs of ureteral compression with hydronephrosis and uremia require emergent decompression by either percutaneous nephrostomy tube or indwelling ureteral stents. Ureteral stent placement is usually not difficult in the setting of ureteral obstruction caused by RPF. The advantage of ureteral stent placement is the opportunity for retrograde pyelograms at time of the procedure to evaluate the anatomy. In critically ill patients with electrolyte abnormalities and little or no urine output, nephrostomy tube placement is favored.

After renal decompression, the patient must be monitored closely for post-obstructive diuresis, renal function status and appropriate replacement of fluids and electrolytes. Post-obstructive diuresis is a prominent polyuria that occurs after relieving complete obstruction of the urinary system (exceeding more than 200 mL per hour). Patients are at risk for severe dehydration, electrolyte imbalances, and hypovolemic shock. The condition usually lasts less than 48 hours. Treatment includes close monitoring of serum BUN, creatinine and electrolytes, and replacement of fluid. Oral replacement is preferred, but if the patient cannot tolerate oral liquids or is unable to keep up with the loss, one-half normal saline is used to replace half of the fluid loss (500 mL for every 1 L lost).  After initial management, it is necessary to identify the potential cause of RPF. Any potential inciting drug should be discontinued immediately.

**Medical Treatment**

Once a diagnosis of RPF is made, whether by radiologic findings or biopsy proven, the common primary medical management has been steroid therapy. The medical literature describes an 80% response rate when treating RPF with steroids alone. This includes resolution of pain and constitutional symptoms within days after initiation of treatment, rapid decline in ESR and diuresis. Dosages and duration of steroid therapy vary considerably, but most regimens start with an initial dose of 60 mg daily tapered to 5 mg daily. One expert consensus recommends treating with prednisone 1 mg/kg per day for approximately 4 weeks. If improvement is observed, the dose is tapered over months to 10 mg/day and maintained for an additional 6 to 18 months. Chronic steroid therapy up to 2 years has been shown to provide a significant improvement in clinical symptoms and regression of retroperitoneal mass. Failure to detect clinical or radiologic improvement within 4 to 6 weeks of initiation of therapy should prompt reevaluation with CT scan and a biopsy to determine if the diagnosis of RPF is correct. If it is confirmed that the disease is RPF, other agents can be used concurrently with steroids. These agents include azathioprine, methotrexate, mycophenolate mofetil, cyclophosphamide, and cyclosporine. Medroxyprogesterone acetate, progesterone, and tamoxifen have also been found to be beneficial in the treatment of RPF.

Monitoring a patient’s response to therapy requires close follow up. The patient should be evaluated clinically within 1 month of initiating treatment for resolution of pain and resolution of urinary obstruction. After that, the patient should be monitored clinically every 2 to 3 months. Clinicians should obtain ESR, CRP, serum creatinine and BUN monthly for the first three months, then every 2 to 3 months. A CT scan should be obtained one month after initiating therapy, then approximately every 3 months to follow the size of the fibrotic mass. Following discontinuation of medical therapy, it is recommended to monitor for disease relapse by obtaining a renal ultrasound, ESR, CRP, serum creatinine concentration every 3 to 6 months and CT every 6 months for the first year, then laboratory testing every 6 to 12 months and CT every 1 to 2 years. Surveillance should be continued indefinitely.

**Surgical Treatment**

Surgical management is reserved for the following scenarios:

- Technical difficulties or complications with other cystoscopic or endoscopic obstruction-relieving maneuvers

- Lack of regression of mass after medical therapy, with persistent encasement of ureters and other structures

- Findings to suggest underlying malignancy to obtain a definitive diagnosis

Surgical management can be approached with an open, laparoscopic, or robotic exploration and entails ureterolysis and manipulation of the ureters to prevent recurrent obstruction. Methods employed to prevent recurrent ureteral obstruction include wrapping the ureters with omental fat to serve as a barrier to prevent encasement by fibrous tissue and promote revascularization, transplantation of ureters to an intraperitoneal position, or transposition of the ureters laterally, with interposition of retroperitoneal fat between ureters and fibrous tissue