Brain AVMs are typically first identified in cross-sectional imaging - computed tomogram (CT) or magnetic resonance imaging (MRI). A combination of MRI and angiography are often helpful to plan therapy and predicting the likely success and associated risks of surgical, endovascular, or radiological therapy.

Computed tomography — On non-contrast CT the nidus is blood density and therefore usually somewhat hyperdense compared to adjacent brain, enlarged draining veins, and calcification may be evident. Although many of them are large, however, no mass effect or edema is present unless they bleed. On postcontrast CT especially with CT angiogram, the diagnosis is easily derived with visible feeding arteries, nidus, and draining veins apparent in the so-called "bag of worm" appearance. The exact anatomy of feeding vessels and draining veins can usually be delineated with angiography. The sensitivity of CT to identify brain AVMs in the acute setting of hemorrhage is reduced owing to compression of the nidus by the hematoma so more sensitive techniques such as MRI or angiography are required.

Magnetic resonance imaging — MRI is very sensitive for plotting the location of the brain AVM nidus and often an associated draining vein or any distant bleeding event. Fast flow in a conglomerate of tangled blood vessels generates serpiginous and tubular flow voids seen on bothT1 and T2, however mostly evident on T2 weighted images. Complications like the previous hemorrhage, adjacent brain edema, and atrophy may be seen.

After radiosurgery, MRI can evaluate the regression of the nidus volume, post-therapy edema as well as radiation necrosis in the radiation field.

Angiography — It remains the gold standard for diagnosis and treatment planning. Nidus configuration, its relationship, and drainage to surrounding vessels are precisely evaluated. The presence of an associated aneurysm suggests a higher risk for hemorrhage. Contrast transit time, which relates to the flow state of the lesion, can provide critical information for endovascular treatment planning.