Clinical manifestation and characterization are imperative before genetic analysis. But phenotypes of various SCA subtypes overlap, so, genotype has become the gold standard for diagnosis. In recent advances, more descriptions of phenotypic differentiation aids in sorting out variants.

**Genetic Testing**

Advances in molecular genetic analysis and testing expedite the definite early classification and diagnosis. Also, recognition of a specific mutated gene helps to test the same gene in other family members. In the setting of positive family history, genetic testing is the definitive way of identifying spinocerebellar ataxia subtypes. Polymerase chain reaction (PCR) of nucleotide repeats in different SCA gene loci helps to identify the specific gene and nucleotide repeats involved.

**Neuroimaging**

Neuroimaging demonstrates the gross cerebellar atrophy most prominent in SCA2 and least in other subtypes, enlargement of ventricles, and atrophy of other parts of the brain as well. Some specific focal or regional atrophies appreciated in certain SCAs are pontocerebellar atrophy with enlargement of the fourth ventricle in SCA3, atrophy of vermis sparing brainstem in SCA5, isolated cerebellar atrophy in SCA6, atrophy of the cerebellar vermis and hemispheres in SCA8, and SCA10, cerebral atrophy in SCA12, etc. Some subtle metabolic abnormalities, not obvious in structural imaging,  may be detected by positron emission tomography (PET) scanning and magnetic resonance spectroscopy; however, rarely routinely performed due to availability and expense.

**Electrophysiologic Testing**

With the loss of function of Purkinje cells and axonal neuropathy of sensory neurons, the state of nerve conduction action potential can be checked by electrophysiologic testing. But this testing cannot differentiate the subtypes of SCAs.