The primary survey, as in any traumatic injury, should begin with an evaluation of the patient’s airway, breathing, and circulation. Immediate resuscitative interventions should take priority over radiologic studies. Clinicians who practice in settings where they are responsible for acute management of patients suffering from strangulation must have extensive experience in airway management, including surgical techniques (emergent tracheostomy and cricothyrotomy).

Patients with "hard signs" or other physical exam findings of extensive cervical injury should immediately have a cervical collar or other immobilization device placed. Removal can only occur once appropriate clinical and radiographic approaches have ruled out unstable fractures, vascular injury, and other threatening pathology. If none of the “hard signs” are present, radiologic studies are not always necessary. After evaluation in the emergency department, the patient may be discharged with strict return precautions. If the patient presents with any of the “hard signs” of strangulation injury, laboratory and radiologic evaluation must be performed.

If the radiologic studies are completely negative, disposition should be based on the patient’s clinical condition. Asymptomatic patients may be discharged after Emergency Department evaluation with strict return precautions and in-home monitoring by family or friends. Symptomatic patients with normal radiologic studies should either be admitted to the hospital or the emergency department observation unit, if available, for further monitoring.

Admitted patients require a multidisciplinary approach depending on the extent of their injuries. Delayed pulmonary edema and complications from concomitant musculoskeletal trauma may become of particular importance and thus specialty and organ-specific care must be sought.