Aripiprazole may be administered with or without food and is available in oral tablets, disintegrating tablets (10 mg and 15 mg), oral solution, and intramuscular (IM) injections for acute symptoms and long-acting IM injections. However, the immediate-release injection (9.75 mg/1.3 mL) was discontinued in the United States. Oral dosing ranges from 5 mg to 30 mg/day and is available in 2 mg, 5 mg, 10 mg, 15 mg, 20 mg, and 30 mg tablets. Both oral and IM routes of administration have similar steady-state serum concentrations and symptom management. The half-life of oral administration is approximately 75 hours. Steady serum concentration doses (based on 15 to 30 mg per day) should occur at approximately 14 days, and therefore it may take up to two weeks to fully assess tolerability. Reaching maximum plasma concentration in patients using depot injections will take place after 5 to 7 days. The long-acting injectable formulation is available in 300 mg or 400 mg prefilled syringes and is administered monthly in patients with the potential for poor medication adherence. The clinician must establish the patient's oral tolerability for aripiprazole before beginning IM medication. It is also important to continue oral aripiprazole for 14 days during the initiation of long-acting IM therapy.

Aripiprazole lauroxil is the prodrug of aripiprazole and is available as a long-acting intramuscular injection (1064 mg, 441 mg, 662 mg, or 882 mg) that can be administered every 4 to 6 weeks and requires a three-week oral medication overlap.

For bipolar I monotherapy, the recommended initial dose of aripiprazole is 15 mg daily, increasing to 30 mg daily as needed. When used as an adjunctive treatment in bipolar I, the recommended target is 15 mg daily. For adjunctive therapy with antidepressants, the initial oral dose is 2 to 5 mg daily, titrating dose up to 5 mg daily in intervals of one week, with a maximum dose of 15 mg/day. The initial dose for treatment of schizophrenia is 10 to 15 mg daily, increasing to a maximum of 30 mg daily. It is important not to titrate the dose more than every two weeks. No dosage readjustment is necessary for renal or hepatic impairment. However, prescribing if aripiprazole with an inducer of CYP3A4 enzyme such as carbamazepine, a higher dose may be required.