Warfarin has several contraindications and clinical considerations for its use.

Warfarin is contraindicated in patients with:

- Hypersensitivity to warfarin or any component of the formulation

- Hemorrhagic tendencies (e.g., active GI ulceration, patients bleeding from the GI, respiratory, or GU tract; a cerebral aneurysm; central nervous system (CNS) hemorrhage; dissecting aortic aneurysm; spinal puncture and other diagnostic or therapeutic procedures with the potential for significant bleeding)

- Recent or contemplated surgery of the eye, central nervous system, or traumatic surgery resulting in large open surfaces

- Bleeding tendencies associated with any of the following:

- Active ulceration or overt bleeding of the gastrointestinal, genitourinary, or respiratory tract
- Central nervous system hemorrhage
- Cerebral aneurysms, dissecting aorta
- Pericarditis and pericardial effusions
- Bacterial endocarditis

- Threatened abortion, eclampsia, or preeclampsia

- Unsupervised patients with conditions associated with a high potential of non-adherence

- Spinal puncture and other diagnostic or therapeutic procedures with the potential for uncontrollable bleeding

- Major regional or lumbar block anesthesia

- Malignant hypertension

- Pregnancy (exception: women with mechanical heart valves at high risk for thromboembolism)

**Clinical Considerations**

Geriatric Considerations:

Elderly patients are at an increased risk of bleeding complications secondary to falls, concomitant drug interactions, cognitive status, and living situation. The risk of bleeding complications has correlated with advanced age. These patients need to be monitored closely and may require a more conservative dosage regimen.

Pregnancy Considerations:

Warfarin has two different pregnancy categories depending on the presence of a mechanical heart valve. Warfarin was listed as a Category D drug for pregnant women with a mechanical heart valve and Category X for all other indications in pregnant women. Warfarin crosses the placental barrier, causing fetal plasma levels similar to maternal values. Warfarin can cause bleeding in the fetus, and use during pregnancy is commonly associated with spontaneous abortion, stillbirth, preterm birth, and neonatal death. In pregnant women with a high risk for thromboembolism from mechanical heart valves, the benefits and risks of warfarin therapy should undergo careful evaluation. Some experts recommend avoiding warfarin use during the first trimester and close to delivery.

Breastfeeding Considerations:

Warfarin is not excreted in breast milk. Therefore, breastfeeding women may receive treatment with warfarin. However, the drug manufacturer recommends closely monitoring breastfeeding infants for bruising or bleeding.

Renal Impairment:

A reduced renal function can cause warfarin to accumulate in the body, thereby increasing bleeding risk. However, dosing adjustments are not necessary for renal impairment. Close monitoring of the patient's INR is the recommended procedure. It is also important to note that warfarin is not dialyzable through hemodialysis.

Hepatic Impairment:

According to the manufacturer's drug labeling, no dosage adjustments are necessary for hepatic impairment. However, the response to oral anticoagulants may become enhanced in patients with obstructive jaundice, hepatitis, and cirrhosis. The INR requires close monitoring in these patients.

Dietary Considerations:

While there is no specific diet recommended for patients on warfarin, certain foods and beverages can either limit or enhance the anticoagulant effect of warfarin. Vitamin K decreases the effectiveness of warfarin in the body. Therefore, the patient should receive education on maintaining a consistent dietary intake of vitamin K-containing foods.

Drug Interactions:

Warfarin has numerous drug interactions that can increase the risk of adverse effects or decrease warfarin's anticoagulant effect. Therefore dosing adjustments, close monitoring, and alternative agents should be considered when combining warfarin with certain medications. Caution is necessary when administering warfarin with antiplatelet agents, fibrinolytics, nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory agents (NSAIDs), antimicrobials, anti-arrhythmic drugs, and other anticoagulant agents. It is worth noting that the S-enantiomer of warfarin is approximately three to five times more potent than the R-enantiomer. Thus, drug interactions involving the inhibition of the S-enantiomer are considered more severe and may require pre-emptive dose adjustments or therapeutic interchange of alternative anticoagulants. Clinicians should reference a comprehensive drug interaction database when necessary.