The cardiovascular system's embryological development begins with cardiac progenitor cells' migration in the epiblast, just lateral to the primitive streak. These cardiac progenitor cells eventually develop into cardiac myoblasts. Within this same splanchnic layer of the mesoderm, so-called "blood islands" eventually undergo a period of vasculogenesis to form vascular structures. Coalescence of the blood islands eventually forms a region known as the cardiogenic field. The cardiogenic field is initially horseshoe-shaped and surrounded by cardiac myoblasts with the cardiogenic field's apex, eventually developing into primitive ventricles along with their respective outflow tracts. Ultimately, the cardiogenic field changes its configuration by cephalocaudal rotation. By doing so, it forms a primitive heart tube continuous with vascular structures.

The cranial aspect of the heart tube directs blood into the dorsal aorta, while the caudal aspect serves as a conduit for systemic venous return. The cephalocaudal rotation is not the only change in configuration at this developmental stage. The closure of the neural tube and the anterior displacement of the buccopharyngeal membrane facilitate the embryological heart's movement into the thorax. The primitive heart tube is composed of three layers, which are analogous to the adult human heart. The endocardium forms the endothelial lining of the embryonic heart. The myocardium forms the muscular bulk of the embryonic heart while the visceral pericardium forms the embryonic heart tube's external surface.

By approximately day 22-23, the heart tube elongates and alters its configuration again, forming a cardiac loop. The cardiac loop forms when the cranial aspect of the heart tube bends ventrocaudally and to the right while the caudal aspect of the heart tube bends toward the dorsocranial aspect and towards the left. The formation of the cardiac loop takes approximately five days and usually complete by day 28. The different parts of the heart tube develop in the following pattern:

- The proximal aspect of the heart tube forms the bulbus cordis, which develops into the trabeculated parts of the right ventricle.

- The middle segment of the heart tube is the conus cordis and is the precursor for the ventricular outflow tracts.

- The distal portion of the heart tube is referred to as the truncus arteriosus. The truncus arteriosus gives rise to the proximal portion of the aorta and pulmonary artery.

Prior to the end of the cardiac loop formation, the heart tube is essentially smooth-walled. However, near the end of the loop formation, trabeculated regions begin to form, and these trabeculated regions serve as primitive ventricles. The impaired development (or total lack of development) of the trabecular meshwork has associations with embryonic lethality.

The heart's septa typically form between the 27th and 37th days of development via fusion of tissue masses. These tissue masses are known as the endocardial cushions, and they contribute to the formation of the atrial/ventricular septa, the AV canals and valves, and the aortic/pulmonary channels. By the end of the 4th developmental week, the common atrium's roof develops a crest-like structure known as the septum primum, which is sickle-shaped. The two inferior limbs of the septum primum migrate toward the endocardial cushion. As the septum primum and the endocardial cushions do not fully fuse initially, there remains an opening called the ostium primum.

The endocardial cushions eventually fuse with the septum primum. Physiologic apoptosis produces perforations in the septum primum, which ultimately coalesce to form a structure called the ostium secundum. The ostium secundum allows for blood from the right primitive atrium to the left primitive atrium. Eventually, expansion of the right atrium occurs, during which a new fold develops in the right atrium. This fold of tissue is called the septum secundum, and it never completely partitions the atrium. The anterior aspect of the septum secundum extends inferiorly towards the fused endocardial cushions.

The septum secundum forms a crescent-shaped configuration that incompletely overlaps the ostium secundum. The remaining opening is the foramen ovale, which is one of two fetal structures responsible for directing blood flow from the developing lungs (the other structure is the ductus arteriosus). After overlapping of the septum secundum over the ostium secundum, the septum primum gradually disappears, its remnant forming the valve of the foramen ovale. After birth, the increased oxygen tension taken from the newborn's first breath allows for increased blood into the lungs. The increased blood flow going into the lungs increases the left interatrial pressure, allowing for blood to close the valve of the foramen ovale against the septum secundum.

In the adult heart, four pulmonary veins feed into the left atrium. In the embryo, there is initially a single pulmonary vein next to the posterior left of the septum primum. With the lung buds' co-development, the pulmonary vein and its branches become a part of the left atrium. This location is the smooth-walled portion of the left atrium (contrasting with the trabeculated left atrial appendage). The adult's right atrium also divides into a trabeculated right atrial appendage and a smooth-walled sinus venarum (originating from the right horn of the sinus venosus).

By the end of the 4th week of gestation, the atrioventricular canal develops two atrioventricular cushions along the superior and inferior borders and two lateral cushions. The superior and inferior endocardial cushions eventually project into the lumen and eventually fuse, although the lateral cushions do not participate in this process. The result is the atrioventricular canal division into two distinct orifices (the left atrioventricular canal and the right atrioventricular canal). Mesenchymal tissue surrounds the peripheral edges of each atrioventricular canal. This mesenchymal tissue eventually thins to form atrioventricular valves. The valves themselves connect to thick papillary muscles via the chordae tendinae. The trabecular meshwork is an essential morphological development.

During the 5th week of development, swellings appear in the truncus. The right superior truncus swelling migrates towards the left, while the left inferior truncus swelling moves towards the right. The truncus swellings eventually rotate around each other to fuse, forming the aorticopulmonary septum. The septum formation divides the truncus into two channels: the aortic channel and the pulmonary channel. As the truncus swellings begin to form, the walls of the conus cordis also start to develop structures called the conus swellings. The conus swellings grow toward one another to eventually fuse to form the primitive outflow tracts. The septum divides the conus cordis into two portions: an anterolateral and a posteromedial portion with the anterolateral portion becoming the outflow tract of the right ventricle and the posteromedial portion becoming the outflow tract of the left ventricle. The semilunar valves' development begins near the completion of the truncus partitioning, starting with primordial semilunar valves located on the truncal swellings. These primordial semilunar valves start as tubercles on the main truncus swellings and eventually thin to become the semilunar valves.

Septum formation of the ventricles has a somewhat different approach from the developmental standpoint, as opposed to the atria. The ventricle walls start to expand by approximately the 4th week, with gradual apposition and merger of the medial ventricular walls, forming a muscular interventricular septum. The membranous part of the interventricular septum forms from the complete closure of the interventricular foramen, which closes from tissue growth from the endocardial cushions. The pacemaker of the primitive heart tube is located in the caudal portion. Later in development, the sinus venosus (a location in the mammalian embryological heart between the two venae) assumes the pacemaker's role of the embryonic heart. Its incorporation into the right atrium serves as the origin of the sinoatrial node.

Studies determined that the sinoatrial node, atrioventricular node, and proximal bundle branches originate from separate lineages early in embryonic development in mouse subjects.