Levothyroxine toxicity is rare; however, it is most likely to occur in the setting of accidental ingestion by children or older adults. Thyroxine (T4) and triiodothyronine (T3) levels rise within 1 to 2 hours of ingestion. In the initial stage of overdose (6 to 12 hours post-ingestion), the common signs of toxicity would be tremulousness, tachycardia, hypertension, anxiety, and diarrhea. Rarely convulsions, thyroid storms, acute psychosis, arrhythmias, and acute myocardial infarction may occur. Laboratory workup usually reveals elevated serum total T4 and T3, suppressed serum TSH, and elevated Free T4 and Free T3.

Employ the following treatment approach in acute levothyroxine overdose.

- Administer activated charcoal to prevent the absorption of levothyroxine.

- Cholestyramine binds thyroxine and enhances its elimination. The dose used is 4 grams orally every 8 hours.

- Beta-blockers are beneficial to alleviate the metabolic effects of thyroid hormone, mainly on the cardiac system (controlling tachycardia, preventing arrhythmias). Propranolol also blocks the peripheral conversion of T4 to T3.

- Glucocorticoids such as (Dexamethasone 4 mg orally) can reduce the conversion of LT4 to T3, the active hormone.

- Propylthiouracil can be used to prevent the conversion of T4 to T3.

- Hemodialysis is utilized in severe cases, but it is of limited benefit since T3 and T4 are primarily protein-bound.

- Hemoperfusion utilizing activated charcoal is a complex but efficient procedure for reducing thyroxine levels. Therefore, reserve it for adult patients with severe intoxication.

- The severe cases of intoxication leading to a thyroid storm require treatment in a MICU.

In summary, it is essential to note that there is no antidote to treat levothyroxine overdose. Treatment options include gastric lavage, activated charcoal, cholestyramine, glucocorticoids, beta-blockers, propylthiouracil, and supportive measures.