- According to health authorities, vaccination for prevention against COVID-19 is crucial in containing the spread of SARS-CoV-2 and controlling this pandemic.

- Given the concern of VITT in individuals vaccinated with the adenoviral vector vaccines(Ad26.COV2.S and ChAdOx1 nCoV-19), healthcare providers, including emergency medicine physicians, primary care clinicians should maintain a high index of suspicion in patients presenting with symptoms on laboratory abnormalities suggestive of VITT as early recognition and management of this syndrome can prevent catastrophic complications.

- The recognition and management of VITT require an interprofessional team approach that includes hematology specialist physicians, nurses, laboratory staff, and pharmacists.

- Pharmacists should assist clinicians with different non-heparin anticoagulation formulations available in the formulary. Nurses taking care of patients should be aware of the syndrome’s close resemblance with heparin-induced thrombocytopenia.

- They should receive education regarding avoiding heparin flushes and detailed instructions about weight-based administration of IVIG.

- There should be close communication between the ordering clinician, the pharmacist, the nurse, and healthcare providers to keep themselves updated with the latest literature regarding this evolving new syndrome.

- Such a holistic approach would lead to early identification of this rare potential life-threatening syndrome and early treatment, which would significantly impact the morbidity and mortality associated with this syndrome.