Treatment of hyponatremia depends upon the degree of hyponatremia, duration of hyponatremia, the severity of symptoms, and volume status.

**Acute Symptomatic Hyponatremia**

- Severely symptomatic hyponatremia: Administer 3% sodium chloride; 100 mL intravenous (IV) bolus (repeat up to twice if symptoms persist).

- Mild to moderately symptomatic hyponatremia: 3% Sodium chloride, slow infusion (use sodium deficit formula to calculate the rate of infusion but recalculate rate with frequent sodium monitoring).

**Chronic Asymptomatic Hyponatremia**

- Hypovolemic hyponatremia: Isotonic fluids administration and holding of any diuretics.

- Hypervolemic hyponatremia: Treat underlying condition, restrict salt and fluids, and administer loop diuretics.

- Euvolemic hyponatremia: Fluid restriction to less than 1 liters per day.

Drugs: Selective vasopressin 2 receptor antagonists are being used recently. They increase the excretion of water in the kidneys without affecting sodium, thereby increase serum sodium levels. These medications are used in patients with euvolemic and hypervolemic conditions (except liver failure) if the above measure does not help.

The goal of correction: Correct sodium by no more than 10 mEq/L to 12 mEq/L in any 24 hour period.

Risk factors for osmotic demyelination syndrome (ODS): Hypokalemia, liver disease, malnutrition, alcoholism.

**Limits of Correction**

- High-risk for ODS: less than 8 mEq/L in any 24 hour period

- Average-risk for ODS: less than 10 mEq/L in any 24 hour period

In the absence of false laboratory hyponatremia, pseudo hyponatremia, and lack of hypovolemic state, including postural hypotension, the next step is to measure the urine sodium and osmolarity. In the low urinary sodium of less than 100 mOsm/kg and absence of rapid water consumption, the potential for a high fluid, low protein diet, including beer potomania, should be examined. In patients with severe hyponatremia of less than 120 mEq/L, the chronicity of the hyponatremia should be considered. Accordingly, in severe, chronic hyponatremia, intravenous 3 percent saline at a rate of 15 to 30 mL/hour should be initiated. In some patients, desmopressin (dDAVP) should also be administered to prevent overly rapid correction.

Three percent saline can be safely infused via a peripheral vein, and so far, vascular thrombosis and extravasation injuries have not been reported. However, some centers have policies against the peripheral infusion of hypertonic saline. In these circumstances, central vein infusions or infusion of a lower concentration with higher infusion rates are required.  Tolvaptan is indicated in hyponatremia associated with high anti-diuretic hormone (ADH) activity.

Fluid restriction is adequate for patients who have normovolemic hypotonic hyponatremia. Some patients with the syndrome of inappropriate antidiuretic hormone secretion (SIADH) who are malnourished may need a high protein intake, which increases the solute load for renal excretion, resulting in more free water removal. Laboratory findings in patients with SIADH reveal hyponatremia (plasma sodium level of less than 135 mEq/L) and low serum osmolality (less than 280 mOsm/kg). Moreover, patients with SIADH have increased urinary sodium levels (greater than 20 mMol/L) and urine osmolality (generally above 100 mOsm/L).