The origins of endorphins have been traced to the precursor pro-opiomelanocortin (POMC) polypeptide, which is synthesized in the pituitary gland. Recent studies have produced evidence suggesting that POMC may also be produced by the immune system and, consequently, also provide a base source for endorphin production. POMC consists of a 241 amino acid chain which is cleaved by enzyme (prohormone convertases) action into the 93 amino acid single-chain polypeptide beta-lipoprotein (beta-LPH). Beta-LPH is cleaved via enzymes into beta-melanocyte-stimulating hormone and endorphins, amongst other molecule types. Endorphins are identified as three distinct peptides termed alpha-endorphins, beta-endorphins, and gamma-endorphins. The beta-endorphins are the longest chain, containing 31 amino acids in the following sequence: Tyr-Gly-Gly-Phe-Met-Thr-Ser-Glu-Lys-Ser-Gln-Thr-Pro-Leu-Val-Thr-Leu-Phe-Lys-Asn-Ala-Ile-Ile-Lys-Asn-Ala-Tyr-Lys-Lys-Gly-Glu. This sequence corresponds to amino acids 104 to 134 in the sequence of beta-LPH. The second-longest chain is the gamma-endorphins, consisting of a 17 amino acid chain the same as the first 17 amino acid chain sequence of the beta-endorphins. Finally, the third and shortest type of endorphins about the amino acid chain sequence is the alpha-endorphins. The alpha-endorphins are amino acid chains comprised of the same first 16 amino acid sequence as the beta-endorphins (and consequently has the same sequence of the first 16 amino acids comprising the gamma-endorphins). Thus, the sequences of beta-endorphins and gamma-endorphins essentially have the sequence of alpha-endorphins nested within them. This molecular configuration thereby allows these endorphins to be the agonist of opioid receptors, the same receptors to which chemicals derived from opium, such as morphine, bind to for triggering physiological responses.