Thyroidectomy may be performed for a number of benign and malignant conditions including thyroid nodules, hyperthyroidism, obstructive or substernal goiter, differentiated (papillary or follicular) thyroid cancer, medullary thyroid cancer (MTC), anaplastic thyroid cancer, primary thyroid lymphoma (surgery is limited to obtaining tissue biopsy), and metastases to the thyroid from extrathyroidal primary cancer (most commonly renal cell and lung cancer).

Thyroid nodules are a worldwide phenomenon present clinically in 1% of men and 5% of women. The majority of nodules are benign, with only 5% of nodules representing cancer. With high-resolution ultrasound, thyroid nodules can be detected in up to 68% of randomly selected subjects who receive a screening ultrasound, with a predilection towards women and the elderly.

Goiter is described as an abnormal growth of the thyroid gland and can be diffuse or nodular. The presence of goiter can be linked to iodine deficiency and is therefore endemic in iodine-deficient regions of the world. In asymptomatic, iodine-deficient groups, a goiter can be diagnosed in approximately a quarter of the population, with increasing frequency in older populations.

Goiter may also occur in regions where significant iodine deficiency does not exist. In these regions, goiter is typically multi-nodular and may be secondary to autoimmune disorders of the thyroid, such as Hashimoto's thyroiditis or Graves' disease.

Thyroidectomy is potentially indicated in both malignant and benign pathologies with a high level of selectivity. Indications include thyroid cancer, toxic multinodular goiter, toxic adenomas, goiter with compressive symptoms, Graves disease that is either not responsive to medical treatment or for whom medical management may not be advised, such as those attempting to become pregnant.

Most thyroid nodules will not require excision. Nodules that are at increased risk of malignancy will often require fine needle aspiration (FNA) to aid in the differentiation between benign and malignant nodules. When nodules are of a size greater than 1 cm, non-functional (known as a "cold" nodule), and/or displaying concerning ultrasound findings, they will generally meet the criteria for biopsy.**size**of the nodule and**sonographic pattern**.

**American Thyroid Association Guidelines**

**Initial Evaluation**

- Serum TSH (if low, scintigraphy indicated)

- Incidental increased uptake on scintigraphy in a nodule >1cm warrants FNA

**Sonographic Pattern**

- Benign pattern (0% risk of malignancy) - no biopsy indicated

- Very low suspicion pattern (<3% risk of malignancy) - biopsy if > or = 2cm in size. Serial ultrasound also acceptable.

- Low suspicion pattern (5-10% risk of malignancy) - biopsy if > or = 1.5cm in size.

- Intermediate suspicion pattern (10-20% risk of malignancy) - biopsy if > or = 1cm in size

- High suspicion pattern (70-90% risk of malignancy) - biopsy if > or = 1cm in size

Historically, thyroidectomy was the treatment of choice for goiter. Improvements in diagnostic imaging and medical management have reduced the need for thyroidectomy for most goiters and many thyroid nodules with benign characteristics. Furthermore, the high frequency of thyroid nodules has provided abundant research used to determine which characteristics of a thyroid nodule require surgery versus observation, protecting many patients from the risk of unnecessary thyroid surgery.In differentiated thyroid cancer, such as papillary thyroid cancer (PTC), lobectomy may be performed for microcarcinoma. Indications for total thyroidectomy rather than lobectomy in PTC include size >1cm, tall cell variants, extrathyroidal extension, bilateral disease, and lymphovascular invasion