**Magnetic Resonance Imaging (MRI)**

MRI is the imaging modality of choice for suspected spinal cord ischemia although it is worth noting that MRI may appear entirely normal in up to 24% of acutely symptomatic patients.

DWI MRI is exquisitely sensitive for detecting cord ischemia and shows a characteristic high signal, indicating cytotoxic edema and reduced free water diffusivity.

Gadolinium enhancement can also distinguish acute cord ischemia, in which the blood-brain barrier is intact (absent enhancement) from non-vascular etiologies which may enhance (intramedullary tumor etc.). The normal evolution of cord infarction results in an enhancement in the subacute phase, approximately 3 to 4 days after the initial insult.

A variety of characteristic MRI “signs” have been described which can support the diagnosis of spinal cord ischemia in the appropriate clinical setting. T2-weighted MRI may show a well-circumscribed high signal lesion at the site of ischemia. In the sagittal plane, this appears as a “pencil-like” zone of signal abnormality.

**Other Imaging Modalities**

The role of computed tomogram (CT) is limited in evaluating suspected spinal cord ischemia due to low sensitivity though it may serve to rapidly assess for treatable causes such as epidural hematoma or displaced fracture compromising vascular flow.

Digital subtraction angiography (DSA) is rarely indicated in ASCI. When clinical features of venous/congestive myelopathy are present, or characteristic MRI findings (dilated vascular flow voids) are suggestive, DSA may be indicated to confirm suspected spinal arteriovenous malformation, fistula, or aneurysm.

**Lumbar Puncture**

CSF fluid analysis is generally not helpful in the initial workup of spinal cord ischemia. CSF may variably show elevated protein concentration which is nonspecific.

**Emerging Techniques**

A range of modern MRI techniques has emerged with potential applications in the evaluation of spinal cord injury and ischemia. Diffusion tensor imaging (DTI), magnetization transfer imaging (MT), the myelin-water fraction (MWF), MR spectroscopy (MRS), and functional MRI (fMRI) have been studied in spinal cord imaging and have potential applications in ischemia. DTI, which measures directional diffusion of water molecules, can approximate axonal integrity and, according to a recent systematic review, shows the greatest promise in imaging cord microstructure integrity.