Because the parasympathetic fibers to the sphincter pupillae and ciliary muscle travel with the innervation to the inferior oblique, and the inferior oblique crosses the inferior rectus laterally, there are potential complications from surgery in this area. If the parasympathetic fibers are damaged during surgery in this area, pupillary abnormalities may result.

The inferior rectus also interacts with the lower eyelid via a fascial connection from its sheath. Weakening or recession of the inferior rectus may widen the palpebral fissure, and this can cause lower lid droop. Conversely, strengthening or resection of the inferior rectus may cause the fissure to narrow and elevate the lower lid.

The nerves to the rectus muscles and superior oblique muscles insert into the muscles at one-third the distance from the origin to the insertion. This makes damage to these nerves during anterior segment surgery difficult but not impossible. Additionally, instruments that are advanced 26 mm posterior to the rectus muscle insertions can cause injury to the nerve.

Blood vessels may be compromised during surgery of the inferior rectus muscle. The vessels which supply blood to the extraocular muscles also supply nearly all the temporal half of the anterior segment of the eye. Most of the nasal half of the anterior segment circulation also derives from blood vessels that supply the extraocular muscles. Therefore, care must be taken during surgery of the medial rectus or other extraocular muscles to avoid disrupting this blood supply.

Other complications may result from inferior rectus surgery, which also may result from other rectus muscle surgery. Unsatisfactory ocular alignment is the most common complication and may require additional surgery to correct. Refractive changes may occur when two rectus muscles of one eye are operated on, which may resolve over months. Other possible surgical complications include diplopia, perforation of the sclera, and postoperative infections. Although uncommon, serious infections may result after strabismus surgery, including pre-septal or orbital cellulitis and endophthalmitis.