The periaqueductal gray is aptly named as the gray matter structure surrounding the aqueduct of Sylvius in the midbrain. Along the caudal-rostral axis, the PAG extends from the level of the posterior commissure down to the level of the locus coeruleus. Internally, the PAG is delineated by columnal based boundaries: the dorsal PAG (dPAG), dorsolateral PAG (dlPAG), the lateral PAG (lPAG) and the ventrolateral PAG (vlPAG).

Several neurotransmitters are involved in the transmission of signals to and from the PAG. Inhibitory serotonergic projections are considered the key component of descending pain pathways. However, norepinephrine, dopamine, enkephalin, glutamate, mu-opioid receptors, and GABAergic neurons contribute in this sense as well.

PAIN CONTROL

The PAG plays a major role in the modulation and perception of pain. Initial recognition of this structure stemmed from the observation that stimulation of the PAG before surgery resulted in decreased anesthetic requirements.

The PAG has two major descending pathways involving the rostral ventromedial medulla (RVMM) and the locus coeruleus (LC). The PAG -LC pathway propagates by norepinephrine (NE), exerting an antinociceptive effect in the dorsal horn via the presynaptic alpha-2 receptor.

Though the serotonergic pathway is the major influencer of pain, other key neurotransmitters have demonstrated involvement in these pathways. Glutamate, when applied to the central amygdala and PAG of rats in experimental settings, demonstrated analgesic properties via higher thresholds for paw withdrawal to pain. However, complexity in this system requires emphasis as activation of the “ON-cells” in the PAG has also shown pro-nociceptive effects.

DEFENSIVE BEHAVIOR

The PAG is a key component in defensive and aversive behavior, mediated by emotional and autonomic arousal. The PAG is the source of unpleasant sensations, including fear, anxiety, and danger.

Overall, defensive behavior can subdivide into immediate and long-term responses. Stimulation of the dorsolateral and lateral PAG demonstrates short-term fight or flight with increases in heart rate and blood pressure, increased alertness, and transmission of non-opioid antinociceptive signals.

MIGRAINES

The PAG has been studied for even more specific functions, such as its role in migraines. Interestingly, the PAG has been implicated in the pathophysiology of migraines, possibly being the “generator” sites for migraine attacks. Increased non-heme iron deposition in the PAG for those with current migraines compared to those without a migraine relate to this evidence, although it is not clear if this is cause or consequence of the attacks.