**Origins**

Although the definition of aggression is simple and straightforward, its origins remain complex and frequently depend upon other, often contradictory, factors. In this exploration, there will be a review of the biological, psychological, and social causes of violence. In exploring the biological basis, there is an analysis of the genetics, brain structures, medical diseases, neurotransmitters, hormones, abused substances, and medications that contribute to aggression. In the psychological assessment, there is an investigation of the DSM–5 diagnoses linked to aggression. Finally, there is an investigation into the social and environmental roots of violence.

**Biologic Contributions**

- Genetics can contribute to aggressive behavior in several ways.

- Certain brain structures and connections have been correlated with aggressive behavior. The prefrontal cortex serves as the executive functioning of the central nervous system. Reduced activity of the prefrontal cortex (medial and orbitofrontal regions), is associated with violent aggression. Lesions or neuronal changes, such as can occur in Alzheimer disease, can remove the inhibitions normally applied and result in unchecked aggressive activity. If there is an overactive amygdala that is coupled with a less active prefrontal cortex, the potential for violence increases.

- Some medical diseases result in aggression. Patients with epilepsy, especially with origins in either the temporal or the frontal lobes, have exhibited violence.  Respiratory patients, especially those with either asthma or chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) in moments of breathing distress, have been known to become aggressive. The most important medical condition that can cause aggression is pain. Regardless of the physical origin of the pain, the person often strikes out in response to the unbearable discomfort.

- Several neurotransmitters have been linked to aggressive behavior, usually when they are excessive or deficient. Serotonin in both excess and deficiency has been correlated with aggression. Where there has been too much serotonin, an inability for MAOs to metabolized serotonin has been the culprit

- Hormones have been implicated in aggression. First and foremost, testosterone plays a major role in aggression.

- A number of substances can lead to aggressive behavior.

- Some prescribed medications have an aggressive response as a side effect. For example, antidepressants, especially in children, have been documented to lead to suicidal and homicidal behavior.

**Psychological Causes**

Although any individual may become aggressive for a variety of reasons, there is a number of specific DSM-5 diagnoses that have violent behavior as one of their features. These include bipolar affective disorder, schizophrenia, the dementia group, post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD), and acute stress disorder. Also, several of the disorders associated with childhood and adolescence, intellectual deficiencies, some personality disorders, and intermittent explosive disorder are associated with violent behavior. As noted earlier, aggression can result from a combination of several conditions. For example, certain persons with PTSD may become violent after consuming alcohol.

It has known patients with bipolar affective disorder to become excessively agitated and aggressive, especially during the manic phase. Grandiose delusions often not only dramatically inflate their self-view but also make them demanding of others and combative to those not acknowledging their perceived greatness. Patients with schizophrenia can be aggressive when responding to command hallucinations ordering them to harm others. Patients with a wide range of dementia, such as Alzheimer disease, not only have memory deficiencies but also lose their executive functions. These executive functions provide good judgment and inhibit unacceptable impulses. This can account for some of the violence seen in long-term care facilities and in places where patients with traumatic brain injuries are treated.

Overwhelming stress can make certain individuals aggressive. It is their way of coping. Patients with PTSD struggle with a host of symptoms that can promote potential aggression. These symptoms include hypervigilance, flashbacks, and nightmares, and can lead to aggression. Several childhood diagnoses, including conduct disorder and attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder (ADHD), can result in aggressive behavior, as can disorders along the autism spectrum, because of communication difficulties, impulsiveness, low tolerance, and frustration.

Persons with intellectual deficiencies, when confronting difficult tasks and situations, may resort to violence as a coping mechanism. ( Davies, 2016)    Certain personality disorders, such as antisocial personality and borderline personality, can cause individuals to exhibit belligerence. Individuals who are antisocial lack an empathic view and have an egocentric center of gravity, which can promote aggression. A person with a borderline personality who is overwhelmed and has boundary issues can become aggressive. Finally, aggression is at the core of persons with intermittent explosive disorder.

Aside from these formal diagnoses, when people are afraid, overwhelmed, feel threatened, or feel out of control, perplexed, disorientated, or frustrated, they often respond aggressively.

**Sociocultural Economic Factors**

The environment can contribute to aggression on many levels: interpersonal, social, group, neighborhood, economic, and cultural conditions can create the potential for or actual violence.

Interpersonal: Interpersonal aggression occurs in a variety of settings. One of the most noted is domestic violence.

Social: In social situations, frustrations can accumulate over time. This is known as an incubation period. In sociology, there is the term "relative deprivation."  In this phenomenon, an oppressed group is granted some gains. They have not achieved all they wanted, but there have been some advances. However, instead of the people being grateful, they realize that they have not received all the items of which they have been deprived and act aggressively. For some, they accumulate enough things that annoy them, and they reach a "tipping" point, where the aggression frequently erupts in violence.

Group: Group experiences also can cause aggression. When many people assemble in one place, there can be growing aggression.