Afatinib has a predictable and manageable side effect profile based on a study by Keating et al.

- Dermatologic:

- Acneiform eruption (less than or equal to 70% to 90%)
- Skin rash (less than or equal to 70% to 90%)
- Paronychia (11% to 58%)
- Xeroderma (31%), pruritus (10% to 21%),
- Cheilitis (12%)

- Endocrine & metabolic:

- Decreased serum potassium (11% to 30%)
- Weight loss (17%)
- Hypokalemia (11%)

- Gastrointestinal:

- Diarrhea (75% to 96%)
- Stomatitis (30% to 71%)
- Decreased appetite (25% to 29%)
- Nausea (21% to 25%)
- Vomiting (13% to 23%)

- Genitourinary:

- Cystitis (13%)

- Hematologic & oncologic:

- Abnormal lymphocytes (decreased: 38%; grades 3/4: 9%)
- Decreased white blood cell count (12%; grades 3/4: 1%)

- Hepatic:

- Increased serum ALT (10% to 54%)
- Increased serum alkaline phosphatase (34% to 51%)
- Increased serum AST (7% to 46%)
- Abnormal hepatic function tests (6% to 18%)
- Increased serum bilirubin (3% to 16%)

- Ophthalmic:

- Conjunctivitis (11%)

- Renal:

- Decreased creatinine clearance (49%)

- Respiratory:

- Epistaxis (17%)
- Rhinorrhea (11%)

- Miscellaneous:

- Fever (12%)

The following side effects occurred in 1 to 10% of patients.

- Central nervous system:

- Fatigue (under 2%)

- Dermatologic:

- Nail disease (3% to 9%)
- Palmar-plantar erythrodysesthesia (2% to 7%)

- Ophthalmic:

- Keratitis (less than or equal to 2%)

- Renal:

- Renal insufficiency (6%)

- Respiratory:

- Interstitial pulmonary disease (2%) [6]
- Dyspnea (less than 2%)

Liu X. et al. reported on two cases of interstitial pneumonia during afatinib therapy.

The second case is a 57-year-old man with advanced lung adenocarcinoma. The patient had the following EGFR mutation: exon 21 L861Q. The patient presented with shortness of breath and fever 22 days after starting afatinib therapy. The patient received empirical antimicrobial therapy, and five days later, the patient received a CT scan which showed pulmonary inflammation. The patient was diagnosed with afatinib-induced interstitial pneumonia and was promptly treated with glucocorticoid therapy which quickly resolved the pneumonia. The investigators conclude that clinicians need to be vigilant for the uncommon afatinib-induced interstitial pneumonia and to promptly treat it with glucocorticoid therapy.