The rubella vaccine is a vaccine used to prevent rubella. Rubella, also known as German measles, is an acute, self-limiting, contagious viral infection seen most often in children and adolescents infected with the rubella virus. Rubella virus is a positive sense, single-stranded RNA virus acquired via inhalation of infectious large particle aerosols during close and prolonged contact with infected individuals.

The virus initially replicates in the nasopharyngeal cells and regional lymph nodes. Viremia occurs 5 to 7 days after inoculation, allowing the infection to spread throughout the body. Typical clinical presentation includes prodromal symptoms followed by a fine, maculopapular rash that erupts on the face and neck, spreading to the torso and limbs and lasting for about three days.

Rubella can also spread via vertical transmission. Rubella infection in early pregnancy carries a significant risk for transplacental infection of the fetus, which may result in fetal loss or congenital malformation. Congenital rubella syndrome (CRS) is a variable constellation of congenital malformations caused by in utero infection early in pregnancy. Common manifestations of CRS include cataracts, deafness, congenital heart disease, and dermal erythropoiesis ("blueberry muffin" appearance).

The rubella vaccine aims to prevent rubella. The vaccine is effective two weeks after a single dose and produces a seroconversion rate of about 95%.

The MMR or MMRV is given subcutaneously in 2 doses: one at 12 to 15 months and one at 4 to 6 years.