Grayscale ultrasound demonstrates the morphology of the arterial system and plaque characterization. Plaque may be anechoic and indistinguishable from the vessel lumen. In these cases, color Doppler can help delineate the vessel's true lumen. Color Doppler can also help differentiate arteries and veins based on flow direction. It helps quickly delineate turbulent flow areas and stenoses by looking for areas of color aliasing.

The complete peripheral arterial duplex exam begins at the abdominal aorta and follows the arterial system vessels to the ankle. The vessels are evaluated in long- and short-axis with B-mode and pulsed Doppler.

The exam is performed by placing the patient in the supine position. A low-frequency transducer is used to evaluate the aorta from just below the xiphoid process and from just to the left of the umbilicus. The celiac and superior mesenteric arteries serve as useful landmarks. The common and proximal external iliac arteries are then interrogated with the transducer at the angle of the iliac crest. The internal iliac artery takeoff differentiates the common from the external iliac arteries. Graded compression can help displace the overlying bowel, improving visualization.

The distal external iliac arteries and remaining vessels are comparatively superficial, and a higher-frequency transducer is preferred. The distal external iliac arteries are identified from the groin and traced down as the common femoral, proximal portions of the profunda femoris, and superficial femoral arteries. At the adductor canal, the superficial femoral artery courses posteriorly, so positioning the patient prone can help assess the distal superficial femoral, popliteal, and origin of the anterior tibial artery (the first branch from the popliteal). Finally, the tibial arteries are traced upward from the level of the ankle - posterior to the medial malleolus for the posterior tibial artery, posterior to the lateral malleolus for the peroneal, and anterior to the ankle for the anterior tibial artery.

The areas most prone to the development of atherosclerotic disease are those exposed to higher degrees of shear stress. These include the common iliac artery, superficial femoral artery at the adductor canal, central popliteal artery, and the tibioperoneal trunk. Areas of suspicion are interrogated and graded by comparing the pre-stenotic, stenotic, and post-stenotic segments. It usually takes at least a 50% decrease in vessel diameter (corresponding to a 75% decrease in cross-sectional area) to become hemodynamically significant.

At 51% to 75% luminal narrowing, the stenotic segment's peak systolic velocity is often twice that of the regular proximal segment. The post stenotic segment shows a degree of turbulence and possible monophasic waveforms.

At 76% to 99% stenosis, increased pulsatility becomes apparent in the pre-stenotic segment. The stenotic segment's peak systolic velocity is often greater than four times that of the proximal normal segment and demonstrates monophasic waveforms. There is significant turbulence in the post-stenotic segment and a tardus parvus waveform (a prolonged systolic upstroke and a decreased systolic amplitude with a rounded peak) distal to the stenosis.