Biotinidase deficiency falls into two categories: profound and partial. Individuals with less than 10% enzymatic activity than normal have a profound disease. Those with 10 to 30% enzymatic activity are classified and treated as partial biotinidase deficiency; this distinction is crucial for prognosis and treatment.

Patients with profound biotinidase deficiency present in early infancy with variable neurological and cutaneous manifestations. The neurological manifestations include:

- Seizures

- Hypotonia

- Ataxia

- Visual impairment leading to optic atrophy

- Sensorineural hearing loss

- Developmental delay

- Spastic paresis

- Lethargy/coma

- Death

Cutaneous manifestations include:

- Skin rash

- Alopecia

- Conjunctivitis

- Seborrheic dermatitis

Other manifestations include:

- Viral and fungal recurrent infections (due to immunological dysfunction)

- Apnea, tachypnea, or stridor

- Metabolic derangement – ketolactic acidosis, organic aciduria, and hyperammonemia

It is imperative to realize that all these symptoms are reversible with early detection and treatment with biotin. However, changes in vision, hearing loss, and developmental delay, if they occur, are irreversible.

Partial biotinidase deficiency can present from infancy to adulthood. The symptoms range from minor cutaneous reactions such as rash and alopecia to major neurological such as seizures, hypotonia, and developmental delay. Typically patients only have symptoms during periods of stress, such as illness. Furthermore, some individuals never have symptoms of the disease.