The diagnosis of ALS is made clinically and is supported by electrodiagnostic evaluation. Electrodiagnostic testing is critical to the diagnosis of ALS as it detects lower motor neuron involvement. Clinically, there is a history of motor dysfunction such as limb weakness or difficulty swallowing along with physical examination findings of upper and motor neuron involvement. The diagnostic criteria of ALS have been standardized through the El Escorial criteria. Per the El Escorial criteria, there should be clinical evidence of upper motor neuron signs, lower motor neuron signs, and the progressive spread of signs from one area of the body to the next, such as the cervical region to the thoracic region. Electrodiagnostic testing and neuroimaging studies should rule out other possible explanations for the findings. The criteria were revised in 2006, which helped to increase the sensitivity of EMG by refining the criteria. Per the revision, fasciculation potentials in the setting of suspected ALS can indicate denervation, without the presence of positive sharp waves or fibrillations on EMG.

Motor nerve conduction studies should examine the median, ulnar and peroneal muscles.  Findings consistent with ALS include normal or decreased compound muscle action potential (CMAP), prolongation of distal motor latency, and slowing of conduction velocity. Typically, CMAP should be normal as the myelin is intact but due to axonal loss, CMAPs and conduction velocity may be decreased. Distal motor latency should also be normal but can be increased with axonal loss.

Sensory nerve conduction studies should be normal in ALS as the dorsal root ganglion is spared in this disease. Sensory nerve action potentials (SNAPs) are not affected in ALS and must be performed to rule out other diseases such as peripheral neuropathy, or plexopathies, in which SNAPs are affected. The sural nerve and ulnar nerves in particular should be tested. It is possible to have an abnormal SNAP with ALS patients if there is a coexisting unrelated medical condition such as peripheral neuropathy.

F wave studies are performed via antidromic stimulation of motor neurons. F wave latencies are typically normal earlier on in the disease but as the disease progresses can be prolonged due to motor neuron loss. It is important to note that abnormalities in F waves are not specific for MND and can be seen in radiculopathy.

On needle EMG, there is evidence of widespread acute denervation with chronic reinnervation. There should be a sampling of at least three limbs with muscles innervated by at minimum two different nerve roots, thoracic paraspinal and bulbar muscles. Acute denervation is manifested with fasciculations, which are spontaneous firing potentials from a motor unit of an affected nerve. They are not specific for ALS as they can be found in patients without ALS. However, in the majority of patients with ALS, there is a display of fasciculations on EMG. Fibrillations and positive sharp waves are also expected in ALS patients. These are spontaneous discharges from a muscle that is no longer innervated.

Chronic denervation is manifested via changes in the motor unit potential (MUP) of nerves. There is an increased duration and amplitude of MUPs as collateral sprouts from unaffected anterior horn cells reinnervate muscle fibers that have lost their innervation. These MUPs are polyphasic and will vary in configuration, having more than four phases in an MUP. Decreased recruitment of MUPs is seen with abnormally increased firing rates. This reflects the loss of MUPs and can be seen early in the disease.