**Folic Acid Supplementation**

Many studies suggested that periconceptional folic acid supplementation with the fortification of a diet rich in folic acid has significant results (50% to 70%) in preventing neural tube disorders. The recommended dose of folic acid to all women desiring pregnancy is 0.4 to 0.8 mg per day.

**Fetal and Postnatal Surgery for Myelomeningocele**

Surgical repair of myelomeningocele in fetus stops leakage of spinal fluid and therefore arrests the herniation of cerebellum, preventing hydrocephalus formation. Postnatal surgical closure of spina bifida should occur within 72 hours. Randomized control trials in the United States proposed that improved ambulation and cognitive behavior are more with prenatal than postnatal surgery.

**Ventriculoperitoneal Shunt**

Hydrocephalus is treated by a ventriculoperitoneal shunt, draining the CSF from the ventricles to the peritoneal cavity.

**Antipyretics**

The use of antipyretics in hyperthermia reduces the chances of NTDs.

**Prenatal counseling**

Once the prenatal ultrasound and other investigations confirm the diagnosis of NTD, the mother and family members should receive counsel regarding the management, possible prognosis, complications, and referral to other specialties for a comprehensive approach to the disease.

**Control of Gestational Diabetes**

The pregnant mother with diabetes has an increased chance of a child with NTDs. Therefore, control of gestational diabetes helps to prevent and reduce the incidence of NTDs.

**Postnatal Assessment and Management**

In the absence of prenatal screening, children with NTDs require immediate assessment after birth about the site of any defects, size, and leakage of cerebrospinal fluid, and any infections, which should be managed accordingly. Ensure aseptic measures during the assessment. The use of non-latex gloves reduces the risk of latex sensitization. Broad-spectrum antibiotics coverage to prevent infections, sterile and saline-soaked dressing, the neurological assessment helps in a wide range to facilitate postnatal life. The surgical management of closed neural tube defects is challenging and complex. Practitioners must be familiar with the underlying embryology associated with the specific defect and the contemporary surgical management to reduce the risk of CSF fistula formation or neurologic compromise, which leads to high morbidity.