Any infant that presents with bilious emesis with or without abdominal distention should undergo initial stabilization that includes ordering nothing by mouth, establishing intravenous access to provide adequate hydration to maintain good perfusion, mechanical respiratory support, correction of any coagulation disorders, and empirical antibiotic coverage. Placement of a nasogastric tube will decompress the stomach and proximal small intestine as well as reduce the risk of aspiration from bilious emesis. Laboratory investigations that include electrolytes, hemoglobin, white blood cell count, and lactate will further help to determine the clinical status of the infant.

Non-operative management includes the use of therapeutic enemas. The most commonly used agent is meglumine diatrizoate that contains 0.1% polysorbate 80 and 37% organically bound iodine. It is a hyperosmolar, water-soluble, and a radiopaque solution having an osmolarity of 1900 mOsm/L. Under fluoroscopic guidance, a 25% to 50% solution of meglumine diatrizoate at low hydrostatic pressure is infused slowly through a catheter inserted into the rectum. Upon placement, fluid is osmotically drawn into the intestinal lumen, hydrating and softening the meconium mass; subsequently followed by transient osmotic diarrhea and diuresis. The catheter is withdrawn, and an abdominal radiograph is necessary to rule out perforation.

Usually, there is a rapid passage of semiliquid meconium, which continues over the next 24 to 48 hours. In the absence of clinical indications, radiographs should be taken every 8 to 12 hours to confirm evacuation of the obstruction and also to exclude late perforation. Reflux of the enema into the terminal ileum is critical for the bowel obstruction to be relieved.

Late perforation can be caused by severe bowel distension by osmotically drawn fluid into the intestine or by the contrast medium directly injuring the bowel mucosa. Hypertonic enemas may lead to hypovolemic shock. Carefully placing the catheter under fluoroscopic guidance and avoiding the inflation of balloon-tipped catheters reduces the risk of colonic or rectal perforation.

Neonates with CF and MI undergoing barium enema have demonstrated a microcolon.

The objectives of operative management include the evacuation of meconium from the intestine, the establishment of intestinal continuity, and preservation of maximal intestinal length. However, no large-scale studies yet exist to identify the best procedure for the surgical treatment of MI.

The following are previously attempted procedures:

- Mikulicz double-barreled enterostomy

- Distal chimney enterostomy

- Proximal enterostomy

- Tube enterostomy

- T-tube enterostomy

- Appendectomy and inserting a cecostomy catheter through the appendiceal stump for instillation of irrigant and evacuation of impacted meconium.

- Resection with primary anastomosis

- Resection with enterostomy

Post-operative care should primarily focus on fluid replacement. The fluid losses from preoperative diarrhea and diuresis, if using meglumine diatrizoate enema, and from surgical losses must be carefully replaced. Ongoing maintenance fluids and replacement of insensible fluids, as well as gastrointestinal losses (nasogastric suction and ileostomy), must be adjusted accordingly. N-acetylcysteine administration via a nasogastric tube or ileostomy may help solubilize residual meconium. Stomas placed in the course of surgical management should be closed in 6-12 weeks to help avoid prolonged problems with fluid, electrolyte, and nutritional losses.

Breast milk or routine infant formula along with pancreatic enzyme replacement therapy (PERT) and vitamins may be given to infants with uncomplicated meconium ileus. Total parenteral nutrition (TPN) or continuous enteral feedings are given to those with a complicated surgical course. Feedings should begin with low volume, half strength, predigested, and diluted formula as stasis may have damaged the bowel mucosa. Signs for feeding intolerance (abdominal distention, heme-positive stools, and or increasing emesis) should be looked for while gradually increasing the strength and volume of feeds.

Spot urinary sodium to creatinine ratio is a more sensitive measure of sodium status (with a goal of 17 to 52 mmol/mmol) especially in infants with significant bowel resection with or without an ileostomy as there is excessive loss of sodium and fluid. Patients with CF are additionally at risk of hyponatremia due to excessive sweat and intestinal sodium losses.

The goal should be to take down ostomies at the earliest, but in the meantime, ostomy-drip feeds of glutamine-enriched formula may be given at low volumes to enhance bowel growth, to reduce bacterial translocation and TPN associated hepatic injury. Infants with MI are also at an increased risk of neonatal cholestasis thus requiring weekly monitoring of liver function.