During the clinical trials, doses up to 7000 mg, i.e., ten times the authorized dose of bamlanivimab, have been administered without any dose-limiting toxicity. In case of overdose, supportive treatment is recommended, along with monitoring of vitals and clinical status. In case of an overdose, there is no specific antidote.

**Specific Populations**

- Pediatric use: Phase 2/3 of the BLAZE-1 Trial was completed in December 2021. No dosing adjustment were made to population of 12-18 years and weighing at least 40 kgs. Dosing adjustment recommendation besides this age/weight group is mentioned above.

- Geriatric use: BLAZE- 1 Trial included 30% of age 65 and 10% 75. No pharmacokinetic differences were noted compared to the younger population.

- Renally impairment: Renal impairment is not expected as the drug is not eliminated via the urine.

- Hepatic impairment: The drug has not been evaluated in cases of moderate or severe hepatic impairment. With mild hepatic impairment, it has been shown to have no difference compared to normal hepatic function.

- Pregnancy: Human IgG1 antibodies can cross the placental barrier. Therefore, the drug has the potential to cross the placental barrier. FDA recommends using the drug in pregnant women if the potential benefit outweighs the risk to both mother and the fetus. There are no sufficient data regarding birth defects secondary to drug use.

- Lactating mothers: Bamlanivimab has a molecular weight of 146,000 Da. Because it is a very large protein, the amount of the drug present in the milk is expected to be low.

Nonclinical Toxicology studies including carcinogenesis, mutagenesis, and reproductive toxicology have not yet been conducted.