Diagnostic criteria for hypogammaglobulinemia by the European Society of immunodeficiency (ESID) require a substantial decrease in IgG concentration defined by at least two standard deviations below the average for the age group. The range for healthy adults is from 8 to 12 g/L. In this group, hypogammaglobulinemia is diagnosed by 2 standard deviations below the average with levels less than 5g/L.

Reduced IgA and IgM isotypes are also commonly seen with low IgG levels. IgM is the main immunoglobulin which is abundant during the primary immune response but is contained in the intravascular compartment. IgG is the most numerous in both vascular and extravascular compartments and interacts with different Fc fragments on immune cells to activate the complement pathway. Measurement of IgG is key in diagnosing Hypogammaglobulinemia.

Evaluation should consist of:

**1. Measuring the serum Immunoglobulin levels (IgM, IgG, IgA):**

- Laboratory tests: CBC with differential, Quantitative serum immunoglobulin levels, Antibody titers in response to immunization (tetanus, diphtheria vaccines), or infections. If the results of the tests are suggestive of XLA, then do flow cytometry to determine the lymphocyte subsets to rule out combined immunodeficiencies.

- In adults and children with CVID, IgE and allergen-specific IgE may be undetectable or absent. For diagnosing CVID, decreased IgG in association with low levels of IgM and/or IgA is needed using age-specific values for pediatric patients.

- The level of IgG is at least two standard deviations below the expected controls in patients with THI.

- Hypogammaglobulinemia is the primary lab finding of CVID. It is important to exclude secondary causes and physiologic causes, before considering primary immunodeficiencies. Selective IgA deficiency has normal levels of other Immunoglobulins, with usually elevated IgM levels.

**2. Functional Antibody production (Isohemagglutinins, IgG antibodies level, post-immunization/post-exposure):**

- Testing for B-cell function can be determined by the presence and titer of isohemagglutinins, and natural antibodies to type A and B red blood cell polysaccharide antigens. It measures IgM antibodies predominantly. The absence of Isohemagglutinins is normal in the 1st two years of life, and are always absent in patients with blood group AB.

- Adequate antibody response in young children demonstrated by vaccination history, antibody titers to Diphtheria, tetanus, H.influenza excludes the diagnosis of CVID.

**3. Flow cytometry for Immunophenotyping of B- cells and T-cell/B-cell evaluation:**

- Conditions of B-cell deficiency mimic each other, hence to differentiate XLA from CVID, hyper–IgM syndrome, and THI flow cytometry is a critical test to demonstrate the absence of circulating B cells which is characteristic of XLA, and presence of B-cells in CVID, IgA deficiency, and hyper-IgM syndromes.

**4. Genetic testing:**

- A genetic test to identify the mutation in the BTK gene once the decreased Ig and B-cells have been found is needed for confirmation. In the absence of family history, molecular testing is indicated for other B-cell defects and XLA to help with genetic counseling.

- Combined immunodeficiencies involving cellular and innate immunity must be excluded in addition to secondary causes of humoral immunodeficiency.

**5. Miscellaneous:**

- Additional blood tests (CRP, ESR) and antinuclear antibody testing may be obtained in patients with active infections, and symptoms suggestive of autoimmune conditions respectively. Lymph node biopsy and bone marrow biopsy can be considered if there is a suspicion of lymphoma or myelodysplasia.