Amaurosis fugax is a harbinger of an imminent stroke. The first study of choice is an ultrasound to determine the presence of carotid artery stenosis. When an individual has been diagnosed with amaurosis fugax, it is vital to refer the patient first to a neurologist to confirm the diagnosis and examine for any other neurological deficits. Since many of these patients are smokers and diabetics and may have hypertension, they need a thorough presurgical workup to ensure that they can undergo general or local anesthesia. The time to undergo carotid endarterectomy is variable but expert opinion states that it should be within 4 to 8 weeks.

While awaiting surgery, the nurse should educate the patient and the family on the dangers of smoking and the importance of blood pressure control. The pharmacist should make sure that the patient is on aspirin and compliant with his blood pressure and diabetes medications. Before surgery, the patient should be advised to stop all blood thinners.

An interdisciplinary team approach to patient care and education will lead to better outcomes. [Level 5]

**Outcomes**

There is a large amount of evidence to show that treating patients with amaurosis fugax can prevent a full-blown stroke. However, the treatment of carotid stenosis is in a state of flux. The condition can also be managed with angioplasty and stenting. For patients who are unfit for surgery or those who are asymptomatic, the endovascular approach may be viable, but symptomatic patients need an open procedure. There still remains debate as to which procedure is safer and the data is mixed and confusing because of the heterogeneity of the patients. The most important thing is to ensure that a patient with amaurosis fugax gets the appropriate referral to a neurologist first to confirm the diagnosis. The choice between a vascular or an endovascular procedure depends on personal preference. Both are safe procedures, and both have a role in the treatment of this serious disorder.