# Continuing Education Activity

Adrenal masses are a frequent observation in the adrenal gland. While most lesions are benign, adrenocortical carcinoma should be a consideration when a patient presents with hypercortisolism. This activity describes the evaluation and management of adrenocortical carcinoma and reviews the role of the healthcare team in evaluating and treating these patients.

**Objectives:**
- Describe the importance of understanding the pathophysiology of adrenocortical carcinoma relative to new treatments. 
- Review the presentation and the evaluation of a patient with adrenal incidentaloma.
- Outline the treatment and management options available for adrenocortical carcinoma. 
- Explain the importance of improving care coordination amongst the interprofessional team to enhance the delivery of care for patients with adrenocortical carcinoma.

# Introduction

The adrenal is an endocrine organ that has two physiological functions. The outer adrenal cortex produces steroid hormones, including glucocorticoids such as cortisol, and mineralocorticoids (aldosterone, and the androgen dehydroepiandrosterone. The glucocorticoids play a role in carbohydrate, protein, and fat metabolism. The mineralocorticoids are essential for the sodium (Na) and potassium (K) balance and the maintenance of fluid homeostasis. Glucocorticoids and mineralocorticoids are critical for survival. The inner adrenal medulla produces catecholamines (dopamine, epinephrine, and norepinephrine ).

Occasionally one does encounter adrenal masses during a routine study.

The Fourth Edition of the World Health Organization (WHO) classification of endocrine tumors published in 2017 has classified adrenal cancer in two groups. The first includes tumors of the adrenal cortex, and the second group includes tumors of the adrenal medulla and extra-adrenal paraganglia.

The following are tumors of the adrenal cortex:

- Cortical carcinoma

- Cortical adenoma

- Sex cord-stromal tumors

- Granulosa cell tumor
- Leydig cell tumor

- Adenomatoid tumor

- Mesenchymal and stromal tumors

- Myelolipoma
- Schwannoma

- Hematological tumors

- Secondary tumors

Adrenocortical adenoma (ACA), Adrenal myelolipoma (mesenchymal and stromal tumors) and adrenal adenomatoid tumor are benign neoplasms of the adrenal cortex. The sex cord-stromal tumor of the adrenal gland is rare, and there are only six reports in the literature.

Adrenocortical carcinomas (ACC) are very uncommon; these lesions are less common than cortical adenomas and pheochromocytoma. The worldwide incidence of ACC is 0.5 to 2 per 1 million people annually.

As with all adrenal tumors, the presence of local or distant spread defines their malignancy. No absolute criteria of malignancy exist for lesions confined to the adrenal gland, but a Weiss score of 3 or higher, which is determined by histopathological features, is generally an indicator of malignancy.

# Etiology

Adrenocortical carcinomas can arise sporadically or be part of a familial cancer syndrome. Although the molecular mechanisms underlying tumorigenesis in many of the hereditary syndromes are well characterized, the molecular pathogenesis of sporadic ACC is less well understood. Furthermore, most cases of ACC appear to be sporadic. Several studies on the clonality of adrenocortical tumors have demonstrated that most benign adrenocortical lesions are polyclonal; however, some ACC that have been studied indicate monoclonal proliferation.

- Li-Fraumeni syndrome is a familial cancer syndrome arising from a germline mutation of the TP53 gene located at 17p13. Patients are susceptible to breast cancer, sarcomas, brain tumors, leukemia, and adrenocortical carcinoma.**Tp53 pathway**.

- Patients with familial adenomatous polyposis (FAP) or Gardner syndrome, which is a mutation of the adenomatous polyposis coli gene (APC) located in 5q21 chromosomal, present with multiple colonic polyps and an increased risk of early colon carcinomas. Furthermore, FAP is associated with pigmented retinal lesions, desmoids tumors, osteomas, thyroid adenoma/carcinomas, and other different malignant tumors. Adrenocortical tumors, especially nonfunctional nodular hyperplasia, cortisol-producing adenomas (CPA), and ACC occur in 7 to 13% of patients with FAP. FAP results from a germline inactivating mutation of APC, a tumor suppressor gene that inhibits Wnt/beta-catenin signaling. According to Knudson’s model, ACC in patients with FAP exhibits somatic APC mutations as a second hit. The activation of the **Wnt/b-catenin signaling pathway**occurs in a third of ACC cases, and less commonly observed in adrenocortical adenoma. Activation of b-catenin is mainly related to the mutation of the Catenin beta-1 gene (CTNNB1). Consistently, transcriptome studies have shown an overexpression of Wnt/b-catenin target genes in ACC.

- Beckwith-Wiedemann syndrome (BWS) characteristically demonstrates genetic and epigenetic events at the 11p15.5 region involving the cyclin-dependent kinase inhibitor 1C (CDKN1C), insulin-growth-factor II (IGF-II), and H19 genes, which results in overgrowth disorders, visceromegaly (macroglossia, hemihyperplasia), malformations (wall defect, umbilical hernia), and predisposition to embryonal malignancies. ACC belongs to the BWS tumor spectrum, which also includes Wilms tumor, hepatoblastoma, rhabdomyosarcoma and neuroblastoma with an overall risk for tumor development in children estimated at 7.5%; most of the tumors occur in the first 8  to 10 years of life.

- Multiple endocrine neoplasia type 1 has an abnormal genetic locus at 11q13, where a defective MEN1 gene encodes a defective tumor suppressor protein, which is the Menin protein. The abnormal function of this protein predisposes the patient to parathyroid, pituitary, endocrine pancreatic, and adrenocortical tumors, including adrenocortical carcinoma.

These candidate genes as a cause of cancer have as their basis the hypothesis that a germline alteration of the genes causing a hereditary familial tumor syndrome also occurs as a somatic event leading to a sporadic tumor. This approach was indeed very successful in identifying TP53 mutation or insulin-like growth factor 2 (IGF2) overexpression in ACC, and APC and the Wnt/b-catenin pathway. Genomewide approaches, including transcriptome, single nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) array, methylation, and microRNAs (miRNAs) analysis, have identified new genetic and epigenetic alterations.

- DNA methylation is the most characterized epigenetic mechanism of regulation of transcription. This methylation occurs in the cytosine of CpG dinucleotides in specific regions with many CpG called CpG islands. Beyond the abnormalities described at the IGF2 locus, a global alteration of methylation patterns has been described in ACC at the genome-wide level.

- MicroRNAs (miRNAs) are small RNAs (approximately 22 nucleotides) regulating gene expression at the posttranscriptional level by targeting mRNAs for cleavage or translation repression. They play an essential role in the pathogenesis of several neoplasms; they are responsible for both oncogene activation and tumor suppressor genes silencing. Their profile of expression can serve as diagnostic and/or prognosis markers and the fact that one can measure them in blood samples.

# Epidemiology

The National Institute of Health Office of Rare Diseases Research reports that fewer than 200000 cases of adrenocortical carcinoma exist within the United States with an incidence of 0.5 to 2 per million worldwide and 0.72 per million in the United States alone. Adrenocortical carcinoma accounts for 0.2% of deaths annually in the United States.

# Pathophysiology

Research over the last decades has elucidated causes of adrenocortical carcinoma to be driven by several molecular changes that include inactivation of tumor suppressor genes and activation of a myriad of different oncogenes, DNA mutations, and epigenetic changes. At the level of the genome, large scale changes occur in gene expression, chromosomal aberrations such as chromosomal gains, chromosomal losses, and loss of heterozygosity, DNA methylation, and dysregulation of microRNA (miRNA) leading to overexpression of these sequences.

Initially, familial syndromes predisposing to ACC allowed the identification of signaling pathways involved in the pathogenesis of adrenal tumors. Notably, the Tp53 pathway, the overexpression of IGF-II, and the Wnt/b-catenin signaling pathway. These were explained in the etiology section. Tp53 pathway via germline mutations is the underlying genetic cause of ACC in 50% to 80% of children with ACC.

Another tumor suppressor gene involved includes Melanocortin 2 receptor (MC2R), also known as the adrenal corticotropin hormone receptor (ACTH-R).

Steroidogenic factor 1 (SF-1) is a transcription factor that normally expresses in the hypothalamus, pituitary, and steroidogenic hormone-producing glands such as the ovaries, testes, and the adrenal cortex, playing a crucial role in the development of these glands.

There are reports of chromosomal aberrations leading to chromosomal gains or chromosomal losses in the pathogenesis of adrenocortical carcinoma. Initial studies showed chromosomal gains found to occur at the following loci: 4q, 4p16, 5p15, 5q12-13, 5q32-qter, 9q34, 12q13, and 19p, while researchers observed chromosomal losses at 1p, 21, 11q, 17p, 22p, and 22q 1. Further studies have since confirmed chromosomal gains at chromosomes 5, 7, 12, 16, 19, and 201,7 and chromosomal losses at 1, 2, 13, 17, and 221,7.  Lastly, microsatellite studies have also shown there to be LOH at the following loci: 17p13, 11q15, and 2p16 at a rate of 85%, 90% and 92% of adrenocortical carcinoma cases, respectively.

DNA methylation has also been studied at a genome-wide level in adrenocortical carcinoma, whereby it was found that there was significantly more hypermethylation at CpG sites (CpG islands) in adrenocortical carcinoma patients versus those with normal adrenocortical tissue samples.  The sites of hypermethylated CpG islands were in regions that led to decreased expression of genes involved in cell cycle regulation and apoptosis regulation.

The dysregulation of micro RNA (miRNA) is also involved in the pathogenesis of adrenocortical carcinoma as well. MicroRNA (miRNA) small, noncoding regions of RNA that are 18 to 25 nucleotides long, and plays an essential role in post-transcriptional regulation of gene expression and various cellular processes such as proliferation, apoptosis, and differentiation.

# Histopathology

The hallmarks of adrenocortical carcinoma include the large size with irregular margins, invasion of surrounding structures, and the presence of distant metastases. The surface of the tumor ranges in color from brown to orange to yellow depending on the lipid content of their cells. Necrosis is almost always present. Importantly, tumor invasion of the capsule, the extra-adrenal soft tissue or direct invasion of lymphatic channels/blood vessels is a common feature of ACC. However, these are relatively nonspecific characteristics and are frequently absent in early disease, making it challenging to discriminate ACC from benign adrenal tumors. In 1984, Louis Weiss,

- Nuclear grade (III or IV)

- High mitotic rate (more than five mitoses per 50 high-power field -HPF-)

- Presence of atypical mitoses

- Percentage of clear cells (less than or equal to 25% of tumor)

- Diffuse architecture

- Microscopic necrosis

- Venous invasion

- Sinusoidal invasion

- Capsular invasion

The presence of more than three or more features is consistent with adrenocortical carcinoma.

Despite the widespread use of this grading system, poorly differentiated ACC may still be confused with renal cell carcinoma, small cell lung carcinoma, melanoma, or hepatocellular carcinoma.  There are many diagnostic algorithms proposed in the previous WHO edition to differentiate cortical carcinoma from adenoma. However, the Weiss score, although imperfect, is the system adopted by the current WHO classification as a primary determinant of malignancy.

Apart from conventional adrenocortical carcinoma, the latest WHO classification also recognizes some histological variants. They are, in the order of decreasing frequency— oncocytic, myxoid, and sarcomatoid carcinomas. Adrenal myxoid carcinomas and sarcomatoid carcinomas are rare. Myxoid carcinoma has abundant extracellular mucin in the stroma. Using the Weiss score, a patient with this subtype of adrenal cortical carcinoma may be underdiagnosed. Sarcomatoid carcinoma reveals the loss of cortical differentiation. The carcinoma may have a common cortical carcinoma area (biphasic). Sarcomatoid carcinoma needs to be differentiated from retroperitoneal sarcoma involving the adrenal gland, especially when the typical cortical carcinoma area is monophasic. In these instances, a battery of immunostains can provide evidence of adrenocortical differentiation,

Adrenal oncocytic carcinoma is termed the oncocytic variant because the predominant cell type is an oncocyte, which is a cell with abundant, granular cytoplasm related to the accumulation of mitochondria and endoplasmic reticulum. The Weiss score does not apply in the differentiation of oncocytic adenoma from oncocytic carcinoma. This reason is that three of the criteria in the Weiss score—high nuclear grade, less than 25% clear cells, and diffuse architecture are characteristics of adrenal oncocytic tumors. Thus, the Lin-Weiss-Bisceglia system is recommended for the differentiation of oncocytic adenoma from oncocytic carcinoma.

In addition to the accepted diagnostic algorithms, immunostaining to assess the proliferation of Ki-67 can be used to help to differentiate adrenocortical adenoma from cortical carcinoma. A consensus has emerged that ACCs have a Ki67 labeling index of over 5%. Conversely, ACA generally shows a much lower index, although there is a level of overlap observed depending on the study examined. Although the ACC diagnosis should not rest solely on any one immunomarker, proliferation markers, as a rule, correlate with mitotic accounts and do play a role in the evaluation of these tumors.

Adrenocortical carcinomas are gradable into low- and high-grade carcinoma groups based on their mitotic rates (fewer than 20 mitoses per HPFs vs. more than 20 mitoses per 50 HPFs), an observation initially made via examining the individual parts of the Weiss score for prognostic significance.

# History and Physical

Adrenocortical carcinoma can present classically in three different ways. About one-third of patients present with symptoms of hormonal excess, another third present with non-specific symptoms and the last third are diagnosed coincidentally when imaging studies are done for other medical conditions.

Hormonal excess could be due to hypercortisolism, hyperandrogenism or both. Hypercortisolism (Cushing syndrome) can present as a plethora (rounded face), diabetes mellitus, osteoporosis, purple striae on the abdominal wall, muscle weakness, truncal obesity, and muscle atrophy. Glucocorticoid excess can present with hypokalemia and hypertension. Malignant adrenal tumors usually present with a clinical presentation of hypercortisolism, rapidly progressing muscle weakness and pronounced muscle weakness. Hyperandrogenism can present with male pattern baldness, virilization, hirsutism, and menstrual abnormalities. About 1 to 3% of patients have excess estrogen production. When estrogen overproduction occurs in males, a syndrome of feminization is seen, resulting in impotence, decreased libido, testicular atrophy, and gynecomastia. About half of the patients that present with hormonal excess have concurrent hypercortisolism and hyperandrogenism. Isolated hyperandrogenism in males is often underdiagnosed.

Autonomous aldosterone secretion can present as hypertension and hyperkalemia. Adrenocortical carcinomas are more often functional in children (90% of cases) compared to adults. Most of these tumors produce androgens, leading to precocious puberty and virilization.

Testicular pain and varicocele may also signal the presence of an adrenal mass.

Although paraneoplastic symptoms are rare, tumor-related, IGF-2 mediated hypoglycemia called Anderson syndrome is a common observation. Tumor chemokines can also cause leukocytosis, polycythemia, and hyperreninemic hyperaldosteronism.

Nonspecific symptoms include local tumor growth, abdominal or flank pain, early satiety, and abdominal fullness. The average size of the tumor at the time of diagnosis is approximately 10 to 13 cm. A minority of patients present with tumors less under 6 cm.

Nonfunctional tumors are typically larger at presentation than functional tumors, and a significant number are discovered incidentally during abdominal or thoracic imaging for other reasons. Some patients with nonfunctional tumors will remain asymptomatic until they present with signs or symptoms of metastatic disease (e.g., jaundice, bone pain). The most common metastases sites are lung (40% to 80%), liver (40% to 90%), and bone (5% to 20%).

# Evaluation

Patients should undergo a necessary basic metabolic panel (electrolytes, glucose, BUN, hepatic function test) and a complete blood count. An initial hormonal evaluation is essential. Staging should include a magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) or computed tomography (CT) scan of the pelvis and abdomen and a CT of the chest. Another clinical suspicion should think another imaging test (e.g., bone scan for skeletal metastasis).

**Biochemistry**

Biochemical evaluation of the blood and urine includes measuring levels of cortisol, mineralocorticoids, androgens, and estrogens.

The European Network for the Study of Adrenal Tumors (ENSAT) suggests a pre-operative hormonal workup for the investigation of a possible ACC (www.ensat.org). In particular, recommendations include the assessment of basal cortisol, ACTH, DHEAS, 17-hydroxyprogesterone, testosterone, androstenedione, and estradiol as well as a dexamethasone suppression test and urinary free cortisol. Recently, it seems more evident that some ACC, previously considered as non-secreting, may also secrete some urine steroid metabolites.

Blood levels of hormones or hormonal symptoms in patients with adrenocortical carcinoma do not bear any correlation to the size of the tumor. In addition to steroidal hormone measurements, it is recommended to exclude a pheochromocytoma when no steroid hormone production is evident.

Pheochromocytoma is measured by measuring 24-hour urine or plasma metanephrine and normetanephrine.

**Imaging**

An adrenal incidentaloma is an unsuspected adrenal mass discovered on cross-sectional imaging performed for another reason.

However, a small percentage of small lesions (less than 4 cm) may also be malignant.

Adrenocortical carcinoma tends to vary in appearance with frequent heterogeneous enhancement because of internal hemorrhage, necrosis, and calcification. Imaging may also reveal metastases to the lung, lymph nodes, or liver. Extension into the renal vein and/or inferior vena cava or adjacent organs may also present.

All patients with ACC must undergo a chest CT scan to detect pulmonary metastases before surgery.  Currently, no single imaging method can characterize a localized adrenal mass as ACC. Regarding traditional imaging, an abdominal CT scan is mandatory if there is suspicion of ACC: many studies have established a threshold of <10 or equal Hounsfield Unit (HU) in unenhanced CT for the diagnosis of a benign lesion. Adrenocortical carcinomas that contain macroscopic fat or areas of intracellular lipid can have greater than 10 HU in portions of the tumor.

In a case with an adrenal mass with a density that is >10UH, the contrast media washout can be used to discriminate the benign adrenal lesions from the ACC.  Absolute adrenal washout is calculated using the density value of an adrenal mass on a non-contrast (non-enhanced) CT, a contrast-enhanced scan with a delay of 60-90 sec (portal venous phase) and a delayed scan at 15 minutes non-enhanced, measured in HU.

- Absolute Adrenal washout

- [Enahanced CT (HU ) - Delayed CT (HU)] / [Enahanced CT (HU ) - Unenhanced CT (HU )] x 100

An absolute adrenal washout over 50% suggests a benign adrenal lesion.

When the CT scan cannot perfectly characterize the adrenal lesion, and there is suspicion of ACC, three major signs on the MRI are useful to confirm ACC: the presence of isointense to hypointense signal on T1-weighted images, a hyperintense signal on T2-weighted images and a heterogeneous signal drop on chemical shift.

Positron emission tomography (PET) with [18F]fluorodeoxyglucose (FDG) and [11C]metomidate (MTO) or [123I]MTO are useful to confirm the diagnosis of a malignant lesion or establish a tumor of adrenocortical origin. ACC typically presents as a heterogeneous and large mass with intense FDG uptake greater than the liver background. In a study of 77 patients with surgically proven diagnosis of ACA or ACC, [18F]FDG PET/CT could reliably distinguish malignant from benign lesions with a cutoff value greater than 1.45 for adrenal to liver maximum standardized uptake value (SUV) (sensitivity; 100% and specificity; 88%). In the same study with a cutoff value of 3.4 for maximum adrenal SUV, the sensitivity was 100%, and specificity was 70%.

In recent years, a new tracer, metomidate ([11C]MTO) has proven useful to determine the adrenocortical origin because it specifically binds to adrenocortical CP450 11B (CYP11B) enzymes, which catalyze the final steps of steroid synthesis.

# Treatment / Management

The management of adrenocortical carcinoma poses a unique challenge because of its multiple endocrine functions. Because of the rarity of adrenocortical carcinomas and the limited clinical series, no universal guidelines exist.

Current practice influence is by expert consensus opinion gathered from medical centers that specialize in the treatment of ACC.

Treatment of advanced ACC must be considered palliative. This treatment includes improving the quality of life (QOL) through necessary interventions (e.g., pain control, prevention of fractures caused by bony metastasis and adequate control of hormonal symptoms) as well as minimizing side effects from antineoplastic therapies.

# Differential Diagnosis

Hormonal excess can be due to a variety of clinical conditions. The primary differential includes:

- ACTH independent cortisol producing adenomas

- Adrenal hyperplasia

- Adrenocortical autoantibodies

- Polycystic ovarian disease

- Ovarian hyperthecosis

- Congenital adrenal hyperplasia (CAH)

The NIH has established guidelines for evaluating incidentally discovered adrenal mass.

# Surgical Oncology

The mainstay of treatment for adrenocortical carcinoma is surgery.

Unfortunately, because of the size of most adrenocortical carcinoma, complete excision is rarely possible.

Microscopically positive resection margins (R1) carry an increased risk of recurrence.

In the past decade, technical advances in minimally invasive surgery have led to increased use of laparoscopic procedures to remove adrenal masses. However, multiple reports have found an increased risk of peritoneal carcinomatosis in ACC patients who underwent laparoscopic resection compared with patients who had open adrenalectomy.

Although minimally invasive resection can reduce the length of hospital stay after surgery, it is viewed by many as being inferior to an open procedure because it impairs the surgeon’s ability to perform a comprehensive regional lymph node dissection and reduces the chance of having R0 resection margins.

Surgical expertise is very important for improving clinical outcomes in localized adrenocortical carcinomas, as shown by more prolonged recurrence-free survival (RFS) and reduced local recurrence rates in patients treated at high-volume centers (those performing 10 or more ACC surgeries annually) compared with rates seen in patients treated in low volume centers, despite the typically larger tumors in patients in the high-volume centers.

Imaging should be utilized before and during surgery because many aggressive adrenocortical carcinomas overgrow, and involve adjacent structures. Intravascular ultrasound or venography may complement other imaging studies to estimate the extent of tumor involvement. Other preoperative considerations include the management and optimization of those patients with hormone excess, especially those with Cushing syndrome.

A radical resection induces temporary cortisol deficiency in patients with cortisol-secreting ACC who will require glucocorticoid replacement postoperatively.

In the case of recurrent cases, surgery is the recommendation for patients with a favorable prognosis and an achievable Ro resection. Surgery for palliative and metastatic cases may be considered depending on prognostic factors. Expected postoperative mortality for patients with ACC is less than 5%. Redo-surgery is recommended for R2 resection.

Although surgery is the treatment recommended for non-metastatic ACC, the decision for resection of the primary tumor in stage IV disease requires individualized attention. In general, those with multiple metastatic deposits in one organ system or widespread distant metastatic disease in multiple organs should not undergo adrenalectomy. Patients with advanced disease who have complete surgical resection procedures often experience a recurrence in the surgical site or distant organs. Late recurrences that occur more than six months after initial surgery can be salvaged occasionally with another resection of the recurrent disease, and this approach correlates with improved survival compared with patients who experience early recurrences, which is often an indication for systemic therapy.

Loco-guided regional therapy, including interventional radiology techniques, are used to control tumor growth and improve secretory status.  Other therapies, including radiofrequency ablation and trans-arterial chemoembolization, are useful in curing small metastatic lesions in liver, lung, and bone. None of these methods have been the subject of clinical trials. However, both methods are an alternative to surgery when surgery is not feasible.

# Radiation Oncology

In localized adrenocortical carcinoma, radiation therapy, in combination with surgery, has been used in only a few patients registered in the National Cancer Data Base.

In patients with advanced or metastatic ACC, palliative radiation therapy can be used to treat selected sites of symptomatic or high-risk metastases.

# Medical Oncology

**HORMONAL MANAGEMENT OF ADRENOCORTICAL CARCINOMA**

The combination of cancer burden and hormonal excesses occur in almost 50% of adrenocortical carcinoma patients. Agents to treat Cushing syndrome such as ketoconazole, metyrapone, and mifepristone are often used, with the hope of reducing the morbidity of cortisol excess. Ketoconazole inhibits CYP17A1, CYP11A1, and to a lesser extent, CYP11B1.

Metyrapone is an inhibitor of steroidogenesis at the level of CYP11B1,

Spironolactone and eplerenone are mineral corticosteroid receptor antagonists that can be used to counteract edema and hypertension associated with cortisol or aldosterone overproduction. Spironolactone can be used to manage androgen effects in females patients with androgen-secreting tumors as well as mineralocorticoid effects in those patients with mineralocorticoid-secreting tumors. Dosing may need to be as high as 200 to 400 mg/day.

The success of hormonal control is contingent on a synchronized approach to reducing hormonal production, counteracting the effects of hormonal overproduction, and reducing disease burden via surgery or systemic chemotherapy.

**LOCALIZED DISEASE**

Localized ACC encompasses stages I and II disease and most patients with stage III disease. Stage I is relatively uncommon, representing only 3% of all ACC cases, whereas stages II and III make up 37 and 34%, respectively.

The drug of choice for adjuvant treatment is mitotane, which exerts hormonal effects by reducing adrenal steroids production by blocking steroidogenic enzymes, as the 11b-hydroxylase enzyme, (officially named cytochrome P450 11B1 -CYP11B1-)  and cholesterol side-chain cleavage by inhibiting CYP11A1 (which appears to be one of the covalently bound mitotane targets) in the adrenal cortex. In the periphery, it increases glucocorticoid clearance.

Mitotane has been shown to significantly improved recurrence-free survival (RFS) in some studies and not others.

Adjuvant treatment generally starts within three months of post-surgery based on animal studies.

**ADVANCED DISEASE**

More than half of ACC patients present with locally advanced or metastatic disease (Stage III or IV).

**Systemic therapy for metastatic disease**

In metastatic disease, different parameters merit consideration: the tumoral volume, the number of metastatic organs, and the progression rates. Debulking surgery only benefits in ACC patients with a limited number of tumoral organs (less than or equal to 2), resectable tumoral mass, with a light progression and when severe hormone excess that is not manageable medically. However, most patients require medical therapy.

Mitotane remains the only medication approved by the European Medicine Executive Agency (EMEA) and the U.S Food and Drug Administration (FDA) for the treatment of “metastatic ACC.” An overview of collecting different studies showed that the objective response rate is at best, 24%.

**Neoadjuvant Approach**

The use of neoadjuvant systemic chemotherapy as a bridge to surgery correlated with a favorable outcome in one small study with borderline resectable adrenocortical carcinoma (BRACC), defined as having oligometastases, needing multiorgan or vascular resection, or having a poor performance status preventing surgery. Twelve patients (80%) received combination therapy with mitotane and etoposide/cisplatin-based chemotherapy, two patients (13%) received mitotane alone, and one patient (7%) received chemotherapy alone. Median DFS for resected BRACC patients was 28.0 months [95% confidence interval (CI), 2.9–not attained] vs 13 months (95% CI, 5.8–46.9) (p = 0.40) for initial surgery patients. Five-year OS rates were also similar: 65 % for resected BRACC vs 50 % for initial surgery (p = 0.72).

**Targeted Therapy Approach**

Targeted therapy may also be an option for the management of adrenocortical carcinoma. The first trials targeted epidermal growth factor receptor (EGRF) gefitinib and a combination of erlotinib and gemcitabine. Among vascular endothelial growth factor, sunitinib exhibited a modest anti-tumor effect in the phase 2 trial. VEGF can be administered in patients without mitotane treatment.

Recently, drugs targeting IGF-II seemed to be very promising, as IGF-II is the most-up regulated gene in ACC (80% as described before). Preclinical studies antagonizing this pathway with pharmacological agents resulted in inhibition of growth in vitro and in vivo. This inhibition was more potent than that observed with the use of mitotane alone in decreasing xenograft growth, and the combination of IGF inhibition with mitotane resulted in greater antiproliferative effects than those observed with the use of single-agent treatment. These data establish the role of targeted disruption of IGF-1R signaling to obtain a therapeutic advantage when used with mitotane therapy or possibly other chemotherapeutics in ACC patients.

# Staging

The widely adopted staging of adrenocortical carcinoma is by the European Network of Study of Adrenal Tumors (ENSAT) due to its correlation with clinical outcome.

- Stage I with a tumor size of smaller than 5 cm.

- Stage II is a tumor with a size of over 5 cm; strictly localized both stages.

- Stage III is characterized by the positive regional lymph nodes, infiltration of the tumor in the surrounding tissue, or a tumor thrombus in the vena cava and/or renal vein.

- Stage IV is defined by distant metastasis.

# Prognosis

The prognosis of adrenocortical carcinoma was previously quite poor. In the past, an average overall survival in patients with adrenocortical carcinoma was 14.5 months with a 5-year mortality rate of about 75 to 90%.

Metastases of ACC has been detected in the liver (48 to 85%), lungs (30 to 60%), lymph nodes (7 to 20%), and bones (7 to 13%) of cases.

More recently, different studies have shown that adrenocortical carcinoma clinical presentation, survival, and prognosis is quite heterogeneous, ranging from short term survival to more long-term survival. Two separate organizations: The Union for International Cancer Control (UICC) and the European Network Staging Study for Adrenal Tumors (ENSAT) have developed newer staging systems which are now used to determine disease-free survival in stage I-III ACC cases and overall survival in stage IV ACC, as follows

- Staging

- Resection status

- Grading of the tumor based on Ki67% proliferation index and mitotic count.

Based on the ENSAT staging system, the 5-year survival rates for ACC are as follows

- 66 to 82% in patients with stage I

- 58 to 64% in patients with stage II

- 24 to 50% in patients with stage III

- 0 to 17% in patients with stage IV

In these latest studies, resection status and tumor grade have been shown to play a key role in the disease-free survival of localized ACC cases. Patients who had completely resected (R0) localized tumors, and incomplete microscopic resection were less likely to have a recurrence, compared to those with advanced tumors and macroscopically positive margins.

European studies of ACC patients have shown that the proliferation index, Ki67, has been the single most important factor in determining the recurrence of ACC in patients following complete resection of a localized ACC tumor (R0) for stage I-III ACC patients. Further research suggests that stage I through III, younger age, and low Ki67 are positive predictors of recurrence-free survival.

Moreover, older age older than 45 years old, distant metastasis, and incomplete resection have shown to associate with poor survival.

Recently, transcriptome analysis revealed unraveled two distinct groups of adrenocortical carcinoma, reflecting tumor proliferation (measured by mitotic counts and cell cycle genes): one group of aggressive proliferating tumors (C1A), associated with a poor prognosis and one group of less aggressive tumors (C1B), associated with a better outcome. Multivariate analysis, including tumor stage and mitotic rate as variables, showed that transcriptome data contained independent prognosis information. One of these studies also used the transcriptome data to define a genes predictor of malignancy and identified three different subgroups in the group of ACC of poor prognosis: one was enriched in TP53 mutations (C1A/p53), the second in beta-catenin cytoplasmic and nuclear accumulation (C1A/beta-catenin) and/or mutations and the third presented neither of these two alterations (C1A/x).

Similarly, the miRNA sequence, miR-195, and miR483-5p have been shown in serum to serve as a biomarker of aggressive ACC, associated with poor prognosis.

# Complications

The complications associated with adrenocortical carcinoma are due to excess hormone production. Hormone excess occurs in 40% to 60% of patients with ACC.

Local or regional recurrences:

- Local or regional recurrences occur in 19% to 34% of patients with no residual (R0) disease after surgery.

Distant metastases:

- More than half of ACC patients present with locally advanced or metastatic disease.

# Postoperative and Rehabilitation Care

The follow-up management is not well-standardized. However, since adrenocortical carcinomas are aggressive tumors, patients should be followed every three months after initial treatment. When the patient has a recurrence free-time of 2 to 3 years, the follow-up may increase to every six months for a total of five years. After five years of disease-free survival, the surveillance can be done every 1 to 2 years, because, although rare, some patients can have a late relapse. Patients should undergo a hormonal investigation, comprehensive imaging work-up, including chest and abdominal CT scan, and complete physical examination. An [18F]FDG-PET can be a consideration, even if it is not regarded as mandatory in the follow-up of ACC patients.

# Deterrence and Patient Education

Adrenal cancer happens when healthy cells in the adrenal gland grow out of control. Some people have no symptoms, but in other cases, the lesion gets discovered while undergoing an imaging test for another reason.

When adrenal cancer causes symptoms, it does so via the production of hormones. Depending on the levels of the hormones involved, this can cause symptoms such as:

- Muscle weakness

- Weight gain

- Increased hair growth, usually on the face (in women) and deep voice

- Fatigue

- Trouble sleeping

- The purple coloration on the skin

- Hypertension

Adrenal tumors can also cause other symptoms that are not related to the level of hormones. These can include:

- Weight loss or loss of appetite

- Pain in the abdomen or lower back

All symptoms listed above can result from many other disorders, and hence a thorough workup is required. However, if a patient perceives these symptoms, they need to report it to their doctor or nurse.

Tests for adrenal cancer usually include:

- Blood analysis and urine tests to determine the levels of different hormones

- CT or MRI scan

The treatment chosen will depend on the stage of adrenal cancer. Most patients with the adrenal disease are treated with surgery to remove the tumor. After surgery, some patients may require additional treatments that can include:

- Chemotherapy

- Radiation therapy

After the initial treatment, the doctor must follow the patient regularly to determine if cancer has been cured or has come back. Follow-up tests include blood and imaging tests. Having symptoms could mean the adrenal tumor has returned. The patient should inform their doctor or nurse if they have any signs or symptoms. Long-term medicinal treatment to correct the hormone levels may be necessary.

**What happens if my adrenal cancer returns or is widespread?**If the adrenal tumor return or spreads, the patient may require additional chemotherapy, surgery, or radiation therapy.

# Enhancing Healthcare Team Outcomes

Adrenocortical carcinoma is necessarily managed by an interprofessional team that includes an internist, radiation oncologist, surgeons, oncologist, and endocrinologist. With early diagnosis combined with prompt treatment, the prognosis for most patients is excellent. However, the late-stage disease has a much poorer prognosis. Therefore, given the rarity of ACC and the chance of not catching the disease early, all members of the interprofessional healthcare team need to be ready to communicate and work as a unit. This is why an experienced oncology specialist should be brought in on the case as soon ass possible.

Nursing will play a vital role in the case, whether management is surgical or medical. Nursing will be the ones to monitor the patient daily, and special-trained oncology nurses should be able to notice signs of medication side effects, as well as the effectiveness of treatment. They are the first line of contact for the patient in most cases and must communicate with the rest of the team when concerns arise.  When ACC is medically managed, the pharmacist should have specialized training in oncology so they can most effectively verify dosing and treatment combinations. As with any illness, they should perform thorough medication reconciliation and report to the oncologist any issues with the medication regimen. In advanced stages, they will also have a role in palliative care settings. Only with a collaborative interprofessional team approach can adrenal cancer be managed most effectively to achieve optimal outcomes. [Level V]