Before any examination, a thorough explanation of the procedure to the patient or parents in a minor setting is necessary. A comprehensive medical and surgical history is essential to understand the exam indications fully, rule out concurrent urinary tract infection, and delineate any prior surgical procedures on the genitourinary tract. Previous radiologic exams should be reviewed for pertinent anatomic considerations or other findings.

For the retrograde radionuclide cystography (RNC) exam, a foley catheter is first inserted into the bladder using an aseptic technique. In certain scenarios, a suprapubic puncture may also be considered.

The bladder is instilled until it reaches its full capacity, determined either by the cessation of passive gravity flow or by reaching the appropriate urinary volume for the patient's age.

Any radioactivity seen above the dome of the bladder or within the renal collecting system indicates VUR. VUR can occur during, before, or after voiding. RNC is very sensitive to identifying reflux. It can detect reflux volume as low as 1 ml. If no activity is seen above the bladder, images are obtained during voiding, as VUR may only be observed during this phase of the examination. Routinely, 5-second images are acquired during filling and voiding with 30-second anterior pre and postvoid images. For reporting purposes, VUR on RNC is graded as mild, moderate, or severe:

- Mild- reflux confined to the ureter

- Moderate: reflux up to the pelvicalyceal system

- Severe: reflux up to the pelvicalyceal system associated with a dilated collecting system along with a dilated and tortuous ureter

Antegrade RNC is performed by first obtaining intravenous access and injecting the appropriate radiopharmaceutical. Supine images of the kidneys and renal collecting system are obtained, and the bladder is imaged until it reaches its maximum capacity. Like the retrograde technique, if possible, the patient is placed in the upright position to void images with the gamma camera at their back. If the patient is not able to cooperate, images are obtained in the supine position. Failure of a patient to hold their urine until requested can result in a nondiagnostic study.

Residual bladder postvoid volume is measured by drawing region of interest (ROI) over the bladder on pre and postvoid images.

Residual volume = [voided volume in ml X postvoid bladder counts (ROI)]/[ Initial bladder counts (ROI)- postvoid bladder counts (ROI)]