Two major pharmacological actions of amphetamines include CNS stimulation and sympathomimetic effects. Therefore, an evaluation must include an investigation into evidence of such effects. CNS stimulation may vary from slight degrees of agitation to intense hyperactivity or seizures. This kind of behavior may be accompanied by gross psychosis with hallucinations and paranoid delusions. Patients generally exhibit paranoia, hostility, combativeness, and sometimes presents with suicidal and homicidal ideations. Such effects are especially noted when METH is abused intravenously. The sympathomimetic impacts of amphetamine toxicity include diaphoresis, hypertension, tachycardia, tachypnea, flushing, headache, mydriasis, nausea, vomiting, and abdominal pain in some severe cases with dryness of mucous membranes. Amphetamine toxicity is a clinical diagnosis and some of the key features to look for are agitation, hyperthermia, tachycardia, hypertension, and diaphoresis. Patients who experience altered mental status will require laboratory studies, including complete blood count (CBC), comprehensive metabolic panel, serum creatine kinase levels, and when appropriate urinalysis. A chest radiograph and electrocardiogram may be required if patients complain of chest pain or palpitations. A CT scan of the head will be required for altered mental status or patients with seizures to rule out any intracranial hemorrhages or stroke. Generally, patient demonstrating only mild symptoms will not require extensive lab work or imaging and often respond to sedation and improve promptly under close observation.