PCC exists in two varieties: 3-factor PCC and 4-factor PCC. The 3-factor-PCC contains factors II, IX, X, and little or no factor VII. In all the indications listed above, 4-factor PCC is the preferred choice. Experts have stated that in cases where 4-factor PCC is unavailable, 3 factor PCC with recombinant factor VII is an acceptable alternative.

PCC dosing products are expressed as units of factor IX. Individualized dosing is based on the severity of the disorder, extent and location of bleeding, and clinical status of the patient.  The approximate dosing required described below should achieve the normalization of INR  (less than or equal to 1.2) within 1 hour of treatment.

**Bleeding/perioperative Prophylaxis of Bleeding During Vitamin K Antagonist Therapy**

INR: 2 to less than 4: 25 units/kg; maximum dose: 2500 units

INR: 4 to 6: 35 units/kg; maximum dose: 3500 units

INR: greater than 6: 50 units/kg; maximum dose: 5000 units

Repeat or subsequent dosing is not recommended.  In patients weighing greater than 100 kg, the recommendation is to exceed the maximum dose.

**Life-threatening Major Bleed With a Non-Warfarin Anticoagulant**

Recommendations are to administer 50 units/kg, with an additional 25 units/kg if the patient meets all the following criteria:

- Bleeding is life-threatening

- The specific antidote is not available (e.g., adexanet alfa for apixaban)

- Patient presents within 3 to 5 half-lives of the drug (half-life is around 12 hours for apixaban and 5 to 9 hours for rivaroxaban) - this window (3 to 5 half-lives) can be extended if renal impairment is present and sufficient to prolong the half-life of the medication.

It is also recommended to administer vitamin K along with PCC when used for reversal of VKA anticoagulation; this results from the long half-life of warfarin requiring sustained reversal that only vitamin K can provide.