ICD system consists of three components;

- The pulse generator or generator is the ovoid/circular pod that houses the sophisticated machinery which reads, recognizes, and stores cardiac rhythm tracings as well as decides for the need and delivery of appropriate therapy (ATP or defibrillation) according to a pre-programmed algorithm. It is implanted in the subcutaneous pocket usually in the pectoral region. It also contains the battery and defibrillator which have finite charge and capacity to defibrillate and pace the heart, as the need be. This part also includes the manufacturer code which is readable on the magnified plain radiogram. The device programmer magnet is placed over Pulse-generator for purposes of magnet inhibition, interrogation, and external programming or therapy. Moreover, these generators also have wireless communication ability with compatible programmers, within a limited radius.

- Leads are the cables or silicone coated wires that connect the generator to the myocardium and house the electrodes which facilitate conduction between the device and myocardium. They remain inside the heart. They have screws at one end hooked to the device, and the cardiac end has either screws or tines by which the lead is secured in place inside the respective cardiac chamber.

- Shocking coil. Inside the ICD, the lead has a shocking coil that delivers the necessary charge for defibrillation/electrical cardioversion. ICD leads can be identified on plain radiograms by the presence of shocking coils which appear as localized and well-demarcated spiral thickenings on the lead usually in the region of SVC on atrial lead and near the ventricular end of RV lead.