The vertebral arteries and the anterior and posterior spinal arteries traverse the foramen magnum. The vertebral artery branches off of the subclavian artery and has four segments. The first preforaminal segment (V1) constitutes the portion from the subclavian to the transverse foramen of C6. The second foraminal segment (V2) travels through the transverse foramen of C6 through C2. When the artery emerges from the foramen of C2, it is considered V3. This third segment, the extradural segment, continues through the transverse foramen of C1, the suboccipital triangle, and the foramen magnum. The point at which the artery penetrates the dura and arachnoid mater indicates the beginning of the fourth and final segment of the vertebral artery, the intradural segment. The right and left fourth segments of the vertebral artery combine to form the basilar artery at the level of the pons.

In addition to the basilar artery, the fourth segment of the vertebral arteries gives rise to the anterior spinal artery, the posterior spinal artery, perforating branches to the medulla, and the posterior inferior cerebellar artery. The anterior spinal artery feeds the upper cervical spinal cord and inferior medulla while the posterior spinal artery feeds the dorsal spinal cord and conus medullaris. The lateral medulla, cerebellar tonsils, inferior vermis, and choroid plexus depend on the posterior inferior cerebellar arteries, and the penetrating branches supply portions of the medulla, the olives, and the inferior cerebellar peduncle.