Once the clinician performs the physical exam and obtains a thorough history and highly suspects lunotriquetral instability, he or she should order appropriate imaging which is greatly beneficial.

Plain radiography can be helpful if abnormal, but LT injury cannot be excluded if it is normal. A lateral and AP wrist radiograph of the injured wrist is the initial imaging to be obtained. On the lateral radiograph, a volar tilt of the lunate can be seen which causes the scapholunate angle to be less than 30 degrees, where a normal angle would be approximately 47 degrees. A scapholunate angle less than 30 degrees is consistent with VISI deformity. A capitolunate angle can also be seen where a normal capitolunate interaction is co-linear. On the AP radiograph, one can see a break in the proximal carpal arc and overlap of the lunate and triquetrum with proximal translation.

Historically, arthrography was beneficial in diagnosis as it demonstrated contrast interdigitating the lunotriquetral ligament; however, this finding was not specific as micro membrane perforations from a degenerative disease could be another cause. Magnetic resonance arthrography has since replaced arthrography.

If an audible clicking sound is associated with the pain, video fluoroscopy can be beneficial in localizing the joint in question.

MR imaging could potentially be very useful and specific in the diagnosis of LT instability, particularly when combined with arthrography. With MR arthrography, spillage of contrast from the radiocarpal to the intercarpal joints through the lunotriquetral interspace indicates disruption or injury to these intrinsic carpal ligaments. Occasionally this can be positive with age-related degenerative changes, similar to regular arthrography.

The most agreed upon and definitive way to diagnose LT joint instability is through direct visualization with arthroscopy.