While the characteristic presentation is that of an abrupt onset of multiple tender, erythematous plaques or nodules, several extracutaneous manifestations may occur.

**Cutaneous manifestations**

The lesions of Sweet syndrome have an abrupt onset, tender erythematous plaques or nodules of varying sizes in an asymmetric distribution. Pustular, vesicular, bullous, and targetoid lesions can present. Lesions are most commonly seen on upper extremities, and can also be present on the face, neck, chest, back, and lower extremities. Oral or genital lesions are rare, with rare cases of oral ulcers reported, especially in association with hematological malignancies. Bullous lesions, which are more common in association with a hematological malignancy, may ulcerate, mimicking pyoderma gangrenosum. Subcutaneous involvement of the fat in Sweet syndrome leads to tender nodules that can mimic erythema nodosum. A positive pathergy test, as seen in Behcet disease, can also be seen in Sweet syndrome.

**Constitutional symptoms**

Fever is almost always present, especially in drug-induced Sweet syndrome, although maybe absent in 10% to 20% of cases of Sweet syndrome secondary to other etiologies. Arthralgia, myalgia, fatigue, malaise, and headache are other common constitutional symptoms seen in Sweet syndrome.

**Extracutaneous manifestations**

Joint involvement is common and may occur in 30% to 60% of cases. Arthralgias and non-erosive inflammatory arthritis have been reported.

Ocular inflammation, especially conjunctivitis, is also commonly seen. Other ophthalmologic manifestations may include episcleritis, scleritis, keratitis (including peripheral ulcerative keratitis), uveitis, and choroiditis.

Reports exist of cases of Sweet syndrome with other systemic involvement, including neutrophilic infiltration leading to myocarditis, multifocal sterile osteomyelitis, alveolitis, pleural effusions, and aseptic meningitis.

**DIAGNOSTIC CRITERIA**

There are proposals for other clinical diagnostic criteria.