Acromegaly is a very insidious disease where changes occur over many years. Consequently, studies have reported that the diagnosis is often delayed for about nine years on average. Patients may seek care for dental problems and cardiac or rheumatological issues before being referred to endocrinology.

GH-secreting pituitary adenomas are often big (> 1 cm) and can have compressive symptoms in the form of visual field deficits, ophthalmoplegia, and headaches, which are out of proportion to the size of the tumor. Co-existent hyperprolactinemia can result in galactorrhea and symptoms of hypogonadism (irregular periods in females and decreased libido in males).

**Acromegaly Characteristics**

Increased size of extremities: Enlargement of the hands and feet is noted secondary to both bony expansion and soft tissue swelling. Patients often appreciate an increase in ring and shoe size. The extremities have a "dough" like consistency due to the soft tissue swelling. There is a decrease in the shoe size and ring size with the treatment of acromegaly due to the resolution of soft tissue swelling; the bony changes, however, are permanent.

Hyperhidrosis and skin tags are present in about 98% of cases of acromegaly; these features are sensitive signs for detecting acromegaly. Skin tags are due to the epithelial cell hyperproliferation induced by GH.

Acromegalic facies: Prominent supraorbital ridge, broad nose, acne, large lips, overbite, prognathism, tongue enlargement, and coarsening of facial features form the characteristic acromegalic facies. These changes, however, are very subtle and often go unrecognized by family members. A comparison of present and old photographs may show gradual changes and is an essential part of the assessment of acromegaly.

Musculoskeletal: Generalized weakness and lethargy are common symptoms. Elongation of the jaw can lead to teeth malocclusion, temporomandibular joint pain, and a characteristic interdental separation. Carpal tunnel syndrome is seen in about 60% of patients and is secondary to median nerve swelling rather than extrinsic compression. Early-onset osteoarthritis may be seen due to incongruent articular surfaces in the hips, knees, and spine. Kyphoscoliosis has also been reported in association with acromegaly.

Deep voice and obstructive sleep apnea can occur secondary to soft tissue swelling of the upper airway and large tongue.

**Gigantism**

Gigantism is very rare and should be suspected when the patient's height is 3 standard deviations above normal mean height or 2 standard deviations above the adjusted mean parental height. Since gigantism is associated with various syndromes like neurofibromatosis, Carney complex, and McCune Albright syndrome, evaluation for neurofibromas with cafe au lait spots, optic gliomas, and skin lentigines should be done.