CDC recommends that the treatment of malaria should not be initiated until the diagnosis has been confirmed by laboratory testing. Treatment should be initiated immediately after the confirmation of malaria infection. Empirical treatment is, however, reserved only for extreme cases where there is a strong clinical suspicion with convincing exposure history, presence of severe disease, or an inability to diagnose malaria due to inadequate laboratory facilities.

The treatment should be guided by three main factors: the infecting Plasmodium species, the clinical status of the patient, and drug susceptibility of infecting Plasmodium, determined by the geographic region where the infection was acquired. Chloroquine sensitivity can be expected if the infection was acquired in Central America west of Panama Canal, Haiti, and the Dominican Republic. In a case when the diagnosis is strongly suspected, and it cannot be confirmed, or when there is no species determination possible, given the global spread of P. falciparum resistant to chloroquine, the clinician should opt for a treatment option effective against chloroquine-resistant P. falciparum. CDC recommends making additional blood smears in infections with P. falciparum after initiating the treatment, to confirm adequate parasitological response (decrease in density) to treatment.

Extended, evidence-based, and comprehensive guidelines for malaria management and optimal dosing of antimalarial medications can be found in the third edition of WHOs Guidelines for the treatment of malaria. Treatment and management algorithms for malaria in the USA are available on the CDC´s official website.

**Uncomplicated Falciparum Malaria**

Uncomplicated falciparum malaria should be treated with one of the artemisinin-based combination therapies (ACT). Artemisinin-based combination therapy (ACT) is highly effective due to its effect on a broader range of parasite life cycles, causing faster parasite clearance and is therefore considered a drug of choice for uncomplicated malaria.

There are some other treatment options, although not as effective as ACTs, such as atovaquone-proguanil, quinine sulfate plus doxycycline, tetracycline, or clindamycin, and mefloquine. For chloroquine-sensitive P. falciparum infections (including

pregnant women), the drug of choice is chloroquine. However, any of the drug choices listed above for chloroquine-resistant strains can be used. Treatment options are the same for the pediatric population, with doses adjusted by the patient’s weight.

**Severe Falciparum Malaria**

All patients diagnosed or with a strong suspicion with signs and symptoms of severe malaria should be promptly treated with parenteral antimalarial therapy. Effective, urgent, and appropriate treatment has the greatest impact on prognosis.

Intravenous or intramuscular artesunate is the first-line treatment in all patients (including children, lactating women, and pregnant women in all trimesters) worldwide and should be used for at least 24 hours and until the oral medication is tolerated.

If artesunate is not available, the recommended drug is artemether in preference to quinine. After the complete course of a 24 hour intravenous artesunate, a regimen of a follow-up drug should be completed. A full 3-day regimen of ACT is recommended. In returning traveler, the follow-on antimalarial medication needs to be other than the antimalarial medication taken for prophylaxis.

Intravenous artesunate is currently not approved by the Food and Drug Administration (FDA) or commercially available in the U.S. but is available from CDC under an expanded-access investigational drug (IND) protocol. It is prepositioned at distribution sites throughout the USA and readily available after contacting CDC. Since severe malaria can progress rapidly, CDC offers guidance on oral treatment that can be used while waiting for IV artesunate to be delivered. They recommend interim treatment with oral artemether-lumefantrine (preferably), atovaquone-proguanil, quinine sulfate, or mefloquine. If a patient can not tolerate oral medications, administration after an antiemetic or via nasogastric tube should be considered.

Patients with falciparum malaria should be admitted to the hospital due to the possibility of deterioration even after the effective treatment was initiated. If patients are determined to have uncomplicated malaria, they can be treated as outpatients after confirming that they can tolerate oral therapy, and the parasitemia has declined.

It is important to provide supportive therapy, such as glucose to maintain euglycemia and acetaminophen for fever control, careful, individualized fluid management as patients present with variable degrees of hypovolemia, acidosis, and acute kidney failure. Blood transfusion is sometimes indicated in severe anemias; benzodiazepines should be used for seizure control. However, prophylactic antiepileptic medications are not recommended, and empiric antibiotics should be used in children with severe malaria and adults with concurrent shock.