Dental pulp tissue, the softest and most easily compromised internal structure of healthy dental tissues, is protected by enamel, the dense mineralized outer tooth structure, and intact periodontium, composed of the periodontal ligament, surrounding alveolar bone, and gingival tissue. Bacteria can enter the pulp through cracks, caries, trauma, or exposed cementum.

Severe inflammatory reactions can lead to pulpal cell injury, potentially compromising pulpal vitality and survivability. Although the infection activates an immune response, immune cells and molecules are unable to effectively penetrate dentin to remove pathogens due to the narrow apical foramen of the tooth and the hard enamel surrounding the internal structures.

Once pulpal vascularity is dysfunctional, progression to pulpal necrosis and apical pathosis is typical.

The now infected and necrotic root canal system is a habitat that allows for the growth and establishment of a mixed, predominately anaerobic flora, which mainly grows in sessile biofilms and aggregates or co-aggregates.

As the invading oral microflora and the immune response clash, the periapical tissues surrounding the tooth's root, such as the periodontal ligament and alveolar bone, can be destroyed. This destruction causes periodontal lesions, which may vary in clinical manifestations.

Thus, we can describe apical periodontitis as an inflammatory disease due to the dynamic interaction between oral bacterial invaders and the body's defensive mechanism at the tooth apex.