According to the Committee on Classification of the World Federation of Neurology, chorea is defined as "a state of excessive, spontaneous movements, irregularly timed, non-repetitive, randomly distributed and abrupt in character. These movements may vary in severity from restlessness with mild intermittent exaggeration of gesture and expression, fidgeting movements of the hands, unstable dance-like gait to a continuous flow of disabling, violent movements." Chorea, similar to choreography, refers to movements that resemble dancing. Chorea usually is accompanied by athetosis and ballism. Athetosis is a slower form of chorea. The slowed movements have a writhing or twisting motion. Ballism is a very severe form of chorea where there is a violent flinging of the extremities. The movements are involuntary and usually involve the limbs. Ballismus is usually unilateral but, rarely, may be bilateral. This activity examines when this condition should be considered on differential diagnosis and how to properly evaluate it. This activity highlights the role of the interprofessional team in caring for patients with this condition.

**Objectives:**
- Identify the various causes that can lead to a presentation of chorea.
- Describe the diagnostic testing and approach in evaluating a patient who presents with chorea.
- Outline management strategies for chorea, including both medical and surgical therapies.
- Explain the importance of improving coordination among the interprofessional team to enhance care for patients affected by chorea.