The necessary treatment of all confirmed distal radial fractures involves pain management, immobilization, and evaluation for open fractures or neurovascular compromise. Patients with decreased sensation, motor deficit, neuropathy, or tense forearm compartments should receive immediate orthopedic consultation. A pulseless extremity should be seen immediately by an orthopedic surgeon, but may also warrant an additional evaluation by the vascular surgery service if available.

Open fractures are also an indication for emergent orthopedic evaluation. Open fractures grading is by the Gustillo-Anderson Scale, which rates fractures ranging from Grade I through Grade IIIc. Grade I represents a wound <1 cm with minimal contamination and soft tissue damage. Grade IIIc represents arterial injury and severe soft tissue damage. All open fractures graded II or higher will need surgical washout, but this decision is at the discretion of the surgeon. All open fractures should receive appropriate tetanus prophylaxis and antibiotic treatment. Gustillo Grades I-II may receive a first-generation cephalosporin such as intravenous cefazolin. Penicillin-allergic patients may receive IV clindamycin. Gustillo Grades 3 or greater will require the above plus the addition of an aminoglycoside such as gentamicin.

Pain management should be tailored to meet the patient’s needs. Many patients initially require IV preparations such as morphine or fentanyl, although some can be treated adequately with oral medications. Advanced techniques such as hematoma blocks or ultrasound-guided nerve blocks may be a consideration for DR fractures that will require manipulation and reduction. Conscious sedation is also frequently utilized in these situations. Ketamine is a medication used frequently for this purpose, and intranasal fentanyl and midazolam are often a combination choice for pediatric patients. Regardless, the medication provided for conscious sedation should provide both analgesia, sedation, and amnesia.

Closed reduction can often be performed on a case by case basis, and is the primary management for most extra-articular DR fractures. The basic mechanism underlying the closed reduction of DR fractures is traction/counter-traction. Finger traps are the best tool for placing a DR fracture under traction. Alternatively, the patient can be positioned on an exam table in the prone position with elbow supported and flexed. The forearm will dangle off the table. Weights may then be hung from the wrist to provide traction. If neither of these options is available, an assistant can hold the hand in traction while the physician provides counter-traction. To reduce an overlapping DR fracture, manually free the impacted bones by increasing the angulation of the fracture while providing simultaneous counter-traction. Once reduced, the arm should have stabilization with a formal 3-point molded short or long-arm cast or “sugar tong” type splint. Post reduction X-rays should be performed to ensure that the reduction has not fallen out of place.

In addition to the above general management, there are individual guidelines and criteria for each specific type of distal radial fracture. The remainder of this section will review the specific indications for surgery or conservative management in the most common distal radial fractures, as well as some additional pearls. Specific surgical techniques are generally outside the scope of this review and are not discussed here.

**Colles’ and Isolated Radial Shaft Fractures**-

Adults with closed extra-articular Colles’ fractures and dorsally angulated isolated radial fractures will generally heal well with closed reduction and casting. To be eligible for closed reduction as primary management these fractures should have no more than 5 mm of shortening, 5-degrees change in radial inclination, 2 mm of articular step-off, and 5 degrees of angulation. Successfully closed reductions may undergo splinting in a sugar tong splint until formal short or long arm casting can be performed.

A fracture that cannot have correction with closed reduction to the above parameters will probably require surgery. These patients should receive close follow up with an orthopedist as the fracture is at risk to fall back into the original deformity, even in a splint. Additional indications for urgent surgical referral are fractures with an intra-articular component, carpal ligamentous instability or suspected Triangular Fibrocartilage Complex (TFCC) injury, carpal dislocation, DRUJ instability, significant comminution, and fractures that do not maintain reduction once splinted. Younger patients are often treated more aggressively with surgical intervention than the elderly; this is especially true in young athletes or highly functioning patients who will have significant deterioration in their quality of life with any poor fracture union.

Most pediatric isolated distal radial fractures are more forgiving than in the adult population. The majority of these fractures will heal well without surgical intervention. The criteria for emergent and urgent surgical referral are similar to the adult population. Extra-articular fractures and Salter-Harris grades I and II can generally be managed conservatively, but should still receive close orthopedic follow up. There is an ongoing debate for the acceptable limits of radiographic angulation, malrotation, and bayonet apposition. Despite the controversy, the classically acceptable limitations are most commonly used today. The acceptable limitations for patients under 10 years old include less than 30 degrees of angulation, less than 45 degrees of malrotation, and less than 1 cm of bayonet apposition. In the absence of any emergent referral indications, pediatric patients with DR fractures can undergo closed reduction and close orthopedic follow-up.

**Complex Fractures Involving the Distal Radius**-

Complex fractures of the distal radius include those with any associated articular involvement, ligamentous instability, TFCC damage, DRUJ injury, carpal fracture, carpal dislocation, volar displacement, significant comminution, significant angulation, or fracture-dislocation. The notion of “unstable” DR fracture is unfortunately defined primarily by expert opinion, and there is no overarching consensus definition seen in the literature. In general, if the fracture has to undergo reduction, that means it is out of the acceptable parameters for just placing a splint, and is unstable/at risk to fall back into deformity. Generally, these fractures include Barton’s fracture, Smith’s, Chauffeur’s fracture, Die-punch, and Galeazzi fracture-dislocation. Any DRUJ involvement will likely necessitate acute operative treatment unless there is only a minimal ligamentous instability without fracture. If seen in the Emergency Department, these complex fractures must at least be discussed with an orthopedist to determine the need for acute surgery or to arrange close follow up. Before outpatient follow-up, complex or unstable fractures should be reduced to the best degree possible and splinted for soft tissue rest and to prevent neurovascular compromise.

**Incomplete Pediatric Fractures of the Distal Radius**-

Incomplete pediatric DR fractures include the Greenstick Fracture and the Torus Fracture. Torus fractures generally heal within 3 weeks without any intervention. These patients should follow up with their primary care within 10-14 days of injury. One study by Andrews et al., showed that Torus fractures might be manageable with soft bandaging. None of the patients involved in that study suffered any adverse events. However, it is still generally recommended at the time of this writing to place all Torus fractures in either a removable fiberglass or Velcro splint for 3 weeks. No consensus currently exists on the best splinting method for Torus fractures.

DR Greenstick fractures generally receive conservative management. Minimally displaced or non-displaced fractures should be splinted and then subsequently placed in short arm casts. Children under 5 with DR greenstick fractures can tolerate up to 35 degrees of lateral angulation and 10 degrees of AP angulation. Children between 5 to 10 years of age can tolerate up to 25 degrees of lateral angulation and 10 degrees of AP angulation. Children older than ten should have reduction to less than 20 degrees of lateral angulation and 0 degrees of AP angulation. DR greenstick fractures should generally be left in a short arm cast for 4-6 weeks.

**Pediatric Growth Plate Fractures of the Distal Radius**-

Salter-Harris fractures can occur in any pediatric bone with a growth plate. They frequently occur in the distal radius. As above, in the absence of neurovascular compromise or incomplete reduction, Salter-Harris grades I and II can be managed with closed reduction and casting. These fractures are not articular and have a good prognosis. Only one attempt should be made at closed reduction to prevent additional growth plate injury which can lead to growth arrest and permanent deformity.

Higher grade Salter-Harris fractures of the distal radius are usually unstable and require surgical fixation. Clinicians must maintain a high level of suspicion for Grade V Salter-Harris DR fractures, especially for high energy mechanism injuries, as they are easy to miss. If untreated, these patients can suffer growth plate arrest. In all cases, growth plate fractures must be at least evaluated by an orthopedist within 7 days. These fractures usually heal after 6 weeks and should be re-evaluated frequently for at a minimum one year to ensure that the growth plate has suffered no permanent damage.