Quetiapine can be life-threatening if abused or misused. Toxicity is associated with levels greater than 1500 ng/mL in serum or plasma. Supportive care is the mainstay of treatment. In acute toxicity, measures are necessary to maintain the airway and ensure adequate oxygenation and ventilation. Gastric lavage and activated charcoal administration alongside a laxative to prevent further drug absorption are used if time appropriate. Plasma concentrations of quetiapine reach maximal levels within 1 to 2 hours of oral administration. ECG is a recommendation to monitor for possible Torsades de pointes or another arrhythmia due to QT-interval prolongation. Treat extrapyramidal effects with anticholinergic and hypotension with intravenous fluids and sympathomimetic agents such as A1 agonists. Management/treatment of neuroleptic malignant syndrome is possible by immediate withdrawal of quetiapine, followed by the management of symptoms.

Currently, no definitive antidote exists to reverse quetiapine toxicity; however, in a case report, the patient developed toxicity secondary to quetiapine, characterized by hypotension, tachycardia, altered sensorium, and electrocardiogram (ECG) showed a QT interval of 110 milliseconds. After the initial failure of symptomatic management, the patient was treated successfully after administration of Intravenous lipid emulsions (ILEs) (a source of calories and essential fatty acids rendered for patients who do not tolerate enteral nutrition) at a dose of 1.5 mg/kg for up to two doses 15 minutes apart. Rapid improvement was seen in the patient after 30 minutes. It is proposed that it might be because of the lipophilic nature of quetiapine.physostigmine (a muscarinic agonist).