History taking should focus on identifying the underlying cause of B12 deficiency. For example, dietary history may help identify nutritional deficiency as the cause. An inquiry should be made about gastrointestinal symptoms, such as diarrhea, hematochezia, or steatorrhea. Steatorrhea may indicate malabsorption of vitamin B12 due to celiac disease or pancreatic insufficiency. Past history of malabsorptive disorders (inflammatory bowel disease, celiac disease, etc.) and gastrointestinal surgical procedures (ileal resection, gastrectomy, bariatric surgery) should be noted. Alcohol intake should be documented, as it can cause macrocytosis and is associated with reduced dietary intake. Patients should be inquired about chronic intake of medications such as proton pump inhibitors, histamine receptor antagonists, and metformin. Sexual history should also be noted, as human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) and neurosyphilis are important differentials for subacute combined degeneration. A family history of genetic disorders and autoimmune disorders should be elicited.

**Neurological Symptoms**

Neurological symptoms may be the presenting symptoms of cobalamin deficiency and may precede the onset of hematological findings. Clinical findings are symmetrical and occur due to the involvement of the dorsal columns, spinocerebellar tracts, and lateral corticospinal tracts. In addition to spinal cord involvement, patients may also have signs and symptoms of peripheral nerve involvement, visual deficits, and neuropsychiatric disease (depression and dementia).

- **Dorsal column involvement**leads to impaired tactile discrimination, proprioception, and vibration sense. The earliest symptoms of dorsal column involvement are paresthesia, observed in the form of tingling, burning, and sensory loss of the distal extremities. Either the upper or lower limbs are involved first, or all four limbs are affected simultaneously. In addition, Lhermitte's sign may be present. Loss of proprioception usually presents as a difficulty in maintaining balance in the absence of visual cues (e.g., in the dark or with closed eyes).

- **Lateral corticospinal tract dysfunction**causes muscle weakness, hyperreflexia, and spasticity. Stiffness is often the initial symptom of lateral cord involvement. Diffuse hyperreflexia can occur, although ankle reflexes are usually absent. Other signs of upper motor neuron damage such as ankle clonus and Babinski sign may be present. Spasticity can progress to paraplegia or quadriplegia if the condition remains untreated. Sphincter involvement in advanced cases can lead to bowel and bladder incontinence.

- **Spinocerebellar tract degeneration**causes gait abnormalities in the form of sensory ataxia. This manifests as a positive Romberg's sign.

**Other Symptoms**

Anemia due to underlying B12 deficiency can present with pallor, fatigue, and signs of congestive heart failure in severe cases. Glossitis may be observed as a beefy red tongue and occurs due to loss of tongue papillae. A yellow-lemon tint due to jaundice may also be observed.