Treatment of MCP, PIP, and DIP joint dislocation may be operative or nonoperative depending on the ease of reduction, post-reduction stability, or involvement of the volar plate or other stabilizing structures. Before any reduction, a digital nerve block using lidocaine, bupivacaine, or tetracaine injected at the dorsal base of the dislocated finger will provide immediate anesthesia.

**Metacarpophalangeal Joint Dislocation Management**

**Nonoperative Management**

Nonoperative management of MCP joint dislocations consists of closed reduction and splinting. The clinician can achieve the closed reduction by extension and axial compression on the proximal phalanx with relocating pressure over the phalangeal base to glide it into position. This approach is different than the traction technique used in PIP joint dislocation. Multiple reduction attempts should be avoided as the inability to reduce may indicate volar plate interposition requiring open reduction. Multiple attempts at MCP joint dislocation reduction have the potential complication of displacing the volar plate between articular surfaces, lumbricals, or flexor tendons. The finger should have to splint with the wrist extended 30 degrees and the MCP joint in 30 to 60 degrees of slight flexion to prevent terminal extension for about 3 to 6 weeks, followed by an additional two weeks of buddy taping.

**Operative Management**

Operative intervention is indicated for nonreducible MCP joint dislocation as there is a high likelihood of volar plate involvement in these cases. Open reduction of MCP joint dislocation can be performed using either a dorsal or volar approach; however, the dorsal approach is preferable as it carries a lower risk of neurovascular injury. After surgery, the wrist is splinted in 30 degrees of extension with the MCP joint in slight flexion for two weeks to prevent terminal extension. The recommendation is that the PIP and DIP joints not be immobilized. Recovery to preinjury motion typically occurs between 4 to 6 weeks.

**Volar Approach for MCP Joint Dislocation**

To prevent neurovascular damage, a volar Brunner's incision is made over the MCP joint between the proximal and distal volar creases while the patient is under general anesthesia. The flexor tendons are present on the ulnar side, whereas the neurovascular bundle is located on the radial side. The volar plate's proximal connection on the metacarpal usually gets ruptured. By releasing the A1 pulley, the tension created by the muscle-tendon constriction around the metacarpal neck is released. Superficial transverse ligament, natatory ligament, and palmar fascia are incised. The joint can be manually reduced following a vertical incision in the volar plate. The volar plate's free slips are then wrapped around the metacarpal's head, and stitches are secured using absorbable sutures. A dorsal block splint is applied following skin closure. After healing, active flexion activities are promoted. At three weeks, the splint is removed, and active extension exercises are introduced.

**Dorsal Approach for MCP Joint Dislocation**

Over the metacarpophalangeal joint, a dorsally curved incision is made either on the ulnar aspect or the radial side. Usually, a dorsoradial incision is made for the 1st & 2nd MCP joints; however, a dorsoulnar incision is preferred for the 4th and 5th MCP joints. The skin flaps are raised, protecting sensory nerve branches and longitudinal veins. The extensor aponeurosis is incised longitudinally along the extensor digitorum tendon. Capsulotomy of the MCP joint is done longitudinally. An elevator is used to shift the intervening volar plate ventrally, which reduces the MCP joint. Clinical testing is done on reduction and stability. Following surgery, the MCP joint is immobilized for two weeks at 30 degrees of flexion, then extension block splinting is done for four weeks.

The benefits of the dorsal open reduction method include good volar plate visibility, prevention of digital neurovascular injury, and correct reduction of the metacarpal head osteochondral fracture. However, this procedure could need longitudinally division of the volar plate and extensor apparatus, which could impair MCP stability.

**Proximal Interphalangeal Joint Dislocation Management**

**Nonoperative Management**

PIP joint dislocations are also manageable with operative and nonoperative options, but unlike MCP joint dislocations, practitioners must determine if the PIP joint dislocation is dorsal, volar, lateral, or rotary as the treatment may differ. For closed reduction of dorsal PIP joint dislocation, the practitioner should apply slight extension and longitudinal traction and, with the other hand, apply pressure to the dorsal aspect of the proximal phalanx to relocate the displaced digit. After reduction, the examiner should evaluate the joint for instability in all planes and obtain radiographs. The normal contour of the dorsal aspect of the PIP joint on lateral plain film is "C" shaped.  If, after reduction, this contour takes on a "V" shape, it may indicate persistent dorsal subluxation, which can lead to severe stiffness.

Unlike volar PIP joint dislocation, lateral dislocations are more likely to require operative intervention. Closed reduction requires relaxation of the extensor tendon and lateral bands by wrist extension and MCP flexion, respectively. Then the middle phalanx is gently rotated back into position. If reduction of the lateral PIP joint dislocation provides a full range of motion without subluxation, then the joint is not grossly unstable. Splinting and reassessment in two or three weeks are recommended in these cases. Splinting remains the mainstay of emergency treatment post-reduction. A recent randomized control trial compared buddy taping versus aluminum orthosis treatment of Eaton grades I and II hyperextension-type injuries and found no difference in strength, pain, or function at three weeks. However, the buddy tape did show an earlier range of motion and decreased edema.

**Operative Management**

All unstable dislocations require referral for orthopedic evaluation and possible open repair.  Indications for operative intervention regarding PIP joint dislocation include joint instability, significant ligament, soft tissue, tendon injury, or dislocations that are not reducible.

**Dorsal Approach For PIP Joint Dislocation**

For volar PIP dislocations, the dorsal approach is indicated.

**Volar Approach For PIP joint Dislocation**

Bruner or zigzag incision is made between the flexor crease and the PIP joint. After raising thick skin flaps, flexor pulleys are released (C1, A3, C2). The A2 and A4 pulleys should not be incised as it would lead to bowstringing of flexor tendons. The flexor tendons are retracted, and the joint capsule is incised. The volar plate is mobilized, and the layered closer is done.

**Lateral Approach For PIP Joint Dislocation**

A mid-axial incision is used over the PIP joint, and a plane is made between the dorsal extensor tendon & volar digital neurovascular bundle. The transverse retinacular ligament and the collateral ligament are incised to expose the PIP joint, which is later repaired after reduction.

**Distal Interphalangeal Joint Dislocation Management**

**NNonoperativeManagement**

DIP joint dislocation management is less complex than PIP joint dislocation. The three types of DIP joint dislocation are dorsal, volar, and lateral. The most common type of DIP joint dislocation is dorsal. Dorsal DIP joint dislocation is reduced with longitudinal traction, relocating dorsal pressure on the distal phalanx with DIP joint in flexion. Often, the reduction occurs easily in the emergency room setting, followed by splinting of DIP in 10 to 20-degree flexion for two to three weeks.

**Operative Management**

Irreversible dislocation is typically due to volar plate interposition and requires surgical intervention. A zigzag incision or mid-axial incision is made centered over the distal interphalangeal joint. The entrapped flexor digitorum profundus and volar plate are mobilized to reduce the DIP joint. After confirming concentric reduction and stability, range of motion exercises are initiated immediately after operative reduction.