Radon exposure is a global environment and health issue. Recent studies in 2012 have noted the highest levels of radon in Armenia, where it is estimated to have contributed to 29% to 30% of lung cancer cases. Japan had the lowest levels, with an estimated 4% of lung cancers attributed to radon. In the US, it is believed that 9% to 13% of lung cancer cases are caused by radon exposure. Historically, it was thought that radon exposure increases in regions where cold climate causes people to spend longer periods indoors. However, climate change and air conditioning have altered this pattern. High levels of radon exposure in a given region depending on the availability of radon in the environment and its ability to make its way into confined spaces/water sources, the ability of radon to concentrate in high levels, and the human behaviors that contribute to increased exposure for long periods.

Radon is present at varying levels across the United States. Some states have mandated radon level disclosure upon the sale of a home. Levels vary from one state to another. However, it is notably higher in North Dakota and Iowa. The United States Environmental Health Protection Agency (EPA) has developed a map of “radon zones” to show the different areas of high radon levels across the nation. There are three different zones designated for each county in each state: zone 1 designates a predicted radon level of greater than 4 pCi/L, zone 2 includes counties with predicted levels between 2 to 4 pCi/L, and zone 3 includes counties with predicted levels less than 2 pCi/L. The map was developed to provide an overview of which areas could potentially have higher levels of radon. However, the EPA recommends that everyone in the United States test their homes for radon levels.

Persons in the mining and building industry who work in confined air spaces are at even higher risk of radon exposure. In particular, recent studies have shown that uranium miners were at the highest risk of exposure. Appropriate ventilation can reduce this risk in miners.

In the US, lung cancer is the leading cause of death for men and women. Smoking remains the main cause of lung cancer. Radon exposure is the second-leading cause of lung cancer overall and the number one cause in non-smokers. The risk of lung cancer is greatly increased in smokers who are also exposed to radon. It is estimated to be 10 to 20 times greater. Because children have smaller lung sizes and faster breathing rates, they are at greater risk due to higher radon inhalation.