# Continuing Education Activity

Extrapyramidal side effects (EPS), commonly referred to as drug-induced movement disorders are among the most common adverse drug effects patients experience from dopamine-receptor blocking agents. A variety of movement phenotypes has since been described along the EPS spectrum, including dystonia, akathisia, and parkinsonism, which occur more acutely, as well as more chronic manifestations of tardive akathisia and tardive dyskinesia. This activity reviews the cause, pathophysiology, and presentation of EPS and highlights the role of the interprofessional team in its management.

**Objectives:**
- Outline the types of drugs known to cause EPS.
- Differentiate the types of EPS symptoms.
- Summarize the treatment of EPS.
- Review the importance of improving care coordination among interprofessional team members to improve outcomes for patients affected by EPS.

# Introduction

Extrapyramidal side effects (EPS), commonly referred to as drug-induced movement disorders are among the most common adverse drug effects patients experience from dopamine-receptor blocking agents. It was first described in 1952 after chlorpromazine-induced symptoms resembling Parkinson disease.

# Etiology

Centrally-acting, dopamine-receptor blocking agents, namely the first-generation antipsychotics haloperidol and phenothiazine neuroleptics, are the most common medications associated with EPS. While EPS occurs less frequently with atypical antipsychotics, the risk of EPS increases with dose escalation.

# Epidemiology

Rates of EPS are dependent on the class of medication administered. First-generation neuroleptics were associated with EPS in 61.6% of patients in a study of institutionalized patients with schizophrenia.

Risks factors include a history of prior EPS and high medication dose.

# Pathophysiology

The mechanism of EPS is thought to be due to the antagonistic binding of dopaminergic D2 receptors within the mesolimbic and mesocortical pathways of the brain. However, the antidopaminergic action in the caudate nucleus and other basal ganglia may also contribute significantly to the occurrence of EPS.

# Toxicokinetics

Researchers previously hypothesized that the faster dissociation of atypical antipsychotics from the dopamine receptor, compared to typical antipsychotics, explained the reduced incidence of EPS. However, a recent study by Sykes utilized a novel time-resolved fluorescence energy transfer assay to demonstrate that binding kinetics and association rates, not dissociation, correlate more with EPS.

# History and Physical

There is a wide spectrum of EPS presentations. Dystonia most often occurs within 48 hours of drug exposure in 50% of cases, and within five days in 90% of cases.

Akathisia is characterized by a subjective feeling of internal restlessness and a compelling urge to move, leading to the objective observation of repetitive movements comprising leg crossing, swinging, or shifting from one foot to another.

Drug-induced parkinsonism presents as tremor, rigidity, and slowing of motor function in the truncal region and extremities. The classic appearance is an individual with masked facies, stooped posture, and a slow shuffling gait. Gait imbalance and difficulty rising from a seated position are often noted.

Finally, tardive dyskinesia manifests as involuntary choreoathetoid movements affecting orofacial and tongue muscles, and less commonly the truncal region and extremities. While symptoms are typically not painful, they may impede social interaction and cause difficulty in chewing, swallowing, and talking.

# Evaluation

In most cases, laboratory and imaging tests are not required. The diagnosis is apparent from an accurate history and physical exam, especially noting a history of medication exposure.

# Treatment / Management

If a patient is experiencing acute onset of EPS, particularly dystonia, the provider must assess if an emergency airway intervention is necessary as laryngeal and pharyngeal dystonic reactions may increase the risk of imminent respiratory arrest. Dystonic reactions are rarely life-threatening, and the provider should discontinue the offending agent and manage pain if present. If the causative medication is a typical first-generation antipsychotic, switching to an atypical antipsychotic may be trialed. Administration of an antimuscarinic agent (benztropine, trihexyphenidyl) or diphenhydramine may relieve dystonia within minutes.

For the treatment of akathisia, strategies similar to managing dystonia are employed, including stopping or reducing the dosage of the offending medication, switching to an atypical antipsychotic if a typical first-generation antipsychotic was the offending drug, and administering anti-muscarinic agents. Additional therapeutic strategies more specific to akathisia include administration of a beta-blocker (most commonly propranolol), amantadine, clonidine, benzodiazepines, mirtazapine, mianserin (tetracyclic antidepressant), cyproheptadine, and propoxyphene.

Tardive dyskinesia is treated by withdrawal or dose reduction of the causative medication, switching to an atypical antipsychotic, withdrawal of concurrent antimuscarinic medications (although trihexyphenidyl has been reported to be therapeutic

Drug-induced parkinsonism is treated with discontinuation or dose reduction of the causative medication, switching to an atypical antipsychotic, and administration of medications used for Parkinson disease, including amantadine, antimuscarinic agents, dopamine agonists, and levodopa.

# Differential Diagnosis

EPS may be challenging to distinguish from other idiopathic movement disorders. Muscle rigidity and tension are nonspecific symptoms that may be observed in neuroleptic malignant syndrome, serotonin syndrome, and other movement disorders. Chorea and athetosis are also present in Huntington disease (distinguished based on family history and genetic testing), Sydenham chorea (identified with a history of streptococcal infection), Wilson disease (adolescent-onset with a defect in copper metabolism), and cerebrovascular lesions.

# Prognosis

EPS typically resolve spontaneously or improve with pharmacologic interventions. Acute dystonic reactions are often transient, but late-onset and persistent tardive dystonia have been described in the literature where symptoms persisted for years.

# Complications

Antipsychotic-induced and metoclopramide-induced laryngeal dystonia has been reported predominantly in young males.

# Consultations

While some drug-induced movement disorders may last a few minutes, others may last long-term for weeks to years, and may potentially lead to contractures, bony deformities, or significant motor impairment. Physical medicine and rehabilitation consultation may provide useful treatment modalities that have shown efficacy in alleviating dystonia, including relaxation training, biofeedback, transcutaneous electrical nerve stimulation (TENS), and percutaneous dorsal column stimulation.

# Enhancing Healthcare Team Outcomes

The spectrum of acute symptoms in EPS is distressing, especially with painful torticollis, oculogyric crisis, and bulbar type of speech. If left untreated, it may cause dehydration, infection, pulmonary embolism, rhabdomyolysis, respiratory stridor, and obstruction.

While typical, first-generation antipsychotics are used less frequently today, the provider must also be cognizant that even second-generation atypical antipsychotics may lead to EPS, although at a lower incidence. Abouzaid and colleagues recently assessed the economic burden of EPS due to atypical antipsychotics in schizophrenia patients. During a 12-month follow-up period, 12.6% of patients experienced EPS. Compared to those without EPS, patients who did experience EPS had more schizophrenia-related and all-cause hospitalizations, schizophrenia-related emergency room visits, and higher schizophrenia-related and all-cause total healthcare, inpatient, and prescription medication costs.

Psychiatric nurses and pharmacists should educate patients about EPS. Nurses monitor patients and consult with the team if issues persist. Pharmacists review acute and chronic medications for doses and interactions. [Level 5]