**Manual Auscultation**

The original method of determining blood pressure via the auscultation of Korotkoff sounds continues to be a mainstay in blood pressure measurement.

The cuff is then gradually deflated while continuing to auscultate over the brachial artery. When the pressure in the cuff falls to the systolic pressure level, pulsatile blood flow begins to re-establish. The resulting turbulence produces characteristic tapping sounds known as Korotkoff sounds. As the cuff continues to deflate to the level of the diastolic pressure, pulsatile blood flow occurs smoothly, and Korotkoff sounds disappear. Thus, the systolic pressure is indicated by the origination of Korotkoff sounds, and their disappearance indicates the diastolic pressure.

The Korotkoff sounds heard when measuring blood pressure are:

- Phase one is a faint but clear tapping sound that gradually increases in intensity

- Phase two is the dampening of this sound, which may be heard like blowing or swishing

- Phase three is when the sharper sounds return that does not have the intensity of phase one

- Phase four is a well-defined muffled sound that progresses to become soft and blowing

- Phase five is the absence of sounds

Of note, medical professionals should be aware of the auscultatory gap, which can result in the premature recording of diastolic pressure. In some patients, particularly those with wide pulse pressure, Korotkoff sounds can temporarily fade but then reappear as the cuff continues to deflate. Medical professionals should thus continue to auscultate over the brachial artery even when Korotkoff sounds disappear to eliminate the possibility of an auscultatory gap. Only the final disappearance of Korotkoff sounds should be used for recording the diastolic pressure.

**Automated Devices**

Automated devices can also be used to measure blood pressure. Rather than auscultating for Korotkoff sounds, these devices measure oscillations in blood flow as the cuff is deflated.

Device-specific algorithms are then used to calculate blood pressure indirectly. An advantage of automated measurements is that they require little user knowledge and are thus suitable for use by laypersons in non-medical environments.

**Invasive Monitoring**

The most accurate method of obtaining blood pressure measurements is with the use of an invasive probe that is inserted directly into the lumen of an artery.