Patients with suspected esophageal motility disorders should be dealt with at a center with expert gastroenterology and surgical services.

- Medical care: The primary pathology in achalasia is irreversible and incurable; therefore, the mainstay of treatment is symptomatic control when the disease is mild to moderate.
- Pharmacological interventions: With medicines, patients achieve good symptomatic control, particularly when the disease is in the early stages. Nitrates have been used historically, along with nifedipine, to control esophageal motility disorders. Other drugs used with limited efficacy are anticholinergics, theophylline, beta-2 agonists, phosphodiesterase inhibitors, and nitroglycerin. For predominant heartburn and reflux symptoms, gastroprokinetic and proton pump inhibitors (PPIs) are used. If an element of anxiety is also evident from history and clinical encounter, low-dose tricyclic antidepressants (TCAs) or selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors (SSRIs) are also used.
- Endoscopic Therapy: Esophagogastroduodenoscopy (EGD) is performed, which can identify the exact anatomic site of narrowing. Dilation can be achieved with multiple techniques, but two widely used and comparatively less invasive techniques are:

- Use of TTS pneumatic balloon
- Use of EndoFlip dilation system

These can be done under general anesthesia or sedation and adequate analgesia. The patient may experience chest pain, worsening of heartburn, and reflux.

Another technique that can be employed while doing the EGD is the injection of botulinum toxin at the LES or at the site of narrowing. This is normally used for poor surgical candidates, or their disease is refractory to medical management.

- Surgical care: With the same principle as balloon dilatation, surgical interventions are targeted at the LES to release the high pressure at the esophagogastric junction (EGJ).
- Heller’s myotomy
- Extended heller myotomy
- Esophagectomy with gastric pull-up or intestinal interposition.