**Hodgkin Lymphoma**

Combined modality therapy, including chemotherapy with antibody-drug conjugates and radiotherapy, is the usual standard of care. Most cases of HL are chemosensitive and overall survival is 86%.

Standard treatment in the United States (US) consists of ABVD (doxorubicin, bleomycin, vinblastine, and dacarbazine). In Germany, the BEACOPP regimen (bleomycin, etoposide, doxorubicin, cyclophosphamide, vincristine, procarbazine, prednisone) is more popular. A third regimen that is used is Stanford V (doxorubicin, vinblastine, mechlorethamine, vincristine, bleomycin, etoposide, and prednisone). All these regimens have similar response rates with BEACOPP carrying slightly better cure rates than the other two but at the cost of greater toxicity, including the development of secondary acute myeloid leukemia/myelodysplastic syndrome and sterility. In 2018, the FDA approved brentuximab vedotin (CD30 targeted antibody-drug conjugate) in combination with AVD chemotherapy for first-line treatment of stage III or IV classical HL.

Systemic chemotherapy is supplemented by local radiation either because of bulky disease or persistent PET/CT positivity after chemotherapy.

Repeat imaging is done to assess the response to treatment, which consists of a PET/CT scan. PET/CT results are evaluated by Deavullie criteria whereby signal less than or equal to the physiologic signal from the liver is negative (1-3) and signal greater than the liver (4-5) is positive. A new strategy evolving in both the United States and Europe is to start the initial treatment with ABVD, monitor response to chemotherapy with repeat PET/CT after two cycles, then escalate the treatment to BEACOPP only for those patients with an incomplete response.

Upon completion of therapy, patients are evaluated as part of surveillance at regular intervals to exclude disease recurrence, with history & physical and basic laboratory tests, but without routine repeat imaging. Because many patients with HL are young and cured, they will live for a long time after treatment and must be monitored for the sequelae of the treatment especially the development of secondary cancers within previous radiation fields, such as lung, breast, or thyroid, as well as coronary artery disease.

For patients with resistant or relapsed HL, several salvage regimens are available. Brentuximab vedotin is also approved by the FDA as a second-line agent. Salvage therapy, if successful, is followed by consolidation with high dose chemotherapy and autologous stem cell rescue. In cases where the disease is fully resistant or relapses again after autologous stem cell rescue, experimental agents within the context of a clinical trial are indicated, or, in selected cases, allogeneic stem cell transplantation.

**Diffuse Large B- Cell Lymphoma**

Many patients with DLBCL achieve a long term disease-free status with aggressive combination chemotherapy.

The gold standard for DLBCL treatment is R-CHOP (rituximab, cyclophosphamide, doxorubicin, vincristine, and prednisone).

For localized disease, combination chemoradiation therapy can be used, with three cycles of systemic chemotherapy supplemented by involved field radiation therapy (IFRT) with the purpose of limiting overall exposure to the chemotherapy. For patients with poor performance status, milder treatment options include R-mini CHOP (reduced doses of all drugs except rituximab), R-CHOP minus doxorubicin (R–CVP), or single-agent rituximab.

Special consideration should be given to cardiac comorbidities due to the cardiac toxicity of doxorubicin, an anthracycline. Baseline echocardiography or multi gated acquisition (MUGA) scan should be performed before initiation of chemotherapy.

For a subgroup of DLBCL, categorized as double hit or triple hit lymphomas (based on rearrangements of two or three genes: c-MYC, BCL-2, and BCL-6), the prognosis is poor, and they tend to carry morphologic, biologic and cytogenetic properties similar to both DLBCL and much aggressive BL. There is a lack of data regarding the optimal chemotherapy regimen for such lymphomas but are usually treated with more intense chemotherapy regimens, similar to those used in the management of BL.

Reimaging by PET/CT is recommended to assess for treatment response at the end of the treatment. Interval assessment is also done during treatment, after 2 to 4 cycles of chemotherapy, with the purpose of identifying those cases not responding to initial chemotherapy. Patients who complete successful therapy should be followed at regular intervals as part of surveillance. Follow-up consists of history and physical examination, with basic laboratory tests (complete blood counts, metabolic panel, liver function tests, and lactate dehydrogenase). Repeat imaging is not needed routinely, in the absence of specific concerns. Most disease relapse occurs within two years, such that the follow-up interval is spaced out if the disease remains in remission beyond five years.

Clinical trials are currently underway to assess the efficacy and safety of adding immunomodulatory agents (lenalidomide) or Bruton’s tyrosine kinase inhibitors (ibrutinib) to R-CHOP in previously untreated DLBCL.

For those cases which do not respond or relapse after first-line chemotherapy, several higher-intensity chemotherapy regimens are used as salvage therapy. Common second-line regimens include R-ICE (rituximab, ifosfamide, carboplatin, etoposide), R-DHAP (rituximab, dexamethasone, cytarabine, cisplatin)  which are more intense than R- CHOP and require inpatient administration of chemotherapy drugs. Survival after successful salvage therapy for resistant/relapsed DLBCL is improved significantly if salvage therapy is followed by high dose chemotherapy with autologous stem cell rescue (HD-SCT) consolidation.

The benefit of HD-SCT lies in the use of high doses of chemotherapy. A harvest of autologous peripheral blood stem cells before administration of high-dose chemotherapy allows for the use of chemotherapy doses, which are so bone marrow toxic that they would otherwise kill the patient, were it not for rescue by stem cell reinfusion. In cases where second-line therapies fail, clinical trials or allogeneic stem cell transplantation may be considered.

The latest advance in the management of relapsed/refractory DLBCL is the utilization of anti-CD19 chimeric antigen receptor (CAR) T-cell therapy.

**Follicular Lymphoma**

As an indolent slow-growing lymphoma, the clinical behavior of FL is variable. While some cases of FL remain asymptomatic, even being untreated, or wax and wane on their own, others progress and cause significant symptoms. Asymptomatic FL can be managed by close observation, that is, monitoring for appearance of signs of progression or significant symptoms before any intervention is planned. Treatment is usually not considered to be curative, so it must be chosen judiciously, weighing benefits against toxicities and the fact that after multiple therapies, toxicity will be cumulative.

For localized FL confined to 1 lymph node area, radiotherapy may be chosen as the single modality of therapy. More commonly, several areas within the body are involved in FL, and systemic therapy is needed. Usually, a less aggressive approach such as single-agent rituximab may be chosen as first-line therapy, even for patients with good performance status, thus reserving the option of escalation in therapy for future needs. For higher disease burden FL, systemic cytotoxic chemotherapy is used. In FL, a number of different regimens have been used over the years.

Since overall survival in FL is measured in decades, it is difficult to show the superiority of 1 regimen over another. Recently, rituximab-bendamustine (R- Benda) has emerged as the most popular treatment, being superior to R-CHOP in terms of progression-free survival.

Maintenance rituximab after completion of frontline systemic chemotherapy, usually once every two months for two years, has been shown to prolong progression-free survival but not overall survival.

As an incurable disease, relapse of FL is anticipated at some point in clinical course and can be treated with the other regimens at frontline treatment. Upon recurrence of all indolent lymphomas, the possibility of transformation to aggressive lymphoma should be excluded. In cases where FL relapses early or show aggressive features, HD-SCT or allogeneic transplantation can be considered.

**Marginal Zone Lymphoma**

In many circumstances, the treatment of marginal zone lymphomas (MZL) is similar to FL, but it differs in certain specific scenarios. For early-stage gastric MALT lymphoma, eradication of H.pylori in patients with favorable cytogenetics results in tumor regression or remission in 50-80% of patients.

Patients with limited disease in whom H.pylori eradication is ineffective, are also cured usually with definitive radiotherapy.

Another important divergence from routine management of FL exists for splenic MZL. For patients with symptomatic splenomegaly and associated cytopenias, surgical splenectomy results in normalization of cell counts and helps to achieve disease stabilization and systemic regression. Single-agent rituximab therapy is also an approved non-surgical treatment alternative.

**Mantle Cell Lymphoma**

Treatment of the less aggressive disease is with either R- CHOP or R- Benda, followed by maintenance rituximab. Most patients also need more intensive treatment regimens. One agent cytarabine is included in most regimens due to its activity in mantle cell lymphoma. The front line chemotherapy is followed in the first remission by consolidation with high dose chemotherapy and autologous stem cell transplantation. One such approach is the Nordic protocol (a maxi R–CHOP regimen alternating with rituximab and high-dose cytarabine). Another regimen is alternating hyper CVAD (cyclophosphamide, vincristine, doxorubicin, dexamethasone) with methotrexate/cytarabine. Lenalidomide and bortezomib have single-agent activity in relapsed MCL. The Bruton’s tyrosine kinase inhibitor, Ibrutinib, is approved by the FDA for use in relapsed MCL as it has good activity in MCL.

**Burkitt Lymphoma**

BL should be approached as an oncologic emergency due to a high proliferation rate of the tumor. This high proliferation rate requires immediate treatment with aggressive chemotherapy regimens in which the intensity of delivery is meant to outpace the capacity for the cellular division to prevent the development of tumor resistance. Failure to do so can result in rapid tumor proliferation, end-organ damage, and death. If treatment is initiated in a timely manner, results are favorable. Treatment options for BL include R-hyper CVAD-methotrexate/cytarabine and R-CODOX-M/IVAC (rituximab, cyclophosphamide, vincristine, doxorubicin, methotrexate/ ifosfamide, etoposide, cytarabine). Recently, DA-R-EPOCH (dose-adjusted etoposide, prednisone, vincristine, cyclophosphamide, doxorubicin, and rituximab) a more intense and easier to tolerate regimen has shown good results. These intense regimens are associated with complete remission rates of approximately 80 to 90% and disease-free survival rates of 50-75%.

With BL, obtaining a good response with the first attempt of treatment is of particular importance.

**Peripheral T- Cell Lymphoma (PTCL)**

For different types of PTCL, there is no consensus on the treatment. Indolent slow-growing cutaneous T-cell lymphomas, including early-stage MF and cutaneous ALCL, can usually be monitored or treated with skin-directed treatments (topical medications, prednisone, ultraviolet therapy, involved-field radiotherapy) or mild systemic treatments such as retinoids. 18-FDG PET scanning is utilized in selected cases, mainly in the evaluation of cutaneous T-cell lymphoma, to identify the extracutaneous disease as it can change both prognosis and therapeutic approach. For the aggressive PTCLs, chemotherapy with multiple agents is used, such as CHOP, although with the exception of ALK-1 positive ALCL, where it is commonly associated with brief progression-free durations.

For nasal NK/T-cell lymphoma, early incorporation of radiation therapy in a combined modality therapy results in better outcomes.

For CD30 positive lymphomas, the antibody-drug conjugate brentuximab vedotin is effective. Histone deacetylase inhibitors such as romidepsin and belinostat have moderate activity in T- cell lymphoma.