Donepezil hydrochloride is available as an oral film-coated tablet in 5 mg, 10 mg, and 23 mg strength. It is also available as an orally disintegrating tablet in 5 mg and 10 mg strength.

- For mild to moderate dementia, the initial dose is 5 mg/day; it can be increased to 10 mg/day slowly over four to six weeks.

- For moderate to severe dementia, the dose can increase gradually up to 23 mg/day after the patient has been on a 10 mg/day dose for at least three months. The 23 mg tablet should be swallowed as a whole, not crushed, chewed, or split, as that may increase its rate of absorption. It is given a once-daily dose. Absorption is not affected by food or the timing of administration.

**Pharmacokinetics/Pharmacodynamics**

- Donepezil absorbs well, with a relative oral bioavailability of 100%. The drug reaches peak plasma concentration in 3 to 4 hours. It has linear pharmacokinetics over a dose range of 1 mg to 10 mg, given once daily. The rate and extent of absorption are not affected by food or time of administration.

- Steady-state is reached after multiple-dose administrations, about 15 days. The steady-state volume of distribution is 12 L/kg. It is approximately 96% bound to plasma proteins, mainly albumin (about 75%) and alpha1-acid glycoprotein (21%). It crosses the blood-brain barrier easily.

- It is metabolized by the liver (via CYP2D6, CYP3A4, and glucuronidation) into four major metabolites, two of which are active and several minor metabolites. It has a long half-life of about 70 hours.

- Donepezil and its metabolites are excreted mainly by the kidneys. Two of those metabolites are known to be active. Around 17% is excreted unchanged in the urine.  About 15% to 20% is excreted in feces.

**Specific Population**

**Patient with Hepatic Impairment:**No dosage adjustment is needed for compensated liver cirrhosis.

**Patient with Renal Impairment:**No dosage adjustment is needed for moderate or severe renal impairment.

**Pregnant Women:**Donepezil is a pregnancy category C drug. There are no sufficient data available for the use of donepezil hydrochloride in pregnant women and the risk associated with the developmental abnormalities.

**Breastfeeding Women:**It is unknown if donepezil or its metabolites are excreted in breast milk.

**Pediatric Patients:**It is not established whether donepezil treatment would be safe and effective in children.

**Geriatric Patients:**The elimination half-life in elderly patients is even longer (around 100 hours) due to an increased steady-state volume of distribution throughout the whole body. No dosage adjustment is needed in elderly patients as steady-state clearance is similar at all ages.