Understanding the different phases of the endometrium during the menstrual cycle and normal developmental phases in the ovarian follicles is essential for both initial baseline screening assessment and monitoring during natural, IUI, or IVF cycles.

**Endometrium**

The endometrium goes through consistent changes each month in response to the hormonal milieu. After sloughing of the endometrium and in response to rising estrogen, the endometrium thickens significantly during the follicular phase and shows a trilaminar pattern on ultrasound. After ovulation, in the luteal phase, the lining becomes decidualized, brighter, and is unilaminar until menstruation. The menstrual endometrium can have a heterogeneous appearance with hyper- and hypo- echoic features. Endometrial thickness (ET), endometrial morphological changes, and vascularity are assessed while performing ultrasound during natural or stimulated cycles.

- Endometrial thickness -  The thickness of the endometrium is thin initially 4.4 +/- 0.2 mm after menses and increases to 10.3 +/- 0.3 mm before ovulation.

- Endometrial morphology can be categorized into three patterns; Trilaminar,  homogenous, and heterogeneous (Figure 1). A trilaminar endometrium is triple-layered and characterized by a hypoechoic endometrium with a central line. This pattern is noted during the follicular phase from 5 to 6 days before ovulation and continues to the day of ovulation.

- Endometrial Vascularity is classified into three grades based on the visual assessment of endometrium on power color flow doppler imaging before ovulation. Grade 1 shows no sub-endometrial blood flow, grade 2 shows sub-endometrial blood flow, and grade 3 shows both endometrial and sub-endometrial blood flow.

**Ovary**

Based on the stages of development, the ovaries have primordial, primary, secondary, tertiary, or antral follicles. The number of primordial follicles determines true ovarian reserve. Primordial follicles are small and difficult to be seen by ultrasound. The ovary has 6-7 million primordial follicles at around five months of gestational age, slowly declining to approximately 1000 at menopause.

With the initiation of menarche, a cohort of dormant primordial follicles are recruited during each day of the menstrual cycle, and these follicles grow in size steadily. These primordial follicles develop into primary, secondary, and antral follicles. Development of the fluid-filled cavity, also called the antrum adjacent to the maturing oocyte, results in forming of the antral or tertiary follicle. In normal cycles, one follicle matures and is destined to ovulate while other follicles degenerate and ultimately disappear through a process called apoptosis or programmed cell death.

Antral follicular count (AFC), one of the standard measurements for ovarian reserve, is calculated as the sum of all follicles ranging from 2 to 10 mm contained within both ovaries. The preferred time to measure the AFC is during cycle days 2 through 4 due to the absence of corpus luteum and ovarian cysts. Even though there is a slight variation in the AFC during the menstrual cycle, the AFC can be performed at any point during the menstrual cycle as long as cysts are not obscuring the view of the ovary in its entirety.

Follicle-stimulating hormone (FSH) receptors are developed in the antral follicle once it reaches a minimum diameter of 6 mm, and further growth of this follicle is under control of FSH produced by the anterior pituitary. Dominant follicles are follicles >10 mm. By day 8 to 12, dominant follicles are usually formed, and they grow at an average of 1 to 1.4 mm in diameter per day until they reach a mean diameter of 20 to 24 mm at the time of ovulation in a natural-unstimulated cycle.

For ovulation trigger, most IVF centers usually use a cut-off of 18 to 20 mm before egg retrievals. This differs from patients undergoing clomiphene citrate cycles in which the recent literature suggests follicles closer to 21 to 22 mm have a higher odds of leading to clinical pregnancy.