The selection of empiric antibiotic therapy for the treatment of MRSA infection depends on the type of disease, local S. aureus resistance patterns, availability of the drug, side effect profile, and individual patient profile.

**SSTIs:**For most uncomplicated SSTIs suspected of MRSA infection, empirical treatment is with oral antibiotics like trimethoprim/sulfamethoxazole, tetracyclines, such as doxycycline or minocycline, and clindamycin. Higher doses of trimethoprim/sulfamethoxazole (160/800mg, one tablet three times daily or 2 tablets twice daily in adults) is recommended for MRSA in patients with normal renal function. Newer agents, such as linezolid and tedizolid, and delafloxacin also can be used as alternative oral regimens if available and deemed cost-effective.

Parenteral antibiotics are indicated for invasive SSTIs or with signs of systemic involvement, inadequate response to oral therapy, or if an SSTI occurs adjacent to an indwelling device.

Intravenous vancomycin is the drug of choice for most MRSA infections seen in hospitalized patients. It can be used both as empiric and definitive therapy as most MRSA infections are susceptible to vancomycin. There are sporadic cases of vancomycin-resistant MRSA. The dosage depends upon the type and severity of the infection. Vancomycin trough is obtained just before the fourth dose to ascertain a therapeutic level. The goal trough range typically is between 10 and 20 micrograms/mL. For complicated infections, the goal is between 15 and 20 micrograms/mL. The dose should be adjusted based on trough levels in the serum and according to renal function.

Daptomycin is a suitable parenteral alternative when vancomycin is not available or not being tolerated. Other short-acting options include ceftaroline and telavancin. Long-acting treatment options include dalbavancin and oritavancin. Regardless of the initial empiric antibiotic choice, subsequent therapy should be tailored based on the careful review of culture and susceptibility data.

The duration of therapy for treatment of MRSA SSTIs may range from 5 to 14 days depending on the extent of infection and response to treatment.

**Bacteremia:**Source control is a significant part of the treatment for MRSA bacteremia along with empiric MRSA coverage until the susceptibility results are available.

Vancomycin and daptomycin are considered adequate empiric therapy according to the Infectious Diseases Society of America guidelines of 2011. MRSA isolates in the bloodstream with vancomycin MIC greater than or equal to 2 micrograms/mL may not respond adequately to vancomycin. Therefore, in these cases, daptomycin is a better option. If either vancomycin or daptomycin could not be used secondary to allergy, toxicity or resistance, telavancin and ceftaroline are also used as alternative antibiotics for treatment of bacteremia. In difficult to treat cases, a combination of parenteral antibiotic drug regimen have also been used, such as the following: daptomycin plus ceftaroline, vancomycin plus ceftaroline, daptomycin plus trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole, ceftaroline plus trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole.

Teicoplanin is a bacteriostatic glycopeptide with a similar spectrum of activity and efficacy as vancomycin and is better tolerated than vancomycin. However, it is used less commonly due to its limited availability. Teicoplanin is not FDA approved and is not available in the USA. There is no role for the use of linezolid, quinupristin-dalfopristin, tigecycline, or fluoroquinolones for treatment of S. aureus bacteremia. Linezolid has been found to be inferior compared to vancomycin in clinical trials.

Follow-up cultures should be repeated to document clearance of the infection from the bloodstream. Persistent, positive cultures after 48 hours of treatment should prompt further evaluation related to drug susceptibility and source control.

**Endocarditis:**The 2015 American Heart Association (AHA) guidelines recommend intravenous vancomycin as the first line treatment for endocarditis. For patients who cannot tolerate vancomycin, intravenous daptomycin should be used. Recommended duration of treatment for native valve endocarditis is six weeks. Prosthetic valve endocarditis secondary to MRSA should be treated with intravenous vancomycin and rifampin for 6 weeks and gentamicin should be given in the first 2 weeks of therapy. However, there is no evidence of additional benefit of combining rifampin or gentamicin with vancomycin or daptomycin for native valve endocarditis. Telavancin, ceftaroline and quinupristin-dalfopritin have been used successfully as a salvage therapy in select group of patients. Clindamycin or linezolid should not be used to treat endocarditis because of their poor outcome compared to cell wall active agents such as vancomycin and daptomycin.****