Dermal synthesis and dietary intake (fatty fish livers, fortified food) are the major sources of ergocalciferol (D2) and cholecalciferol (D3), both of which are converted to 25-hydroxy-vitamin D2 (25-OH-D2) and 25-hydroxy-vitamin D3 (25-OH-D3) respectively in the liver by the enzyme hepatic enzyme 25–hydroxylase. Both 25-OH-D2 and 25-OH-D3 are then converted to the most active form of vitamin D (1,25 dihydroxyvitamin D) by the enzyme 1-alpha-hydroxylase in the kidneys. This active 1,25 dihydroxyvitamin D increases intestinal absorption of calcium and bone resorption and decreases renal excretion of calcium and phosphate. Vitamin D deficiency can result from several causes.

**1. Decreased dietary intake and/or absorption.**

Certain malabsorption syndromes such as celiac disease, short bowel syndrome, gastric bypass, inflammatory bowel disease, chronic pancreatic insufficiency, and cystic fibrosis may lead to vitamin D deficiency. Lower vitamin D intake orally is more prevalent in the elderly population.

**2. Decreased sun exposure.**

About 50% to 90% of vitamin D is absorbed through the skin via sunlight while the rest comes from the diet. Twenty minutes of sunshine daily with over 40% of skin exposed is required to prevent vitamin D deficiency.

**3. Decreased endogenous synthesis.**

Individuals with chronic liver disease such as cirrhosis can have defective 25-hydroxylation leading to deficiency of active vitamin D. Defect in 1-alpha 25-hydroxylation can be seen in hyperparathyroidism, renal failure and 1-alpha hydroxylase deficiency.

**4. Increased hepatic catabolism.**

Medications such as phenobarbital, carbamazepine, dexamethasone, nifedipine, spironolactone, clotrimazole, and rifampin induce hepatic p450 enzymes which activate degradation of vitamin D.

**5. End organ resistance.**

End organ resistance to vitamin D can be seen in hereditary vitamin D resistant rickets.