Immunotherapy including ipilimumab, nivolumab, and pembrolizumab and targeted therapy with combination BRAF and MEK inhibitors are the first-line therapeutic options recommended for advanced melanoma. These groups of medications provided significant advances in the management of melanoma patients with untreated BM.

**Immunotherapy**

Since 2011, multiple immunotherapy medications were approved in patients with melanoma. Ipilimumab, a cytotoxic T-lymphocyte associated protein 4 (CTLA-4) inhibitor and programmed cell death-1(PD-1) inhibitors nivolumab, and pembrolizumab are currently approved in advanced melanoma.

The combination of ipilimumab and nivolumab has an approximately 50% response rates in patients with asymptomatic BM.

Combination therapy was noted to show a significantly higher intracranial response of 46% compared to 20% with single-agent nivolumab. A meta-analysis of patients with melanoma and BM showed the combination of ipilimumab and nivolumab was associated with improved PFS and OS.

In symptomatic patients, there is limited data on the efficacy of immunotherapy as a sole initial therapy. Usually, these patients will require steroids with/without local CNS therapy before systemic therapy. It is recommended to decrease the dose of steroids to minimal or even discontinue them prior to the start of immunotherapy due to decreased efficacy of immunotherapy in combination with steroids.

**BRAF and MEK Inhibitors**

Approximately 40% of melanomas harbor a BRAF mutation which is a component of the mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK) signaling pathway and activates the downstream MEK protein. By the use of molecularly targeted agents that inhibit the BRAF and MEK, the treatment of metastatic melanoma has improved significantly. The most common BRAF mutation is the V600E, but there are other mutations noted within the BRAF protein. Three combinations of BRAF plus MEK inhibitors are currently available which include dabrafenib plus trametinib, vemurafenib plus cobimetinib, and encorafenib plus binimetinib. To determine the efficacy of the combination of BRAF plus MEK inhibitors, a phase II COMBI-MB study evaluated dabrafenib and trametinib in multiple subsets of melanoma patients with BM. In the subset of patients with asymptomatic and no prior therapy to the BM with associated BRAF V600E mutation, intracranial response rates were about 60% with a median PFS of about 6 months.

Similar responses were also noted in other subsets of patients who received prior local therapy to the BM, harbor other BRAF mutations, and in symptomatic patients.

**Chemotherapy**

Cytotoxic chemotherapy didn’t show any efficacy in patients with BM alone or in combination with RT and has no significant role in the management of these patients.