A muscular, extraperitoneal organ in the pelvis, the urinary bladder receives urine from the ureters and drains urine via the urethra. It is anchored at the apex of its dome to the umbilicus via the median umbilical ligament, which is a remnant of the fetal urachus. Immediately to the right and left of the median umbilical ligament, the medial umbilical ligaments, which are the remnants of the obliterated umbilical arteries, also connect the bladder to the umbilicus. The bladder neck connects to the prostate in men and is attached to the pelvic diaphragm via the medial and lateral puboprostatic ligaments in men and the pubovesical ligaments in women.

Arterial blood supply to the bladder arises from the internal iliac arteries. The superior and inferior vesical arteries, with additional inputs from the obturator and inferior gluteal arteries, as well as from the vaginal and uterine arteries in women, merge to form the lateral and posterior bladder pedicles.  The venous drainage from the bladder arises from the vesical venous plexus and drains via the internal iliac veins. Lymphatic drainage from the bladder proceeds via the external iliac, internal iliac, obturator, and common iliac lymph node chains.

The urinary bladder has four distinct layers. The urothelium is the innermost layer and is comprised of the transitional epithelium (urothelium), which is 7-10 cells deep and is composed of apical, intermediate, and basal cells. The apical umbrella cells are in direct contact with the urine and are the first defensive barrier for uropathogenic bacteria while allowing for selective transport of electrolytes across the bladder membrane.

The lamina propria layer, deep to the urothelium, contains connective tissue, lymphatics, nerves, and blood vessels. Deep to the lamina propria is the muscularis propria, which contains the smooth muscle, known as the detrusor, which is responsible for bladder contraction. The muscle fascicles are assorted in random directions in the body of the bladder, which is above the trigone, and they are organized in a layered circular configuration at the trigone and bladder neck. These features allow for the bladder to expand to accommodate urine and to empty in a coordinated fashion. The compliance afforded by the bladder's multi-layered design allows for low-pressure filling. Beyond the muscularis are the final layers of the bladder, the serosa, and fat.

Such anatomic features are important in understanding and treating bladder cancer. Once bladder cancer invades into the lamina propria layer, the metastatic potential via lymphatics and blood vessels encountered increases.

When considering urinary tract reconstruction after bladder removal, either continent or incontinent diversion techniques are available. The choice of reconstruction must include patient's desires, abilities, and motivation, as well as medical comorbidities and prior surgical or radiation history, as these factors will determine both the type of reconstruction performed and the choice of bowel segment to be employed in reconstruction.  Different segments of bowel have been used in various configurations to create urinary diversions.

The most common segments of bowel used for urinary diversions are the ileum and colon, though the stomach and jejunum have also been utilized less frequently. The use of bowel segments in the urinary diversion can have metabolic consequences. Factors that contribute to metabolic derangements include the choice of bowel segment, the surface area of the bowel segment employed, and the duration of the contact time of the urine in the bowel.

When creating a neobladder or continent cutaneous pouch, the choice of bowel segment and configuration of bowel utilized must allow the reservoir to store urine at low pressure to prevent damage to the upper urinary tract. The reservoir must also maintain the capability to expand to allow for volitional emptying in intervals short enough to avoid excessive metabolic consequences while being able to retain urine for several hours for social continence.

The distal ileum is the most commonly utilized bowel segment for urinary conduits and orthotopic neobladders. The ileum has a relatively small diameter and is quite mobile for optimal positioning in the abdomen or pelvis, based on a reliable blood supply arising from the superior mesenteric artery. The ileum can be opened and folded in such a manner as to allow for a low-pressure reservoir to be constructed as required for a neobladder.  There are rare cases in which the ileal mesentery is short or thickened with mesentery so thick that it cannot be folded and brought to a suitable position in the pelvis for an orthotopic neobladder. In such cases, an ileal conduit or a continent cutaneous diversion should be performed. The ileum is rarely involved in radiation fields and, while prior pelvic irradiation has historically served as an indication for a transverse colon conduit, recent studies demonstrate that the ileum can safely be used in the setting of prior pelvic radiation.

Ileum and colon segments can both absorb ammonium, hydrogen, and chloride from urine while excreting bicarbonate.