Patients with a diagnosis of osteoporosis should have a laboratory assessment of their renal and thyroid function, a 25-hydroxyvitamin D, and calcium level. The World Health Organization (WHO) has established dual X-ray absorptiometry tests scans of the central skeleton are the best test for assessing bone mineral density. A dual X-ray absorptiometry scan can be completed in five minutes with minimal radiation exposure. Dual X-ray absorptiometry scans measure all calcified tissue in the path of the scan, and specificity is better than sensitivity.

Peripheral dual X-ray absorptiometry tests and ultrasound measure density in bones not at high risk and do not correlate well to the standard dual X-ray absorptiometry scan of the hip and spine. They are not as useful in diagnosis or treatment decisions.

A dual X-ray absorptiometry scan reports the t-score and a z-score. A t-score reflects the difference between the measured bone mineral density and the mean value of bone mineral density in young adults. It is measured in standard deviations. The WHO has defined normal bone mineral density for women as a t-score within one standard deviation of the young adult mean. Scores between negative 1 and negative 2.5 reflect a diagnosis of osteopenia. Scores below negative 2.5 reflect a diagnosis of osteoporosis.

Instead of measuring against a young adult mean, a z-score is the number of standard deviations above or below the age-matched bone mineral density. It is useful when suspecting secondary osteoporosis. A score is less than negative 1.5 warrants a workup for secondary causes of osteoporosis.

The low bone density of the hip has the highest predictive value of future fracture. This is because spine bone density can be falsely elevated due to calcification from degenerative joint disease. Spinal density can still be useful in younger perimenopausal women without significant degenerative joint disease. The spine can show initial osteoporotic changes before they can be detected in the hip.

A validated tool developed by the World Health Organization is the osteoporosis risk assessment tool which gives a ten-year probability of a major fracture.  It can be used on men or women and takes into account the body mass index, independent risk factors, and some causes of secondary osteoporosis. It is most useful in determining which patients with osteopenia need treatment and determining which patients younger than the age of 50 would benefit from dual X-ray absorptiometry scanning due to a high risk of fractures. It does not have utility for patients who are already being treated for osteoporosis.