Treatment is indicated in symptomatic cases or in asymptomatic patients who have a positive blood smear or PCR for more than three months. There are two regimens used for treatment in mild to moderate disease. The first and most commonly used regimen is atovaquone plus azithromycin. The other option is quinine plus clindamycin which has much higher rates of adverse drug reactions compared to atovaquone/azithromycin (72% versus 15% respectively). A 7- to 10-day course of either regimen is recommended. Severe disease, requiring hospitalization or causing organ failure, typically occurs in high-risk populations or in those infected with the B. divergens species. These patients require treatment with clindamycin plus quinine (IV quinidine may also be used, but the patient requires monitoring for QT prolongation).

The duration of treatment is at least 7 to 10 days but is based on clinical and laboratory response. Some of these patients with immunocompromising conditions will have persistent or relapsing disease, in which case, a course of at least six weeks is recommended, with treatment continued for at least two weeks after parasites are no longer detected on blood smears. For patients who fail to respond to standard therapy, other regimens have been used including atovaquone plus azithromycin plus clindamycin; atovaquone plus azithromycin plus doxycycline; and atovaquone plus clindamycin plus doxycycline. No particular anti-parasitic combination therapeutic drug regimen has demonstrated superiority.  If possible, it is also recommended to reduce underlying immunosuppression.

Partial or complete red blood cell (RBC) exchange transfusion is indicated in patients presenting with a parasitemia of at least 10% and anemia with hemoglobin of <10 g/dL. Consideration for exchange transfusion should be strongly given in those with infection due to B. divergens pulmonary, renal or hepatic dysfunction, regardless of parasitemia level.

Respiratory distress is common in severe disease and patients must be monitored in the ICU. The respiratory distress is usually due to endotoxin release following medication-induced lysis of the red cells.