Several theoretical concerns about the long-term safety of low-carb diets deserve mention. Low-carb diet safety concerns relate to ketosis, long-term cardiovascular safety, lipid, and renal effects.

**Ketosis**

Nutritional ketosis can be induced in the keto diet, the induction phase, and when carb load is limited to less than 10% of macronutrient intake or 20 to 50 gm/day of carbohydrates. However, there is no evidence that very low-carb intake produces metabolic ketoacidosis and remains safe in patients, even with type 2 diabetes.

**Mortality and Cardiovascular Safety**

There have been several studies linking low-carb diets to increased mortality. Epidemiological studies and meta-analyses have shown an increased mortality risk with a carbohydrate intake of less than 40%.

**Lipid Response**

Incorporating more fat and protein in response to reducing dietary carbs has led to concerns about the effect of low-carb dieting on lipids, specifically LDL cholesterol. Recent systematic reviews of low-carb diets on lipids demonstrate a neutral to a small increase in LDL but a favorable triglycerides reduction and an increase in HDL cholesterol, particularly those assigned to the very low-carb intervention.

**Renal Function**

With a potentially higher protein intake on low-carb diets, some have expressed concerns about renal function. However, depending on specific goals, athletes should ingest protein loads to optimize muscle protein synthesis (1.6 gm/kg) or endurance sports (0.8 gm/kg).