A strong clinical suspicion for aspergillosis should prompt the evaluation due to the ubiquitous nature of Aspergillus conidia in the environment. The presence of Aspergillus in a sputum sample in and of itself does not indicate infection unless other signs, symptoms, and host risk factors are present. Alternatively, invasive aspergillosis can present with subtle symptoms.

**Invasive Fungal Rhinosinusitis**

Suspicions of invasive fungal rhinosinusitis should prompt emergent evaluation by an otolaryngologist so that nasal endoscopy with culture collection or other surgery can be performed urgently. These patients should be managed by infectious disease clinicians, otolaryngologists, and transplant physicians (if appropriate). Adjunctive imaging, such as CT of the maxillofacial sinuses and MRI of the brain, helps to evaluate for bone abnormalities and characterize the extent of sinus disease. However, one should note that CT can underestimate the extent of the infection, and MRI may better characterize disease progression.

**Invasive Pulmonary Aspergillosis**

Patients with suspicions of invasive pulmonary aspergillosis should undergo chest CT to evaluate the presence or extent of the disease as well as to direct further efforts, such as bronchoscopy.Aspergillus species in the sputum or by bronchoalveolar lavage supports the diagnosis of aspergillosis, but tissue sampling revealing invasive Aspergillus hyphae finalizes the diagnosis.

Patients within the first three months of lung transplant are at risk of invasive fungal infection at the anastomosis of the transplant.

Biomarkers and Other Laboratory Investigations

Serum biomarkers such as galactomannan are helpful in the right population. It has the best-studied utility in patients with hematologic malignancy and hematopoietic stem cell transplant recipients, with an approximate 70% sensitivity.

Galactomannan can also be measured from bronchoalveolar lavage samples and has a sensitivity of 93.2% when an OD of 0.5 is used.

1,3-beta-D-glucan tests are very sensitive but are nonspecific as this is a component of the fungal cell wall and is not specific to Aspergillus species.

It should be noted that blood cultures are very rarely positive for Aspergillus species, even with a severe disease burden of disseminated disease.

**Chronic Pulmonary Aspergillosis**

Several criteria must be met to diagnose chronic pulmonary aspergillosis. At least three months of pulmonary symptoms, systemic symptoms, or progressive characteristic radiologic findings must be noted along with microbiology or serology confirming Aspergillus involvement.Aspergillus IgG can also help diagnose chronic aspergillosis.

**Allergic Bronchopulmonary Aspergillosis (ABPA)**

Patients with cystic fibrosis or asthma suspected of allergic bronchopulmonary aspergillosis (ABPA) should undergo Aspergillus skin testing or IgE against A. fumigatus, chest imaging, a measurement of total IgE level, A. fumigatus specific IgG, serum precipitins, and blood eosinophil count. Patients noted to have positive Aspergillus skin testing or IgE, total IgE greater than 1000 IU/mL, and at least two of the three other criteria meet diagnostic criteria for ABPA.A. fumigatus specific IgG or serum precipitins, blood eosinophil count greater than 500 cells/L without systemic corticosteroids use, and chest imaging consistent with ABPA.

**Rare Manifestations**

Rarely is a thoracentesis required for pleural effusion. A rare manifestation of aspergillosis includes black pleural effusion, rarely reported with Aspergillus niger infection.

**Radiology**

Radiology is a critical adjunct for the diagnosis of aspergillosis.Aspergillus, and the ground-glass opacities are observed due to the surrounding thrombosis and hemorrhage.

In chronic, necrotizing aspergillosis, consolidation can be seen that generally starts in the upper lobes with bronchiectasis that evolves into cavitation.