Understanding the structure and histology of the periodontium is clinically significant to the discussion of wound healing, drugs and environmental factors affecting it, periodontal diseases, and overall health risk factors. Lamina propria of gingiva regenerates more readily due to fiber differentiation after wounding, compared to the alveolar bone, which relies on osteocyte, bone marrow cells, endosteum cells, and osteogenic cells of periosteum, which occupy different compartments.

Histopathology of periodontal diseases is described in 4 stages:

- Initially, the gingival crevicular fluid (GCF) amount is increased due to vascular changes in response to the initial insult. At this benign stage, polymorphonuclear neutrophils are attracted to the lesion site, and T lymphocytes are responsible for fibroblasts in the area.

- The early lesion is characterized by redness of the lesion. At this stage, PMNs clear and breakdown the collagen fibers, which leads to an increase in the previously made space for infiltrates.

- At this stage, the established lesion is dominated by B cells and leukocyte aggregation. This will initiate the lesion side transformation by changing both junctional and sulcular epithelium into an extremely vulnerable epithelium called the pocket epithelium. This is apparent as bleeding upon gentle gingival manipulation.

- An advanced lesion characterized as loss of gingival fibers and alveolar bone is caused by migration of biofilm into the pocket and creating an environment for anaerobic bacterias proliferation.

**Gingivitis**is an initial response to combat the first insult to the periodontium. As the name suggests is the inflammation of the gingiva, which is a component of the periodontium resulting from the accumulation of microbial plaque near the gingival sulcus. Gingivitis has a delayed appearance in children with a predominance of T lymphocyte infiltrates.

**Periodontitis**is the inflammation of the periodontium as a whole which extends to the jawbone and is irreversible. Pathophysiology of the periodontitis is explained by replacement and remodeling of previously normal alveolar bone, especially the spongy bone, that can happen in healthy individuals due to chronic inflammation. White blood cells are active during inflammation, and osteoclasts lineage is related to WBC. As a result, osteoblast is inhibited without reducing the rate of osteoclasts. It is observed on a radiograph as reduced opacity of the alveolar crest.

**Hyper-cementosis**is thought to be due to growth factors disturbances in conditions such as acromegaly, gigantism, or Paget’s disease. Cementoblasts are located within the PDL and can undergo remodeling and repair. Excessive cementoblast deposition can cause hyper-cementosis. This can further cause concrescence which is the adherence of two teeth together by the roots (hence a radiograph is needed before tooth extraction). This is a rare finding that has been seen in patients with systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE).

**Cementicle is**a condition in which masses of acellular cementum appear in abnormal location due to disruption of oppositional growth of cementum. This condition happens mostly in the elderly and appears as psammoma body-like calcifications. The process is thought to develop due to the encounter of cementoblasts with thrombus lodged in a nearby capillary.

**Mesial drift**: Also known as physiological drift, is referred to as the migration of teeth in a mesial direction caused by asymmetrical remodeling of alveolar bone tissue. Two major concepts are believed to cause this drift: First, unbalanced bone remodeling of 2 adjacent teeth. And second, remodeling due to occlusal forces leads to an imbalance of acellular cementum. This asymmetrical remodeling causes tooth movement.

**Peri-implantitis**is due to the failure to create the junction between the implant and the oral mucosa, and that leaves the underlying connective tissue exposed to the permanent oral microbiome and creates chronic inflammation of gingival and bone tissue.

**Widening of PDL space:**with occlusal/orthodontic trauma, the fibroblast in PDL responds by increasing its activity and lead to the widening of PDL (meaning the neighboring tissue is lost). This can be seen on a radiograph and can be accompanied by bone loss or hyper-cementosis. Certain medications such as bisphosphonate are used to manage rheumatoid arthritis osteoporosis, osteogenesis imperfecta, multiple myeloma.