The prevention of relapses is perhaps the most fundamental task in addiction recovery. Five broad strategies have been used in relapse prevention: 1. therapy, 2. medications, 3. monitoring, 4. peer support, and 5. emerging interventions. Individuals often combine two or more of these approaches in their recovery plans.

**Therapy**

Several forms of therapy have been widely used to help individuals struggling with addiction. The various forms of therapy share many common elements, and a combination of different approaches are useful for an individual.

Motivational interviewing is an approach that seeks to increase an individual's readiness to change destructive behavior. Therapists using motivational interviewing employ techniques such as engaging in discussion about concerns, focusing the discussion, evoking motivation and confidence in their ability to change, and planning for change by developing a series of steps the individual can use to change. Motivational interviewing correlates with effect sizes of up to d=0.5.

Cognitive-behavioral therapy (CBT) is one of the most widely used forms of treatment for addiction recovery. This therapy helps individuals overcome the challenges that perpetuate harmful drug/alcohol use and equip them with the skills needed to achieve recovery.

Researchers have also studied acceptance and commitment therapy as a treatment for addiction. In this form of treatment, the provider works to help an individual change the relationship they have with the substance to which they are addicted. One metanalysis found that this form of therapy was associated with improved outcomes in addiction but noted the effect size was relatively small.

Contingency management is an application of operant conditioning to addiction recovery. Participants who submit a negative urine drug screen often receive motivational incentives such as a voucher which they can exchange for various items they desire (i.e., food items, movie passes). Contingency management programs are often some of the most effective interventions in addiction recovery with effect sizes of up to d=0.62.

The community reinforcement approach has been used for decades and seeks to emphasize the benefits of abstinence and reduce the positive reinforcement associated with drug or alcohol use. The therapist often focuses on increasing motivation to quit, developing coping skills, and promoting family involvement.

**Medications**

A variety of drugs are used to help individuals in the process of recovery from addiction.

Nicotine

Medications for nicotine use disorders commonly target cessation rather than relapse prevention. However, maintenance treatment may be necessary for individuals with frequent relapses. Bupropion has been shown effective for relapse prevention (OR=1.49) and has been studied for up to 12 months after nicotine cessation.

Alcohol

Disulfiram is a medication that inhibits aldehyde dehydrogenase resulting in the build-up of acetaldehyde, which produces uncomfortable physical effects. As a result, disulfiram acts as a deterrent against an alcohol relapse until the body metabolizes the medications. One significant challenge regarding the use of disulfiram is non-adherence. Supervised treatment with disulfiram has correlated with an increased time to relapse and a reduced number of drinking days.

Naltrexone is a medication used to help prevent relapses on alcohol by reducing cravings. It is available in an oral tablet and a monthly injection. Studies have shown that the use of naltrexone is associated with a reduced risk of relapse with a number-needed-to-treat (NNT) to prevent a return to any drinking of 20.

Acamprosate is another medication used to help prevent relapses of alcohol use. Studies have shown an NNT to prevent a return to any drinking of 12.

Opioids

Methadone is a full opioid agonist used to reduce the risk of relapses. Some studies have shown methadone to be the most effective treatment for opioid dependence as it has demonstrated a lower rate of relapse compared with buprenorphine. However, methadone's potential for abuse and its resulting strict administration schedule (initially observed daily dosing) reduce its desirability for some patients. Higher doses and greater individualization in dosing correlate with greater retention in treatment.

Buprenorphine is a partial opioid agonist. It is often combined with naloxone to prevent diversion and injection. Although it has been shown to be somewhat less effective at preventing relapses than methadone, the reduced diversion potential, allowing for greater patient autonomy, may make it a more suitable choice for some patients.

Cannabis

Several agents have been studied to assist with cannabis relapse prevention, but limited evidence prevents the widespread application of these findings to clinical practice. Some studies have shown that preparations containing THC can improve rates of treatment completion. Trials of selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors, bupropion, anticonvulsants, mood stabilizers, gabapentin, and N-acetylcysteine have finished, but the results have been insufficient to recommend their use in treatment.

Methamphetamines

A wide variety of medications targeting diverse pathways have been studied for methamphetamine addiction. Agents studied include antidepressants, psychostimulants, topiramate, baclofen, gabapentin, antipsychotics, N-acetylcysteine, acamprosate, oxazepam, naltrexone, atomoxetine, oxytocin, and others. However, no agents have shown clear efficacy in reducing the risk of relapse. In light of many negative studies, researchers have called for the exploration of novel agents. As a result, it is likely that effective medication treatment for methamphetamine addiction will not be available soon.

**Monitoring**

Various forms of monitoring have been used to detect drug/alcohol use. Objective evidence of abstinence has been a critical component of many relapse prevention programs. The results often inform contingency management programs (discussed above) of drug tests. Also, the use of some medications (i.e., buprenorphine and methadone) require periodic drug screens to ensure the individual is not diverting the medication or using other substances of abuse. Lastly, even in the absence of explicit consequences for alcohol or drug use, knowing they may be subject to testing provides a measure of deterrence against relapses for some individuals.

Urine drug screens have been the most widely used and can detect the widest variety of substances. However, urine drug screens require the individual to travel to a clinic or testing center and have some cost associated with the testing materials and staff time. Point-of-care tests often use drug test strips or cups that can provide results in approximately five minutes. Laboratory tests take longer and often have a greater associated cost, but offer higher sensitivity and specificity.

Breathalyzers have also been widely used to detect alcohol use. Breathalyzers have the advantage of being quick and inexpensive to administer. However, at this time, breathalyzers are only able to detect alcohol, so they may not provide deterrence against relapse on other substances unless combined with random urine drug screens. Smartphone technology has resulted in remote breathalyzer programs in which an individual can provide a sample into a Bluetooth-connected breathalyzer while the mobile phone takes a picture to confirm their identity.

Skin monitors have also been used to detect alcohol use but are limited to alcohol, expensive, and usually only available to individuals in the criminal justice system.

Salvia tests are sometimes used to detect the use of certain drugs.

Hair follicle drug tests are available for some substances but are not widely used in treatment.

**Peer Support**

A variety of peer support programs have been established to allow individuals who have progressed in recovery to assist people in earlier stages.

The most widely used programs include Alcoholics Anonymous (AA), Narcotics Anonymous, and SMART Recovery. These groups emphasize the need for frequent meetings, working through a specified program, and guidance from a mentor.

Although the term "recovery coach" was first used in 2006, the service has not gained wide adoption in addiction treatment. Peer recovery coaches are individuals who have experienced addiction themselves but have been abstinent for an extended period (often at least one or two years). Peer recovery coaches complete approximately 40 hours of training in addition to a minimum number of hours of work in the field to obtain certification. Peer recovery coaches can then contract with clinics or offices to work one-on-one with assigned individuals as a service that is billable through Medicaid in many areas.

**Emerging Interventions**

Several developing interventions are currently under scrutiny as treatments for addiction. A limited number of studies have considered the use of transcranial magnetic stimulation (TMS) as a treatment for addiction. One meta-analysis showed a reduction in cravings for cannabis in participants who received TMS versus controls.

Several hallucinogenic agents have been examined in several studies over the past 30 years. Some studies have shown improvements in areas such as cravings, alcohol consumption, and drinking consequences. However, the authors of the systematic review did note that most of the studies were limited by small sample sizes and were open-label.