The preference of treatment depends on the severity of tricuspid regurgitation, etiology, and the presence and the extent of associated abnormalities including pulmonary hypertension, heart failure, and other valve conditions.

Management of severe tricuspid regurgitation includes medical therapy, counseling regarding pregnancy and physical activity, consideration of tricuspid valve surgery, and evaluation and treatment of the underlying cause.

**Medical Treatment**

In patients with tricuspid regurgitation secondary to left-sided heart failure, adequate control of fluid overload is indicated. Diuretics are suggested in these cases. Loop diuretics are commonly used. Restricted intake of salt is indicated. The head of the bed should be elevated as it may improve dyspnea. Digitalis, potassium-sparing diuretics, angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitors and anticoagulants are indicated in these patients. Atrial fibrillation, if present, can be controlled by starting the patients on antiarrhythmics.

The following medications are used:

- Diuretics: Furosemide

- Antiarrhythmics

- Digoxin

- Angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitors

- Anticoagulants

**Tricuspid Valve Surgery**

Indications for tricuspid valve surgery depend upon whether surgery for left-sided (aortic or mitral) valve disease is indicated

For patients undergoing left-sided valve surgery:

- Tricuspid valve surgery is recommended in these patients with severe TR, as observed in the 2014 American Heart Association/American College of Cardiology (AHA/ACC) and the 2012 European Society of Cardiology (ESC) valvular disease guidelines

- Patients undergoing left-sided valve surgery and who have mild, moderate or severe TR, concomitant tricuspid valve repair is recommended in the following cases:

- Dilation of the tricuspid annulus (transthoracic echocardiogram indicating a diameter of greater than 40 mm or 21 mm/m2 indexed for body surface area or intraoperative diameter greater than 70 mm)

- Previous history of right heart failure. This is a recommendation in the AHA/ACC valve guidelines

**Isolated Tricuspid Surgery**

The appropriate timing of isolated tricuspid valve surgery is not well established.

In patients who are refractory to medical treatment but have severe tricuspid regurgitation, tricuspid valve surgery is suggested (weak recommendation). It is preferred to perform it before the onset of significant right ventricular dysfunction to control or prevent symptoms, as recommended in the 2014 AHA/ACC valvular guidelines.

In symptomatic and severe isolated tricuspid regurgitation without right ventricular dysfunction, tricuspid valve surgery is strongly recommended as per the 2012 ESC valvular guidelines.

In asymptomatic or minimally symptomatic patients with severe TR, the role of tricuspid valve surgery is ambiguous. The 2014 AHA/ACC valvular guidelines note this uncertainty and include a very weak recommendation that tricuspid valve surgery may be considered for asymptomatic or minimally symptomatic patients with severe primary tricuspid regurgitation and progressive moderate or greater RV dilation and/or systolic dysfunction.

**Treatment Based on the Etiology**

In tricuspid valve endocarditis, it is recommended to excise the tricuspid valve without immediate replacement. The excision of the diseased valve wipes out the endocarditis while the antibiotic treatment is continued. An artificial valve can be inserted if the right heart failure symptoms are refractory to medical management and the infection is well controlled.

In Ebstein anomaly, no surgery is needed in asymptomatic tricuspid regurgitation. However, symptomatic patients may need to be treated with the tricuspid valve repair or replacement.