Domestic and family violence is difficult to identify, and many cases go unreported to health professionals or legal authorities. Due to the prevalence in our society, all healthcare professionals, including psychologists, nurses, pharmacists, dentists, physician assistants, nurse practitioners, and physicians, will, at some point, evaluate and possibly treat a victim or perpetrator of domestic or family violence.

**Healthcare Professional Recognition, Evaluation, and Referral**

- Healthcare professionals should be able to identify domestic and family violence victims and potential abusers.

- Healthcare professionals should be able to assess all patients for abuse and offer counseling, education, and referral.

- Domestic and family violence victims may suffer emotional, physical, and psychological abuse and need empathy and understanding.

- Health professionals must be able to identify the signs and symptoms of mental and physical disease, illness, and injury related to domestic violence and family violence and provide initial counseling of victims.

- Injuries often require immediate evaluation and treatment after an assault; as a result, health providers are often the first to evaluate and identify domestic and family violence victims.

- All healthcare professionals need to be aware of the presence of potential abuse victims in their clinical settings.

- When healthcare professionals identify domestic or family violence, they should have a plan that includes providing community resource information related to shelter, counseling, advocacy groups, child protection, and legal aid.