The healthcare industry is becoming increasingly commercialized. New, untested molecules or those with a very weak level of evidence receive aggressive promotion. This industrial behavior can affect the patients (through product advertisements on TV and social media) as well as dermatologists (tall claims by medical reps). While there is no denying that cosmeceuticals constitute possibly over 40% of a specialist's prescription, the dermatologist should exercise great caution before endorsing a product. Attempt to search for the highest level of evidence published and safety-associated trials on a few patients with consent should be the approach towards a newly launched cosmeceutical. Members of the healthcare team must ask about the patient's concomitant treatment, including unrevealed home-based therapies (which often includes irritants) such as face-masks, toners, astringents, and most dreaded, steroidal creams to ensure best and safe outcome with treatment.

To ensure public safety, an interprofessional team that includes a pharmacist, primary care provider, and nurse practitioner should educate patients about the benefits/harms of a cosmeceutical. Further, the cost implications of long term use for maintenance should be discussed at some point in time during the therapeutic regime. The patient should always receive information about alternative or adjuvant treatment options, whether drugs/physical procedures or injectables. Finally, patients should understand about the existence of fake, counterfeit, and bogus cosmeceuticals on the market.

All members of the interprofessional team, from the family physician (including NPs and PAs), the dermatologist, the nursing staff, and the pharmacist, need to have a thorough understanding of these agents. This knowledge will permit team members to determine which agents the patient may be using (since many of them are available over the counter), and communicate with each other to ensure minimal adverse events or interactions with other cosmeceuticals or even actual medications. With each member weighing in and communicating across disciplines, the interprofessional team can better achieve optimal results. Specialty care dermatology and plastic surgery nurses educate and monitor patients, providing feedback to team members. Pharmacists check for drug-drug interactions and also provide education. [Level V]

The healthcare industry needs to take a proper judgment on the judicious use of these agents, which may qualify as drugs. Eventually, their efficacy must be tested. Also, their potency should be compared to other drugs before we start prescribing them as dermatologists and physicians till then, research needs to be increased, and patient education is a must.

Lastly, in the current era of social media and internet serving as sources of primary-skin-care for many patients, dispelling the myths and tall claims sourced from these has become an essential duty of the dermatologist. Remember, the dermatologist is the doctor. The patient lured by the gentlemen pickpockets of social media are innocent and often amenable to transformation with proper counseling. But this requires patience on behalf of the doctor as much as the patient himself/herself.