ADEM is classically seen following an illness (or less frequently, a vaccination) with a lag time ranging from a few days to up to 60 days (mean is 26 days). Although in about 25% of affected individuals, there may not be an obvious preceding event. The onset of ADEM is acute and rapidly progressive, and it is characterized by multifocal neurologic symptoms that require early hospitalization.

Some non-specific (e.g., constitutional) symptoms associated with ADEM include fever, headache, fatigue, malaise, nausea, and vomiting. In approximately 20% to 52% of cases in adults, there may be associated with altered mental status (encephalopathy), which may involve irritability, confusion, psychosis, somnolence, or even coma. In addition to motor and sensory deficits (e.g., paraparesis, tetraparesis), patients may also present with brainstem deficits (e.g., dysarthria or oculomotor dysfunction), or other neurologic abnormalities (e.g., seizures, meningismus, ataxia, aphasia, nystagmus, optic neuritis, urinary retention, elevated intracranial pressure, or extrapyramidal signs).

Some adults with ADEM may also develop signs of peripheral nervous system involvement which are defined by abnormalities on electrodiagnostic testing. Signs and symptoms of peripheral involvement may include paresthesia or anesthesia of the limbs or muscle atrophy.

Patients with ADEM presenting with peripheral involvement have been seen to have a worse prognosis and increased risk of relapse compared to those with only CNS involvement.