**Observation**

Asymptomatic or minimally symptomatic lesions identified on imaging for another reason can be reasonably followed with serial examination and neurological imaging due to the primarily low-grade nature of this group of tumors. Changes to the radiological characteristics of the tumor or the development of new neurological symptoms should prompt discussion at interprofessional conferences to consider intervention.

**Medical Treatment for Seizures**

Medical treatment for this group of tumors chiefly encompasses the use of anti-epileptic medications for LEATs. The specific agents used are variable, and typically a variety of different agents are trialed. However, these tumors are often refractory to maximal medical therapy and typically require surgical intervention.

**Surgical Treatment**

Surgical resection is the treatment of choice for symptomatic neuronal and glioneuronal tumors.

Gross total resection for higher-grade lesions appears to be more important. A higher extent of resection (EOR) appears to improve survival in patients with anaplastic ganglioglioma, which is similar to data from other high-grade CNS lesions such as glioblastoma.

These may help reduce some of the morbidity related to intraventricular surgery for large tumors. Laser interstitial thermal therapy (LITT) is another emerging minimally invasive surgical strategy for intracranial lesions that have been applied to brain tumor and epilepsy surgery.

**Radiation Therapy**

The role of radiation is somewhat limited for this group of tumors since most are WHO grade I. However, higher-grade lesions including anaplastic ganglioglioma, liponeurocytoma, and some central/extraventricular neurocytoma may require adjuvant radiation therapy. Radiation is most commonly employed for anaplastic ganglioglioma, although it is not employed in all cases.

In cases of gross total resection for anaplastic ganglioglioma, adjuvant radiation therapy alone may be considered, but in cases of subtotal resection, clinicians should consider adjuvant chemoradiation therapy.

Liponeurocytoma may also be treated with postoperative radiation. Patients who underwent subtotal resection or recurrent liponeurocytoma have been successfully treated with adjuvant radiotherapy in case reports and small case series.

**Chemo- and Immunotherapy**

Chemo- and immuno-therapies are typically reserved for grade 2 and 3 tumors in a fashion similar to radiation therapy. Immunotherapies targeting BRAF are emerging as adjuvant therapy for use in anaplastic ganglioglioma.

Agents such as vincristine, cisplatin, etoposide, carboplatin, cyclophosphamide, and lomustine have all been documented in case reports and small cases series for use in central neurocytoma.