Anterior shoulder instability is defined as a soft tissue or bony insult of the shoulder that causes the humeral head to sublux or dislocate from the glenoid fossa. The lifetime risk of suffering from anterior shoulder instability is 1 to 2%. The young, active, athletic population is at high risk to shoulder instability events. Over the last few decades, the knowledge regarding the risk factors, diagnosis, nonoperative and surgical management, and rehabilitation principles has continued to improve, permitting clinicians to provide optimal management of shoulder instability patients. A comprehensive history, clinical exam, diagnostic imaging studies, and accurate characterization of each patient’s instability pattern will help healthcare providers properly treat and manage each patient appropriately. This activity describes the risk factors, classification, pathophysiology, evaluation, and management of patients with anterior shoulder instability. It highlights the role of the interprofessional team in the appropriate care of affected patients.

**Objectives:**
- Describe the pathophysiology of anterior shoulder instability.
- Outline the evaluation, including clinical and imaging studies in patients with anterior shoulder instability.
- List the conservative and interventional treatment options available for patients with anterior shoulder instability.
- Outline interprofessional team approaches to improve care delivery, advance the treatment of anterior shoulder instability, and improve patient outcomes.