The incidence of major complications is 1.15% after mastopexy, 1.40% after augmentation, and 1.86% after augmentation/mastopexy. Hematoma and infection are the most frequent, 1% and 0.25%, respectively. Small hematomas can be observed, but large and tight hematomas need urgent evacuation, hemostasis, and closure. Furthermore, a BMI greater than 30 is an independent risk factor for postoperative infection and hematoma formation. Patient age over 60 years is noticed to be an independent risk factor only for hematoma formation.

The most common non-major complications after mastopexy alone are suture spitting, bottoming out, and excess scarring. Suture spitting is more common in the SPAIR technique, bottoming out in inferior pedicle based and inverted-T mastopexies and excess scarring in periareolar mastopexies. Other tissue-related complications are nipple necrosis, malposition, deformity, and ptosis recurrence. Implant-related complications after augmentation/mastopexy are implant malposition and asymmetry, capsular contracture, and skin rippling.

Reoperations are usually held off until the breast tissue settles down and acquires the final shape and projection, which can take 6 to 12 months. A survey completed by 487 board-certified plastic surgeons in 2002 elucidated the following findings: the most popular approach was the inverted-T mastopexy, but the modified vertical mastopexies (Hall-Findlay and SPAIR techniques) were becoming more popular and had the highest satisfaction rate. Periareolar mastopexy had the lowest satisfaction rate among surgeons and had the highest revision rate (50%) compared to inverted-T and vertical mastopexy (21% and 29.9%, respectively). Most revisions were secondary to recurrent ptosis, bottoming out, excess scarring, and malposition.