**Non-operative Treatment**

This includes the application of cervical halter traction with active range of motion exercises. This is followed by ambulatory immobilization with active range-of-motion exercises.

**Indications for Surgery**

**For Adults**

- ADI of more than 5 mm

- Moderate displacement or instability in dynamic films

**For Children (when one or more of the following is present)**

- Neurological deficits

- Persistent ADI of more than 4 mm

- Persistent deformity of more than three months

- Recurrent deformity despite six weeks of immobilization

Brief skeletal traction (starting with 7 to 8% of body weight and increasing to 7 kg) under general anesthesia is initially advised.

- Transoral odontoidectomy

- Transoral anterior release and

- Transoral anterior reduction plate

These have shown good anatomical reduction as well as improved neurological outcomes.

**Methods of Posterior Arthrodesis**

- 
**Gallie or Sonntag or Brook’s methods**

These procedures used wiring alongside bone grafts—however, these required prolonged postoperative immobilization alongside a high risk of complications and nonunion. There are also high graft site complications**.**

- 
**Transarticular C1-2 (Magerl), C1 lateral mass to C2 pedicle screw (Goel-Harms), and C1 pedicle to C2 pedicle implants**

They can be applied to children as young as 1.7 years.

The screws are most often placed via Pedicle drill-guided, fluoroscopy-assisted methods.

**Occipitocervical fusion**is indicated for:

- Occipitocervical instability

- Concomitant basilar invagination,

- An osseous anomaly of C1, and

- Failed previous atlantoaxial fusions - occipitocervical fixation restricts head movements

Other **long-term complications**of the posterior fusion include:

- Graft subsidence

- Instability of the subaxial spine- cervical lordosis may increase with 1 degree per fused level per year till adulthood. Subaxial kyphosis usually corrects itself via Toyama remodeling.