# Introduction

Tyramine is a trace monoamine with sympathomimetic properties. It is naturally found in foods, plants, and animals. By definition, all monoamines have an amine group separated from an aromatic ring by a two-carbon chain. Dopamine, norepinephrine, and serotonin are monoamines. Trace monoamines were named for their relatively low frequency in mammalian tissues compared to their more abundant and discussed monoamine neurotransmitter counterparts; epinephrine, norepinephrine, dopamine, and serotonin.

Other trace amines include octopamine, phenethylamine, N-methylphenethylamine, and N-methyltyramine. Tyramine is degraded by several enzymes, most notably monoamine oxidase. Tyramine is often found in fermented, aged, cured, and spoiled foods where microbes with decarboxylase enzymes convert the amino acid tyrosine into tyramine.

Tyramine has long been shown to cause cardiovascular effects when consumed in large, pathologic amounts.

# Fundamentals

Tyramine is a trace monoamine with indirect catecholamine releasing properties.

# Issues of Concern

Hypertensive crisis after tyramine ingestion, also referred to as the “cheese effect,” has become increasingly rare. Most documented cases occur in individuals receiving monoamine oxidase inhibitors, which have largely been replaced for newer classes of antidepressants with more selectivity and fewer side effects.

Tyramine and other biogenic amines (e.g., histamine) formed from decarboxylation of amino acids have been minimized in food production by the advent of culture starters with reduced carboxylase producing organisms.

- Fermented vegetables, including kimchi and sauerkraut,

- Select fresh produce including grapes, avocado, and beetroot

- Wine and beer,

- Cheese, especially cheddar and feta

- Cured or salt dried meats

- Chocolate

- Coffee

- Soy sauce, Worcestershire sauce

- Pickled or salt-dried fish or shrimp

Ingestion of 10 to 25mg of tyramine in patients taking MAOIs will produce a severe adrenergic response, including hypertension, headaches, and possible intracranial hemorrhage.

Although not completely understood, tyramine containing foods are known triggers for patients with migraines.

# Cellular Level

Tyramine exerts its vasopressor response as it is an indirectly acting sympathomimetic agent. Taken up by the NET- Norepinephrine reuptake transporter and precipitating the release of large quantities of norepinephrine into circulation

# Mechanism

The administration of tyramine displaces norepinephrine, epinephrine, and dopamine from pre-synaptic storage vesicles.

When not ingested, tyramine is made endogenously from the decarboxylation of the amino acid tyrosine by the enzyme aromatic L-amino acid decarboxylase (AADC).

# Pathophysiology

New evidence has also revealed a G-protein coupled receptors that tyramine and other biogenic amines bind to directly, called Trace amine-associated receptors (TAARs).

TAAR1 has been found in large amounts in the stomach and small intestine and may play a role in the brain-gut-microbiome axis.

# Clinical Significance

Counseling patients to avoid tyramine containing foods when taking MAOIs remains standard of care. Patients on MAOI should be instructed to keep a record of their blood pressures. Maintaining a high index of suspicion and inquiring about tyramine consumption containing foods in hypertensive patients on MAOIs can aid in diagnosis. The physiologic effects of irreversible MAOIs such as tranylcypromine, phenelzine, and selegiline can persist for up to 3 weeks, and tyramine avoidance should continue during that time. Dietary counseling for patients taking MAOIs should begin before therapy, continue during follow-up to monitor compliance, and include

- Education on a low tyramine diet with consumption of only fresh foods

- Identification and avoidance of high tyramine foods

- Instructions to begin the diet before MAOI therapy and continue for four weeks after stopping MAOIs

Tyramine has been implicated as a potential migraine trigger.