A good understanding of airway anatomy and the tracheobronchial tree is essential to performing safe single-lung ventilation, which is the preferred method for surgical interventions during thoracic procedures. The fiberoptic bronchoscopy enables a good visualization of the airway anatomy. The first branching point in the airway is the carina which marks the bifurcation of the trachea into the 2 mainstem bronchi at the level of the sternal angle, the left and right main bronchus. The trachea is about 10 to 13 cm long and has 12 concentric cartilaginous rings. These rings are deficient in their posterior aspect and thus for C-shaped rings as seen on a cross-section. The trachea divides in an area known as the carina, which marks the division into the left and right main bronchus (as depicted in the figure).

The left main bronchus (LMB) continues for about 5 cm, after which it branches into the left lower lobe bronchus (LLLB) and left upper lobe bronchus (LULB). The right main bronchus (RMB) is shorter than the left side, but it is also wider and more vertical than the left side. The right main bronchus gives off the right upper lobe bronchus and continues further as the bronchus intermedius. The take-off of the right upper lobe bronchus is about 2.0 cm in adult men and about 1.6 cm in adult females. A knowledge of tracheal anatomy helps the anesthesiologist to position the double-lumen tube for selectively isolating one lung for ventilation. This anatomy must undergo careful observation once the double lumen tube is in place and the fiberoptic scope is inserted to check the cuff position and verify correct tube placement.

During normal breathing, both lungs receive an equal amount of air for ventilation and blood flow for perfusion (based on gravitational forces). However, after starting single-lung ventilation, all ventilation goes to one lung only, which creates significant hypoxia related to right-to-left shunting (the shunt can reach up to 50%). However, the position of patients during surgeries can influence the amount of shunt as lungs become dependent on gravity. The ventilated lung is therefore affected and restricted by the weight of the contralateral hemithorax from one side and limitations of the chest wall from the other side. However, lung elastance is increased in the lateral position with single-lung ventilation during operations which may predispose to ventilator-associated lung injury.