**Direct End-to-End Coaptation**

Direct end-to-end coaptation is the treatment of choice for facial nerve injury whenever feasible. Functional outcomes are improved when the nerve is repaired immediately after injury; this situation is only likely to occur during iatrogenic trauma (see image).

The proximal nerve stump will ideally be encountered near the distal stump, even though it will not be stimulable. If the proximal stump is not apparent, it can be located via dissection of the facial nerve distally from the main trunk. The main trunk of the facial nerve may be identified by tracing the tragal pointer or deep aspect of the anterior surface of the tragal cartilage and the tympanomastoid suture line. The main trunk of the facial nerve is typically located under a small vein, deep to a fat pad, roughly 1 cm deep, and 1 cm inferior to the tragal pointer, within about 3 mm of the medial end of the tympanomastoid suture line.

Once the nerve stumps have been identified, they should be trimmed back to healthy tissue, as evidenced by pinpoint bleeding within the nerve. When the injury is fresh, the required debridement is usually minimal. However, if the injury is old, scar tissue may have formed; this may necessitate more aggressive trimming of the nerve with internal neurolysis, removing the section containing scar tissue, or external neurolysis, dissecting scar tissue away from the outside of the nerve to improve exposure. Intraneural scar tissue prevents proper axonal regeneration across the neurorrhaphy and must be removed completely, even if the removal precludes a tension-free neurorrhaphy and a nerve sheath or interposition graft becomes required (see below). Similarly, if ≥50% of the diameter of the nerve has been injured, the injured segment should be resected and the nerve repaired to reduce the amount of intraneural scar tissue that forms.

The neurorrhaphy itself is typically performed under an operating microscope to improve visibility. The sutures should be placed as interrupted stitches in the epineurium, avoiding overtightening of the knots and pushing the nerve ends together with excessive force, likely distorting the fascicles contained therein. If fascicles herniate through the neurorrhaphy suture line, the sutures should be replaced with less tension on the knots, or the fascicles should be trimmed back to allow them to lie within the neurorrhaphy. Individual fascicular repair placing sutures in the perineurium rather than the epineurium is rarely performed; there is no reliable way to determine the correlates between proximal and distal stump fascicles. Outcomes are equivalent between perineurial and epineurial repair; the latter procedure is far less technically challenging.

A cutting or spatula-tipped needle is preferable to a tapered needle. Tapered needles, such as those used for microvascular anastomosis, quickly dull with repeated passes through the relatively tough epineurium; cutting and spatula-tipped needles will not. The authors prefer to sew toward themselves whenever possible, placing the first bite of the first stitch through only the epineurium of the distal nerve stump and directing the stitch from outside the nerve to inside the nerve. The second bite is taken after pulling the needle completely through the distal stump epineurium; this bite goes from within the nerve to outside, again taking only epineurium in the bite. To approximate the nerve ends before tying, pull the suture through the nerve back towards the distal stump until the tail is short enough to manage easily. Four flat throws on the knot with the tails cut short will suffice, with a surgeon's knot often placed as the first throw.

The first stitch is generally placed in the center of the superficial aspect of the epineurium, where it is easiest to sew; once the first suture is placed, two or three more interrupted stitches may be added to approximate the epineurium gently in a circumferential fashion (see video). Alternatively, fibrin glue may be used to coapt the nerve stumps, which appears to produce comparable functional outcomes to suture neurorrhaphy. However, using sutures provides a more stable repair more capable of resisting the tension that may be applied by patient movement.

If tension-free neurorrhaphy between the proximal and distal nerve stumps is impossible, three other commonly-employed options exist. The first option is to coapt the nerve ends via a nerve sheath and leave a small gap between them. The second option, described below, is to interpose a cable graft from a donor nerve, and the third option is to perform a nerve transfer. Gaps between proximal and distal nerve stumps of ≤6 mm can be bridged by regenerating axons during the healing process, providing a sheath, typically made of collagen, connects the nerve ends and encloses the gap; outcomes are comparable to those achieved with primary neurorrhaphy.

**Facial Nerve Coaptation with Interposition Grafting**

If the gap between the proximal and distal nerve stumps is too long to allow primary neurorrhaphy, an interposition graft, or "cable" graft, may be employed to span the distance. Placing a cable graft necessarily requires two neurorrhaphies instead of the one in a primary repair; this significantly increases the risk of axonal loss. This risk may be mitigated by reversing the anatomical direction of the grafted nerve; the distal end of the graft is sutured to the proximal nerve stump and vice versa. This practice theoretically allows every fascicle present at the distal end of the graft, now placed proximally, to have a continuous tract all the way to the proximal end of the graft, now located distally. Typically, sensory nerves are used for graft material: most commonly, the greater auricular or sural nerves and occasionally the medial or lateral antebrachial cutaneous nerves.

The greater auricular nerve arises from the second and third cervical nerve roots, providing sensation to the inferior aspect of the auricle, the lobule, and some skin overlying the mastoid process and parotid gland. It can provide 7 cm or more of length, and its diameter is approximately 1.5 mm, making it a suitable size match for the facial nerve.

The sural nerve arises from the fourth and fifth lumbar and first sacral nerve roots, resulting from the confluence of the medial and lateral sural cutaneous nerves.

**Cross-face Nerve Grafting**

From a technical standpoint, cross-face nerve grafting is equivalent to placing a long interposition graft; functionally, it is a nerve transfer, as axons from a different nerve are being redirected into the distal stump of the facial nerve (see image). For this reason, the technique may be applied in cases where the proximal stump of the facial nerve is unavailable for coaptation. More frequently, however, the cross-face graft is used to reinnervate a specific muscle group, such as the orbicularis oculi or zygomaticus major and minor muscles, or to control a transferred muscle for facial reanimation, such as the gracilis or sterno-omohyoid muscles.

Placement of a cross-face graft requires exposing the recipient facial nerve or branch thereof on the injured side and performing a facial nerve exploration on the contralateral side to identify an appropriate branch to donate axons. The contralateral branch selected should correspond as precisely as possible with the innervated muscle of the target branch; if successful, the cross-face graft will facilitate spontaneous muscle movement on the reinnervated side, and it is important to produce as much facial symmetry as possible. For example, it would be a suboptimal outcome if a smile on the donor side were to cause an eye blink on the injured side.

Cross-face nerve grafts are notoriously unreliable, particularly when performed in older individuals, patients with longstanding facial paralysis, and patients at increased risk for losing facial function on the donor side, such as those with neurofibromatosis type 2, who are at risk of developing bilateral vestibular schwannomas; such patients are not ideal candidates for the procedure. As with any other nerve transfer procedure, donor site morbidity and axon availability should be considered preoperatively. Because a facial nerve exploration is required on the donor side for cross-face nerve grafting, patients should be aware of the potential for a scar. Additionally, sacrificing a facial nerve branch large enough to provide sufficient axons for effective reinnervation runs the risk of causing weakness. In practice, the weakness is seldom clinically apparent and may help to improve symmetry. The axon count in the sural nerve is approximately 1100, enough to permit the transit of the approximately 900 axons required for effective reinnervation.

**Hypoglossal Nerve Transfer**

Nerve transfers are usually performed when the proximal facial nerve stump is unavailable, as when nerve injury occurs at the skull base or intracranially, as many as 12 months have passed since the injury, or the nerve transfer is being performed for reinnervation of a particular facial region as part of a multi-segment reinnervation and reanimation treatment plan. The two most commonly performed procedures in current practice are the hypoglossal and the masseteric nerve transfers.

The hypoglossal nerve is located superficial to the carotid arteries and deep to the central tendon of the digastric muscle and is typically approached via a high, transverse neck incision. The hypoglossal nerve provides motor innervation to the anterior two-thirds of the tongue and contains approximately 9000 axons, 50% more than the 6000 found in the facial nerve.

The classic hypoglossal nerve transfer procedure involves transecting both the hypoglossal and facial nerves and suturing the proximal hypoglossal stump into the distal facial nerve stump; this procedure is so morbid that it is rarely performed in current practice. Another common procedural variation involves transecting the facial nerve in the mastoid, reflecting the distal facial nerve inferiorly, and performing an end-to-side neurorrhaphy into the hypoglossal nerve. Alternatively, the epineurium of the hypoglossal nerve may be incised, and one-third to one-half of the fascicles may be reflected superiorly to be sewn end-to-side or end-to-end into the main trunk of the facial nerve. However, if some return of facial nerve function is expected, but additional muscle tone is required, hypoglossal-facial nerve transfer without division of the main trunk of the facial nerve is preferable. Lastly, epineurial windows may be made, and one-third of the fascicles in the hypoglossal and facial nerves divided so that an interposition or "jump" graft may be sutured end-to-side into both nerves to carry axons from the transected fascicles in the hypoglossal nerve to the transected fascicles in the facial nerve (see image).

Regardless of the technique selected, however, the donor site morbidity and facial movement outcomes are inversely proportional; as more axons are transferred to the face, more axons are taken from the tongue. While younger patients better tolerate donor site morbidity than older patients, the resulting dysphagia and dysarthria may become problematic with time.

**Masseteric Nerve Transfer**

While the hypoglossal nerve is relatively conveniently located in the upper neck, not far from the facial nerve, the masseteric nerve lies directly deep to the facial nerve and is easily accessed via the same incision used for facial nerve exposure. The nerve to the masseter muscle is a branch of the mandibular division of the trigeminal nerve. The masseteric nerve exits the skull base via the foramen ovale and traverses the infratemporal fossa before entering the deep surface of the masseter muscle via the sigmoid notch of the mandible. The masseteric nerve contains approximately 1500 axons; this may account for the lower resting tone of the masseter muscle compared to that of the tongue.

There are multiple methods to locate the masseteric nerve. The authors prefer to mark a point 3 cm anterior to the anterior surface of the tragal cartilage and 1 cm inferior to the inferior border of the zygomatic arch, as described by Borschel et al. At this point, dissection approximately 1.5 cm deep to the SMAS should reveal the masseteric nerve beneath a consistently encountered tendinous layer within the muscle.

Another advantage of the masseteric nerve transfer over hypoglossal nerve transfer is its comparative lack of donor site morbidity; loss of masseteric function is well tolerated, and not all patients suffer a noticeable loss of facial volume from muscle atrophy. However, as with the hypoglossal nerve transfer, using the masseteric nerve to provide facial movement requires the patient to initiate a conscious movement, such as when biting down or clenching the jaw (see video). Over time, many patients can smile without needing to bite down hard, but achieving a spontaneous smile with either a masseteric or hypoglossal nerve transfer is comparatively uncommon, especially in adult patients.