The most feared complication of mandible reconstruction is graft failure and the need for a second reconstructive surgery. Infection, early movement of the jaw (often from early chewing), and poor nutrition either from the flap vessels or surrounding tissues, all increase the risk of reconstructive failure. Patients with a jaw radiotherapy history, hypothyroidism, protein deficiency, uncontrolled diabetes, active tobacco use, and other conditions are at increased risk of poor wound healing; efforts should be made to control these conditions much as possible before surgery.

In osseous free tissue transfer, success rates are generally above 95%; however, the most common complication is a vascular compromise with subsequent partial or complete flap failure. Venous compromise is more common than arterial compromise. Both are most likely to occur in the first 72 hours after microvascular anastomosis, as this is the time during which re-endothelialization of the vessels is occurring. Vascular compromise can occur at any time after flap transfer up until angiogenesis renders the tissue independent of its pedicle, which usually takes at least 2 to 3 weeks.

Several complications may develop after the reconstruction is fully healed; improper sizing, positioning, or shaping of the graft or reconstructive plate can cause a malocclusion, facial asymmetry, and chronic temporomandibular joint pain. Additionally, radiotherapy, major infection, or additional surgery - such as placement of dental implants - that occurs after healing can still compromise the blood supply to the area and cause partial or complete flap failure.