The primary function of the levator anguli oris muscle is to elevate the corner of the mouth, which it achieves in concert with the zygomaticus major muscle, whose effect is to raise and lateralize the oral commissure, moving it obliquely superiorly and laterally. Varying ratios of contraction between the levator anguli oris and the zygomaticus major muscles help define the unique characteristics of an individual's smile. The muscle fibers of levator anguli oris form an angle of approximately 37 degrees with those of the more lateral zygomaticus major muscle.

Other contributors to the elevation of the upper lip are the levator labii superioris (also known as the quadratus labii) and the levator labii superioris alaeque nasi muscles, which move the lip directly upwards. The zygomaticus minor muscle inserts on the orbicularis oris muscle more medially than the zygomaticus major muscle but still has an oblique vector of pull.

The levator anguli oris, located along with the buccinator and mentalis in the deepest layer of the mimetic muscles, originates roughly 1 cm inferior to the infraorbital foramen within the canine fossa of the maxilla. Its fibers travel in an anteroinferior direction to insert into the modiolus of the oral commissure, a fibrous nexus of muscle interdigitation at the lateral aspect of the orbicularis oris situated at the corner of the mouth. Contributing to the modiolus are the zygomaticus major, risorius, buccinator, depressor anguli oris, orbicularis oris, and levator anguli oris; each of these muscles exerts a force on the oral commissure in a different vector, permitting the myriad variations and nuances of human facial expression.