# Introduction

Protein C and protein S are glycoproteins, predominantly synthesized in the liver, that are important components of the natural anticoagulant system in the body.

A deficiency of protein C and protein S results in the loss of these natural anticoagulant properties, resulting in unchecked thrombin generation and thromboembolism.

# Etiology and Epidemiology

Protein C and S deficiencies can be secondary to inherited gene mutations or due to acquired causes.

**Protein C Deficiency**

In the healthy general population, the incidence of asymptomatic protein C deficiency is 1 in 200 to 500 individuals, while clinically significant venous thromboembolism is estimated to occur in 1 in 20,000 individuals.

Protein C deficiency may be inherited or acquired.

The inherited form of protein C deficiency is typically an autosomal recessive disorder; however, de novo mutations have been reported. Approximately 160 mutations in the protein C gene (PROC) located on chromosome 2q14.3 have been described in the literature.

Protein C deficiency may also be acquired by one of several mechanisms. Newborns may have physiologically low levels of protein C at birth; levels have been reported to be as low as 35% in otherwise healthy full-term infants. This is an age-related acquired form of protein C deficiency; protein C levels increase to the lower level of the adult reference range by 6 to 12 months of age.

**Protein S Deficiency**

The exact prevalence of protein S deficiency in the general population is unknown. However, some studies have estimated a prevalence of 0.03% to 0.13% in healthy individuals.

Protein S deficiency may also be inherited or acquired.

The inherited form of protein S deficiency is typically an autosomal dominant disorder. The PROS1 gene is located on chromosome 3q11.1, and approximately 200 mutations in this gene have been described in the literature.

Type I protein S deficiency is the most common type and is characterized by a low total protein S level, low free protein S level, and low protein S activity. Type II deficiency is characterized by a normal free and total protein S level but low protein S activity levels. Type II deficiency is a rare form of the disease. Type III protein S deficiency is characterized by normal total protein S levels but low free protein S levels and low protein S activity.

Protein S deficiency may also be acquired by one of several mechanisms. Newborns may have low levels of protein S at birth; levels increase to the adult reference range by 6 to 10 months of age, typically sooner than protein C levels.

# Pathophysiology

Protein C and protein S are primarily synthesized in the liver. Protein S is also synthesized by platelets, endothelial cells, osteoblasts, and vascular smooth muscle cells and circulates in plasma.

Protein C is activated by the thrombin-thrombomodulin complex to form activated protein C (APC) on the surface of the vascular endothelial cells.

In protein C or protein S deficiency, the coagulation cascade continues unchecked with the overactivity of factor V and factor VIII, resulting in excessive thrombin production.

Mutations to factor V (G1691A) in the activated protein C resistance disorder can prevent deactivation even in the presence of proteins C and S, promoting blood clotting.

# Specimen Requirements and Procedure

Proteins C- and S-antigen and activity levels are usually performed by collecting a venous blood sample in citrate. These samples are centrifuged in the laboratory to separate the plasma. The plasma is frozen in aliquots and stored at -80^oC until analysis.

The typical volume of plasma required is 0.5 mL per 2.7 mL. The plasma needs to be frozen within four hours of collection.

The patient should discontinue warfarin for at least two weeks before drawing the sample.

It is crucial to perform protein C and S testing several weeks after an acute thrombosis or inflammatory condition to allow serum levels to return to baseline.

# Diagnostic Tests

**Protein C Deficiency**

- Protein C functional assay - This is the preferred assay in the clinical setting, as this can help identify both type I and type II disorders. Available options include factor Xa-based, activated partial thromboplastin time (aPTT) based, or a chromogenic assay.

- Total protein C - Measured by immunoassay. This helps distinguish type I and type II deficiencies.

- Mutational analysis - PROC1 mutation testing is done once the initial testing suggests underlying protein C deficiency. This can help provide genetic counseling to patients and to understand the natural history of the disease.

**Protein S Deficiency**

- Total protein S - Measured by immunoassay. Other detection methods include ligand-based or monoclonal antibody-based methods.

- Free protein S - Measured by immunoassay. Antibody-based methods are also used in some laboratories.

- Protein S functional assay - Measured by a clot-based assay. The amount of protein S activity is proportional to the time to clot formation.

- Mutational analysis - PROS1 mutation testing is done once the initial testing suggests underlying protein S deficiency.

# Interfering Factors

Interfering factors include the presence of the lupus anticoagulant, factor V Leiden mutations, APC resistance, elevated plasma factor VIII levels, and hyperlipidemia.

Functional protein S assays should be employed alongside the free protein S immunoassays due to various interferences during testing.

# Results, Reporting, and Critical Findings

Normal reference ranges for proteins C and S are age-dependent.

**Protein C [IU/dL, Mean (range)]**

- 1-5 years: 66 (40-92)

- 6-10 years: 69 (45-93)

- 11-16 years: 83 (55-110)

- Adult: 96 (64-128)

**Total Protein S [IU/dL, mean (range)]**

- 1-5 years: 86 (54-118)

- 6-10 years: 78 (41-114)

- 11-16 years: 72 (52-92)

- Adult: 81 (60-113)

**Free Protein S [IU/dL, Mean (range)]**

- 1-5 years: 45 (21-69)

- 6-10 years: 42 (22-62)

- 11-16 years: 38 (26-55)

- Adult: 45 (27-61)

# Clinical Significance

Patients with hereditary defects of the protein C and protein S pathways are prone to thromboembolic events such as deep venous thrombosis, pulmonary embolism, stroke, and organ ischemia.******Treatment**

The long-term treatment for protein C and S deficiencies is anticoagulation with heparin bridged to warfarin. The medications should overlap for five days until the therapeutic range of the international normalized ratio (INR) of 2.0 to 3.0 is reached for two consecutive days.

The warfarin dose should be carefully assessed and bridged with a therapeutic dose of heparin as it can impose warfarin-induced skin necrosis in protein C and S deficiency. Warfarin inhibits the Vitamin K-dependent clotting factors and proteins C and S. Warfarin-induced skin necrosis transpires due to the relatively short half-life of proteins C and S, which are inhibited first when warfarin is administered. This further promotes the procoagulant effects of other vitamin K-dependent clotting factors and forms microthrombi.

**Monitoring**

Patients prescribed warfarin for long-term use warrant recurrent monitoring to confirm the medication is in the optimal range and that benefits exceed the risk of harm.

# Enhancing Healthcare Team Outcomes

Proteins C and S are glycoproteins synthesized in the liver, which function to maintain the physiologic function of coagulation within the body. When mutated or dysfunctional, they can cause symptoms of blood clotting in all ages, with onset from birth to late adulthood. These thrombophilias prompt care from interprofessional healthcare teams, which include primary care providers, hematologists, nurses, and pharmacists.

This team-based approach provides an integrated, evidence-based strategy to treat patients with symptomatic thrombophilias and monitor asymptomatic thrombophilias. The interprofessional team should be up-to-date with the latest management guidelines for anticoagulation use and regularly monitor the INR to maintain therapeutic ranges. Patients should be educated on their disease, medication compliance, and factors that may interfere with medication to cause sub-therapeutic or toxic levels. Genetic counseling should be offered to at-risk patients with a history of thrombophilia or a family history of the disease. The interprofessional team should be able to inform their patients about the risk and probability of the condition being transmitted to offspring.

The care of protein C and protein S deficiency is most beneficial when managed in an interprofessional team strategy to form a therapeutic alliance and enhance patient-centered care to achieve the desired outcome.