The ascending reticular activating system is the anatomic structure that mediates arousal. Neurons of the ascending reticular activating system are located in the midbrain, pons, and medulla, and control arousal from sleep. Metabolic conditions, likely hypoglycemia or hypoxia, can decrease acetylcholine synthesis in the central nervous system, which correlates with the severity of delirium.

Alzheimer dementia is characterized by a reduction of neurons in the cerebral cortex, increased amyloid deposition, and production of neurofibrillary tangles/plaques; vascular dementia is characterized by evidence of cerebrovascular disease with multiple infarctions.

Coma can be secondary to a deficiency of substrates needed for neuronal function, such as in glucose in hypoglycemia or oxygen in hypoxemia, or can be secondary to direct effects on the brain, such as an increase in intracranial pressure in herniation syndromes. The cerebral perfusion pressure (CPP) is dependent on the mean arterial pressure (MAP) and the intracranial pressure (ICP). Therefore, as the ICP rises due to the mass occupying lesion (such as in intracranial hemorrhage or brain mass), the cerebral perfusion decreases unless the blood pressure is increased (CPP equals MAP minus ICP). The resultant decrease of CPP results in coma.

Additionally, malignant arrhythmias or hypotension can decrease the MAP enough to decrease perfusion to the brain. Remember that cardiac output equals stroke volume times heart rate, and changes in the rate or the stroke volume can reduce the cardiac output enough to alter the MAP.