Treatment includes various interventions under the medical and surgical domains. Knowing the mechanism of Meige syndrome, one can easily understand why anticholinergics (e.g., trihexyphenidyl), dopamine antagonists (e.g., tiapride, tetrabenazine), GABA receptor agonists (e.g., benzodiazepines, baclofen) are effective for such patients. Other medications include antiepileptics (e.g., valproic acid), and a number of psychoactive drugs. Eszopiclone and nitrazepam react at those specific subunits (omega-1 and omega-2) of the GABA receptor complex that alleviate the eyelid spasming. According to some case reports, zolpidem is effective in such patients as it is highly specific for a GABA omega-1 receptor. Long-term use of psychoactive drugs can cause eyelid spasming that is more often associated with the use of typical antipsychotics, though worsening of blepharospasm has been reported with the use of olanzapine.

Botulinum A injection is showing promising results and is reserved for those patients who are poorly responsive to oral medication or are having side effects of these medications. What hinders the excessive use of botulinum A injection is a therapeutic resistance that occurs due to antibody production after recurrent and long-term use. Moreover, it would cause weakness of nearby muscles or cause worsening of existing dysphagia or dysarthria.

Deep brain stimulation of globus pallidus interna (GPi) has proved to be an effective treatment option in whom botulism toxin and other conservative treatment options are not providing the required results. Placement of electrodes should be planned schematically as ventral and posterior portions of globus pallidus interna are the topographical representation of face while the cervicofacial area is more toward anterior.