Monoamine oxidases function as catalysts for the oxidative deamination of monoamines, including the neurotransmitters serotonin and histamine, as well as the catecholamines dopamine, norepinephrine, and epinephrine. There are two main isoenzymes of monoamine oxidases: MAO-A and MAO-B. Norepinephrine, epinephrine, dopamine, tryptamine, and tyramine are all oxidized by both isoenzymes. On the other hand, serotonin is mainly oxidized by MAO-A.

MAOs are present in most of our body’s tissues, but their distribution is not even. In the brain, most of the MAOs are present in the striatum of the basal ganglia and the hypothalamus.

Inhibitors of monoamine oxidases function, as the name implies, by inhibiting the enzyme MAO, and thus result in the accumulation of its substrates (the monoamine and catecholamine neurotransmitters, as well as tyramine ingested in some foods.) The accumulation of serotonin, norepinephrine and dopamine in the synaptic clefts in the CNS is then responsible for MAOIs’ antidepressant effect. It’s important to state that this is mainly dependent on the inhibition of MAO-A, with MAO-B inhibitors being devoid of antidepressant activity. This effect is likely due to the heterogenicity of isoenzyme distribution in the brain. Conversely, the motor symptom alleviation effects of MAOIs are mainly achievable via the selective inhibition of MAO-B (as this is the dominant isoenzyme in the basal ganglia). L-deprenyl (selegiline), being one of the selective MAO-B inhibitors (at low doses), is effective in treating early Parkinson disease symptoms.