Abaloparatide is administered through subcutaneous injection. The recommended dose for subcutaneous injections is 80 mcg once daily into the periumbilical region of the abdomen. It is supplied as a single-patient-use prefilled pen intended to deliver 30 doses. Subcutaneous administration of abaloparatide should be supplemented with calcium and vitamin D if the patient's dietary intake is inadequate. The patient should be in an environment where they can sit or lie down for the first few doses of abaloparatide administration, as this drug can cause orthostatic hypotension within four hours of injection.

As some patients prefer not to use injectables, it can lower their medication adherence; transdermal patches may become a viable alternative. The transdermal patch is a novel mode of administration currently in clinical trials and under evaluation.

In a randomized, open-label, active-controlled study of 500 patients with postmenopausal osteoporosis with a high risk for fractures, the efficacy and safety of the transdermal patch were compared to the subcutaneous injection of abaloparatide. The subcutaneous injection of abaloparatide resulted in 3.7% and 3.4% increases in total bone density in the total hip and femoral neck, respectively.

The transdermal patch showed increases of 2.0% and 1.9% for total hip and femoral neck bone density, respectively. While transdermal patches prove to be safer and more tolerable, with fewer subjects withdrawing, interrupting, or discontinuing the patch compared to subcutaneous injection, it is unknown whether transdermal administration reduces vertebral fractures.

The efficacy of the transdermal patch was compared to a placebo control group, with results indicating a reduction in nonvertebral fractures, increased bone mineral density of the hip, spine, and femoral neck, and reduced incidence of hypercalcemia. Based on clinical studies, 80 mcg of abaloparatide is recommended for administration once daily via injection into the periumbilical region.

**Pharmacokinetics**

The absolute bioavailability after 80 mcg of abaloparatide in healthy women is 36%. The mean half-life of abaloparatide is 1.7 hours.[16] After nonspecific proteolytic degradation, abaloparatide peptide fragments are primarily eliminated through renal excretion.