Agranulocytosis should be differentiated from other conditions that cause bone marrow failure and leukemias. The following are the differential diagnosis of agranulocytosis:

- Aplastic anemia: Aplastic anemia is a condition of bone marrow failure characterized by features of pancytopenia. It includes signs and symptoms of anemia (pallor, fatigue, dizziness, murmur), petechial rashes, gingival bleeding, infections, and ulcerations.

- Acute myeloid leukemia (AML): Patients with AML present with signs and symptoms of bone marrow failure and organ infiltration. Bone marrow failure results in signs and symptoms of pancytopenia like pallor, fatigue, gingival bleeding, rashes, and infections.

- Acute lymphoblastic leukemia (ALL): ALL is a malignant disease of the bone marrow presenting with pancytopenia. It is the most common type of cancer and leukemia in children characterized by fever, pallor, fatigue, dizziness, bleeding, blood clots, lymphadenopathy, infections (pneumonia, and urinary tract infection).

- Human immune deficiency virus (HIV): Patients with HIV can present in any stage of the illness with flu-like illness, fever, malaise, rash, oral ulceration, and severe infections. A detailed history can help differentiate it from agranulocytosis.

- Epstein-Barr virus (EBV) infectious mononucleosis: EBV infectious mononucleosis is an infectious disease caused by EBV (human herpes virus-4). It presents with fatigue, malaise, sore throat, pharyngitis, and fever.

- Bacterial sepsis: Sepsis is a life-threatening condition characterized by fever (temperature more than 38 degrees Celcius, or less than 36 degrees Celcius) with or without chills, hypotension, tachypnea, respiratory infections, altered mental status, gastro-intestinal or genito-urinary infections.