Orthognathic surgery repositions the maxilla, the mandible, or both. There are numerous indications for orthognathic surgery, including obstructive sleep apnea, Angle’s class II occlusion, Angle class III occlusion, canting of the occlusal plane, aesthetic considerations, and an open bite, among others. A LeFort I osteotomy for the maxilla and bilateral sagittal split osteotomies for the mandible are the mainstays for modern orthognathic surgery. With both the maxilla and mandible manipulated, there is an opportunity to dramatically change a patient’s occlusion. For this reason, dental modeling is imperative to the process, whether done with traditional stone model surgery or virtual surgical planning.

Maxillofacial trauma treatment, including mandibular and LeFort midface fractures, is founded upon pre-traumatic occlusion restoration. Some fracture patterns, particularly in the mandible, resulting in predictable malocclusions. For example, a condylar or subcondylar fracture reduces the vertical height of the mandible, causing premature contact of the ipsilateral posterior dental arch. An anterior open bite characterizes a bilateral condylar fracture because of these dimensional changes.

Mobility of the mandible and/or the maxilla can create complex clinical situations in which occlusion can be altered adversely. Maxillomandibular fixation (MMF) is used intraoperatively to re-establish a patient’s occlusion. This can be achieved using Erich arch bars, inter-maxillary fixation screws, or rapid maxillomandibular fixation systems, among other techniques. With native occlusion secured using MMF, the midfacial fractures and/or mandibular fractures can be reduced and internally fixated.

Mandibular movement can influence forces surrounding mandibular fractures. The suprahyoid musculature and bite force puts downward anterior pressure on the mandible. The masseter, temporalis, and pterygoid muscles pull the posterior mandible upward. These opposing forces can reduce some (favorable) fractures and displace other (unfavorable) fractures.