**A brief history of ptosis surgery:**

Early treatments for ptosis involved excision of the excess skin on the upper eyelid. The earliest description of suspension of the eyelid to the brow with absorbable catgut sutures was made by Dransart in 1880. This was modified by Pagenstecher who suspended the eyelid skin to the brow with silk sutures. Wright (1922) and Crawford (1956) attempted the use of the fascia lata as a sling, by attaching it to the tarsal plate and anchoring it to the frontalis muscle.

Levator resection, initially carried out through the conjunctival route, was introduced by Bowman in 1857, and later developed by Blaskovics (1909).  It was further improved by Berke and Illif. Berke (1959) is credited with evolving the levator function technique to decide the intraoperative lid height which is a useful guide during surgery.

Everbush (1883) and Wolf (1896) popularized the anterior or skin approach for ptosis correction. In their opinion, it is a more efficient approach to the identification of the levator aponeurosis, and a larger area of the aponeurosis can be excised using this approach. Also, as the anatomy is easier to understand, it is easier to perform for novice surgeons.

Fasanella and Servat in 1961 described a simple vertical lid shortening procedure for correcting mild ptosis.

Correction of ptosis is essentially surgical with few exceptions.  The techniques most commonly used in adult ptosis are Levator repair (Anterior approach) and Muller’s muscle-conjunctival resection (Posterior approach). Frontalis sling is seldom used in adult patients. However, it is the preferred technique for myogenic and neurogenic ptosis where the risk of exposure keratopathy is high and sling surgery can be easily reversed in such scenarios.

**Levator Aponeurosis Advancement procedure**

It is the procedure of choice for aponeurotic and involutional ptosis which is caused by dehiscence, disinsertion or thinning of the levator aponeurosis. The procedure can be combined with an upper eyelid blepharoplasty in patients with associated dermatochalasis.

**Skin markings**

The upper eyelid crease is marked prior to infiltration of local anesthetic in order to maintain symmetry between the two eyes. Skin markings should be done with the patient in sitting posture and eyes in primary gaze. In patients with a preexisting faint eyelid crease, the same crease can be marked. Patients with unilateral ptosis presenting with a raised or absent lid crease, markings are made based on the contralateral normal eyelid crease. However, in patients with bilateral ptosis, the lid crease is marked at 8-10mm along the papillary plane and tapered to 5-6mm medially and laterally.

**Anesthesia**

Local anesthetic infiltration is done with 2% lidocaine containing 1 to 100000 epinephrine. Epinephrine causes vasoconstriction and thus prevents the spread of the drug and helps in hemostasis. 1 to 1.5ml of local anesthetic is infiltrated along the skin marking. Excessive infiltration is avoided to prevent complete paralysis of the levator which makes it difficult to assess the lid position during surgery. Additional IV sedation with monitored anesthetic care can be given to reduce anxiety but over sedation should be avoided.

**Surgical steps**

Routine cleaning and draping of the face are done.  It is important to keep both eyes exposed to assess the lid position during surgery.

Lid crease incision is made with a 15 blade. Unipolar cautery or CO2 laser can also be used to make the lid crease incision which helps in hemostasis.

Dissection is then done to open the orbicularis oculi muscle along the entire length of the incision which exposes the orbital septum below. Orbicularis oculi muscle if hypertrophied can be partially excised along the incision.

Dissection is done inferiorly in the sub orbicularis oculi plane to expose the upper part of the tarsal plate. Excessive dissection up to the lid margin is avoided as it causes post-operative lash ptosis.

The orbital septum is now opened. Orbital septum is identified by applying pressure gently over the globe which causes the pre-aponeurotic fat pad to bulge forward. The septum is carefully incised over the prolapsed fat using Westcott scissors and the dissection carried medially and laterally to open the entire septum. Care should be taken to open the septum slightly higher up on the lid to avoid any inadvertent damage to the aponeurosis below.

The preaponeurotic fat is gently separated from the underlying levator by blunt dissection and using cotton tip applicator. A Desmarre’s retractor is used to retract the fat, and all fibrous connections between the septum and levator must be released to avoid post-operative lid retraction.

The disinserted or dehisced aponeurosis is identified as a faint white line at the level where the septum fuses with the aponeurosis. In such cases, the muller’s muscle with the peripheral arterial arcade on its anterior surface can be seen above the superior border of the tarsal plate. In some patients, the aponeurosis may be thinned out or infiltrated with fat.

The levator is now advanced and re-attached to the upper one-third of the tarsus using a double-armed 5-0 vicryl or polyester suture.

A partial thickness suture is taken through the central part of the tarsus 2mm below the superior edge. The eyelid should be everted and checked to ensure that the suture has not passed through the entire thickness of the tarsus. This is important to avoid corneal abrasions. The suture is then passed through the disinserted edge or higher on the aponeurosis in a horizontal mattress fashion and a slip knot tied. The patient is asked to open eyes and lid position assessed both in the lying down and sitting posture. The level of suture placement on the aponeurosis may be increased or decreased to achieve the desired eyelid height and contour. Once the desired lid height is achieved the suture is tied and cut. Similar sutures are then passed medial and lateral to the central suture, lid contour and height assessed and permanent knots placed.

Eyelid crease forming sutures may be placed if required using two or three interrupted sutures using 6-0 ethilon which pass from the lower skin edge, a partial thickness bite is then taken through the levator aponeurosis and the needle is then passed through the upper skin edge and a permanent knot tied.

The wound is closed with interrupted 6-0 plain gut or ethilon sutures. Antibiotic ointment is applied over the wound. A temporary eye patch may be applied.

Post-operatively patient is advised to place ice compresses over the lids for the first 48 hours. Antibiotic ointment is applied over the wound and lubricating eye drops used frequently. Suture removal occurs 7 to 10 days post-operatively.

**Muller’s muscle-conjunctival resection (MMCR)**

This posterior approach technique is useful for patients presenting with mild ptosis and excellent levator function or ptosis secondary to Horner’s syndrome and anophthalmic socket. It is a modification of the Fasanella – Servat procedure where a bit of tarsus is removed along with conjunctiva and muller’s muscle. Prior to surgery, it is imperative to perform a 2.5% phenylephrine test and confirm elevation of the ptotic lid. If the ptotic lid elevates by 2mm, Dresner recommends 4mm of MMCR for every 1mm of ptosis correction.

**Anesthesia**

The upper eyelid is everted and 1-2ml of 2% lidocaine containing 1:100000 epinephrine is infiltrated above the superior border of the tarsus to produce ballooning of the conjunctiva. An additional lid crease infiltration and IV sedation under monitored anesthetic care may be given.

**Surgical steps**

Routine cleaning and draping of the face are performed.  Both eyes are kept exposed to assess the lid position during surgery.

Eyelid traction sutures are taken with 5-0 mersilk sutures. The upper eyelid is everted using Desmarres retractor and held in position by clamping the traction sutures to surgical drapes over the forehead.

The conjunctiva is dried with gauze and markings are made above the superior tarsal border. Another marking is made superior to the first marking at a distance which is equal to half the desired MMCR (For a patient who requires 2mm of ptosis correction an 8mm of MMCR is required. In this case the superior conjunctival marking is made at 4mm from the superior tarsal marking).

Three 6-0 silk sutures are passed through the superior conjunctival markings. The sutures are passes such that they incorporate only the conjunctiva and Muller's muscle. Traction is applied to the sutures which causes separation of the conjunctiva and muller’s from the underlying levator aponeurosis. The Desmarres retractor is removed.

A Putterman mullerectomy clamp is then placed at the base of the tented tissue ensuring that the tarsus is not incorporated in the clamp.

A double-armed 6-0 plain cut or vicryl suture is then passed in a running horizontal mattress fashion below the clamp from one end to the other.

The clamped conjunctiva and Muller’s are then resected using a 15 blade, and the tissues cut using metal on metal contact between the blade and Putterman clamp.

The suture is then passed in the reverse direction from one end of the wound to the other in a running horizontal mattress fashion and a knot tied. Another technique is to pass the suture ends from the conjunctival side through the full thickness of the eyelid and exit on the skin side and secured. In such cases, suture removal occurs after 1 week.

Post-operatively patient is advised to place ice compresses over the lids for the first 48 hours. The patient should apply antibiotic ointment at bedtime for a week, and lubricating eye drops used frequently.

**Frontalis sling surgery**

Frontalis sling is commonly performed in patients with severe ptosis and poor levator action (less than 4mm). This procedure is often used in adults with myasthenia gravis, chronic progressive external ophthalmoplegia, IIIrd nerve palsies and other conditions that lead to a very weak levator function. It is the procedure of choice in severe congenital ptosis with poor levator action, but other indications for sling surgery include myogenic ptosis, neurogenic ptosis, blepharophimosis syndrome, and Marcus Gunn jaw-winking syndrome.

The frontalis muscle contributes about 2 to 3 mm of eyelid elevation. This action is utilized in frontalis sling surgery where the eyelid is suspended to the frontalis muscle to achieve eyelid elevation. Various materials are used for suspension which may be autogenous, allogenic or synthetic.

Autogenous materials include fascia lata, palmaris longus tendon, and temporalis fascia. Allogenic material consists of banked fascia lata.  Synthetic materials include polypropylene (prolene), supramid nylon suture, mersilene mesh, and silicone.

Among these, the most widely used are silicone rod and fascia lata with the latter being the gold standard material of choice.

There are two techniques of frontalis sling: Crawford technique and Fox pentagon. The Fox pentagon with fewer stab incisions is faster and easier to perform and is the technique most commonly followed.

**Skin markings (Fox pentagon method)**

It consists of 5 small incisions. Two eyelid markings are made 2mm from the lid margin at the medial and lateral limbus. These markings can be adjusted to get a good contour which can be determined using a forceps to raise the lids. Two eyebrow markings are made just above the eyebrows corresponding to the medial and lateral canthus. A central forehead incision is made in the pupillary plane slightly higher than the eyebrow markings.

**Anesthesia**

General anesthesia is the preferred choice for children; however, local anesthesia with intravenous sedation is better for adults. Local anesthetic infiltration is with 2% lidocaine containing 1 to 100000 epinephrine. The local anesthetic infiltrates along the skin marking, and pressure applied.

**Surgical steps**

Routine cleaning and draping of the face are p.  Both eyes remain exposed to assess the lid position during surgery. The forehead is also kept exposed to pass the sling.

Stab incisions are made through the skin markings. The central forehead incision is widened to 3 to 5mm.

The sling loaded on a needle is passed from the central forehead incision and brought out through the medial eyebrow incision engaging the frontalis muscle. It is then passed from the medial eyebrow incision to the medial eyelid incision passing deep to the orbicularis oculi but anterior to the orbital septum and tarsal plate.

Next, it is passed from the medial to the lateral eyelid incision. Here the sling lies superficial to the tarsus. Care is necessary to avoid globe injury. This can be achieved by using a lid guard.

The sling is now passed in the reverse direction from the lateral eyelid incision to the lateral eyebrow and subsequently out through the central forehead incision. The lid height is now adjusted on the table and when the desired contour is achieved the sling is secured with a silicone sleeve and the excess sling material cut. The sling with the sleeve is then buried in a pocket created. The incisions are then sutured with 6-0 plain gut.

Frost suture may be taken through the lower eyelid to protect the cornea in the immediate post-operative period.

Post-operatively patient is advised to place ice compresses over the lids for the first 48 hours. The patient should apply antibiotic ointment at bedtime for a week, and lubricating eye drops used frequently. Frost suture removal is performed after 48 hours.