# Introduction

Positron emission tomography (PET)  scanning is an imaging modality with primary use in the field of oncology. It utilizes radiotracers for measuring various metabolic processes in the body. Various changes in metabolism, blood flow, and regional chemical composition can be analyzed by it. Radio-tracers can be injected, swallowed, or inhaled depending upon the site of the body being examined, and the tracer gets trapped in various tissues of the body depending upon the affinity. Areas of higher activity show higher uptake and brighter spots on images. Unstable nuclei of radioactive-tracer emit positrons that produce gamma rays upon the combination with the neighboring electrons. The gamma rays are detected by a ring of detectors in the scanner. A computer then uses this data to create a 3D-image of the tracer in the body. Various tracers are utilized depending on the targets.

# Procedures

The tracer may be administered via an intravenous route, orally or via inhalation. The tracer takes some time to distribute throughout the body. A contrast may be administered intravenously or orally if a PET-CT is to be done. Positioning depends upon the site to be scanned. The PET machine has a central hole through which the patient slides through. First images are generally scout images to assess whether the positioning is correct. Sometimes breath-holding maybe required. The scan takes anything from 30 minutes to 1 hour.

# Indications

**Oncology**

Tracers used commonly include fluorine-18 (18F) fluoro-deoxyglucose (FDG), called [18F] FDG PET. 18F-FDG being a glucose analog, gets picked up by the cells instead of regular glucose for metabolism. Glucose gets phosphorylated by hexokinases. The values of the mitochondrial form of this enzyme are raised in cancers that are rapidly growing. In locations of cancer, the metabolic activity is quite high; hence the glucose uptake is quite high. So this 18F-FDG also gets taken up quite significantly in these locations, and then this shows up as a bright spot on the PET scan. This helps in the detection of metastasis also. Typical doses amount to 7.5 mSv.

FDG-PET is used for diagnosis, staging, and monitoring cancers, particularly in Hodgkin's lymphoma,

A positive FDG-PET scan means a tissue biopsy is indicated in that location.

FDG-PET has a role in the detection of recurrent cervical cancer in symptomatic and asymptomatic women. Thiry percent of asymptomatic women had recurrent disease detected by PET scan compared to 66.7% of symptomatic women. The sensitivity of PET for recurrent disease in asymptomatic women was 80.0%, specificity 100%, the positive predictive value of 100% and a negative predictive value of 88.9%. For symptomatic women, the sensitivity of PET was 100%, specificity 85.7%, the positive predictive value of 93.3%, and negative predictive value of 100%. Hence, whole-body PET can be a sensitive imaging modality for the detection of recurrent cervical carcinoma in both symptomatic and asymptomatic women also.

The 68-gallium DOTA peptide is used to detect primary and metastatic neuroendocrine tumors (NETs). NETs express somatostatin receptors (SSTRs), with SSTR2 (51%) of cases, followed by SSTR1 (47%) and SSTR5 (43%). The remaining SSTR4 (36%) and SSTR3 (23%) have low expression levels.et al. reported a sensitivity of 88% for ln-octreoscan in comparison to 97% for the 64-Cu DOTA PET-CT.et al. found 68-Gallium DOTA PET-CT scans to detect 74.3% of the lesions, whereas 111-ln-octreoscan detected 12% of the lesions.

Other tracers being used include C-labelled metomidate (11C-metomidate) for detecting adrenocortical tumors.

**Neurology**

Areas of high radiotracer uptake are associated with higher brain activity. It measures indirectly the flow of blood through the brain, which has been correlated with areas of higher brain activity. Oxygen-15 is used for this.

Alzheimer disease results in decreased brain metabolism of both glucose and oxygen. [18F] FDG PET of the brain is used to differentiate Alzheimer disease from other dementias. Perfusion, glucose metabolism, and Aβ imaging have an established role and are included in the revised diagnostic criteria as important biomarkers. Florbetapir F18, flutemetamol F18, and florbetaben F18 are used to detect amyloid-beta plaques. Other targets include tau protein and neuro-inflammation. Protein kinase C (PKC) promotes the induction of alphasecretase or “a disintegrin and metalloprotease (ADAM)” non-amyloidogenic cleavage of amyloid precursor protein (APP) and hence have an important role in the acquisition and maintenance of memory in Alzheimer disease (AD). Deficits in PKC are seen early in the course of the disease. A selective PKC inhibitor, enzastaurin (LY317615), has recently been radiolabeled with C to be used as a potential probe for PET imaging applications.

The cholinergic deficit has been studied with PET, the radio-labelled analog of acetylcholine, such as N-[(11) C]-methyl-4-piperidyl acetate (MP4A). Decreased cortical uptake is found in AD patients, with a greater reduction in Lewy body dementia more so in the posterior cingulate gyrus.

**Neuropsychology:**PET scanning helps delineate a link between specific processes and brain activity.

**Psychiatry**: Radiotracers binding to dopamine, serotonin, opioid, and cholinergic receptors are used to study their roles in various psychological disorders.

**Stereotactic Surgery and Radiosurgery**: PET-image guided surgeries are now being done.

**Cariology**

[18F]FDG-PET helps to identify hibernating myocardium. Imaging of atherosclerosis to detect patients at risk of stroke may also be done. Using FDG PET, we can detect inflammation quite early even before morphological and irreversible vascular changes are seen. Hence early diagnosis and treatment of large-vessel vasculitis are possible.

**Myocardial Perfusion Tracers**: Tracers have been developed to visualize the myocardial blood flow, including nitrogen-13 (13N)-labeled ammonia and oxygen-15 –labeled water ([15O]-H2O) and rubidium-82 (82Rb)-chloride and copper-62 (62Cu)-labeled pyruvaldehyde bis (N4-methylthio-semicarbazone) or [62Cu]-PTSM. Only 13N and 82Rb are approved by the FDA.

**Myocardial Metabolic Tracers**: The heart uses primarily free fatty acids (FFA) in oxidative metabolism. Ischemic & hypoxic myocardium prominently utilize glucose because of increased anaerobic glycolysis rate. Tracers to visualize this include  18F-FDG and carbon-11–labeled palmitate and acetate. PET with myocardial perfusion and [18F]-FDG quite accurately assesses myocardial viability & is considered the gold standard for assessing myocardial viability. Predicting functional recovery of heart, improvement in congestive heart failure symptoms, exercise capacity, quality of life, cardiac events, remodeling, and long-term survival is possible with PET.

**Infectious Diseases**

PET can be used to image bacterial infections via 18F-FDG, by identifying infection-associated inflammatory response. Agents include [18F]maltose,[23] [18F]maltohexaose & [18F]2-fluorodeoxysorbitol (FDS).

**Autoimmune Diseases**

The upcoming role of PET is included in the new group of diseases called IgG4 diseases. FDG PET/CT isn’t included in standard sarcoidosis workup, but it’s efficient in the initial diagnosis and follows up of disease management. It can help to assess cardiac involvement, response to treatment, and evaluation of reversible granulomas as well as to determine the best site for biopsy.

**Musculoskeletal System Diseases**

PET provides muscle activation data about deep-lying muscles compared with techniques like electromyography, which is useful in superficial muscles only. [18F]-NaF is used to measure regional bone metabolism and blood flow. [18F]NaF is recently being used in studying bone metastasis also.

# Interfering Factors

Strenuous exercises can lead to a considerable increase in radiotracer uptake by various tissues & hence should be avoided prior to imaging.

# Complications

PET-CT has the complications involved with contrast administration, including possible anaphylaxis, contrast-induced nephropathy, etc. Generally, the radiotracers used don’t cause any significant side effects.

# Patient Safety and Education

PET-CT involves radioactive material, and exposure to radiation is there. 18F-FDG has an effective radiation dose of 14 mSv. Potential side effects of radiation as they hold for other imaging modalities are seen in PET scan also. In a standard PET scan amount of radiation is quite less, of the range of 8 mSv, about equivalent to that received from natural sources like the sun. PET-CT uses higher levels of radiation of the range of 24mSv. Pregnant ladies shouldn’t undergo a PET scan unless absolutely necessary as radioactivity can affect the fetus. A breastfeeding woman should limit close contact with infants or pregnant women for up to 12 hours. Breast milk may be discarded until 12 hours & after about 24 hours, it is considered safe to breastfeed again.

# Clinical Significance

As mentioned above, PET scanning has a lot of potential in newer and newer fields of medicine, including the already established oncology & the upcoming fields like neurology, cardiology, psychiatry, and immunology. Many new uses are being discovered every day, and PET scanning is becoming a radiological test, which is quite sought after.