A thorough history and physical exam should be performed on any children presenting with syndactyly. Any family history of syndactyly should be noted. Incomplete penetrance may result in situations where syndactyly may "skip" a generation. It is important to ascertain if there were any pregnancy or birth complications. For patients presenting as neonates or infants, a thorough newborn orthopedic exam should be considered to search for any suggestion of an underlying syndrome. It is important to note that isolated simple syndactyly is not typically associated with an underlying genetic syndrome.

With specific attention to the syndactyly deformity, it should be noted which digits are affected, whether the affected digits appear to be fused via soft tissue only or a combination of bony and soft tissue fusion. The distal extent of the interdigital connection should be noted. If there is a question of subtle incomplete syndactyly, a physical examination of the fingers in the sagittal plane is useful. Normally, the web spaces are angled at or near 45 degrees with one of the affected digits extended, and the adjacent digit flexed.  The presence of flexion and extension creases in the affected digits should be evaluated as they can give a clue to the underlying bony fusion and function of the digits.

As some patients may have had previous treatment or surgery, history should also include previous records and operative reports. Photographs prior to surgery or demonstrating the progression of creep post-surgically may be useful. The skin should be examined for previous scars and skin donor sites to help plan future incisions. Particularly in a revision setting, a thorough sensory examination and vascular examination should be performed.