There are a variety of techniques that are preferred for the actual liposuction procedure, though basic principles include:

- Typically, cannula entry sites large enough for the cannula to enter are made in the skin with a 15 blade scalpel.

- The dominant hand controls the cannula or the syringe (if manual suction is employed), while the non-dominant hand is spread wide on the skin, constantly feeling the presence of the distal cannula. The non-dominant hand provides two important functions, to lightly palpate for areas of adiposity and to constantly monitor the depth of the cannula.

- Suction should occur just beneath the superficial fat layer. The presence of skin dimpling is an indicator that the cannula resides in too superficial of a location, which can lead to obvious contour irregularities.

- Traditional suction-assisted liposuction (SAL) with cannulas is the most widely used technique; however, there are recent technological advancements that have led to new techniques that deserve discussing.

- Power-assisted liposuction (PAL) utilizes a cannula that has a small motor that oscillates the cannula back and forth, which is thought to make the process more efficient.
- Ultrasound-assisted liposuction (UAL) utilizes an ultrasound cannula, which causes the breakdown of the adipose cells, which can then be suctioned out using a standard cannula, again with the effort in mind to alleviate surgeon fatigue and increase the efficiency of the procedure.
- Laser-assisted liposuction (LAL) uses a laser-equipped cannula to help breakdown targeted adipose tissue, which can then be suctioned out that also demonstrates higher efficiency in terms of fat reduction.

- Regardless of the technology employed, the endpoint of liposuction is based on the clinical judgment of the surgeon based on the lack of palpable adipose tissue in the targeted area.

The debate continues as to whether the addition of either UAL or LAL adds any benefit to traditional SAL procedures. A recent review of the literature, however, would suggest that, for the most part, LAL and UAL offer no demonstrable benefits over SAL to recommend a change in practice patterns.

- UAL prevailed over SAL in the treatment of gynecomastia

- LAL and UAL prevailed over SAL with decreased blood in high-volume lipoaspirates

- LAL prevailed over SAL with skin tightening in the submental area