The history and the physical examination findings of the interventricular abscess will vary depending on the acuity of presentation, the extent of involvement of the myocardium, damage to the conduction pathways, and patency of the cardiac valves. There should be a high index of suspicion for an interventricular abscess in patients with arrhythmias, heart block, and extension of the abscess into the annulus.

**HISTORY:**In the setting of an acute infection, a classical presentation of acute hemodynamic distress is more likely.

- Dizziness

- Dyspnea

- Chest pain likely myocardial infarction, or angina symptoms

- Paroxysmal nocturnal dyspnea

- Cyanosis

- Orthopnea

- Syncope or near syncope

- Joint pain

- Cough

- Skin rashes

- Recent surgery or trauma to the heart

- Travel to endemic areas

- Exposure to an animal

- Exposure to infection risk factor

**PHYSICAL EXAM:**The signs and symptoms of an interventricular septal abscess may reflect the presence of infective endocarditis.

- Bradycardia

- Heart failure signs and symptoms including S3, inspiratory basal crackles in lungs, jugular venous distention, and bilateral leg edema, abdominal ascites

- Aortic regurgitation (AR) or dilated aortic root findings including decrescendo murmur (AR), soft mid-diastolic rumble heard at the apical area (Austin Flint murmur), Corrigan's pulse, De Musset's sign, Quincke's sign, Muller's sign, Hill's sign, and Duroziez's sign.

- A ventricular septal defect may present as a systolic murmur at the left lower sternal border, cyanosis, and heart failure.

- Pulmonary hypertension signs that include a loud P2 component of the second heart sound.

- Mitral regurgitation findings that include a holosystolic murmur at the apex, and pulmonary edema.

- Diffuse multiorgan involvement feature due to systemic emboli from an abscess.

- Back tenderness due to osteomyelitis

- Petechia

- Sublingual or splinter hemorrhages

- Osler nodes

- Janeway lesions

- Roth spots

- Splenomegaly