Lithium is administered orally in pill form, capsule, or liquid. The tablet is available in a controlled release 450 mg tablet or a slow-release formulation in a 300 mg tablet. Capsules are available in 150 mg, 300 mg, and 600 mg strength. The liquid formulation is available as 8 mEq/5 mL strength. The dosage usually starts at 300 mg twice or three times a day.

It takes about 1 to 3 weeks for lithium to show the effects and remission of symptoms. Many patients show only a partial reduction of symptoms, and some may be nonresponders. In cases where the patient does not display an adequate response, consider monitoring plasma levels, and titrating the dose. A single nighttime dose may be a consideration to minimize side effects in stabilized patients. Lower doses and lower serum levels of lithium are preferable in elderly patients. If patients do not show an adequate response, the clinician should consider augmentation. The preferred agents are valproate, lamotrigine, and atypical antipsychotics like risperidone, olanzapine, quetiapine, ziprasidone, and aripiprazole.

Lithium should be tapered gradually over three months. Rapid discontinuation increases the risk of relapse. Certain medications increase serum lithium levels, including diuretics (especially thiazides), non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs like ibuprofen and COX-2 inhibitors, and angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitors. Metronidazole raises lithium levels by decreasing its renal clearance. Carbamazepine, phenytoin, and methyldopa may increase the toxicity of lithium.