In the Sustained Treatment of Paroxysmal Atrial Fibrillation (STOP-AF) trial, 245 patients were randomized to either cryoballoon-based PV isolation with the first-generation cryoballoon or antiarrhythmic drug therapy. At 12 months of follow-up, 69.9% of the cryoballoon group versus 7.3% of the drug therapy group, were free of recurrent AF (p < 0.001).

Because of its historical development, radiofrequency ablation is the most frequent method used to perform pulmonary-vein electrical isolation. However, cryoballoon ablation is rapidly becoming the more frequently used technology. One multicenter randomized trial by Kuck et al. comparing radiofrequency ablation to cryoballoon catheter ablation found that cryoballoon ablation was non-inferior to radiofrequency ablation, with primary endpoints including recurrence of atrial fibrillation, occurrence of atrial flutter or atrial tachycardia, use of antiarrhythmic drugs, or repeat ablation occurring in 34.6% in the cryoballoon group versus 35.9% occurring in the radiofrequency group (P<.001). The complication rate in both groups was also non-significant.

As expansion of the balloon to a certain size requires ideal pulmonary venous anatomy, cryoablation may not be feasible for every patient with paroxysmal atrial fibrillation. This has been shown in a study by Kubala et al. which demonstrated that patients with a left common ostium had more recurrences compared to normal PV anatomy.

In conclusion, cryoballoon ablation for atrial fibrillation offers an effective, safer, less operator-dependant, means of achieving pulmonary vein isolation, with greater improvement in the quality of life, compared to medical therapy. As such, physicians should present the option to patients with symptomatic atrial fibrillation, not responding to medical therapy.