Overall, hysteroscopy is regarded as a safe, minimally invasive procedure.

**Uterine Perforation**

The most common reported complication of both diagnostic and operative hysteroscopy is uterine perforation.

Bleeding alone without uterine perforation may be encountered with deep dissection into the myometrium and intersection with a perforating vessel. This complication is more common with operative hysteroscopy and the removal of type I and type II subserosal fibroids. Bleeding may be managed with electrocautery, uterotonics such as oxytocin, or foley balloon catheter placement to be left inside the uterus to tamponade bleeding.

**Fluid Overload**

Complications pertaining to distension media used in hysteroscopy deserve detailed discussion. The fluid deficit is carefully calculated intraoperatively to quantify the amount of fluid the patient is absorbing into their circulation. Of particular concern is the risk of hyponatremia and resulting cerebral edema, especially when electrolyte-free hypotonic solutions are used. Cerebral edema may manifest with symptoms of nausea and or vomiting, dizziness, shortness of breath, or headache. The mechanism of fluid absorption has to do with the amount of intrauterine pressure created by hysteroscopic fluid management systems and the venous absorption of distending media.

Electrolyte-rich isotonic fluid, such as normal saline, may be used with bipolar systems. As such, bipolar systems have less risk of fluid overload syndromes. In healthy women, hysteroscopy should be aborted if the fluid deficit exceeds 2500mL when isotonic distention media is used and 1000 mL with hypotonic media. In women with comorbidities such as cardiac or pulmonary conditions that compromise hemodynamic stability, the surgeon should consider termination of the procedure with a fluid deficit of 1000mL and 750mL of an isotonic and hypotonic solution, respectively. Avoidance of OHIA can be achieved with close monitoring of fluid status. Patients at risk for OHIA may be identified beforehand by assessing estimated procedure time, risk for incomplete resection of intrauterine pathology, and the existence of comorbidities.

**Embolism**

Hysteroscopy can result in carbon dioxide embolism if it is used as the distending media. This complication can be catastrophic if it occurs due to the potential for cardiac failure leading to death. Limited studies show a wide-ranging air embolism rate from 10 to 50% with the use of carbon dioxide.