# Continuing Education Activity

Acute necrotizing ulcerative gingivitis (ANUG) is a rapidly destructive, non-communicable microbial disease of the gingiva in the context of an impaired host immune response. It is characterized by the sudden onset of inflammation, pain, and the presence of "punched-out" crater-like lesions of the papillary gingiva. This activity reviews the evaluation and treatment of acute necrotizing gingivitis and highlights the role of the interprofessional team in the care of patients with this condition.

**Objectives:**
- Describe the pathophysiology of acute necrotizing ulcerative gingivitis.
- Outline the typical presentation of a patient with acute necrotizing ulcerative gingivitis. 
-  Review the management options for acute necrotizing ulcerative gingivitis.
- Summarize the importance of collaboration and communication amongst the interprofessional team to enhance the care of patients with acute necrotizing ulcerative gingivitis.

# Introduction

Acute necrotizing ulcerative gingivitis (ANUG) is a rare infectious disease of the gum tissue, affecting <1% of the population. ANUG presents as an acute, painful, and destructive ulceration and inflammation of the interdental gum tissue.

# Etiology

ANUG is commonly due to an opportunistic bacterial infection and is predominantly associated with fusiform and spirochete bacteria. One study identified spirochetes and a majority of Gram-negative bacteria, including Bacteroides intermedius and Fusobacterium spp. as the most common causes.Treponema spp., Selenomonas spp., Fusobacterium spp., and Prevotella intermedia.

# Epidemiology

ANUG has been documented by historians since the fourth century BC. Most of the reports from the ancient world were among fighting troops, and studies of ANUG in the modern world are still finding it common among soldiers.

# Pathophysiology

Physiologic factors that play a main role in ANUG include psychological stress, poor diet, insufficient sleep, alcohol, tobacco, poor oral hygiene, preexisting gingivitis, and HIV infection. These factors have been shown to impair the host immune response, which facilitates bacterial pathogenicity. Psychological stress reduces the gingival microcirculation and salivary flow and increases adrenocortical secretions, which can modify the function of polymorphonuclear leukocytes and lymphocytes. This alters the immune response as well as the patient's behavior and mood, resulting in insufficient oral hygiene, malnutrition, and increased tobacco consumption.

# Histopathology

Often, the use of microbiological testing does not provide relevant diagnostic information, as the microbiological description of ANUG can also be typical of healthy gingiva, gingivitis, and periodontitis.

Four distinct layers have been described. Most superficial is a bacterial area of fibrous mesh composed of epithelial cells, leukocytes, and a variety of bacterial cells, including rods, fusiform bacteria, and spirochetes. Deep to that layer exists a neutrophil-rich zone composed of a higher number of leukocytes, spirochetes, and bacterial cells. Next lies a necrotic zone containing disintegrated cells, spirochetes, and fusiform bacteria. The deepest layer contains spirochete infiltration.

# History and Physical

ANUG remains largely a clinical diagnosis; thus, the physical exam is critical. The diagnosis is based on three essential findings. Necessary findings include mouth pain, usually of rapid onset, gum bleeding, and, most specifically, ulceration and necrosis of the interdental papillae.

The diagnosis of ANUG is associated with poor oral hygiene and weakening of the host immune system, particularly in the setting of HIV infection.

# Evaluation

As mentioned above, the diagnosis of ANUG is largely based on a detailed history and physical exam. A gram stain of gingival tissue has been shown to be useful in supporting the diagnosis, but it is not required and is not always performed.

# Treatment / Management

The treatment of ANUG should be approached in successive stages, including treatment of the acute phase, treatment of any preexisting condition, treatment of disease sequelae, and transition to supportive or maintenance phase.

Treatment of the acute phase aims to halt tissue destruction and to control the patient's discomfort. This involves gentle, ultrasonic debridement of superficial gingival plaques and calculi along with localized oxygen therapy, directed at necrotic lesions.

Metronidazole (250 mg 3 times a day) is a common first drug choice due to its activity against anaerobes. Penicillin, tetracyclines, clindamycin, amoxicillin, and amoxicillin with clavulanate have been shown to produce "acceptable" results and are considered on a case-by-case basis. Oral penicillin, for example, was demonstrated in one study to show significant clinical improvement in three to six days.

After the acute phase has been controlled, treatment of any preexisting condition, such as chronic gingivitis, should be initiated. This stage involves professional prophylaxis in the form of scaling and root planning and the establishment of maintenance of oral hygiene methods by the patient.

The main goal of the maintenance phase is to comply with oral hygiene practices and control any predisposing factors.

In summary, the treatment of ANUG consists of a multifactorial approach involving superficial debridement, oral hygiene instruction, utilization of antimicrobial mouthwash and oral antibiotics, and initiation of a comprehensive prophylaxis plan involving root planning and predisposing factor management.

# Differential Diagnosis

ANUG diagnosis may be confused with other bacterial conditions and also many viral conditions. Considerations for a differential diagnosis should include bacterial infections like gonococcal or streptococcal gingivitis, acute herpetic gingivostomatitis, infectious mononucleosis, and also with some mucocutaneous conditions such as desquamative gingivitis, multiforme erythema, and pemphigus vulgaris.

# Pertinent Studies and Ongoing Trials

There have been studies of various suspected risk factors associated with acute necrotizing ulcerative gingivitis. Approximately two-thirds of the observed studies on ANUG have been surveys or case reports, the remaining being case-control studies. Only a few longitudinal and population-based studies are available, mostly in high-risk populations. The findings of many of these studies pertain to gingivitis in general rather than acute necrotizing ulcerative gingivitis specifically. Other existing studies are based on small numbers or solely on case histories without the inclusion of control subjects, which leaves much to be desired in this field of research. However, as mentioned above, the epidemiology and low observed prevalence of ANUG in the population severely limits most longitudinal studies at this time.

# Prognosis

Adequate treatment usually prevents the progression of the disease, and ulcer healing can be expected in a few days utilizing this treatment approach. Nevertheless, lack of treatment can lead to deterioration in the form of potentially fatal conditions such as necrotizing ulcerative periodontitis (NUP) and even cancrum oris (noma).

# Complications

Acute necrotizing ulcerative gingivitis may lead to devastating tissue damage in the form of necrotizing periodontitis, necrotizing stomatitis, and cancrum oris (noma), which is frequently fatal. Its identification and treatment is a challenge, but a necessity, for adult and pediatric practitioners alike.

# Deterrence and Patient Education

Healthy gums are extremely important to a patient's overall health. Maintaining good oral hygiene is the most effective way to avoid developing destructive gum disease such as gingivitis. There are many steps to take to keep gums healthy, including twice-daily brushing, daily flossing or interdental cleaning, and visiting a dentist regularly.

# Enhancing Healthcare Team Outcomes

Acute necrotizing ulcerative gingivitis and the wide-range of gum disease presentations pose a diagnostic dilemma to clinicians and is best managed by an interprofessional team approach.  Though there are specific diagnostic criteria to diagnose ANUG, patients may exhibit non-specific signs and symptoms or only meet some of the diagnostic criteria. Regardless of the specific presentation, recognition of potential necrotizing gum disease is the most critical action. Many studies emphasize the prevention of periodontitis and the need for intervention to be tailored to the individual's needs. One meta-analysis identified critical actions that may help in the implementation of preventive programs. The first critical action is communication to the public of the importance of gingival bleeding as an early sign of periodontal disease. The second critical action is the implementation of universal periodontal screening by the oral health care team. Third, we must understand the role of health promotion as well as understanding the limitations of self-medication with oral health care products. The final critical action is facilitating access to appropriate and effective professional preventive care.