Oral mucosal development

The oral mucosal epithelium primarily derives from the ectoderm (lips, cheeks, palate, gingivae, the floor of mouth) and endoderm (tongue). Early on in development during the first and second weeks of gestation, a single layer of epithelial cells lines the oral cavity. Subsequently, two cell layers between weeks 5 and 6, and by week 10, a multilayered epithelium is present. At this time, surface features of the oral mucosa, such as the papilla on the anterior two-thirds of the tongue and the palatal rugae, begin development. By approximately week 23 in utero, the oral epithelium has differentiated into stratified keratinized palatal and gingival epithelium, as well as stratified nonkeratinized epithelium, which lines the lips, cheeks, soft palate, and floor of the mouth.

Dentogingival junction development

The development of the dentogingival junction is unique, as it involves the movement of teeth through the gingival epithelium and associated connective tissue, without causing epithelial breach or disruption. The tissues involved in the formation of this complex include the junctional epithelium (JE), sulcular epithelium, and underlying connective tissue. As a tooth comes in contact with the epithelial lining of the oral cavity, the connective tissue between the tooth and oral mucosa breakdown, and the basal layer of the oral epithelium begin to proliferate. Following this is the fusion between the reduced enamel epithelium and oral epithelium, with a breakdown of the central aspect of the epithelial surface. This development ensures no loss of epithelial continuity as the tip of the tooth descends into the oral mucosa. After the tooth enters the oral cavity, the cells of the enamel epithelium transform into JE cells, which act to maintain the junction between the enamel and epithelium via hemidesmosomes.