Initial investigation reports may be non-specific. Therefore, a high degree of clinical suspicion is important for the diagnosis and initiation of appropriate empirical therapy as syndromic management of atypical pneumonia.

Baseline blood investigations may include complete blood count (CBC), liver function tests (LFT), renal function tests (RFT), erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR), and serum electrolytes. Raised or normal total leukocyte count can be seen, but relative leukopenia is also common. ESR is usually raised. In the case of psittacosis, slightly deranged LFTs and RFTs can be seen. If a patient has a productive cough, then sputum culture with staining is also ordered to rule out the causative bacterium and its resistance. The culture of Chlamydia from respiratory secretions in special media is possible but difficult. Not all laboratories are equipped to perform this type of specialized testing.

Specific diagnostic testing is serological, which is regarded as the gold standard. Elevation in C. pneumoniae IgM titer in a patient with CAP is diagnostic of acute infection, whereas an increase in IgG (by four times) is suggestive of a previous infection. For C. psittaci infection, micro-immunofluorescence (MIF) test or polymerase chain reaction (PCR) assay is used to confirm the strong clinical suspicion of a possible diagnosis of psittacosis especially, to distinguish it from other chlamydial species.C. trachomatis, Giemsa stained smears are used to look out for cytoplasmic inclusions or EBs to confirm the diagnosis.

On chest radiographs, there are usually atypical and non-specific findings, but alveolar opacities can be seen as well. Patchy consolidations or reticular interstitial opacities may be visible. Pleural effusions are common, and rarely noncardiogenic pulmonary edema is seen. Lobar opacification is uncommon but can be seen in the case of psittacosis.