**Anterior Hypothalamic-Preoptic Area in Thermostatic Detection of Temperature**

- The anterior hypothalamic-preoptic area contains cold and heat-sensitive neurons - central thermoreceptors.

- The temperature sensory signals from the central anterior hypothalamic-preoptic area are transmitted into the posterior hypothalamic area.

- When the preoptic area is heated, the skin all over the body immediately breaks out in a profuse sweat, and the blood vessels over the whole-body surface become dilated.

- Also, any excess body heat production becomes inhibited.

**Posterior Hypothalamus Integrates the Peripheral and Central Temperature Sensory Signals**

- The temperature sensory signals from the central anterior hypothalamic-preoptic area are transmitted into the posterior hypothalamic area.

- The temperature sensory signals from the peripheral thermoreceptors are transmitted to the posterior hypothalamus.

- These signals are integrated to control the heat-conserving and heat-producing reactions of the body.

**Detection of Temperature by Receptors in the Deep Body Tissues**

- Deep body temperature receptors are in the abdominal viscera, the spinal cord, around or the great veins in the thorax, and upper abdomen.

- The deep thermos-sensitive receptors, like the skin temperature receptors, detect mainly cold rather than warmth.

- Both the deep body receptors and the skin receptors are probably concerned with preventing hypothermia, that is, preventing low body temperature.

**Detection of Temperature by Receptors in the Skin**

- The skin has both warmth and cold receptors.

- The warmth receptors at the skin are much less than cold receptors. Therefore, peripheral detection of temperature mainly concerns detecting cool and cold temperatures.

- When the skin becomes chilled over the entire body, immediate reflexes are invoked that include sweating inhibition, shivering, skin vasoconstriction to diminish the loss of body heat.