**Diet**

In general, animal-based protein foods such as eggs, dairy, meat, and seafood provide all nine of the essential amino acids in adequate amounts. Soy-based foods are unique because they are tasteless and provide all nine essential amino in sufficient quantities. Most other plant foods, including whole grains, nuts, legumes, and seeds, possess high levels of some amino acids and low amounts of others. It would be wrong to assume that animal-based foods provide more protein than plant-based ones. A cup of tofu contains the same number of grams of protein as 3 ounces of steak, chicken, or fish. A half-cup of lentils has more grams of protein than an egg. Not all plant foods are low in the same amino acids, so eating a variety of plant-based foods can provide all nine of the essentials. For example, pairing protein sources, like rice and beans or hummus and pita bread or oatmeal topped with almond butter. However, in terms of volume, it may be necessary to eat more plant-based foods to get a similar amount of protein and amino acid profile provided by animal-based proteins.

**Digestion**

When the food reaches the stomach, hydrochloric acid denatures the protein, unfolding it and making the amino acid chain more accessible to enzymatic action. Then, pepsin, a protein produced by gastric chief cells, cleaves any available protein into smaller oligopeptide chains, which then move on into the duodenum. The second set of digestive enzymes, made by the pancreas, further cleave oligopeptides into tripeptides, dipeptides, and individual amino acids. These products can all be taken up by intestinal cells where dipeptides and tripeptides convert into amino acids. Some amino acids are part of the process of synthesizing intestinal enzymes and new cells. Most enter the bloodstream and are transported to other parts of the body.

**Gross****Anatomical Manifestation**

Hair is a protein that contains a lot of twists and turns. Therefore it is not surprising that hair contains many disulfide bonds Heat denatures proteins; this is why individuals may steam their hair to "relax" and straighten very curly hair. Organ systems in the body possessing beta-pleated sheets require flat tissues such as flat bones and skin.