Initial evaluation with plain radiographic films demonstrating two orthogonal views is the initial diagnostic standard, although they often appear normal in the early course of the disease. Magnetic resonance imaging is the recommendation for detecting earlier stages of the disease due to its high sensitivity in detecting bone edema.

**Classification**

**Osteonecrosis of the Hip**

Femoral head osteonecrosis falls into two classes: traumatic and atraumatic. Of the atraumatic cases, up to 70% may be bilateral.

**Osteonecrosis of the Knee**

Spontaneous osteonecrosis of the knee (SONK) is the most common type.

**Osteonecrosis of the Shoulder**

Osteonecrosis of the shoulder most frequently results from trauma; however, it can arise from the causes outlined above, for instance, prolonged high-dose corticosteroid usage. Hertel et al.

**Osteonecrosis of the Talus**

Most commonly caused by trauma resulting in displaced fractures to the neck of the talus. The incidence of avascular necrosis increases with co-existing dislocation at the ankle or subtalar joint. The talus body is often affected by a predominate cartilaginous surface limiting its vascular supply.

**Osteonecrosis of the Lunate**

More commonly known as Keinbock disease involves a collapse of the lunate due to vascular insufficiency and osteonecrosis. A history of repetitive trauma, biomechanical factors related to ulna variance, and anatomic factors such as the presence of both dorsal and palmar blood supply may contribute to the risk of avascular necrosis. The Lichtman staging of Keinbock disease uses four stages. The first radiographic feature becomes apparent in stage 2 disease, represented by lunate sclerosis without height loss.

**Osteonecrosis of the Scaphoid**

Known as Preiser disease, it arises from an uncertain etiology. Risk factors include alcohol abuse, trauma, steroid use, and connective tissue disorders.