The urinary and genital tract originates initially from the intermediate mesoderm, which differentiates into the urogenital ridge and further differentiates into the nephrogenic and gonadal cords, respectively.

The nephrogenic cord develops into the pronephros, mesonephros, and metanephros. Most of the pronephros degenerates. The mesonephric duct forms the ureteric bud, which branches to form the major tracts of the kidneys, including the collecting ducts and the ureter. The metanephros forms the bulk of the kidney, such as the glomerulus.

Until 4th week of the development, the gonad is undifferentiated. Male or female differentiation does not start until the seventh week of gestation.

Additionally, the androgens produced by the Leydig cells are responsible for the development of the male external genitals. Also, within the male gonad are Sertoli cells, which secrete anti-Mullerian hormone to inhibit the development of the paramesonephric ducts (Mullerian ducts), the pathway for female development. The mesonephric duct forms the epididymis, vas deferens, and seminal glands.

The mesonephric ducts also give rise to the ureteric bud and trigone of the bladder in both sexes. The ureters and collecting system of the kidney develope from the ureteric bud. The prostate and urethra are both formed from the urogenital sinus. The primordial phallus forms from the genital tubercle in the cranial end of the cloacal membrane. At around 25 to 26 weeks of development, the testicles descend transabdominally, through the inguinal canal, into the scrotum guided by the gubernaculum. The gubernaculum is the genito-inguinal ligament that develops in the seventh week of mesenchymal origin.