Stress fractures are the partial or complete fracture of a bone as a result of sub-maximal loading. This injury is often compared analogously to fatigue fractures found in engineering materials such as bridges and buildings although some would argue that the mechanisms are different. Normally, submaximal forces do not result in the fracture; however, with repetitive loading and inadequate time for healing and recovery, stress fractures can potentially occur. The debate continues whether the cause is contractile muscle forces acting on a bone or increased fatigue of supporting structures; it is likely that both contribute.

Stress fractures can be stratified as high or low risk, a categorization that alludes to the likelihood of propagation to displacement or non-union thus requiring surgical fixation. High-risk areas include the calcaneus, fifth metatarsal, sesamoid, talar neck, tarsal navicular, anterior tibial cortex, medial malleolus, femoral neck, femoral head, patella, and pars interarticularis of the lumbar spine. Low-risk stress injuries include pubic ramus, sacrum, ribs, proximal humerus/humeral shaft, posteromedial tibial shaft, fibula, and second through fourth metatarsal shafts.

Risk factors for stress injuries include energy deficiency through diet (i.e., low caloric intake based on the amount of exercise performed) and hypovitaminosis D. The female athlete triad consisting of disordered eating, amenorrhea or oligomenorrhea, and decreased bone mineral density also increase the risk for stress injuries

Because stress injuries frequently occur with a change in training routine, they are common in runners and military recruits. For runners, this may mean an increase in training intensity or a change in footwear or training surface. Increasing distance beyond 32 km (20 miles) per week was found to be associated with an increased rate of stress fractures in one study. In military recruits, these injuries are often associated with the initiation of basic training or changes in training with increased running and marching.

Anatomic and biomechanical risk factors are more difficult to study. Among military recruits, only a narrow width of the tibia and increased external rotation were found to be risk factors for stress fracture. Female runners with stress fractures were found to have smaller calf girth and less lean muscle mass in the lower limb. Previously, ground reaction forces were thought to contribute to the development of lower-limb stress fractures. However, a 2011 systematic review found that the evidence did not support this assumption