The detailed history and physical examination are vital in determining the underlying cause of cyanosis. The provider should inquire about the onset, duration, intake, or exposure to poisonous substances, exposure to the cold, site where cyanosis can be appreciated, and associated symptoms. If the cyanosis is present since birth, the cause is congenital. However, a more recent onset is highly suggestive of acquired etiology. It is essential to differentiate the central, peripheral cyanosis, and differential cyanosis as each implies different etiologies.

In assessing cyanosis, the onset is an important clue to the underlying cause. In congenital heart diseases, the conditions which present with cyanosis in the first week are tricuspid atresia, Ebstein anomaly, critical pulmonary stenosis, etc. The conditions which usually manifest after the first week are tetralogy of Fallot, transposition of great arteries, truncus arteriosus, etc.

Fever may be seen if the cause of cyanosis is infectious such as croup, pneumonia, septic shock, etc. The presence of clubbing can most likely be seen in congenital heart conditions, right to left shunts, and pulmonary diseases. Respiratory symptoms are more commonly associated with central cyanosis.

Physical examination should be carried out in an adequate light for the correct assessment of cyanosis. Poor light exposure, the thickness of the skin, and pigmentation of the skin can affect the accuracy of physical assessment. Cheeks, nose, ears, and oral mucosa are the best areas to assess cyanosis as the skin in these areas is thin, and blood supply is good. This can help determine if the cyanosis is generalized, limited to extremities, or if there is a difference in the bluish discoloration in different extremities.

The prime sites of the bluish discoloration in central cyanosis are lips, tongue, hands, feet, and mucous membranes of the oral cavity. The depth of the color usually correlates with the amount of desaturated hemoglobin, and hence, the severity of cyanosis. Clubbing can be seen in some patients with long-standing central cyanosis. Methemoglobinemia or sulfhemoglobinemia should be high on differentials if central cyanosis does not get better with oxygen administration.

The inspection also includes looking for any thoracic cage deformity, accessory muscle use for respiration (nasal flaring, grunting, intrathoracic/supraclavicular retractions), asymmetry of chest expansion, discomfort in breathing, audible breath sounds, clubbing, posture, etc. These are helpful in narrowing down the underlying causes, especially if the cause is cardiac or pulmonary. It is helpful to carry out the palpation of brachial and femoral pulses, tactile and vocal fremitus, assessment of ventilation, and measurement of blood pressure in all four extremities.

Peripheral cyanosis is characterized by the following:

- Localized cyanosis affecting only extremities

- Pink tongue as mucous membranes are almost never involved

- Cold extremities as compared to warm extremities in central cyanosis

- Clubbing is absent

- Pulse volume usually low

- Capillary refill time more than 2 sec

- Disappears with massage and warming

- Dyspnea usually absent

In children, the most common etiologies for life-threatening central cyanosis are congenital heart disorders and polycythemia. The common causes of peripheral cyanosis in this age group are cold exposure and acrocyanosis.