Image quality can be defined as the attribute of the image that influences the clinician's certainty to perceive the appropriate diagnostic features from the image visually.

- Contrast: Radiographic contrast is a fractional difference in the signal or brightness between the structure of interest and its surroundings.

- Dynamic range: The dynamic range is the range of various X-ray intensities that can be imaged by the detector.

- Spatial resolution: Spatial resolution is the imaging system's ability to distinguish the adjacent structures separate from each other. A bar pattern containing alternate radio-dense bars and radiolucent spaces of equal width can be imaged to get the subjective measurement of spatial resolution in units of line pairs per millimeter. The modulation transfer function (MTF) is an objective measurement of the spatial resolution obtained by measuring the transfer of signal amplitude of various spatial frequencies from object to image.

- Noise: The radiographic noise is the random or structured variations within an image that do not correspond to X-ray attenuation variations of the object. The noise power spectrum is the best metric of noise that measures the spatial frequency content of the noise.

- Signal to noise ratio (SNR): The signal to noise ratio is an important metric that combines the effects of contrast, resolution, and noise. Higher the signal and lower the noise, the better is the image quality. Images with high SNR allow the recognition of smaller and lower contrast structures. Detective quantum efficiency (DQE) is the best measure of signal to noise ratio (SNR) transfer efficiency of the imaging system.

- Artifacts: Artifacts contribute to poor image quality due to factors other than low resolution, noise, and SNR. These include unequal magnification, non-uniform image due to detector problems, bad detector elements, aliasing, and improper use of grids.