Candidal vulvovaginitis is common. It is responsible for a third of all cases of vulvovaginitis in reproductive-aged women, and 70% of women report having had candidal vulvovaginitis at some point in their lifetimes. About 8% of women suffer recurrent candidal vulvovaginitis. The most common responsible pathogen is C. albicans (in about 90% of cases), with most of the remaining cases caused by Candida glabrata. It is important to recognize that detailed epidemiological data is not available for this disease process. Because of the wide availability of over-the-counter treatments, many patients with candidal vulvovaginitis likely do not present for care. Furthermore, diagnosis is based on both clinical and ancillary evaluation, and therefore, epidemiologic reports based on culture alone overestimate disease, as 10% of women are asymptomatic with positive candidal cultures. Finally, studies demonstrate that self-diagnosis is not accurate, so data derived from a patient query are likely somewhat inaccurate.

Recognized risk factors for acute candidal vulvovaginitis include estrogen use, elevated endogenous estrogens (from pregnancy or obesity), diabetes mellitus, immunosuppression (i.e., patients with chemotherapy or antimetabolite medications, HIV infection, or transplant patients), and broad-spectrum antibiotic use. Although candidal vulvovaginitis is more common in women who are sexually active, there is no evidence that candidal infection is sexually transmitted. Patients with recurrent candidal vulvovaginitis (defined as four or more episodes of culture-proven candidal vulvovaginitis) have predisposing genetic factors that cause them to be susceptible to recurrent fungal infections. These factors may also predispose to a hypersensitivity to Candida.