AVMs tend to be clinically asymptomatic in 15% of cases until the presenting event occurs.

- Approximately 41 to 79 percent present with intracranial hemorrhage. AVMs are the second most common cause of intracranial bleed after cerebral aneurysms, responsible for 10 percent of all cases of subarachnoid hemorrhage. Children are more likely to present with hemorrhage than adults. Hemorrhages are usually intraparenchymal, but can primarily occur in the subarachnoid space. Symptoms due to hemorrhage include loss of consciousness, sudden and severe headache, nausea, vomiting as the coagulated blood makes its way down to be dissolved in the individual's spinal fluid. Reported sequelae caused by local brain tissue damage on the bleed site are also possible, including seizure, hemiparesis, a loss of touch sensation on one side of the body, and deficits in language processing. Minor bleeding may be asymptomatic. Following the arrest of bleeding, most AVM victims recover symptomatically, as the damaged blood vessel repairs itself.

- Studies report seizure as a presenting disorder in 15 to 40% of patients. The risk of seizures increases with cortically-located, large, multiple, and superficial-draining AVMs. Seizures are typically focal, either simple or partial complex, but often show secondary generalization.

- The progressive neurological deficit may occur in 6 to 12% of patients over a few months to several years. A vascular steal syndrome has been hypothesized to cause this presentation, but in most cases, this is related to mass effect, hemorrhage, or seizure. These include seizure, hemiparesis, visual disturbances, loss of sensation in one-half of the body, and aphasia. Minor bleeding can occur with no noticeable symptoms.

- A headache – There are no specific headache features that associate with AVM, which may be incidental to the headaches.