Patient complaints of thoracic outlet syndrome can be vague and have a wide range of symptoms depending on the etiology of the malady. Nebulous pain is one of the most common complaints amongst all etiologies. Venous obstruction can present with upper extremity swelling, venous distention, and pain ranging from the hand to the forearm.

The physical exam, in a patient with suspected TOS, is crucial to confirming the diagnosis and pinpointing the etiology. Improper posture can trigger symptoms, so a quick overview of the patient is necessary. Symmetry and range of motion of both arms should be tested initially. Spurling’s test in which the patient’s head is extended and laterally flexed with the examiner providing axial compression. This test should reproduce radicular pain. In a patient with suspected arterial compression due to TOS, the Adson maneuver should be performed. This test involves extending and slightly abducting the shoulder. The patient extends their neck and turns it toward the examiner’s shoulder while the examiner palpates the radial pulse. The pulse should diminish if arterial compromise is present.

A neurological exam focused on the upper extremity is necessary to evaluate for nerve compression. Gilliatt-Sumner hand is a finding in which the abductor pollicis brevis and the hypothenar muscles become atrophied due to the nerve compression.

The roos stress test can help to test for any variant of TOS. In this test, the patient abducts and externally rotates their shoulders with the elbow at a ninety-degree angle. The patient will then open and close their hand. Fatigue or reproduction of symptoms is a positive result.