Several techniques have been described for reversed or valvotomized saphenous vein graft harvesting for coronary artery bypass grafting. Reversed vein grafting negates the function of the venous valves inherent to the saphenous vein whereas valvotomized veins lose their valvular function.

Initial identification of the saphenous veins can be performed by identifying anatomic landmarks and palpating a thrill with one hand while milking the vein with the other hand; additionally, preoperative ultrasonography can directly visualize and mark the saphenous vein.

Historically, an open approach to SVG harvest has been the method of choice, in which an incision is made following the course of the saphenous vein and continued down until the identification of the vein. Sequential, step-ladder, incisions can also be used, rather than a single, parallel incision. Dissection continues along the length of the vein with care to manipulate the vein as minimally as possible. Tributaries are identified and clipped or tied. On obtaining a suitable length of vein, the proximal and distal aspects of the vein are clamped, the vein is ligated and removed. The vein is carefully cannulated to avoid endothelial damage, and heparinized saline is used to insufflate the vein to assess for any points of extravasation that can be addressed with clips, ties or by oversewing with monofilament suture. This specimen is then placed in a heparinized saline bath until used for implantation.

More recently, a less invasive approach to saphenous vein harvesting has been implemented—the endoscopic saphenous vein harvest (EVH). EVH of the saphenous vein begins by making a small incision just above the medial aspect of the knee to obtain ~ 35 cm of graft, or by making an additional incision 2-3 cm above the medial malleolus to capture the entire ~70 cm length of the vein. A balloon tip trocar is then inserted into the incision in the direction of the groin, and a tunnel around the saphenous vein is created by insufflating the fascial canal along the length of the vessel. A conical dissection cone is then advanced towards the groin along the anterior aspect of the vessel free from tributaries. Circumferential dissection of the vein is then performed carefully identifying any tributaries along the lateral and posterior aspects of the wall; these undergo ligation with bipolar electrocautery. Once the vessel is isolated entirely, a stab incision is made at the groin and the vessel is removed. Similar to open harvest, the vein is then cannulated and any remaining branches or points of injury are clipped, tied or oversewn.

Whether performing open or endoscopic harvest, extreme care is necessary to avoid unnecessary trauma and damage to the vessel, as increased manipulation of the vein is associated with higher rates of thrombosis and atherosclerosis, and decreased vessel patency.