A technique referred to as bounce diving is commonly used in standard commercial wet diving and also for dry diving the tunneling industry when hyperbaric interventions are required. Bounce diving requires several teams of CAWs, working in succession over a 24-hour period.  The hyperbaric chamber is used to compress the workers into the face of the TBM to perform their duties. The chambers are built directly into the front of the tunnel boring machines (TBMs) during fabrication. The time spent performing their duties in the face of the TBM is commensurate with the depth and time of the work and the decompression tables used. Upon completion of their shift, they decompress in the hyperbaric chamber. During compression and decompression, the CAWs are observed by a team of skilled hyperbaric chamber operators and the on-site hyperbaric medical teams.  Some construction companies have used dive medical technologists (DMTs) to perform on-site medical duties. The company allocates them to multiple duties such as driving the chamber and entering the chamber while at depth to attend to medical emergencies.  Some actually expect the chamber to be decompressed by the DMT from inside the chamber simultaneously while performing the emergency medical duties.  This practice should be considered unsafe and avoided as it is not the optimal fashion to provide hyperbaric medical services.  There should be an experienced dive medicine physician and medical team on-site separate from chamber operation duties. The team should be composed of emergency medical technologists (EMT) with hyperbaric or dive medic certification (CHT) and/or emergency trained nurses (CEN) with hyperbaric certification (CHRN) to assist the physician in performing diver health evaluations.  The National Board of Diving and Hyperbaric Medical Technology (NBDHMT) and the Baromedical Nurses Association (BNA) provide these certifications.  This method of working with the onsite medical team is the preferred and safest method to provide the required healthcare to the CAW teams. Using a highly qualified medical team on-site comes with a higher cost factor for the construction company but will prove to be a money-saving endeavor if a significant emergent medical problem was to occur.

The term "bounce diving" makes reference to daily compression and decompression of the CAWs; similar to that performed in commercial wet diving. The hyperbaric intervention begins with a rapid compression to the working depth.  The rate of compression is commensurate with the CAWs ability to equalize middle ear pressure, and not to exceed the predetermined minimum time limit of compression to the working depth.  This is followed by a short working period and longer decompression to surface.  A variety of gases may be employed for this purpose. The most common being oxygen when the decompression depth reaches 60 FSW equivalent. At this point of decompression, oxygen is breathed intermittently during a series of decompression stops.  This continues until the CAWs reach the surface.

The required pressure to maintain a balance between the earth and the face of the TBM is known before hyperbaric interventions and adjusted based on the earth conditions.   A diving plan is put in place that will include a compression rate and working time to pressure based on the working depth.  They use a variety of accepted diving decompression tables that may include the use of a variety of gas mixtures depending on the depth of the work and necessary time for decompression. The decompression tables used will vary depending on the preference of the dive company and hyperbaric physicians responsible for setting the best bounce-dive schedule in an attempt to mitigate the potential for decompression sickness. The French decompression tables for tunnel bounce diving are preferred as they are more conservative than the U.S. Navy Treatment Tables (USNTT).  They also employ a combination of air-Oxygen decompression using a sealed mask to shorten decompression time and add a significant level of safety (risk mitigation) to the decompression schedule.  Air-only decompression tables are used by some companies but are discouraged. The benefits of using oxygen as a supplemental gas for working at pressure and for decompression are well known and will decrease the incidence of DCS

More practical ways of performing hyperbaric interventions are being investigated.  One such option is mixed gas saturation diving and its physiologic and pathologic effects on CAWs and commercial divers

Saturation dives can be accomplished using compressed air but are most commonly performed using mixed gases; helium being the most common additive to air or gas mixture. All the components of the air we breathe become toxic at depths greater than 60 FSW and over prolonged periods of time.   The potential for oxygen toxicity increases with the risk of nitrogen narcosis.  The addition of helium to the mix decreases the amounts of oxygen and nitrogen rendering the breathing mixture less-toxic to the CAW.  The goal is to maintain an oxygen partial pressure of 0.3 to 0.4 atm at depth (slightly higher than sea level at 0.21). These levels seem to mitigate the risks of oxygen toxicity and hypoxia. Lowering nitrogen levels mitigates the risk of nitrogen narcosis and improved CAW mentation.  CAWs performing hyperbaric interventions need not be concerned with an excursion deeper than or more shallow than the working depth.   Any minimal changes in depth between the habitat, excursion shuttle, and man-lock are managed by the dive team life support technologists and hyperbaric physician.  This is not the same for wet divers who may be required to ascend and descend in the water once they leave the diving bell or transfer capsule to reach a work area.  Here, excursion decompression tables are used to mitigate the risk of DCS.