**History**

A detailed history and physical are imperative to evaluating vertigo since differentiating vestibular versus central, potentially life-threatening processes is of critical importance. Ask open-ended questions to obtain the best possible description of symptoms. Ask regarding the timing of symptoms and context, as well as exacerbating and alleviating factors. Inquire about recent viral infections due to association with labyrinthitis and about trauma, recent neurosurgery, and medications that may be ototoxic, as this may suggest an alternate diagnosis.

The severity of each episode covers a wide spectrum. For instance, in extreme cases, even the slightest head movement could result in nausea and vomiting. Patients with BPPV do not have dizziness all the time. The attacks of severe dizziness only occur when there is head movement. Between episodes, patients have few or no symptoms at rest. However, occasionally patients present with the complaint of an ongoing "foggy or cloudy" sensorium.

An episode of BPPV is usually set off by a sudden movement from the erect to the supine position keeping the head at an angle of 45 degrees toward the side of the involved ear. For an episode of BPPV to occur, the head actually must turn to the offending position, and it will not be enough to just be in the provocative position. Once the provocative pose is reached, the symptoms appear after a few seconds. When BPPV gets triggered, patients suddenly feel having been thrown into a rolling spin, tumbling toward the affected ear. The spell is violent at the outset and usually disappears within 20 to 30 seconds. The same spell strikes again upon sitting erect; however, this time, the nystagmus is reversed.

**Physical Examination**

The physical examination in patients with BPPV is usually unremarkable. The Dix-Hallpike maneuver is the only standard clinical test of great clinical significance in BPPV.

In the Dix-Hallpike maneuver, the patient is rapidly moved from a sitting to the supine posture with the head turned 45 degrees to the right. After 20 to 30 seconds, the patient is brought back to the sitting position. If there is no nystagmus, the same procedure is repeated on the left side. While performing the Dix-Hallpike maneuver, some important tips to be mindful of are:

- The head should not be turned 90 degrees as this can bring about an illusion of bilateral influence.

- The briskness with which the Dix-Hallpike test is performed should be individualized to each patient.

- The Epley modification - The test should be performed from behind the patient as it is easier to pull the outer canthus in the superolateral direction to observe the eyeball rotation.

- The axis of the nystagmus is near the undermost canthus. It is useful to direct the patient gaze toward the anticipated axis to minimize suppression.

In a study, Yetiser and Ince reported that the most effective way to diagnose lateral canal BPPV was the head-roll maneuver. This was in comparison to the lying-down and head-bending tests. The study found that the head-roll maneuver located 75% of cases with apogeotropic nystagmus and 95.6% of cases with geotropic nystagmus.

The following are some important points to remember regarding the history and physical examination of the patients with BPPV:

- Common risk factors include increasing age, female gender, vestibular neuronitis, labyrinthitis, head trauma, migraine, inner ear surgery, and Meniere disease.

- A central disorder is likely responsible if vertigo has no relation with movements. Labyrinthitis or vestibular neuronitis may mimic BPPV; however, unlike BPPV, movement in any plane can trigger a spell that will usually persist for days.

- BPPV often lasts for more than 30 seconds. In contrast, vertigo associated with other disorders is of longer duration, such as an episode of Meniere disease could last for hours, vestibular neuronitis or viral labyrinthitis persists for days, migraines have a variable duration, and the rest of the central disorders may be constant.

- BPPV has an episodic nature. In posterior canal BPPV, the spells repeat over weeks to months. In lateral or horizontal canal BPPV, the episodes repeat over days to weeks.

- An isolated attack should not be taken as BPPV unless the Dix-Hallpike maneuver is positive.

- Vertigo associated with BPPV is usually intense, specifically in the lateral canal type. If vertigo is mild, other causes, particularly central, should be considered.

- BPPV is sudden in origin, while central causes present gradually.