Most of the cases of peripheral lymphadenopathy are believed to have resulted from the reactivation of latent tuberculosis.

Cell-mediated immunity develops approximately 3 weeks after exposure. Bacterial antigens are presented to CD4 T cells by antigen-presenting cells dendritic and macrophages. CD4 T-cells produce interferon-gamma, which in turn activates the macrophages. Activated macrophages produce many factors such as tissue necrosis factor(TNF), cytokines, and chemokines which attract other phagocytes including neutrophils, monocytes, alveolar macrophages responsible for the formation of granuloma with epitheliod cells and multinucleated giant cells surrounded by a rim of sensitized T cells and later on central caseous necrosis that may contain tubercle bacilli. Activated macrophages also produce nitric oxide and free radicals that kill bacteria. Primary TB with lymph node involvement has the same pathogenesis as in granuloma formation.Reactivation of latent infection gives rise to secondary tuberculosis in previously sensitized patients may occur shortly or decades after the initial infection, principally when the host immune defense is weakened. It may also result from reinfection. Some hypothesis says lymph node involvement is less in secondary TB than in primary due to fibrosis and early wall off of focus in previously sensitized immunocompetent patients. Progressive secondary TB, especially in immunocompromised (HIV) and debilitated patients, cause massive hematogenous and lymphatic dissemination leading to miliary TB with multiple extrapulmonary involvements, mainly peripheral lymph nodes. Notably, cervical lymph nodes involvement is exceptionally more common.

Scrofula may be due to the draining of primary focus into peripheral lymph nodes, particularly cervical lymph nodes along with mandibular, upper jugular, and tonsillar. These lymph nodes are vulnerable due to lowered resistance by recurrent infections of other bacterial in the throat makes a suitable environment for the growth of mycobacteria. Tubercle bacilli reach these lymph nodes either by lymphatic or hematogenous dissemination.

Tonsils and adenoids can also be the primary source of tuberculous infections. The primary inflammatory reaction is followed by caseous necrosis and cold abscess formation, and later on, fibrosis and calcifications occur as a part of the healing process. Inflammation and necrosis are bounded by a fibrous capsule, which limits the spread of infection. Rupture of fibrous capsule causes accumulation of abscess under superficial fascia forms "collar-stud abscess."