A failure to follow the expected trajectory of social-emotional development can lead to undetected mental and emotional health problems. Adverse childhood experiences can alter development significantly. Thus, alongside screening for child development, actively screening for family dysfunction and supporting families in establishing a healthy nurturing environment is vital. By having a thorough knowledge of developmental pathways and adverse childhood experiences, and having a close follow-up established with families in the medical home, pediatricians and medical professionals are in a prime position to identify risk factors and developmental delays timely.

Medical professionals taking care of children should begin with identifying and addressing the family's concerns, asking open-ended questions regarding social-emotional milestones, and intentionally observing parent-child interaction and child’s interaction with the environment including themselves. While examining the patient, they should observe age-appropriate developmental interaction.  They should give teenagers the opportunity to engage in health visits in a private and safe environment without a caregiver. Also, should be able to address questions about parenting advice. These include advice on temper tantrums and defiant behaviors, child care and preschool guidance, referring to parent training management when appropriate, and counseling on temperament differences and "goodness of fit" models.

The American Academy of Pediatrics (AAP) and Bright Futures Guidelines for Health Supervision of Infants, Children, and Adolescents emphasize active screening for developmental delays and environmental risk factors on top of clinical surveillance. This includes the use of standardized screening tools for social-emotional development and for environmental risks appropriate to the risk level of the population you serve. Environmental risk factors should include caregiver/family functioning, caregiver mental health, socio-economic stress, refugee/immigrant status, safety concerns, caregiver drug addiction, etc. AAP recommends screening for autism spectrum disorder (ASD) at both the 18- and 24-month health supervision visits, and whenever concerns are raised. When using screening tests, one should be cognizant of some potential limitations including the inability to administer and score the screening tool correctly, using it as a diagnostic tool, failure to incorporate other available clinical data, and using a linguistic or culturally inappropriate tool.

If screening identifies any risk factor or delays, it should always follow with further assessment and evidence-based interventions. Screening for maternal depression especially during the first year of childbirth is important. Identifying and intervening for maternal depression early on can avoid attachment and social-emotional problems in the child later. With clear delays in social and language development, it is important to initiate services even before a confirmed diagnosis as early intervention is the key. If the child is younger than 3 years should be referred to local Early Intervention EI services. A child 3 years of age or older should be referred to their school district. Anticipatory guidelines should include evidence-based strategies for age-appropriate behavioral interventions such as the management of temper tantrums for toddlers. Implementing the use of developmental screening tools in clinical practice has shown an encouraging trend though still, a wide gap in practice remains.

**Standardized Screening Instruments**

**Caregiver Functioning**

- Adverse Childhood Experience Score

- Parenting Stress Index-Short Form

- Depression, Anxiety, and Stress Scale

- Patient Health Questionnaire-2

- Edinburgh Postnatal Depression Screening

- Center for Epidemiologic Studies Depression Scale

**Temperament**

Carey Temperament Scales

**Infancy to Early Childhood**

- Ages and Stages Questionnaire: Social-Emotional

- Survey of Well Being of Young Children

- Communication and Symbolic-Behavior Scale

- Developmental Profile, Infant Toddler Checklist

- Brief Infant-Social Emotional Assessment

**Early Childhood to Adolescence**

- Eyberg Child Behavior Inventory

- Pediatric Symptom Checklist

- Pictorial Pediatric Symptom Checklist

**Multidimensional**

- Infant-Toddler Social Emotional Assessment

- NCAST Parent-Child Interaction Feeding and Teaching Scale

- Achenbach System of Empirically Based Assessment

- Behavior Assessment Scale for Children Second Edition

- Connors Comprehensive Behavior Rating Scales

- Child Symptom Inventories-4

- Vanderbilt Parent and Teacher Assessment Scales

**Single Dimension Attention-Deficit/Hyperactivity Disorder**

- Conners Third Edition

- Attention Deficit Disorders Scale

- Brown Attention Deficit Disorder Scales

**Single Dimension Anxiety/Depression**

Beck Youth Inventories

(Adapted from Duby JC, Social and Emotional Development. In: Voigt RG, Macias MM, Myers SM, eds. Developmental and Behavioral Pediatrics. Elk Grove Village, IL: American Academy of Pediatrics; 2011:241–248)