The central nervous system is the main system involved. Specific brain structures have specific tasks within memory development. For example, the hippocampus is required for the consolidation of memories from short-term to long-term, whereas the amygdala adds emotional pertinence to memories. It is the pattern and strength of the connections between cortical structures that permit the storage and retrieval of encoded information.

Functional imaging, such as PET or fMRI, has permitted investigation of structures involved in the encoding of stimulus into declarative memory. Certain brain regions may have a specific function in the consolidation of memories. However, most of the cortex works in a combined fashion to enhance the retrieval of memories and learning. "Working memory," temporary memory that does not necessarily get encoded into long term memory, gets defined differently in the literature, with some authors discussing working memory in similar mechanisms as long term memory. In contrast, others discuss it as a different and separate process to store and manipulate information.

The hippocampus is a structure related to visuospatial processing, and, in part, to “working” memory. Saturating mechanisms of working memory are possible, with excessive details or quantity of information leading to mistakes in this short-term memory.

The amygdala functions in processing emotional components of memory, such as pain, fear, and pleasure. Animals stimulated with a noxious or rewarding stimulus, display increased activity in areas of the amygdala, allowing the animals to differentiate between positive and negative memories. Negative stimuli are more easily stored and remembered, as they tend to create a fight or flight response. In humans, negative stimuli presented during memory formation was associated with the subjects retaining more details about the stimuli (images, words, etc.). Reward stimuli, or “good” stimuli, also may increase retention, but to a lesser degree.

The ventral prefrontal cortex correlates with remembering pre-learned schema. It has robust connections with medial temporal structures, and it helps to recognize something that has already happened, while remembering some details associated to it, helping filling gaps in things we think we know already.

The nervous system has deep connections with the endocrine system. For example, the release of cortisol, our primary stress hormone, initiates by signaling within the hypothalamus. Also, there is a correlation between the density of receptors for cortisol, glucocorticoid receptors (GR), within the hippocampus, and the capacity of the neuronal pathways to store information. Upregulation of GRs and corticoids acts in synergy with memory plasticity and memory storage resulting in stressful situations having stronger memories.