Differential diagnosis of myopathy is extensive, as it varies depends on the associated symptoms:

**Guillain-Barre syndrome:**The typical patient with GBS, which in most cases will manifest as acute inflammatory demyelinating polyradiculoneuropathy (AIDP), presents 2-4 weeks following a relatively benign respiratory or gastrointestinal illness with complaints of finger dysesthesias and proximal muscle weakness of the lower extremities. The weakness may progress over hours to days to involve the arms, truncal muscles, cranial nerves, and muscles of respiration.

**Tick-borne diseases:**The reference standard for the diagnosis of tickborne rickettsial diseases is the indirect immunofluorescence antibody (IFA) assay using paired serum samples obtained soon after illness onset and 2-4 weeks later.

**Lambert-Eaton myasthenic syndrome (LEMS):**proximal muscle weakness, depressed tendon reflexes, post-tetanic potentiation, and autonomic changes due to impairment in acetylcholine release.

**Myasthenia gravis:**an autoimmune disorder of peripheral nerves in which antibodies form against acetylcholine (ACh) nicotinic postsynaptic receptors at the myoneural junction. A reduction in the number of ACh receptors results in a characteristic pattern of progressively reduced muscle strength with repeated use of the muscle and recovery of muscle strength following a period of rest. The bulbar muscles are affected most commonly and most severely, but most patients also develop some degree of fluctuating generalized weakness.

Other differentials include the following:

- Malignant hyperthermia

- Myotonia

- Myositis ossificans

- Myositis associated with the vasculitides

- Paraneoplastic syndromes (eg. carcinomatous neuropathy, cachexia, myonecrosis)

- Direct muscle damage (trauma, excessive exercise)

- Nutritional deficiencies (vitamin E deficiency, malabsorption syndromes)