Primary hyperaldosteronism (PHA) occurs due to the excess aldosterone production by the adrenal gland. The most common cause of PHA (in two-thirds of the patients) is idiopathic bilateral adrenal hyperplasia. In the remaining one-third of patients, a tumor in the zona glomerulosa, known as Conn syndrome, can directly cause an increase in aldosterone. These patients are usually asymptomatic but can typically present with hypertension and hypokalemia.

Secondary hyperaldosteronism (SHA) occurs due to the excess stimulation of the RAAS. It can happen due to physiologic state of transient RAAS activation such as hypovolemia but can be seen in pathological states of sustained RAAS activation. Renal artery stenosis (atherosclerosis or fibromuscular dysplasia) causes decreased blood flow through the kidneys, simulates a false sense of hypovolemia, and activates aldosterone secretion. In left-sided congestive heart failure and cor pulmonale, a decrease in cardiac output leads to aldosterone stimulation. In patients with cirrhosis and ascites, the reduction in circulating fluid volume leads to decreased perfusion through the kidneys and results in increased aldosterone secretion. Less commonly found is a renin-producing tumor in the juxtaglomerular cells. Both primary and secondary hyperaldosteronism can present with a broad clinical range.

Aldosterone is the primary mineralocorticoid in the body. Aldosterone acts on the epithelial sodium channels (ENaC) in the collecting tubules and causes sodium reabsorption. This creates a negative potential in the tubular lumen and, in turn, causes movement of cations (primarily potassium and hydrogen ions) into the tubular lumen to maintain electrical neutrality, resulting in hypokalemia and metabolic alkalosis. The increased reabsorption of sodium leads to hypertension and volume expansion.****