# Continuing Education Activity

Diabetes insipidus (DI) is a disease process that results in either decreased release of antidiuretic hormone (ADH, also known as vasopressin or AVP) or decreased response to ADH, causing electrolyte imbalances. There are two types of diabetes insipidus, central and nephrogenic, and each has congenital and acquired causes. Diabetes insipidus is caused by a problem with vasopressin production in the pituitary gland (central) or the action of vasopressin in the kidneys (nephrogenic). Based on the site of its pathology, it can be divided into central diabetes insipidus (CDI) and nephrogenic diabetes insipidus (NDI). This activity reviews the etiology, presentation, evaluation, and management of diabetes insipidus and the role of the interprofessional team in evaluating, diagnosing, and managing this condition.

**Objectives:**
- Review the pathophysiology of the two primary categories of diabetes insipidus causes in each category.
- Outline the factors in evaluating a patient with suspected diabetes insipidus, including laboratory analysis.
- Describe the treatment options for diabetes insipidus, depending on the specific etiology.
- Explain the importance of improving coordination among the interprofessional team to enhance care for patients affected by diabetes insipidus.

# Introduction

Diabetes insipidus (DI) is a clinical syndrome characterized by the passage of abnormally large volumes of urine (diabetes) that is dilute (hypotonic) and devoid of taste from dissolved solutes (i.e., insipid). They belong to a group of inherited or acquired disorders of polyuria and polydipsia. This is associated with insufficient arginine vasopressin (AVP) or antidiuretic hormone (ADH) secretion or renal response to AVP, resulting in hypotonic polyuria and compensatory/underlying polydipsia.

# Etiology

Diabetes insipidus is caused by a problem with vasopressin production in the pituitary gland (central) or the action of vasopressin in the kidneys (nephrogenic). Based on the site of its pathology, it can be divided into central diabetes insipidus (CDI) and nephrogenic diabetes insipidus (NDI).

**1. Central Diabetes Insipidus (CDI)**

Based on a literature review, the most common cause of Central diabetes insipidus (CDI) is idiopathic diabetes insipidus (DI).

a) Idiopathic CDI

Approximately 30 to 50 percent of cases of CDI are idiopathic. They are suggested to be associated with an autoimmune etiology in most patients.

Another study of 150 patients with CDI evaluated their association with other autoimmune diseases and their correlation with imaging findings. The study reported etiology of CDI was idiopathic in 43 percent, familial in 4 percent, granulomatous in 8 percent, and an acquired cause like cranial trauma, tumor, or surgery in 45 percent of cases.

Antibodies to vasopressin cells were found in approximately one-third of the patients with idiopathic disease and about one-quarter with non-idiopathic disease.

The autoantigens involved in idiopathic CDI are not entirely elucidated. In patients with lymphocytic infundibuloneurohypophysitis (LINH), autoantibodies to rabphilin-3A, a regulator of secretory vesicle trafficking, are found in a large majority of patients.

b) Familial and congenital disease

Many familial and congenital diseases have been associated with CDI. These include familial CDI, Wolfram syndrome, proprotein convertase subtilisin/kexin type 1 (PCSK1) gene****deficiency, and congenital diseases such as congenital hypopituitarism and septo-optic dysplasia.

- Familial CDI, also called familial neurohypophyseal DI or FNDI, is an autosomal dominant disease caused by mutations in the gene encoding antidiuretic hormone (ADH; also called arginine vasopressin or AVP).

- Wolfram syndrome or DIDMOAD (diabetes insipidus, diabetes mellitus, optic atrophy, and deafness) syndrome is characterized by CDI, diabetes mellitus, optic atrophy, and deafness, with cognitive and psychiatric issues that may appear later in life

- Proprotein convertase subtilisin/kexin-type 1 (PCSK1) gene deficiency — The PCSK1 gene encodes a 753-amino acid precursor, preproPC1/3, which is processed in the ER into its proenzyme form, proPC1/3. ProPC1/3 is then modified by cleavage of its prodomain into active PC1/3.

- Congenital hypopituitarism — CDI has been described in patients with congenital hypopituitarism with or without ectopia of the posterior pituitary lobe.

c) Neurosurgery or trauma

Traumatic injury to the hypothalamus and posterior pituitary or neurosurgery with a transsphenoidal approach usually induces DI.

Despite the relatively high frequency of CDI in patients undergoing neurosurgery, most cases of polyuria in this setting are **not**due to CDI.

d) Cancer

Primary or secondary (most often due to lung cancer, leukemia, or lymphoma) tumors in the brain can involve the hypothalamic-pituitary region and lead to CDI.

e) Hypoxic encephalopathy

Hypoxic encephalopathy or severe ischemia (as seen with cardiopulmonary arrest or shock) can lead to diminished ADH release.

f) Infiltrative disorders

Infiltrative disorders like Langerhan's cell histiocytosis, granulomatosis with polyangiitis, autoimmune lymphocytic hypophysitis, and sarcoidosis are associated with CDI.

**2. Nephrogenic Diabetes Insipidus (NDI)**

Nephrogenic diabetes insipidus (DI) refers to a decrease in the urinary concentrating ability of the kidney that results from resistance to the action of antidiuretic hormone (ADH). The pathology can be due to resistance at the ADH site of activity in the collecting tubules or interference with the countercurrent mechanism due, for example, to medullary injury or decreased sodium chloride reabsorption in the medullary aspect of the thick ascending limb of the loop of Henle.

The most common causes of NDI are hereditary nephrogenic DI in children, chronic lithium ingestion, and hypercalcemia in adults. Acquired causes are often partially reversible with cessation of the offending drug or correction of hypercalcemia.

a) Hereditary nephrogenic DI — Hereditary nephrogenic DI is an uncommon disorder resulting in variable degrees of resistance to ADH.AVPR2 gene is located on the X chromosome (Xq-28).

b) Vasopressin V2 receptor gene mutations — Approximately 90 percent of cases of hereditary nephrogenic DI have X-linked inheritance. They are due to mutations in the AVPR2 gene, which encodes for a dysfunctional vasopressin V2 receptor (V2R).

c) Aquaporin-2 gene mutation — The second form of hereditary nephrogenic DI is caused by a defect in the aquaporin-2 gene that encodes the ADH-sensitive water channels in the collecting tubule cells. This variant may have autosomal recessive or autosomal dominant modes of inheritance.

d) Lithium toxicity - About 20 percent of patients on chronic lithium therapy develop polyuria causing NDI. The adverse effect of lithium is mediated by the entry into the principal cells in the collecting tubule via the epithelial sodium channel (ENaC).

e) Hypercalcemia - A plasma calcium concentration persistently above 11 mg/dl (2.75 mmol/L) can impair renal concentrating ability.

f) Hypokalemia - Persistent severe hypokalemia can impair urinary concentrating ability. The mechanisms by which this occurs are incompletely understood. Downregulation of urea transporters may also contribute to the impairment of urinary concentrating ability induced by potassium depletion.

g) Other: NDI has been described in numerous other conditions.

- Kidney disorders: Symptomatic nephrogenic DI can be seen in sickle cell disease or trait, autosomal dominant polycystic kidney disease and medullary cystic kidney disease, renal amyloidosis, and Sjögren syndrome.

- Drugs: Other than lithium, various other medications like cidofovir, foscarnet, amphotericin B, ofloxacin, ifosfamide, and orlistat have been shown to cause NDI. Drug-induced nephrogenic DI is typically reversible, at least in part.

- Pregnancy: A transient form is noted in a few patients during the second half of their pregnancy.

3. **Pregnancy-Induced/Gestational Diabetes Insipidus**

- Increased vasopressin metabolism induced by placental cysteine aminopeptidase.

4. **Primary Polydipsia**

a) Psychogenic polydipsia

b) Drug-induced: Anticholinergics, phenothiazines

c) Intracranial etiology: Hypothalamic tumors, tuberculous meningitis, sarcoidosis

d) Lowering of the hypothalamic threshold for thirst - dipsogenic DI

# Epidemiology

Diabetes insipidus is an uncommon endocrine disorder affecting nearly 1 in 25,000 people or about 0.004% of the global population.

# Pathophysiology

Diabetes insipidus, based on the site of pathology, can be caused by two different defects, i.e., central and peripheral (nephrogenic) types.

The **central DI**is secondary to Inadequate/ impaired secretion of Vasopressin (AVP) from the posterior pituitary gland in response to osmotic stimulation and a decrease in blood pressure. AVP is synthesized as a precursor complex in the supraoptic and periventricular nuclei of the hypothalamus and encoded by the AVP-neurophysin II gene. It is released by calcium-dependent exocytosis. The osmoreceptors are found in the hypothalamus, arterial baroreceptors, and the atrial stretch receptors. In most cases, the neurohypophysis is destroyed by various acquired or congenital anatomic lesions secondary to pressure or infiltration. The resulting hypotonic diuresis depends on the degree of destruction of the neurohypophysis, leading to complete or partial deficiency of AVP secretion.

Despite the wide variety of lesions that can potentially cause CDI, it is much more common not to have CDI in the presence of such lesions than to produce the syndrome. This apparent inconsistency can be understood by considering several common neurohypophyseal physiology principles and pathophysiology relevant to all these causes. Lesions contained within the sella turcica that destroy only the posterior pituitary generally do not cause CDI because the cell bodies of the magnocellular neurons that synthesize AVP remain intact, and the site of release of AVP shifts more superiorly, typically into the blood vessels of the median eminence at the base of the brain. Perhaps the best examples of this phenomenon are large pituitary macroadenomas that completely destroy the anterior and posterior pituitary.

DI is a distinctly unusual presentation for such pituitary adenomas because the destruction of the posterior pituitary by such slowly enlarging intrasellar lesions merely destroys the nerve terminals, but not the cell bodies, of the AVP neurons. As this occurs, the site of release of AVP shifts more superiorly to the pituitary stalk and median eminence. The development of DI from a pituitary adenoma is so uncommon, even with macroadenomas that completely obliterate sellar contents sufficiently to cause panhypopituitarism, that its presence should lead to consideration of alternative diagnoses, such as craniopharyngioma. This often causes damage to the median eminence because of adherence of the capsule to the base of the hypothalamus, more rapidly enlarging sellar or suprasellar masses that do not allow sufficient time for shifting the site of AVP release more superiorly (e.g., metastatic lesions, acute hemorrhage), or granulomatous disease, with more diffuse hypothalamic involvement (e.g., sarcoidosis, histiocytosis).

A second general principle is that the capacity of the neurohypophysis to synthesize AVP is greatly in excess of the body's daily needs for maintaining water homeostasis. Carefully controlled studies of the surgical section of the pituitary stalk in dogs have demonstrated that the destruction of 80% to 90% of the magnocellular neurons in the hypothalamus is required to produce polyuria and polydipsia in these species. Thus, even lesions that cause destruction of the AVP magnocellular neuron cell bodies must produce a large degree of destruction to produce DI.

As the name suggests, in **Nephrogenic DI**, the site of action of AVP at the levels of kidneys is the V2 receptors are defective.

Various mutations cause several different defects in cellular processing and function of the receptor but can be classified into four general categories based on differences in transport to the cell surface and AVP binding and/or stimulation of adenylyl cyclase, as follows: (1) the mutant receptor is not inserted in the membrane; (2) the mutant receptor is inserted in the membrane but does not bind or respond to AVP; (3) the mutant receptor is inserted in the membrane and binds AVP but does not activate adenylyl cyclase; or (4) the mutant protein is inserted into the membrane and binds AVP but responds subnormally in terms of adenylyl cyclase activation.

The two principle negative feedback loops associated with body water homeostasis and the effects of DI are quite drastic. The osmoregulation negative feedback loop responds to changes in serum osmolality, with normal serum osmolality being between 285 mOsm/kg and 295 mOsm/kg. When osmolality is greater than 295 mOsm/kg, a loss of body water occurs, and the blood is more concentrated. The baroregulation negative feedback loop responds to changes in blood volume and blood pressure. The hypothalamus responds to the baroreceptor changes by suppressing or increasing ADH synthesis and release from the posterior pituitary gland. Even slight changes, such as a 5 to 10% decrease in blood volume or a 5% decrease in mean arterial pressure, can stimulate ADH release. In general, the body first regulates ADH secretion in response to osmoregulation. In severe volume depletion, baroreceptor stimulation of ADH takes precedence over osmoregulation.

**Gestational Diabetes Insipidus**

Gestational DI occurs in about 1 in 30,000 pregnancies due to the degradation of AVP by the enzyme cysteine aminopeptidase. Vasopressinase levels are typically higher in pregnant women (up to 300 times higher), more so in twin pregnancies.[

# History and Physical

The primary symptoms common to both types include polydipsia, polyuria, and nocturia. Polyuria is defined as a urine output of more than 3 L/day in adults or 2 L/m^2 in children.

In children, symptoms can be nonspecific, and they may present with severe dehydration, constipation, vomiting, fevers, irritability, failure to thrive, and growth retardation. In patients with central nervous system (CNS) tumors, headaches and visual defects may present in addition to the classic symptoms.

The serum concentration in untreated CDI is often in the high normal range, secondary to stimulation of thirst centers in the brain to replace urinary water losses.

Patients with CDI may develop decreased bone mineral density at the lumbar spine and femoral neck. The mechanism for this is unclear.

Additional symptoms in patients with diabetes insipidus may include weakness, lethargy, fatigue, and myalgias.

# Evaluation

Diagnosing the type of diabetes insipidus is essential for making the optimal treatment decision. A potential misdiagnosis and the resultant treatment can cause catastrophic consequences.

The various polyuria-polydipsia syndromes often show overlapping features. This makes the diagnosis and classification of DI difficult. The water deprivation test or the indirect water deprivation test generally helps distinguish between different forms of diabetes insipidus. This interpretation is complicated in partial central DI, nephrogenic DI, or chronic primary polydipsia. Typically, patients with partial central or nephrogenic DI retain some amount of response to water deprivation and desmopressin administration.

An algorithmic approach can help diagnose and classify suspected cases of DI.

**1. Confirmation of hypotonic polyuria**

The primary objective in this step involves differentiating between conditions that give rise to polyuria resulting from osmotic diuresis (such as in hyperglycemia) and DI/primary polydipsia, in which polyuria predominantly involves water diuresis.

The first step is to confirm if the patient indeed has polyuria. Calculate the total 24-hour urine volume to confirm polyuria. Obtain baseline values of plasma electrolytes, random serum, and urine osmolality.

Polyuria is defined as the excretion of a urinary volume >150 ml/Kg/24 hours at birth, >100-110 ml/Kg/24 hours up to the age of 2 years, and >50 ml/Kg/24 hours in older children or adults. Patients need not hold any medications that can cause polyuria, such as diuretics or sodium-glucose co-transporter-2 (SGLT-2) inhibitors, for this step, as the goal of this step is to establish the presence of polyuria. Once polyuria is confirmed and other causes are ruled out, we measure the urine osmolality.    Hypotonic urine is typically defined as an osmolality of <300 mOsm/Kg.

If the urine osmolality is >800 mOsm/Kg, this indicates optimal plasma AVP levels and appropriate renal response to AVP, thereby ruling out any DI.

Similarly, a high plasma osmolality (≥300 mOsm/Kg) is typically seen in DI, while a normal or low plasma osmolality (≤280 mOsm/Kg) is usually seen in primary polydipsia.

**2. Diagnosis of the type of polyuria-polydipsia syndrome**

To differentiate central and nephrogenic diabetes insipidus and primary polydipsia, perform a water deprivation test and desmopressin (DDAVP) trial. Typically a 7-hour deprivation test is adequate to diagnose diabetes insipidus. Primary polydipsia may require longer dehydration periods. The basic principle behind the water deprivation test is that in individuals with normal posterior pituitary and renal function (or those with primary polydipsia), an increase in plasma osmolality from dehydration stimulates AVP release from the posterior pituitary, which then leads to water reabsorption in the nephrons, thus resulting in concentration of urine and an increase in urine osmolality. In central or nephrogenic DI, the urine fails to concentrate optimally with water deprivation, and there is persistent excretion of hypotonic urine.

In adults, the water restriction test should be discontinued when one of the following is reached:

- Urine osmolality reaches the normal reference range.

- Urine osmolality is stable on two to three consecutive hourly measurements, even with rising plasma osmolality.

- Plasma osmolality greater than 295 mosmol/kg to 300 mosmol/kg

- Plasma Na greater than 145 mEq

If nephrogenic diabetes insipidus is suspected in newborns and young infants, the diagnostic test of choice is DDAVP (1 mcg subcutaneously or intravenously over 20 minutes, maximum dose of 0.4 mcg/kg).

In children, the water deprivation test should be closely monitored. If one of the following endpoints is reached, discontinue the trial:

- Urine osmolality reaches the normal reference range.

- Plasma osmolality greater than 295 mosmol/kg to 300 mosmol/kg

- Plasma sodium greater than 145 meq/L

- Loss of 5% of body weight or signs of volume depletion

Once the diagnosis of DI is established, desmopressin administration can distinguish between central and nephrogenic DI. In central DI, once the deficient action of AVP is substituted with desmopressin administration, the urine osmolality should increase, while in nephrogenic DI, as the desmopressin is ineffective due to lack of renal response to its actions, the low urine osmolality persists.

The water deprivation trial is most accurate when DDAVP is not given. After water deprivation, studies have demonstrated that desmopressin can increase urine osmolality by greater than 100% incomplete central diabetes insipidus and up to 50% in partial central diabetes insipidus.

In cases of nephrogenic diabetes insipidus, water deprivation suboptimally increases urine osmolality. DDAVP minimally increases urine osmolality in partial nephrogenic diabetes insipidus, with no increase in urine osmolality in complete nephrogenic diabetes insipidus.

Central diabetes insipidus is diagnosed when there is evidence of plasma hyperosmolality (greater than 300 mosm/l), urine hyperosmolality (less than 300 mosm/l or urine/plasma osmolality less than 1), polyuria (urinary volume greater than 4 mL/kg/hr to 5 mL/kg/hr for two consecutive hours after surgery).

Limitations of measuring plasma AVP levels include rapid clearance with wide fluctuations due to the instability of AVP in plasma.

Measurement of plasma copeptin:

Copeptin (carboxy-terminal-Pro-vasopressin) is the C-terminal peptide of pro-vasopressin co-secreted with AVP from the posterior pituitary.

Hypertonic saline infusion test:

- Hypertonic saline (3% saline, 513 mOsm/L) infusion coupled with plasma copeptin measurement is an alternative test that is now being recommended by many experts in the field of DI as the preferred test to be used in place of the water deprivation test.

**3. Identification of the cause of Diabetes Insipidus**

Once the type of polyuria-polydipsia syndrome is identified, efforts must be undertaken to diagnose the underlying pathology. In conditions of central DI, a detailed clinical history with an exam should be performed to check for hormonal deficiencies. Biochemical tests should be conducted as per protocol following clinical evaluation.

Nephrogenic DI, in the majority of cases, is acquired, usually in the setting of certain drugs like lithium, demeclocycline, and others.

Primary polydipsia or dipsogenic DI is likely secondary to mood disorders or schizophrenia treatment. Various hypothalamic diseases like sarcoidosis, tuberculosis, trauma, and neoplasms alter the thirst response by lowering the thirst threshold, causing polydipsia. The anticholinergic nature of these drugs also leads to dry mouth and excessive water intake.

Gestational diabetes insipidus occurs due to the enzymatic breakdown of the endogenous AVP by a placental cysteine aminopeptidase.

# Treatment / Management

DDAVP, an ADH analog, can be administered orally, intranasally, subcutaneously, or intravenously. In adults, the dose is ten mcg by nasal insufflation or 4mcg subcutaneously or intravenously. In newborns or young infants, the dose is one mcg subcutaneously or intravenously over 20 minutes with a maximum dose of 0.4 mcg/kg.

It is essential to replete fluid losses in diabetes insipidus, as some patients may have thirst impairment and will not respond adequately to water intake.

**Central Diabetes Insipidus**

The preferred therapy is DDAVP.

It is crucial to monitor hyponatremia, as water retention can lead to sodium concentration changes that may cause brain injury. The patients and families should be educated to observe for nausea, vomiting, lethargy, headaches, confusion, seizures, and coma symptoms.

Other treatment options for central diabetes insipidus include a low-solute diet (low salt, low protein), thiazide diuretics, chlorpropamide, carbamazepine, and non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAID).

DDAVP is considered safe during pregnancy.

**N****ephrogenic Diabetes Insipidus**

The first step is to correct the underlying cause. If possible, discontinue the offending agent, such as lithium.

A low-solute diet may decrease urine output. The lower amount of total solutes ingested, the lower the urine volume that will be excreted.

Thiazide diuretics may be used in conjunction with dietary changes. The mechanism of administering a diuretic for polyuria is to promote the reduction of urine volume, which triggers the endogenous release of aldosterone. By having less water delivered distally, there would be less water loss in the collecting tubule, where ADH targets its effects.

Other treatment options include DDAVP and NSAIDs. NSAIDs inhibit prostaglandin synthesis, which has antagonistic effects on ADH.

# Differential Diagnosis

Causes of polyuria besides diabetes insipidus include:

- Primary polydipsia

- Glucosuria in uncontrolled diabetes mellitus

- Urea after a high-protein diet

- Polyuria is also seen after administering large volumes of intravenous dextrose in water.

- Tissue catabolism results in urea production leading to polyuria

- Use of Mannitol

Nocturia can also be secondary to:

- Drinking water or fluids before going to bed

- Prostatic hypertrophy in men

- Diabetes mellitus

# Prognosis

The prognosis for most patients with diabetes insipidus is excellent as long as the underlying primary cause can be treated. Lithium discontinuation can restore normal kidney function, but the nephrogenic DI may be permanent in some patients.

As long as the individual has access to water, mortality can be avoided. However, the condition can lead to cardiovascular collapse, fever, and hypernatremia in children and older patients.

# Complications

Without medical treatment, the potential diabetes insipidus complications include:

- Chronic dehydration

- Tachycardia

- Decreased temperature

- Hypotension

- Weight loss

- Fatigue

- Headaches

- Kidney damage

- Brain damage

# Consultations

An endocrinology consult is often warranted to identify the etiology of hypernatremia secondary to central or nephrogenic causes. A neurosurgeon is involved in cases of pituitary tumors or craniopharyngioma.

# Deterrence and Patient Education

Patients play a crucial role in their care. They should be educated on the following points:

- Medication compliance is critical - this is especially true with any diuretic medication

- Reduce salt and protein intake

- Maintain fluid intake - even to the point of carrying water at all times

- Monitor for signs of dehydration (e.g., dizziness, light-headedness, confusion, inability to think clearly)

# Pearls and Other Issues

Patients with significant electrolyte abnormalities should be closely monitored and admitted to the hospital.

# Enhancing Healthcare Team Outcomes

There are many causes of diabetes insipidus, and the disorder is best managed by an interprofessional team that includes the primary care provider, nurse practitioner/physician assistant, internist, and pharmacist. Patient education is crucial. The key is to hydrate, replace the electrolytes, and then manage the primary condition causing DI. The pharmacist should keep track of all medications that can cause DI and make the appropriate recommendations to the clinician. The nurse should educate the patient on traveling to hot destinations because dehydration can exacerbate the symptoms. If possible, travel should be avoided until the condition is treated. In post-operative patients, the specific gravity of the urine and osmolality should be monitored before administering desmopressin. Also, regular monitoring of electrolytes should be considered.

**Outcome**

The outlook for patients with diabetes insipidus depends on the cause. The prognosis for benign causes is good, but the prognosis is guarded if the cause is a malignancy.