**Antiprotozoal Agents**

Chloroquine contraindications include patients with previous sensitivity to 4-aminoquinoline. Contraindications include patients with G6PD deficiency and those with porphyria or psoriasis. Additionally, it should be avoided in those with visual field defects or myopathies. It is, however, safe in pregnancy and for use in children.

Primaquine is contraindicated in patients with methemoglobinemia, granulocytopenia, or myelosuppression. It should be avoided in pregnancy and those with G6PD deficiency.

Mefloquine is contraindicated in patients with arrhythmias, cardiac conduction abnormalities, psychiatric disorders, and epilepsy. In the past, recommendations were to avoid its use in pilots or others with jobs that require fine motor skills.

Iodoquinol should be avoided in patients with renal or thyroid disease and om those who cannot tolerate iodine. It should also be discontinued in cases of iodine toxicity where symptoms such as fever, pruritis, and dermatitis persist.

Diloxanide furoate is typically not recommended in pregnancy.

Metronidazole causes a disulfiram-like reaction when taken with alcohol. Furthermore, it leads to lithium toxicity when taken with lithium and potentiates the effects of coumarin-type anticoagulants, e.g., warfarin. This drug should be avoided in pregnancy.

Emetine contraindications include patients with renal and cardiac disease and pregnancy.

**Antihelminthic Agents**

Albendazole is contraindicated in patients with cirrhosis and those with previous hypersensitivity to benzimidazole drugs.

Amphotericin B causes renal insufficiency; therefore, concomitant use with nephrotoxic medications should be avoided.

Praziquantel should be avoided in ocular cysticercosis due to the damaging effects of the destruction of the parasites. Contraindications also include patients who need to stay alert for driving as it causes drowsiness. It should be avoided during pregnancy.

**Ectopacitisides**

Lindane contraindications include patients with seizure disorders, and its use should be only as a second-line intervention in the elderly, young children, and patients weighing less than 50 kg, as they are more likely to present with these adverse effects.