Repetitive transcranial magnetic stimulation utilizes non-invasive brain stimulation and has shown promising results for diagnostic and therapeutic purposes. A detailed mental and physical health examination is essential for the physicians to understand if rTMS would effectively treat a certain individual. Treatment-resistant depression, PTSD, OCD, and Tourette's disorder are among the few where rTMS have shown beneficial effects. The physician should be aware of the medication trials the patient has initially tried. Also, one should consider if there is any substance misuse by the patient.

A team of psychiatrists, psychologists, social workers, nurse practitioners, and primary care providers are involved and educate the patient regarding the importance of follow-up sessions. They note the medication trials the patient has tried and how the symptoms improved to the medication than to the rTMS sessions. Psychotherapy and medications are often continued as maintenance therapy after the success of rTMS therapy to prevent relapse. Social workers are assigned to manage if these patients can work or drive back to verify the effectiveness of their daily routine activities.

Communication becomes essential at all interprofessional levels to ensure adequate patient care. Places that provide rTMS services should be well equipped with measures to treat seizures. For any other side-effect, referrals should be made to manage any long-term outcomes and minimize the need for medical error. In all, studies have shown that rTMS is an effective technique for treating neuropsychiatric disorders.