The bones of the wrist: the carpal bones are connected to one another by a complex network of ligaments, these ligaments provide the structural integrity necessary to create the connection of the forearm to the wrist and the wrist to the hand to execute dynamic functions of these anatomic regions.  Most carpal ligaments are within the layers of a joint capsule and referred to as being capsular anatomic structures

There are two vital ligamentous structures commonly associated with wrist sprains:

**TFCC Injuries**

The triangular fibrocartilage complex (TFCC): located at the ulnar aspect of the wrist, is triangular and located at the distal radioulnar joint (DRUJ) and is held in place by radioulnar ligaments (RUL) and ulnocarpal ligaments (UCL). The primary purpose of this structure is to provide stability of the DRUJ and allow the wrist to withstand pressures applied to the ulnar aspect of the wrist. The triangular fibrocartilage provides resistance against compressive forces, while the RUL primarily stabilizes the DRUJ, and the UCL prevents dorsal migration of the distal ulna.

**Scapholunate Injuries**

The scapholunate ligament complex: Located at the proximal aspect of the wrist, this U-shaped structure is composed of three compartments: the volar, mid-substance, and dorsal. The dorsal compartment is considered the most important biomechanically. The structure is composed of both intrinsic and extrinsic ligaments. The intrinsic ligaments are the primary stabilizers, while the extrinsic ligaments are considered secondary. Injury severity of this structure depends on which ligaments are affected. The role of this structure is to support the scaphoid and lunate connections, which serve as the proximal foundation of the wrist.