There are multiple risk factors for strokes, which can be divided into modifiable and nonmodifiable categories—many of the causes of hemorrhagic and ischemic stroke overlap. The nonmodifiable risk factors of each include age, sex, race, and genetics. The risk increases as you get older; the risk is higher in men at a younger age, but the risk of death is higher overall in women; and the risk is significantly greater in African Americans, and slightly higher in Hispanics and Native Americans as well, compared to whites.

Modifiable risk factors, including hypertension, smoking, obesity, alcohol consumption, and diet all contribute to both ischemic and hemorrhagic stroke. However, hyperlipidemia, physical inactivity, diabetes, and cardiac causes such as cardiomyopathy, heart failure, and atrial fibrillation, are risk factors for ischemic stroke but not hemorrhagic stroke.

The etiology of hemorrhagic stroke is most frequently hypertension, especially in developing countries where the burden of hypertension is unknown due to infrequent screening and diagnosis. Less frequently, hemorrhagic strokes can also be due to angiopathies, which can be diagnosed with a cerebral angiogram.

Ischemic stroke is frequently broken into several etiological categories, including atherosclerotic, cardioembolic, lacunar, and cryptogenic. However, ischemic stroke can also, at times, be due to more specific causes such as vasculitis, dissections, or genetic disorders. In the case of atherosclerotic disease, severe stenosis or thrombosis can be caused by cholesterol plaques, which can cause occlusions of vasculature or stenosis of vessels, blocking blood flow and leading to cerebral ischemia. Cardioembolic strokes can occur in the case of atrial fibrillation or, in younger individuals, a patent foramen ovale, particularly in the setting of deep vein thromboses. In both of these cases, clots can travel from the heart through the left ventricle into the aorta and lodge in the internal carotid artery (ICA) or its branches, most frequently the MCA. The smaller deeper vessels that are the culprits of lacunar infarcts, such as the lenticulostriate arteries, are more often affected by hypertension and diabetes than by thromboses.