The ED50 (median effective dose) is the dose of a medication that produces a specific effect in 50% of the population that takes that dose. This number has common use as what a clinician or patient can expect for a drug effect, but clinicians may use a different dosage for their particular intended effect, depending on the balance of need or benefit of the drug versus the toxicity of the drug. The toxic dose in 50% of the population is called TD50; the ED50 should hopefully be much less than the TD50, as this would indicate an effective medication at a lower dose.

The ED50 for a particular medication derives from a dose-response curve, in which the ED50 is at the dosage (x-axis) where there is 50% of the desired response (y-axis).

The ED50 should be used as a clinical starting point for practitioners when prescribing medications, as adjustments are made to balance efficacy and toxicity. The E-max would be equivalent to the maximum effect the drug may have. It is important to remember that as dosages increase, the risk for toxicities will increase, and they may not be directly proportionate. Each patient requires individualized goals of treatment and should be monitored for such to ensure the lowest effective dose possible, especially for long-term treatment.

There are two forms of dose-response curves, graded and quantal. Graded answers the question, ‘how much’; whereas, quanta answers, ‘yes or no.’ The ED50 may change depending on the question the clinician is trying to answer, therefore, using the recommended ED50 as a starting point is recommended and making adjustments based on the clinical outcomes for the patient.