**Corneal Astigmatism**

- Corneal astigmatism is the most common form of astigmatism and is secondary to abnormal corneal curvature.

**Lenticular Astigmatism**

- Curvatural lenticular astigmatism is a secondary abnormal curvature of the lens as seen in lenticonus.

- Positional astigmatism is due to tilting or displacement of the lens as in subluxation.

- Index astigmatism is due to the variable refractive index of various meridians.

**Retinal Astigmatism**

- Retinal astigmatism is due to oblique placement of macula.

**With the Rule Astigmatism**

- In this, the two principal meridians are right-angled to each other, with the vertical meridian being steeper than the horizontal.

**Against the Rule Astigmatism**

- In this, the horizontal meridian is more curved than the vertical meridian. This will require convex cylindrical correction at 180 ± 20 or a concave cylindrical lens at 90 ± 20.

**Oblique Astigmatism**

- In this, the two principal meridians are right-angled to each other but not horizontal or vertical (For example, 45 degrees and 135 degrees).

**Bioblique Astigmatism**

- In this type of astigmatism, the two principal meridians are not at right angles to each other (For example, 20 degrees and 110 degrees).

**Simple Astigmatism**

- When light rays are focussed in front of the retina in one meridian, it is called simple myopic astigmatism. When they are focussed behind the retina, this is labeled simple hypermetropic astigmatism.

**Compound Astigmatism**

- When the rays of light in both the meridian are focussed in front of the retina, this is labeled as compound myopic astigmatism, and when they are focussed behind the retina, this is labeled as compound hypermetropic astigmatism.

**Mixed Astigmatism**

- In this scenario, the light rays in one meridian are focussed in front of the retina, and in other meridians, it is concentrated behind, so one meridian is myopic, and in another, it is hypermetropic; this is called mixed astigmatism.

The most common and important causes of astigmatism are keratoconus, posterior keratoconus, corneal scar, keratoglobus, pellucid marginal degeneration, Dellen, LASIK, photorefractive keratectomy, pterygium, rheumatic ulcer, shield ulcer, Mooren ulcer, microbial keratitis, herpetic keratitis, band-shaped keratopathy, vortex keratopathy, corneal edema, basement membrane dystrophy, lattice dystrophy, contact lens wear, contact lens warpage, post keratoplasty astigmatism, suture induced astigmatism,  ptosis, cataract wound-related, radial keratotomy, trabeculectomy, glaucoma shunt procedure, penetrating injury, foreign body, chalazion, tumor, and capillary haemangioma.