The retina is an ocular structure responsible for gathering gross visual stimuli that enter the eye and transforming them into neuronal signals transported to the brain for interpretation. Truly, it comprises two distinct entities that work in concert with each other: the neural retina and the retinal pigmented epithelium. The underlying choroid and its blood supply also play a crucial role in this process; these three structures must work together to maintain homeostatic balance and function properly.

**The Neural Retina**

The photoreceptor layer houses the cell bodies of rod and cone photoreceptors; these cells contain visual pigments responsible for absorbing light and triggering the conversion of light photons into neurochemical signals, a process known as phototransduction. The neural retina****comprises seven layers of various photosensitive neurons that synapse on one another along a cascade that ultimately terminates in the visual cortex of the occipital lobe for interpretation.

**The Retinal Pigmented Epithelium**

Outer to the neural retina is the **retinal pigmented epithelium (RPE)**, a single (simple) layer of cuboidal epithelial cells joined together by zonula occludens junctions. These tight junctions allow RPE cells to act as a gate, containing bidirectional pumps that regulate the transport of molecules to and from the choroid and neural retina.

These unique characteristics allow the RPE to provide functional support to the neural retina and act to maintain metabolic homeostasis via:

- Digestion of photoreceptor outer segments and recycling of used photopigments during the visual cycle

- Maintenance of the outer blood-retinal barrier via intercellular tight junctions

- Reduction of oxidative stress

**The Choroid**

The underlying choroid is a vascular structure that supplies oxygen and nutrients to the RPE and the majority (approximately 85%) of the retina. Its large diameter, fenestrated vessels are specialized to support the extensive metabolic demand of the photoreceptors and RPE.

This article focuses on certain histologic changes in RPE cells and disruption of retinal homeostasis. The changes described here are the basis for developing retinal lesions (and associated lesions) known as congenital hypertrophy of the RPE.