Indications for pneumonectomy can be broadly classified into malignant and non-malignant lung disease. Malignancy constitutes the most common indication. It is usually reserved for patients with more advanced disease when the tumor is located in the main stem bronchus or extends across a major fissure. This can be reliably predicted by clinical staging but may also be required due to intraoperative findings. Non-small cell lung cancer is the most common type of malignancy requiring pneumonectomy. It is sometimes also indicated for mesotheliomas and extensive thymomas. Extension of the tumor into the carina will usually require sleeve pneumonectomy. Pneumonectomy is rarely performed for lung metastasis.

Among the most common non-malignant conditions which require pneumonectomy are inflammatory lung disease. In such a group of patients, underlying medical conditions should be properly optimized before proceeding with surgery. This includes the treatment of underlying infections, optimization of lung functions, and patients' nutritional status. Proper preoperative optimization decrease the risk of empyema and bronchopleural fistulas, which are frequent complications in such a group of patients. Despite the challenges encountered, the outcome is usually favorable, and the chances of a complete cure are high.

Another common indication for pneumonectomy is blunt and penetrating lung trauma causing major lung injuries as lacerations or tracheobronchial disruptions. These patients usually present in shock, requiring resuscitation to restore the circulating blood volume. Despite successful resuscitation attempts, mortality is high and is usually attributed to pulmonary edema and right-sided heart failure. Of note, blunt lung trauma is associated with higher mortality than penetrating trauma, and other associated non-lung injuries also have a significant impact on the outcome.