**Echocardiography**

Echocardiography uses ultrasound to visualize the four chambers of the heart and provides insight regarding inappropriate internal pressures or hypertrophy. In addition to the size of the right atrium and ventricle, the echocardiogram evaluates right ventricular ejection fraction through the tricuspid annular plane systolic excursion (TAPSE), another important consideration when diagnosing hypertension in the pulmonary vasculature.

**Right Heart Catheterization**

If preliminary findings warrant further investigation, a cardiologist will conduct a right heart catheterization to confirm the diagnosis. A right heart catheterization provides information regarding the mean pulmonary artery pressure, right atrial pressure, and pulmonary artery occlusion pressure. It also can provide empirical information that would be used to calculate a transpulmonary gradient and pulmonary vascular resistance.

**Different Variables and Calculations**

In a healthy individual at rest, the mean pulmonary artery pressure (mPAP) is 14 +/- 3 mmHg while a resting (mPAP) of greater than 25 mmHg would meet the criteria for a diagnosis of pulmonary hypertension. Pulmonary artery occlusion pressure (PAOP) and mean pulmonary artery pressure (mPAP) are variables in the calculations for determining transpulmonary gradient and pulmonary vascular resistance.

- The equation to calculate pulmonary vascular resistance: (mPAP-PAOP)/(CO).

- The equation to calculate the transpulmonary gradient: mPAP-PAOP.

Pulmonary artery occlusion pressure is one of the most sensitive findings of right heart catheterization.

**Additional Testing**

Additional testing needs to be completed to rule out other disease processes that could contribute to pulmonary hypertension. Potential etiologies of pulmonary hypertension include connective tissue diseases, obstructive sleep apnea, embolism, and left heart failure, to name a few. These include spiral CT or ventilation-perfusion (VQ) scans to rule out the presence of thromboembolic activity within the lung's vasculature. Pulmonary function testing identifies and categorizes any intrinsic lung disease that may be contributing. High-resolution CT imaging can be helpful when ruling out pulmonary parenchymal disease.