Endoscopic myotomy (Dohlman Procedure) demands neck extension; therefore, it would not be an appropriate choice for patients with cervical stenosis who would not tolerate neck extension. The definitive management of symptomatic Zenker diverticulum is the surgical approach. The decision to use either an open or endoscopic transoral approach (rigid endoscope or a flexible endoscope) is made by clinicians based on several factors. The most important factors to be considered are 1. the ability to visualize the ZD and septum endoscopically, 2. patient's body habitus, 3. the ZD pouch feature in relation to the posterior wall, and 4. local expertise. Accordingly, patients with short necks decreased hyomental distance, and/or those patients with obesity are most often managed with an open approach. However, diverticula with less than 2 cm length are usually managed with endoscopic methods.

Transoral (endoscopic) approaches are categorized as minimally-invasive surgery and are associated with shorter procedural times, hospital stays, rapid resumption of oral intake, lower rate of complications. More significantly, in case of recurrence, the access would be easier. Endoscopic approaches are also associated with significantly high rates of symptom recurrence.

For patients who are considered poor surgical candidates, a flexible endoscopic approach is the procedure of choice. The main advantage of the flexible endoscopic approach is that it can be performed without general anesthesia. On the contrary, general anesthesia is required for open surgical and rigid endoscopic approaches. Hypothetically, a higher recurrence rate and the need for revision with a flexible endoscopy approach are expected.  Bleeding and recurrence are more likely following flexible endoscopic techniques. However, dental injury and vocal fold palsy are expected as rare complications following the rigid endoscopy.