Access to the refluxing superficial vein is obtained with a 16 or 18 F needle under ultrasound guidance at the lowest point of its incompetence. In general, the point of access is limited to 15 cm distal to the knee joint. The radiofrequency ablation catheter is then advanced under ultrasound guidance and placed at least 2 cm distal to the saphenofemoral junction. Once the catheter is in place, a tumescent anesthetic solution is injected around the vein under ultrasound guidance along the entire course of the vein. The tumescent anesthetic solution usually contains epinephrine, bicarbonate, and lidocaine. An example of a tumescent anesthetic would be a combination of 0.5 mg adrenaline or epinephrine, 4.2 mg bicarbonate, and 35 ml lidocaine diluted in 500 ml 0.9 percent saline.

This serves to insulate the surrounding soft tissue, nerves, deep vessels from heat injury. It also helps compress the target vein, thereby increasing contact of the heating element on the RFA catheter with the vein walls. The RF generator is then activated, which results in segmental heat energy of 120 degrees Celsius being applied. The RF generator is activated in 20-second intervals until the entire length of the vein is treated.

At the end of the procedure, hemostasis is achieved by manual compression at the site of venous access and catheter entry. Compression bandages and stockings are then applied on the treated leg for 1 to 3 days to reduce post-procedure bruising, tenderness. Patients are encouraged to walk after the procedure. Follow-up protocols vary by institution. In general, between 1 and 3 days, patients undergo repeat venous ultrasound. This ensures successful occlusion of the treated vein and confirms the absence of deep venous injury. The patient then also undergoes a repeat clinical evaluation in 1 to 3 weeks.

After radiofrequency therapy of varicose veins, compression stockings are recommended for continued regular use. The duration of compression stocking is guided by clinical judgment.