Sputum analysis's diagnostic results involve many different diseases, such as respiratory infections, lung cancers, and non-cancerous lung conditions. Pneumonia is the most common lung infection disease and may relate to potential spreading. Untreated pneumonia may lead to severe complications. Lung cancer is ranked the fourth most commonly diagnosed malignancy in developed countries, and the first in cancer-caused death worldwide.

According to the symptoms of the patient, the pulmonologist or infectious disease expert orders the laboratory tests. A nurse or a healthcare supporter will then collect the sputum sample and send it to the clinical lab. The laboratory specialist will conduct the diagnostic tests for the sputum specimen and report the results. The radiologist may also need to carry out a chest X-ray for the patient. When the physician receives the sputum diagnostic reportings, they may prescript the drugs for the patient's treatment. Then the nurse will perform the clinical therapy.

Once the patient is discharged from the hospital, the nurse should educate the patient and the family members on how to take care of good health. After that, a pharmacist will observe the outpatient therapy and make sure the patient follows the treatment. When the patient has an allergy to some drugs or has difficulties in obeying the treatment, the pharmacist should report the situation to the interprofessional team. Besides, a social worker is needed to support the outpatient spiritually and financially. To ensure the treatment at home is working for the patient, regular following up serial monitoring in the clinical lab and imaging studies by the radiologist are essential.

**Outcomes**

The multidisciplinary team approach facilitates the delivery of high-quality healthcare services to the patient. Previous evidence suggested that patients are more satisfied with the traditional care model and have improved life quality if they receive multidisciplinary care.