The first and most important equipment required for performing chemical peeling is the actual peeling agent. Before delving into listing the various types of solutions and acids used for this purpose, a swift review of basic chemistry is necessary to understand some of the commonly used terms. One important concept is the pKa of the peeling agent, which is the pH at which 50% of the chemical is in a free acid state. When choosing the type of peel used, a lower pKa correlates with a stronger peel. Indeed, there are many types of peeling agents available.

- Alpha hydroxy acids (AHA) are a fruit-derived family of carboxylic acid. In this group, the hydroxyl group links to the alpha part of the chemical. Examples to AHAs are glycolic acid from sugar cane, lactic acid from milk, and citric acid from citrus fruits.

- Beta hydroxy acids (BHA) on the other hand, have their hydroxyl group attached to the second carbon atom and include salicylic acid. A popular solution containing equal parts (14 grams) of salicylic acid, lactic acid 85%, resorcinol (a phenol derivative), and a 100 mL of ethanol is Jessner solution.

- Trichloroacetic acid (TCA) is a widely used peeling agent with varying effects according to concentration and whether it was part of a solution.

- Phenol, which is an aromatic hydrocarbon, represents a powerful chemical used in deeper peels. For example, one can mix phenol 88% with hexachlorophene, soap, croton oil, and distilled water to create the Baker-Gordon formula.

The following are examples of common agents listed with its corresponding depth of effect

- Very light peels: 10 to 20% TCA, low-potency glycolic and salicylic acid, and retinoic acid

- Light peels: 20 to 30% TCA, Jessner solution, and 40 to 70% glycolic acid

- Medium peels: combinations of 35% TCA with either Jessner's solution (credit to Monheit) or 70% glycolic acid (credit to Coleman)

- Deep peels: greater than 50% TCA, croton oil-phenol combinations (e.g., Baker-Gordon formula)

Each agent has a slightly different mechanism of action, not within the scope of this review, but the principles are generally the same. Epidermolysis, particularly of the stratum corneum provides smoother skin. Peels that reach the basal layer containing melanocytes will improve uneven pigmentation. When peels affect the papillary or upper to the mid-reticular dermis, this aids with reducing rhytides with deposition of elastin and collagen.

For patient safety, resuscitation equipment needs to be available in a well-ventilated procedure room. Personnel must wear gloves. Application brushes, cotton swabs, and gauze should be available as well. Cardiac monitoring must be available if using phenol, given the risk of cardiotoxicity.