Managing substance-induced disorders disorder requires a multidisciplinary approach involving the patient, the patient’s family, physician, nurse, and therapist. Although substance-induced disorders (depression and bipolar) subside after the biological effects of the drug fade, vulnerable individuals can develop a full-blown major depressive disorder or bipolar disorder, without proper management, psychiatric and medical complications can be fatal.

In the emergency department, physicians and assigned nurses are responsible for coordinating the care, which includes the following:

- Drug levels in the blood and or urine

- Monitor the patient for signs and symptoms of respiratory depression and cardiac arrhythmias.

- Administer benzodiazepines or antipsychotics for acute mania.

- Creatine phosphokinase (CPK) to rule out rhabdomyolysis

- Provide rehydration with normal saline

- Provide 1:1 for safety (suicide and injury to others)

- Consider involuntary status for imminent threats to self and others

- Physical restraints as the last result

- Consult an addiction specialist

In the outpatient clinic physician and assigned nurse are responsible for:

- Assure the patient’s safety and others in case of acute mania or severe depression.

- Transport the patient to the emergency department.

- Consider an involuntary commitment to a psychiatric hospital for imminent threats to self and others.

Physicians, nurses, and therapists should discuss and involve the family in the treatment plan. An interprofessional team that provides a holistic and integrated approach can help achieve the best possible outcomes.