# Continuing Education Activity

Progressive supranuclear palsy (PSP) is a form of atypical parkinsonian syndrome, also known as a Parkinson-plus disorder. It is an uncommon neurological disorder that can affect movement, gait, balance, speech, swallowing, vision, eye movements, mood, behavior, and cognition. When the condition was originally referenced in 1964, it was described as a constellation including supranuclear gaze palsy, progressive axial rigidity, pseudobulbar palsy, and mild dementia. Since this condition was originally described, different phenotypes have been characterized and linked to the severity of abnormal tau accumulation and neuronal loss in various brain regions. However, despite variable clinical presentation, neuropathologic features remain consistent among patients with this disease. This activity illustrates the evaluation and treatment of progressive supranuclear palsy and reviews interprofessional teams' role in managing those with this condition.

**Objectives:**
- Describe common presenting signs and symptoms of progressive supranuclear palsy.
- Review the conditions that should be ruled out prior to making the diagnosis of progressive supranuclear palsy.
- Explain how the diagnosis of progressive supranuclear palsy is made. 
- Describe a structured interprofessional team approach to provide effective care to and appropriate surveillance for patients with progressive supranuclear palsy.

# Introduction

Progressive supranuclear palsy (PSP) is an uncommon neurological disorder that affects movement, gait, balance, speech, swallowing, vision, eye movements, mood, behavior, and cognition. Steele, Richardson, and Olszewski described the syndrome in 1964 as an unusual constellation of supranuclear gaze palsy, progressive axial rigidity, pseudobulbar palsy, and mild dementia.

In 1972, Steele predicted clinical variants of the syndrome were likely to occur as the disease affected different brainstem nuclei at different times and to different degrees.

# Etiology

The cause of progressive supranuclear palsy is unknown. Advanced age

# Epidemiology

Recent studies have reported the prevalence of progressive supranuclear palsy to be 5.8 to 6.5 per 100,000.

# Pathophysiology

The defining histopathologic feature of progressive supranuclear palsy is an intracerebral aggregation of the microtubule-associated protein tau with preferential involvement of the subthalamic nucleus, pallidum, striatum, red nucleus, substantia nigra, pontine tegmentum, oculomotor nucleus, medulla, and dentate nucleus.

**Macroscopic Pathology**

The gross examination of the brain in progressive supranuclear palsy often shows atrophy of the frontal lobe (especially the precentral gyrus), midbrain (especially the tectum), and to a lesser degree, the pons. The subthalamic nucleus is smaller than expected and maybe discolored gray.

# History and Physical

Progressive supranuclear palsy is an akinetic-rigid form of parkinsonism. The onset of the disease is insidious and symmetric in most patients. Early in the course of the disease, motor abnormalities are typically axial and not appendicular. Gait difficulty and falls are the most common initial manifestation. Other modes of onset include non-specific dizziness, generalized motor slowing, and personality change. Only occasionally, the onset may be resting tremor.

**Postural Instability and Falls**

Patients with classic progressive supranuclear palsy, PSP-RS, have a stiff and broad-based gait, with an inclination to have their knees and trunk extended (as opposed to the flexed posture of idiopathic Parkinson disease), and arms slightly abducted. Instead of turning en bloc, as seen in Parkinson disease, they tend to pivot quickly, which further increases their risk of falls. This is sometimes referred to as the "drunken sailor gait." When they fall, it is usually backward due to a lack of postural reflexes.

**Oculomotor Findings**

Although extraocular movement abnormalities, specifically supranuclear ophthalmoplegia, are the hallmark of progressive supranuclear palsy, only a minority of patients present with gaze palsy. Often the first ocular motility abnormality noted on physical examination is impairment of vertical saccades. Eventually, most patients with progressive supranuclear palsy show slow or absent vertical saccades.

The combination of rare blinking, facial dystonia, and gaze abnormalities leads to the development of a classic facial expression of perpetual surprise or astonishment.

**Motor Involvement**

Bradykinesia, with marked micrographia, is the primary feature of parkinsonism present in all types of progressive supranuclear palsy. Rigidity in patients with progressive supranuclear palsy is usually more apparent in axial than limb muscles, especially the neck and upper trunk. On examination, it can be demonstrated by resistance to passive movement of the neck.

There can be dystonia of the neck, typically retrocollis. The face of patients with progressive supranuclear palsy is often stiff, immobile, and deeply furrowed (the look of surprise) also due to dystonia.

**Cognitive and Behavioral Abnormalities**

The neuropsychological profile of progressive supranuclear palsy primarily involves frontal lobe dysfunction. This includes impaired executive function making it difficult to shift between mental tasks,

The presence of severe frontal cognitive deficits is a common finding in these patients.

Behavioral abnormalities are also common in patients with progressive supranuclear palsy. In a case series of 22 patients with progressive supranuclear palsy, the most common behavioral symptoms were apathy (91%), disinhibition (36%), dysphoria (18%), and anxiety (18%).

Pseudobulbar palsy is another characteristic feature of progressive supranuclear palsy. Emotional incontinence is less common than in other forms of pseudobulbar palsy

**Sleep Disturbances**

Early or late insomnia and difficulties in maintaining sleep have all been reported in patients with progressive supranuclear palsy. Marked rigidity may result in the inability to remain comfortable in bed, further contributing to sleep complaints. Rapid eye movement sleep behavior disorder (RBD) is infrequently associated with progressive supranuclear palsy.

Patients with the classic PSP-RS usually develop initial symptoms in their mid-60s, and the disease advances from symptom onset to death in 7 years, on average.

# Evaluation

The International Parkinson and Movement Disorder Society (MDS) progressive supranuclear palsy study group published the MDS-PSP criteria in 2017

**Radiographic Features**

Neuroimaging in patients with progressive supranuclear palsy by MRI shows atrophy and signal increase in the midbrain, degeneration of the red nucleus, atrophy of the quadrigeminal plate, enlargement of the aqueduct and third ventricle, atrophy of the pons and cerebellum, and signal increase in the inferior olives. With the progression of the disease, frontal and temporal lobe atrophy may develop. While no feature on MRI or functional imaging studies is entirely specific for progressive supranuclear palsy, the “hummingbird sign” is often present, in which the shape of the rostral midbrain atrophy on mid-sagittal images looks like a hummingbird.

# Treatment / Management

The management of the cognitive, motor and gait aspects of progressive supranuclear palsy is challenging, and the treatment for individuals suspected to have progressive supranuclear palsy remains symptomatic and supportive, with ongoing clinical trials striving to identify disease-modifying therapies often targeting the underlying tau pathology. For motor (parkinsonian) symptoms, levodopa combined with a dopa decarboxylase inhibitor (e.g., carbidopa) is generally tried, with typically modest to no success in most progressive supranuclear palsy phenotypes but potential benefit in the PSP-P predominance type. Overall, evidence for mild to moderate benefits with levodopa is low

The potential value of physical therapy is increasing interest, particularly given evidence of benefit for individuals with Parkinson's disease. A recent trial showed improvement in the Progressive Supranuclear Palsy Rating Scale (PSPRS).

While case reports and series suggest promising experiences with unilateral or bilateral pedunculopontine nucleus (PPN) deep brain stimulation (DBS) in patients with suspected progressive supranuclear palsy, a recently published randomized controlled trial of unilateral PPN DBS in 8 individuals with PSP-RS showed no benefit in gait, postural stability, and fall PSPRS subitems when comparing ON and OFF stimulation conditions at 6- and 12-month follow-up.

There are no accepted treatments for the cognitive symptoms in individuals with suspected progressive supranuclear palsy, with small trials and case series of cholinesterase inhibitors suggesting that these drugs may help cognition but worsen motor function.

To date, studies of potentially disease-modifying therapies have failed to demonstrate efficacy in individuals suspected to have progressive supranuclear palsy. Randomized, placebo-controlled trials of riluzole,

Regardless of investigational and symptomatic treatment approaches used throughout the disease course, palliative care is an important component of progressive supranuclear palsy treatment with hospice as a valuable resource in the late stages.

Current investigations of tau-focused progressive supranuclear palsy therapies include TPI-287, a microtubule stabilizer, C2N-8E12/ABBV-8E12, and BMS-986168/BIIB092, both anti-tau monoclonal antibodies, and salsalate, a tau acetylation inhibitor. Microtubule stabilizers are hoped to compensate for microtubule dysfunction associated with loss of tau function; anti-tau monoclonal antibodies are hoped to impede the spread of pathogenic tau, and tau acetylation inhibitors are hoped to inhibit acetylation of soluble tau and thus limit hyperphosphorylation.

# Differential Diagnosis

The differential diagnosis of progressive supranuclear palsy includes corticobasal ganglionic degeneration (CBGD),

Other conditions that may produce similar symptoms include Whipple disease, mitochondrial myopathies,

# Prognosis

Disease progression in progressive supranuclear palsy usually occurs fairly rapidly and relentlessly.

In a 2017 systematic review and meta-analysis, predictors of shorter survival included the progressive supranuclear palsy-Richardson (PSP-RS) phenotype compared with the progressive supranuclear palsy-parkinsonism (PSP-P) phenotype, early falls, and early cognitive symptoms (both more common in the PSP-RS phenotype).

# Pearls and Other Issues

- Unlike typical Parkinson disease, falls begin within the first year of progressive supranuclear palsy, and by year 3, they are common unless precautions are taken to prevent them.

- Downgaze is affected before upgaze, whereas; lateral eye movements are usually preserved in progressive supranuclear palsy.

- Apathy seems to predominate over other neurobehavioral abnormalities in progressive supranuclear palsy.

- Patients with progressive supranuclear palsy develop frontal cognitive impairment.

- The pathology of progressive supranuclear palsy is characterized by widespread neurodegeneration associated with tau protein deposition in subcortical regions.

- The first therapeutic step in progressive supranuclear palsy is identifying and prioritizing the symptoms that can be treated.

# Enhancing Healthcare Team Outcomes

**Evidence-Based Outcomes**

Disease progression in progressive supranuclear palsy usually occurs fairly rapidly and relentlessly.

**An Interprofessional Approach**

Given the rapid progression of the disease and rapidly deteriorating quality of life, the education of the patient and family is critical. The home care nurse should closely monitor the patient with particular attention to daily living activities. The pharmacist should pay particular attention to the potential side effects of any medications. Only an integrated systemic care plan can help improve the quality of life and reduce the morbidity of the disease.

At each clinic visit, the nurse should focus on educating the family and ensuring that all concerns are answered. Today there are support groups for patients with progressive supranuclear palsy that help provide motivation and the latest information.

It is highly recommended that physical therapy and an occupational therapist be involved early in the disease process in helping maximize function, ambulation and facilitate the use of an ambulatory device.

Without a cure, the majority of patients are dead within seven years, but with an interprofessional approach, health care workers can make a significant difference in the quality of life.