The following factors may alter the results of a urine sample analysis:

- **Light and Temperature:**If exposed for a considerable period of time, bilirubin and urobilinogen may decompose due to their instability under these conditions. Additionally, room temperature favors the growth of microorganisms, such as bacteria.

- **Bacterial Growth:**Contamination of the sample or pathogenic bacteria may produce a variety of inaccurate results. For example, they may produce a false-positive blood reaction and affect the specimen's pH towards acidity or alkaline.

- **Alkaline pH:**This concentration may show false-positive results regarding the presence of protein.

- **Glucose:**If present in the sample, it may be metabolized by microorganisms and cause a decrease in the sample's pH.

- **Contrast Agents:**May produce false-positive results of specific gravity.

- **Exercise:**May alter the specific gravity and electrolyte concentration of the sample.

- **Foods and Drugs:**May alter the urine's color, odor, or pH value. Examples include, but are not limited to, red beets, blackberries, rhubarb, food coloring (e.g., aniline), ibuprofen, chloroquine, metronidazole, deferoxamine, nitrofurantoin, phenytoin, rifampicin, phenolphthalein, phenothiazines, and imipenem/cilastatin.

- **Preservatives:**Although used occasionally, they can alter the accuracy of the results. Some examples include:
- **Thymol:**May generate false-positive reactions for albumin.
- **Formaldehyde:**May cause false-positive results for leukocyte esterase, peroxidase reaction, urobilinogen, and glucose if strips are used.
- **Hydrochloric Acid:**Although used to preserve cell structures and determine steroid concentrations, it affects the sample's pH.
- **Mercury Salts:**May produce false-negative results for leukocyte esterase reaction.
- **Boric Acid:**While commonly used to preserve bacteria present in urine, this substance may reduce the sensitivity of the leukocyte reagent on dipsticks and alter initial pH values. Moreover, excessive concentrations may prevent bacterial growth in samples reserved for culture.