Cholesterol fulfills several biological functions and is necessary for successful cellular homeostasis. It acts as a precursor to bile acids, assists in steroid and vitamin D synthesis, and plays a central role in maintaining cellular membrane rigidity and fluidity.

All classes of steroid hormones, glucocorticoids, mineralocorticoids, and sex hormones, are derivatives of cholesterol. Synthesis occurs in the placenta and ovaries (estrogens and progestins), testes (testosterone), and adrenal cortex (cortisol, aldosterone, and androgens). The initial rate-limiting reaction converts cholesterol to pregnenolone, which is then oxidized and isomerized to progesterone. It is further modified in the ER and mitochondria by various hydroxylation reactions to other steroid hormones (cortisol, androgens, and aldosterone). Aldosterone acts primarily on the renal tubules, stimulating potassium excretion and uptake of sodium and water. Its ultimate effect is an increase in blood pressure. Cortisol allows the body to handle and respond to stress through its effects on intermediary metabolism, in other words, increased gluconeogenesis and the inflammatory and immune responses. The androgens, specifically testosterone, estrogens, and progestins, are responsible for sexual differentiation, libido, spermatogenesis, and ovarian follicle production.

Vitamin D3 (cholecalciferol) from either the skin or the diet undergoes hydroxylation by 25-alpha hydroxylase to form 25-hydroxycholecalciferol (calcidiol) in the liver from lipid-soluble compounds with a 4-ringed cholesterol backbone. It is then further hydroxylated by 1-alpha hydroxylase to an active form 1,25-dihydroxycholecalciferol (calcitriol) in the kidneys. Vitamin D plays an integral role in the terminal differentiation of hypertrophic chondrocytes, subsequent calcification of the bone matrix. In addition, it plays an important role in calcium homeostasis helps by mobilizing calcium from the bones and stimulating intestinal absorption and reabsorption in the kidneys.

Bile is a watery mixture of both inorganic and organic compounds, of which phosphatidylcholine and conjugated bile salts/acids are quantitatively the most important. Between 15 and 30 grams of bile salts/acids are secreted from the liver each day, but as a result of bile reabsorption, only about 0.5 grams are lost daily in the feces. As a result, to replace the amount lost, roughly 0.5 grams per day is synthesized from cholesterol in the liver. Cholesterol is incorporated as the backbone in bile acid synthesis, a complex multistep, multi-organelle process. This synthesis accomplishes 2 goals. First, it creates a way for the body to excrete cholesterol as there is no way to break it down physiologically, and it allows lipids to be digested via emulsification and subsequent break down by pancreatic enzymes.