The management of exotropia depends on the type of exodeviation and associated ocular findings, if any.

**Congenital Exotropia**

Amblyopia therapy should be started at the earliest possible. Surgical treatment should be planned after six months of age and usually better before 24 months. Bilateral lateral rectus recession or unilateral recession- resection procedure may be preferred in the amblyopic or the non-dominant eye.

**Intermittent Exotropia**

The management of intermittent exotropia can be divided into non-surgical and surgical heads.

**Non-Surgical**

- **Refractive error correction**– Cycloplegic refraction should be done to assess any underlying myopia, hyperopia, astigmatism, or anisometropia. If refractive errors are not rectified, they can impair fusion and thus lead to a manifest deviation. Minus lenses, in particular, helps in regaining the fusion control. These patients need to be followed up closely at a gap of 3 months to check compliance and improvement in control after spectacle usage.

- **Over minus therapy**– Minus lenses work by stimulating the accommodative convergence. This is particularly useful in patients with a high AC/A ratio.

- **Antisuppression exercises**– In the form of part-time occlusion, are particularly beneficial for very young children who cannot perform active orthoptic exercises. This may help in improving the stage of intermittent exotropia to exophoria. Occlusion can be advised for either the dominant eye or an alternate eye occlusion in patients with alternating exotropia t prevent amblyopia. These passive antisupression exercises are also helpful during waiting periods before surgical correction or in young children until accurate measurements are recorded.

- **Prismotherapy**– Prisms have a limited role in patients with intermittent exotropia. These are used to promote fusional convergence. Base in prisms are used to promote bifoveal stimulation. Prims might also be useful in the immediate postoperative period as a temporary measure if patients complaint of transient disturbing diplopia.

- **Orthoptics**– Active anti-suppression exercises and diplopia awareness exercises like bar reading, cheiroscope, or synaptophore help make the patient aware whenever the deviation becomes manifest.

**Surgical**

Surgical intervention might be needed when the exodeviation occurs for more than 50% of the waking hours, and there is a recorded gradual loss of fusional control, progressive increase of primary deviation, asthenopic symptoms not relieved by convergence, or fusional exercises, development of suppression or gradual deterioration of distance stereopsis.

**Surgical Options**

- Bilateral lateral rectus recession

- Unilateral medial rectus resection with lateral rectus recession

- Augmented bilateral lateral rectus recession

- Supermaximal unilateral recession resection procedure

The surgery of choice depends on the type and degree of exodeviation, the patient's preference, and the surgeon's experience and expertise. In general, the consensus is to perform unilateral lateral rectus recession with medial rectus resection procedure or bilateral lateral rectus recessions in patients with basic and simulated divergence excess types of intermittent exotropia, and a bilateral medial rectus resection in convergence insufficiency type of intermittent exotropia.

The role of Botulinum toxin has also been evaluated in patients with intermittent exotropia.

**Sensory Exotropia**

In these cases, the alignment is mainly for cosmetic reasons and to help them improve their quality of life. It is common for patients with sensory exodeviations to expect eyes' alignment in adolescence, especially when going for a high school education or before marriage. The usual choice of surgery in these patients will be a recession resection procedure in the amblyopic eye.

**Consecutive Exotropia**

Details of the surgical procedure performed should always be checked. Any underlying refractive errors should be corrected, and a trial of amblyopia therapy, if needed should be started.

The patient should be assessed for binocular sensory cooperation.

- Normal retinal correspondence and bifoveal fusion – Exercises to overcome suppression, improve fusional convergence, and later planned for surgical correction.

- No bifoveal fusion – Assess cosmetic appearance. If good – observation alone with regular follow-ups can be advised. If poor – plan for cosmetic surgical correction.

Ceylan et al., in their study, compared lateral rectus recession versus medial rectus advancement for the treatment of patients with consecutive exotropia. Although there were no statistically significant differences, they found better results with medial rectus advancement than lateral rectus recession in treating consecutive exotropia.