Nortriptyline is usually taken orally as a capsule or an oral solution. Capsule form comes in 10 mg, 25 mg, 50 mg, and 75 mg strengths. The oral solution form is usually of the following composition 10 mg/5 mL (473 mL). The usual adult dose is 25 mg three or four times daily; it should begin at a low level and increase as needed. As an alternate regimen, the total daily dosage can be given once daily. When doses higher than 100 mg daily are administered, plasma levels of nortriptyline should be monitored. Doses higher than 150 mg daily are not recommended.

**Use in Specific Patient Population**

- **Patients with Hepatic impairment:**No information has been provided in the manufacturer's product labeling. However, caution and dose reduction are advised in patients with hepatic impairment, given the drug's primary metabolism is by liver enzymes.

- **Patients with Renal impairment:**No information has been provided in the manufacturer's product labeling.

- **Pregnancy Considerations:**According to product labeling, preclinical studies during pregnancy have been inconclusive. Safe use of nortriptyline during pregnancy has not been established; therefore, when the drug is administered to pregnant patients or women of childbearing potential, clinicians must weigh the potential benefits against the possible hazard.

- Breastfeeding Considerations: According to product labeling, the safe use of nortriptyline during lactation has not been established. However, nortriptyline's concentration in breastmilk is low. Consequently, amounts ingested by the infant are small. However, the less active metabolites are often detectable in low levels in infant serum. Many reviewers consider nortriptyline preferred TCA during breastfeeding; however, drugs that have a better safety profile during lactation are paroxetine and sertraline.

- **Pharmacogenomic considerations:**Advancement in the field of pharmacogenomics can be used to deliver effective patient-centered by individualized drug therapy regimens.
- In CYP2D6 ultrarapid metabolizer, clinicians should avoid nortriptyline use due to potential lack of efficacy and consider alternative drugs not metabolized by CYP2D6.
- In patients who are CYP2D6 poor metabolizers avoid nortriptyline use due to the potential for adverse drug reactions. Clinicians can consider alternative drugs not metabolized by CYP2D6. Consider a 50% reduction of the recommended starting dose if a TCA is warranted.