Myotonic dystrophy has a spectrum of clinical history and presentation, based on the number of CTG repeats present in the individual. This is a multisystem disorder that affects somatic and smooth muscles, and ophthalmological, cardiovascular, endocrine, and central nervous systems as well. It can range in presentation from lethal in infancy to being mild with the first presentation in late adulthood. DM1 is classically divided into three types: (1) congenital, (2) mild, and (3) classic. There is an additional subtype that typically presents in childhood, around the age of 10 as well. DM2 is a milder form than classic DM1.

**Congenital Myotonic Dystrophy (CDM)**

The congenital form presents in about 15% of cases, with fetal-onset involvement of muscle and the CNS and typically is seen in those with more than 1,000 repeats.

**Mild Myotonic Dystrophy**

The mild form of DM1 or the oligosymptomatic form is associated with mild weakness, myotonia, and cataracts that begin between 20 to 70 years (typically after age 40 years).

**Classic Myotonic Dystrophy**

The classic form of DM1 usually manifests during 2, 3, or 4 decades of life. Myotonia is the primary initial symptom.

**Childhood Myotonic Dystrophy**

The childhood (infantile) subset of DM1 typically presents around age 10. It might even be undiagnosed due to a lack of neurological symptoms unless there is a prior positive family history of DM. Initial symptoms include learning difficulties and psychosocial problems.

**Myotonic Dystrophy Type II**

DM2 typically manifests in adulthood (median age 48 years) and has a variable presentation.