- Coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19), the illness caused by SARS-CoV-2, has overwhelmed many healthcare systems worldwide.

- The emergency authorization use of monoclonal therapies (casirivimab plus imdevimab, bamlanivimab plus etesevimab, or sotrovimab) in combatting COVID-19 appears promising.

- Limited published data is available regarding the adverse effects and drug-drug interactions with these therapies. Hence its clinical use in patients nonhospitalized with COVID-19 illness who are at high risk of developing severe illness requires an interprofessional team that includes clinicians, nurses, and pharmacists, and they should be aware of the mechanism of action of these therapies reported potential side effects, drug-drug interactions, and recommended doses.

- All patients should receive the fact sheet issued by the US FDA about the monoclonal antibody cocktail they receive before receiving the drug. Considering monoclonal antibodies are commonly associated with infusion-related reactions, the patient should be monitored closely during the infusion and at least 1 hour after the infusion is complete.

- There should be open and close communication between the ordering clinician, the pharmacist, and the nurse to minimize adverse reactions and improve clinical outcomes.

- Such a holistic approach would lead to the early identification of potential side effects and drug-drug interactions associated with this drug.

- Lastly, hospitals and healthcare communities should have a plan in place to triage moderate and high-risk patients for additional therapy, such as monoclonal antibodies, on an outpatient basis.

Interprofessional communication and care coordination are crucial to providing SARS-CoV-2 care using novel monoclonal antibody treatments to optimize patient outcomes and reduce potential adverse events.