Fat necrosis is most commonly the result of breast trauma (21 to 70%), fine needle aspiration or biopsy, anticoagulation treatment, radiation, and breast infection.

Free Flap

The free flap has gained favor for breast reconstruction after mastectomy over the past several decades. A flap a transfer of tissue with its blood supply from one part of the body to another.  After a partial or total mastectomy, this process is autologous breast reconstruction, and this can be by pedicled or free tissue transfer. In pedicled tissue transfer, the blood supply is kept intact, and the tissue flap is tunneled or rotated to the recipient site. In a free flap, the vessels get disconnected during the transfer, thus making it "free," and then reconnected microsurgically to a new artery and vein at or near the recipient site. Deep inferior epigastric perforator flap (DIEP) is the current mainstream choice for breast free flap.

The creation of a flap is complex and requires a substantial level of training, planning, and surgical expertise. Many factors lead to fat necrosis in flap reconstruction.  However, the cause of the problem is ischemia - either inadequate arterial inflow or poor venous outflow can cause ischemia and subsequent fat necrosis of the flap itself. Many studies have demonstrated the association of breast fat necrosis in free flap reconstruction with the number of perforators and flap weight.

Breast Reduction/ Lumpectomy

There are many techniques described to reduce breast size, based on incision and pedicle types. Breast reduction is also possible by liposuction alone, but that is mainly reserved for young women with high expected skin elasticity. The pedicle is the area of the adipose tissue supplied by one or many arterial perforators which branch into smaller capillaries. If blood supply is disrupted significantly, especially in distal areas of the pedicle and overlying skin, then fat necrosis can occur. The amount of breast tissue excised directly correlates to the complication rate.

Fat Grafting

Fat grafting is done by harvesting fat using liposuction from one part of the body and injecting it to another. Fat grafting can be especially useful in the management of contour deformity in breast reconstruction, known as a "step-off deformity," or the point where the breast reconstruction (implant or flap) transitions to the native chest wall. Additionally, fat grafting can improve surrounding skin quality after radiation or skin-sparing mastectomy, decrease implant visibility in a patient with minimal subcutaneous fat or minimal native breast tissue, and fill in defects caused by the excision of previous breast fat necrosis.

Fat necrosis is a commonly seen result after fat grafting, as the blood supply to fat grafted is random and acquired from surrounding tissues by diffusion and neovascularization.****Although multiple fat grafting techniques have undergone evaluation, there is no consensus on superiority amongst them.

Mastectomy

Breast fat necrosis after mastectomy often occurs due to small amounts of adipose tissue without blood supply being left behind, causing ischemia-related necrosis. The mass is often palpable, and the differential diagnosis includes fat necrosis, fibrocystic disease, hematoma or seroma, suture or dermal calcifications, scar tissue, edema, abscess, and, more concerning, recurrent or new breast cancer.

Radiation Therapy

Flaps experience a higher rate of fat necrosis when irradiated. The rate of symptomatic fat necrosis in brachytherapy and now accelerated partial breast irradiation is found to be 1 to 50%.