There is currently no FDA-approved indication for glucosamine sulfate, despite its popularity as a supplement in the treatment of osteoarthritis.

Osteoarthritis (OA), a common degenerative joint disease affecting 240 million worldwide, is a progressive condition most frequently affecting the larger weight-bearing joints of the body.

Although in vitro studies have demonstrated that glucosamine formulations significantly downregulate and upregulate catabolic and anabolic processes, respectively, human clinical trials completed to date have been unable to demonstrate these effects in vivo effectively. Although various studies have attempted to evaluate the effectiveness of glucosamine sulfate as a therapeutic agent in the treatment of OA, the majority of these have been of poor quality and/or at high risk of sponsorship bias. Most studies showing symptomatic improvement secondary to glucosamine sulfate treatment were generally of lower quality and small sample size, making it difficult to draw conclusions. The remaining, larger studies hold a high probability of bias, as the majority appears to have been sponsored by corporations manufacturing these formulations. Moreover, the heterogeneity between studies examining the capacity of oral glucosamine sulfate as an OA therapy is prohibitive of pooling data and validating conclusions. The verdict regarding the use of the supplement as an adjunct osteoarthritis therapy remains unclear.

As a result, there are no current guidelines on its use for osteoarthritis for the majority of joints due to lack of definitive evidence except for the knee; The American Academy of Orthopaedic Surgeons (AAOS) recommends against the use of glucosamine sulfate as a treatment for knee arthritis specifically following AHRQ report presents a high-quality systematic review of level I evidence covering the best available evidence and does not support the prescribing of glucosamine and/or chondroitin symptomatic OA of the knee.

Other possible indications for glucosamine sulfate include temporomandibular joint disorder and rheumatoid arthritis. However, similar to osteoarthritis, there is no evidence to date supporting the effectiveness of glucosamine sulfate as an agent for symptomatic relief or as a modifier of disease progression.