The pars nervosa, in conjunction with the infundibular stalk, makes up the posterior pituitary gland. The infundibular stalk contains unmyelinated axonal bodies of magnocellular neurosecretory cells originating in the hypothalamus. These neurons project to the pars nervosa, where they release the neuroendocrine hormones oxytocin and arginine vasopressin (AVP) into the systemic circulation via fenestrated sinusoidal capillaries. Because these hormones get synthesized by neuronal cell bodies within the paraventricular and supraoptic nuclei, the pars nervosa is often considered an extension of the hypothalamus.

The two hormones released in the pars nervosa have distinct physiologic roles. Oxytocin generates smooth muscle and myoepithelial cell contraction, facilitating uterine contraction during parturition and milk letdown in lactation. AVP, also known as antidiuretic hormone (ADH), prevents consequences of volume depletion through a variety of mechanisms, each associated with a unique receptor subtype. The V1 receptor is expressed primarily on vascular smooth muscles and causes arteriolar contraction when stimulated by AVP. Expression of the V2 receptor occurs on the renal collecting ducts and tubular epithelium where AVP triggers the synthesis and expression of water transporter Aquaporin-2, increasing solute-free water reuptake and inducing a hypotonic shift in blood osmolarity. In concert, these receptors allow AVP to regulate blood tonicity and support blood pressure during volume loss. The V3 (also known as V1b) receptor is present in a variety of organs, including the anterior pituitary, where it stimulates the release of adrenocorticotropin (ACTH), beta-endorphin, and prolactin.