- The precise mechanism by which sodium oxybate improves symptoms in patients with narcolepsy is not well understood. There is a hypothesis that improved sleep might be due to the increased time spent in Stages N2 and N3, and the decrease shift to stages N1/Wake/REM, resulting in a deeper sleep.

- Sodium oxybate is the sodium salt of gamma-hydroxybutyrate (GHB), an endogenous compound and metabolite of the neurotransmitter GABA. It is postulated that the therapeutic effects of sodium oxybate on cataplexy and excessive daytime sleepiness are attributed to GABA-B receptor agonist activity.

- Several studies have shown that the drug has effects that mimic that of ethanol. It does this mainly by binding to GABA and extra-synaptic GABA. Compared to a placebo group, a controlled group of alcoholic dependent subjects will show up to a 34 percent increase in abstinence. The idea supports the already established use of sodium oxybate in countries like Australia and Italy, which have used the drug for over 25 years as an agent for alcohol withdrawal syndrome (AWS) and maintain abstinence.

- Narcolepsy is a complex sleep disorder that results in a disrupted sleep-wake cycle, with the loss of hypocretin (orexin). Even though it is the most common cause of EDS, it often goes undiagnosed due to a lack of experience of clinicians or because it is confused with other psychiatric disorders. Early diagnosis and treatment are crucial as it has been shown to improve the outcome of the patient.

**Pharmacokinetics**

- Pharmacokinetics of GHB is nonlinear and is similar following single or repeated dosing of sodium oxybate.

**Absorption**

- Following oral ingestion of sodium oxybate, GHB is absorbed rapidly across the clinical dose range, with an absolute bioavailability of about 88%. A high-fat diet delays the absorption of sodium oxybate.

**Distribution**

- GHB is a hydrophilic compound with plasma protein binding less than one percent.

**Metabolism**

- Studies indicate that metabolism is the major elimination pathway for GHB, producing carbon dioxide and water via the tricarboxylic acid (Krebs) cycle. An alternate pathway of biotransformation involves β-oxidation via 3,4-dihydroxybutyrate to carbon dioxide and water. No active metabolites have been identified.****

**Excretion**

- The clearance of GHB is almost entirely by biotransformation to carbon dioxide, which is then eliminated by exhalation. Thus, on average, less than 5% of unchanged drug appears in human urine within 6 to 8 hours after dosing**.**