Endocarditis is an infectious condition or inflammation of the cardiac valves or the endocardium.

- Valvular disease such as rheumatic heart disease and congenital heart abnormalities like a bicuspid aortic valve, ventricular septal defect, coarctation of the aorta are risk factors for infectious endocarditis. Pathogens that account for infectious endocarditis vary and depend on the risk factors including intravenous drug abuse, existing valvular dysfunction, poor oral hygiene, and dental procedure, immunocompromised status, the cardiac implantable electronic device (CIED), or previous history of infectious endocarditis. In infectious endocarditis, neurological complications correlate with the size of vegetation and bacterial load. Among all the causative pathogens, Staphylococci aureus is the most common microorganism of infective endocarditis in the United States and other developed countries. Staphylococci aureus IE is significantly more likely to result in embolic events than other pathogens. Neurological sequelae from IE are as following, 

- Embolic stroke is caused by vegetation debris that lodge in the cerebral blood vessels and ended up resulting in infarction; 
- Transient ischemic attack (TIA) is an episode of neurologic dysfunction attributed to ischemia of brain, spinal cord, or retina;
- Cerebral hemorrhage
- Meningitis
- Brain abscess
- Toxic encephalopathy
- Seizure

- Nonbacterial thrombotic endocarditis is associated with connective tissue disorders, autoimmune disorders, malignancy, and other hypercoagulable states. Vegetations in NBTE are usually small and can easily dislodge compared to IE. Hence, NBTE with vegetations has an increased risk of developing cerebral microemboli events and intracranial lesions.