During the development of the fetus, the external human face starts to develop during the fourth through sixth weeks. The face derives from the first two pharyngeal arches, neural crest cells, frontonasal prominence, medial nasal prominence, oropharyngeal membrane, and lateral nasal prominence. During week four of development, the oropharyngeal membrane breaks down to create the oral cavity. The frontonasal prominences develop into the forehead, bridge of the nose, medial nasal prominences, and lateral nasal prominences. The medial nasal prominences will further develop into the primary palate, philtrum, upper four incisors, and parts of the jaw. The lateral nasal prominences develop into the sides of the nose. The first pharyngeal arch will form the cheeks, lateral upper lip, lateral upper jaw, and secondary palate. The second pharyngeal arch will form the lower lip and jaw. All these structures form bilaterally and migrate toward the midline before fusing.

The nerve innervation of the face will also originate from the first and second pharyngeal arches. The first pharyngeal arch will form the trigeminal nerve, while the second pharyngeal arch develops the facial nerve. As for the blood supply to the face, the third aortic arch forms the common carotid artery, which divided into the internal and external carotid arteries as it elongates. As the external carotid artery elongates, it further branches into the superior thyroid, lingual, facial, ascending pharyngeal, occipital, posterior auricular, and superficial temporal arteries. Uniquely, the first aortic arch forms the maxillary artery that perfuses the deeper structures of the face. The maxillary anastomoses with the external carotid artery becoming one of the terminal arterial branches of the external carotid artery.