Apgar scores were designed to help identify infants that require respiratory support or other resuscitative measures, not as an outcome measure. The Apgar score alone should not be considered evidence of asphyxia or proof of an intrapartum hypoxic event. A low Apgar score of 0 to 1 at 1 minute is not predictive of adverse clinical outcomes or long-term health issues since most infants, even those with very low 1-minute scores will have normal scores by 5 minutes. Low Apgar scores at 5 minutes correlate with mortality and may confer an increased risk of cerebral palsy in population studies but not necessarily with an individual neurologic disability. Most infants with low Apgar scores do not go on to develop cerebral palsy, but lower scores over time increase the population's risk of poor neurologic outcomes. Scores less than five at 5 and 10 minutes correlate with an increased relative risk of cerebral palsy. Neonates with scores less than five at 5 minutes should have umbilical artery blood gas sampling performed. Apgar scores that remain at 0 after 10 minutes may indicate that the termination of resuscitative efforts is appropriate as very few infants survive with good neurologic outcomes if no heart rate has been detectable for over 10 minutes.

The Apgar score alone should not be considered as evidence of asphyxia or evidence of an intrapartum hypoxic event. A low Apgar score of 0 to 1 at 1 minute is not predictive of adverse clinical outcomes or long-term health issues since most infants, even those with very low 1-minute scores will have normal scores by 5 minutes. Low Apgar scores at 5 minutes correlate with mortality and may confer an increased risk of cerebral palsy in population studies but not necessarily with an individual neurologic disability.