The presence of known allergy to medications that are planned to be used, and refusal or inability to cooperate and consent are absolute contraindications.

The presence of infection or malignancy with loci along the needle path is a relative contraindication due to a risk of dissemination. The procedure should be postponed if uncorrected coagulopathy is present, as sympathetic ganglia lie in close proximity to major blood vessels that are at risk of being damaged during the intervention. Patients taking anticoagulant medications should be evaluated and managed as per the American Society of Regional Anesthesia and Pain Medicine guidelines. Pre-existing motor and sensory deficits, concordant with the area of the block, should be thoroughly documented and the possibility of delaying block until improvement of symptoms, if feasible, discussed. Physiologic effects of sympathetic blockade must be considered, especially in susceptible patients, on an individual basis; e.g., unopposed parasympathetic transmission at the level of blockade; visceral blocks cause splanchnic vasodilation and may aggravate hypovolemia; stellate ganglion blocks may cause temporary alteration of vision necessitating the availability of an escort; intestinal hypermotility after celiac plexus block increases the risk of bowel obstruction, etc.

All blocks should be performed under sterile conditions in a facility with adequate resuscitation equipment immediately available. Intravenous access should be considered depending upon the patient and which block is being performed. Available imaging studies must be reviewed prior to any block to evaluate for the presence of altered anatomy.