The pathogenesis of acanthosis nigricans is likely related to growth factor levels and insulin-mediated activation of insulin-like growth factor (IGF) on keratinocytes and increased growth factor levels. The pathophysiological process behind acanthosis nigricans appears to be related to the proliferation of fibroblasts and the enhanced stimulation of epidermal keratinocytes.

In patients with benign acanthosis nigricans, evidence suggests that insulin or an insulin-like growth factor is enhancing the propagation of epidermal cells. Other mediators that have been identified include fibroblast growth factor, tyrosine kinase receptors (epidermal growth factor receptor). High concentrations of insulin are thought to cause proliferative effects by binding to IGF-1 receptors. It is important to note that free IGF-1 levels also are high in people with metabolic syndrome, leading to faster cell differentiation and cell growth.

Recently, both syndromic and familial forms of acanthosis nigricans have been observed. Familial and syndromic forms of acanthosis nigricans have been identified. Many other syndromes share similar features, such as hyperinsulinemia, craniosynostosis, and obesity. These are subdivided into insulin-resistant syndromes and fibroblast growth factor defects.

Other insulin resistant syndromes include Rabson Mendenhall syndrome, leprechaunism, Berardinelli-Seip syndrome, Dunningan syndrome, and Alstrom syndrome. Excessive friction or sweating may also be playing a contributory role.

In patients with malignant acanthosis nigricans, the most probable stimulating factor is secreted by the cancer cells. Two possibilities are transforming growth factor or epidermal growth factor because both have high levels in people with gastric adenocarcinoma. Other reports indicate normalization of urine transforming growth factor after surgical removal of a tumor, followed by regression of the skin lesions.

Usage of medications like insulin have also been implicated, most likely due to the activation of IGF receptors. A few case reports on ectopic acanthosis nigricans in syndromic patients report patient acquisition of the disorder after skin grafting from an affected site.