The management of postural orthostatic tachycardia syndrome divides into non-pharmacologic and pharmacologic approaches and contingent on accurate diagnosis, patient education, and therapy adherence.

Patient education and management of expectations are crucial to the overall successful management of POTS given its often non-specific and chronic debilitating nature. It is important to assess the patient’s understanding, answer and follow-up on questions and concerns, and emphasize the need for a multi-pronged therapeutic approach to treatment to improve quality of life. There is no current class I recommendations for POTS management.

Exercise conditioning is a fundamental aspect of postural orthostatic tachycardia syndrome treatment (class IIA),

Pharmacologic therapies (class IIb) are not considered first-line treatment for POTS and enter the clinical picture in severe or refractory cases with the goal of stabilization for continued physical reconditioning.

Fludrocortisone, a synthetic mineralocorticoid aldosterone analog, increases salt retention and plasma volume. Adverse hypertension, hypokalemia, and headaches may be present.

The alpha-1-adrenergic agonist midodrine causes systemic vasoconstriction leading to an increase in venous return that may be effective in hypotensive phenotypes. Limitations include frequent dosing, urinary retention, and supine hypertension.

Clonidine and alpha-methyldopa are central-acting alpha-2 agonist sympatholytics that may be beneficial in hyperadrenergic subtypes with hypertension as a predominant symptom. May cause adverse sedation, cognitive clouding, and fatigue.

Beta-blockers (propranolol, metoprolol) may reduce upright tachycardia without significant hemodynamic changes. However, worsening fatigue is a concern.

Pyridostigmine is an acetylcholinesterase inhibitor that increases acetylcholine levels in the autonomic ganglia.

Generally medications exacerbating specific symptoms such as tachycardia (sympathomimetics including amphetamines, selective serotonin and/or norepinephrine reuptake inhibitors, droxidopa) or worsening orthostatic intolerance (diuretics, calcium channel blockers, nitrates, opiates, tricyclic antidepressants) should be avoided; in specific cases it may be beneficial in accordance with the patient’s history and presentation.