Cervical cancer screening requires acquiring cervical cells in the transitional zone in the cervix. The transitional zone is also called the squamocolumnar junction because it is the joining process of the ectocervix and the endocervix. The ectocervix is comprised of non-keratinized stratified squamous epithelium, while the endocervix is simple columnar epithelium. The simple columnar cells also have glandular cells that secrete mucus.

The anatomic pathology for cervical cytology mainly arises from the two cell types found in the transitional zone: epithelial and glandular. Epithelial cell pathology is graded in an ascending fashion:

- **Atypical Squamous Cells of Undetermined Significance (ASC-US)**: This is the most common abnormal pap smear diagnosis.

- **Atypical Squamous cells-Cannot excludes High-grade intraepithelial lesions (ASC-H)**: This diagnosis is exceedingly rare and requires colposcopy to assume that there truly are no high-grade intraepithelial lesions.

If the pathologist can determine that there is a morphological change within the cells, the following is the nomenclature used:

- **Low-grade Squamous Intraepithelial Lesions (LSIL):**This definition covers the spectrum of changes in squamous cells that can potentially progress to squamous cell carcinoma. This finding is highly suggestive of an HPV infection. This nomenclature includes cervical intraepithelial neoplasia (CIN) 1 and mild dysplasia. While this finding is present in 2% of all pap smears, the regression rate of LSIL in 2 years is over 85%.

- **High-grade Squamous Intraepithelial Lesions (HSIL)**: This definition is a general title for abnormalities in squamous cells with a serious concern of progressing to cervical cancer. This finding is highly suggestive of an HPV infection. This title includes the historical terminology of CIN2, CIN3, moderate dysplasia, severe dysplasia, and carcinoma in situ.

- **Squamous cell carcinoma**: This is rarely diagnosed on a pap smear.

In addition to the epithelial cells, the pathologist can identify abnormal glandular cells and are graded in an ascending fashion:

- **Atypical Glandular Cells (AGC):**This cell type can be found in the endocervix and can also appear in other parts of the reproductive tract, like the endometrium. It is diagnosed in 0.3% of all pap smears. AGC identifies cells that have progressed beyond temporary inflammatory changes but have not mutated as much to be diagnosed as adenocarcinoma.
- Atypical glandular cells favor endocervical origin (AGC-EC): This diagnosis is least likely to have associated endometrial cancer.
- Atypical glandular cells favor endometrial origin (AGC-EM): This diagnosis is most likely to have associated endometrial cancer.
- Atypical glandular cells not otherwise specified (AGC-NOS): This diagnosis is in the middle with having an association with endometrial cancer.

- **Endocervical Adenocarcinoma In situ (AIS)**: This diagnosis has become more frequent over the previous decades. The prevalence is 11.2 per 100,000 and is most likely to be diagnosed in patients between the age of 30 to 40.

- **Adenocarcinoma**: This diagnosis is the invasive version of AIS, which can be found in the transition zone but is more common to present within the cervical canal. This condition also derives from the glandular cells of the endometrium.
- **Adenocarcinoma Malignum (AM)**: A rare cervical disease that is diagnosable with a pap smear. This disease usually arises in the endocervical region and is often misdiagnosed as a benign lesion.

Less commonly, abnormal pap smears can arise from other histological subtypes. Cervical cancer can arise from a neuroendocrine origin, with the two main subtypes being large cell and small cell. Other types of tumors that can cause cervical cancer include sarcoma, lymphoma, and melanoma.