The course of NF-1 varies considerably in various patients, but most have a benign course of the disease without developing major complications. The variability in presentation appears to be at least partially genetically determined and is unrelated to the unaffected allele. If the clinical presentation is limited to one part of the body, it is called segmental NF-1 (neurofibromatosis type 5) due to mosaic NF-1 gene mutation.

- **Cafe-au-lait macules:**Sharply defined light brown patches vary in size from 0.5 cm to 50 cm; the majority are ten cm or less. They are the first feature of the disease and appear in all children affected by the disease. They increase in size and number during the first decade of life. 1 to 3 cafe-au-lait macules are observed in about 15 percent of the normal population. NF-1 is distinguished by having six or more cafe-au-lait macules.

- **Neurofibromas:**Neurofibromas are present in the skin (cutaneous), under the skin (nodular), and along with roots of the nerve (plexiform). Pregnancy is associated with an increase in the number and size of tumors, indicating a hormone-responsive state.

- **Freckling:**Axillary and/or inguinal freckling in patients is usually pathognomonic for NF-1, known as Crowe's sign. Freckles are small and grouped when compared to cafe-au-lait macules. It is present in around 70% of individuals and appears later than café-au-lait spots by 3 to 5 years. Other intertriginous areas might also be involved.

- **Lisch nodules:**Lisch nodules appear as dome-shaped lesions around the iris on slit-lamp-examination. They are present in over 90% of the affected adults and are also known as pigmented iris hamartomas. They are usually asymptomatic but used to confirm the diagnosis in the affected individual and the parent.

- **Skeletal abnormalities:**Kyphoscoliosis occurs in 10 to 25 percent of the affected individuals, and high-level lesions may lead to respiratory difficulties.

- **Neurological abnormalities:**Learning disability, cognitive dysfunction, developmental delay, autism spectrum disorder, attention deficit hyperactivity disorder, macrocephaly, and dural ectasia are reported.

- **Malignancies:**Neurological tumors consist of optic nerve glioma, astrocytoma, brainstem glioma, and schwannomas. Intracranial tumors can cause headaches and seizures.

- **Other presentations:**Hypertension, congenital heart disease, irritable bowel syndrome, and constipation have been reported with NF-1.

Lisch nodules are the commonest ophthalmic manifestation of NF1. Freckling is found in approximately 80-90% of the patients. Neurofibroma is seen in almost all NF1 patients over 30 years of age. The plexiform neurofibroma is seen in 25 to 30% of the cases.

Nevus anemicus (NA) and Juvenile Xanthogranulomas (JXG) are also significantly associated with patients with NF1 in the early years of their lives.

A whole body MRI (WBMRI) during the first evaluation revealed

- Focal areas of signal intensity (approx 70%)-with cerebellum involvement in 72% of the cases

- Optic pathway glioma (approx 16%)

- Bony dysplasia- sphenoid wing involvement in half the cases, followed by tibia and fibula in 40%

- Spinal dura ectasia , and

- Plexifirm neurofibroma (PN).

The most frequent NF1-related manifestation in the same study included:

- Café-au-lait macules (CALMs)(100%)

- Macrocephaly (55%),

- Axillary freckling (45%),

- Lisch nodules (32%), and

- Cutaneous neurofibromas (18%).

Developmental delay, PN, and NF1 are more common in familial cases.