Treatment of Zollinger-Ellison syndrome consists of surgical and non-surgical options. Currently, surgery is the only curative option for gastrinomas. Specifically, a duodenectomy for duodenal gastrinomas since multiple tumors tend to be present, and excision/enucleation for pancreatic tumors.

Octreotide is an octapeptide that pharmacologically mimics the actions of natural somatostatin. Interestingly, it is a more potent inhibitor of growth hormone, glucagon and insulin secretion, than natural somatostatin, and even has a longer half-life. These properties make Octreotide indicated for the treatment of growth-hormone producing tumors (such as in acromegaly and gigantism), pituitary tumors that secrete thyroid-stimulating hormone, symptoms of diarrhea and flushing from carcinoid syndrome, and diarrhea in patients with VIP-secreting tumors (VIPomas). Additionally, it is often given parentally to manage acute hemorrhage due to esophageal varices caused by liver cirrhosis. It has poor gut absorption; therefore, parenteral administration is necessary.

GLP-1, along with GIP, is a member of the incretin family of peptides and hormones. Incretins are released in response to eating and stimulate a decrease in blood glucose levels via augmenting insulin secretion from the pancreas. In fact, incretins are so powerful that they are directly responsible for higher serum insulin secretion and blood levels in response to oral glucose versus intravenous glucose administration. Furthermore, synthetic GLP-1 receptor agonist drugs have shown a therapeutic benefit for patients with type 2 diabetes, mainly because GLP-1 will stimulate the release of insulin regardless of blood glucose levels. GLP-1 also mediates the “ileal brake,” which is the inhibition of gastric and pancreatic secretion and motility that occurs in response to an increased amount of nutrients detected in the ileum; this serves as a critical inhibitory feedback mechanism that has strong implications for slowing gastric emptying and promoting satiety in diabetes patients and overweight patients.