The diagnosis of steatorrhea is based on clinical findings, laboratory tests, and radiological images. Endoscopy with small intestinal biopsy, liver biopsy, and other specialized investigations may be needed to detect the exact etiology of steatorrhea.

Quantitative estimation of fecal fat (exceeding 7 g per 24 hours) is an essential first step for the diagnosis of steatorrhea. The standard method of fecal fat quantification is by calculating the coefficient of fat absorption (CFA).

For evaluation of chronic pancreatitis, a plain abdominal radiograph may show pancreatic calcification, abdominal CT or MRI scans may reveal calcifications of chronic pancreatitis and ductal dilatation, magnetic resonance cholangiopancreatography (MRCP) or endoscopic retrograde cholangiopancreatography (ERCP) can offer a more detailed evaluation of pancreatic parenchymal and ductal changes in chronic pancreatitis.

For evaluation of celiac disease, estimation of serum tissue transglutaminase IgA antibodies (TTG-IgA) with total serum IgA is the recommended screening test.

In patients suspected to have chronic liver disease, serum liver tests may reflect a cholestatic pattern, elevation of alkaline phosphatase and gamma-glutamyl transferase are frequent findings in both PBC and PSC. AST, ALT, and bilirubin may be normal or elevated. Anti-mitochondrial antibodies are noted in 90 to 95% of patients with PBC.

In PSC, magnetic resonance cholangiography (MRC) is the preferred modality and may show a multifocal narrowing of both intrahepatic and extrahepatic biliary ductal strictures. These strictures may be seen alternating with dilation, which is referred to as the "beaded" appearance.

Endoscopy with direct aspiration and culture of the small intestinal contents was traditionally the gold standard test for SIBO.