Phenytoin displays its primary signs of toxicity on the nervous and cardiovascular systems. Overdose on oral phenytoin mainly causes neurotoxicity, whereas cardiovascular toxicity is the main side effect of parenteral administration.

**Neurotoxicity**

The neurotoxic effects are concentration-dependent and can range from mild nystagmus to ataxia, slurred speech, vomiting, lethargy, and eventually coma and death. The following is a generalized correlation of side effects with total plasma phenytoin concentrations (the value obtained via most laboratories):

- Below 10 mg/L: Rare side effects

- 10 to 20 mg/L: Occasional mild horizontal nystagmus on lateral gaze

- 20 to 30 mg/L: Nystagmus

- 30 to 40 mg/L: Ataxia, slurred speech, tremor, nausea, and vomiting

- 40 to 50 mg/L: Lethargy, confusion, hyperactivity

- Over 50 mg/L: Coma and seizures

Seizures are infrequent and usually occur at very high serum concentrations. The presence of seizures with phenytoin overdose should prompt the search for other causes.

**Cardiac Toxicity**

Phenytoin is a Class IB antiarrhythmic; its suppressant effects on the cardiac voltage-gated sodium channels can lead to dysrhythmias as well as sinoatrial and atrioventricular blocks. These effects rarely occur with oral administration. However, in the intravenous form, the primary toxicity is believed to be from propylene glycol, which is a cardiac depressant; rapid infusions of phenytoin can lead to bradycardia, hypotension, and asystole. Care must be taken not to administer intravenous phenytoin at a rate faster than 50 mg per minute.

**Other Toxicities**

“Purple glove syndrome” is a rare side effect that can accompany the intravenous administration of phenytoin. The worsening limb edema and discoloration appear to result from the crystallization of phenytoin within the blood. When there are extensive skin necrosis and limb ischemia, this can lead to amputations.

**Chronic Toxicity**

Chronic intake of phenytoin can lead to megaloblastic anemia due to folate deficiency, peripheral neuropathy, or lupus-like syndrome. These are not commonly reported in acute overdoses.

**Toxicokinetics**

Due to its metabolism by the CP450 microsomal enzyme system, drugs that alter their function can place the patient at risk for toxicity by increasing the plasma phenytoin concentrations. These include amiodarone, cimetidine, cotrimoxazole, disulfiram, fluconazole, metronidazole, chloramphenicol, sodium valproate, 5-fluorouracil, and sulphonamides.

**Management**

There is no specific antidote for phenytoin toxicity; supportive care is the hallmark of treatment.