**General Adverse Effects**

The most common adverse effect for any diuretic is mild hypovolemia, which can lead to transient dehydration and increased thirst. When there is an over-treatment with a diuretic, this could lead to severe hypovolemia, causing hypotension, dizziness, and syncope. More generalized side-effects of diuretic agents include headache, urinary frequency, restlessness, weakness, fatigue, and lethargy. GI disturbances like nausea, vomiting, constipation, diarrhea, anorexia and abdominal pain can occur with loop diuretics and PSDs than any other diuretic group.

Electrolyte abnormalities are commonly associated with all the diuretic agents, and their mechanisms of such effect are well-established, and these mechanisms are explained under the respective class of diuretics below. To give a broader picture, hypokalemia, for example, is caused by all the diuretics except PSDs, which causes hyperkalemia. Acid-base disorders usually accompany the electrolyte derangement due to their close association with their reabsorption in the renal tubules. Metabolic disturbances can lead to derangement of glucose, uric acid, or lipid levels with certain diuretics and are individually discussed. Other rare adverse effects include impotence, hyperglycemic hyperosmolar non-ketotic syndrome, skin reactions, aplastic anemia, thrombocytopenia, agranulocytosis, hemolytic anemia, muscle cramps, and myalgia. In general, adverse effects are dose-dependent and are higher with loop diuretics as they have the most significant diuretic effect. With controlled low-dose formulations, adverse effects have reduced substantially, especially with thiazide diuretics.

**Loop Diuretic-specific Effects**

- **Hypokalemia and metabolic alkalosis**can occur with both loop and thiazide diuretics but more common with loop diuretics. Loop agents increase distal Na+ delivery at macula densa and cause volume depletion, both of which indirectly activate the RAAS pathway. Aldosterone thus produced, which causes aggressive Na+ reabsorption leading to a negatively charged lumen and causing trapping of K+ and H+ ions in the lumen and eventually causing hypokalemia and metabolic alkalosis, similar to Conn syndrome. Increased distal Ca2+ delivered by loop agents may decrease the severity of hypokalemia but inhibiting K+ secretion indirectly by blocking ENaCs.

- **Hypocalcemia and hypomagnesemia**: Blocking NKCC2 function leads to suppression of ROMK-mediated K+ recycling into the lumen, which leaves a decreased transepithelial voltage (with a less positive luminal charge). This reduced luminal positivity reduces the driving force required for Ca2+ and Mg2+ reabsorption via the paracellular pathway, causing  (see above) hypocalcemia and hypomagnesemia.

- **Hyperuricemia**: Both loop and thiazide diuretics are anions that are secreted in exchange for urate molecules via the OATs leading to urate reabsorption and hence hyperuricemia. Thus these diuretics are associated with an increased risk of gouty attacks.

- **Hypertriglyceridemia****and****Hypercholesterolemia**: Loop diuretics can increase the levels of low-density lipoprotein cholesterol (LDL-C) and triglycerides (TG) levels, but the mechanism for this remains unclear.

- **Hypochloremia**is associated with increased fractional excretion of Cl- relative to that of Na+.

- **Ototoxicity**is a specific adverse effect of loop agents not shared by any other diuretic, and it manifests as sensory neural hearing loss, tinnitus, vertigo, or dizziness.

- **Hypersensitivity reactions:**Furosemide can cause hypersensitivity reactions such as skin rashes or acute interstitial nephritis. Reports also exist of more severe anaphylactic reactions.

- **Stevens-Johnson syndrome**: Loop diuretics have implications as a rare cause of Stevens-Johnson syndrome.

- Other less common adverse effects of loop diuretics include photosensitivity, nausea, and allergic interstitial nephritis.

**Thiazide-specific Effects**

Electrolyte abnormalities are the most common adverse effects associated with chronic thiazide therapy in hypertension. They occur most commonly with longer-acting agents such as chlorthalidone and metolazone, but this is mitigated to an extent with a low-dose strategy.

- **Hypokalemia and metabolic alkalosis**: Thiazides can cause RAAS activation only via volume depletion (see above) as they act on NCC channels located distal to the macula densa and do not influence salt-sensors located there. Aldosterone from the RAAS pathway enhances the excretion of K+ and H+ in the tubules, as explained above. Also, thiazides cause decreased distal Ca2+ delivery, which stimulates ENaCs leading to increased K+ secretion, thereby contributing to hypokalemia.

- **Hyponatremia**: Even though loop diuretics suppresses a greater load of Na+ reabsorption than other agents, hyponatremia most often results from thiazides because thiazides lead to reduced free-water clearance and they do not interfere with urine concentrating ability (countercurrent pathway) when compared to loop agents. Furthermore, increased water intake and increased vasopressin secretion contribute to dilutional hyponatremia.

- **Hypercalcemia/hypocalciuria**Volume depletion by thiazides causes enhanced Na+ reabsorption in the PTs, which in turn stimulates increased passive Ca2+ reabsorption via paracellular pathway there, a proximal response. As a distal response, inhibition of NCC channels by thiazides could play a role in enhancing Ca2+ reabsorption by modulating the activity of TRP vanilloid-5 channels.

- **Hypomagnesemia**also correlates with the chronic use of thiazides and is mediated through thiazide-mediated inhibition of NCC channels, which indirectly inhibits Mg2+ reabsorption via downregulating TRP melastatin-6 channels.

- **Glucose intolerance**: Thiazide-induced hypokalemia in pancreatic interstitium hyperpolarizes the islet cells, thereby inhibiting calcium influx and thus decreasing the calcium-dependent release of insulin resulting in hyperglycemia. Thiazides also cause an increase in the inflammatory response, abnormal lipid metabolism, RAAS activation, and oxidative stress, thus decreased insulin sensitivity that arises as a consequence is multifactorial. New-onset diabetes due to thiazides is also of concern in obese and hypertensive individuals.

- **Hyperuricemia**: The incidence of this adverse effect increases with the number of years using thiazides for hypertensive therapy.

- **Hypertriglyceridemia****and****Hypercholesterolemia:**Thiazides, while not affecting high-density lipoproteins, have been shown to increase LDL-C levels by 10%, total cholesterol by 4%, and TG levels by almost 15%. There is evidence on the dose-dependency of this side-effect and reduced occurrence with low-dose therapy.

- **Stevens-Johnson syndrome**: Thiazides, like loop diuretics, are also implicated as a rare cause of Stevens-Johnson syndrome

- Rarely Thiazides can increase the risk of developing acute pancreatitis owing to increased serum calcium levels.

**Potassium-sparing Diuretic Specific Effects**

More generalized and less common side-effects of K+-sparing agents include headache, fatigue, and GI disturbances like nausea, vomiting, constipation, diarrhea, anorexia, and abdominal pain.

**ENaC Inhibitor Specific Effects**

- **Hyperkalemia and hyperchloremic metabolic acidosis are**the most common side-effect of this class of diuretics due to their inhibition of ENaCs and, consequently, suppressed secretion of K+ ions and H+ ions from the ASDN.

- Amiloride carries a black-box warning for hyperkalemia. Nausea, flatulence, and skin rashes can occur with amiloride or triamterene. Rarely, nephrolithiasis can result from triamterene use.

**Aldosterone Receptor Antagonist Specific Effects**

- Side-effects of this category are attributed to spironolactone and are dose-dependent in most situations and can include menstrual irregularities, breast tenderness, and orthostatic hypotension.

- **Gynecomastia**: Spironolactone is a non-selective ARA and is structurally similar to progesterone and results in progestogenic and anti-androgenic effects, which block both the production of androgens such as testosterone and their binding to their androgenic receptors. Such a decrease in androgens decreases the androgen to estrogen ratio, opening the way for estrogens to exert their unrestrained action causing gynecomastia.

**Carbonic Anhydrase Inhibitor Specific Effects**

- **Hyperchloremic metabolic acidosis:**Acetazolamide most commonly cause symptomatic metabolic acidosis. The majority of HCO3+ ions are reabsorbed in the PT with the help of carbonic anhydrase enzyme, and inhibition of this enzyme by acetazolamide causes wastage of HCO3+ ions in the urine (bicarbonaturia). This activity leads to reduced serum HCO3+ levels, and intracellular Cl- ions are then released into the plasma to compensate for the loss of negative charge causing normal anion gap metabolic acidosis, aka hyperchloremic metabolic acidosis**.**Chronic use of acetazolamide is not warranted due to this side-effect.

- **Hypokalemia:**is due to increased distal delivery of Na+ ions and their reabsorption in exchange for K+ ions.

- **Fanconi syndrome**: Inhibition of HCO3+ ions also cause type-2 proximal renal tubular acidosis, which can cause PT dysfunction leading to drug-induced Fanconi syndrome.

- Other less common side effects include Light-headedness, circumoral paresthesias, weakness, and confusion.

**Osmotic Diuretic Specific Effects**

- **Electrolyte abnormalities:**Though mannitol does not interfere with electrolyte reabsorptive mechanisms, it can cause inhibition of water transport, and this diminishes the ability of renal tubules to reabsorb Na+ ions, which can cause hyponatremia. Increased distal delivery of Na+ ions can lead to K+ loss as described above and thus hypokalemia. As it causes increased serum osmolality, mannitol causes a shift of water from the intracellular compartment to the plasma, leading to an increase in blood volume, which can further result in dilutional hyponatremia and hypokalemia.

- Mannitol-induced overt expansion of extracellular fluid volume can precipitate pulmonary edema in HF patients due to hypervolemia.