The only definitive treatment for left ventricular false aneurysms is surgery.  The goal is to exclude the aneurysmal segment and restore left ventricular size and shape. Median sternotomy is the preferred approach. Full cardiopulmonary bypass is instituted, and aortic cross-clamping is necessary.  The literature has published several repair techniques, but all aim to exclude the aneurysmal sac and restore normal left ventricular geometry. One method of patch repair is described here. The aneurysm wall is incised, and any indwelling thrombus is aspirated and evacuated. The tissue is debrided back to healthy myocardium. The myocardial defect is then measured, and a Dacron patch cut to approximately 2 to 3 cm larger than the diameter of the defect. This patch is then sutured in place to cover the defect. Interrupted pledgeted mattress sutures are placed through the healthy myocardium and then through the patch. It is essential to ensure large, generous bites of healthy tissue. The Dacron patch is lowered into place and secured. A second layer of running suture can be placed to aid with hemostasis.

Percutaneous embolization can be a consideration in non-surgical candidates. This method is contraindicated in cases of active endocarditis or the presence of thrombus in the left atrium. Right, and left heart catheterization is performed to evaluate the pressures inside the heart, and the left ventriculogram checks the anatomy and wall motion of the left ventricle. A catheter is inserted through the femoral incision and progressed to the left atrium, where a guide catheter is used to target the false aneurysm. Embolization coils are led into the false aneurysm sac and neck, or the site of communication between the left ventricle and false aneurysm is closed off with an Amplatzer vascular plug.

Regular follow up evaluations to monitor the progression of false aneurysms are important.