There is limited concrete evidence regarding the absolute etiology of vestibular migraine. However, genetics may play a role in vestibular migraines as displayed by a recent study showing an autosomal dominant inheritance trait linked to gene locus 5q35 in a four-generation family line. The majority of this family demonstrated headaches followed by vertigo within 15 to 20 years after the onset of migraine headaches.

Many peripheral vestibular disorders are seemingly associated with a vestibular migraine, some of which include Meniere syndrome and benign paroxysmal positional vertigo.

**Meniere Syndrome**

While it seems Meniere syndrome is associated with vestibular migraine, the relationship appears complicated. Clinical evaluation of dizzy or vertiginous patients is commonplace at many tertiary otolaryngology centers. With the understanding of some selection bias, a study from one of these centers demonstrated nearly 30% of Meniere syndrome patients may also have vestibular migraine, while an additional 30% did not meet vestibular migraine criteria but did demonstrate some migraine-like qualities.

An additional study showed some fascinating associations between Meniere syndrome and vestibular migraine. Thirteen percent to 18% of those initially diagnosed with probable or definite vestibular migraine developed bilateral, low-frequency sensorineural hearing loss within 9 years. Interestingly, 7% to 11% developed cochlear symptoms that met the American Academy of Otolaryngology, Head and Neck Surgery (AAO-HNS) criteria for bilateral Meniere syndrome.

In 2013, Wise and Sargent presented that those who suffer from simultaneous migraine headaches with intractable Meniere syndrome experienced worse quality of life-related surgical outcomes compared to intractable Meniere syndrome alone. These findings were obtained after undergoing endolymphatic sac decompression for intractable Meniere syndrome.

The idea that one may suffer from both diseases cannot be discounted, and therefore ought to be considered in the workup and treatment. Additionally, due to similar symptomatology diagnostic uncertainty may confuse the patient regarding the actual disease with which they suffer.

**Benign Paroxysmal Positional Vertigo (BPPV)**

The association between BPPV and vestibular migraine is another complicated one as the relationship is not well understood. It has been shown that those with BPPV who are successfully treated with the Epley maneuver have a higher prevalence of motion sickness or migraine history compared to the general public.

Further, a conglomerate of the symptoms of vertigo, nausea, and headaches accompanied by sustained nystagmus on positional testing that dissipates when the patient is symptom-free suggests a vestibular migraine.

**Migraine Anxiety-Related Dizziness (MARD)**

MARD is a condition that must be considered as recurrent dizziness can cause debilitating anxiety. This disease is diagnosed with symptoms of anxiety, migraine, and vestibular symptoms. Treating anxiety as well as the migraine and balance disorder is a must.