The mainstay of treatment for adrenocortical carcinoma is surgery.

Unfortunately, because of the size of most adrenocortical carcinoma, complete excision is rarely possible.

Microscopically positive resection margins (R1) carry an increased risk of recurrence.

In the past decade, technical advances in minimally invasive surgery have led to increased use of laparoscopic procedures to remove adrenal masses. However, multiple reports have found an increased risk of peritoneal carcinomatosis in ACC patients who underwent laparoscopic resection compared with patients who had open adrenalectomy.

Although minimally invasive resection can reduce the length of hospital stay after surgery, it is viewed by many as being inferior to an open procedure because it impairs the surgeon’s ability to perform a comprehensive regional lymph node dissection and reduces the chance of having R0 resection margins.

Surgical expertise is very important for improving clinical outcomes in localized adrenocortical carcinomas, as shown by more prolonged recurrence-free survival (RFS) and reduced local recurrence rates in patients treated at high-volume centers (those performing 10 or more ACC surgeries annually) compared with rates seen in patients treated in low volume centers, despite the typically larger tumors in patients in the high-volume centers.

Imaging should be utilized before and during surgery because many aggressive adrenocortical carcinomas overgrow, and involve adjacent structures. Intravascular ultrasound or venography may complement other imaging studies to estimate the extent of tumor involvement. Other preoperative considerations include the management and optimization of those patients with hormone excess, especially those with Cushing syndrome.

A radical resection induces temporary cortisol deficiency in patients with cortisol-secreting ACC who will require glucocorticoid replacement postoperatively.

In the case of recurrent cases, surgery is the recommendation for patients with a favorable prognosis and an achievable Ro resection. Surgery for palliative and metastatic cases may be considered depending on prognostic factors. Expected postoperative mortality for patients with ACC is less than 5%. Redo-surgery is recommended for R2 resection.

Although surgery is the treatment recommended for non-metastatic ACC, the decision for resection of the primary tumor in stage IV disease requires individualized attention. In general, those with multiple metastatic deposits in one organ system or widespread distant metastatic disease in multiple organs should not undergo adrenalectomy. Patients with advanced disease who have complete surgical resection procedures often experience a recurrence in the surgical site or distant organs. Late recurrences that occur more than six months after initial surgery can be salvaged occasionally with another resection of the recurrent disease, and this approach correlates with improved survival compared with patients who experience early recurrences, which is often an indication for systemic therapy.

Loco-guided regional therapy, including interventional radiology techniques, are used to control tumor growth and improve secretory status.  Other therapies, including radiofrequency ablation and trans-arterial chemoembolization, are useful in curing small metastatic lesions in liver, lung, and bone. None of these methods have been the subject of clinical trials. However, both methods are an alternative to surgery when surgery is not feasible.