# Continuing Education Activity

Arsenical keratosis is an important cutaneous manifestation of chronic arsenic toxicity (CAT). As it is a common presenting complaint of CAT and a precancerous condition, awareness and a high degree of suspicion are required among clinicians for a prompt diagnosis and treatment. This activity reviews the clinical presentation, complications, evaluation, and treatment of arsenical keratosis and highlights the role of an interprofessional team in the management of these patients.

**Objectives:**
- Describe the pathophysiology of arsenical keratosis.
- Outline the typical presentation of arsenical keratosis.
- Summarize the treatment options available for arsenical keratosis.
- Review the importance of improving care and coordination amongst the interprofessional team members to improve outcomes for patients affected by arsenical keratosis.

# Introduction

Arsenical keratosis is a precancerous dermatosis seen in patients with chronic arsenic toxicity (CAT).

Arsenical keratosis with skin hyperpigmentation is the earliest and most common presenting complaint in CAT.

# Etiology

Arsenical keratosis is a cutaneous manifestation of 'arsenicosis,' defined by the World Health Organization (WHO) as a chronic health condition resulting from the ingestion of arsenic above the safe limit for a minimum duration of 6 months.

- Contaminated groundwater- Used for drinking, cooking, and irrigating crops.

- Food crops- Crops that are grown in contaminated soil or irrigated with contaminated water can be a source of arsenic.

- Medications- Fowler's solution (1% potassium arsenite) was used in the 20th century to treat various dermatoses and asthma.

- Occupational exposure- Arsenic is used in the manufacture of alloys and in the processing of pigments, textiles, glass, paper, hide (tanning process), wood preservatives, and ammunitions. Workers involved in smelting and mining of metals have greater exposure to arsenic than those involved in the manufacture of insecticides/ pesticides/ herbicides, pharmaceuticals, and poultry feeds. The population living close to these industries or mining activities is also at risk.

- Tobacco- Tobacco plants can take up arsenic naturally present in contaminated soil and insecticides. Cigarettes manufactured in the 1950s had high arsenic content, which has been gradually reduced to acceptable levels over the years. However, regulating the arsenic content in handmade cigarettes like bidis has not yet been possible.

# Epidemiology

A greater incidence and prevalence of arsenic keratosis is reported from countries with documented environmental arsenic contamination, most commonly in groundwater. This includes Bangladesh, India, Taiwan, Mexico, Chile, Argentina, Japan, and China, to name a few.

# Pathophysiology

Though the exact pathomechanism underlying the premalignant and malignant manifestations of chronic arsenic exposure is unknown, there are several hypotheses that have been proposed and researched in several parts of the world. Arsenic metabolism in the body has a key role in most of these theories. Some such tested theories are as follows:

- Genetic polymorphism of enzymes involved in the metabolic pathway; arsenite methyltransferase (AS3MT) is the main mediator in the biomethylation of arsenic.

- Global DNA hypomethylation due to depletion of S-adenosylmethionine in cells during the process of arsenic biomethylation. This leads to aberrant gene expression in cells, resulting in carcinogenesis.

- Reactive oxygen species generated during the metabolism of arsenic causes oxidative DNA damage, resulting in chromosomal abnormalities and sister chromatic exchange.

The development of premalignant and malignant lesions is further facilitated by an individual's genetic susceptibility. This includes polymorphism in the DNA repair pathway genes (e.g., ERCC2, XRCC3), tumor suppressor gene (TP53), glutathione S-transferase superfamily enzymes, IL10, TNF alpha, and NLRP2. Studies have demonstrated an exaggerated expression of pro-inflammatory cytokines in chronic arsenic toxicity. Recent studies have revealed the role of arsenic-induced epigenetic alterations i.e., changes in gene expression in the development of premalignant dermatoses and malignancy.

# Histopathology

Prominent compact hyperkeratosis, parakeratosis, and acanthosis are the constant features found on histopathological examination of arsenical keratosis. Papillomatosis and vacuolated keratinocytes may be present. Keratinocyte atypia may or may not be seen, and its severity can vary from mild atypia to features of squamous cell carcinoma in situ, which is indistinguishable from Bowen's disease.

A similar histopathological picture can be seen in actinic keratosis, Bowen's disease, and verruca vulgaris.

# Toxicokinetics

Arsenic, a metalloid, naturally occurring in sediments and minerals, is a colorless, odorless, and tasteless chemical carcinogen.

Arsenic enters the bloodstream predominantly through gastrointestinal absorption. Entry through the respiratory route and transcutaneous absorption is also known to occur. A small portion of the absorbed arsenic gets excreted unchanged in the urine. The major portion undergoes hepatic biomethylation to monomethylarsonic acid and dimethyl arsenic acid and gets excreted in the urine.

Most of the accumulated arsenic gets excreted over time; however, keratin-rich tissue like nails, hair, and skin are an exception to this.

# History and Physical

The usual presenting complaints are horny lesions over the extremities, particularly involving the palms and soles, which may be associated with pain and/or fissuring. The lesions are insidious in onset and gradually increase in number and size. On physical examination, multiple yellowish to pigmented hyperkeratotic papules and plaques that start over the pressure points over soles and palms are seen. As the disease progresses, the lesions increase in number, size, and thickness and can coalesce to form large verrucous plaques.

- Mild- Slight thickening of skin or papules of size less than 2 mm on a background skin with grit-like texture, best appreciated by palpation.

- Moderate- Multiple raised, warty, keratotic, corn-like papules of size 2-5 mm.

- Severe- Keratotic papules of size more than 5mm or confluent keratotic plaques, with or without fissures.

Arsenical keratosis is often accompanied by pigmentary disturbances, which can be generalized/ diffuse hyperpigmentation or localized patchy hyperpigmentation predominantly involving the skin folds.

CAT is a multisystem disorder, and patients with arsenical keratosis can have symptoms of chronic liver disease, chronic lung disease, distal sensorimotor neuropathy, peripheral vascular disease, ischemic heart disease, chronic kidney disease, and non-specific gastrointestinal symptoms like anorexia, dyspepsia, and diarrhea. They may also complain of headache, weakness, fatigue, redness of eyes (conjunctival congestion), and swelling of legs (non-pitting pedal edema). Diabetes and hypertension are prevalent in these patients.

Thus, while evaluating a patient from an arsenic-endemic area, presenting with acquired palmoplantar keratoderma, arsenical keratosis should be suspected, and the clinician must look for other skin manifestations and systemic symptoms of CAT. This should be followed by appropriate laboratory investigations to confirm the diagnosis.

# Evaluation

Investigations should be directed towards establishing CAT in the patient and identifying the source of arsenic exposure.

- Estimation of arsenic concentration in drinking water/well water- An acid-washed plastic container is used to collect at least 50ml of water to be tested. WHO has set a provisional guideline value of 10 mcg/L for the maximum permissible concentration of arsenic in drinking water.

- Estimation of arsenic concentration in urine- It is an indicator of recent exposure to arsenic and should be ideally done in a 24-hour urine collection. An easier alternative is to test a spot urine sample or the first-morning urine sample. Both methods are comparable as the arsenic excreted remains stable throughout the day. Seafood containing the non-toxic organic form of arsenic should be avoided for at least four days prior to testing, as it can make the results unreliable. A concentration of more than 50 mcg/L proves recent exposure to arsenic.

- Estimation of arsenic concentration in hairs and nails- After using arsenic-free shampoo to wash hair and ensuring that the patient has not used any coloring agent, 30 hairs of 6 cm length from females and 60 hairs with the base from males are collected and tested. Nail clippings are taken from all fingernails and toenails. A concentration of arsenic more than 1 mg/kg of dry hair and more than 1.5 mg/kg of the nail indicates arsenic exposure in the preceding 9 months.

- Estimation of arsenic concentration in suspected sources like medications or pesticides by using atomic absorption spectrometry, calorimetric method, spectrophotometry, etc.

- Histopathological examination of the keratotic skin lesions is done to look for malignant transformation but has little role in the conformation of the diagnosis.

Estimation of arsenic concentration in drinking water is usually the first step in the evaluation of CAT. However, in clinical scenarios where drinking water data is unreliable, like in the case of a migratory population, the patient's biological sample analysis is crucial in establishing the diagnosis.

# Treatment / Management

After establishing arsenic toxicity in the patient, and positively identifying the source of arsenic exposure, prevention of further exposure forms the mainstay of treatment. Mild to moderate disease have shown improvement in many such instances.

Treatment of arsenical keratosis is not mandatory, and the objective is to administer a supportive and symptomatic treatment that relieves the patient's discomfort. There are no universally accepted standard guidelines for the treatment of arsenical keratosis. Treatment should be tailored to the patient's needs, the severity of the disease, comorbidities, and tolerance for pain. Treatment options that have been tried over the years are as follows:

- Cryotherapy

- Curettage and electrodessication

- Carbon dioxide laser ablation

- Topical keratolytic agents- salicylic acid (5 to 10%), urea (10 to 20%)

- Imiquimod 5% cream

- Topical 5-fluorouracil

- Oral retinoids

- Surgical excision

Acitretin with topical keratolytic agents can be used to treat patients with extensive lesions. It can play the role of chemoprevention in CAT associated cancers.

# Differential Diagnosis

- Verruca vulgaris

- Corns/ calluses

- Dermatophyte infection

- Lichen planus

- Hyperkeratotic eczema

- Palmoplantar psoriasis

- Porokeratosis punctata palmaris et plantaris

- Clavi syphilitici

- Inherited palmoplantar keratoderma

# Prognosis

Arsenical keratosis is a precancerous condition and can progress to squamous cell carcinoma (SCC). Though rare, the SCC that arises in arsenical keratosis are locally aggressive and demonstrate a greater metastatic potential compared to SCC arising in actinic keratosis.

# Complications

- In extreme cases of arsenical keratosis, diffuse involvement of palms and soles with painful fissuring can be seen.

- Arsenical keratosis is one of the several skin conditions that can be associated with a cutaneous horn.

- Malignant transformation, usually, SCC should be suspected when there is a sudden increase in size, induration, fissuring, bleeding, inflammation, perilesional erythema, and ulceration.

- Several organ systems can be affected in CAT, some leading to irreversible changes, chronic disease, and also predisposing to visceral malignancies.

# Deterrence and Patient Education

Arsenical keratosis is an early cutaneous marker of CAT, which is a multisystem disorder with complications that can develop years after arsenic exposure.

Smoking and nutritional deficiencies increase the chances of developing arsenical keratosis, and measures should be taken to mitigate the same. Patients should be taught to identify the features of malignant transformation of arsenical keratosis and seek medical care early on.

# Enhancing Healthcare Team Outcomes

Patients with arsenical keratosis often present to their primary care clinician. These patients need to be referred for further evaluation to a dermatologist as several skin diseases can be clinically similar, and a dermatologist will be able to diagnose them based on the concomitant signs and risk factors. As it is an early manifestation of CAT, a missed diagnosis can have adverse long term outcomes. Once diagnosed and initiated on treatment, the patient can be referred to their primary care clinician for further management of arsenical keratosis. A dermatopathologist has an important role in management when a malignant transformation is suspected; if the histology reveals malignancy, surgical excision is done by a plastic surgeon.

Regular follow-up visits to identify systemic complaints and timely referral can lead to early diagnosis and treatment of associated systemic diseases, including malignancies. Hence, holistic management by an interprofessional team consisting of a dermatologist, primary care clinician, dermatopathologist, and plastic surgeon improves the outcomes of this multisystem disorder of public health relevance.