Isoniazid is metabolized primarily by the liver by acetylation of N-acetyl transferase 2 (NAT2). Three metabolites have implications that correlate with the liver injury associated with the drug: acetyl hydrazine (AcHz), hydrazine (Hz), and a metabolite from the bioactivation of isoniazid itself. There is considerable variation in acetylation rate and elimination half-life from individual to individual, which is not accounted for by dose and concentration. This appears to contribute to the risk for hepatotoxicity and the other adverse effects associated with isoniazid.

The mild liver injury will occur in up to 20% of patients taking isoniazid. Clinical manifestations of hepatotoxicity include fever, fatigue, nausea, and vomiting. However, most patients experiencing isoniazid-induced liver injury are asymptomatic. Usually, it is detected only by measuring increased levels of alanine aminotransferase (ALT) and aspartate aminotransferase (AST), which may rise to as high as five times the normal limit. In a process called “adaptation,” the hepatic markers will return to normal in most of these patients, even with continued administration of the drug. About 1% of patients will experience severe liver injury, and isoniazid therapy should stop immediately. Reintroducing isoniazid in these cases is contraindicated as it can cause rapid symptom onset, and fatal hepatitis during isoniazid treatment is associated with continued use after symptoms of hepatitis present.

Most patients recover entirely from isoniazid hepatotoxicity after discontinuation, although full regression takes weeks.