# Continuing Education Activity

Chloroquine or hydroxychloroquine, a less toxic metabolite of chloroquine, can cause pathologic ocular damage unless strict prescribing and screening guidelines are followed. Ocular damage due to these medications can include corneal deposits, posterior subcapsular lens opacity, ciliary body dysfunction, macular pigment loss, peripheral bone spicule formation, vascular attenuation, and optic disc pallor. Ocular symptoms of retinopathy associated with these medications can include blurred vision, partial loss of central and peripheral vision and in the later stage, loss of night vision. Symptoms of corneal deposits include haloes and glare. Clinical research has resulted in precise screening protocols and safe dosing guidelines to prevent ocular toxicity and detect retinal damage at an early stage. This activity describes the ophthalmic evaluation and potential pathologic findings in patients on chloroquine or hydroxychloroquine, reviews current ophthalmic screening guidelines for patients taking these medications, reviews treatment options for ocular toxicity related to these medications, and highlights the role of the interprofessional team in improving care for this patient population.

**Objectives:**
- Outline the ophthalmic screening guidelines for patients on chloroquine or hydroxychloroquine. 
- Explain the dosing guidelines for chloroquine and hydroxychloroquine.
- Review what patient attributes influence the risk for chloroquine or hydroxychloroquine toxicity.
- Summarize a well-coordinated, interprofessional team approach to ensure that patients taking chloroquine or hydroxychloroquine adhere to ophthalmic screening guidelines.

# Introduction

Chloroquine (CQ) is used to prevent and treat malaria and amebiasis,

Both medications can cause corneal deposits, posterior subcapsular lens opacity, ciliary body dysfunction, and most important, irregularity in the macular pigmentation in the early phase, a ring of macular pigment dropout in the advanced stage, and peripheral bone spicule formation, vascular attenuation, and optic disc pallor in the end-stage. Ocular symptoms of retinopathy include blurred and partial loss of central vision, side vision, and in the later stage, night vision.  Symptoms of corneal deposits include haloes and glare.  Clinical research has resulted in precise screening protocols and safe dosing guidelines to prevent ocular toxicity and detect retinal damage at an early stage.

# Etiology

Chloroquine and hydroxychloroquine bind to melanin in the retinal pigment epithelium (RPE) and cause damage to the macular cones outside of the fovea.  The drugs inhibit RPE lysosome activity, reduce phagocytosis of shed photoreceptor outer segments causing an accumulation of outer receptor segments.  In response, pigment-containing RPE cells migrate into the outer nuclear and outer plexiform layers of the retina resulting in irreversible photoreceptor loss and RPE atrophy.

# Epidemiology

The advance of spectral domain optical coherence tomography (SD-OCT) and multifocal electroretinography (mf-ERG) technology has allowed for better detection of retinopathy.

The incidence of HCQ retinal toxicity was found to be 0.38% in a 2003 study of 526 patients.

A report in 2015 described that pericentral maculopathy without the classic parafoveal (Bull's eye) retinopathy is common in Asian (50%) compared to Caucasian (2%) patients,

# Pathophysiology

In malaria, chloroquine and hydroxychloroquine act as chemotherapeutic agents against erythrocytic forms of the Plasmodium parasites. Absorption of the drug increases the pH of the acidic food vacuoles of the parasite while it is inside the erythrocyte, which interferes with vesicle function and the development and asexual reproduction of the parasite.

# Histopathology

SD-OCT testing visualizes the retinal layers in as much detail as microscopic examination and in CQ/HCQ retinopathy a loss of the photoreceptor inner-outer segment junction (the IS/OS line, also called the ellipsoid zone or the photoreceptor integrity line (PIL)) and a thinning of the outer nuclear layer of the retina are observed.

# Toxicokinetics

Both chloroquine and hydroxychloroquine have excellent oral absorption and bioavailability.  Both have a long and variable plasma elimination half-life because of a high volume of distribution, an extended mean residence time (HCQ 1300 hours and CQ 900 hours), and about half the drug metabolites undergoing unmodified renal clearance.  Both drugs are modified by cytochrome P450 in the liver.

# History and Physical

History should include the medical condition(s) that prompted CQ or HCQ therapy, the time since the start of therapy and the daily dose in mg per kilogram of the patient's actual weight.  Ideal weight was the preferable measure in the past but can cause overdosing of thin patients, and the patient's actual weight is now the preferred measure.

Vortex keratopathy (corneal verticillata) rarely causes vision complaints. In some advanced cases, patients may notice haloes and glare. The deposits occur within the sub-epithelium, do not stain, and are non-irritating.  Verticillata appears as bilateral fine, golden-brown or gray opacities in the inferior cornea that branch out from a central whorl.

# Evaluation

Three reports from the American Academy of Ophthalmology (AAO) in 2002, 2011, and 2016 have provided clinicians with evidence-based guidelines for screening patients on CQ/HCQ therapy.

The guidelines recommend starting annual screening after 5 years unless additional risk factors are present that include small stature, obesity, liver or kidney disease, and retinal disease.  In these cases, test on an annual basis from the start.  Since mf-ERG, is the most sensitive test but not as readily available, some protocols recommend introducing it at a later stage.

**Interpretation of Results**

- Visual field: defects are most likely to occur at 5 degrees from the center, except in Asian patients where the defect may be over 10 degrees from the center.  Use statistical analysis to determine the significance of the data.

- SD-OCT: will reveal parafoveal thinning of the photoreceptor integrity line and the outer nuclear layer of the retina; this results in a "flattening" of the foveal depression and the "flying saucer sign" where the outer nuclear layer in the fovea's center is unaffected, and just around it this layer is much thinner (the edge of the saucer).

- FAF: reveals in early maculopathy, a ring of hyperfluorescence (caused by the accumulation of lipofuscin) and in later stages, a ring of hypofluoresence (caused by the loss of photoreceptor and retinal pigment epithelial layers).

- mf-ERG: amplitude reduction is most common in ring 2, followed by ring 3, 4 and 1.  Delayed implicit times are less common.

- The dilated fundus exam: 2016 recommendations indicate that with better dosing guidelines and earlier detection, end-stage bull's eye maculopathy presents less often.  However, the clinician should have familiarity with the fundus appearance of irregularity in the macular pigmentation in the early phase, a ring of macular pigment dropout in the advanced stage, and peripheral bone spicule formation, vascular attenuation, and optic disc pallor in the end-stage.

# Treatment / Management

The clinician needs to be well-versed in the reasons to prescribe chloroquine and hydroxychloroquine and dosing recommendations to detect those patients at increased risk.

Chloroquine has a long history in the treatment of malaria caused by Plasmodium vivax, ovale, malariae, and falciparum in regions where P. falciparum has not developed resistance to it (mainly in North Africa).  It also has utility in treating amebiasis, especially the extra-intestinal forms.  For malaria prophylaxis in adults, start 500 mg CQ phosphate once a week from 2 weeks before until 8 weeks after travel to an endemic area.  The adult dose for active infection of malaria is a total dose of 2500 mg divided over 3 days for patients over 60 kg and for those less than 60 kg, 41.7 mg/kilogram of divided over 3 days.  Give patients with amebiasis a 1 gram loading dose for two days followed by 500 mg of CQ phosphate for 2-3 weeks.  Chloroquine is often part of a multi-drug regimen with other anti-parasitic medications.  A cumulative dose of over 460 g or a daily dose of 2.3 mg/kg body weight/day is high risk.

HCQ treats rheumatic conditions as mentioned previously in this article. It also has utility in the treatment or prevention of malaria. For malaria prophylaxis in adults, start 400 mg HCQ once a week from 2 weeks before until 8 weeks after travel to an endemic area.  The adult dose for the treatment of malaria is a total dose of 2000 mg divided over 3 days for patients over 60 kg and for those less than 60 kg, 25 mg/kilogram divided over 3 days.  For rheumatic diseases, the most common dose is 400 mg per day.  In 2016, the previous guideline to keep the daily dose of HCQ under 6.5 mg/kilogram of ideal bodyweight was adjusted to 5 mg/kilogram of the actual body weight to keep the risk of retinopathy within acceptable levels.

Previous guidelines using ideal weight protect short stature, obese patients, while the new guidelines using actual weight appear to protect short stature thin patients from receiving a dose that is too high.

Convincing evidence of toxicity should result in the drug's discontinuation in consultation with the prescribing physician.  Because of the long half-life of both drugs, retinopathy can continue for over 6 months, and studies have shown ongoing changes for up to 20 years after cessation of the drugs.

# Differential Diagnosis

The differential diagnosis for CQ/HCQ vortex keratopathy (VK, also called corneal verticillata) includes:

- Sub-epithelial deposition of other medications:  A good medical history should reveal the medication responsible.  Amiodarone most commonly is the cause of vortex keratopathy, followed by CQ, HCQ, indomethacin, and phenothiazines.  The appearance of the verticillata caused by these different medications is similar in appearance.

- Fabry disease: Verticillata from Fabry disease is similar in appearance to those caused by medications. Fabry disease presents with retinal vessel tortuosity and cataracts as well.  Other findings include pain of the extremities and angiokeratomas of the skin.  Cardiovascular, renal and cerebrovascular disease are late manifestations.

- Iron lines: Caused by iron deposition from the tear film into the basal epithelium layer.

- Hudson Stahli line: Tends to be more linear and usually horizontal and at the junction of the lower one third and upper two-third of the cornea.

- Fleisher ring: This is present in moderate to advanced cases of keratoconus.  The inferior portion of the ring may be present in less advanced cases and can be confused with VK.

- Corneal irregularity from refractive procedures such as radial keratotomy:  The deposits are within the irregularities caused by the surgery (for example, within the radial keratotomy incisions).

- Stocker's line: The iron line is found next to the head of a pterygium.

- Ferry's line: The iron line is found next to a glaucoma filtering bleb.

- Gout: Uric acid crystal deposition in Bowman's membrane appears as a dust-like brown type of band keratopathy.  In an early stage, it can be confused with VK.

- Corneal chrysiasis: Caused by deposition of gold in the corneal stroma.  A good medical history should reveal a history of treatment with intramuscular injections of gold salts.  The deposition is more granular in appearance and more diffusely distributed throughout the surface of the cornea.

**The Differential for CQ/HCQ Retinopathy Includes**

Age-related macular degeneration: Geographic atrophy (GA) in the absence of drusen and choroidal neovascularization and CQ/HCQ retinopathy can present similarly.  Both present with thinning of the photoreceptor integrity line and the outer nuclear layer of the retina and atrophy of the choriocapillaris on SD-OCT.

Central areolar choroidal dystrophy (CACD): CACD can appear in a bull's eye pattern.  However, it develops between age 20-40 years old, usually too young of an age to have been on CQ/HCQ for over 20 years and to be at high risk of CQ/HCQ retinopathy.  It progresses through 4 stages, each associated with characteristic retinal and choroidal findings.  A speckled FAF pattern is present in 85% of patients with CACD and can be used to differentiate CACD from GA and CQ/HCQ retinopathy.

Stargardt disease: Presence of irregular, pisciform, yellow flecks, at the RPE level in the macula with a possible extension into the periphery differentiates Stargardt disease from CQ/HCQ maculopathy.  The commonest age of onset is in the 2nd decade of life; the classic "beaten bronze" appearance and positive genetic testing for the ABCA4 mutation are additional ways to differentiate the two conditions.  Finally, the classic "silent choroid" found in patients with Stargardt disease when tested with fluorescein angiography is not present in patients with CQ/HCQ retinopathy.

Cone-rod dystrophy (CRD): CRD can present with bull's eye maculopathy. CRD occurs in childhood and causes loss of central vision and photophobia in the early stage, followed by central scotomas, loss of color vision, and peripheral vision.  Night blindness is a present in the early stage.  Photopic and scotopic ERG testing is precise in differentiating CRD from CQ/HCQ retinopathy.

Benign concentric annular dystrophy (BCAD): This rare disorder is characterized by a bull's eye macular pigmentary change while visual acuity is well-preserved.

# Prognosis

When the clinician that detects early retinopathy does not discontinue CQ/HCQ therapy, the prognosis is a progressive loss of paracentral vision followed by loss of central vision and night blindness.  Even when the clinician discontinues therapy, retinopathy can progress for many years.  Progression of vortex keratopathy (VK) causes increasing haloes and blur but is fully reversible upon discontinuation of therapy.

# Complications

Even when the clinician and patient adhere to screening guidelines and retinopathy is detected in a sub-clinical stage, discontinuation of chloroquine or hydroxychloroquine therapy may not stop the progression of retinopathy to a stage where the patient loses vision.

# Deterrence and Patient Education

As discussed in previous sections, a thorough knowledge of the latest screening guidelines, last amended in 2016, and clear communication on the risks and benefits of CQ/HCQ therapy are essential in reducing toxicity while maintaining the extensive benefits of CQ/HCQ treatment of certain parasitic and rheumatic diseases.

# Enhancing Healthcare Team Outcomes

To reduce the incidence of chloroquine and hydroxychloroquine toxicity, health care providers (HCP's) that prescribe these medications and those that screen for ocular toxicity have developed clear dosing and screening protocols that have reduced the risk of end-stage disease; bull's eye maculopathy and central vision loss (Level I).

The best approach to maintaining excellent patient care and minimizing risk is a team approach involving nurses, nurse practitioners, physician assistants, and physicians. [Level V]