Robotic  TKA is a technology that uses dynamic referencing to assess knee stability, alignment, and knee range of movement intraoperatively, enabling intraoperative adjustments of bone resection and positioning of the prosthesis. Reduced soft-tissue dissection and muscle injury help reduce the inflammatory response and improve the achievement of physiotherapy goals quickly, such as straight leg raise restoration.

**Examples of the Available Robotic-Assisted TKA Systems**

There are several types of robotic TKR with different brand names. One of these types consists of a robotic arm designed to assist in TKA through a haptic interface. This semiactive robotic system stops the saw when bone resection begins to go outside predetermined parameters set in the preoperative plan. It improves the surgeon's ability to perform the knee alignment and protect the soft tissue components like the MCL, PCL, and the popliteal artery. It creates a three-dimensional model of the patient's knee from CT images to exactly calculate bone resection, prosthesis size, and position.

Another type of semiactive robotic system is a handheld robotic burr manually controlled by the surgeon. It is used for partial knee arthroplasty (unicondylar TKR and patellofemoral knee arthroplasties); it is also now available for TKA. Instead of working through a haptic interface, it is a semiactive system that follows the navigation field's burring tool trajectory. It controls the exposure and speed of the burr to protect against undesired resection of tibia or femur. This system does not need preoperative CT. It also can be used with different prosthetic implants and different brands.

Some other types were developed to obtain adequate implant fit and positioning; it is a CT based autonomous active system and is suitable for any prosthesis. The CT scan is uploaded to software to create a three-dimensional image, then the surgeon plant the surgery preoperatively and decide the exact resection size of the bone, prosthesis sizing, and positioning. The surgeon confirms the restoration of the mechanical axis. After the usual surgical approach, positioning, and validation of the device with pins followed by navigation markers, then the robotic tools do both femoral and tibial cuts.

The last type of robotic TKR is a motor-powered robotic TKR that helps the surgeon to do precise tibial and femoral cuts. It needs a preoperative plan to avoid mistakes while using a conventional saw, oscillating to ensure accurate alignment and positioning of the prosthesis. This type of robotic TKR does not use a preoperative CT scan. One of its disadvantages is that it is only suitable for one type of knee prosthesis.