Tobacco smoking is a life-threatening addiction that, if untreated, can cause damage to every organ system in the human body. The best way to avoid a TS-related illness is never to start smoking, and the second-best way is to stop smoking cigarettes as soon as possible. Helping a patient to stop smoking is one of the most beneficial preventive medicine interventions currently in existence. Nearly every member of the healthcare team may play an important role in the assistance of smoking cessation.

Nurses play a large role in assisting clinicians in tobacco cessation programs. In some hospitals, nurses are being trained to deliver behavioral and pharmaceutical interventions to inpatient smokers. These interventions have shown great promise in significantly reducing smoking in certain populations.

Clinicians are also at the front lines in the fight against tobacco smoking. Unfortunately, several studies have shown that brief episodes of clinician advice do very little to aid in smoking cessation; reinforcement must come from the entire healthcare team including pharmacists and nurses.

Clinical scientists also play a very important role in the fight to end tobacco addiction and tobacco-related diseases. They continue to investigate and discover the physiology of tobacco-related illnesses, the effectiveness of tobacco cessation medications and interventions and study tobacco smoking-related conditions across a broad spectrum of populations. From the toils of scientific research, much about tobacco smoking has been elucidated, and yet we as a society have much to learn, but an interprofessional team approach to smoking cessation will yield better patient results. [Level 5].