# Continuing Education Activity

Leflunomide is a medication used in the management and treatment of rheumatoid arthritis. It is in the non-biological DMARDs class of medications. This activity reviews the indications, action, and contraindications for leflunomide as a valuable agent in treating and managing rheumatoid arthritis. This activity will highlight the mechanism of action, adverse event profile, and other key factors of leflunomide use in a clinical setting, pertinent to members of the interprofessional team in the care of patients with rheumatoid arthritis and related conditions.

**Objectives:**
- Identify the mechanism of action of leflunomide.
- Describe the potential adverse effects of leflunomide.
- Review the appropriate monitoring of leflunomide.
- Summarize some interprofessional team strategies for improving care coordination and communication to advance leflunomide use in the care of rheumatoid arthritis and improve outcomes.

# Indications

Leflunomide is a disease-modifying antirheumatic drug (DMARDs), which is FDA approved to treat individuals with rheumatoid arthritis.

# Mechanism of Action

Leflunomide is an immunomodulatory oral medication that becomes metabolized in the body to its active form metabolite A77-1726, also known as teriflunomide. This metabolite acts by inhibiting the mitochondrial enzyme dihydro-orotate dehydrogenase.

# Administration

Leflunomide is available in oral tablets and comes in the following dosages:

- 10 mg

- 20 mg

- 100 mg

Patients can be started on an oral loading dose of 100 mg once a day for three days, followed by a maintenance dose of 10 mg or 20 mg per day -depending on the patient's tolerance. These are the recommended dosages for the treatment of Rheumatoid arthritis.

# Adverse Effects

Common adverse effects of leflunomide include:

- Diarrhea

- Elevation in liver enzymes

- Hypertension

- Rash

- Nausea

- Abdominal pain

- Back pain

- Alopecia

Less common effects are hematological disorders, such as pancytopenia, and pulmonary disorders such as interstitial lung disease and pneumonitis.

Leflunomide can also cause reversible inhibition of MAO-A and MAO-B receptors but is only slightly effective as an MAO inhibitor. Researchers studied it for the treatment of Parkinson disease.

# Contraindications

**Pregnancy**

Teratogenicity with leflunomide contraindicates its use during pregnancy and warrants discretion in females during childbearing years.

**Liver impairment**

Leflunomide is contraindicated in severe hepatic impairment due to hepatotoxicity.

**Lung Disease**

Leflunomide is also contraindicated in patients with underlying Interstitial lung disease and can cause symptoms within three months of starting leflunomide.

Other contraindications include hypersensitivity, previous or current skin reactions, immunosuppression, and impaired bone marrow function.

# Monitoring

- Liver function tests

- CBC

- Blood pressure

- Pregnancy

Leflunomide black box label warning warrants periodic monitoring of hepatic enzymes every four weeks for the initial six months and every other month after that.

# Toxicity

**Cholestyramine**

- Four grams of cholestyramine every 6 hours for 14 days is the recommended intervention for wash-out therapy due to the long half-life of leflunomide.

Leflunomide toxicity can affect the liver by causing acute drug-induced hepatic injury and affect the pulmonary system through pneumonitis and interstitial lung disease. During these complications, discontinuation of leflunomide and empirical cholestyramine wash-out therapy is recommended for toxicity.

# Enhancing Healthcare Team Outcomes

Leflunomide is an FDA-approved medication indicated for the treatment of rheumatoid arthritis. Managing the treatment of patients prescribed leflunomide requires excellent communication between the patient and professional healthcare providers. These providers need to function as an interprofessional team to include a primary care physician, a rheumatologist, a nurse, and a pharmacist. The primary care physicians and rheumatologists necessitate excellent patient rapport, so the patient fully understands the importance of medication compliance and education on the treatment and illness. It is vital to be engaged in the patient's care, so relapses, remissions, and disability do not occur long term.

The primary care and specialist should be familiar with leflunomide, its implications, and adverse effects. The patients prescribed leflunomide need routine checkups to observe if the medication is in an optimal range and the patient is not experiencing elevation in liver enzymes. Collective decision-making and interprofessional communication are necessary elements to enhance patient-centered care and achieve the desired outcome. Without the proper care and communication of an interprofessional team of healthcare professionals, the risk of adverse events and leflunomide toxicity, including drug-induced hepatitis, drug-induced pneumonitis, pancytopenia, and harm to the fetus during pregnancy, is highly likely. An interprofessional healthcare team working across disciplinary lines providing an integrated, evidence-based strategy to patients receiving treatment with leflunomide will help deliver the best possible outcomes.