**Supportive Measures**

- Supportive measures to improve patient’s generalized well-being and nutritional status

- Hygiene maintenance: avoid perianal skin soiling with regular cleaning, zinc oxide application, incontinence pads.

- Avoid food which can provoke diarrhea (high lactose/ fructose diet)

- Patients with mild cognitive impairment might benefit from regular defecation program.

**Medical Management**

Directed at improving stool consistency and reducing stool frequency

- Bulking agents (methylcellulose) to improve stool consistency

- Loperamide (Imodium) 4 mg three times a day to reduce stool frequency, improve urgency, increase colonic transit time and increases anal sphincter resting tone

- Diphenoxylate (Lomotil) also results in clinical improvement, but objective tests do not improve

- Treatment of other underlying disorders if suspected such as bile salt malabsorption, IBS, and IBD

- In postmenopausal women, estrogen replacement therapy might be beneficial

- In cases of combined urinary and fecal incontinence, amitriptyline might be helpful.

If the above therapy fails, further investigation should be done with anorectal manometry with imaging (EUS/MRI).

**Biofeedback Therapy**

Indicated for patients with impaired external sphincter tone and loss of sensation to rectal distention if detected during manometry. Biofeedback therapy is based on the concept of cognitive retraining of the pelvic floor and abdominal musculature to overcome the above defects. Studies report a wide range of success rates ranging from 38 % to 100%. This wide variation is due to small-scale studies with methodological limitations with a different definition of outcomes.

**Surgery**

In patients with refractory symptoms that do not respond to the above measures.

Surgical approaches can be divided into four categories:

- For patients with the simple structural abnormality of sphincters, such as due to obstetric trauma, overlapping sphincter repair might be sufficient. The success rate is 70% to 80%.

- For patients with the anatomically intact but weak sphincter, a post-anal approach for augmentation of anorectal angle is performed. The success rate is 20% to 58%.

- For patients with severe structural damage to the anal sphincter, the construction of neosphincter is performed using either autologous skeletal muscle (gracilis or gluteus) or artificial bowel sphincter. The success rate is 38% to 90%.

- Rectal augmentation (side to side ileorectal pouch or ileo-rectoplasty) is considered in patients with the reservoir or rectal sensorimotor dysfunction.

Recently injection of silicone has been shown to augment the function of the internal anal sphincter. Others have shown promise with carbon-coated microbeads. Sacral nerve stimulation is a minimally invasive approach for fecal incontinence. The stimulator may benefit patients with minor anal sphincter deficits due to a neurological issue. The two step procedure involves initially placing temporary external electrodes into the sacral foramen. The stimulation decreases symptoms of fecal incontinence by enhancing the squeeze and resting anal pressures and colonic motility. Patients who respond, then undergo permanent placement of an embedded neurostimulator. While good outcomes have been reported in several studies, the surgery can be associated with hematoma, seroma, and infection. In addition, lead migration and paresthesias are not uncommon. To counter these problems. sacral transcutaneous electrical nerve stimulation is now being evaluated.

Another relatively new method to manage fecal incontinence is the use of an injectable anal bulking agent. The hyaluronic acid derivative is injected into the anal mucosa and if the treatment can be repeated. Early results show that some patients may have a reduction in episodes of fecal incontinence.

In 2015, the vaginal bowel control device was approved for fecal incontinence. The vaginal insert has an inflatable balloon which exerts pressure through the vaginal wall onto the rectal area, and thus reducing fecal incontinence. The device does need regular cleaning and can be inflated and deflated as needed.