Uncomplicated Genital Chlamydia:

The World Health Organization (WHO) recommendations for treatment of uncomplicated genital chlamydia infections are the following:

- Azithromycin 1000 mg orally as a single dose **or**

- Doxycycline 100 mg orally twice a day for seven days, or one of these alternatives: tetracycline 500 mg by mouth four times a day for seven days, erythromycin 500 mg orally twice daily for 7 days, or ofloxacin 200-400 mg orally twice daily for 7 days

Anorectal Chlamydial infection:

In anorectal chlamydial infections, the WHO recommendation is oral doxycycline 100 mg twice daily for 7 days over oral azithromycin 1 g as a single dose.

Chlamydial infection in pregnancy:

WHO recommends the following for the treatment of chlamydial infection in pregnancy:

- Azithromycin recommended over erythromycin, amoxicillin, and erythromycin

- Azithromycin 1 g orally as a single dose **or**

- Amoxicillin 500 mg orally three times daily for 7 days **or**

- Erythromycin 500 mg orally twice daily for 7 days

Lymphogranuloma Venereum:

The WHO recommends the following for the treatment of lymphogranuloma venereum (LGV):

- In adults and adolescents with lymphogranuloma venereum, the guidelines suggest doxycycline 100 mg orally twice a day for 21 days over azithromycin 1 g orally weekly for 3 weeks.

- Good practice dictates the treatment of LGV, particularly for men who have sex with men and for people with HIV infection.

- When contraindications to doxycycline are present, azithromycin should be the therapeutic choice.

- When no other treatment options are available, erythromycin 500 mg orally four times a day for 21 days is an alternative.

- Doxycycline should not be used in pregnancy.

Infant disease:

Oral erythromycin is the preferred treatment for both conjunctivitis and pneumonia in the neonate. Azithromycin is an acceptable alternative. Infants who fail an initial course of erythromycin are recommended to retreat with another fourteen-day course of erythromycin.

- Erythromycin 50 mg/kg by mouth in 4 divided doses for 14 days **or**

- Azithromycin 20 mg/kg by mouth daily for 3 days