# Continuing Education Activity

Chondrodermatitis nodularis chronica helicis (CNH) is a benign inflammatory condition that affects the skin and cartilage of the pinna. CNH, also known as Winkler disease, commonly affects the helix of the pinna, though in some cases, the antihelix also may be affected. This activity reviews the evaluation and management of chondrodermatitis nodularis chronica helicis and highlights the role of the interprofessional team in the care of affected patients.

**Objectives:**
- Identify the etiology of chondrodermatitis nodularis chronica helicis.
- Describe the presentation of patients with chondrodermatitis nodularis chronica helicis.
- Outline the treatment options available for patients with chondrodermatitis nodularis chronica helicis.
- Explain interprofessional team strategies for improving coordination and communication to advance the management of chondrodermatitis nodularis chronica helicis and improve outcomes.

# Introduction

Chondrodermatitis nodularis chronica helicis (CNH) is a benign inflammatory condition that affects the skin and cartilage of the pinna. CNH is also known as Winkler disease, named for the dermatologist who first described the condition in 1915. It was later defined in 1918 by Foerster, who also outlined the microscopic, clinical, and treatment details of the disease.

This condition commonly affects the helix of the pinna, though in certain cases, the antihelix also may be affected. For this reason, some have suggested renaming the condition chondrodermatitis nodularis auricularis. Other synonyms for the condition are chondrodermatitis nodularis helicis, ear pressure sores, and chondrodermatitis nodularis antihelicis.

# Etiology

The exact etiology behind the development of CNH remains unclear. Most authors believe it is caused by chronic and excessive pressure on the pinna. Consistently sleeping on the same side seems to contribute to the condition. Other causes of pressure include the continuous and prolonged use of hearing aids, headphones, and other headgear. CNH may also be associated with autoimmune and connective tissue disorders, especially in young female patients. Anatomical features like a protruding helix or antihelix have also been considered potential contributing factors. Additional predisposing conditions include repeated trauma, solar damage, and exposure to cold weather.

Additionally, certain unique anatomical features make the pinna vulnerable to the development of CNH. These include minimal subcutaneous tissue and a limited blood supply. The auricular cartilage is at risk for damage due to pressure and cold as a result of the thinness of its skin and subcutaneous tissue. The nature of the auricle as an appendage on the side of the head also limits its vascularity, which further compounds the problem by causing a delay in the healing process and enhancing the chances of ischemia.

# Epidemiology

Chondrodermatitis nodularis chronica helicis probably occurs commonly, but it is infrequently documented in the literature. For this reason, the exact incidence of CNH remains unknown. When not associated with autoimmune processes, this disease commonly affects men of middle age or later (70-90% of patients) but may affect women and younger adults as well. CNH can occur in all ethnicities; however, it is more frequent among fair-skinned people with a history of chronic sun exposure.

# Pathophysiology

The exact pathological mechanism behind CNH remains unknown; however, several risk factors have been identified, as mentioned above. Perichondrial vasculitis theory, described in 2009 by Upile et al., proposes that the disease process begins as a result of pressure on the auricle, potentially exacerbated by same-side sleeping and prominauris, which subsequently causes arteriolar narrowing in the perichondrium of the helix. This leads to ischemia, necrosis, and extrusion of underlying cartilage. Ultimately, a foreign body reaction ensues, resulting in a severe localized inflammatory reaction and the development of CNH.

# Histopathology

Histopathology shows hyperkeratosis, parakeratosis with adjacent hyperplasia of the epithelium, and substantial destruction of dermal tissue, usually lined by sclerotic tissue. Other features include the proliferation of dermal vessels and the destruction of underlying cartilage.

# History and Physical

**Symptoms**

Chondrodermatitis nodularis chronica helicis patients typically present with the complaint of a spontaneously appearing, painful nodule on the helix or antihelix of the pinna. CNH primarily occurs on the ear of the usual sleeping side, more often the right one. CNH classically presents unilaterally; nevertheless, bilateral ear involvement is also observed. Prominauris, the wearing of headgear or hearing aids, frequent talking on the telephone, and an autoimmune predisposition often precipitate onset. The nodule grows rapidly and then typically plateaus in size. Nocturnal pain is the most frequent symptom; only a few cases have been reported with daytime pain, usually worsened by touching the ear.

**Physical Examination**

Physical examination reveals a well-circumscribed, rounded nodule with raised edges and a crust in its center, often overlying an ulcer which may occasionally have exposed cartilage at the bottom. The lesion has a diameter of 4 mm to 6 mm and is typically surrounded by an erythematous area. The most common site is the apex of the helix. The nodule tends to be firm, tender, and usually fixed to the underlying auricular cartilage. Other associated features include bleeding and exudate accumulation after removal of the crust. The development of CNH on the antihelix is more common among females than males. Rarely, appearance at other sites, such as the external auditory canal and posterior part of the pinna, has been reported.

# Evaluation

Diagnosis of CNH begins with a clinical examination. Histopathological examination of a skin biopsy may confirm the diagnosis. Some authors recommend laboratory studies to rule out systemic illnesses like scleroderma, thyroid disease, and other collagen vascular diseases, especially in adults presenting under 40 years of age.

# Treatment / Management

There are several therapeutic options for the management of CNH. These can be broadly divided into conservative treatment and surgical excision.

**Conservative Treatment**

- Pressure-relieving prosthesis/padding is a cost-effective and inexpensive method. The primary goal of these prostheses is to relieve or eliminate pressure on the lesion. They are available in various forms, such as self-adherent foam sponges, foam bandages attached to the head, and doughnut pillows for sleeping. These methods are met with variable success, predominantly dependent upon patient compliance rates.

- Some clinicians have used topical and intralesional steroids; however, in the absence of interventions to alleviate physical pressure, steroids do not appear to be effective.

- Hyaluronic acid injection may provide relief by offering cushioning and insulation (as a supplement to the thin subcutaneous tissue that naturally exists in the area in question).

- Photodynamic therapy may be effective; however, a disadvantage of this modality is the requirement for multiple treatment sessions.

- Carbon dioxide/argon laser is another treatment option. The lesion is ablated with the laser, and later the wound is allowed to heal by secondary intention. In some ways, this represents an alternative to conventional surgical excision.

- Topical application of 2% nitroglycerine paste twice daily has been shown to relieve symptoms and appearance by improving perfusion to the affected area. Nitroglycerine patches may be used as a substitute.

- Diliazem topical cream has also been described as an effective alternative.

- Cryosurgery is another option to remove the lesion.

- Electrocauterization/curettage is yet another treatment modality, again essentially presenting an alternative to surgical excision with a blade.

**Surgery**

Many techniques have emerged over the years for surgical excision of CNH. These include wide local excision followed by auricular reconstruction using skin grafts or local flaps, removal of the lesion skin and cartilage, and skin-sparing, cartilage-only excision techniques. Most studies agree that the simplest approach, with primary excision and meticulous trimming of cartilage, is the method of choice and provides adequate results.

# Differential Diagnosis

Condrodermatitis nodularis chronica helicis may be confused with a malignant skin condition like basal cell carcinoma due to its nodular appearance and central crusting. Larger, inflamed lesions may mimic squamous cell carcinoma. Gouty tophi are also on the differential diagnosis; however, unlike CNH, tophi appear as multiple lesions and tend to occur at other sites, like fingers and toes. Keratoacanthoma may look similar to CNH initially but grows much faster and classically resolves spontaneously after a few months due to its growth outstripping its blood supply; CNH is unlikely to resolve spontaneously. CNH lesions with substantial keratosis may resemble seborrheic or keratotic dermatitis as well.

# Prognosis

CNH has a good prognosis, although recovery typically takes months. Spontaneous resolution is extremely rare. Recurrence is often seen when lifestyle modifications are not maintained.

# Complications

While CNH is unlikely to resolve spontaneously, its progression tends to be limited to a single, well-circumscribed lesion measuring 4-6 mm in diameter. Leaving the lesion untreated does not put the patient at risk for additional long-term sequelae; however, because the lesions are uncomfortable, the patient may lose sleep and suffer chronic discomfort. Additionally, the lesions may become infected due to violation of the skin and potential exposure of the underlying cartilage. Complications may also arise from the treatment itself, particularly surgical procedures, which may heal poorly or fail to alleviate the problem. In the event that a surgical resection leaves a palpable cartilaginous edge or point, chronic pressure may lead to development of a de novo lesion.

# Deterrence and Patient Education

While it is certainly unnecessary to counsel all patients on the importance of shifting from side to side at night to prevent development of CNH, it is important for primary care providers to be aware of the condition and to have a low threshold for advising patients to avoid pressure on their ears should painful lesions with a central crust appear along the helix or antihelix, because a significant proportion of CNH cases can be remedied with conservative measures over the course of several months. Taking a break from headgear or hearing aids, finding a different way to talk on the telephone, protecting the ears from cold, and sleeping on a different side or on a doughnut-shaped pillow can all play important roles in the resolution of CNH. That said, it is important to have a low threshold for biopsy of these lesions, particularly if they are not painful, because they tend to appear in areas that are prone to developing non-melanomatous skin cancer, especially in males over the age of 40 years with an history of skin damage due to sun exposure.

# Enhancing Healthcare Team Outcomes

Chondrodermatitis nodularis chronica helicis is best managed by an interprofessional team, including otolaryngology or dermatology nurses. CNH is a relatively common disorder, but it is often not diagnosed. It is believed to result from pressure on the auricle that ultimately causes inflammation secondary to vascular insufficiency. The basic feature is a painful ear, usually at the helix. Over the years, many treatments have been proposed for this condition, including prosthetic appliances and surgical excision. To improve outcomes, clinicians should first attempt pressure-reducing remedies. Surgery to remove the lesion should be the last resort. Because of a lack of large studies, there is no general consensus on which treatments are most effective. For this reason, patients should be counseled initially to avoid pressure on the ear, which appears to provide symptom relief in many cases.