The prior medical history or history of present illness of the patient who sustains an amniotic fluid embolism (AFE) may reveal advanced maternal age, multiple pregnancies, placenta accreta, placenta abruption, placenta previa, preeclampsia, gestational diabetes, polyhydramnios, amniocentesis, amnioinfusion, mechanical rupture of membranes, or any surgery to the gravid uterus. The classic history is that women in the late stages of labor become acutely short of breath with hypotension. There may be agitation or a feeling of impending doom before the onset of other symptoms. She may experience seizures followed by cardiac arrest. Massive DIC-associated hemorrhage follows and then death. Mostly die within an hour of onset. Data shows that 53% of females with AFE present at the time of delivery or even before it and remaining presented by an average of nineteen minutes after delivery.

The physical exam will show a patient in cardiovascular collapse with marked hypoxemia, hypotension, and cyanosis. The classic triad of AFE is hypoxia, hypotension, and coagulopathy. The temperature will be normal. The funduscopic exam may reveal minute bubbles in the retinal arteries. The patient would be tachypneic, perhaps with the classic holosystolic high-pitched murmur of tricuspid regurgitation. This murmur is loudest at the lower left sternal border and radiates to the right sternal edge. Hemorrhage may range from massive to minimal. The uterus frequently is atonic (83%), which further accentuates bleeding. Initial bleeding is generally from the vagina but may also be first seen in surgical incisions. Full-blown DIC is seen in approximately 80% of patients. The neurologic exam usually reveals a dysphoric and encephalopathic patient. Tonic-clonic seizures (10-50%) may complicate the picture.