The hypoglossal nerve (cranial nerve XII) starts in the hypoglossal nucleus of the medulla. It passes between the olive and pyramid of the anterior brainstem before exiting the cranial cavity through the hypoglossal canal. Then, it receives contributions from cervical nerves as it enters the neck between the internal carotid artery and internal jugular vein. Upon reaching the tongue's lateral aspect, it lies close to the hyoglossus muscle and inferior to the lingual nerve. The hypoglossal nerve only has the motor function and controls all the intrinsic and extrinsic muscles of the tongue.

The motor fibers to the laryngeal and pharyngeal muscles begin in the nucleus ambiguus and exit the medulla at the root of the accessory nerve to join the vagus nerve (cranial nerve X) before exiting the jugular foramen and traveling within the carotid sheath in the neck. The recurrent laryngeal nerves eventually branch off the vagus, wrapping underneath the right subclavian artery on the right and aortic arch on the left. The nerves then ascend in the groove between the trachea and esophagus to reach the larynx, supplying all the larynx's intrinsic muscles except the cricothyroid muscles.

Damage to these nerves at any point in its course can result in neuropraxia (mild, temporary loss of function) or axonotmesis (usually permanent, irreversible damage).

The hypoglossal and recurrent laryngeal nerve are located adjacent to the oropharynx junction and the hypopharynx; thus, this area is where concurrent injury and paralysis most likely arise.