Many diseases can mimic the signs and symptoms associated with FMF. Therefore, a detailed history and physical examination of patients, including the history of attacks, history of fever, and family history, can help differentiate other diagnoses from FMF.

Acute abdomen

Peritonitis attacks in FMF can be easily mistaken with an acute abdomen. It is not uncommon for patients to undergo radiologic diagnostic studies or surgical procedures to look for the causes of the acute abdomen such as appendicitis, cholecystitis, perforated viscus, or other abdominal pathologies before the diagnosis of FMF is confirmed.

Juvenile idiopathic arthritis

Children who present with attacks of arthritis and fever can be misdiagnosed with juvenile idiopathic arthritis.

Systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE), rheumatoid arthritis (RA)

Positive antinuclear antibodies test with low complements levels are usually found in SLE. Rheumatoid factor and anti-cyclic citrullinated peptide antibodies are found in RA. Moreover, in RA, the arthritis is symmetric polyarthritis and involves the hands and feet.

Other familial periodic fever syndromes

- Periodic fever with aphthous stomatitis, pharyngitis, and adenitis (PFAPA)

- Aphthous ulcers, pharyngitis, lymphadenopathy common
- Abdominal pain is not common
- Attacks typically last longer than FMF
- Responds to steroid therapy but not to colchicine

- Tumor necrosis factor (TNF) receptor-associated periodic syndrome (TRAPS)

- Autosomal dominant
- Attacks last longer than FMF
- Rash, myalgia, and periorbital edema common
- Responsive to treatment with steroids

- Hyper immunoglobulin D syndrome (HIDS)

- Mevalonate kinase deficiency
- Elevated immunoglobulin D levels
- Fever with cervical lymphadenopathy, vomiting, diarrhea, abdominal pain
- Conjunctivitis in some cases

- Muckle-Wells syndrome and familial cold urticaria (FCU)

- Urticaria is more common

- Cellulitis

- Erysipelas-like lesion of FMF can be confused with cellulitis. Again, a detailed history of the patient and unresponsiveness to the antibiotics can help differentiate it from cellulitis.