As stated above, these gases are relatively benign for acute adverse reactions.

**Acute Toxicities**

- Nephrotoxicity – can occur with all volatile gases. Sevoflurane is metabolized by CYP 2E1 at a much faster rate compared to the other volatile gases and produces increased levels of inorganic fluoride (F), which has been shown during in vivo studies of rats to cause renal impairment. Clinically this renal impairment has not been reported; however, the recommendation is still that sevoflurane not be used in patients with preexisting renal dysfunction undergoing extensive procedures.

- Hepatotoxicity – uncommon, but reports exist of individuals with prior exposure specifically to halothane. Patients would present immediately after a procedure with halothane-induced fulminant hepatic failure.

- Carbon monoxide (CO) poisoning – is a concern as all inhaled anesthetics can produce CO from interaction with the dry CO2 absorbers used in the perioperative setting. The largest producer of CO in this manner is desflurane. This situation can is avoidable by routinely changing the absorbent before each day of cases.

**Chronic Toxicities**

- Hematotoxicity – chronic exposure to N2O has shown to decrease methionine synthase activity, an important enzyme in the recycling of vitamin B. Prolonged vitamin B deficiency can result in megaloblastic anemia, and peripheral neuropathies in patients who work in dental practices should prompt clinical suspicion of this etiology.

- Teratogenic/reproductive effects – early exposure can cause cognitive impairment later in life, particularly N2O, as described above, which can disrupt vitamin B-dependent metabolic pathways.

- Carcinogenic – continued exposure to trace concentrations of anesthetic gases by operating room personnel correlated with increasing rates of cancer diagnosis in these individuals

**Overdose or Postoperative Reversal**

There is no pharmacological reversal of anesthetic gases in use for postoperative recovery or in the event of an overdose. The primary reversal method is to remove the patient from continued exposure to gas and hyperventilate to decrease the concentration of gas in the patient’s alveoli.