The diagnosis of EMPD must trigger a laboratory work-up aiming to detect an underlying malignancy. Depending on the area of skin lesions, the following examinations should be performed: cervicovaginal smear, rectocoloscopy, cystoscopy, abdominal ultrasound or computed tomography scanning, gastroduodenal fibroscopy, mammography, intravenous urography, the dosage of serum tumor markers (CEA, CA 19–9, CA 15–3).

A clinical follow-up needs to be long-term as some patients develop recurrences more than 15 years after initial treatment. For non-invasive EMPD, the follow-up could be biannual for 3 years, then annually for 10 years. For invasive EMPD or those associated with a distant tumor, the follow-up should be more frequent (3 or 4 times per year), with biopsy of any suspicious skin lesion. Specifically for perianal EMPD, follow up should involve an annual complete examination, punch biopsy of any new lesion, and proctosigmoidoscopy. These patients should undergo colonoscopy every 2 to 3 years. Vulvar EMPD may be followed up with regular vulvar inspection, punch biopsies to exclude invasive disease in any recurrent lesions, and hysteroscopy/regular pelvic ultrasound scans.

A lymph node staging system was proposed by Hatta and colleagues, where N0 implies no involvement of lymph nodes; N1, unilateral involvement; and N2 bilateral or distant-site disease. The Kaplan-Meier overall survival curve figured in this study depicts decreasing survival with increasing lymph node status. Thus, a clinical predicament arises when faced with managing a patient with histologically proven EMPD and negative clinical lymphadenopathy. This issue has been broached recently in the literature relating to 2 surgical aspects: the value of sentinel lymph node biopsy (SLNB) with or without complete lymph node dissection (CLND) and the pertinence of elective lymph node dissection (ELND) in managing invasive EMPD. The basis from which these procedures stem is centered on the notion that metastases first pass through the lymphatic system before disseminating systemically and that, by interrupting this passage, it may be possible to prevent widespread disease.