Infants born with MSAF should have routine neonatal care while monitoring for signs of distress according to the general neonatal resuscitation guidelines. According to the 2015 guidelines, the American Heart Association, the International Liaison Committee on Resuscitation, and the American Academy of Pediatrics no longer recommend routine endotracheal suctioning for non-vigorous infants with MSAF.

MAS management is mainly supportive, but early identification and support can improve outcomes and decrease morbidity and mortality. This requires an interprofessional team approach, including the obstetrician, midwife, neonatologist, respiratory therapist, nurse, pediatric pulmonologist, and pediatric cardiologist.

- Oxygen therapy: Supplemental oxygen is often needed in MAS with goal oxygen saturation > 90% to prevent tissue hypoxia and improve oxygenation. Hypoxemia is an important trigger of pulmonary vasoconstriction, which can increase PVR and worsen PPHN.

- Ventilatory support: This is indicated with refractory hypoxemia despite oxygen therapy, carbon dioxide retention, and increased respiratory distress. It also has a role for respiratory support in PPHN and air leak syndromes. There are no specific ventilation strategies. Oxygenation monitoring and serial ABG to help optimize oxygenation and ventilation are key. In severe cases with refractory hypoxemia, the patient might require extracorporeal membrane oxygenation (ECMO) for cardiorespiratory support.

- Surfactant: The use of surfactant in MAS is not standard of care; however, as discussed above, surfactant inactivation has a role in the pathogenesis of MAS. Therefore surfactant may be helpful in some cases.

- Nitric oxide: Inhaled nitric oxide is a pulmonary vasodilator that has a role in pulmonary hypertension and PPHN.