Patients with suspected acute compartment syndrome of the forearm should be assessed following the advanced trauma life support principles and managed in a multidisciplinary approach. A senior review must be done as soon as possible after the patient has arrived in the emergency department. First steps can be taken on initial assessment such as oxygen administration, elevating the arm in a sling, splitting or removing a tight cast or dressing, ensuring the patient is normotensive as hypotension reduces perfusion pressure and causes further tissue injury. The definitive treatment of acute compartment syndrome is a surgical intervention in the form of urgent forearm compartment fasciotomies.

Surgical intervention is performed under general anesthetic. The fasciotomy approaches are volar and dorsal. The volar incision starts just radial to FCU at the wrist and extends proximally to the medial epicondyle. The fascia over the deep muscle compartment needs to be dissected. This approach decompresses the anterior compartment and the posterior compartment as well. The incision can extend distally also to release the carpal tunnel. The dorsal incision starts 2 cm distal to the lateral epicondyle toward the midline of the wrist. It decompresses the mobile wad of Henry and the posterior compartment. Usually, the wounds are left open and covered in sterile dressings, and the patient will require a second look intervention at 48 to 72 hours. During the second look procedure, the dead muscle tissue needs to be debrided, and delayed primary closure of the wounds can be attempted. If the operating team cannot close the wounds, a negative pressure dressing should be considered, followed at a later stage by split-thickness skin grafting.