Empagliflozin is an antidiabetic agent used in adult patients with type 2 diabetes mellitus. It was FDA-approved in 2014. Empagliflozin can be used as a single agent or as a combination agent with other antidiabetic products. Combination products include empagliflozin and linagliptin and empagliflozin in combination with metformin. These newer agents can be more expensive for patients, thus impeding the clinician's ability to prescribe them based on patient financial considerations. However, the American Diabetes Association (ADA) is calling for agents with proven mortality reduction for use as second-line therapy after metformin. Such agents include empagliflozin and liraglutide. The primary treatment for diabetes is lifestyle management and exercise, followed by metformin use. Per Standards of Medical Care in Diabetes, if the A1c is greater than 9%, then combination therapy with metformin is recommended. In 2016, the FDA (United States Food and Drug Administration) approved a new indication for empagliflozin, which was to reduce the risk of cardiovascular death in adult patients with type 2 diabetes and cardiovascular disease. Empagliflozin has been shown to reduce hospitalizations for heart failure and death from cardiovascular causes. Patients are at an increased risk of cardiovascular mortality with type 2 diabetes, so prescribers should be made aware of the benefits of empagliflozin. In a nutshell, empagliflozin may be effective in the following settings.

- In overt atherosclerotic CVD and/or heart failure patients with suboptimal glycemic control despite metformin and lifestyle modification

- Nephropathy (urine albumin-to-creatinine >300 mg/g)

- As a third-line agent in case of suboptimal glycemic control despite using two oral drugs, or metformin and insulin therapy

- As a second-line agent in cases of suboptimal glycemic control for patients with metformin who cannot take insulin and weight gain and hypoglycemia is a significant issue.