The treatment of encephalocele is surgical. The goals are to repair the bone defect with a water-tight dural closure, eliminate the excess skin, and remove the non-functional brain tissue. When an anterior encephalocele is removed in infants or young children, the facial skeleton will remodel substantially. Craniofacial reconstruction is required for extensive frontal cases to correct hypertelorism and bone defects.

The surgical approach is usually open, but an endoscopic approach can be used when an anterior encephalocele involves the sphenoid/ethmoid region. Endoscopic endonasal surgery for anterior basal encephaloceles provides a relatively favorable risk-benefit profile, with a low postoperative CSF leak rate.

The time to perform surgery depends on the size, location, associated complications, and whether a skin layer covers the encephalocele. If a skin layer is present and acts as a protective cover, surgery can be delayed for a few months or years. If no layer of skin protects the encephalocele, surgery is recommended shortly after birth. Children with basal encephaloceles should have an early surgical correction to prevent infections and the progressive herniation of intracranial contents.

For sincipital or basal encephalocele surgery, the low blood reserve in small children and technical anatomic challenges must be weighed against the risks of facial deformity, airway compromise, and infection. As a result, some have recommended deferring surgery until the age of 2 to 3 years if there is no evidence of active rhinorrhea or a life-threatening condition. However, others have recommended surgery as early as two months as there is sufficient nasal expansion caused by the encephalocele, decreasing the technical difficulties.

Repair of the dural defect, either primarily or using pericranium, must be done in all cases. Fibrin glue is used to reinforce the closure.