Most atlas fractures result from significant trauma. History will often reveal an axial load injury to the cranium, including a dive into shallow water, a football tackle, or a motor vehicle collision with blunt cranial trauma. However, different patient populations, such as osteoporotic patients or patients with neuromuscular diseases, may be at increased risk.

Any cervical trauma exam must initiate with an assessment of the ABCs: airway, breathing, and circulation. If tracheal intubation is required, it should be done with manual in-line stabilization to avoid any displacement of fractures/dislocations. A thorough neurologic evaluation must be performed, starting with the Glasgow Coma Scale. All other traumatic injuries to other organs must be evaluated initially according to the Advanced Trauma Life Support (ATLS) protocol.

The physical exam must be detailed; one should take note of any axial neck pain or external signs of trauma to the cervical spine. A thorough neurologic exam should be performed, including cranial nerves, and a complete upper and lower extremity sensory and motor examination. In patients who may demonstrate signs of neurologic shock, a rectal exam and bulbocavernosus reflex should be tested.

C1 fractures usually present with axial neck pain with no evidence of neurologic dysfunction. When involved, cranial nerves in the medulla and pons are at risk due to their caudal location: cranial nerves VI to XII may result in their respective palsies. Fractures involving the C1/C2 transverse foramina can cause blunt vertebral artery injury (BVAI), resulting in basilar insufficiency; a thorough cranial neurologic exam should be performed. ROM should not be permitted prior to radiographic clearance.