Haynes and co-authors brought up a classification of Cogan syndrome in 1980 as typical (defined by Cogan) and atypical (structures other than cornea are involved, such as uvea, conjunctiva, sclera, optic disc, and retinal vessels).

- 1- non-syphilitic interstitial keratitis (IK) with possible iritis, subconjunctival/conjunctival hemorrhage, lacrimation, and red-eye. The keratitis begins in the subepithelial region and rapidly evolves into interstitial keratitis that usually develops corneal neovascularization. Interstitial keratitis is the most common ocular feature of Cogan syndrome. One or both eyes can be involved. Usually, the visual prognosis is good. The interstitial keratitis progresses rapidly and then resolves, usually with corneal scarring and ghost vessels. The symptoms of active IK include redness, sensitivity to light (photophobia), visual decline, ocular pain, and watering. There may be recurrences of these symptoms years after initial resolution.

- 2- vestibular association similar to Ménière disease, with gradual hearing loss that might lead to deafness occurring within two years from the eye symptoms. The sensorineural hearing loss usually aggravates rapidly, usually leading to deafness in 1 to 3 months. In typical Cogan syndrome, the vestibulo-auditory symptoms arise within two years of ocular involvement.

In contrast, atypical Cogan syndrome is when

- 1. other types of ocular involvement are present such as conjunctivitis, scleritis, choroiditis, episcleritis, uveitis, closed-angle glaucoma, retinal vasculitis, retinal hemorrhages, retinal artery occlusion, central retinal vein occlusion, exophthalmos, vasculitis optic neuropathy, papillitis, or optic disc edema,

- 2. audiovestibular symptoms do not resemble Ménière disease or appear before or after ocular symptoms for more than two years.

However, patients with typical Cogan syndrome may develop features of atypical Cogan syndrome later.

Cogan syndrome follows an upper respiratory tract infection (URTI) episode in almost 27% of reported cases. A history of diarrhea, immunization or dental infections may be present. Mostly, the ears or the eyes alone are firstly affected. The most common ocular involvement is interstitial keratitis and other presentations: retinal vascular disease, scleritis, uveitis, episcleritis, papilledema, exophthalmos, conjunctivitis, and tendonitis. Seventy-four percent of patients present with ocular redness, 50% with pain, 50% with photophobia and tearing, and 42% with diminished visual acuity.

Examination shows ciliary injection associated with iritis, opacities in the corneal stroma, and a granular corneal infiltration, especially in the posterior portion of the cornea close to the limbus. Secondary corneal neovascularization usually occurs. Both eyes are involved in most patients. However, the symptoms may differ in each eye. Some patients may present with blindness or amaurosis.

Multiple organs are affected in 2/3rd of cases, and another systemic disorder was seen in 1/3rd of the cases. Interstitial keratitis may not be the presenting feature and may develop years later. There may be sectoral conjunctival congestion with subepithelial/anterior corneal stromal peripheral or mid-peripheral keratitis.

The first system affected is the vestibular system, followed by the cochlear system in days or weeks. The symptoms are similar to recurrent Ménière disease, including nausea, vomiting, vertigo, and tinnitus. Progressive sensory hearing loss is noted that causes deafness in 1-3 months. Spontaneous nystagmus and a degree of ataxia can occur. A study by Grasland et al. showed that the disease affects both the ocular and audiovestibular system in 17/52 (33%) patients with typical Cogan syndrome compared to atypical Cogan syndrome (12% of patients).

Systemic involvement is present in around 30 to 80% of patients. Cardiovascular manifestations typically involve aortitis, which leads to aortic insufficiency in around 10% of patients and congestive heart failure.

Neurologic symptoms are nonspecific, including headache and coma. Some rare manifestations such as pyramidal syndrome, spinal cord disease, cerebellar syndrome, meningeal syndrome, peripheral neuropathy, facial palsy, and encephalitis may occur.

Musculoskeletal manifestations may occur, including arthritis, myalgias, synovitis, arthralgia, and articular effusion. Results of muscle biopsies may be abnormal and show atrophy and muscle necrosis and may mimic myositis. The rest of the systemic manifestations are quite rare such as cutaneous signs (urticarial rash, erythematous rash, nodules, ulcerations, vascular purpura), lung involvement (dyspnea, cough, pleurisy, hemoptysis, thoracic pain, discrete abnormalities on radiological images), urinalysis abnormalities, and lymphadenopathies.