Management of symptomatic enchondroma lesions typically involves surgical management in the form of simple curettage with bone grafting. The bone graft used may be allogeneic bone, autogenous, or synthetic bone substitutes. The impact of the type of graft on healing, recurrence, complications, and malignant transformation is unknown. Currently, no standardized algorithm for surgical treatment of enchondroma exists. Also, the necessity of curettage with grafting remains unproven. Asymptomatic enchondromas can be observed.

During surgical management, one needs to stick to the principles of tumor surgery to prevent tumor dissemination. The surgery is performed under tourniquet control without exsanguination using an esmarch bandage. After the curettage, various adjuncts can be used that supposedly kill the residual tumor cells and help reduce recurrence. They include phenol, liquid nitrogen, cryotherapy, polymethyl methacrylate, and electrocautery.

After the curettage, the bone void can be filled using either autograft, allograft, bone substitute, or bone cement. Some studies have described leaving the void without filling it with grafts/ cement with equivalent functional outcomes. The proponents of the latter theory suggest that it saves surgical time, prevent donor site morbidity, and prevents complications related to the introduction of foreign materials (in the case of allografts and bone cement).

Prophylactic intervention aiming to prevent impending fracture via internal fixation methods is unknown and controversial. Retrospective studies have formed a basis to guide the indications, but the limits of these guidelines are the use of plain radiographs, subjective patient information, and inadequate understanding of the biomechanical factors involved in the neoplastic process. The Mirels criteria were developed to quantify the risks of fracture pertaining to bone neoplasms. These criteria consider the location, pain, lesion type, and lesion size.

A score greater than 8 dictates a significant fracture risk and a need for a prophylactic internal fixation. A bone tumor with a score less than seven can undergo observation according to these criteria. In applying these criteria, the defined fracture risk uses the load-bearing requirement of the bone divided by its load-bearing capacity. The parameters for load-bearing requirement and capacity were also stipulated and analyzed. The patient's age, weight, activity level, and ability to protect the site dictate the load-bearing requirement. The load-bearing capacity depends on the amount of bone loss, modulus of the remaining bone, and location of the defect with respect to the type of load applied.