# Continuing Education Activity

Herbal products, botanical products, or phytomedicines are produced from plants or botanicals to maintain health or treat diseases. Herbal supplements are products specifically used for internal use. A large number of prescription drugs and over-the-counter medications originate from plant derivatives. They differ from herbal supplements in that they use FDA-regulated purified ingredients. However, the FDA does not regulate the manufacture of herbal supplements. Therefore, preparations may contain a portion of the plant or the whole plant and may vary in consistency. Herbal supplements are most often sold in solid form (capsules, pills, tablets, lozenges), but are also available in liquid or powder form. This activity focuses on the commonly used herbal supplements in the United States and reviews the treatment of conditions using these medications while highlighting the role of the interprofessional team in treating patients using these medications.

**Objectives:**
- Explain the FDA regulations involving herbal supplements.
- Describe the potential for inconsistency in herbal dosing.
- Outline the risks, benefits, and potential interactions of the most common herbal supplements.
- Review the commonly used herbal supplements in the United States and review the treatment of conditions using these medications by an interprofessional team.

# Introduction

Herbal products, botanical products, or phytomedicines are produced from plants or botanicals to maintain health or treat diseases. Herbal supplements are products specifically used for internal use. A large number of prescription drugs and over-the-counter medications originate from plant derivatives. They differ from herbal supplements in that they use FDA-regulated, purified ingredients. However, the FDA does not regulate the manufacture of herbal supplements. Therefore, preparations may contain a portion of the plant or the whole plant and vary in their consistency. Herbal supplements are most often sold in solid form (capsules, pills, tablets, lozenges) but are also available in liquid or powder form.

This paper focuses on the following commonly used herbal supplements in the United States. These are:

- Saw Palmetto

- Garlic

- Gingko Biloba

- Echinacea

- Black Cohosh

- Ginseng

- Hawthorn

- St. John's Wort

- Goldenseal

- Feverfew

# Function

**Saw Palmetto**

Saw palmetto is indigenous to the southeastern United States. Historically, it was used by Native Americans to treat genitourinary symptoms, relieve inflamed mucous membranes, increase testicular function and increase breast size.

**Garlic**

Garlic (Allium sativum) is among the most researched herbal supplements and is the second most used complementary therapy.

**Gingko Biloba**

Ginkgo biloba is commonly used to improve memory and cognition in the elderly suffering from impaired cerebral circulation. Mitochondrial dysfunction is one theory proposed as the leading cause of cognitive decline.Gingko biloba leaves are flavonoids and terpene trilactones.Gingko biloba significantly improved cognitive function in dementia patients.Gingko biloba. Specifically, Gingko biloba was shown to improve endocrine homeostasis, regulate hormone sensitivity, maintain endothelial microvascular integrity, and proteolyze tau proteins.

**Echinacea**

Echinacea is a native species to eastern and central North America. Historically, Native Americans used Echinacea for treating colds, bronchitis, flu, and respiratory infections.Echinacea is known as an immunostimulant, boosting both innate and specific immunity. It has also demonstrated antiviral, anti-inflammatory, and antimicrobial effects.Echinacea extract significantly increased expression of CD80, CD86, and MHCII, upregulated markers of classically activated macrophages (M1), and the production of IL-6 IL-12p70, IL-1beta, nitrous oxide (NO), and TNF-a. Intracellular bactericidal activity and enhanced phagocytosis were also observed.Echinacea was as effective as oseltamivir with fewer adverse events and reduced risk.

**Black Cohosh**

Black cohosh (Actaea racemosa) is commonly used to treat premenstrual syndrome (PMS), dysmenorrhea, menopausal symptoms, and in particular, hot flashes. It has also seen increased use in women who have breast cancer.

**Ginseng**

Ginseng is used commonly to boost energy, enhance physical and mental performance, treat erectile dysfunction, and strengthen the immune response. Ginseng is a generic term that represents several species in the genus Panax. These include Panax quinquefolius L (American ginseng), Panax ginseng, and Panax japonicus (Asian ginseng). Ginseng is composed of a diverse amount of active compounds that affect many metabolic pathways. Of those, ginsenosides have been shown to have clinical significance. They are found in the plant's roots but have also been reported to be abundant in the berries.

Ginsenosides and their metabolites are known to modulate signaling pathways of metastasis, angiogenesis, inflammation, oxidative stress, and stem/progenitor-like properties in breast cancer cells.

**Hawthorn**

Hawthorn (Crataegus monogyna) is commonly used for heart-related conditions, specifically as a supportive treatment for angina, atherosclerosis, heart failure, angina, atherosclerosis, and high blood pressure. Hawthorn's effects on the heart were first reported in the first century AD and have been well established.

**St. John's Wort**

St. John's Wort (Hypericum perforatum) is commonly used to treat mild-to-moderate depression. St. John's Wort as a medicinal herb is traceable back to the ancient Greeks who used it to treat burns, as an astringent to arrest diarrhea, and as a diuretic.

At a daily dosage of 300 to 1200 mg, St. John's Wort was more efficacious than standard antidepressant therapy in patients with mild-to-moderate depression.Staphylococcus aureus (MRSA).

**Goldenseal**

Goldenseal (Hydrastis canadensis) has long been used for its antiseptic qualities and activity against colds, the flu, and inflammation of the nares. It is indigenous to eastern North America and southeastern Canada. Native Americans used the roots of goldenseal to treat skin and eye infections and gastrointestinal irritation.Staphylococcus aureus, preventing damage to human skin keratinocytes.Mycobacterium species, including M. tuberculosis.Herpes simplex virus 1 and 2 by modulating host cell activation of the NF-kB and MAPK pathways.

**Feverfew**

Feverfew (Tanacetum parthenium) is commonly used for migraine headaches and menstrual cramps. It is native to Asia Minor but cultivated worldwide. Major active compounds found in feverfew include sesquiterpene lactones, 3b-hydroxy parthenolide, parthenolide, canin, and artecanin.

# Issues of Concern

A significant concern of herbal supplementation is that many patients use herbal supplements but underreport them to their clinicians. In a Spanish study, 20% of patients reported taking an herbal supplement in addition to prescription drugs.

Not knowing if a patient uses herbal supplements may inadvertently complicate treatment. Since some herbal supplements are known to inhibit or enhance prescription drugs, not knowing what herbal supplements a patient is taking can lead to either ineffective treatment or toxicity and harmful side effects.

# Clinical Significance

A significant concern of herbal supplements clinically is their interaction with cytochrome p450 enzymes (CYP450). Especially when patients are taking prescription drugs and herbal supplements concurrently. 80% of prescribed medications are metabolized through six CYP enzymes (CYP1A2, CYP2C9, CYP2C19, CYP2D6, CYP2E1, CYP3A4).Gingko biloba, hyperforin in St. John’s Wort, ginsenosides in ginseng, and diallyl sulfide in garlic induce CYP450 enzymes. Terpenes in black cohosh and Echinacea extract may inhibit CYP450 enzymes.

The other possible interaction is when an herbal supplement has a similar mechanism of absorption, distribution, metabolism, or excretion (ADME) to a prescribed drug. In these cases, changing the prescribed drug dosage can safely counteract the negative interaction.

Garlic may act as a blood thinner by inhibiting platelets and negating the effects of anticoagulants.

People with ragweed allergies may be allergic to Echinacea as well. Six months of continuous ingestion of different Echinacea preparations showed no toxic effects.

Black cohosh has been shown to interact with the OATP2B1 enzyme; this may reduce the efficacy of fexofenadine, glyburide, amiodarone, and many statin medications.

In several human trials, Asian ginseng was shown not to affect CYP2E1, CYP1A2, CYP2D6, or P-gp.

Gingko biloba has been shown to inhibit platelet aggregation. Several studies, however, showed that Gingko did not increase bleeding risk or have a significant effect on hematologic parameters.Gingko may increase INR when combined with warfarin, which may increase the bleeding risk when taking Gingko and warfarin simultaneously.

Goldenseal has been shown to inhibit CYP2D6 and CYP3A4. These two enzymes metabolize 50% of current pharmaceutical agents. It is strongly recommended to avoid taking goldenseal with most prescription and over-the-counter medications.

St. John’s Wort has been shown to induce CYP3A4 and P-gp. It may interact (reduce effectiveness) with irinotecan, protease inhibitors, digoxin, cyclosporine, tacrolimus, warfarin, and oral contraceptives.

Saw palmetto has been shown not to affect CYP1A2, CYP2D6, CYP3A4, or CYP2E1 enzymes.

Reported possible side effects of hawthorn include nausea, dizziness, vertigo, fatigue, sweating, headache, palpitations, and epistaxis. It is not recommended during pregnancy because it can cause uterine stimulation.

# Other Issues

American consumers trust that their prescription drugs are of high quality and are consistent in purity and potency, often without question. According to a study done in 2007, this expectation has been transferred over to herbal supplements despite their lack of regulation in the United States. 70% believed the FDA tests herbal supplements, and 60% thought they regulated them.Gingko biloba supplements underwent comparison, 6 of the samples contained fillers that had no measurable Gingko biloba DNA.

Preparation is another issue affecting herbal supplements. Herb preparation and the parts used significantly affect its efficacy and attributes. For example, Echinacea’s various effects depend on what part of the plant gets harvested, i.e., flowers, roots, or leaves.

One method of alleviating these issues is through certification. In 2007, the FDA established regulations for dietary supplements called Current Good Manufacturing Practice (cGMP). It is a list of nonbinding recommendations in manufacturing, labeling, packing, or holding operations for dietary supplements. Manufacturers can certify their products to verify active components and concentrations of heavy metals and other possible contaminants.

Further research is necessary to standardize extraction methods and the preparation of herbal supplements so that their effectiveness is consistent.

# Enhancing Healthcare Team Outcomes

Because patients are generally reluctant to disclose their herbal supplementation, it is crucial to develop a trusting relationship that would allow patients to discuss dietary supplement use without reservation. All interprofessional healthcare team members need to be on the same page regarding herbal supplements, share information through open communication between team members, and deliver a consistent message to the patient. This approach will optimize therapeutic efficacy and reduce potential adverse effects. [Level 5].

In detecting possible interactions between supplements and drugs, thorough notes should be taken on herbal supplement usage, including initiation and discontinuation.

Clinicians need to understand whether an herbal supplement affects a prescribed drug's clinical effect without affecting its dosage or whether it is affecting the concentration in the blood and, therefore, its pharmacologic action (pharmacokinetics). This understanding will lead to a more informed decision on whether to change the dosage of a drug or discontinue the supplement(s) in question altogether. Nurses need to include these agents in the patient's medication record. The pharmacist can consult with the clinician to check for interactions, as these are often not benign substances and can alter drug therapy. Providing continuing medical education (CME) and/or further research into herbal supplement-prescription drug interactions would increase understanding and benefit the patient-physician relationship.