GH is a 191 amino acid-long protein with two disulfide bonds. It is secreted by the somatotroph cells in the anterior pituitary. It circulates for the most part as a 22kD protein and the remaining as a 20kD protein. It is secreted in a pulsatile manner, 4 to 11 pulses in a day. Due to this pulsatile nature of secretion, the measurement of random GH levels is not useful. Growth hormone-releasing hormone (GHRH) stimulates the release of GH from the pituitary. GHRH-containing neurons are mainly seen in the arcuate nucleus and ventromedial nucleus. Somatostatin, which is also secreted from the hypothalamus, exerts an inhibitory action on the secretion of GH. GHRH and somatostatin also regulate each other's secretion in a paracrine manner. GH stimulates the synthesis of IGF-1 from the liver. IGF-1 is a 70 amino acid protein that is similar to insulin. Besides, post-receptor signaling mechanisms involving tyrosine kinase and insulin receptor substrate-1 (IRS-1) are also similar for IGF-1 and insulin. IGF-1  circulates bound to IGF-1 binding proteins. IGF-1 exerts a negative feedback mechanism through GHRH and somatostatin.

Several other hormones can also modulate the secretion of GH. The thyroid hormone facilitates the expression of the growth hormone gene. Hypothyroidism has been known to be associated with low GH and IGF-1, which are reversible with thyroid hormone replacement therapy. Gonadal hormones can also upregulate the secretion of GH, as evident during the onset of puberty. Hypoglycemia decreases somatostatin secretion from the hypothalamus and increases the release of GH. Mutations in the somatotrophs are a prerequisite for the abnormal response to GHRH. Point mutations in Arg 201 and Gly227 have been reported, which are the sites for adenosine diphosphate (ADP) ribosylation and the binding domain of guanine triphosphate (GTP), respectively, and they result in adenyl cyclase activation similar to GHRH. The tumorigenesis, which leads to a monoclonal cell expansion, is multifactorial, and the presence of a mutation alone is not enough.