**Fetal Development**

Luteinizing hormone and human chorionic gonadotropin (hCG) are two essential hormones in the development of both sexes. Their levels can be seen to fluctuate throughout development. In male fetuses, hCG begins at a high level in the plasma and quickly decreases between weeks 10 and 20 of gestation and then slowly decline after that. In contrast, LH secretion increases by week 10 and reaches a peak before week 20, followed by a gradual decrease thereafter. Because of increased plasma levels of HCG early on in gestation, it is a more significant contributor to testosterone production by Leydig cells than LH early in the development of a fetus. However, as LH levels rise, the regulation of testosterone formation changes to LH driven by around weeks 15 to 20 of gestation. This change in regulation can be exemplified by anencephalic male fetuses that are deficient in LH. In these fetuses, normal development of the male reproductive tract occurs while hCG levels are high initially. However, due to the lack of LH, the development of the external genitalia is impeded when hCG levels decrease around gestational weeks 15 to 20

In female fetuses, the peak levels of LH are higher than in male fetuses; this has been thought to be due to negative feedback of higher testosterone levels on the hypothalamic-pituitary-gonadal axis in male fetuses. Female fetuses have a lower level of gonadal hormones during gestation because the development of the female reproductive tract is not dependent on circulating levels of LH or hCG. The developing ovary does not even express luteinizing hormone/choriogonadotropin receptors until the 16th week of gestation, thus the reason why there is minimal steroidogenesis in the ovary until after delivery of the fetus

**After Delivery**

After delivery, regardless of sex, a sharp increase in LH levels is seen because of the withdrawal of estrogen from the mother. After this temporary increase in LH levels, they begin to decline and stay at low basal levels until prepuberty starts in both sexes

**Puberty**

In the years leading up to puberty in both sexes, there is a slow increase in the secretion of LH nocturnally. As puberty progresses, LH begins to be secreted less so in a nocturnal pattern followed by a pulsatile pattern throughout the whole day. This increase in gonadotropin secretion helps to stimulate gonadal steroidogenesis important to undergo maturation