There are 3 techniques with which to attempt an anesthetic block to the radial nerve.

**Proximal Third of the Forearm**

An anesthetic block can be performed in this location before the superficial radial nerve joins the lateral aspect of the radial artery proximal to its division into smaller branches.

- The patient can be supine or be sitting upright. Have the patient pronate their arm to facilitate placement of the needle with the operator standing on the lateral (cephalad) side of the arm-board.

- Here, the superficial radial nerve is covered by the brachioradialis muscle. Place the linear ultrasound transducer, preferably in an in-plane approach from the lateral side of the forearm. Use a 25-gauge needle, preferably 38 mm in length, for this procedure.

- Identify the radial nerve at an initial depth of 25 mm under the brachioradialis muscle using the ultrasound. Upon scanning, the radial nerve is seen as a hyperechoic structure underneath the brachioradialis muscle.

- Place the needle tip in an in-plane view from lateral to medial through the brachioradialis muscle adjacent to the superficial radial nerve.

- Confirm that there is no inadvertent entry into the vasculature via negative aspiration.

- Inject local anesthetic of choice and observe for layering of local anesthetic under the brachioradialis muscle and around the superficial radial nerve.

**At the Elbow in the Antecubital Fossa**

An anesthetic block can be performed here at the antecubital fossa before the nerve divides into superficial (sensory) and deep (motor) branches.

- The patient can be supine or be sitting upright. Have the patient supinate their arm to facilitate placement of the needle with the operator standing on the lateral (cephalad) side of the arm-board.

- Place the ultrasound, using the linear transducer, preferably in an in-plane approach from the lateral side of the elbow. Use a 25-gauge needle, preferably 50 mm in length, for this procedure.

- Identify the radial nerve between the brachioradialis and the biceps muscle in this location. Our preferred approach is to start proximally above the elbow and identify the radial nerve as a triangular hyperechoic structure coming off the distal humerus. We suggest following this distally to the antecubital fossa, where the nerve will branch into its superficial and deep branches.

- After identification, choose a point of injection before the bifurcation of the radial nerve.

- Place the needle tip in an in-plane view from lateral to medial until you enter the fascial plane adjacent to the radial nerve.

- Confirm that the tip is not in a vascular space by negative aspiration

- Inject local anesthetic of choice and observe for layering of a local anesthetic around the radial nerve.

**Above the Elbow Just Distal to the Humeral Spiral Groove**

An anesthetic block can be performed here at the level of the spiral groove on the posterolateral aspect of the humerus to block the deep and superficial branches of the radial nerve.

- The patient can be supine with the arm placed in shoulder adduction, and internal rotation with the elbow flexed and rested on the patient’s chest. The operator should be standing on the lateral (cephalad) side of the arm-board.

- Place the ultrasound, using the linear transducer, preferably in an in-plane approach on the spiral groove of the posterolateral humerus distally. Use a 25-gauge needle, preferably 50 mm in length, for this procedure.

- Identify the radial nerve as a triangular hyperechoic structure coming off the humerus at this location.

- Place the needle tip in an in-plane view from lateral to medial until it enters the fascial plane adjacent to the radial nerve.

- Confirm that the tip is not in a vascular space by negative aspiration

- Inject local anesthetic of choice and observe for layering of a local anesthetic around the radial nerve.