There are two prevailing hypotheses that serve to explain the mechanisms for complication formation in diabetic patients - the osmotic hypothesis and the metabolic flux hypothesis. Research has shown that both hypotheses do play a role in diabetic complications and often occur simultaneously.

The osmotic hypothesis emphasizes the effects of the accumulation of intermediates in the polyol pathway, specifically sorbitol. Sorbitol and fructose are both practically membrane impermeable. In tissues without sorbitol dehydrogenase such as the retina, kidneys, and Schwann cells, accumulation of sorbitol intracellularly draws fluid into the tissues leading to elevated osmotic stress.

This hypothesis is the prevailing explanation for why cataract formation occurs in the lens, which has a low level of sorbitol dehydrogenase activity. In mice that overexpress aldolase reductase combined with having a sorbitol dehydrogenase deficiency phenotype, elevated glucose levels resulted in a quicker rate of lens sorbitol accumulation and subsequent cataract formation. Additionally, due to the lack of sorbitol dehydrogenase, sorbitol accumulation can impair kidney function. Studies have shown that sorbitol accumulation intracellularly leads to enzymuria and proximal tubular cell dysfunction.

Sorbitol accumulation also impairs Schwann cell function. Schwann cells are responsible for the myelination of peripheral nerves. Sorbitol accumulation results in Schwann cell de-differentiation to immature cells and a decreased expression of IGF-1 in the cells.

Metabolic flux is the rate of turnover of metabolites through a pathway. Nuclear magnetic resonance was utilized to examine diabetic cataractogenesis and found that in diabetic patients, there was a 3000% per hour turnover of NADPH. Furthermore, there was a competition for NADPH between glutathione reductase and aldolase reductase.

These biochemical disturbances have been credited to being caused by hyperglysolia, a term used to describe elevated cytosolic glucose and/or rates of glucose metabolism.

Other hypotheses have clinical and pathological significance, such as protein kinase C overactivation or increased glycolytic flux.