Perhaps one of the most clinically significant topics on the sphincter of Oddi is sphincter of Oddi dysfunction (SOD). Sphincter of Oddi dysfunction is defined broadly as the impairment of the sphincter's ability to perform its normal functions of controlling the flow of contents into the duodenum, as mentioned above.

The main clinical feature of sphincter of Oddi dysfunction is intermittent bouts of epigastric and right upper quadrant pain often precipitated by meals. The pain may last between half an hour and up to several hours and most commonly presents in women between the ages of 20 and 50 years, although it can present at any age and in both sexes.

- Nausea and vomiting, which may be mistaken for a gallbladder attack

- Transient increase in liver function tests (LFT) or pancreatic enzymes

- Delay in the emptying of contrast from the CBD or PD while in the supine position

- Radiating pain in the region of the back, shoulder, or scapula

- Dilation of the CBD or PD

While all the above are typical symptoms and findings associated with sphincter of Oddi dysfunction, all of these factors are not present in every patient with sphincter of Oddi dysfunction. SOD is often broken down into two main categories: (1) stenosis and (2) dyskinesia.

**Sphincter of Oddi Stenosis**

Any process that involves a narrowing of the sphincter of Oddi, excluding dysfunction inherent to the sphincter muscle itself, is described as a sphincter of Oddi stenosis.

**Sphincter of Oddi Dyskinesia**

While sphincter of Oddi stenosis represents a physical impairment due to damage, inflammation, or neoplastic processes, the sphincter of Oddi dyskinesia represents a less understood motility disorder.

- A paradoxical response to endogenous hormones due to dysfunctional neurologic pathways may cause sphincter of Oddi dyskinesia.

- The sphincter of Oddi dyskinesia may lie at the hormonal and neurotransmitter level leading to the sphincter of Oddi hypertension.

**Sphincter of Oddi Dysfunction Diagnosis and Management**

The gold standard test to diagnose sphincter of Oddi dysfunction remains Sphincter of Oddi manometry (SOM), which involves using ERCP techniques and knowledge of manometry to directly examine the motor activity of the sphincter of Oddi.

The Milwaukee stratification was used in the EPISOD randomized clinical trial, whose key result was that patients with type III SOD do not benefit from endoscopic sphincterotomy.

Other tests besides manometry for investigating the function of the sphincter of Oddi include quantitative hepatobiliary scintigraphy (HBS) and fatty meal ultrasonography (FMU). These tests are non-invasive, in contrast to manometry. HBS is a nuclear medicine test in which a tracer is used to demonstrate biliary flow, and the use of intravenous CCK can augment the diagnostic potential of this technique.