The management and prognosis of long thoracic neuropathy are dependent upon the mechanism of nerve injury. For instance, recovery from neuralgic amyotrophy is typically a gradual process occurring throughout one to three years. Contrastingly, injury as a result of a repetitive activity or carrying of heavy loads are incomplete and generally resolve spontaneously in 6 to 24 months. In these cases, physical therapy and exercise are crucial in the maintenance of the range of motion and strengthening of surrounding muscles, such as the trapezius and rhomboid muscles. Trauma to the long thoracic nerve, either from a direct insult to the shoulder or lateral chest wall, is generally more severe and recovery is limited. Patients may be surgical candidates if they do not experience functional recovery. There have been recent case reports documenting successful treatment with nerve transfer utilizing the thoracodorsal or medial pectoral nerves.

Inasmuch as the long thoracic nerve innervates the serratus anterior muscle, clinical examination of neural integrity is assessed by observing the power and symmetry of bilateral scapulae and serratus anterior muscles. Any asymmetry, muscular atrophy, or fasciculation noted is suggestive of long thoracic nerve injury, and the serratus muscle wall test can be performed to examine and compare the strength of the serratus anterior. The serratus wall test entails the patient facing approximately 2 feet away from a wall and pushing against the wall with palms flat at waist level. Damage to the long thoracic nerve would manifest as winging (medial winging) of the scapula secondary to paralysis of the serratus anterior muscle.