The cornea comprises distinct, densely placed, multi-scale structures with fibers of distinct patter arranged in various layers. Each layer is composed of distinct components having variations in collagen density, elastin, fibronectin, laminin, and proteoglycan.

The anterior-most layer over the corneal surface is the tear film composed of lipid and aqueous components, and the protein layer is typically 3 um thick in healthy subjects. The tear film helps provide lubrication and protection through soluble factors and maintains a smooth optical surface.

The spacing between the lamella and collagen fibrils is essential for maintaining corneal transparency, and the proteoglycans maintain this spacing. The stroma is acellular, and one keratocyte is found in every 50,000 cubic microns. The Dua's or Pre-Descemet's layer is nearly identical to adjacent stromal tissue. There is a difference in proteoglycan distribution due to the higher density of lamella and more spacing between the collagen fibrils.

The different macromolecules have varied subunits that point to other mechanical functions or different evolutionary developmental origins. Another group of molecules is glycosaminoglycans (GAG) which attract and retain water, absorb the shock, and impact tissue viscosity.

The endothelial pump plays a significant role in maintaining hydration of the cornea, which also plays a crucial role in maintaining corneal mechanics. The stroma also contributes to the major strength of the cornea. The interweaving corneal lamellae also provide resistance to the tensile strength of the cornea. The degree of collagen fibril alignment and the fibril diameter can vary; it will be essential to understand that the mechanical properties will also vary with the depth. Another critical point of consideration is lateral heterogeneity in the cornea. This fibril orientation provides a distinct lateral pattern at varying depths in the cornea. This is important because keratoconus may manifest in varied ways due to tissue structure, and surgical planning will benefit by taking these heterogeneities into account.