The most common pathological feature of temporal lobe epilepsy is hippocampal sclerosis. Hippocampal sclerosis (HS) consists of neuronal loss and gliosis in the dentate nucleus and pyramidal layer of the hippocampus. The mechanism of damage in HS is glutamate discharge during the seizure episode. The most frequent site of damage is in the CA1 area of the hippocampus. It is controversial whether HS is a result of seizures or a cause of seizures.

Both cortical and subcortical structures play an important role in controlling the level of consciousness. Higher-order association cortices on both sides have a role in maintaining an overall level of attention and awareness, and they interact reciprocally with the subcortical arousal structures. Subcortical arousal systems contain numerous neurotransmitter systems that act in conjunction to maintain the level of consciousness.

The characteristic feature of the complex partial seizure (focal impaired awareness seizure) is impaired awareness, referring to decreased overall arousal and responsiveness. These seizures most commonly arise from the temporal lobe. Simple responses like visual tracking may be preserved in complex partial seizures. However higher-order processing tasks like a verbal response, decision making are profoundly impaired.

Several mechanisms of altered consciousness in the setting of focal seizures have been proposed.

**Network Inhibition Hypothesis**

Focal ictal activity in the temporal lobe produces abnormal polyspike discharges. Abnormal seizure activity is carried to subcortical structures with pools of GABAergic inhibitory neurons via known anatomical connections. This may inhibit the subcortical arousal systems in the upper brainstem, thalamus, hypothalamus, and basal forebrain. Inhibition of subcortical arousal leads to slow-wave activity in regions of the frontoparietal association cortex bilaterally, producing impaired consciousness.

**Epileptic Activation of Subcortical Structures, Mainly Thalamus and Upper Brainstem**

The prefrontal cortex and the nonspecific thalamic nucleus and the midline regions of the intralaminar thalamic complex have close connections. It is hypothesized that the rapid epileptic spread from all the frontal regions of the reticular formation may be responsible for the impaired consciousness observed in frontal lobe epilepsy. A similar mechanism has been suggested in temporal lobe epilepsy with additional spread to the upper brainstem structures.

**Epileptic Disturbance of the Normal Balance Between Excitation and Inhibition of Cortical/Subcortical Networks**

Interference with the normal activity of the primary motor cortex or epileptic activation of the negative motor areas during frontal lobe involvement, or both, may be responsible for the arrest of activity during a seizure, has been suggested by some authors.