Nitrous oxide administration is via inhalation utilizing a simple face mask, laryngeal mask airway, or an endotracheal tube. Administration of nitrous oxide according to the European Society of Anaesthesiology Task Force on Nitrous Oxide is given below.

For surgical procedural sedation and dental procedures, nitrous oxide (30 to 50%) is combined with oxygen.

For general anesthesia, nitrous oxide(50 to 70%) is used. But due to its low potency, it can not be used as a single anesthetic agent; hence it is combined with other agents. Specially designated equipment for administering NO must be employed to ascertain concentrations of 50% NO and 50% oxygen. In contrast with dental apparatus, the device approved for obstetric use does not allow the clinician to modify the proportion of gases.

- Induction: The combination of lower solubilities in blood and different tissues makes N2O one of the fastest anesthetic agents. N2O uptake in the lungs improves the blood concentrations of concomitantly administered other volatile inhalation agents and oxygen, leading to faster induction and improved arterial oxygenation.

- Maintenance: N2O is mixed with different drugs during maintenance because of its insufficient anesthetic potency. As discussed above, nitrous oxide has a MAC of 105%, but the provision of sufficient oxygen delivery precludes the administration of concentrations above 70–75%, thus limiting its use to 0.7 MAC. Combining propofol with nitrous oxide for dental sedation decreases propofol requirements and reduces the hypotensive effects compared to propofol alone.

- Emergence: Nitrous oxide quickens emergence from anesthesia. In addition, nitrous oxide has a short elimination half-time; hence washout from the brain is swift because of its lower lipid solubility, leading to rapid recovery.

**Use in Specific Patient Populations**

**Patients with Renal Impairment:**No information is provided in the manufacturer's labeling for dose adjustments in patients with renal impairment.

**Patients with Hepatic Impairment:**No information is provided in the manufacturer's labeling for dose adjustments in patients with hepatic impairment.****

**Pregnancy Considerations:**According to ACOG (American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists), guidelines 50% nitrous oxide with 50% oxygen is used during labor and for postpartum perineal repair. It is important to recognize that nitrous oxide crosses the placenta, and it is rapidly eliminated by neonates upon the commencement of breathing. However, ACOG and the American Society of Anesthesiologists note that due to the increased risk of sedation and maternal hypoxemic episodes, nitrous oxide should not be combined with systemic opioids or sedatives, or hypnotics.

**Breastfeeding Considerations:**The half-life of nitrous oxide in the mother is short, and the nitrous oxide is not anticipated to be absorbed by the infant. Therefore, if used as part of general anesthesia, breastfeeding can be started after the mother has recovered adequately from anesthesia.