# Continuing Education Activity

Kleine–Levin syndrome (KLS), also known as "Sleeping beauty syndrome," is a rare yet devastating parasomnia that includes recurrent episodes of hypersomnia, along with behavioral or cognitive abnormalities, coupled with compulsive eating and hypersexuality. This activity reviews the evaluation and management of Kleine–Levin syndrome and reviews the role of the interprofessional team in evaluating and treating patients with this condition.

**Objectives:**
- Review the presentation of a patient with Kleine–Levin syndrome. 
- Outline the physical exam findings associated with Kleine–Levin syndrome.
- Identify the treatment considerations for patients with Kleine–Levin syndrome.
- Review how interprofessional team coordination and shared communication can improve outcomes for patients with Kleine–Levin syndrome.

# Introduction

Kleine–Levin syndrome (KLS), also known as "Sleeping beauty syndrome," is a rare yet devastating parasomnia that includes recurrent episodes of hypersomnia, along with behavioral or cognitive abnormalities, coupled with compulsive eating and hypersexuality.

Critchley and Hoffman actually defined the syndrome in 1942 and gave it its name after the publication of the classic paper, “The Syndrome of Periodic Somnolence and Morbid Hunger (Kleine–Levin syndrome)."

# Etiology

No specific and definitive cause of Kleine–Levin syndrome has been determined.

It has been documented that increased frequency of the human leukocyte antigen DQB1 * 0201 allele is associated with Kleine–Levin syndrome.

# Epidemiology

Due to its extreme rarity, the exact prevalence of Kleine–Levin syndrome is unknown, while according to a systematic review, between 1962 and 2004 found 186 worldwide cases.

It is considered rare for patients over the age of 30 to have their first episode of Kleine–Levin syndrome. Events that have been documented to be closely associated with the onset of Kleine–Levin syndrome include infections such as a cold-like syndrome with a fever, alcohol use, sleep deprivation, head trauma, physical exertion, unusual stress, traveling, and marijuana use.

# Pathophysiology

The pathogenesis of Kleine–Levin syndrome is not wholly understood. Viral and autoimmune processes may also be involved in the pathophysiology of Kleine–Levin syndrome since flu-like symptoms are noted at disease onset.

Possible autoimmune-induced inflammation may cause the hypoperfusion observed on SPECT. However, no changes in serum cytokine levels during Kleine–Levin syndrome episodes were observed compared to between episodes.

Functional neuroimaging has also shown decreased striatal dopamine transporter binding potential in asymptomatic patients with Kleine–Levin syndrome when compared to control patients. Hypermetabolism of cerebral glucose was found within the thalamus and putamen during symptomatic Kleine–Levin syndrome episodes. While, in contrast, relatively lower glucose metabolism was found during symptomatic Kleine–Levin syndrome episodes bilaterally in occipital gyri, in left lingual gyrus, and right angular and middle and superior temporal gyri.

Since derealization often appears in the presentation of Kleine–Levin syndrome, this may suggest underlying parieto-temporal dysfunction. The parieto-temporal junction is involved in the cross-modal association between somatosensory (body knowledge), auditory and visual information. Thus dysfunction and/or hypoperfusion in the junction could possibly lead to derealization.

Hypocretin has been studied closely in regard to Kleine–Levin syndrome since greater than 90% of patients with narcolepsy have reduced cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) hypocretin concentrations. However, hypocretin levels in the CSF of Kleine–Levin syndrome patients have sometimes been found to be normal, while other times found to be decreased. Hence, analysis of CSF hypocretin levels in Kleine–Levin syndrome needs to be carefully evaluated while recognizing that episodic reductions in Kleine–Levin syndrome may not be as drastic as seen in narcolepsy-cataplexy.

# History and Physical

Patients with Kleine–Levin syndrome will present with recurrent hypersomnia that is sudden in onset. Sleep duration during these episodes can range from 12 to 24 hours a day. Prodrome can include a sudden overwhelming sense of lethargy.

Frank hypersomnia is noted in the first episodes, while heavy fatigue characterizes later episodes.

Seventy-five percent of patients had an alteration in their eating behaviors during episodes of KLS, with the majority experiencing megaphagia, preferring sweets. The increased food intake can include 6 to 8 meals a day and result in a  7 to 30 lb (3.2 to 13.6 kg) weight gain.

Compulsive behaviors and actions can also occur and have included inappropriate and compulsive singing, rocking one's body, chewing one's lips, and compulsive writing on the walls. Afflicted patients can endorse a sensation of derealization with feelings of detachment and strangeness.

# Evaluation

Diagnosis of Kleine–Levin syndrome can be challenging. It is a clinical diagnosis of exclusion, requiring the clinician to rule out other disease processes that can mimic the symptoms of Kleine–Levin syndrome.

Decreased slow wave sleep early in Kleine–Levin syndrome attacks with a subsequent return to baseline despite continuing symptoms and, paradoxically, normal rapid eye movement (REM) sleep early in an attack but decreased REM sleep as the attack progresses has been reported.

# Treatment / Management

There is no definitive treatment for Kleine–Levin syndrome during either the acute episode or interepisodic period.

Antidepressants did not prevent relapse, except in a single case, in which a monoamine oxidase inhibitor (moclobemide) was utilized. Carbamazepine improved abnormal behavior. Lithium was found to significantly improve abnormal behavior, reduce the duration of episodes, and decrease relapses, improving recovery of symptoms.

Modafinil was shown to decrease the duration of the symptomatic periods but did affect the recidivism rate.

# Differential Diagnosis

Kleine–Levin syndrome can often be mistaken for psychiatric conditions. Differentials can include atypical depression, severe depression, bipolar disorder, narcolepsy, Klüver-Bucy syndrome, menstruation-related hypersomnia, mass brain lesions, mitochondrial disease, urea cycle defects, Lyme disease, acute intermittent porphyria, and temporal lobe epilepsy.

# Prognosis

Kleine–Levin syndrome has a fair prognosis and typically has a benign clinical course, ultimately leading to spontaneous resolution of symptoms.

# Complications

There are no known long-term complications of untreated Kleine–Levin syndrome, as the disease spontaneously resolves on its own.

# Deterrence and Patient Education

Patients who may develop abnormal sleep patterns, such as those seen in Kleine–Levin syndrome, should speak to their clinician regarding the need for further evaluation by a sleep specialist. Clinicians should educate and prepare patients with Kleine–Levin syndrome regarding their clinical course and anticipated symptoms that may arise. Nurses can provide additional counseling and monitor therapeutic results. The pharmacist can check for drug interactions and verify dosing, and also counsel the patient regarding administration and potential adverse effects. Patients should be reassured regarding the benign nature of the disease without any known long-term complications. An interprofessional team approach will yield the best patient outcomes. [Level 5]

# Pearls and Other Issues

Kleine–Levin syndrome consists of hypersomnia, behavioral or cognitive disturbances, hyperphagia, and hypersexuality. It primarily affects adolescent males. It is a clinical diagnosis of exclusion. No specific etiology has been identified for the disease. However, possible etiologies include a psychologic disturbance, trauma, toxins, infection, serotonergic or dopaminergic neurotransmitter abnormalities, and autoimmunity. Functional neuroimaging, polysomnography, and EEG can help further workup and aid in understanding the neuropathology behind the disease. There is no definitive treatment for Kleine–Levin syndrome, but several psychotropic agents, such as lithium, anticonvulsants, antidepressants, stimulants such as modafinil, have been utilized.

# Enhancing Healthcare Team Outcomes

Patients suffering from Kleine–Levin syndrome can present to either their primary care physician, pediatrician, nurse practitioner, physician assistant, psychiatrist, psychologist, neurologist, or somnologist. Psychotherapy can be provided by non-physician professionals such as psychologists. Physicians can direct pharmacotherapy after being formally diagnosed with Kleine–Levin syndrome. To help with advanced workup of the disease neuropathology, neuroradiologists may be employed to evaluate, for example, functional MRIs. Thus, it requires an interprofessional team of healthcare professionals that need to remain cognizant of KLS's unique presentation as patients can present initially to a wide array of specialists. Clinical awareness of this condition can lead to improved patient care and outcomes. [Level 5] Improved interdisciplinary communication enhances the quality of care of patients with KLS and further enhances their clinical outcomes.