The goal of treatment is a restoration of anatomy and function.

In general, increasing degrees of displacement, comminution, and rotational malalignment are critical factors in assessing the fracture pattern's potential for stability and reduction maintenance with nonoperative management.

Over the last few decades have seen advances and improvements regarding low-profile plates/screw options. Kirschner wires (K-wires) might be a better option for patients who require maximum cosmesis.

**Special Considerations**

**Thumb Metacarpal Fractures**

The thumb metacarpal deserves special consideration, given the relative lack of interossei and deep intermetacarpal ligament support.

- Abductor pollicis longus (APL) - pulls the shaft in a proximal, dorsal, and radial deformity

- Extensor pollicis longus (EPL) - same as APL

- Adductor pollicis - pulls the shaft into supination and adduction

The distal fragment assumes an apex dorsal, adducted, and flexed position.

Despite the thumb tolerating more angulation than other metacarpals due to its higher mobility, an apex dorsal angulation of over 30 degrees often fares poorly with nonoperative management. Indications for closed reduction and thumb spica casting include:

- Extra-articular fracture

- Less than 30 degrees of angulation following closed reduction

- Non-displaced (or less than 1 mm displacement) of an intra-articular fracture (i.e., Bennet fracture)

Note that intra-articular fractures (Bennett – 2 part and Rolando – 3 part fracture patterns) most commonly require surgical fixation, as the joint surface needs to be reduced to avoid long-term post-traumatic deformity and articular cartilage degeneration.

Operative indications for thumb metacarpal fractures include:

- Extra-articular fracture patterns with greater than 30 degrees of angulation following attempted closed reduction

- Loss of reduction following thumb spica casting/splinting

- Intra-articular fracture patterns:

- Bennett fractures with less than 1 mm displacement or
- Rolando fracture (any type, even non-displaced/minimally displaced)

Operative techniques include:

- Closed reduction and percutaneous k-wire fixation

- Open reduction internal fixation

- Often preferred over CRPP techniques in fracture patterns with greater than 1 mm displacement or in fracture patterns with large articular pieces amenable to screw fixation

- Distraction and external fixation

- Preferred in the setting of severely comminuted fracture patterns with associated major soft tissue injuries

**Metacarpal Head Fractures**

Metacarpal head fractures are the least common, and management is best performed operatively if there is an intra-articular step-off. Stable fixation allows for earlier mobilization, which can reduce stiffness. Severely comminuted fractures may require:

- External fixation

- Metacarpophalangeal joint arthroplasty (MCP arthroplasty)

- MCP fusion 

- Indicated in the setting of severe arthritic changes, end-stage

In the setting of "fight bite" injuries, management must include early IV antibiotics, irrigation, and surgical debridement of the MCP joint.

**Metacarpal Neck Fractures**

Metacarpal neck fractures are the most common, as anatomically, the metacarpal neck is the weakest point in the bone.

If the reduction is stable, then early mobilization is ideal, and it rarely needs splinting for longer than six weeks. Radiographs can be obtained to ensure alignment maintenance during the follow-up period.

**Metacarpal Shaft Fractures**

The consensus on the acceptable nonoperative parameters following closed reduction of metacarpal shaft fractures include the following:

- Index and long finger

- Angulation (degrees): 10-20
- Shortening (mm): 2-5

- Ring finger

- Angulation (degrees): 30
- Shortening (mm): 2-5

- Small finger

- Angulation (degrees): 40
- Shortening (mm): 2-5

Shaft fractures can be transverse, oblique, spiral, or comminuted.

Transverse and short oblique fractures tend to result in a dorsal angulation deformity. Less angulation is tolerated compared to metacarpal neck fractures. Oblique fractures tend to shorten as fragments slide on each other. If the fracture line is long enough (twice the diameter of the bone) and bone fragments are large enough (three times the width of the screw), a double lag screw fixation is possible. If it is impossible, a single screw will require a neutralization plate. The use of K-wires is also a possibility.

The same principles apply to spiral fractures while exercising care that lag screws are placed perpendicularly to the fracture line. Screws require less dissection than plating, which can reduce adhesions and scarring, although, with aggressive physiotherapy, stiffness can be minimized in either instance.

**Metacarpal Base Fractures**

In the presence of metacarpal base fractures, it is important to rule out carpometacarpal dislocation, as high energy is likely to be involved in the trauma. Intra-articular fractures are more common on the ulnar side of the hand than the radial due to the higher mobility of these joints.

**Open Fractures**

Open fractures should have treatment with local wound care and antibiotics. Although controversial, healthcare providers are to utilize best judgment practices regarding timely debridement with removal of any dirt/debris and primary versus secondary wound closure in the acute setting. For example, management of fight bite injuries is best with formal surgical irrigation and debridement of the MCP joint, given the high risk of infection with local wound care in the emergency department only. When in doubt, clinicians should consult the hand surgical service on call at the institution.

Extensive open fracture patterns and soft tissue injury may require subsequent/serial irrigation and debridement procedures, depending on the extent of the injury. Occasionally, second look debridement 1 to 3 days later may be necessary.