**Carpal Tunnel Syndrome**

The carpal tunnel is a space-bound by carpal bones and a transverse ligament. Within the tunnel run the tendons of the flexor digitorum superficialis, flexor digitorum profundus, and flexor pollicis longus in addition to the median nerve. Carpal tunnel syndrome occurs with overuse of the wrist and entrapment of the median nerve within the canal. Nerve compression leads to nocturnal paresthesia and pain.

**Arthritis**

Both osteoarthritis and rheumatoid arthritis can affect the wrist joint. Osteoarthritis is general wear-and-tear arthritis that arises due to the mechanical destruction of articular cartilage. It is more common in weight-bearing joints, therefore, we will focus on rheumatoid arthritis in this review. The pathogenesis of rheumatoid arthritis is autoimmune destruction of articular cartilage.

**Scaphoid Fracture**

More common in the younger population, a scaphoid fracture results from a blow to the wrist often by falling on an outstretched hand. The scaphoid bone is unique because of its retrograde blood supply from distal to proximal.

**Distal Radius Fracture**

The most common wrist fracture sustained secondary to a fall on an outstretched hand is a (dorsally displaced) distal radius fracture.

- Die-punch: depressed lunate facet fracture fragment at the articular surface of the distal radius

- Barton's: volar lip fracture pattern with radiocarpal joint subluxation/dislocation

- Chauffer's: radial styloid fracture

- Smith's: volar displaced fracture pattern, extra-articular