If the diagnosis of abusive head trauma is being considered, other causes should be excluded. Accidental head trauma, birth trauma, bleeding diathesis, congenital conditions, neoplastic conditions, metabolic conditions, meningitis, connective tissue diseases, and obstructive hydrocephalus are all part of the differential. These conditions have similar findings as abusive head trauma and must be excluded. Other considerations include osteogenesis imperfecta, glutaric aciduria, vitamin K deficiency, and rebleeding into a prior subdural hematoma.

The differential diagnosis includes:

- Accidental head trauma

- Acute subdural

- Arteriovenous malformation

- Bleeding disorders

- Blood dyscrasias

- Cerebellar hemorrhage

- Connective tissue disorders

- Epidural hematoma

- Infectious subdural effusion

- Intracranial hemorrhage

- Metabolic disorders such as glutaric aciduria type 1, which causes retinal hemorrhages

- Stroke

- Subdural empyema

**Injuries That May Be Abusive Head Trauma**

- Children may develop serious head injuries from falls. However, the majority do not cause serious head trauma. Any child with severe injuries related to a fall requires further examination, and the diagnosis of abusive head trauma should be considered.

- Falls from a bed, unless it is a bunk bed, are usually minor, although some may have a fracture of the arm, leg, clavicle, or skull. Severe head trauma is rare. The degree of injury depends on the type of flooring and the distance of the fall. Carpeting or padded flooring is associated with a lower incidence of significant injury.

- Falls down the stairs are a significant risk for injury, especially if the child is in a walker or stroller. About 1 to 8% develop intracranial bleeds. If the child was held and dropped while walking down or up the stairs, injuries are less severe. Single injuries to the head or extremities usually predominate. Multiple injuries are uncommon. Stairway injuries are usually less severe than free falls.

- Short vertical falls of 1 to 4 feet rarely cause severe head trauma or multiple injuries. One study of deaths in those children who died after a fall of 1 to 4 feet usually found other evidence consistent with abuse. Another study looked at children who died after a 5 to 6 feet fall and found that most had some evidence of abuse. Falls from 10 feet or higher rarely result in death unless the height is extreme. The greater the height, the greater the incidence of fractures and injuries. A study of 75,000 cases from the United States Consumer Product Safety Commission found that 18 children suffered fall-related injury deaths. Seven fell from a swing and eleven from a horizontal surface, such as a ledge or ladder.