Disordered sleep and work schedules have a large impact on emergency management service provider performance. Adrenaline provides a performance benefit for bad calls, but daily fatigue leads to more errors during routine, gray-area calls. Driving safety is an important topic during discussions about emergency management service provider sleep and schedule disturbances. Ambulance crashes are highly noticeable in the media and are typically the result of fatigued or distracted driving. Sanctioned defensive driving courses promote more safety, but still don't replace a healthy sleep schedule.

Current research suggests that poor sleep habits accelerate the advancement of the disease process, such as diabetes and heart problems. Often a poor diet is prevalent in the EMS field. Poor food choices, especially late at night, can contribute to sleep problems and disease process. Healthcare courses in prevention can often eliminate or reduce risk factors in diet and sleep problems.

Enjoying time at home with family and/or friends is a vital component of being happy in life. Companionship in some form is desired on every level of human intelligence. Sleep and work schedule disorders often have a direct impact on time at home. The time off from work is largely used to rest from a taxing work schedule. Holidays and appointments often become less important, due to sleep and work schedule disorders.

State emergency management service-controlling agencies are conducting studies in the emergency management service field to correct the issues discussed in this article. New pay scales and scheduling techniques are being considered to address and improve these problems. While some emergency management workers perform the traditional 24-hour shifts, some companies have opted to test a 12-hour shift system. The reduced shifts are aimed at reducing emergency management provider fatigue. The ultimate goal of newer scheduling techniques is the last patient contact of the shift should receive the same level of quality care, as did the first patient of the shift.

Emergency management providers are dedicated to their community and patients and continue to do their jobs while they work on issues involved in their field of work.