The most common adverse effects include pruritus, fatigue, and abdominal pain/discomfort. Other reported side effects include rash, oropharyngeal pain, dizziness, constipation, arthralgia, dyslipidemia, headache, eczema, depression, hypersensitivity reactions, and thyroid function abnormality.

If pruritus does occur, it can be managed by adding bile acid sequestrants, antihistamines, dose reduction, or temporary dosing interruption.

Obeticholic acid has also been associated with decreases in high-density lipoprotein cholesterol and triglycerides and increases in low-density lipoprotein cholesterol.

In patients with decompensated cirrhosis or Child-Pugh B or C hepatic impairment, when dosed more frequently than the recommended starting dosage of 5 mg once weekly, hepatic decompensation and failure cases fatal have been reported in the postmarketing reports. In patients with PBC with decompensated cirrhosis or Child-Pugh Class B, Child-Pugh Class C, it is essential to follow dosage guidelines. Patients at risk for hepatic decompensation should be closely monitored while on OCA.

Dose-dependent liver-related adverse reactions such as jaundice, worsening ascites, portal hypertension, and primary biliary cholangitis flare were also reported in patients with doses of 10 to 50 mg (5 times the recommended dose.) A pooled analysis of 3 placebo-controlled trials done on patients with PBC revealed that for the 10 mg dose, liver-related adverse effects were 5.2 per 100 patient exposure years (PEY) versus 2.4 for the placebo group. Liver-related adverse effects for the 25 mg group were 19.8 per 100 PEY and 54.5 per 100 PEY for the 50 mg group.

Patients that experience paradoxical worsening of liver disease, worsening enzyme elevations, or evidence of hepatic decompensation should discontinue OCA.