The main issue of concern is whether the William back exercises were superior or inferior to the McKenzie protocol. Researchers have compared the Williams and McKenzie protocols for back pain. Decreasing pain and return of lumbar motion were the variables examined. In the comparison of the two groups, patients who underwent the McKenzie protocol improved function to a significantly greater extent than patients in the Williams protocol group, as well as achieved this results in a significantly decreased period. EMG activity at four lumbar vertebrae was examined in patients performing posterior and anterior pelvic tilt exercises of the Williams protocol. The results showed the positions of pelvic tilt, curl up, knees to chest, and hamstring stretch, when completed with posterior tilt, minimized the electromyographic activity in both the lumbar and sacral regions. Furthermore, the use of anterior tilt positions should be avoided to minimize electromyographic activity in the lumbar and sacral regions. Lastly, the electromyographic activity the four lumbar vertebral levels respond independently of each other while the performance of Williams' flexion exercises.

Generally speaking, patients with acute mechanical low back pain do not get referred to physical therapy or a home exercise program, but select populations at increased risk for developing chronic back pain could benefit.

Although some studies do prove that there is a significant efficacy of exercise therapy in selected cases of acute low back pain (less than four weeks).