# Introduction

Trinucleotide repeats are sets of three nucleotides present in succession in various copy numbers throughout the human genome.

# Mechanism

Microsatellites are parts of the genome consisting of short repeat units, including trinucleotide repeats.

Anticipation is a genetic phenomenon commonly seen in trinucleotide repeat disorders such as Huntington disease and myotonic dystrophy in which symptoms of a genetic disorder manifest at earlier ages with each subsequent generation. Therefore as the number of trinucleotide repeats increases in an affected patient's progeny, one may observe an earlier and more severe manifestation of symptoms.

# Testing

Diagnosis of trinucleotide repeats disorders is often possible via a detailed personal history and physical exam. Family history can often be beneficial, obviating the need for expensive genetic testing. However, in primary disease diagnosis and upon patient request, genetic testing for the number of trinucleotide repeats provides a definitive diagnosis.

# Pathophysiology

If trinucleotide repeats exist in exonic sequences, an increasing number of copies can have an effect on transcription and translation of proteins contributing to pathology. However, many also occur in UTRs, and, while it would appear not to affect pathology, they actually can still contribute to disease.

The mechanism by which trinucleotide repeats cause disease is still under extensive study, but some theories have emerged about what contributes to trinucleotide repeat instability. One study points to mismatch repair (MMR) proteins and their role in promoting instability through overexpression.

# Clinical Significance

DNA repeat expansions are the underlying pathology in about 20 to 30 neurodegenerative and neuromuscular disorders in humans.

There are many different types of SCA, but we will focus on Type 1 as an example. Spinocerebellar ataxia Type 1 is an autosomal dominant disorder that involves a CAG repeat in the ataxin (ATXN1) gene on chromosome 6.

Huntington disease is an autosomal dominant disorder that involves a CAG repeat in the huntingtin (HTT) gene on chromosome 4.

Fragile X syndrome is an X-linked dominant disorder that involves a CGG repeat in the fragile X mental retardation 1 (FMR1) gene on the X chromosome.

There are a few different types of myotonic dystrophy, but we will again focus just on type 1 as an example. Myotonic dystrophy type 1 is an autosomal dominant disorder that involves a CTG repeat in the dystrophia myotonica protein kinase (DMPK) gene on chromosome 19.

Friedrich ataxia is an autosomal recessive disorder involving a GAA repeat in the frataxin (FXN) gene on chromosome 9.