Zonisamide acts through the blockade of voltage-dependent sodium and T-type calcium channels. It possibly also inhibits glutamate release. It is a weak carbonic anhydrase inhibitor, although this action is not responsible for its antiepileptic activity.

**Pharmacokinetics**

**Absorption**

Zonisamide is rapidly absorbed and evenly distributed following oral administration. Maximum concentration occurs within 2 to 5 hours. Food delays the time to maximum concentration but not bioavailability. If taken with food, it may take up to 4 to 6 hours to reach peak plasma levels. Bioavailability is high, but because of the lack of availability of a parenteral product, absolute bioavailability in humans is unknown. It is metabolized mainly by cytochrome P450 3A4. Intestinal 3A4 may account for decreased bioavailability of oral preparation.

**Distribution and Protein Binding**

Zonisamide has a dose-dependent decrease in volume of distribution. It has saturable binding to erythrocytes, especially to intracellular carbonic anhydrase. It binds to red blood cells (RBC) and is found in higher concentrations in RBCs than in plasma. Whole blood zonisamide concentration is non-linear as the dosage increases; however, plasma zonisamide concentration is linear with increased doses. Around 40% of zonisamide is bound to plasma proteins, especially albumin.

**Metabolism and Clearance**

Following oral administration, the half-life of zonisamide is estimated at 50 to 69 hours for plasma and 105 hours for RBCs. It takes up to 14 days to reach steady-state levels after taking a stable dose of zonisamide. Less than 30% of it is eliminated unchanged in the urine. Most of the drug undergoes extensive hepatic metabolism. The major metabolite of zonisamide is 2-sulfamoylacetylphenol (SMAP), formed by liver microsomal enzymes primarily through cytochrome P450 3A4. It is metabolized to a lesser extent by CYP 2C19 and CYP 3A5. Metabolites are pharmacologically inactive and are excreted primarily by kidneys.