**History**

It includes detailed birth history, medical/surgical history, and 3-generation family history.

Clinical features associated with CMD are as follow:

- Prenatal: polyhydramnios, reduced fetal movements, preterm delivery <36 weeks, small for gestational age.

- Neonatal: hypotonia, hyporeflexia, muscle weakness (distal > proximal), neck muscle weakness (flexion), myopathic facies (ptosis, facial diplegia, atrophy of temporalis muscles, tent-shaped mouth), contractures, arthrogryposis, scoliosis, talipes equinovarus, visual impairment (cataract, lens opacification), respiratory distress, weak cough, sleep apnea, pulmonary hypoplasia, bronchopulmonary dysplasia, raised right hemidiaphragm, pneumothorax, recurrent infections/otitis media, aspiration pneumonia, feeding and sucking difficulties, gastroparesis, GERD, constipation/diarrhea, fecal incontinence, increased sensitivity to anesthesia (due to respiratory muscle compromise and central dysregulation of breathing), cardiac conduction disturbances, valve defects (mitral), and early death.

- Infancy and childhood, age 1 to 10 years: usually, they are able to walk with improvement in motor function; however, progressive weakness restarts in the 2nd decade. Myotonia (by 10 years of age), intellectual disability (50-60%), autism, ADHD, psychiatric disorders, vision problems (hyperopia, astigmatism, cataract), excessive daytime sleepiness, cardiac and endocrine complications.

- **Respiratory:**respiratory difficulties are found in 50% of neonates and are the main cause of neonatal mortality and used to distinguish between mild and severe CDM.

- **Musculoskeletal:**proximal muscle weakness in DM1 indicates a poor prognosis. The biphasic course in CMD shows improved/stable disease until adolescence/young adult with gradual deterioration. Complications of muscle weakness may include scoliosis and contractures producing foot deformity and toe walking. Bulbar muscle weakness may produce swallowing, speech, and language difficulties.

- **Cognition:**cognitive impairment is one of the most common and challenging manifestations of childhood DM1. CDM patients are most affected, with IQ range 40 to 80, mean 70 (average normal 100). Cognitive impairment correlates with the severity of weakness, size of CTG repeat, and maternal transmission.

- **Sleep:**excessive sleep disorder and sleep apnea may adversely affect learning, memory, high-level cognitive processing, and physical functioning, exacerbating psychomotor and cognitive delays.

- **Psychosocial:**50% of children have psychiatric diseases (phobia, depression, anxiety), and ADHD. Avoidant personality, apathy, and autistic features may be present.

- **Cancer:**There is an increased risk of cancer in patients with type 1 myotonic dystrophy, including thyroid, uterine, choroidal melanoma, colon, testicular, prostate, and basal cell cancer.

- **Others:**features of adult “classic” DM are not evident in childhood, including cataracts, significant cardiac disorders, and diabetes mellitus. Lens pathology is evident in 40% and can predict future cataract. Conduction disturbances observed on ECG, or valve abnormalities may be symptomatic. Hypothyroidism, hypogonadism, growth hormone abnormalities, and androgen insensitivity are rare. In contrast, testicular atrophy and infertility are common in CDM males, as are irregular menses in CDM females.

**Physical Exam:**vital signs, weight, height, and head circumference measurements are essential. Comprehensive neonatal exam looking for dysmorphic features, contractures, scoliosis, pulmonary and cardiac evaluation for abnormal chest rise, or murmurs. Abdominal exam for organomegaly, back for scoliosis, the musculoskeletal system for contractures, detailed neurological exam assessing mental status, cranial nerves (myopathic facies, ptosis, dysphagia, weak cry/cough/gag, respiratory failure), motor (axial and appendicular hypotonia, frog-like posture, decreased movements), reflexes, Babinski response, sensory, coordination and primitive reflexes. Examine mother (myopathic facies, shake hand as myotonia prevents the prompt release of grip, percussion with a reflex hammer, by tapping thenar, wrist extensor will produce involuntary muscle contraction with a delay in relaxation, called percussion myotonia).