The use of an electrocardiogram is standard for identifying electrical variations within the heart. PACs typically have normal QRS complex and a normal, short, or longer PR interval than sinus rhythm. Sometimes, non conducted PACs occur in which there is no QRS complex following the PAC. PACs can be unifocal arising from one location (similar P waves in all PACs) or multifocal and arising from several locations (different P wave morphologies for PACs). The P wave of the PAC typically occurs earlier than the sinus P wave and has a different morphology and axis from the sinus P wave. It appears dissimilar from a standard sinus node generation, with variations in height, length, and shape of the P wave; furthermore, the P wave may be inverted or biphasic.

Depending on the location of the generating focus, the PR interval can be shorter (<120 milliseconds if originating from low right atrium near the AV node) or longer than usual. Examination of multiple leads may be required to differentiate subtle differences. A negative P wave in the inferior leads suggests a low atrial focus and a negative P wave in the lead I and aVL suggests a left atrial origin. PACs may also appear within the preceding T wave in accelerated heart rates. If the EKG does not reveal PACs on examination, a 24-hour Holter monitor may be useful for identifying intermittent complexes.

Jugular venous pressure mappings may also play a role in the evaluation of PACs. Though the sensitivity of this test may be suboptimal, positive findings are useful for clinical correlation. Furthermore, being a simple physical exam finding to estimate central venous pressure, there is no added expensive or invasive method. Positive findings on this maneuver would be the visualization of the typical cannon 'a' wave, which is a sizeable venous pulse, causing a prominent bulge of the jugular veins. This occurs when the atrium contracts and blood is forced upon a close ventricle, cause a pressurized backflow into the central venous system. In the setting of PACs, if the premature contraction of the atrium occurs during systole when the tricuspid valve is closed, this sign may manifest. Electrophysiologic mapping studies are not indicated for the identification of PACs.

After the identification of PACs, echocardiography is useful in determining the functional status of the heart and identifying potential underlying structural abnormalities. Evaluation for structural heart disease should always be undertaken in patients with frequent PACs because of its prognostic important and treatment requirement. Laboratory testing can be done to identify electrolyte abnormalities.