Daunorubicin is an anti-neoplastic agent that has approval from the Food and Drug Administration (FDA) as a remission induction therapy along with another cytotoxic agent in acute non-lymphocytic leukemias including acute myelogenous, promyelocytic, and erythroid leukemias in adults and acute lymphocytic leukemia (ALL) in both children and adults.

In adult non-lymphocytic leukemias, daunorubicin hydrochloride has been seen to produce a complete remission rate of 40 to 50% when used as a single agent and 53 to 65% complete remission rate when used with cytarabine. The cumulative dose of 270 mg/m^2, along with cytarabine, has been shown to be most effective with the lowest toxicity rates.

Clinical studies showed that daunorubicin prolongs the complete remission duration of childhood ALL when used in combination with vincristine-prednisone compared to using vincristine and prednisone alone. However, no evidence is available regarding its impact as a part of consolidation therapy. Whereas in adult ALL, daunorubicin significantly increases the rate of complete remission from 47% to 83% when added to the triple therapy with vincristine, prednisone, and L asparaginase; however, it does not affect the duration of the complete remission.

Daunorubicin is also used as part of the aggressive CHOP (cyclophosphamide, daunorubicin, vincristine, and prednisone) regime to treat adult T cell leukemia caused by human T-lymphotropic virus (HTLV) and other chronic lymphomas, although the long-term remission effects are limited.

In 2017 the liposomal co-formulation of daunorubicin and cytarabine was approved by the FDA for the treatment of adults with therapy-related AML or AML with myelodysplasia-related changes (AML-MRC), these two types of AML are known for their poor prognosis.

Off-label, the liposomal form of daunorubicin, is also used as a first-line agent to treat Kaposi sarcoma in patients with advanced human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) syndrome along with HAART therapy.