The diet helps to manage obesity that often accompanies lipedema. Generally, lipedema fat is resistant to weight loss with diet.

Compression garments are recommended for cosmetic reasons. Circular knit garments are seamless and better suited for women with less lymphedema, whereas flat knit garments are suited for women with ankle cuff or unusual shapes.

Bariatric surgery like gastric bypass or sleeve gastrectomy should be suggested for benefits on overall glucometabolic aspects, especially prediabetes, diabetes, or cardiovascular risk. Women should be counseled before the bariatric surgery that the post-surgery lipedema part would get more accentuated. Compression garments, decongestive therapy should be offered to prevent the development of lymphedema, and a consult with a plastic surgeon should also be recommended for excess skin removal post-bariatric surgery.

Liposuction is a very effective treatment for lipedema when conservative therapies fail. In this procedure, lipedema fat is removed, sparing the lymphatic vessels. Several techniques are used as follows.

- Tumescent technique: Klein solution (normal saline or lactated ringer, lidocaine or prilocaine, epinephrine, sodium bicarbonate) is used to saturate the fat. This tumescence provides turgor to tissue that microcannula slide through the fat, and tiny, rapid vibrations break the fat, which is then suctioned out.

- Water-jet assisted liposuction (WAL): Klein solution or saline used as a jet that releases the fat for liposuction. No waiting period is required to tumescent the tissue.

- Laser-assisted liposuction: this technique is reserved for areas with fibrosis like posterior thighs. Liposuction performed without general anesthesia has rapid recovery; also, it is recommended to undergo liposuction in stages rather than removing all fat in one sitting. 3 to 5 sessions of liposuction with a good interval of time in between are suggested.

The quality of life has significantly improved regarding pain, muscle cramps, tightening, itching, edema, bruising, cosmetic appearance after liposuction. The aim of surgical treatment is mainly to reduce the volume and help in the reduction of mechanical impairment of walking. But liposuction is a very costly therapy; insurance coverage and reimbursement are the main issues.

A pneumatic compression device is used for lipedema as well as lymphedema. In treating lymphedema, manual lymphatic drainage like myofascial therapy or deep tissue therapy like Astym therapy, Graston technique, and compression reduction techniques have been shown to reduce fibrosis in lipedema fat and increased blood flow to the tissues.

No specific medication or supplement is used to treat lipedema, but frugs are used as an adjunctive, especially to prevent lymphedema and venous disease; both are complications of lipedema. Sympathomimetics like amphetamine or phentermine binds to adrenergic receptors that induce lipolysis. Adrenergic receptors are located on lymphatic and blood vessels. Metformin and resveratrol are useful to prevent fibrosis and hypoxia-inducible factor (inflammatory factor) development. Diosmin, a bioflavonoid found in citrus fruits, functions as lymphagogue, reduces swelling is helpful in lipedema and associated chronic venous insufficiency. Selenium, a mineral, has improved inflammation, reduced leg volume in lipedema and lymphedema.

Several drugs that cause fluid retention should be avoided, like calcium channel blockers, thiazolidinediones, gabapentin, oral corticosteroids, beta-blockers. Furosemide, a diuretic, should also be avoided as it increases the protein concentration in the interstitial organ that halts the fluid.