The STA is the first branch off of the ECA arising from its anterior surface just inferior to the level of the greater cornu of the hyoid bone; it then branches into the infrahyoid artery, the superior laryngeal artery, and the cricothyroid artery and sternocleidomastoid artery.

- Infrahyoid artery: supplies the infrahyoid muscles

- Superior laryngeal artery: supplies mucous membranes, and muscles of the larynx

- Cricothyroid artery: supplies the cricothyroid muscle, isthmus, and pyramidal lobe (when present)

- Sternocleidomastoid artery: supplies the sternocleidomastoid muscle.

The ITA is the third branch of the thyrocervical trunk. The inferior thyroid artery is considered the principal blood supplier of the thyroid gland. The ITA gives rise to the ascending cervical artery, the inferior laryngeal artery, and also gives pharyngeal, tracheal, and esophageal branches. Also of importance, the ITA supplies the four parathyroid glands. Anatomical importance regarding the ITA is that it courses medially and posteriorly to the carotid sheath.

Ascending cervical artery: Supplies the neck, and gives off many small spinal arteries.

Inferior laryngeal artery: Supplies the larynx anastomosing with the superior laryngeal artery. This courses with the recurrent laryngeal nerve.

Venous return from the thyroid is not as complicated as the arterial supply. The superior thyroid veins and middle thyroid veins drain into the internal jugular vein. The right and left inferior thyroid veins to drain into their respective brachiocephalic veins (right and left). The left internal jugular vein drains into the left subclavian vein to form the left brachiocephalic vein. The right internal jugular vein drains the right subclavian vein to form the right brachiocephalic vein. The right and left brachiocephalic veins coalesce to create the superior vena cava returning deoxygenated blood to the right atrium.