Back pain affects millions of people and is a leading cause of chronic pain and disability. It also leads to higher costs of healthcare. The first line assessment of back pain comes from the patient's primary care provider. They are essential in the evaluation and treatment of back pain. It helps to identify red flags for urgent treatment and referral, and it aids to minimize unnecessary procedures or opioid prescriptions and is critical in limiting the development of chronic pain.

The patients who develop chronic pain may benefit from seeing a chronic pain specialist for possible medication management and/or interventional procedures. Signs and symptoms of inflammatory arthritis of the lumbar spine should be further evaluated by a rheumatologist. Either severe radiculopathy or rapid neurological changes should be evaluated by a neurosurgeon urgently. Management of comorbid depression is also paramount. Cognitive-behavioral therapists and/or psychiatrists are needed to help co-manage patients with back pain with comorbid mental health disorders. The physical therapist should be involved early in the care and urge the patient to exercise regularly. The dietitian should encourage a healthy diet and body weight maintenance.

Furthermore, a nutritionist or obesity medicine specialist can help with weight loss and is useful for both primary and secondary prevention of back pain. Acupuncturists, osteopathic manipulative medicine specialists,  yoga instructors, or tai chi instructors can all be instrumental in improving function in patients with both acute and chronic low back pain. Pharmacists play an essential role in the care of complex patients with chronic pain; patients may be on multiple opioids and sedatives requiring frequent monitoring. Furthermore, radiologists aid in the diagnosis of various etiologies of back pain, including spinal stenosis and disc herniation.

Back pain, if not treated appropriately, can become chronic and debilitating over time. There is some debate as to the most appropriate treatment for back pain to maximize outcomes. Disease-oriented medicine, not holistic, has proven to have relatively weak outcomes regarding chronic back pain.  Approaching the treatment of pain from an interprofessional approach maximizes the chances of having better results.

Nursing should assist the clinical team with educating the patient on non-narcotic pain medications and possibly on alternative means of pain control, including yoga, deep breathing, and acupuncture. Clinicians should refrain from empirically prescribing narcotics as they lead to addiction, tolerance, and abuse. In the rare instances when narcotics are specified, both the pharmacist and clinician should work together to avoid long-term prescriptions of controlled drugs.

Bearing in mind the clinical clues which provide worse prognostic outcomes such as underlying mental health disorders, kinesiophobia, obesity, and smoking, it is likely to be helpful to treat the whole patient with an interprofessional team. Screening for some of these comorbidities as a primary care provider may be of assistance if the patient is not responding to conservative therapy. The primary physician can also offer smoking cessation and other lifestyle management counseling to the patient. The interprofessional team should communicate with each other to prevent duplication of treatments and tests, and this also helps deliver the same message to the patient.

**Outcomes**

The addition of early physical therapy has shown benefit more rapid improvement of health care utilization and opioid use