The treatment of BS should be aimed to reduce the swelling during the acute episodes and to correct the sequelae in the quiescent stage.

There are no well-defined protocols to treat inflammatory attacks. Several authors report good results with the use of steroids, both systemic and topical. However, there are only a few reports based on case series and suggest only some improvement. Considering the potential side effects of steroids, especially if administered systematically, this treatment is not accepted as a general rule for treating the BS, although it could be considered in certain cases. Other immunosuppressant agents have been tried topically, such as tacrolimus.

Karakonji et al. reported improvement in the acute stage of two patients with BS using oral doxycycline, based on its properties as a matrix metalloproteinase inhibitor.

Apart from these different attempts with discreet outcomes for treating the acute inflammatory attacks, the treatment of BS is mostly based on surgery to correct the complications. Surgery is reserved for patients in the quiescent phase after the disease has been quiet for 6 - 12 months. Otherwise, the risk of treatment failure increases significantly. As mentioned above, the most common sequelae in BS include dermatochalasis with either fat prolapse or fat atrophy, upper lid ptosis, lacrimal gland prolapse, and lateral canthus and lower eyelid malposition.

All these conditions need to be addressed with a wide armamentarium of surgical techniques that should be combined according to the case. Blepharoplasty, ptosis surgery, and canthal surgery in these patients are more challenging than in other cases, due to the particular changes seen in the periocular tissues of BS patients.