The onset is critical. Acute, sudden, and rapid onset is suggestive of acute pathology as opposed to chronic, insidious onset, which might be concerning for malignancy or other chronic etiology. While a good history is vital in a patient with new onset of jaundice, following are some of the features in history that can point toward a specific etiology.

- Presence of pain, specifically epigastric or right upper quadrant pain before the onset of jaundice might suggest choledocholithiasis or cholecystitis causing Mirrizi syndrome

- Presence of fever is highly suggestive of cholangitis

- The onset of jaundice after any hepatobiliary surgery might indicate, bile duct injury, bile duct leak. Jaundice is not always present in cholestasis

- Any history of critical illness or shock that can cause cholestasis of sepsis

- Any recent new medication use, especially antibiotics which can cause cholestasis

- Insidious onset of jaundice with nausea, vomiting, and prodrome phase is suggestive of viral hepatitis. History of prior travel, sexual contact, blood transfusion, and major surgery as well as the history of intravenous (IV) drug use can support this diagnosis

- Family or personal history of any autoimmune disease can point toward PSC or PBC

Other clinical features observed in patients with chronic cholestasis:

- Itching: The itching may be misdiagnosed as being due to a primary dermatological condition, particulalrly when there is no jaundice in some patients with cholestasis. Itching is typical in chronic cholestasis. Better in the morning and gets worse throughout the day after intake of food in the morning. During night time, fasting permits concentration of biliary elements decreases leading to improvement of itching in the morning.

- Fatigue: About 70% to 80% patients with chronic fatigue suffer from fatigue. Underlying abnormal serotonergic neurotransmission or neuroendocrine defects in the corticotrophin hormone axis are believed to be underlying etiology.

- Fat-soluble vitamins: Bile is necessary for absorption of ingested fat-soluble vitamins (A, D, E, and K). In chronic cholestasis, deficiency of these vitamins occurs leading to clinical features of their deficiency.

- Xanthomas: Flat or slightly raised yellow skin deposits are usually present around the eyes but can be present in palmar creases and other parts of the body.

**Physical Examination**

The extent of jaundice can assess the degree of hyperbilirubinemia. Examination of icterus should be done in the conjunctiva, oral mucosa, as well as skin throughout the body.

**General Examination**

Cachexia or wasting indicate either cancer or cirrhosis. Findings of diffuse lymphadenopathy especially Virchow’s nodes can be suggestive of underlying malignancy.

**Skin Examination**

In chronic cholestasis scratch marks due to pruritus, melanin pigmentation, as well as xanthomas over eyelids, extensor surfaces, and palmar creases can be found. Findings of chronic liver disease, for example, spider angiomas might suggest cirrhosis. Findings of needle track markers might suggest intravenous (IV) drug use.

**Abdominal**Examination

Large, nodular liver suggests possible hepatic metastasis. Tender hepatomegaly can be seen in viral hepatitis, congestive heart failure, and alcoholic hepatitis. In choledocholithiasis and cholecystitis, right upper quadrant (RUQ) tenderness is appreciated. Palpable, enlarged, painless gallbladder can suggest pancreatic cancer. Splenomegaly can be seen due to massive hemolysis or portal HTN. Ascites can be observed in cirrhosis due to portal HTN.