Radiotherapy can be used as adjuvant therapy for cholangiocarcinoma following surgery, although its use is controversial. Instead, a combination of chemoradiotherapy is typically administered, improving survival. Many retrospectives and small randomized trials have shown superior outcomes with adjuvant therapy with both chemotherapy and radiotherapy.

Radiotherapy is more critical in palliative care, providing improvement of symptoms and may improve survival in locally advanced patients. Concurrently administered chemotherapy may further enhance these results. Newer radiation therapy techniques, including intraluminal transcatheter brachytherapy, intraoperative radiation therapy, intensity-modulated radiation therapy, and three-dimensional treatment planning, permit radiation dose escalation without significant increases in normal tissue toxicity, thereby increasing the effective radiation dose.

External beam radiotherapy has been the most commonly used modality and is typically administered to a total dose of 45–60 Gy. The optimal radiation dose and schedule in the adjuvant and "definitive" treatment of biliary malignancies is unknown. Palliative radiation therapy has frequently been employed in the management of patients with locally advanced and unresectable tumors. Palliative irradiation after biliary bypass prolongs survival in many studies. Adjuvant radiotherapy following resection had a survival benefit in intrahepatic cholangiocarcinoma patients with regional lymph node metastasis. The majority of patients with locally advanced, unresectable cholangiocarcinoma die of tumor-related liver failure. Controlling these tumors with ablative radiation will prolong the survival of patients.