As with most personality disorders, diagnostic features of schizoid personality disorder overlap with other personality disorders. These include:

- Schizotypal personality disorder

- Paranoid personality disorder

- Avoidant personality disorder

- Obsessive-compulsive personality disorder

Most notably, schizotypal personality disorder shares multiple salient commonalities with schizoid personality disorder. In fact, these two disorders are considered to be on a continuum with schizophrenia spectrum disorders. This continuum consists of schizoid personality disorder and schizophrenia on opposite poles, with schizotypal falling somewhere in between. Schizotypal can be differentiated with its more pronounced “magical” and eccentric thought processes. Paranoid, avoidant, and obsessive-compulsive personality disorders are also often on the clinician's list of differential diagnoses. Unlike the aloofness observed in schizoid, however, patients with paranoid personality disorder are often overly resentful and can demonstrate explosive anger. And although patients with avoidant personality disorder share the trait of social isolation, this isolation precipitates from the fear of rejection, whereas those with schizoid are simply ambivalent towards human contact. Lastly, patients with obsessive-compulsive personality disorder are driven by a necessity to maintain control and will use the ego defense of intellectualization and isolation to expiate undesirable emotions, appearing similarly ambivalent to those with schizoid personality disorders.