**Endopelvic Biomechanical Dynamics**

An interesting longitudinal study of 2016 that appeared in PNAS shows that the pelvic form in both genders is not static but changes with age. The pelvic morphology seems to change every two decades due to re-modeling and general bone reshaping.

Two radiological studies in MRI have explored the possibility of evaluating the endopelvic diameters of subjects positioned in different postures: in the supine position, on the "all-fours" (supporting herself on her hands and knees), and in kneeling squats. Significant changes have been highlighted in the change of position with a decrease in the diameters of the conjugate of about 3 mm, an increase in the anteroposterior diameters of the mid-plane, and the outlet of 4 and 5 mm, while the transversal diameters show an increase about 15 mm. The study was performed on two groups of women: pregnant and not pregnant. The results were the same. The pelvic inlet showed less difference than the outlet and the mid-pelvis: it could mean that in changing position, the inlet modifies its shape and inclination more on the horizontal plane than its transverse diameter.

In the clinical obstetric and osteopathic fields, evaluating the quality of the posterior pelvic movement is proposed as a general indication of the possibility of vaginal delivery. The diameters of the sacral area are the transverse diameter that lies between the two posterior superior iliac spines (PSIS) and the longitudinal diameter stretched between the spinous apophysis of the fifth lumbar vertebra and the beginning of the intergluteal groove (the "diamond test," taught for decades in the osteopathic practice). They should increase their amplitude when the pregnant subjects go from standing upright to squatting. Depending on possible amplitude restriction of the range of motion, a joint (sacroiliac, hip, or pubis) or fascial/ligamentous dysfunction could be hypothesized.

**Pelvimetry and Obstetrics: Past and Present**

The classical external pelvimetry, whose foremost representative was the French medical doctor Baudelocque in the 18th century, was abandoned with the advent of the technological era. It had been an attempt to explain the reasons for dystocia without offering any means to solve the problem.

In the first decades of the twentieth century, the radiologic exam shed new light on static pelvimetric evaluation with the possibility of directly measuring the internal diameters; however, this method was also disappointing. MRI has made measurements easier and more precise due to reproducible scans. The ability to record images with motion has made it possible to see live childbirth and confirm that the change of position of the parturient modifies the internal pelvic diameters.

The evidence illuminated by the radiological studies supports the research and definition of a clinical test of external pelvimetry. The present qualitative test in pelvimetry, currently suggested in obstetric and osteopathic settings, has some practical limitations like the lack of standardization, the difficulty for most pregnant women near term gestation to come down smoothly into a squatting position, and the lack of reference curves and cut-off values.