The rapid diagnosis and treatment of this condition are crucial for reducing the risk of development of complications and to optimize outcomes. Numerous studies have demonstrated the best strategy for management of Pott puffy tumor is the combination of medical treatment with systemic antibiotics and surgical treatment to drain abscesses, debride devitalized tissue, and restore sinus drainage.

Once the patient arrives and PPT is suspected, the patient should be admitted and started on broad-spectrum intravenous (IV) antibiotics, IV hydration, analgesia, and rapid coordination for imaging studies. Once the diagnosis is confirmed, otolaryngology and neurosurgical consultation should be obtained.

**Broad-Spectrum IV Antibiotics:**Should begin as soon as the diagnosis is suspected. Coverage for the most common pathogens, including Gram-positive and anaerobes, is required. It is essential to choose antibiotics that have adequate blood-brain barrier penetration for intracranial coverage. Choices include penicillins or vancomycin, 3rd generation cephalosporin, and metronidazole. Once the culture results are available, broad-spectrum antibiotics can be changed to more targeted therapy. The length of treatment varies but is prolonged, often 4-8 weeks of IV antibiotic therapy postoperatively. Some small extradural collections are often treated with IV antibiotics, but aspiration/biopsy is highly recommended to obtain culture and guide antibiotic therapy.

**Surgery:**Surgical options include an open approach or a minimally invasive technique (endoscopic intranasal frontal sinusotomy). The goal of surgery is to drain the sinus and excise the infected bone; this is extremely important to obtain a successful treatment. Traditionally, an open approach was the standard of care due to better visualization of the frontal recess, but it can result in significant cosmetic deformity. With recent advances in technique and experience, endoscopic intranasal frontal sinusotomy is not more widely used. The endoscopic approach has significantly less morbidity and mortality, shorter convalescent period, and no external scarring.

- Craniotomy: for direct visualization, opening and exenteration of the frontal sinus, radical debridement of the infection, and removal of osteomyelitic bone/abscess. It has a high risk of cosmetic deformity due to surgical scars and complications.

- Trephination: may be done for abscess aspiration.

- Frontal sinus obliteration: to remove all the sinus mucosa involved and prevent future infections.

- Minimally invasive endoscopic frontal sinusotomy: drains the sinus, removes the mucosa, but involved bone can not be removed.