**Major forms of human trafficking**are sex trafficking, forced labor, and domestic servitude.

Sex trafficking is "a commercial sex act is induced by force, fraud, or coercion, or in which the person induced to perform such act has not attained 18 years of age." It is the most prevalent form of trafficking in the United States and includes prostitution, pornography, mail-order brides, and other non-consensual sex work. Consensual commercial sex is not considered human trafficking. Minors cannot legally consent and therefore cannot participate in consensual commercial sex. Recruitment techniques used by traffickers include contact via social networking sites, public places (malls, schools), group and foster homes.finesse pimping and guerilla pimping. Finesse pimping is often used with young or vulnerable targets. The trafficker uses false kindness, psychological manipulation, or promises to build a relationship with the victim they then abuse. A finesse pimp may present as a "boyfriend" of the patient. Guerrilla pimping is more commonly used in adults and involves physical force and beatings to manipulate the victim.

Labor trafficking is "the recruitment, harboring, transportation, provision, or obtaining of a person for labor or services, through the use of force, fraud or coercion for the purpose of subjection to involuntary servitude, peonage, debt bondage or slavery." Peonage is paying off a debt through labor. In debt bondage, the victim is forced into labor to pay off a loan, debt, or other obligation. Labor trafficking is used in agriculture, domestic services, hospitality, and construction. Traffickers often target victims in or near poverty.

Child trafficking encompasses child sex trafficking, forced child labor, and the use of child soldiers. Trafficking Victims Protection Act (**TVPA**) in 2000 established that force, fraud, or coercion did not need to be established in cases of sex trafficking in minors.

The profile of a human trafficker is broad. They can be of any gender, race, or background. They may present with the patient as a family member, coworker, or friend. In sex trafficking, the victim may report that the trafficker is their boyfriend or is taking care of them. As previously described, anyone can be a victim of human trafficking. However, vulnerable populations are often targeted by traffickers. The following are risk factors of vulnerable populations:

**Adverse Childhood Experiences**

Adverse Childhood Experiences (ACES) can increase the likelihood of risk-taking behavior that could predispose a person to become a trafficking victim. The CDC-Kaiser Permanente Adverse Childhood Experiences study investigated the ramifications of child abuse and neglect on health and well-being later in life. The study was done from 1995-7 with ongoing surveillance of study participants by the CDC. According to this study, neurodevelopment is disrupted or stunted following an adverse childhood experience. Social, emotional, and cognitive impairments result, which progress to high-risk behaviors that negatively impact overall health. Disease, disability, and social problems ensue, which may lead to an early death. The study found a correlation between a higher ACE score and an increased risk of poor physical and mental health due to poor choices, risky behaviors, and social issues.

An ACE questionnaire asks difficult, emotion-provoking questions related to growing up during the first 18 years of life. Questions are related to physical, emotional, and sexual abuse and the frequency of such insults. The suicide of a family member, drug addiction, and mental health issues play roles in calculating the score. ACE scores can range from zero to 10, with zero representing no exposure.

According to a Florida study conducted between 2009 and 2015, trafficking abuse reports were highest among children with an ACE score of six or greater. Children with a sexual abuse history in connection with a higher ACE score had an increased chance of exploitation by traffickers. According to a 2017 study, sexual abuse was the most reliable predictor of a person's exploitation by traffickers.

**Lesbian, Gay, Bisexual, Transgender Questioning**

A critical distinction among the lesbian, gay, bisexual, transgender, and questioning (LGBTQ) population was revealed by the 2012 North Carolina, 2011 Washington, and 2011 and 2012 Wisconsin Behavioral Risk Factor Surveillance System (BRFSS) survey. Lesbian, gay and bisexual (LGB) individuals had higher ACE scores than their heterosexual counterparts. In this 2016 study, Austin, Herrick, and Proescholdbell concluded that the higher prevalence of ACES among LGB individuals might account for some of the increased risks for poor adult health outcomes, poor choices, and heightened risk of being trafficked.

The National Center for Transgender Equality (NCTE) conducted a 2015 US Transgender Survey and found that 5% of all participants engaged in sex work for income in the past year. Fifty-five percent of those who had used sex to meet basic needs in the past year were transgender women. Approximately 19% had participated in some form of sex for money, food, sleeping quarters, or other goods or services. According to one study, those who had engaged in sex for money were more likely to have experienced some form of intimate partner violence or sexual assault. Debt bondage places an "invisible chain" that binds a victim to a "Romeo" or "guerilla" pimp. The invisible chain tightens with unmet quotas and may become a physical one. Further resources provided by the Polaris Project address the risks of being trafficked within the LGBTQ community and are available on their website.

**Trafficking Risk Factors and Vulnerability**

Sexual abuse puts an individual at risk for substance abuse, mental health issues, and a lack of the concept of social norms, belonging, or a sense of family. Vulnerability and feelings of distrust towards authority figures take the place of security. Often, those who are supposed to protect the victim are the initial perpetrators of the insult or crime. "Forgotten," "invisible," "different," "broken," and "discarded" are all words used to describe the feelings of individuals who are trafficked. A trafficker preys upon this vulnerability, uses it to their advantage, and strategically places themselves nearby. Often seen as a rescuer who offers a chance at a better life, security, or a remote possibility that better days are ahead, a trafficker is actually a profiler, looking for victims to turn a profit.

Traffickers do not discriminate based on gender, race, social demographic, immigration status, or economic status. No exact mold fits a victim. Anyone is at risk, but certain populations have a higher vulnerability. The US Department of Health Office on Trafficking in Persons in 2017 identified at-risk groups:

- survivors of child abuse, sexual abuse, assault, interpersonal or intimate partner violence

- gang members subjected to violence

- those exposed to community violence.

The SOAR Campaign identifies the lack of stable support structure or home life as a risk factor for trafficking. Lack of social support is found with runaways, foster children, children in the juvenile justice system, homeless youth, unaccompanied minors, persons displaced due to a natural disaster, and individuals who possess a language or cultural barrier. Increased risk also occurs in substance abuse patients, undocumented or migrant workers, and the LGBTQ population. In addition, minorities, people with disabilities, and those living on Native American reservations can be at a higher risk of being trafficked.

The US Department of Education published a fact sheet for schools entitled "Human Trafficking of Children in the United States," which discusses the vulnerability of school-age children as it relates to human trafficking. Examples of identified child trafficking cases involved stripping, pornography, forced begging, commercial sex, magazine crews, drug sales, and the cultivation of illegal products. Children at greatest risk were identified as working in restaurants, hair and nail salons, as nannies or au pairs, or in agricultural settings. The fact sheet goes on to describe at-risk children and those potential victims of human trafficking. Signs of child trafficking include unexplained absences, poor attendance, runaway behavior, frequent travel to other cities, inappropriate dress for the current weather, sleep deprivation, malnourishment, or impairment due to drugs or alcohol.

Lack of a stable support structure and the accessibility of social media outlets may put a child at risk of being targeted for sexual exploitation. Social media websites, classified advertisement sites, chat rooms, and after-school programs are potential venues for youth exploitation.  School hallways pose a risk, as a trafficker may, in fact, be another student. A promise of a party or other good time may be used to entrap an unsuspecting, troubled, or bored youth. Educational campaigns, such as the "Blue Campaign" created by the US Department of Homeland Security, offer much-needed insight into the identification and treatment ramifications of victims of human trafficking. The Blue Campaign by the Department of Homeland Security offers sex trafficking awareness videos to educate our youth on the risks that traffickers pose in familiar places such as schools, coffee shops, malls, sporting venues, and other hangouts."