If hysteroscopy is performed in the ambulatory or inpatient operating room setting, more personnel must be included in the interprofessional healthcare team. Technicians and representatives should confirm all proper functioning of equipment needed before the patient enters the operating room. Scrub technicians are essential in pre-preparing equipment, so delays and malfunctions may be limited. The final patient assessment before surgery should always be prompted by the circulator or other operating room staff and include a pelvic examination. It is essential to brief each team member about each case; this occurs on multiple levels and culminates with a time-out before the procedure is undertaken.

Anesthesia should direct patient positioning to avoid dislodging endotracheal tubes, lines, and other monitoring systems. Throughout the procedure, appropriate attention to surgical undertakings is needed from the scrub tech and circulator in order to maintain adequate lighting, fluid balance, and distending media pressure. Equipment adjustments may also be needed, such as in the display monitors or electrocautery instruments. Inattention to detail may have severe consequences, as described above. At the procedure end, all fluids in, fluids out, blood loss, and urine output is documented and announced by the circulator nurse. Anesthesia must continue to monitor hemodynamic and respiratory statuses after extubation or weaning from sedation. However, it is important to remember that all healthcare team members are responsible for working together to ensure the patient's safety.

Effective communication between nursing staff in the pre-, intra-, and post-operative units is key to patient treatment. If all members of the nursing staff are kept up to date on patient status and events, this creates a much safer patient environment, especially with surgical management.

In-office hysteroscopy does not need to consist of more than two to three personnel. The surgeon may be semi-self-sufficient, and a scrub tech is not required. However, thorough equipment understanding and review are required by the provider. In academic centers, in-office hysteroscopy offers more involvement for residents and medical students, as personnel is reduced, but assistance may be needed to ensure smooth operation in the awake patient. Patient comfort and assurance are of utmost importance. The right demeanor in an in-office hysteroscopy team can ease anxiety and improve outcomes.