# Continuing Education Activity

Ventricular tachycardia (VT) is a wide complex arrhythmia of ventricular origin, defined as three or more consecutive beats at a rate of more than 100 beats per minute. Sustained ventricular tachycardia is defined as tachycardia that continues for more than 30 seconds or leads to hemodynamic compromise within 30 seconds and requires intervention. On the other hand, non-sustained ventricular tachycardia lasts less than 30 seconds and does not cause hemodynamic instability. Ischemic heart disease is the most common cause of ventricular tachycardia, and VT has a wide range of clinical presentations, including palpitations, chest pain, shortness of breath, syncope, and cardiac arrest. This activity reviews the evaluation and management of ventricular tachycardia and highlights the importance of an interprofessional team in managing patients with ventricular tachycardia.

**Objectives:**
- Explain the pathophysiologic basis of ventricular tachycardia. 
- Summarize the differential diagnoses of ventricular tachycardia. 
- Describe the evaluation and management of patients presenting with ventricular tachycardia. 
- Explain the importance of a comprehensive healthcare system with particular emphasis on communication between interprofessional teams to facilitate prompt and thorough delivery of care to patients with ventricular tachycardia.

# Introduction

Ventricular tachycardia (VT) is a wide complex tachycardia, defined as three or more consecutive beats at a rate of more than 100 per minute, arising from the ventricle.

On the basis of QRS morphology, VT is divided into monomorphic and polymorphic ventricular tachycardia. Monomorphic VT is characterized by a single, stable QRS morphology with no beat-to-beat variation, while polymorphic VT has beat-to-beat variation in QRS shape and multiple QRS morphologies.

Ischemic heart disease is the most common cause of ventricular tachycardia, and 5 to 10% of patients with acute coronary syndrome are found to have ventricular arrhythmias. Ventricular tachycardia in acute coronary syndrome is usually polymorphic, while monomorphic ventricular tachycardia is a sign of a myocardial scar.

Ventricular tachycardia is a major contributor to sudden cardiac death in patients with ischemic and non-ischemic cardiomyopathy. Ventricular tachycardia in cardiomyopathy is usually monomorphic due to scar-related reentry, and its degeneration into ventricular fibrillation may result in cardiac arrest or even sudden cardiac death.

# Etiology

Ventricular tachycardia accounts for approximately 8% of cases of wide-complex tachycardia.

The other causes of ventricular tachycardia include ischemic or non-ischemic dilated cardiomyopathy, adult and congenital structural heart disease, inherited cardiac channelopathies, infiltrative cardiomyopathy, electrolyte imbalances (hypokalemia, hypocalcemia, hypomagnesemia), illicit drugs such as cocaine or methamphetamine, and digitalis toxicity.

Inherited cardiac channelopathies are more common in young individuals. The long-QT syndrome is the most common inherited cardiac channelopathy, and Torsades de Pointes is the characteristic feature of the long-QT syndrome.

Idiopathic ventricular tachycardia is an uncommon class of ventricular tachycardia. It is usually found in younger people, with no evidence of structural heart disease. The most common idiopathic ventricular tachycardia arises from outflow tracts, mitral/tricuspid annulus, and fascicles of the left bundle branch.

# Epidemiology

Ventricular tachycardia and ventricular fibrillation cause most cases of sudden cardiac death, with an estimated rate of 300,000 deaths each year in the United States.

Ventricular tachycardia is much more common in the setting of acute coronary syndrome, and around 5 to 10% of the patients presenting with acute myocardial infarction are found to have ventricular arrhythmias within the first few days of the presentation.

Idiopathic ventricular tachycardia is less common, and it is estimated to have an incidence of around 15 per 100,100 individuals in the general population. Its incidence increases with age, and there is no difference between men and women. The incidence of idiopathic VT has increased over the last two decades, mainly because of early diagnosis and increased awareness. The age at the diagnosis of idiopathy VT varies from 2nd decade to the 70th decade, but the mean age at the time of diagnosis is reported as 52 years in one study.

# Pathophysiology

**Mechanism of Ventricular Tachycardia**

Ventricular tachycardia is a diverse group of tachyarrhythmias, and its cellular mechanism depends on the underlying structural heart disease and channelopathy. Understanding the mechanism of ventricular tachycardia helps in the risk stratification of patients and guides appropriate management strategies. Reentry is the most common mechanism of ventricular tachycardia, followed by triggered activity and enhanced automaticity.

The basic mechanism of ventricular tachycardia in long QT syndromes is triggered activity due to early after-depolarization. While delayed after-depolarization is the main mechanism of ventricular tachycardia in catecholaminergic polymorphic VT, verapamil-sensitive VT,  and digoxin toxicity.

**Hemodynamic Consequences of Ventricular Tachycardia**

The hemodynamic effects of ventricular tachycardia depend on coronary artery disease,  left ventricular systolic function, valvular heart disease, and other co-morbid conditions. The rapid ventricular rate in VT leads to low cardiac output due to a significant reduction in preload as well as stroke volume.

Ventricular tachycardia is relatively well tolerated in patients with a structurally normal heart, but incessant VT may lead to tachycardia-induced cardiomyopathy, hemodynamic instability, heart failure, and syncope.

# History and Physical

Clinical presentation of ventricular tachycardia varies, depending on the patients` age, co-morbid conditions, underlying structural heart diseases, and mechanism of ventricular tachycardia. Although the common symptoms of ventricular tachycardia include palpitations, shortness of breath, chest pain, and syncope, the patients may present with cardiac arrest or even sudden cardiac death.

Ventricular tachycardia in the presence of coronary artery disease may present with chest pain, syncope, shortness, and cardiac arrest. Ventricular tachycardia in the presence of left ventricular systolic dysfunction is not tolerated well and results in significant hemodynamic compromise patients usually present with syncope, shortness of breath (due to pulmonary edema), cardiac arrest, and even sudden cardiac death. While those with implantable cardioverter-defibrillator (ICD) may present with ICD shocks.

The clinical examination of ventricular tachycardia may include hypotension and signs of heart failure. Elevated jugular venous pressure and cannon waves can be found even in hemodynamically stable patients. The detailed precordial examination may reveal the signs of underlying structural heart disease and signs of adverse effects of antiarrhythmic drugs, e.g., amiodarone.

# Evaluation

**History and Physical Examination**

Detailed history and clinical examination are pivotal in evaluating a patient with ventricular tachycardia. All patients undergoing evaluation for ventricular tachycardia should be asked about the risk factors for atherosclerotic cardiovascular diseases, prior history of palpitations, syncope, or ventricular tachycardia, and history of inherited cardiac conditions in the first-degree relatives.

**Electrocardiographic Evaluation**

The first step in evaluating presumed ventricular tachycardia is a 12-lead electrocardiogram (ECG).

**Echocardiogram and Other Non-invasive Imaging**

In patients with ventricular tachycardia and possible structural heart disease, an echocardiogram is recommended to evaluate the cardiac structure and function.

**Invasive Evaluation**

For patients presenting with cardiac arrest due to ventricular tachycardia due to presumed myocardial ischemia, an invasive coronary angiogram is recommended to evaluate coronary artery disease and guide the revascularization strategy.

**Genetic Testing**

Genetic testing is not recommended as a routine test in patients presenting with ventricular tachycardia. However, in selected patients with suspected inherited cardiac channelopathies, genetic testing can be done to confirm the diagnosis.

**Other Investigations**

Serum levels of potassium, magnesium, and calcium are essential investigations for diagnosing and managing patients with ventricular tachycardia. High-sensitivity cardiac troponin is required for the diagnosis of myocardial infarction. While natriuretic peptide is an excellent prognostic marker in patients with structural heart disease who present with ventricular tachycardia and have the risk of sudden cardiac death.

# Treatment / Management

**Acute Management**

Cardiac arrest is the life-threatening presentation of ventricular tachycardia. Patients presenting with cardiac arrest secondary to ventricular tachycardia should be resuscitated and managed according to the advanced life support (ACLS) algorithm.

Ventricular tachycardia (VT) storm is one of the presentations of VT in patients with structural heart diseases. It is defined as three or more episodes of sustained ventricular tachycardia within 24 hours, which requires intervention in the form of antiarrhythmic drugs, anti-tachycardia pacing, or direct current cardioversion.

In patients with structural heart disease and hemodynamically stable ventricular tachycardia, intravenous procainamide, amiodarone, and sotalol (depending on availability) are recommended for the acute treatment of ventricular tachycardia.

Intravenous beta-blockade and non-dihydropyridine calcium channel blockers are the first choice drugs for treating hemodynamically stable patients with idiopathic ventricular tachycardia.

Intravenous beta-blockade is the mainstay of treatment in hemodynamically stable patients with VT secondary to underlying cardiac channelopathies.

**Long-Term Management**

All patients with structural heart disease and left ventricular systolic dysfunction should be offered guidelines-directed medical therapy for heart failure.

In patients with ischemic cardiomyopathy who present with ventricular tachycardia, the long-term beta-blockade is recommended to prevent the recurrence of VT and reduce the risk of sudden cardiac death. If the patients present with recurrent episodes of ventricular tachycardia or ICD shocks despite being on the optimal doses of beta-blocking drugs, amiodarone, and sotalol are recommended to suppress the recurrent ventricular tachycardia.

Catheter ablation has been proven as an effective treatment option for patients with drug-refractory ventricular tachycardia. It is recommended in a select group of patients with ischemic cardiomyopathy who continue to have sustained VT on antiarrhythmic drugs or are intolerant of amiodarone or other antiarrhythmic medications.

Patients with non-ischemic cardiomyopathy who survive sudden cardiac death due to VT or develop sustained VT with no reversible cause should have an ICD implanted for secondary prevention of SCD if they have an expected survival of more than a year with good quality of life. While amiodarone can be considered for preventing sudden cardiac death and recurrence of VT if the expected meaningful survival is less than a year.

In patients with ventricular tachycardia due to arrhythmogenic right ventricular cardiomyopathy (ARVC), the beta-blockade is helpful in reducing recurrent arrhythmia. All patients with ARVC who survive sudden cardiac death are recommended to have an ICD implanted for secondary prevention of sudden cardiac death.

Beta blockade is the mainstay of treatment for patients with congenital long QT syndrome and catecholaminergic polymorphic ventricular tachycardia (CPVT).

Non-dihydropyridine calcium channel blockers and beta-blockade are effective treatment options for patients with idiopathic ventricular tachycardia. Most patients respond very well to beta-blockers and verapamil and do not require further treatment options.

# Differential Diagnosis

Ventricular tachycardia is the most common cause of broad complex tachycardia. However, there are multiple other causes of broad complex tachycardia. The common differentials of VT include supraventricular tachycardia with bundle branch aberrancy, supraventricular tachycardia with preexcitation, antidromic atrioventricular tachycardia (AVRT), pacemaker-mediated tachycardia, and metabolic derangements.

A meticulous history, clinical examination, and electrocardiogram (ECG) help differentiate ventricular tachycardia from the other causes of broad complex tachycardia.

# Prognosis

The prognosis of VT depends on the underlying etiology and the presence of structural heart disease. As coronary artery disease is the main cause of VT, patients with ischemic cardiomyopathy-related VT have the worst prognosis. The two-year mortality in these patients has been reported to be as high as 30% if they remain untreated.

Patients with idiopathic ventricular tachycardia have excellent prognoses in the absence of other co-morbid conditions, and they are estimated to have longevity almost equal to the general population.

# Complications

Complications of ventricular tachycardia depend on the underlying mechanism of ventricular tachycardia. The common complications of idiopathic ventricular tachycardia include tachycardia-induced cardiomyopathy and heart failure. Tachycardia-induced cardiomyopathy is much more common in patients with incessant episodes of VT and those with a genetic predisposition and other risk factors of cardiomyopathy, e.g., alcohol intake.

Cardiac arrest and sudden cardiac death are the major complications of inherited ventricular tachycardia as well as scar-related ventricular tachycardia. However, these complications can be minimized with early recognition and implantation of implantable cardioverter-defibrillator.

# Deterrence and Patient Education

Ventricular tachycardia is a potentially life-threatening condition. Although palpitation is the most common presentation of ventricular tachycardia, patients may present with syncope, cardiac arrest, and even sudden cardiac death. All patients with broad complex tachycardia should undergo detailed evaluation, including three-generation family history, transthoracic echocardiogram, and cardiac magnetic resonance imaging (if required). Patients with a family history of sudden cardiac death at a young age are recommended to consult a cardiologist to evaluate cardiac channelopathies and other inherited cardiac conditions. Asymptomatic relatives of patients with inherited channelopathies and other inherited causes of ventricular tachycardia should consult a cardiac electrophysiologic and/or a geneticist for screening and genetic counseling.

# Enhancing Healthcare Team Outcomes

Cardiac arrest is a fatal presentation of ventricular tachycardia. Early recognition, bystander cardiopulmonary resuscitation (CPR), and public access to defibrillation have helped improve the rate of survival for patients who have an out-of-hospital cardiac arrest due to ventricular arrhythmias. However, survival after out-of-hospital still remains low.

In-hospital cardiac arrest shares a similarity with out-of-hospital cardiac arrest in that early cardiopulmonary resuscitation (CPR), and defibrillation are important factors in survival. [Level 1] Every minute treatment is delayed reduces survival by approximately 10%.

Management of a patient with ventricular tachycardia requires an interprofessional team. A cardiac electrophysiologic and a cardiac critical care nurse are essential to the team. Diabetic patients with ischemic heart disease should be seen by an endocrinologist to manage it properly. Strenuous exercise should be avoided as it may precipitate VT in some patients. All patients should be strongly encouraged to discontinue smoking. Patients presenting with VT secondary to (suspected) inherited cardiac conditions require a geneticist for genetic counseling and testing. The pharmacist should educate the patient on medication compliance and the need to follow up with the cardiologist, as well as perform medication reconciliation and contact the prescriber if they have any concerns about the patient's medication regimen. They can assist the clinical team in managing drug-drug interactions and making appropriate drug treatment selections. Nurses often coordinate activities between various providers, counsel patients, and assist in assessments and procedures. This interprofessional model will help drive optimal patient results in VT cases. [Level 5]