Clinicians evaluating patients with either acute or chronic shoulder instability should obtain a comprehensive history. Providers should document any detailed elements regarding the index injury for first-time versus chronic presentation dislocators. Also, other elements often include the following:

- First-time dislocators: 

- Patients presenting after a single acute event typically report a recent history of high-energy trauma or collision impact causing the dislocation.
- Clinicians should inquire regarding the following:

- Degree of trauma (high- or low-energy impact mechanisms)
- Sports activity and position(s)
- Discern a true dislocation from a subluxation event

- Elicit the requirement for on-field or on-site manual reduction; presentation to the emergency department +/- sedation requirements.

- Chronic cases: 

- Patients typically present after having delayed once the range of motion limitations begin to impact daily activities significantly.
- Clinicians should gather a detailed history of any inciting instability events.

- The initial injury may be overlooked, and the patient subsequently develops chronic instability/recurrence.
- Heightened clinical suspicion is warranted in the setting of:

- History of seizures or electrical shocks
- Polytrauma, where the shoulder instability was overlooked or missed


- Low-energy, recurrent subluxation cases:

- Shoulder instability episodes during sleep may indicate more complex instability that may involve significant bone loss. 
- Clinicians should elicit any medical comorbidities, family history of underlying connective tissue disorders, or generalized hyperlaxity on the exam.

A thorough history also includes sports participation and position(s) (if applicable occupational history and current status of employment, hand dominance, any history of injury/trauma to the shoulder(s) and/or neck, and any relevant surgical history.

**Physical Examination Pearls**

**C-spine / Neck Exam**

Co-existing cervical radiculopathy should be ruled out in any situation where neck and/or shoulder pathology is considered.

**Shoulder Exam**

Examiners should observe and compare bilateral shoulder girdles for any notable asymmetry, scapular posturing, muscle bulk comparison, or any atrophic changes. The skin should be observed for the presence of any previous surgical incisions, lacerations, scars, erythema, or induration.

Chronic instability patients will almost always exhibit at least a mild degree of asymmetry. The deltoid muscle often demonstrates atrophy in chronic dislocators. The findings can be rather subtle, especially in obese patients.

In the setting of chronic anterior instability, the clinician may appreciate a palpable anterior fullness. Upon observation, the posterior shoulder (viewed from the patient's side) will be relatively flat relative to the anterior fullness. Chronic anterior and posterior instability patients may also exhibit corresponding posterior and anterior acromial prominences, respectively.

Scapulothoracic motion and scapular winging should also be evaluated during active and passive motion.

After the observational component of the physical examination, the active and passive ROM is documented. This exam finding may be limited in the setting of initial follow-up in the clinic after an acute instability event or the setting of any complex instability case, especially in cases of glenoid bone loss.

In chronic anterior instability, the clinician should attempt to assess the current status of the axillary nerve, although chronic dislocators often exhibit excellent deltoid function and internal and external rotator strength. Specific testing of the supraspinatus muscle can be difficult when passive ROM is limited. Any evidence of significant muscular weakness may hint at an underlying associated neurologic deficit.

The clinician should perform a detailed sensory examination in all acute and chronic instability patients. In addition to axillary nerve function, motor function of the elbow, wrist, and hand should undergo an assessment to rule out the possibility of a brachial plexus injury associated with the dislocation. Distal pulses should be assessed at the wrist as well.

For older patients and in the setting of suspected concomitant shoulder pathologies (e.g., rotator cuff injuries or biceps tendon pathology), specialized testing for these pathologies should also be considered.

**Provocative Examination Testing/Maneuvers**

**Shoulder Instability Considerations**

Global tissue laxity should undergo an assessment by examining glenohumeral translation and hypermobility at the shoulder joints and other joints in the body, if applicable. Hyperlaxity at other joints (e.g., elbow and knee hyperextension) may aid in the clinical diagnosis of underlying MDI-related diagnoses or connective tissue disorders.

**Anterior Apprehension Test**

The anterior apprehension test is performed by lying the patient supine on the examination table. The examiner positions the shoulder to 90 degrees of abduction and 90 degrees of external rotation while applying an anteriorly-directed force to the proximal humerus. The test is positive if it reproduces the symptoms of anterior instability.

Apprehension at lower degrees of abduction may suggest glenoid bone loss. Patients may guard the shoulder during the examination, but in most circumstances, the provider can determine if the apprehensive position demonstrates the patient's feelings of anterior shoulder instability.

**Jobe Relocation Test**

The Jobe relocation test is utilized with the previous apprehensive testing maneuver. Once the patient reports a subjective feeling of reproducing the shoulder instability symptoms, the examiner applies a posteriorly directed force while keeping the shoulder in the same apprehensive position. Resolution or improvement of symptoms indicates a positive test result.

**Load-and-shift Test**

The examiner uses one hand to apply an axial load through the elbow to center the humeral head within the glenoid. An anterior and posterior directed force is then applied at 0-, 45-, and 90 degrees of shoulder abduction. Increased translation at increasing degrees of shoulder abduction implies a compromise of the IGHL.

Grading of the magnitude of humeral head translation is as follows:

- Grade 1:

- Increased translation compared with the normal shoulder.

- Grade 2

- Indicates humeral head translation to, but not over, the glenoid rim.

- Grade 3

- Indicates translation of the humeral head over the glenoid rim.

The load-and-shift test is up to 98% specific, but it has poor sensitivity for detecting unidirectional and multidirectional instability.

**Other Exam Considerations**

The shoulder should also be examined for associated posterior and multidirectional instability. In every patient undergoing surgery, examination under anesthesia should occur, and the results should be compared with those of the uninjured contralateral side.

Depending on the patient's age, the clinician may expect various degrees of associated shoulder pathologies. For example, older patients with acute shoulder instability are susceptible to associated rotator cuff injuries. Pain with weakness against resisted abduction or external rotation may suggest the presence of associated rotator cuff injuries. For example, patients with anterior shoulder instability in end-range positions demonstrate some degree of external rotation weakness.