**Penetrating Diaphragmatic Injury**

The diaphragm separates the negative pressure thorax from the positive pressure abdomen and spans from the lower sternum anteriorly to as low as L3 posteriorly. Depending on the phase of respiration, the location can be quite variable, and wounds that appear to be remote from its perceived location may violate the diaphragm. Any penetrating injury to the abdomen or chest from the T4 through T12 dermatome anteriorly and the L3 region posteriorly should be considered to have potentially caused the diaphragmatic injury. Left-sided injuries are more common, possibly due to protective shielding by the liver but also perhaps due to the mechanism as most are related to stabbings and assailants are more likely to be right-handed thus inflicting injuries on the victim’s left. Penetrating injuries tend to be smaller, most measuring less than 2 cm. As a result, penetrating injuries are more likely to be occult and frequently result in delayed diagnosis. Penetrating injuries are most commonly associated with liver, hollow viscous, and splenic injuries.

**Blunt Diaphragmatic Injury**

Rupture of the diaphragm occurs when intra-abdominal pressure suddenly rises above the tensile strength of the diaphragmatic tissue. Blunt trauma produces larger, radial tears, often measuring 5 cm to 15 cm. Like penetrating injury, blunt diaphragmatic injuries occur most frequently on the left side which may be due to a congenital area of weakness in the diaphragm or because the liver attenuates some of the compressive force.  When present, right-sided injuries to the diaphragm have a higher mortality rate due to more severe associated injuries. As compared to penetrating injuries, patients with blunt injury have a higher rate of injury to the aorta, lung, pelvis, and spleen.

Diaphragmatic injuries rarely occur alone and most patients have concomitant abdominal, head or thoracic injuries. Splenic rupture and liver laceration are not uncommon injuries in patients with diaphragmatic trauma.