As described by the Beers criteria, cimetidine should be avoided in geriatric patients with delirium or at high risk of delirium, as histamine H2 receptor antagonists may worsen their mental status or induce cognitive decline.

Healthcare professionals, including pharmacists, primary care providers, and nurse practitioners, should counsel patients to stop the drug promptly and report signs of an allergic reaction or worsening of gastrointestinal discomfort, especially blood in the stool, as a more thorough evaluation will be required. Clinicians, gastroenterologists, pharmacists, and nurses must review the patient's current medication history taking this H2-receptor antagonist to avoid decreased metabolism of the other drug by cimetidine via the inhibition cytochrome P450 isoenzymes. This interaction potential is especially true since cimetidine is available OTC, and patients may be taking it without first checking with the health care team. Adverse interaction potential is particularly problematic for patients on warfarin, so the interprofessional team must be aware of this combination. Nurses often collect medication information from patients, and pharmacists can verify non-prescription drug intake. The nurse or pharmacist should report to the entire interprofessional healthcare team if concerns are discovered. This type of collaboration is crucial to ensuring optimal outcomes with minimal adverse events. [Level 5]

Patients suspected of having peptic ulcer disease should be investigated- upper gastrointestinal endoscopy and taking gastric mucosal biopsies. Those with an H. pylori infection should have treatment with a standard triple therapy regimen consisting of a proton pump inhibitor and two antibiotics (clarithromycin and amoxicillin/metronidazole) to eradicate the infection instead of only receiving symptomatic treatment with an H2-receptor antagonist. For obstetricians, patients with reflux esophagitis during pregnancy should have therapy with an H2-receptor antagonist (cimetidine, ranitidine, or famotidine); these drugs are all FDA category B and considered safe during pregnancy. There is no apparent increased risk for spontaneous abortion, preterm labor, or low birth weight after first-trimester exposure to H2-receptor antagonists.

Given the interaction and adverse event profile of cimetidine, and the improvement in newer agents in the H2-receptor antagonist class, cimetidine may not be the optimal initial therapeutic choice for many patients.