It sometimes occurs that patients with no history of HTN, in whom echocardiography is performed for other reasons, manifest LVH and/or changes consistent with diastolic dysfunction DD, suggesting HTN has been present, but undiagnosed, for some time. Also, patients in whom severe BP gyrations occur under anesthesia, but SBP does not rise above 130 mm Hg may reflect patients with HTN who are hypovolemic.

It sometimes occurs that a patient is brought to the operating room for lower extremity surgery for gangrene, with SBP of 180 and/or DBP of 110. As such, patients may develop sepsis, or may already be septic, surgery is emergent. In such cases, a saddle block via spinal anesthesia is often performed. If spinal is chosen, we recommend it be performed prior to the administration of any antihypertensive agents. These patients may be hypovolemic, especially if they are concurrently hyperglycemic, and, in such patients, even a saddle block may lower BP dramatically. We emphasize the importance of a large-bore IV, and that antihypertensive treatment only be considered, in small doses, after the hemodynamic impact of the spinal has stabilized. Sometimes, the spinal will bring BP to normal levels, in which case antihypertensive treatment should be initiated slowly when HTN reappears as hemodynamic effects of the spinal regress.

If surgery is performed in the sitting position, as is sometimes done during neurosurgery and shoulder surgery, it should be appreciated that non-invasive BP measured at the level of the brachial artery does not reflect BP perfusing the brain. Therefore, cuff BP goals should be maintained higher than normal. If an arterial line is inserted, the transducer should be placed and zeroed at the level of the ear. Placement of the arterial line transducer at the level of the operating room table, and management of BP to that arterial line, has resulted in brain injury in a patient undergoing neurosurgery in the sitting position.

Not all adrenal tumors are pheochromocytomas. Most are non-functioning tumors, some are metastases, and some are aldosterone-producing adenomas. Others may be due to Cushing disease or cancer. Urinary metanephrine and normetanephrine levels may be used to differentiate pheochromocytomas from other lesions. The classic triad of headache, HTN, and palpitations is present in less than a quarter of patients. Not all patients with pheochromocytoma are hypertensive, and 10% to 15% are asymptomatic. Pheochromocytoma is just one of the possible causes of secondary HTN. Still, it is the most important to be aware of in the perioperative period as the administration of anesthesia to patients with unknown/untreated pheochromocytoma has been reported to result in perioperative mortality as high as 50%, due to severe HTN or arrhythmias. Preoperative preparation includes alpha blockade, followed by the addition of CCB or beta-blockers as needed to control BP. Several measurements of SBP should be less than 160 mm Hg before surgery. As alpha blockade takes effect, patients are advised to increase liquid and salt intake orally. Beta-blockade should never be initiated before alpha-blockade in patients with pheochromocytoma, as the unopposed alpha effect can result in severe HTN. Historically, preoperative preparation was performed over one to two weeks. Some recent reports indicate just one week of preoperative preparation is as safe. However, these are retrospective reports, not prospective randomized studies. It should also be appreciated that current improved outcomes may be due to improved anesthesia and intensive care techniques. In the absence of preoperative alpha blockade and fluid supplementation, hypotension after tumor removal is more common than HTN.