Diabetic lumbosacral radiculoplexus neuropathy follows a limited disease course. Multiple small studies have correlated improvement of patient outcomes regarding symptomatic improvement with the use of immunosuppressant agents: steroids, immunoglobulin, and plasma exchange, but clear evidence is still necessary due to conflicting outcomes.

In a double blinded-study, including 75 patients, comparing high-dose steroid (weekly dose of 1g methylprednisolone, for 12 weeks) vs. placebo, there was a statistically significant improvement in the patient’s secondary end-point (symptomatic improvement of pain and weakness). The primary outcome, which measured time to improvement, was not met, as it demonstrated both patient samples had improvement in subsequent evaluations. The hypothesis is that earlier intervention in patients using steroids would result in a more favorable outcome than patients not using steroids. Ultimately, no conclusive evidence has shown support for the use of immunomodulators.

The treatment itself is centered mainly on symptomatic management of pain, management of hyperglycemia, and improvement in mobility. Pain management with paracetamol and NSAIDS is an option. Amitriptyline at night (particularly in accompanying insomnia), selective serotonin receptor inhibitors (SSRIs) for depression/anxiety and anticonvulsant agents are also possibilities. Opiates (tramadol, oxycodone) or steroids may merit consideration in severe disease, and hospitalization or pain management consultation may also be contemplated in cases with unremitting pain.

In some cases, when total pain relief is not possible, the goal becomes to make the pain more tolerable for the patient. Appropriate counseling should be given regarding the prolonged course of the disease, providing encouragement due to potential disability and reassurance on some degree of improvement. Disability and home safety, among other problems, should also receive attention. Management of diabetes may be recommended.