Blood and Urine Tests: The first step in the diagnosis of pheochromocytoma and/or paraganglioma is to validate the excessive production of catecholamines and then followed by anatomical identification of the tumor. The measurement of plasma fractionated metanephrines is usually the first screening test as it has a high sensitivity of 97% and an acceptable specificity of 93%.

Radiological Tests: Upon obtaining proof of excessive catecholamines production, imaging modalities are the next step. Computed tomography (CT) scanning or T2 weighted magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of the entire retroperitoneum rather than the thorax or pelvis should be then be used to locate the tumor. CT scans should be non-contrast. If the CT shows 10 Hounsfield units or less, it suggests a lipid-rich mass and hence rules out pheochromocytoma and paraganglioma. If the tumors are still not localized, the next step should be functional imaging. MRI shows the typical salt-and-pepper appearance of the tumor: salt-appearance is rare that reflects 'hemorrhage' and pepper is due to 'flow voids' shows high vascularity.

Functional Tests: 123-I meta-iodo-benzyl-guanidine (MIBG) or positron-emission tomography with Galium labeled 1,4,7,10-tetra-acetic acid-octreotate (Ga DOTATATE-PET-CT) or F-labeled L-dihydroxyphenylalanine (L-DOPA) are extremely sensitive in identifying any hidden pheochromocytoma and/or paraganglioma. Ga-DOTATATE PET-CT has limited availability; however, in difficult cases, it is the most accurate test to locate a tumor.

Genetic Tests: Mutations such as SDHA, SDHD, SDHB, Carney-stratakis dyad, RET, NF1, VHL, MAX, TMEM127, and MEN 2A, and 2B, have been associated with pheochromocytoma and/or paraganglioma. Patients are offered genetic testings once the diagnosis and treatment have concluded.

Surgical Biopsy: Lesional biopsy is the gold standard to confirm the diagnosis but does not differentiate between pheochromocytomas and paragangliomas. Since most paragangliomas are vascular, a preoperative biopsy is not common.