Cervical cancer screening guidelines have been established for the general population by three major organizations, including the American Cancer Society, the American Society for Colposcopy and Cervical Pathology and the American Society for Clinical Pathology.

- For females younger than 21 years, no screening is recommended.

- In addition, for women aged 21-29 years, recommendations include cytology without HPV testing. Human papilloma virus is most commonly diagnosed in teenagers and young females in their twenties. Therefore, pap smears in this age group will cause abnormal findings. The majority of young women have an effective immune response that will clear the infection in 8 months or decrease the viral loads to undetectable levels.

- For women aged 30-65 years, recommendations include cytology alone every three years or cytology with HPV testing every five years.

- For women who underwent total hysterectomy with no history of cervical dysplasia or cancer in the past 20 years, no screening is recommended.

- For women older than 65 years, no screening is necessary after adequate prior screening results. Two consecutive negative cytology results with negative HPV testing or three consecutive negative cytology results constitutes adequate previous prior screening results. Women with a prior history of cervical dysplasia or adenocarcinoma should continue screening for 20 years.

Primary HPV testing for cervical cancer screening has specific indications established by ASCCP and Society of Gynecology Oncology [SGO].

Primary HPV testing should not be used in females younger than 25 years, re-screening after a negative primary HPV test should not occur earlier than three years and genotype should be completed for all positive HPV results. There are no clear guidelines for using primary HPV testing for immunocompromised and HIV positive females.