Even though heart disease may occur for various reasons in younger age groups, perioperative cardiac mortality and morbidity are predominantly an issue in the adult population undergoing major non-cardiac surgery.

**Risk Factors**

Clinical risk factors for a perioperative major adverse cardiac event (MACE) include the following

- Reduced functional status (< 4 METs)

- Ischemic heart disease (history of MI, angina pectoris, etc.)

- Heart failure

- Cardiomyopathy

- Severe valvular heart disease (severe aortic stenosis, symptomatic mitral regurgitation)

- Significant arrhythmias (Mobitz II AV block, 3rd-degree block, symptomatic ventricular arrhythmia, symptomatic bradycardia, newly recognized ventricular tachycardia)

- Chronic renal failure

- History of cerebrovascular accident or transient ischemic attack

- Diabetes mellitus requiring Insulin

- Chronic pulmonary dysfunction

- Obesity

- Anemia

Following a thorough physical exam and evaluation of risk factors, patients undergoing surgery should undergo assessment for additional preoperative interventions by using the American College of Cardiology/American Heart Association algorithm. The guidelines provide a template for assessing cardiac risk, by taking into account both the patient’s condition and the extent of the surgery. It is followed in a stepwise fashion and stops at the first point that applies to the patient.

Step 1 in the algorithm considers the urgency of surgery.

Step 2 focuses on active cardiac conditions such as acute MI, unstable or severe angina, decompensated heart failure, severe valvular disease, or significant arrhythmias. Active cardiac conditions warrant postponement of surgery for all except lifesaving emergency procedures.

Step 3 considers the surgical risk or severity.  Surgical interventions divide into low-risk, intermediate-risk, and high-risk groups with estimated 30-day cardiac event rates (cardiac death and MI) of <1, 1–5, and >5%, respectively. Please see the attached image for a more detailed division of surgical risk.

Step 4 assesses the patient’s functional capacity based on Metabolic Equivalents (METs). One MET equals the basal metabolic rate. Exercise testing provides an objective assessment of functional capacity. Without testing, functional capacity is estimated by the ability to perform the activities of daily living. Please see the attached image for examples of Metabolic Equivalents of functional capacity.

Step 5 considers patients who have an inadequate or indeterminate functional capacity and need intermediate-risk or vascular surgery. The number of patient-level clinical predictors from the RCRI (CAD, heart failure, cerebrovascular disease, diabetes, renal insufficiency) determines the likely benefit of further cardiac testing among individuals who reach step 5. Patients with no clinical predictors proceed to surgery. Those with risk predictors may benefit from further testing, but only if the results alter management.