Several medications indicated for antiemetic use produce antimuscarinic effects, most often as part of their adverse effect profiles. This article will focus on scopolamine, a drug that acts as an antiemetic primarily through its antimuscarinic mechanism of action.

Two common indications for the use of scopolamine are motion sickness and postoperative nausea and vomiting (PONV). Less common indications are also listed below.

**Motion Sickness**

- A scopolamine patch is indicated for the prophylaxis of motion sickness in patients with a prior history of the condition.

- It can also be used to treat existing motion sickness if avoidance of stressors is not possible.

- Although a transdermal patch is more common, a faster onset has been reported with the combination of transdermal scopolamine with oral scopolamine, discussed further in the Administration section of this article.

**Postoperative Nausea and Vomiting (PONV)**

- A scopolamine patch is indicated as part of a complete anesthetic plan, in conjunction with additional antiemetics, for patients with an increased risk of PONV.

- The following factors have been found to correlate with increased risk of PONV:

- Female gender 
- Non-smoker status 
- History of PONV
- History of motion sickness
- Young age
- History of migraine
- Obesity
- Use of postoperative opioids
- Use of inhalational agents including N2O
- A long duration of anesthesia

- The following factors may contribute to increased risk of PONV, but their significance is currently unclear
- Type of surgery (e.g., open versus laparoscopic)
- Presence of postoperative pain
- Postoperative pain with a pelvic or visceral origin

- One objective measure developed and commonly used is the simplified Apfel score, which comprises the following factors:

- Female gender 
- Non-smoker
- History of PONV
- Use of postoperative opioids

- If three or four of the Apfel score conditions are present, scopolamine is an additional antiemetic medication that the clinician can add to the patient’s care plan. However, an Apfel score of 3 or 4 does not necessitate the use of scopolamine; likewise, a patient with an Apfel score of 2 or lower may still receive scopolamine.

**Enhanced Recovery After Surgery (ERAS) Protocols**

- Many centers implement ERAS protocols for various types of surgeries. A crucial component of these protocols is the control of PONV. ERAS protocols vary from center to center and on the type of surgery. Although some studies don’t explicitly report the sequence/types of antiemetics used, several studies reported the use of scopolamine as a standard part of their ERAS protocol.

**Refractory nausea and vomiting**

**Dizziness**

**Vertigo**

**Drooling**

**Depression**(off-label)