As for other types of strokes, embolic stroke patients’ presentation depends on the cerebral region affected. However, they may usually differ from patients with underlying small vessel disease etiology clinically.

The onset of symptoms in embolic strokes is usually very rapid and may show a rapid regression (4.7-12% of cases) compared to short onset (minutes to hours) and subsequent typical worsening of symptoms in lacunar infarcts. Some stroke experts call this phenomenon the "spectacular shrinking deficit syndrome" which carries a high clinical suspicion of cardioembolic origin of stroke. This dramatic improvement of a severe neurological deficit may be due to the distal migration of the embolus which is followed by the recanalization of the occluded vessel.

In one study altered consciousness was found to be a more predictive presentation of cardioembolic infarction rather than atherothrombotic infarction.

Cortical signs including Wernicke's aphasia, Broca's or global aphasia, hemianopia, gaze deviation, and neglect are other common cardioembolism secondary symptoms. In the posterior circulation, cardioembolism can produce a lateral medullary syndrome, cerebellar infarcts, multi-levels infarcts, and basilar occlusion, which may be fatal, and top of the basilar syndrome. Cardioembolism may cause posterior cerebral artery infarcts presenting with visual field cuts without associated weakness.

Procedures and activities that increase the right atrial pressure could also lead to cardioembolic strokes, such as Valsalva-provoking activities. Symptoms could occur after bending and severe coughing which may suggest an underlying right to left shunts such as PFO, leading to a paradoxical embolism.

On the other hand, patients presenting with lacunar strokes due to an underlying small vessel disease have no cortical signs. Typically, they present with pure motor hemiparesis, pure sensory syndrome, ataxic hemiparesis stroke, sensorimotor stroke, and dysarthria clumsy hand syndrome among others.