Vergence eye movements (either convergence or divergence) are a summation of components in response to a stimulus. Vergence implies the movement of both eyes in conjunction with one another. In patients with convergence insufficiency, the etiology is presumed to be an innervational difference in these components that results in the limited capacity to converge with near demands. These components, often described as Maddox components of vergence, include tonic, proximal, fusional, and accommodative vergences.

Tonic vergence describes the angle of vergence in the absence of a stimulus. The physiological position determined by tonic vergence often differs from the fusional vergence demand, and this difference is what constitutes an individual's phoria. A phoria manifests during a disruption of binocular vision, such as monocular viewing, and is an error of binocular alignment. Phorias are elicited in monocular viewing since, under binocular viewing, the other vergence components compensate for a difference in vergence demand.

Another component is proximal vergence, which refers to vergence stimulated by a perceived distance or depth. Proximal vergence results in binocular fixation composed of large gaze shifts and comprises the majority of binocular shifts in fixation. Upon the completion of binocular shifts from proximal vergence, fusional vergence takes over to maintain vergence. Fusional, or disparity vergence, is the third component and utilizes feedback from retinal image disparity to maintain ocular alignment accurately through small eye movements. Accommodative convergence, the final component, describes the coupling relationship between stimulated convergence and the response to ensure clarity by the accommodative system.

For CI, treatment options are tailored towards improving the tonic and proximal vergence components through procedural therapies, as they are adaptable with exercises. The contributions of fusional and accommodative vergences were found to be untrainable.