The differential diagnosis of malignant pleural effusion should include other causes of pleural effusion. In pediatrics, the most common cause of the pleural effusion is an infection. This is usually pneumonia with parapneumonic effusion. The causative organism for pneumonia and other infectious causes of pleural effusion has been discussed earlier. Pleural effusion from congestive heart failure should also be considered as fluid can accumulate in the pleural cavity from heart failure. Most of the heart failure in the pediatric population is from congenital heart diseases.

Chylothorax can develop in pediatric patients with congenital heart disease after surgery. This might be due to:

- Injury to the thoracic duct

- Venous or lymphatic congestion

- Central venous thrombosis

In any case, the chylous fluid with a milky white appearance can accumulate in the pleural fluid and cause significant effusion with respiratory compromise.

In the differential diagnosis, a detailed history and physical examination can help the clinician. Ancillary studies can assist with the history and physical examination. Thoracentesis with the pleural fluid analysis is especially useful. The Lights criteria can differentiate between exudate and transudate. The glucose level in the pleural fluid is similar to the level in the plasma. In MPE, the pleural fluid glucose level is usually lower than 60 mg/dl. The pH of the pleural fluid is usually lower than 7.3 in MPE. Pleural effusion secondary to infection is exudative in nature, while effusion from heart failure is transudative. In MPE, it is sometimes very difficult to distinguish between the 2 types of effusion. However, in nearly 95% of the MPE cases, the pleural fluid is exudative. Analysis of pleural fluid for malignant cells can sometimes be helpful, albeit with false positive results. In adults, the pleural fluid might be sent for tumor markers to help identify the primary tumor causing the effusion.