A balance between ghrelin and leptin is essential in maintaining adequate energy homeostasis. Furthermore, the interactions of these signals between the GI tract and adipocyte storage allow the appropriate signals to be sent to various nuclei within the hypothalamus to exert the desired effect. An imbalance causes diverse pathophysiology related to weight imbalance and improper energy homeostasis.

**Obesity:**With the prevalence of obesity continuing to rise, secondary diseases associated with obesity continue to rise, including diabetes mellitus, hypertension, liver disease, stroke, and myocardial infarctions. Furthermore, the social stigma related to obesity is associated with unemployment and social disadvantages.

**Eating Disorders:**Anorexia nervosa and bulimia nervosa are both eating disorders associated with irregular eating patterns and concerns with body shape and weight. Many of these disorders have a psychological component and were long thought to be psychiatric disorders. However, new data has shown that individuals with anorexia nervosa have higher plasma ghrelin levels than normal individuals. Similarly, research has shown that individuals with bulimia nervosa have elevated fasting plasma ghrelin levels compared to individuals of similar BMIs.

**Prader-Willi Syndrome:**Prader-Willi Syndrome (PWS) is a genetic form of obesity, with deficits in ghrelin-signaling due to deficits in the expression of chromosome 15q11.2-q13. Hyperphagia is a typical symptom shown at a very young age. Children typically present with hypotonia, narrow forehead, developmental disability, almond-shaped eyes, small hands and feet, and short stature.

**Rheumatoid Arthritis:**Besides regulating weight, leptin also has pro-inflammatory effects, especially within the joints. Research has demonstrated that patients with rheumatoid arthritis have elevated levels of leptin in the bloodstream.

**Mood Disorders:**Ghrelin and leptin play an essential role in energy homeostasis, and pathophysiology related to energy imbalance drastically affects mood disorders. While ghrelin is mainly known as the hunger hormone, it is also involved in the reward and motivation signaling pathways, which link to stress, anxiety, and depression.