Anatomical variations primarily involve discrepancies between the anastomotic connections between the branches of the nerves discussed as well as variation in the origin of the common and proper digital nerves. Other variations usually involve the course or origin of the nerves as they enter the hand. Some of these variations are outlined here below.

- **Median Nerve:**
- The anastomotic connection between the proper digital nerves of the median nerve and the superficial branch of the ulnar nerve will sometimes originate from the median nerve instead of the ulnar nerve. The clinical consequence of this is that the median nerve may innervate the entire ring finger instead of only the radial half.
- The median nerve has numerous branching pattern variations, both proximal, distal, and inside the carpal tunnel.

- **Radial Nerve:**
- A variation involving the superficial branch of the radial nerve as it courses through the forearm where it maintains superficial to the brachioradialis until the level of the wrist. In this position, the nerve may be confused with either the medial or lateral antebrachial cutaneous nerves and thus should always be a consideration during surgery of this region.

- **Ulnar Nerve:**
- Occurring at the level of the hook of hamate, five types of bifurcations described
- Type 1: Birfucates into a superficial sensory branch of the ulnar nerve (SSBUN) and a dorsal branch of the ulnar nerve (DBUN) 
- Type 2: Trifurcates into a DBUN, 3rd digit common digital nerve, and a 5th digit proper digital nerve 
- Type 3: Similar to type 1 but the 5th digit proper digital nerve originates off the DBUN 
- Type 4: Trifurcates like type 2 but has an additional anastomotic superficial branch
- Type 5: Trifurcates like type 2 but has an additional distal DBUN off the 5th digit proper digital nerve