Many pathologies can impact the TMJ and potentially cause varying degrees of clinical dysfunction.  These conditions include but are not limited to

- Rheumatoid arthritis: crepitus, limited ROM, increased stiffness, pain, joint sounds

- Psoriatic arthropathy: joint sounds, morning stiffness, pain

- Ankylosing spondylitis: joint sounds, pain in the lateral pterygoid muscles, hypertrophy of the masseter muscle, limitation of the ROM

- Pain: articular sounds.

- Fibromyalgia syndrome: myalgia, pains of TMJ

- Muscular pain

- Multiple sclerosis: myalgia pains of TMJ, pain during the movement of the mouth

**Clinical evaluation**begins by observing the patient's natural movements. The evaluation includes the observation of the symmetry of the face and the movements of TMJ as well as when the pain appears (at which articular degree of opening or closing and accessory movements), and the entity of the pain and if a joint sound appears.

The muscles are palpated (internally and externally), the presence of enlarged submandibular lymph nodes is also checked by palpation. Next comes testing the strength of the muscles, individually, and during complex movements. The operator passively moves the jaw, using a glove, to evaluate the TMJ ligament apparatus. We look inside the mouth to check for anatomical anomalies. The fingers are placed on the joint while the patient opens his mouth to evaluate further anomalies. Always with the fingers in support of the TMJ, it is asked to pull out the tongue, turn and flex/extend and incline the neck, during the opening of the mouth; this is to verify any accentuations of TMJ dysfunction, in association with other muscle-joint districts.

Some tools can improve the measurement of the ROM of the mouth, such as the Boley gage and the TheraBite range of motion scale. These evaluations have their basis in the research diagnostic criteria for temporomandibular disorders (RDC/TMD), updated to 2016.

In children with a type II class, they have a higher percentage of TMJ dysfunction; this dysfunction in the growth phase will result in an asymmetry of the mandibular branch.

**Instrumental assessments**are critical to a safe diagnosis and are necessary before taking a therapeutic approach to a TMJ in dysfunction.

Panoramic radiography. Allows evaluation of the mandibular condyles corresponding glenoid fossa relationship.

Multi-slice computed tomography or cone-beam computed tomography. To evaluate the morphology of the components that make up TMJ, as well as bone position and pathologies.

Magnetic resonance image. It is possible to observe the condition of the articular disk, anatomy, function, and form.