**Cervical Epidural Injections**

Cervical epidural injections are a minor outpatient procedure, the risk of the procedure is relatively low, but there have been associated cases with serious complications that worsen patient morbidity. Patients with at least four to six weeks of stable radicular pain secondary to nerve compressive of the cervical vertebrae can benefit from a cervical epidural corticosteroid injection. Before the procedure, it is imperative to identify the risk factors and perform a thorough assessment of the patient. An interprofessional team approach is the best way to care for patients with cervical radiculopathy and minimize the complications of this procedure. Before and after the epidural injection, the patient should have the following done:

- Evaluation by their primary care physician. The patient should have failed conservative management of cervical radiculopathy before being a candidate for an epidural injection.

- Complete advanced imaging, including X-ray, CT, or MRI, is confirming the underlying pathology causing cervical radiculopathy by a radiologist.

- In cases of nonequivalent imaging, nerve conduction studies or electromyography (EMG) can be done by a neurologist or physical medicine specialist.

- Be consulted by the pharmacist for the use of blood thinners before the procedure.

- In cases of worsening or severe symptoms, a neurosurgeon should be consulted for surgical decompression of the spinal cord rather than a minimally invasive epidural injection.

- The various specialist performs cervical epidural injection depending on the severity and duration of the patient's neck pain. A referral by the primary care physician can be placed to either anesthesia, a pain medicine specialist, physical medicine, and rehabilitation, or neurology (interventional).

- Specially trained nurses in radiology, neuroscience, and rehabilitation are essential for the care of these patients.

- A fluoroscopy technician should be present for the procedure.

- Following the procedure, the patient should be monitored by nursing for post-procedure sequella.

Coordination of the interprofessional team provides improved outcomes and higher patient satisfaction. [Level 5]