While evaluating the female pelvis, it is customary to perform both transabdominal and transvaginal imaging.

**Transabdominal**

Transabdominal imaging of the postmenopausal pelvis is usually of limited utility due to the normal atrophic changes of the reproductive organs. However, it may be helpful in patients that have an especially enlarged uterus or large pelvic masses due to a broader field of view compared to transvaginal imaging. It is also helpful in patients who are unable or unwilling to tolerate a transvaginal ultrasound. Transabdominal imaging is typically performed with a full bladder using 2.5 to 5 MHz transducers.

**Transvaginal**

A transvaginal approach is the technique of choice when performing an ultrasound on a postmenopausal patient due to its high-resolution images. A transvaginal scan is performed after emptying the bladder using a higher frequency transducer (5-8 MHz).

The endometrial thickness is calculated as the maximum anterior to the endometrium's posterior dimension when viewed in the sagittal or long-axis view of the uterus.  Occasionally a small amount of anechoic fluid is noted in the endometrial canal in postmenopausal women.  In such cases, the endometrial thickness is measured by measuring the anterior and posterior dimensions of the endometrium separately and adding them together.

These transabdominal and transvaginal imaging modalities are also useful in evaluating adnexal masses by identifying the origin, physical characteristics like size, contents like solid or cystic, septations, laterality, presence of papillary excrescences, presence or absence of free fluid in the pelvis. Apart from identifying the gynecological causes for adnexal masses, ultrasound can also be used to identify other non-gynecological causes for adnexal masses like appendicitis or appendicular abscess or pelvic kidney or peritoneal inclusion cysts.

**Saline Infusion Sonography**

Saline-infusion sonography, or SIS, can be a helpful adjunct to transvaginal ultrasound in evaluating the lesions in the endometrial cavity or in patients with difficulty visualizing the endometrial lining. In SIS, a small catheter is inserted through the cervix into the endometrial canal. Saline is then infused through the catheter while a transvaginal ultrasound is performed. The saline distends the endometrial cavity, allowing for intracavitary lesions such as endometrial polyps or submucosal fibroids to be seen more easily. In the case of postmenopausal bleeding, SIS can help determine if the endometrium is only focally thickened (in the case of a polyp) or more globally thickened (in the case of hyperplasia or malignancy).

**Doppler**

Doppler ultrasound, with which blood flow through vessels can be evaluated, is another technique that may be applied when imaging a postmenopausal patient. Doppler can be helpful in the differentiation of a benign from a malignant adnexal mass.