Ectodermal dysplasias are a rare group of conditions (over 200) that are due to abnormal development of ectodermal derived tissues, which can include the hair, teeth, nails, and glands. The conditions can have different genetic causes, but they share similar characteristics and present with a combination of symptoms. The diagnosis is made clinically. Ectodermal dysplasias are due to genetic defects on different chromosomes, and there have also been cases of spontaneous mutations. An example is hypohidrotic ectodermal dysplasia (HED) which is usually transmitted as an X-linked recessive trait can result from mutations in the EDA gene (as discussed above).  The reported prevalence of ectodermal dysplasias as approximately 7 out of 100000 newborns.

Ectodermal dysplasias can be organized based off of their molecular pathways; some of them are listed below

**EDA/NFKappaB pathway:**

Christ-Siemens-Touraine syndrome—EDA

- Presents with Hypohidrosis, hypotrichosis, hypodontia, smooth dry skin, craniofacial dysmorphology, periorbital pigmentation

Incontinentia Pigmenti—IKBKG

- Presents with Short stature, cataracts, microphthalmia, hypodontia, thorax abnormalities, staged skin involvement, nail dystrophy, atrophic hair

Ectodermal dysplasia and immunodeficiency 1 (EDAID1)—IKBKG

- Presents with hypohidrosis, hypotrichosis, and immunodeficiency

**WNT pathway:**

Goltz syndrome—PORCN

- Presents with short stature, hearing loss, oral papillomas, hypodontia, syndactyly

Schopf-Schulz-Passarge syndrome—WNT10A

- Hypodontia, eyelid cysts, keratoderma, hypoplastic nails, hypotrichosis

**TP63 pathway:**

ADULT syndrome—TP63

- Lacrimal obstruction, hypodontia, dysplastic teeth, breast hypoplasia, ectrodactyly, thin skin, dysplastic nails

Limb-mammary syndrome—TP63

- Lacrimal duct atresia, hypodontia cleft p, hypoplastic breasts, syndactyly, ectrodactyly, nail dysplasia

**Management:**

Current management of ectodermal dysplasia syndromes focuses on multidisciplinary efforts from various specialists, including dermatologists, ENT specialists, pediatrics, psychologists, and dentists. It is essential to diagnose the syndrome early to initiate early interventions to prevent further derangements and to restore cosmetic features.