# Definition/Introduction

Asterixis is a clinical sign that describes the inability to maintain sustained posture with subsequent brief, shock-like, involuntary movements. This motor disorder is myoclonus characterized by muscular inhibition (whereas muscle contractions produce positive myoclonus).

Asterixis can be elicited on physical examination by having the patient extend their arms, dorsiflex the wrists, and spreading the fingers (similar to pushing against a wall) with their eyes closed. This is used to test for the “flap” at the wrist and is the most common method of assessment. One can also elicit asterixis at the hip joint by keeping the patient in the dorsal recumbent position (supine with their knees bent up in an outward position while the feet are flat) and allowing the knees to fall to the sides.

# Issues of Concern

The exact pathophysiology of asterixis is still unknown. Several theories suggest a role for the ascending activating systems associated with arousal, which is disturbed in encephalopathy and lesions of the thalamus and midbrain.

# Clinical Significance

Asterixis can either be unilateral or bilateral and is typically asynchronous, irregular and variable in frequency and amplitude. Although the clinical sign may suggest an underlying process, the clinical history of the presenting illness is fundamental in triggering further workup.

Bilateral asterixis is most commonly associated with metabolic encephalopathies, especially hepatic. The presumption in hepatic encephalopathy was that damage to brain cells due to the impaired metabolism of ammonia was predominantly related to the development of asterixis in hepatic encephalopathy,

Unilateral asterixis is usually because of focal brain lesions in the thalamus, although there have been reports of lesions in the midbrain, parietal cortex, and frontal cortex causing unilateral asterixis

Asterixis is a significant yet poorly understood clinical sign and is part of the West Haven Criteria used to grade the severity of hepatic encephalopathy as it seems to be a relatively sensitive sign of the disease but is non-specific.