# Continuing Education Activity

A greenstick fracture is a partial thickness fracture where only the cortex and periosteum are interrupted on one side of the bone while they remain uninterrupted on the other side. Greenstick fractures occur most commonly after a fall on an outstretched arm (FOOSH); however, they can also occur due to other types of trauma, including motor vehicle collisions, sports injuries, or non-accidental trauma where the child is hit with an object. Malnutrition, specifically vitamin-D deficiency, increases the risk of greenstick fractures of the long bones after a trauma. This activity reviews the evaluation, management, and pathophysiology of greenstick fractures and highlights the role of the interprofessional team in caring for affected patients.

**Objectives:**
- Identify the pathophysiology of greenstick fractures.
- Review the X-ray features of a greenstick fracture.
- Outline the treatment and management options available for greenstick fracture.
- Explain the interprofessional team strategies to improve care coordination and care delivery to advance the management of greenstick fractures and improve patient outcomes.

# Introduction

The makeup, anatomy, and histology of the pediatric skeletal system is not just a smaller version of the adult form; rather, it is unique in that it allows for rapid growth and change throughout development from childhood to adulthood.

The physis is split into 4 zones: (1) the reserve or resting zone, which is made up of hyaline cartilage; (2) the zone of proliferation, which is made up of multiplying chondrocytes that arrange into lacunae (lakes); (3) the zone of hypertrophy, where the chondrocytes stop dividing and start enlarging; and (4) the zone of calcification, where minerals are deposited into the lacunae to calcify the cartilage. The calcified cartilage breaks down, allowing for vascular invasion and osteoblastic/osteoclastic bone matrix deposition and remodeling.

Therefore, prior to ossification, the majority of pediatric bone is just calcified cartilage, which is very compliant when compared to the ossified bones of adults.

A greenstick fracture is a partial thickness fracture where only the cortex and periosteum are interrupted on one side of the bone while they remain uninterrupted on the other side.

# Etiology

Greenstick fractures occur most commonly after a fall on an outstretched arm (FOOSH); however, they can also occur due to other types of trauma, including motor vehicle collisions, sports injuries, or non-accidental trauma where the child is hit with an object. Malnutrition, specifically vitamin-D deficiency, increases the risk of greenstick fractures of the long bones after a trauma.

# Epidemiology

Approximately 12% of all pediatric emergency department visits in the United States are due to musculoskeletal injuries. Fractures make up a large percentage of musculoskeletal injuries resulting in significant morbidity and complications. Greenstick fractures are most likely to be found in the pediatric population under 10 years of age but can occur in any age group, including adults.

# Pathophysiology

A greenstick fracture is a partial thickness fracture where only the cortex and periosteum are interrupted on one side of the bone but remain uninterrupted on the other.

Greenstick fractures can also occur in the face, chest, scapula, and virtually every bone in the body, but with much less frequency than long bones.

# Histopathology

The periosteum, metaphysis, and diaphysis are strong and continuous from the metaphysis to the epiphysis, surrounding the physis to provide support. Although the walls surrounding the physis are strong, the hypertrophic zone of the physis is a weak point where fractures commonly occur. Injury to the physis or the epiphyseal plate can lead to bone growth retardation, as the vascular bed that supports physical growth originates from the epiphyseal plate.

Although the diaphysis and metaphysis are calcified in adults, they are weaker than in the pediatric population, leading to greenstick, torus, and plastic bending injuries. Greenstick fractures can occur anywhere throughout the diaphysis and metaphysis but are no longer called greenstick fractures if they involve the physis, as those are classified as Salter-Harris fractures. Greenstick fractures are theorized to occur due to the increased ratio of collagen matrix with more immature cross-links and a higher immature/mature crosslink ratio.

# History and Physical

History and physical exams of patients with greenstick fractures are no different from patients with other types of fractures. Age, gender, anatomic location, soft tissue involvement (assessment of open versus closed), and mechanism of injury are all important features of the history. Location, soft tissue involvement, and neurovascular status are important aspects of a physical exam. Furthermore, the joints below and above the site should be evaluated for occult fractures or multiple fractures.

Findings on the history commonly include accidental trauma like FOOSH but can include history like being hit with a baseball bat or other item and other forms of accidental trauma.

Common physical findings include decreased range of motion, pain to palpation, and ecchymosis over the injured area.

# Evaluation

Diagnostic evaluation includes an x-ray of the injured extremity or area of complaint. Typical X-ray findings demonstrate a bending injury with a fracture line that does not completely go through the bone.

# Treatment / Management

If the degree of angulation is significant, then the healthcare provider needs to perform a closed reduction and immobilization.

Cast immobilization of long bone greenstick fractures should last approximately six weeks.

Although less commonly practiced, greenstick fractures may be treated with splinting if there is only a small amount of angulation and if there is close follow-up with the family or patient.

# Differential Diagnosis

Salter-Harris fracture, torus fracture, toddler fracture (non-displaced spiral fracture of the distal tibia), spiral fracture, non-accidental fracture, open fracture, pathologic fracture, non-displaced fracture, and plastic deformities, among others.

# Prognosis

Generally, the prognosis is good; the majority of greenstick fractures heal well without functional or gross changes in the appearance of the injured bone. However, if not properly immobilized and without proper orthopedic follow-up, there is the risk of refracture, complete fracture, and displacement of the fracture.

# Complications

Greenstick fractures have a high risk of refracture due to their instability and the need to be quickly immobilized.

# Consultations

Orthopedic consultation should be considered in the initial exam and diagnosis but is not necessary for simple greenstick fractures without angulation.

# Deterrence and Patient Education

Trauma and sports injuries, most commonly due to a FOOSH, may lead to fractures and require immediate evaluation to prevent complications. Greenstick fractures require immediate immobilization to prevent recurrent fractures, complete fractures, or displacement. Activities with a high risk of falling should be avoided while the patient is healing, as there is a high risk of refracture and complete fracture.

# Pearls and Other Issues

Fractures of the neonatal skull most commonly are greenstick fractures.

# Enhancing Healthcare Team Outcomes

Greenstick fractures are usually seen in the pediatric population and are best managed by an interprofessional team that includes the pediatrician, emergency department physician, orthopedic nurse, and orthopedic surgeon. If the degree of angulation is significant, then the healthcare provider needs to perform a closed reduction and immobilization.

The outcomes for most children are good. However, follow-up is required to ensure proper healing is occurring.