Conservative management of acute osteoporotic compression fractures with goals of reducing pain and improving functional status includes acetaminophen, ibuprofen, opioids, physiotherapy, rehabilitation programs, and bed rest. Bracing for compression fractures is often done for patient comfort and is unlikely to influence spinal stability.

For persistent pain and the failure of conservative treatments, surgical intervention is necessary. A  2018 Cochrane review was not able to support vertebroplasty for treating acute to subacute osteoporotic vertebral fractures.

Vertebroplasty is usually an outpatient procedure that takes one to two hours where under guided imaging, a needle gets inserted into the vertebral body, and cement is injected.  This cement hardens quickly and stabilizes the fracture. Kyphoplasty is a very similar procedure, but in this case, a balloon is used to expand the vertebral body before injecting the cement.

The goals of managing spine fractures are to ensure spinal stability and preserve neurological function.

Patients with SCI will need ICU admission, central and arterial lines, and possible airway support. Spinal cord injury can lead to unopposed parasympathetic stimulation resulting in vasodilation and hypotension.  Norepinephrine or dopamine will provide both alpha and beta stimulation and should be used to maintain blood pressure with a MAP goal of greater than 85 for seven days. Acute trauma patients should remain in both cervical and thoracolumbar precautions until cleared.

The treatment goal for vertebral fractures is clinical stability as evaluated mechanically and neurologically, assessing the spines' ability to handle physiologic loads properly without resulting in neurological injury and simultaneously preventing deformity and pain. Classifying the acute traumatic fracture correctly will then allow for the appropriate choice of surgical stabilization or conservative management and have been discussed above. Always treat the underlying cause of the fracture.

Those who present with osteomyelitis and discitis will undergo 6 to 8 weeks of targeted IV antibiotics after biopsy leads to a microbial diagnosis. Often these patients can undergo conservative management and do not require surgical intervention. A biopsy can also be utilized to determine metastatic disease if this is also on the differential.