Patients with Bertolotti syndrome most commonly present with nonspecific low back pain. Unfortunately, the differential diagnosis for low back pain is quite broad, and many can be present simultaneously to cause a multifactorial etiology. Musculoskeletal, neurological, and oncological pathologies should be considered.

Common causes of back pain include lumbar strains, degenerative disc disease, lumbar disc herniations, annular tears/fissures, lumbar facet arthropathy, facet cysts, Tarlov cysts, scoliosis, and sacroiliac joint pain.

Meticulous history-taking and physical examination can help to exclude several of these other diagnoses.

When patients experience leg symptoms in addition to lower back pain, providers should also consider compressive lumbar pathologies, including lumbar stenosis/claudication and radiculopathy.

These entities should be taken into consideration along with - and not necessarily exclusive of - Bertolotti syndrome, as lumbar stenosis/radiculopathy, can present as back pain in their own rights due to their own underlying etiologies.  As such, it may be quite common to have tandem reasons for back pain.

Neoplastic processes should also not be overlooked. Lower back pain unrelieved by conservative measures and in the presence of sudden weight loss/gain, intractable night pain, and otherwise unexplained should raise suspicion for a primary or malignant tumor of the lumbar spine/sacrum/pelvis.

Appropriate imaging and labs will help in the diagnosis of malignancy and, if identified, should be referred for oncologic treatment accordingly.