A Femoral artery pseudoaneurysm consists of an outpouching of 1 or 2 layers of the vessel wall. A true aneurysm, on the other hand, involves all the 3 layers including the intima, media, and adventitia. Clinically, it may present with pulsatile hematoma, pain, ecchymosis, or with active extravasation. In chronic scenarios, once a fibrous capsule has been formed, it may present with a persistent flow communicating with the arterial lumen. Pseudoaneurysm clinical progression varies; its complications depend on the size, mechanism of injury, duration, patient comorbidities as well as neck diameter. Potential complications include expansion, rupture, embolization, extravasation with arterial wall compression and ischemia. Clinical examination should raise a high index of suspicion once a pulsatile mass can be felt, especially when a patient reports recent intervention.

The common iliac artery gives off 2 major branches; the internal iliac artery (IAA) provides blood supply to the pelvis while the external iliac artery (EIA) is the main blood supply to the foot. Once it passes the inguinal ligament, EIA then becomes the common femoral artery (CFA). CFA then bifurcates into the profunda artery and superficial femoral artery (SFA). It is important to understand the anatomic landmarks clearly before making an arterial puncture. It is common practice to identify these important landmarks and use sonographic guidance for safe cannulation of the arterial lumen. It is also advisable to make the arterial entry into the CFA at a level where external compression would prevent any hematoma or PSA formation. The ideal entry-level would then be above the femoral head. Hence, draw the anatomic landmarks which consist of the following: a line one fingerbreadth below a line connecting the anterior superior iliac spine (ASIS) with the pubic symphysis and a second line at the inguinal crease. Between these 2 lines, the practitioner should find the common femoral artery overlying the femoral head for easy compressibility. Palpate for a point of maximal impulse, which is the entry point.