The SI joint is a diarthrodial synovial joint. It is surrounded by a fibrous capsule containing a joint space filled with synovial fluid between the articular surfaces. The articular surface is made up of two, strong, C-shaped layers. It is distinguished from other synovial joints by the unusual articulation of two different types of cartilage. The sacral capsular surface is composed of hyaline cartilage while the iliac capsular surface is composed of fibrocartilage. There are three main types of cartilage found in the body: hyaline, fibrocartilage, and elastic. Hyaline cartilage is made from type II collagen and is the weakest type of cartilage. Fibrocartilage is made from type I collagen and is the strongest type of cartilage.

The SI joint is also unique in that its articular surfaces have multiple ridges and depressions that develop and deepen over one's lifetime. During the natural bone maturation process, the morphology and characteristics of the sacroiliac joint change. The joint surfaces are relatively flat in early life and allow for a gliding motion between the sacrum and ilium in all directions. However beginning in the second and third decades of life, the sacroiliac joint surfaces develop distinct angulations and lose their flat surface. The joint develops an elevated ridge along the iliac surface and a depression along the sacral surface. This produces a functional interlocking between the 2 bones. This interlocking limits the movement at the SI joint which creates the overall stability of the joint. This increase in the sacroiliac joints’ stability makes dislocations very rare.

Biomechanically, the sacroiliac joint performs several functions. Primarily, its purpose is to attenuate the distribution of force loads from the lower extremities. It functions both as a shock absorber for the spine above and converts torque from the lower extremities into the rest of the body. The primary plane of motion is anterior-posterior along a transverse axis. Nutation refers to anterior-inferior movement of the sacrum while the coccyx moves posteriorly relative to the ilium. Counternutation refers to a posterior-superior movement of the sacrum while the coccyx moves anterior relative to the ilium. In most individuals, this motion is limited to 2 to 4 mm of movement due to the bony architecture and ligamentous structures of the joint.

A strong ligamentous architecture stabilizes the SI joint. The interosseous sacroiliac ligament forms the major connection between the sacrum and the ilium. It is the strongest ligament in the body and prevents anterior and inferior movement of the sacrum. The posterior (dorsal) sacroiliac ligament connects the posterior-superior iliac spine (PSIS) and the iliac crest to the third and fourth segments of the sacrum. The ligament resists counternutation and can be palpated directly below the PSIS. The sacrotuberous ligament blends with the posterior sacroiliac ligament and functions to resist nutation of the joint. The sacrotuberous ligament then passes behind the sacrospinous ligament. The sacrospinous ligament originates on the ischial spine and attaches to the lateral sacrum to oppose the nutation of the sacrum during weight-bearing and gait. The presence of the sacrotuberous and sacrospinous ligaments creates the greater sciatic foramen and the lesser sciatic foramen. These ligaments help prevent flexion and rotation of the ilium past the sacrum. Of note, the pudendal nerve lies between these two ligaments and may become entrapped, leading to perineal pain. The anterior sacroiliac ligament is an anterior-inferior thickening of the fibrous capsule that is not as well defined as other SI ligaments. It is the thinnest of all ligamentous structures and most vulnerable to injury making it a common source of pain.