Leiomyoma: Histologically, cells are arranged in intersecting fascicles with abundant eosinophilic cytoplasm and sparse intervening stroma. Immunohistochemistry is positive for h-Caldesmon, SMA, MSA, estrogen, and progesterone receptors, while CD34 is negative. The molecular analysis demonstrates HMGA2-RAD51B t(12;14) and FH mutation.

Solitary fibrous tumor: Morphologically uniform spindle to oval cells are seen around prominent staghorn vessels. There is perivascular hyalinization, and stroma can be variably fibrous. The lipomatous variant contains mature adipose tissue.

Spindle cell lipoma: Morphology demonstrates a mixture of mature adipose tissue, bland spindle cells, thin 'rope-like' collagen, and stromal mast cells. Myxoid stroma is not uncommon. 'Fat-poor' cases are also present. Immunohistochemistry demonstrates positive staining for CD34, while staining is negative for SMA, desmin, and Nuclear Rb.

Fibromatosis: Microscopically noted to have an abundant collagenous matrix and is reportedly highly infiltrative. It is associated with familial adenomatous polyposis (FAP). Immunohistochemically, stains are positive for nuclear beta-catenin, Nuclear Rb, and stains are negative for hormonal receptors and CD34. It is associated with APC or CTNNB1 mutations.

Pseudoangiomatous stromal hyperplasia (PASH): This is a common spindle cell lesion in premenopausal women or patients on hormone replacement therapy. Histologically PASH shows slit-like clefts resembling vascular spaces and is less cellular than myofibroblastoma. It is less likely to form a mass than myofibroblastoma and demonstrates entrapping ducts and lobules. Stains positive for desmin, SMA, vimentin, estrogen receptos, progesterone receptos, and nuclear Rb.

Nodular fasciitis: It is associated with prior history of breast injury. Microscopy findings are notable for bland fibroblastic/myofibroblastic cells with variable cellularity in a tissue culture pattern. There is a myxoid stroma with extravasated red blood cells, stromal lymphocytes, and giant cells. Immunohistochemistry is negative for CD34 and positive for SMA, focal desmin, and nuclear Rb. Molecular analysis is positive for USP6 rearrangement, and MYH9 is the most common fusion partner.

Metaplastic spindle cell carcinoma: On histology, epithelial components or epithelioid cells can be present, associated with high nuclear grade, and frequent mitosis in high-grade cases. This tumor is infiltrative and encases normal breast ducts, commonly with stromal lymphocytes. Immunohistochemistry is positive for cytokeratins, p63, and negative for estrogen receptors, progesterone receptors, and desmin. Genetic alterations involving PTEN, TP53, and EGFR have been reported.

Invasive lobular carcinoma: This is notable for single files of low-grade dyscohesive cells, cytoplasmic vacuoles with absent spindle cells, and infiltrative borders. Atypical lobular hyperplasia and lobular carcinoma in situ can be present. Cells are positive for estrogen receptors, progesterone receptors, E-cadherin, cytokeratins, and GCDFP-15. Mutations are reported in CDH1.

Other differential diagnoses include:

- Benign fibrous histiocytoma

- Hamartoma

- Fibroadenoma

- Low-grade sarcoma

- Lymphoma

- Malignant fibrous histiocytoma

- Phyllodes tumor

- Low-grade myofibroblastic sarcoma

- Angiomyolipoma