Table 1. The latest version of the American Society of Anesthesiologists (ASA) physical status classification system (ASAPS), as approved by the ASA House of Delegates on October 15, 2014, and adapted for this presentation. Note that no specific classification is assigned to patients with moderate systemic disease, just assignments for patients with mild systemic disease (ASA 2) and those with severe systemic disease (ASA 3).

Abbreviations used: ASA: American Society of Anesthesiologists, BMI: body mass Index, CHF: congestive heart failure, COPD: chronic obstructive pulmonary disease.

ASA 1: A normal healthy patient.

Example: Fit, nonobese (BMI under 30), a nonsmoking patient with good exercise tolerance.

ASA 2: A patient with mild systemic disease.

Example: Patient with no functional limitations and a well-controlled disease (e.g., treated hypertension, obesity with BMI under 35, frequent social drinker, or cigarette smoker).

ASA 3: A patient with a severe systemic disease that is not life-threatening. Example: Patient with some functional limitation due to disease (e.g., poorly treated hypertension or diabetes, morbid obesity, chronic renal failure, a bronchospastic disease with intermittent exacerbation, stable angina, implanted pacemaker).

ASA 4: A patient with a severe systemic disease that is a constant threat to life. Example: Patient with functional limitation from severe, life-threatening disease (e.g., unstable angina, poorly controlled COPD, symptomatic CHF, recent (less than three months ago) myocardial infarction or stroke.

ASA 5: A moribund patient who is not expected to survive without the operation. The patient is not expected to survive beyond the next 24 hours without surgery—examples: ruptured abdominal aortic aneurysm, massive trauma, and extensive intracranial hemorrhage with mass effect.

ASA 6: A brain-dead patient whose organs are being removed with the intention of transplanting them into another patient.

The addition of “E” to the ASAPS (e.g., ASA 2E) denotes an emergency surgical procedure. The ASA defines an emergency as existing “when the delay in treatment of the patient would lead to a significant increase in the threat to life or body part.”

Examples of ASAPS Classification

**Patient  1**

A 20-year-old college athlete from Brigham Young University is scheduled to undergo an elective ACL repair. Non-smoker, nondrinker, no medications, BMI 23. This patient would be assigned ASAPS Class 1.

**Patient  2**

A 19-year-old college student from the University of California - Santa Barbara (a top “party school”) is scheduled to undergo emergency orthopedic surgery following a fall from his frat house roof after attending a weekly “kegger” party. The patient takes recreational medications only (mostly cannabis) and has a BMI of 29. This patient would be assigned ASAPS Class 2E by being a frequent social drinker and being scheduled as an emergency case. Note that the “full stomach” status of the patient does not figure into his ASAPS yet still adds considerably to his overall anesthetic risk.

**Patient 3**

A 30-year-old woman is scheduled to undergo elective surgery to remove a large ovarian cyst. Comorbidities include anemia from menorrhagia and type II diabetes treated with metformin. She is a non-smoker, an occasional social drinker, and has a BMI of 42. This patient would be assigned ASAPS Class 3.

**Patient 4**

A 70-year-old woman is scheduled to undergo an emergency laparoscopic appendectomy. Comorbidities include severe COPD as a consequence of a life-long smoking habit, morbid obesity (BMI 46), and type II diabetes. She gets short of breath walking more than a few meters. This patient would be assigned ASAPS Class 4E.

**Patient 5**

A 55-year-old man is scheduled for emergency repair of a ruptured abdominal aortic aneurysm. He is brought to the operating room with CPR in progress due to asystole. He had been intubated earlier in the Emergency Department without the need for any drugs. This patient would be assigned ASAPS Class 5E as he would not be expected to survive beyond the next 24 hours with or without surgery.

**Patient 6**

A 25-year-old man sustained a severe head injury in a motorcycle accident. He was not wearing a helmet. After a neurosurgical decompression procedure and numerous other interventions in the intensive care unit, it is clear that there is no hope for recovery. He is unresponsive to all noxious stimulation. Testing for brain death is carried out according to the American Academy of Neurology guidelines for Brain Death Determination, which reveals a complete absence of central nervous system function. His family agrees to make his organs available for transplantation. This patient would be assigned ASAPS Class 6.