The internal capsule is a two-way tract for the transmission of information to and from the cerebral cortex. It lies in the inferomedial portion of each cerebral hemisphere. On transverse sections of the brain, the internal capsule is a V-shaped structure with the apex pointing medially. The lentiform nucleus forms the lateral bounds of the internal capsule, while the thalamus and caudate form the medial bounds. Above the superior border of the lentiform nucleus, the fibers of the internal capsule arrange in a radiating pattern known as the corona radiata.

Fibers of the corona radiata travel caudally and become densely packed to form the internal capsule. The fibers become even more densely packed as they continue past the basal ganglia, forming the basis pedunculi at the midbrain. As the axons from the internal capsule travel down the brain, their numbers decrease as many descending axonal tracts terminate in the thalamus and various other nuclei in the brainstem. The internal capsule subdivides into the anterior limb, genu, posterior limb, retrolenticular segment, and sublenticular segment. Each portion of the internal capsule carries distinct ascending and descending axonal tracts that each have critical functions.

The internal capsule's anterior limb is bounded by the head of the caudate nucleus medially and the lentiform nucleus laterally. The anterior limb contains fibers of the anterior thalamic radiation and frontopontine fibers.

In a study utilizing diffusion MRI, researchers segmented the anterior limb into five regions.

The internal capsule's posterior limb is bounded by the thalamus medially and the lentiform nucleus laterally. The posterior limb contains fibers of the posterior thalamic radiation, corticospinal tract, corticorubral tract, and corticopontine tract.

The corticospinal tract is the primary motor pathway that innervates lower motor neurons. Corticopontine fibers originate from all areas of the cerebral cortex, course to the cerebellum, and terminate in deeper pontine nuclei. These fibers are crucial for the coordination of voluntary motor functions.

The dentatothalamic tract from the dentate nucleus end by synapsing with cells in the contralateral ventrolateral nucleus of the thalamus. The axons of the thalamic neurons ascend through the internal capsule to terminate in the primary motor area of the cerebral cortex. Through this pathway, the dentate influences motor activity on the same side of the body by acting on the motor neurons of the opposite cerebral cortex.

The location of the genu of the internal capsule is at the apex of the pallidal part of the lentiform nucleus. The anterior and posterior limbs join at a right angle in this region to form the genu.

The location of the sublenticular segment of the internal capsule is below the lentiform nucleus. This area contains auditory radiation fibers which course from the medial geniculate body and terminate in the transverse temporal gyri of Heschl. The retrolenticular segment of the internal capsule is around the posterior edge of the lentiform nucleus. It contains fibers of the optic radiation which connect the lateral geniculate nucleus to the calcarine fissure (a.k.a geniculocalcarine radiations). Parts of the optic radiation also course through the sublenticular segment of the internal capsule. The optic radiation transmits visual information from the retina to the visual cortex.