Treatment with APS-1 is multi-faceted and needs collaboration among different specialties.

Mucocutaneous candidiasis: Oral candidiasis treatment is with two topical polyene antifungals for 4-6 weeks. Recurrent oral candidiasis treatment is with weekly pulse prophylaxis with a polyene antifungal given every 3 weeks. Therapy for infection of the angle of the mouth is with natamycin or chlorhexidine gel. Vaginal candidiasis should have treatment with fluconazole. Nail infection can be challenging to treat and may require a referral to a podiatrist.

Hypoparathyroidism: The objective of treatment is to maintain normocalcemia. Acute hypocalcemia warrants intravenous supplementation of calcium gluconate or calcium chloride. In nonacute circumstances, oral calcium and vitamin D supplementation may suffice to maintain normocalcemia. The goal is to maintain calcium in the low normal range.  Recombinant PTH may be an option in cases where conventional treatment fails to normalize the calcium levels.

Adrenal insufficiency: The mainstay of treatment is glucocorticoid supplementation with hydrocortisone. The recommended dose is 10 mg in the morning and 5 mg around 3:00 to 4:00 PM. In cases of malabsorption, higher doses of hydrocortisone may be necessary.  Fludrocortisone (0.05 to 2 mg) may be used to replace mineralocorticoids; however, sensitivity varies among individuals. Dosing will require titration to maintain normokalemia and prevent pedal edema. All patients with adrenal insufficiency should wear an alert bracelet.