Before performing a TURP, patients must understand the expectations before, during, and after the case. Initially, a thorough history needs to be performed, focusing on their voiding history, urinary symptoms, frequency, urgency, flow rate, dysuria, nocturia, and incontinence., A review of what they have tried to manage their LUTS and medication history should be done. A physical exam should also be completed focusing on the genitalia, and a digital rectal exam, which is utilized to evaluate for other pathology that describes symptoms and to estimate the size of the prostate. A post-void residual and urine analysis is preferred to assess the patient's voiding ability and rule out a UTI before the surgery.

Before TURP for urinary retention, some urologists will perform urodynamics on some or all of their preoperative patients to determine the functionality of the bladder. This testing provides more information about bladder functionality and may aid in the informed consent discussion before the surgery. This would be most reasonable in cases where detrusor muscular contractile ability is uncertain, such as in patients with an underlying neuropathy, persistently large bladder capacities, or urinary retention with >1,500 mL. However, there is little data on the benefit of urodynamics in the perioperative setting.

Other urologists believe that the best option is to perform the TURP, regardless, as it provides the patient with the best opportunity for spontaneous voiding post-operatively. In some of these questionable cases, placement of a suprapubic tube at the time of the TURP can be considered with the understanding that it will be removed if the patient demonstrates persistently low (<200 mL) postvoid residuals after surgery. This avoids the need to perform a separate suprapubic tube placement surgery later. Preoperative urodynamics is also recommended in patients with detrusor instability and poor bladder compliance who are more likely to develop post-operative urinary frequency and urgency issues which should be addressed prior to surgery.

All the options for managing LUTS should be discussed and reviewed to ensure the patient fully understands the risks and benefits of all the reasonably available choices. After this in-depth discussion, an informed decision can be made to proceed to a TURP procedure.

With advances in medical equipment, patients can have resection of a TURP with an electrical element or prostatic vaporization using a laser fiber. The TURP has been around for many years and allows quick resection of large prostates in patients with obstructive BPH that are not on active anticoagulation. This technique also allows for a pathologic review of the prostatic chips to look for possible prostate cancer.

Cutting and coagulating currents require separate generators, usually packaged together inside one electrosurgical unit. Cutting current quickly achieves full voltage, while coagulating current is much slower to reach peak levels—this slower type of current results in charring and fulguration, which together produce the coagulating effect. The generators also greatly increase the electrical frequency from the standard 60 Hz current to avoid having any unexpected reaction with body tissue.

The preop evaluation generally includes a history and physical as well as baseline electrolytes, CBC, PSA, a post-void residual determination, and urinalysis, which are reasonable preoperative tests prior to urologic surgery. Coagulation studies are no longer considered necessary unless there is a history of unexplained or unusual bleeding. Renal imaging studies and urodynamics are also unnecessary in most cases.

The 2021 American Urological Association Guidelines on Management of Benign Prostatic Hyperplasia recommends the consideration of an evaluation of prostate size and shape before any surgery. This may be done by cystoscopy, transrectal ultrasonography, computed tomography (CT), or magnetic resonance imaging (MRI).

Two weeks of finasteride therapy, a 5 alpha-reductase inhibitor, has been shown to reduce microvascular density and intraoperative blood loss; therefore, it is recommended, especially in larger prostates, prior to TURP.

Preoperative antibiotics are recommended 1 hour before the expected start of surgery.

Due to the high risk of increased bleeding, venous thromboembolism prophylaxis is generally not recommended in TURP, except for early ambulation.

**Monopolar vs. Bipolar**

Transurethral resection of the prostate can be done with either a monopolar technique or bipolar. The original TURP procedure designed and developed in the 1930s and 40s used monopolar equipment where the electrical current passes from the wire loop through the tissue in direct contact with the electrode, through the patient to the grounding pad. For this to work, the irrigating fluid must be non-conducting such as water, 5% glucose, glycine, sorbitol, mannitol, or sorbitol/mannitol. (Water and 5% glucose are no longer used.) The use of these types of irrigation causes a possible chance of dilutional hyponatremia or TUR syndrome, especially in prolonged or high blood loss procedures.

As there is constant irrigating fluid absorption during the resection, the patient will incorporate some of the irrigation during the procedure, which causes hyponatremia if excessive fluid is absorbed. A monopolar resection will not work using a conducting fluid such as normal saline. For this reason, many facilities have switched to bipolar equipment where both electrical poles are within the resectoscope instrument. This allows for using normal saline as the irrigation fluid and eliminates the possibility of TUR syndrome. However, the risk of TUR syndrome is somewhat overblown as the actual incidence is roughly only 20 cases/1,000 monopolar TURP surgeries.

Bipolar equipment may not be available in many parts of the world; it requires completely changing sets of urologic instruments, a dedicated electrosurgical generator unit is needed, and it generally tends to be somewhat slower than monopolar resection, although overall results are comparable.

The 2021 AUA Guidelines recommend both monopolar and bipolar transurethral resection depending on physician experience, expertise, and the available instrumentation. The overall outcomes and complication rates are essentially equivalent.

The laser technique or photo vaporization of the prostate (sometimes called a laser TURP even though it's vaporization and not resection) can be safely utilized for men on anticoagulation. This technique is generally slower than the TURP and does not allow pathologic examination as the removed tissue is vaporized.