**Common**

Pain is self-limiting, and a short course of simple analgesics such as paracetamol and non-steroidal anti-inflammatory medications is usually sufficient.

An altered voice is usually the resolution of preexisting hyponasal speech and is often seen as a benefit rather than a complication.

Adenoid regrowth is noted in a small number of patients, and occasionally a revision adenoidectomy is necessary, particularly in patients having undergone adenoidectomy for infectious/otitis media indications

**Rare**

Dental trauma and minor injuries to the lips and tongue can occur following adenoidectomy and tonsillectomy. The surgeon must enquire preoperatively about loose teeth and fillings, and exercise caution when introducing and opening the Crowe-Davis mouth gag to minimize these risks.

Intraoperative bleeding can result in the formation of a "coroner's" clot in the nasopharynx that can dislodge and result in fatal aspiration. For this reason, it is mandatory to suction the postnasal space before completing the surgery.

Postoperative bleeding is rare, and with the widespread adoption of diathermy and techniques involving direct visualization, rates have declined to as low as 0.07%.

Atlantoaxial subluxation (Grisel syndrome) is a rare but serious complication following adenoidectomy. Pre-existing laxity of the anterior spinal ligament (associated with Down syndrome) and excessive use of diathermy are recognized risk factors. Management consists of analgesia, immobilization, and neurosurgical intervention in refractory cases.

Long-term velopharyngeal insufficiency is rare, occurring in between 1 in 1,500 and 1 in 10,000 cases. It results in hypernasal speech and nasal regurgitation. Risk factors include a known cleft palate or an occult submucosal cleft palate. A partial adenoidectomy retaining tissue at the velopharyngeal junction should be considered in these cases to minimize the risk. Rarely, reconstructive surgery is required to improve severe speech and swallowing impairment.