# Definition/Introduction

Drug-eluting stents (DES) are vascular prostheses used by interventional cardiologists to reopen and maintain patent coronary arteries narrowed by arteriosclerosis. The history of interventional cardiology began with balloon angioplasty in 1977. Sigwart et al. introduced the first bare metal stent (BMS) in 1986.

Facing the variety of DES, one can classify them according to three characteristics:

- Scaffold

- Drug-delivery mechanism (i.e., polymer)

- Therapeutic agent

The development of DES evolved through different generations. First-generation DES had a stainless steel scaffolding coated with either sirolimus or paclitaxel. The RAVEL, SIRIUS, and TAXUS trials evaluated first-generation DES.

Stents prevent the vascular recoil cardiologists observed with balloon angioplasty (PTCA). Bare metal stents (BMS) are superior to PTCA alone as was shown in the BENESTENT and STRESS trials.

Problems with hypersensitivity to stents have been proposed and subsequently, the concept of polymer-free or biodegradable polymers was introduced. Recently reestablishment of healthy long-term vasomotion with biodegradable stents have gained significance.

Different characteristics make each drug-eluting stent unique. Each of them has advantages and disadvantages which derive from differences in drug-loading capacity, drug-release pharmacokinetics, polymer durability, biocompatibility, influence on vascular wall thinning, aneurysm formation, and delayed restenosis.

The FDA MAUDE database showed that most stent fractures do not trigger symptoms, are difficult to assess and thus, are probably under-recognized.

# Issues of Concern

**The Scaffold**

Stents can be classified according to characteristics like metallic basis and design.

Stainless steel or tantalum was used in early BMS.

Later on, nitinol, a combination of nickel and titanium, was introduced into clinical practice as it exhibited elastic properties and thermal shape memory.

Recent stent backbones are made from chromium combinations with either cobalt or platinum as they allow thin strut structure. Cobalt chromium stents are a choice in higher-risk lesions due to their high radial strength, low profile and increased elasticity.

Due to improved scaffold materials having higher radial strength, strut thickness decreased from around 140 micrometers in thick-strut stents to around 70 micrometers in thin-strut stents. The ISAR-STEREO trial showed the superiority of thin-strut stents with lower restenosis.

The problem of metal allergy plays no role in the pathogenesis of restenosis, but its influence on outcome shows contradictory evidence.

Apart from the metallic basis, scaffold design has clinical implications as relates to vessel injury during implantation, and different designs result in different injury patterns with greater injury leading to increased tissue proliferation and platelet adhesion.

Multicellular stents can subdivide into closed-cell and open-cell designs. Closed-cell stents show a more uniform drug delivery but are less flexible, whereas open-cell stents have a non-uniform drug distribution but improved alignment to the vessel.

Bioabsorbable stents are non-permanent implants avoiding caging vessels and obstructing side branches and allow vasomotion.

**The Therapeutic Agent**

Antiproliferative drugs stop vascular smooth muscle cell proliferation and thus, neointimal hyperplasia. Sirolimus and paclitaxel were used in first generation DES. Paclitaxel inhibits microtubule disassembly and thus interferes with the cell cycle, leading to cell cycle arrest in G0-G1 and G2-M phases.

Therefore, later generation stent therapeutic agents evolved from sirolimus. Changes to the sirolimus structure created compounds such as everolimus (SDZ RAD) which showed anti-arteriosclerotic features and prevented graft rejection.

Other investigated therapeutic agents are

- Dual drug-eluting stents DDES, which carry two therapeutic agents to combine their mechanism of action, for example antiproliferative and additional anti-thrombotic effects. The modification of the coating allows time controlled release of the drugs targeting the different timing of bio-response to stent implantation.

- Phytoncide (PTC), which shows the same anti-inflammatory and antiproliferative effects in vitro as sirolimus and thus might serve as an alternative to sirolimus

- Glucocorticoids, which are useful to suppress inflammatory changes that lead to restenosis

- Gene eluting stents, which deliver plasmid DNA to express appreciated proteins inside cells. The expression of VEGF, for example, supports healthy endothelialization of the stent luminal surface

- Galangin, which up-regulates p27KIP1 that arrests cell cycle in the G0-G1 phase, inhibits proliferation of vascular smooth muscle cells

- Tacrolimus reduces restenosis via the calcineurin/NFAT/IL-2 pathway but is inferior in head-to-head comparison to other stents eluting rapamycin agents

- Stem-cell carrying stents to support healthy reendothelialization

- Radioactive stents

- Actinomycin

- Probucol

- 7-Hexanoyltaxol

**The Coating**

Stent coating serves different purposes. It facilitates drug stent adhesion, drug-release, biocompatibility, and modulates thrombogenicity. Polymers are repeating sequences of chemical connections. Drug delivery via polymers follows the principle of diffusion, dissolution or ion exchange.

- Organic or inorganic

- Bio-erodable or permanent

- Uniform or nonuniform drug delivery

- Luminal or abluminal coating

- Active or passive

First generation DES used synthetic polymers such as poly(ethylene-co-vinyl acetate) (PEVA) and poly(n-butyl methacrylate) (PBMA) or tri-block copolymer poly(styrene-b-isobtylene-b-styrene) (SIBS). PEVA and PBMA coat SES whereas SIBS coats PES. SIBS allows early burst release of the drug which is ideal for controlling the early vascular injury following stent implantation. Observations of late stent thrombosis with PEVA and PBMA triggered investigations to find the underlying causes. Hypersensitivity arose as a factor as tissue surrounding stents became infiltrated by inflammatory cells.

Other coating options include

- Gold-coated stents, which exhibited an increased risk for restenosis

- Heparin

- Endothelial cells or its progenitors

- CD34 antibodies

- Natural glycocalyx

To further reduce the inflammatory response, stent coatings employed bioabsorbable polymers such as poly-lactic acid (PLA), poly(lactide-co-glycolide) (PLGA) and polycaprolactone (PCL).

The problems associated with coating polymers such as inflammation or hypersensitivity can be avoided altogether by using drug reservoirs stents or nanoparticles.

# Clinical Significance

The plentitude of different drug-eluting stents requires knowledge about their characteristics to align the advantages and disadvantages of the stent with the requirement of each unique lesion. Stent performance depends strongly on lesion characteristics.

New-generation DES can be used in complex lesions such as with diabetic patients,

Bare metal stents are not outdated, but drug-eluting stents have largely replaced them.

The discussion about the appropriateness of real-world stenting practice is ongoing. For example, the NORSTENT study emphasized the advantages of BMS compared to DES. Designing studies and finding evidence is difficult, which can be illustrated by the fact that the progression of restenosis differs, which makes early angiographic measures unrelated to late stenotic changes. Measuring restenosis risk as a surrogate is common among studies, but it may not correlate with clinical endpoints such as death and myocardial infarction.

Evidence advocates for everolimus-eluting stents, which exhibit the most favorable outcomes and the future might belong to biodegradable polymers and bioabsorbable scaffolds.