Obesity and its comorbidities have a significant burden on the healthcare system. According to AHA, Obesity is a multifactorial disease with pathophysiology associated with biological, socioeconomic, psychosocial, and environmental risk factors and leading to adverse health outcomes. Obesity is linked to dyslipidemia, type II diabetes mellitus, hypertension, and sleep disorders. Obesity is also with increased coronary artery calcium score, a marker of coronary atherosclerosis.

Orlistat effectively lowers body weight, BMI, cholesterol levels, and waist circumference. It has also been shown to cause a modest decrease in blood pressure and improved glycemic control in patients with diabetes. Gastrointestinal adverse effects are the most common reason for discontinuation of the medication. The drug can be used in the proper clinical setting to achieve weight loss goals and decrease obesity complications.

Clinicians must be vigilant while prescribing orlistat, especially in patients with diabetes, epilepsy, HIV, and blood coagulation disorder. The clinical nurse is required to assist the medical team in educating the patient on the expected gastrointestinal effects of the drug. A specialized pharmacist is a key to optimizing therapy with this drug. The pharmacist should assist the medical team in adjusting doses or timing of other medications when starting the patient on orlistat therapy to ensure their efficacy is not reduced. The pharmacist must educate the patient on proper dosing, timing, and frequency of therapy to minimize adverse outcomes. Dieticians should be involved in patient care, ensuring the patient has direction on a nutritionally balanced, low-calorie diet. For the management of cholelithiasis or nephrolithiasis, surgical consultation may be required. Psychiatrists and psychologist consultations may be necessary for bulimia nervosa.

A coordinated and collaborative interprofessional team of clinicians, pharmacists, nurses, physician assistants, and dieticians can improve the efficacy of orlistat therapy and achieve optimal patient results. According to the AACE/ACE comprehensive clinical practice guidelines for obesity, interprofessional collaboration and communication between clinicians(MD, DO, NP, PA), dietitians, nurses, instructors, physical activity trainers, and clinical psychologists are essential for the effective management of patients with obesity and improving outcomes related to orlistat therapy.