Thorough history and physical examination, including all systems, habits, medications, allergies, present acute and chronic illnesses and previous illnesses, significant injuries and surgeries, and a meticulous family medical-surgical history with multigeneration family cancer history, engaging cancer genetics counseling when hereditary disease is suspect, are mandatory when undertaking the medical care of women in whom genital cancer or precursors are known or suspected from chief complaints, symptoms, presenting signs, known or revealed risk factors and/or family cancer pedigree (see above: Etiology and Epidemiology and below: Evaluation and Management).

Abnormal uterine bleeding (AUB) is the most frequent symptom of endometrial cancer (see below: Differential Diagnosis).**.**

While the prevalence of endometrial cancer in premenopausal women younger than 50 years with AUB is 1% or less, the disease may be diagnosed in a few women during their third decades of life and rarely even in teenagers.

Because the incidence of endometrial cancer is so low (0.1/100,000) before age 20 years, once systemic disease has been ruled-out and regular ovulatory menstrual cycles have been reestablished, endometrial assessment generally is not recommended in teenagers with AUB, unless the young woman is obese and has experienced 2 to 3 years of anovulatory bleeding. As the risk for endometrial cancer increases with age, this rule may be followed for adult women younger than age 35 years. However, after excluding pregnancy and evaluating for endocrinopathies and systemic and iatrogenic causes, all women with AUB older than 35 years should have the endometrial assessment to rule-out hyperplasia or malignancy.

Synchronous ovarian cancers occur with some 10% of endometrial cancer cases and may be more prevalent in premenopausal women 50 years of age and younger.

While AUB, especially PMB, is by far the most common presenting symptoms and signs of endometrial cancer, occasionally abnormal vaginal discharge or cervicovaginal cytology may lead to the diagnosis. Examination of Pap smear taken within 6 months prior to the diagnosis of endometrial cancers reported that 38% were abnormal, 21% were consistent with adenocarcinoma, and 13% showed atypical glandular cells.