# Definition/Introduction

In 1985, the United States Congress passed the Consolidated Omnibus Reconciliation Act (COBRA), which encompasses many health insurance program regulations. This act encompasses mandates on private pension plans, disability insurance, group health plans, and emergency medical treatment. The focus of this article is on the Emergency Medical Treatment and Active Labor Act (EMTALA).

Congress passed the EMTALA in 1986, and it guarantees non-discriminatory access to emergency medical care.

EMC is listed as: “a condition manifesting itself by acute symptoms of sufficient severity (including severe pain) such that the absence of immediate medical attention could reasonably be expected to result in placing the individual’s health [or the health of an unborn child] in serious jeopardy, serious impairment to bodily functions, or serious dysfunction of bodily organs.”

# Issues of Concern

The primary issue of concern with the COBRA and EMTALA laws is that the terminology used is vague and, therefore, open to interpretations.

HMOs and other such insurance programs are often not held liable for these violations while they gatekeep the care their clients receive. While insurance programs are not penalized or pay for this service, physicians and hospitals do not receive compensation for the treatment of uninsured and underinsured patients.

Of all the investigations performed by CMS, 40% were violations, but only 3% resulted in fines.

About 20% of EMTALA violations settlements between 2002 and 2018 included psychiatric emergencies.

# Clinical Significance

EMTALA and COBRA laws prevent "patient dumping," which is a form of economic discrimination where uninsured patients do not receive treatment and transfer to public institutions or are discharged because of the high anticipated costs of their emergency diagnoses or treatments.

EMTALA has often been cited as a major contributor to emergency department overcrowding and costs.

# Nursing, Allied Health, and Interprofessional Team Interventions

Physicians are often solely held accountable for providing an appropriate medical screening examination and correct documentation. However, 20% of EMTALA violations result from emergency department nurses; this can range from incorrect transfer documentation to innocent advice on where to get faster care. While nurses cannot be held liable under EMTALA, they are held accountable under their states' Nurse Practice Act, and they can also be named in medical malpractice lawsuits.

Other hospital care staff, such as pharmacists and physical therapists, are unlikely and rare causes of EMTALA violations. However, all care staff should ensure every patient is getting appropriate care regardless of insurance status and ability to pay.