There is no specific test that accurately diagnoses nephrogenic systemic fibrosis (NSF). The diagnosis is usually made with a good history, appropriate physical examination, and exclusion of other differential diagnoses. The health professional should consider the clinical scenario of this condition while making the diagnosis. The typical clinical scenario is a patient with severe renal insufficiency (eGFR less than 30 mL/min/1.73 m^2) exposed to GBCAs during an MRI examination. It is essential to know that patients with mild or moderate renal insufficiency may also be affected by this condition, but this occurred when older high-risk GBCAs were utilized. The biopsy of the affected organ, including the skin with the typical findings, may furtherly support the diagnosis.

A deep punch biopsy of the skin should be performed. A sample of the dermis, subcutaneous fat, and fascia should ideally be obtained. On histopathology, lesions within 20 weeks of disease onset show reticular, dermal, large, and epithelioid or stellate spindle cells. These cells extend into the subcutaneous fat lobule septa and widen it. The spindle cells are arranged diffusely among thickened collagen bundles. Clefts encompass spindle cells that are CD34/procollagen positive and form a dense interconnecting network. Lesions that are older than 20 weeks from clinical onset have less prominent clefting, less mucin, and fewer CD34/procollagen–positive cells. Calcification, which is dystrophic in nature, can be present. Histopathologically, nephrogenic systemic fibrosis resembles scleromyxedema.

Rarely, some patients with NSF are found to have the following in their blood:

- Peripheral eosinophilia

- Antinuclear antibodies

- Anticardiolipin or antiphospholipid antibodies

- Hypercoagulability

Nerve conduction abnormalities have been reported in some patients.