Evaluating for SSPE tends to be multi-faceted. While the gold standard for diagnosis is brain biopsy, clinicians tend to use a set of criteria to diagnose SSPE.  Initially, Dyken criteria were developed to help diagnose SSPE. This consisted of certain symptoms and specific CSF/serum, EEG, and brain biopsy findings, requiring at least 3 of the five criteria for diagnosis. However, due to the variable nature of the SSPE presentation, the second set of criteria was developed in 2010. This proposed SSPE diagnosis criteria include several major and minor criteria, with a diagnosis requiring two major and one minor criterion. If there is insufficient evidence or supporting criteria for diagnosis, but it is still highly likely, histopathological and molecular testing is available.

**Major Criteria**

- One of the major criteria is having either a typical or atypical presentation. The typical presentation is defined as either acute, rapid, subacute, or chronic progressive or chronic relapsing-remitting.

- The atypical presentation includes seizures, prolonged stage I, or unusual age at presentation. Another major criterion is elevated anti-measles antibodies greater than or equal to 1:4 in the CSF or 1:256 in the serum.

**Minor Criteria**

- The minor criteria cover supporting evidence of clinical presentation, one of which is EEG findings consistent with high-amplitude slow waves occurring bilaterally and synchronously at fixed and regular intervals. These are called slow-wave complexes or Radermecker complexes.

- Another minor criterion is an elevated level of globulin in the CSF, that makes up more than 20% of the total protein found in CSF.

- Brain biopsy findings consistent with SSPE discussed in the histopathological section is a minor criterion

- Lastly, a molecular test used to identify the genome mutations in the wild strain of the measles virus is a minor criterion.

**CSF findings**can include pleocytosis and increased immunoglobulins as described in the criteria with normal glucose and protein levels. ELISA of CSF will typically show the presence of the measles virus.

**Imaging**can be used as supportive evidence of a diagnosis, but it does not always have abnormal findings.

**Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI)**can show decreased gray matter volume, hyperintensities, and atrophy with marked ventriculomegaly.

**Magnetic resonance spectroscopy**can also be used to evaluate patients for SSPE. If caught early in the course, there will be a decrease in N-acetyl-aspartate and an increase in choline, which is evidence of inflammation and demyelination.