Diagnosis of tubulointerstitial nephritis may be delayed due to nonspecific symptoms. It is challenging to differentiate acute and chronic TIN, and equally important to separate TIN from other causes of renal diseases, such as glomerulonephritis and acute tubular necrosis because treatment and prognosis are different. Clinical assessment, laboratory findings, and imaging tests are the approaches by clinicians to make the diagnosis.

**Renal Biopsy**

Histopathological view after the renal biopsy is the only definitive diagnosis and gold standard for TIN, which shows characteristic diffuse or focal inflammatory cells (lymphocytes, plasma cells, neutrophils, eosinophils, histiocytes) infiltration, edema, and fibrosis along with tubulitis. One should always have a high suspicion of TIN in any patient with renal insufficiency. If there is no clinical improvement even after the withdrawal of offending agents, the patient should be advised for renal biopsy, provided there are no contraindications, and the patient agrees.

**Imaging Tests**

Renal ultrasonography (USG) and CT scans are often used as imaging studies to support the diagnosis of TIN. These tests reveal bilateral normal to the increased size of the kidney and diffusely increased cortical hyperechogenicity.

In another study, it was revealed by USG that the increase in the width of the kidney was more significant than in other dimensions.

**Blood Testing**

The most significant manifestation of renal failure in TIN is increased blood urea nitrogen and serum creatinine. The diagnosis could be considered initially when patients develop a rise in serum creatinine levels.

**Urine Analysis and Microscopy**

Urine analysis is one of the most commonly used tests and provides a helpful clue to diagnosing TIN. Positive proteinuria in dipstick test and microscopic or macroscopic hematuria is associated with drug-induced TIN in less than 50% of cases but about 90% in beta-lactam antibiotics-induced TIN. Urine leukocytes are present in almost all patients with methicillin-induced TIN but less common with other antibiotics. Esinophiluria (Wright or Hansel stain) is present in the drug-induced acute TIN but not sensitive and specific due to being present in other conditions.

Diagnosis and monitoring of disease activity are helped by urinary biomarkers, for instance, monocyte chemotactic peptide-1 (MCP-1), alpha1-microglobulin (A1M), and beta2- microglobulin (B2M).