Symptomatic management of Loeffler endocarditis can be achieved with supportive care with diuretics, digoxin, and conventional therapy for heart failure, including angiotensin-converting enzyme (ACE) inhibitor angiotensin II receptor blockers, beta-adrenergic blockers, and aldosterone antagonists.

Patients with Loeffler endocarditis typically need mitral valve replacement due to mitral regurgitation. The mitral valve can be replaced with either a mechanical or bioprosthetic valve, but a biological valve is preferable due to a high incidence of mechanical valve thrombosis. There is no indication for prophylactic anticoagulation in Loeffler endocarditis. However, if a ventricular thrombus is diagnosed via echocardiography or CMR, anticoagulation should be started. Warfarin or low molecular weight heparin can be used in patients with Loeffler endocarditis with ventricular thrombus or when a mechanical mitral valve is implanted.

Treatment of the underlying HES should be started as soon as the diagnosis is made. Steroids are the first-line therapy for HES due to their anti-inflammatory effect. Hydroxyurea can be used as a second-line agent depending on the etiology of the condition. All patients diagnosed with HES with or without cardiac involvement should have genetic testing for FIP1L1-PDGFRA mutation as it affects the management of the disease. Those who are positive for mutation should be treated with imatinib, a tyrosine kinase inhibitor, which has provided a good treatment response in the literature.