The mammary gland is a highly evolved and specialized organ present in pairs, one on each side of the anterior chest wall. The organ's primary function is to secrete milk. Though it is present in both sexes, it is well developed in females and rudimentary in males. It is also a vital accessory organ of the female reproductive system.

**Type:**It is an apocrine type of gland. In these glands, the apical part of the cells and a part of the cytoplasm are lost in the secretion.

**Situation:**The mammary gland is situated in the pectoral region in the superficial fascia. However, a part of it called the axillary tail pierces the deep fascia and lies in the axilla.

**Shape:**The shape of the mammary gland is hemispherical in young adult females but becomes pendulous in the later stage of life.

**Weight:**Though it varies from one person to another, the mammary gland usually weighs between 500 to 1000 grams each.

**Extent:**The vertical extension of the mammary gland is from the second rib to the sixth rib. The horizontal extension is from the lateral sternal border to the mid-axillary line. A significant part of the organ lies in the superficial fascia. A portion of the breast called**axillary tail (of Spence)**pierces into the deep fascia and extends to the axilla up to the third rib level.

**Deep relations:**Deep to the mammary gland tissue is a retro mammary space of loose areolar tissue, which gives free mobility to the mammary gland. Below it is the fascia (pectoral fascia), which covers the pectoralis muscle. Other muscles that lie partly underneath the mammary gland are the serratus anterior muscle and the external oblique muscle of the abdomen.

The mammary gland is best studied by dividing into four quadrants by a vertical and a horizontal, imaginary line passing through the nipple. The four quadrants are upper lateral, upper medial, lower medial, and lower lateral quadrants.