Valproic acid exhibits its pharmacologic effects in a couple of ways, such as by acting on GABA (γ aminobutyric acid) levels in the CNS, blocking voltage-gated ion channels, and inhibiting histone deacetylase. Impaired GABAergic inhibitory activity is established pathophysiology of seizure initiation and propagation, given that controlling this pathway a potential target for antiepileptic drugs. GABA is synthesized from α-ketoglutarate through the tricarboxylic acid(TCA) cycle and metabolized into succinate semialdehyde and then to succinate by GABA transaminase and succinate semialdehyde dehydrogenase, respectively. Previous studies have shown that valproic acid inhibits GABA transaminase and succinate semialdehyde dehydrogenase, increasing the GABA concentration by reducing its degradation (Figure-1).

Valproic acid may also exert antiepileptic effects by reducing the high-frequency firing of neurons by voltage-gated sodium, potassium, and calcium channel blockade. Valproic acid modulates the biochemical phenomenon of aura and affects nociception by modulating GABA and/or glutamate-mediated neurotransmission. In neuropathic pain, it has been demonstrated that valproic acid blocks neurogenic inflammation by GABA-A receptor-mediated inhibition. Recently, valproic acid showed to be an inhibitor of histone deacetylase (HDAC), particularly HDAC1, as well as other HDAC. Histone deacetylase inhibition potentially upregulates the expression of genes that regulates apoptosis and antitumor action.

Additionally, valproic acid affects signaling systems like the Wnt/Beta-Catenin and ERK pathways, which similarly interfere with inositol and arachidonate metabolism. Valproate use plays a role in the expression of multiple genes involved in cell survival, transcription regulation, ion homeostasis, signal transduction, and cytoskeletal modifications. Both immediate biochemical effect and genomic influences as a long-term effect can explain the underlying effect of valproic acid in treating all three indications listed above.