**Osteosarcoma**

The features seen on plain film radiographs vary depending on the destructive nature of the tumor and the degree of remineralization. Often, a lesion with irregular, poorly defined margins is observed. Several classical signs may be noted. They are not pathognomonic for osteosarcoma and are not always present. Codman’s triangle is an effect caused by the elevation of the periosteum over the lesion in a tent-like manner. The classical ‘sun-ray’ appearance describes the invasion of the periosteum by thin spicules of bony tumors in an outward direction. Garrington’s sign describes widening of the periodontal ligament and inferior alveolar nerve canal.

More precise imaging should be undertaken, ideally with magnetic resonance imaging (MRI), to assess the extent and invasion of the lesion, specifically looking at marrow involvement and relation to surrounding structures; this will allow for tumor staging.

Biopsy through the center of the lesion must be obtained to get an accurate tissue diagnosis. Osteosarcoma can be a difficult histological diagnosis, and occasionally repeated biopsies are required. Staging scans are undertaken specifically to assess thoracic metastasis, most commonly through a computerized tomography (CT) of the chest.

**Fibrous Dysplasia**

On radiographs, fibrous dysplasia is a poorly defined lesion that merges into surrounding bone. It has a classical ‘ground glass’ appearance. It may begin as a lucent lesion and become more sclerotic over time. On CT imaging, there is a buccolingual expansion and thus thinning of the cortical plate. There is also a characteristic 3-dimensional displacement of the inferior alveolar nerve canal and loss of the lamina dura around affected teeth.

**Central Giant Cell Granuloma**

When assessing central giant cell granulomas, it is important to exclude any underlying systemic diagnosis. Hyperparathyroidism will lead to brown tumors, which will occur as multiple osteoclastic giant cell tumors. Cherubism will cause bilateral lesions in the mandible of young children. Bloods work assessing bone profile and PTH levels is important, and family history might highlight potential cherubism.

Radiographic assessment is not pathognomonic and may vary. It will show a radiolucent lesion, which may be small around the root of a tooth or large, involving most of the jaw, resorbing the cortical plate and adjacent teeth. For small lesions, plain radiographs may suffice. For large, aggressively destructive lesions, 3-dimensional CT imaging will provide a more complete picture of the bony destruction.

**Osteoma**

Osteoma may be incidental findings on imaging. However, in the case of clinical detection, assessment with initial radiographs will show a well-defined radio-opacity.

**Osteochondroma**

Plain film radiograph of osteochondroma has pathognomonic features, specifically continuity of the medullary space with the underlying bone. Three classical appearances have been described. Firstly, an enlarged condyle with anteromedial extension into the lateral pterygoid.

CT imaging will give a more 3-dimensional appreciation when assessing the lesion and allow better pre-operative planning; this can often be completed as a cone-beam CT with reduced radiation doses.

**Osteoblastoma**

Radiographic findings are mixed for these lesions; alternating regions of radiolucency and radiopacity are observed depending on the degree of calcification.