Different organizations have different lists of "absolute" and "relative" contraindications to UAE.  The following list roughly orders contraindications from strongest to weakest.

- Viable active pregnancy

- Active endometritis

- Malignancy of the uterus/cervix without concurrent surgical treatment planned

- Postmenopausal patient with bleeding of undiagnosed etiology

- Fibroid that is already infarcted (based on MRI)

- Fibroid that is smaller than 1 cm

- Fibroid with pedunculated morphology (such as stalk width less than 50% of the maximum width; some people use different percentage cutoffs)

- Fibroid located in the cervix

- Concurrent use of a GnRH agonist

- Prior pelvic radiation therapy

- Immunocompromised state

- Fibroid growth resulting in overall uterus size equivalent or greater than the expected size at 24 weeks gestation (uterus craniad aspect reaching the umbilicus)

- Severe contrast allergy

- Severe renal insufficiency not receiving dialysis therapy

- Uncorrectable coagulopathy

Of some controversy:

- Patient desire for future pregnancy

- Adenomyosis

For both of these topics, the 2014 SIR guidelines state that in the absence of further evidence, neither should be seen as a contraindication but only as a point of discussion.  The 2009 SIR guidelines listed patient desire for future pregnancy as a relative contraindication and were ambivalent on adenomyosis, only stating that "extensive endometriosis or adenomyosis" could result in UAE failure.  Evidence regarding these issues is discussed elsewhere in this article.

Gonadotropin-releasing hormones that may have been prescribed as medical therapy should be stopped at least three months before UAE because they constrict the uterine arteries and may preclude their catheterization.

If the stalk of a pedunculated fibroid is much less than the overall fibroid diameter, then laparoscopic resection can avoid the chance of the fibroid sloughing and forming a loose necrotic tissue mass in the abdomen that can become infected and form an abscess.  A fibroid that is very large and has an extensive blood supply is unlikely to be successfully embolized, whereas a fibroid that is very small is unlikely to be the source of symptoms.  Fibroids of the cervix are often able to be removed surgically via a vaginal approach.