Most of the retinal artery macroaneurysms essentially undergo spontaneous resolution and involution, and the patients can be observed. A thorough, structured workup for the systemic association should be advised with a proper follow-up for at least six months.

RAMs that undergo spontaneous resolution do not usually have any sequelae. In case of ruptured RAM leading to hemorrhage and exudation but not involving the macula, a close follow-up at first one month followed by every 1-3 monthly is to be done until complete involution.

Treatment is recommended for complicated or non-resolving macroaneurysms.

**1 ) Laser Photocoagulation**

It includes direct or indirect laser application or a combination of both in case of a hemorrhage or exudation involving the macula.

A ) Direct laser photocoagulation- It helps in sealing the aneurysm using minimal power (100 to 300 mW) with a large spot size (200-500 microns) given for a longer duration (200-500 milliseconds) to create a light burn.

B ) Indirect laser photocoagulation - Reduces the consumption of oxygen and blood flow to the aneurysm along with decreasing exudation from the surrounding capillaries. Direct thermal energy delivery to the lesion is avoided, and rather confluent burns for a shorter duration (100-200 milliseconds) with a power of 400mW at 200 μm spot size with medium darkness are given around the aneurysm and more specifically to the retinal capillaries that are damaged surrounding the lesion.

Complications include arteriolar occlusions, retinal break, artery to vein shunting, a breakthrough of hemorrhage, capillary dropouts, choroidal neovascular membrane formation, an extension of exudation, traction at the retina, scarring of the subretinal region, or even symptomatic scotomas may occur post laser application.

C ) Subthreshold laser - It is used in the management of fovea involving exudative RAMs. It does not form a visible burn mark is not formed. It causes increased expression of the heat shock protein resulting in selective retinal pigment epithelial cell damage with a better balance between angiogenic factors and cytokine release. Hence, it causes retinal hyperthermia below the cell death threshold.

Battaglia Parodi and colleagues conducted a pilot study to compare subthreshold (exposure time of 0.3 seconds, power of 1400 mW, spot size of 125 nm, and a duty cycle of 15%) with threshold laser treatment reported similar anatomical and visual outcomes. Still, the incidence of epiretinal membrane formation was decreased when the subthreshold laser was used.

Yellow dye laser and indocyanine green dye-enhanced photocoagulation can also be used to treat retinal artery macroaneurysm.

**2 ) Intravitreal Injection of Anti VEGF (Anti-Vascular Endothelial Growth Factor) Agents**

It was first used in the management of retinal artery macroaneurysm in 2009.

Chanana et al. reported that intravitreal bevacizumab (1.25 mg) expedited a decrease in the retinal thickness and is also well tolerated.

Jonas et al. reported the use of bevacizumab for the management of retinal artery macroaneurysm induced macular edema.

Wenkstern et al. reported the use of intravitreal ranibizumab with focal laser photocoagulation to close the retinal artery macroaneurysm with subsequent reduction in the macular edema.

Tsakpinis et al. used intravitreal bevacizumab to treat multilevel hemorrhage in the retina and observed a faster visual rehabilitation.

Cho et al. suggested the use of bevacizumab for both macular edema and hemorrhage secondary to retinal artery macroaneurysm.

Erol et al., in a case series of 7 patients, concluded that intravitreal ranibizumab is effective in the treatment of symptomatic retinal artery macroaneurysm and also proposed for more prospective randomized trials to study the exact role of ranibizumab in the treatment of symptomatic RAM.

Chatziralli et al. also demonstrated the use of ranibizumab for the resolution of macular edema.

Lin Z et al. in 2019 suggested the use of ranibizumab and conbercept for the treatment of patients with symptomatic retinal artery macroaneurysm.

**3 ) YAG Laser Hyaloidotomy**

This method is mainly used for pre-retinal hemorrhages. It acts by causing focal disruption of the inner limiting membrane and allowing better absorption by causing hemorrhage to dissolve into the vitreous. However, complications like epiretinal membrane formation, macular hole formation, retinal detachment, and secondary non-clearing vitreous hemorrhage may occur.

**4 ) Pneumatic Displacement with or without  intravitreal tissue plasminogen activator (tPA) injection**

This can be used for submacular hemorrhages. This involves the use of perfluorocarbon gas with or without intravitreal tissue plasminogen activator (tPA) with subsequent prone position to displace hemorrhage out of the macular area by using the effect of gravity.

Intravitreal tPA, 0.1 to 0.2 ml (12.5 μg/0.1 ml or 25 μg/0.1 ml), can cause thrombolysis and clearance of subretinal hemorrhage.

**5) Pars Plana Vitrectomy (PPV)**

PPV may be needed in patients with non-clearing or breakthrough vitreous hemorrhage. PPV may also be used for clearing submacular hemorrhage, for faster visual recovery, or in case of poor visibility preventing recognition of other pathologies of the macula. Complications of PPV include active bleeding, cataract progression, formation of retinal breaks/detachment, macular hole, or even endophthalmitis.

Hence, tPA, pneumatic displacement, and vitrectomy should be considered in cases with more extensive or non-resolving hemorrhages.

Kumar A et al. described intraoperative OCT (optical coherence tomography) guided subretinal cocktail injection for treating a ruptured retinal artery macroaneurysm with multilevel bleed, which caused the complete displacement of the subretinal bleed along with partial recovery of the outer retinal architecture as early as the first day postoperatively. The technique was first described by Martel and Mahmoud to treat massive submacular bleed secondary to the choroidal neovascular membrane. The method involves initial core vitrectomy and posterior vitreous detachment followed by injection of 0.1 ml recombinant tissue plasminogen activator (12.5 μg/0.1 ml) with 0.1 ml bevacizumab (1.25 mg/0.05 ml) and 0.3 ml air in subretinal space using an extendible 41 gauge needle attached to a 1 ml tuberculin syringe followed by filling 20% SF6 (Sulfur hexafluoride) gas in the vitreous cavity and propped up the positioning of the patient.

Hillenkamp and colleagues compared PPV with intravitreal tPA 0.2 ml (40µg) and gas (20% SF6) versus PPV with subretinal tPA [10–20µg (0.05–0.1 ml) of rtPA using 41G subretinal cannula] and gas (20% SF6) in cases with submacular hemorrhage. They found that the subretinal tPA arm was associated with a higher rate of complete displacement of submacular hemorrhage. Final visual acuity was similar in both arms, and complications were more common in the subretinal tPA arm.

Retinal capillary and retinal venous macroaneurysms associated with edema can be treated with laser photocoagulation or anti-VEGF injections.

Retinal arterial macroaneurysms associated with uveitis need investigation and management of uveitis, especially to rule out ocular sarcoidosis and peripheral multifocal chorioretinitis.