The flap harvest can be performed under general anesthesia with the patient in a supine position. The thickness of the thigh skin is assessed preoperatively by doing a skin pinch test, which gives an idea of whether the donor site will close primarily or require a split thickness skin graft from the contralateral thigh. In patients with peripheral vascular disease, a CT angiogram can be used to assess the vascular flow to the limb and the availability of perforators.

Before starting the procedure, the hair of both thighs is clipped. A critical point to note is that the foot and leg should be in a neutral position with both pointing towards the ceiling; this is mandatory for flap harvest, and rotation should be avoided at all costs.

Preoperative flap marking is done by drawing a line from the anterior superior iliac spine (ASIS) to the superolateral border of the patella, which represents the septum between the rectus femoris and vastus lateralis muscles, and serves as the longitudinal axis of the flap. The midway point on this line is marked, and a circle with a 3 cm radius is drawn around it. Most perforators will be found in the outer, lower quadrant of this circle. Using a handheld Doppler, the dominant cutaneous perforators are identified and marked, and the flap is designed according to the defect size. The flap can be planned with perforators in a central position or in an eccentric position; the latter yields a greater pedicle length. Finally, prepping and draping is accomplished to facilitate a two-team approach to simultaneous flap harvest and recipient site preparation.

The flap is designed and marked to facilitate longitudinal closure of the donor site, but if the recipient defect is large, flaps up to 35 cm x  25 cm can be harvested based on a single perforator; these larger donor site defects are more likely to require skin grafting for closure.