TcPO has recently become increasingly popular for wound assessment and patient selection for HBOT. Notably, logistic limitations such as the absence of an HBOT center in the vicinity, plus the fact that committing to HBOT schedules is physically demanding for patients and finally the high cost of treatment renders patient selection a critical step before the start of HBOT. TcPO measurement at sea level or higher pressures, before or during HBOT, while breathing room air or 100% oxygen may provide clues for the effectiveness of HBOT. Among these, measuring TcPO while the patient is inside the chamber breathing 100% oxygen at 2 ATA to 2.5 ATA (in-chamber TcPO measurement) is accepted as the most reliable method of identifying patients most likely to benefit from HBOT.

Studies have shown that if TcPO levels increase above 200 mmHg inside the chamber, there will be a 74 to 88% success rate with HBOT. If, however, TcPO remains under 100 mmHg, the failure rate with HBOT might be as high as 90%. In-chamber TcPO2 levels under 50 mmHg are almost always associated with HBOT failure. If in-chamber TcPO measurement is not available, taking a TcPO measurement at sea level while the patient inhales 100% oxygen may also provide some clues on the potential benefit of HBOT in wound healing. This is known as the normobaric oxygen challenge test. Accordingly, if TcPO levels remain under 35 mmHg while the patients inhale 100% oxygen, or if the increase in TcPO levels remains under ten mmHg, almost 89% of the patients will fail to heal with HBOT. One study reported an 88% success rate with HBOT if TcPO values increased above 100 mmHg during the normobaric oxygen challenge test.