Non-operative treatment of both bone forearm fractures in the pediatric population is common and typically results in a good to excellent outcome.

Isolated minimal or non-displaced ulnar shaft fractures can be treated nonoperatively with casting or functional bracing, close follow-up, and serial examinations. Because most forearm fractures require surgery, initial reduction and immobilization should be performed with the goal of best preparing the patient for surgery.

For significantly displaced fractures, procedural sedation can be used to properly reduce the fracture and apply a splint. Open fractures should be reduced and thoroughly irrigated, and antibiotics should be started as soon as possible. Standard immobilization is achieved using a sugar-tong splint with the forearm in neutral rotation and the elbow flexed to 90 degrees. Surgical treatment options include open reduction internal fixation (ORIF) and intramedullary nailing. Shorter intraoperative times and decreased scarring are observed benefits following fixation with intramedullary nailing.

Some studies suggest that a hybrid fixation method of plate fixation of radius and intramedullary nailing of the ulna is a better approach as it shows good stability, fewer complications, and good clinical outcomes.

Finally, bridge plating techniques are utilized for fractures with significant comminution and when interfragmentary compression is unattainable. The goal of any fixation method is to achieve anatomic length, alignment, and rotation across the fracture site. Bone grafting is often utilized if segmental defects are present. However, its effect with regard to fracture union is debated.