Abnormal aggregation and consumption of platelets result in erythromelalgia associated with thrombocythemias like essential thrombocytosis and polycythemia vera. It is believed that prostaglandins and cyclooxygenase play an important role in this pathophysiology.

Primary erythromelalgia is due to alterations of voltage-gated NaV 1.7 sodium channels. These sodium channels are found primarily on nociceptive neurons and play a crucial role in determining the threshold necessary to cause an action potential. Mutations in the SCN9A are responsible for erythromelalgia cause the sodium channels to become hyperexcitable, which leads to nociceptive neuron firing at subthreshold stimuli. This, in turn, leads to a previously nonpainful stimulus eliciting a painful response resulting in a burning pain seen in erythromelalgia. Most of the cases of primary erythromelalgia have been found to be early-onset (onset in the first decade of life); however, late-onset (onset in the second decade of life) is found to have a new mutation in Na V1.7, Q10R. This mutation is found to have a smaller degree of dorsal root ganglion excitability and hence later onset of symptoms. This theory also suggests a genotype-phenotype relationship at three levels (clinical, cellular, and molecular/ion channel).

Secondary erythromelalgia is due to a variety of causative agents, and the pathophysiology is not always well understood. When associated with hematological conditions, it is believed that platelet activation causes thrombi to form within arterioles. The thrombi occlude the vessels causing tissue hypoxia and, ultimately, pain.

There is a common shunting hypothesis proposed for both primary and secondary erythromelalgia. This hypothesis states that the symptoms of erythromelalgia are due to skin hypoxia as a result of increased arteriovenous shunting leading to an imbalance between thermoregulatory and nutritive perfusion.