Wounds occasionally result in an exaggerated healing response and lead to the formation of keloids and hypertrophic scars. By definition, hypertrophic scars are confined within the margins of the original wound bed whereas keloids extend beyond those borders. It is thought that excess tension from excess movement over a joint, underlying bony structures, or loss of tissue may play a role in the development of these particular scars. Keloids also occur more frequently in patients with darker skin.

The exact mechanism of how these scars form is unknown, but abnormal or hyperactive fibroblasts have been found in keloids. These fibroblasts create abundant amounts of collagen, elastin, fibronectin, and proteoglycan and respond excessively to stimulation. This response is likely related to the up-regulation of insulin-like growth factor receptors on keloid fibroblasts. Insulin-like growth factor stimulates collagen production. Unlike normal scars, collagen deposited in keloids is arranged haphazardly, and likely plays a role in their expansion beyond wound edges.

Collagen found in hypertrophic scars is bundled and arranged in wavy patterns parallel to the epithelial surface. This somewhat organized pattern differentiates hypertrophic scars from the chaotic orientation seen in keloids. Unlike the fibroblasts in keloids, fibroblasts found in hypertrophic scars normally respond to growth factors and produce only a small excess of collagen. Hypertrophic scars also contain unique nodular structures of alpha-smooth muscle actin myofibroblasts, similar to those involved with scar contraction. It is thought that over time hypertrophic scars may regress, whereas keloids will not.