**Fluorosis**

Early childhood intake of fluoride supplements and fluoride levels greater than 0.7 ppm in drinking water are associated with the risk of mild to severe dental fluorosis with associated aesthetic concerns.

Children under four years of age are at risk of dental fluorosis in the permanent incisors and first molars since these teeth' calcification and maturation occur during these ages. Permanent premolars and second molars calcify and mature during four to six years of age; therefore, they are at risk of dental fluorosis. After six years of age, the risk of dental fluorosis is less significant.

To avoid the risk of fluorosis in children and still reap the caries-preventive benefits of fluoride for all age groups, fluoride-containing products must be used appropriately.

**Impact of COVID-19 on Preventive Care**

The impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on preventive dental care was studied using fluoride varnish as the preventative measure in child wellness checkups. Results showed a significant drop in quarterly fluoride consumption and a decrease in routine dental visits. These findings highlight the importance of interprofessional collaboration between medical doctors and dentists to provide dental care in pediatric medical offices.

If dental care services continue to decrease due to the COVID-19 pandemic, access to dental care for children via non-traditional strategies is needed, such as teledentistry and preventive dental services in medical offices.

**Barriers to DCP Practice Measures**

Barriers that deter dentists from using DCP measures include dentist beliefs, attitudes, and other factors. First, in most countries, dentists agreed that poor coping skills of young children during their dental visits limit DCPs from delivering appropriate dental care and, therefore, DCP measures.

On the other hand, the main reasons that encouraged dentists to adhere to preventive measures were teamwork (21%), post-graduation education (12%), and professional understanding of the benefits of DCP (12%).