# Introduction

Koilocytosis is a descriptive term derived from the Greek adjective koilos, meaning hollow. Koilocytosis is pathognomonic, though not required, for the diagnosis of low grade squamous intraepithelial lesion (LSIL). Koilocytes are squamous epithelial cells with perinuclear cavitation and nuclear features of LSIL, to include nuclear enlargement, coarse chromatin, and irregular nuclear membranes. A rim of condensed cytoplasm often surrounds the perinuclear cavitation, giving the cell a "halo" or cleared-out appearance around the dysplastic nucleus. Researchers and pathologists have identified koilocytic cells in epithelium throughout the body, but the initial description came from cervical samples.

# Issues of Concern

Koilocytosis describes the culmination of specific cellular events caused by infection with human papillomavirus (HPV).

# Causes

HPV Transmission occurs through direct contact of skin or mucosal membranes, and commonly, the virus is sexually transmitted. It infects the immature basal cells of the squamous epithelium. When immature basal cells do not have the protective cover of more mature cells, they are vulnerable to infection. Exposure of the immature basal cells can occur through metaplastic processes, i.e., the transition zone of the cervix, or through external insults resulting in mucosal or epithelial injury. Once a virus infects a basal cell, it then replicates in the maturing squamous cells and can cause the cleared-out cytoplasm and nuclear changes characteristic of koilocytes.

# Anatomical Pathology

Koilocytes are not visible grossly, but they are visible microscopically. The anogenital and oropharyngeal regions are the main areas of the body that harbor koilocytes.

With the hematoxylin and eosin stain of fixed tissue, the findings are very similar. The pink cytoplasm condenses around conspicuous perinuclear cavitation, and the enlarged nucleus exhibits hyperchromasia and membrane irregularity.

Electron microscopy, a specialized modality of anatomic pathology, can also contribute to the identification of koilocytes by revealing viral particles within the nucleus.

# Clinical Pathology

Koilocytosis is a description used in anatomic pathology, but it may involve clinical pathology by prompting HPV DNA testing.

# Biochemical and Genetic Pathology

Koilocytosis is part of a precancerous pathway in cervical specimens.

# Mechanisms

HPV is a non-enveloped DNA virus with a circular double-stranded DNA. After infection of a basal cell, HPV transcribes one of its two DNA strands, thus leading to viral protein formation. Two proteins, E6 and E7, are responsible for the oncogenic effects of the virus. They interrupt normal cell death pathways and promote cellular proliferation by interfering with the tumor suppressor genes RB and p53. If the virus incorporates its DNA into the genome (integrated viral DNA), it replicates in the maturing squamous cells. The koilocytic morphology results from E4 protein, which acts to disrupt the cytoskeleton of the squamous cell.

# Clinicopathologic Correlations

Koilocytosis more likely occurs in certain demographic groups and anatomic locations due to the frequent sexual transmission of HPV. Although, other transmission modes are possible, such as a vertical transmission from mother to infant.

Koilocytosis is not visible on physical exam, but colposcopy may reveal lesions that exhibit koilocytosis microscopically on subsequent biopsy. The correlation between HPV type and colposcopic appearance is an area of research.

# Clinical Significance

Koilocytosis and its significance vary between organ systems. Koilocytosis reveals HPV infection, which is often transient. The immune system clears most HPV infections within 18 months.

In certain cancers of the head and neck, HPV testing has prognostic significance, but the diagnostic algorithm does not include the identification of koilocytes. Survival is better in patients with HPV-associated squamous cell carcinoma of the head and neck compared to squamous cell carcinoma that is not HPV-associated.

Anal cancers are frequently associated with HPV, and anal cytology specimens undergo evaluation in much the same manner as cervical Pap smears. Koilocytes are not a frequent finding, but they are diagnostic of LSIL in this anatomic location as well.

In penile cancer, the absence of koilocytosis may predict lymph node metastasis.

As research continues, the role of koilocytosis in different organ systems may change. Currently, koilocytosis acts as a marker for HPV infection and may help direct further diagnostic decision-making.