Thiazide type diuretics are contraindicated if the patient is anuric, and in patients with sulfonamide allergies.

CCBs are contraindicated in patients with hypersensitivity to the drug.

ACE inhibitors are contraindicated in patients with a history of previous hypersensitivity to ACE inhibitors, history of ACE inhibitor-related angioedema, other types of angioedema, pregnancy, or the use of aliskiren.

Beta-blockers are contraindicated in asthma patients, especially nonselective beta-blockers. Relative contraindications are hypotension and bradycardia. They should be avoided in patients with cocaine-induced coronary artery spasms.

Loop diuretics are contraindicated in patients with hypersensitivity to sulfonamides, anuric patients, and patients with hepatic coma.

Potassium-sparing diuretics are contraindicated in patients with chronic kidney disease, hyperkalemia, and caution is necessary when combining them with ACE inhibitors, ARBs, and aliskiren.

Clonidine is contraindicated in patients with hypersensitivity to alpha-2 agonists and should be avoided in patients with depression and recent myocardial infarctions.

Hydralazine is contraindicated if the patient has a history of hydralazine allergy. In patients with coronary artery disease, hydralazine can stimulate the sympathetic system. In patients with rheumatic mitral valve disease, pulmonary artery pressure can increase due to hydralazine treatment.

Minoxidil is contraindicated in pregnant and breastfeeding females and patients with hypersensitivity to minoxidil.

Contraindications to alpha-blockers include patients with a history of orthostatic hypotension and patients on phosphodiesterase inhibitors.