Treatment of femoral PSA includes open surgical repair, ultrasound-guided compression, ultrasound-guided thrombin injection, coil embolization, covered stent placement.

Surgical repair of PSA is an option when a concomitant arterio-venous fistula exists. It should also be considered when there is ongoing hemodynamic instability, limb ischemia. Surgical principles consist of controlling the artery proximally and distally and primary repair of the arterial defect. When hemorrhagic shock ensues, digital compression of the bleeding site should be performed first followed by vascular control, and primary arteriography. Sometimes a retroperitoneal incision may be required for obtaining external iliac artery exposure in large PSA. If the primary repair cannot be successfully achieved, then a vein graft should be used to reconstruct the arterial system.

Ultrasound compression is utilized to visualize the neck of the PSA and apply pressure until the neck is occluded. While performing compression if a PSA is present, care should be taken to avoid compression of the femoral artery. PSA is treated successfully with ultrasound when the neck is less than 2 cm. Technical failures with this method have been estimated up to 10% to 30%. If this occurs, then alternative treatment should be sought.

Ultrasound thrombin injection is also a minimally invasive procedure that can be performed at the bedside under local anesthesia. To qualify for this treatment modality, the PSA should typically have a long neck that is narrow and easily seen on ultrasound. A spinal needle (22 gauges) is inserted into the sac and under continuous visualization thrombin is injected into the sac. The needle is visualized during the entire procedure to avoid accidental thrombin injection into the arterial system. Approximately 100 to 500 U/ml of thrombin is injected into the sac at about 0.1ml increments until thrombosis is achieved. A technical failure has been reported between 5% to 10% using this method providing neck anatomy is adequate.

Another minimally invasive treatment includes endovascular treatment which could entail both coil embolization or covered stent deployment. Complications include failure of treatment as well as PSA formation since often the contralateral groin is used to gain access.

With any treatment mentioned above, complications include thrombosis of both the venous and arterial systems. Embolization into the distal arterial tree can occur up to 2% to 4% of the cases; hence a thorough pulse examination should be carried prior and after the procedure. If distal embolization is suspected, a Fogarty catheter should be passed both proximally and distally. Once the flow has been restored, the nurse should be asked to palpate the pulses in the feet.

If the patient has a true aneurysm, then repair is not recommended. The aneurysm should be resected and a prosthetic graft should be inserted.