Poliomyelitis (commonly referred to as "polio") is a vaccine-preventable disease caused by the poliovirus.

This virus is highly infectious, spreading from person to person mainly through the fecal-oral route. Children under the age of 5 are most commonly infected. Seventy-two percent of infected children will remain asymptomatic but continue to shed the virus that may infect others. Once ingested, the virus multiplies in the gastrointestinal (GI) tract and can ultimately lead to an acute nonspecific illness, including symptoms such as:

- Sore throat

- Vomiting

- Fever

- Fatigue

- Headache

- Neck stiffness

- Extremity stiffness/pain

Most notably, the virus's invasion of the central nervous system (CNS) can lead to significant morbidity, including paralysis of the extremities or the diaphragm, which occurs in approximately 1 in 200 persons infected. Those with CNS manifestations of poliomyelitis are at particularly high risk of mortality, with 5% to 10% ultimately dying due to diaphragm paralysis.

An injectable polio vaccine has been available in the United States since 1955, an inactivated (or killed) vaccine that was pioneered by Jonas Salk. Subsequently, Albert sabin introduced a live, attenuated (or weakened) vaccine in 1961.

Specific recommendations regarding vaccine administration in the United States are made by the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) and, more specifically, the Advisory Committee on Immunization Practices (ACIP). Recommendations regarding routine childhood immunization against polio include a four-dose vaccine series of inactivated polio vaccine (IPV) given at two months, four months, 6 to 18 months, and 4 to 6 years of age.

The third and fourth doses must be separated by at least six months. Due to the use of combination vaccines during childhood, some children may receive five doses of IPV, which is considered a safe practice.

Alternate recommendations are provided for catch-up immunization schedules for children or accelerated vaccine series for adults or children traveling to areas of the world where transmission is a higher risk.

There are no routine recommendations for adults regarding the inactivated polio vaccine series, largely because most adults in the United States have been vaccinated as children. Those adults at higher risk of exposure are encouraged to consider the vaccination series. The risk of exposure may be increased by travel to endemic areas, occupational exposure, or contact with known unvaccinated persons.

The inactivated polio vaccine series is intended to provide protection against all known wild-type strains of the poliovirus, which includes types 1, 2, and 3.

In some areas of the world, routine vaccination practice includes the oral poliovirus vaccine (OPV) rather than inactivated polio vaccine. Both series are comprised of four doses. A key difference is that the oral polio vaccine is a live attenuated virus. A series begun with one formulation may be completed with the other, so long as the individual receives a total of four doses, the last dose is given as a booster between the ages of 4 and 6 years.