Chromhidrosis, while benign, can pose a diagnostic dilemma. This condition can receive treatment on an outpatient basis, but still requires the efforts of an interprofessional healthcare team. A thorough history and physical exam should be performed on every patient presenting with colored sweat to assist in making the diagnosis, finding the cause, and preventing unnecessary laboratory testing. If the diagnosis is unclear, prompt consultation with an interprofessional group of specialists may be needed. A dermatologist may be necessary to perform a skin biopsy or evaluate skin scrapings — a dermatopathologist to examine the skin biopsy for hematoxylin and eosin staining, and possibly under fluorescence light. A culture may be needed to rule out the possibility of a chromogenic microorganism causing pseudochromhidrosis. If the patient displays significant depression or anxiety related to the symptoms, consultation with a psychiatrist or a mental health counselor may be appropriate. A thorough discussion with the patient regarding the disease, potential treatment options, and the prognosis is essential as some cases are chronic and may be present for years, as is the case with apocrine chromhidrosis. Dermatology nurses educate patients and their families, perform followup, and verify compliance while keeping the clinician informed. Pharmacists review medications prescribed, check for drug-drug interactions, and also have a role in education. These interprofessional collaborations can help patients achieve optimal outcomes. [Level 5]