In 2020, new cancer cases and deaths are projected at 1,806,590 and 606,520 in the United States. The cancer death rate increased until 1991, then fell steadily through 2017, which resulted in an overall decline of 29%, which translates into an estimated 2.9 million lesser cancer deaths than would have happened if peak rates had persisted. The long-term reductions in death rates for the four leading cancers (lung, colorectal, breast, prostate) were one of the factors which drove the progress. However, through the period from 2008 to 2017, the decline in cases slowed down for female breast and colorectal cancers and stopped for prostate cancer. In contrast, declines progressed for lung cancer in men, from 3% annually to 5% from 2008 through 2013 and from 2013 through 2017, respectively. Yet lung cancer continued to cause more deaths in 2017 when compared to breast, prostate, colorectal, and brain cancers combined. Even though the colorectal cancer screening rates made show improvement when compared to the past rates, there was still a group of the population, mostly the uninsured, no source of care, people with no visit to a physician in the last one year, and non-Hispanic Asian who were lagging in screening.

Potential harms from screening include false-positive tests and hence resulting in over-diagnosed and over-treated cancers. The additional concern with a false-positive result is undue anxiety and subjecting the patient to invasive diagnostic testing. One of the strategies to avoid this would be to target screening to individuals at high risk to make screening cost-effective and to balance the benefit to harm trade-off.