To perform a portacaval shunt, a general anesthetic is required. With regard to anesthesia, major hazards include hypoxia and hypotension. In patients who have impaired liver function, there is the possible danger of using a halogenated compound, so these agents should not be employed during the surgical operation. Other commonly used general anesthetic agents, as well as muscle relaxants, appear to have no to a little adverse effect on liver function. The availability for the administration of fluids and of blood products in adequate amounts in a rapid fashion, if needed, should be made.

In terms of positioning the patient, the be patient should be elevated on the right side to an approximately 30-degree angle to aid in the extension of the right subcostal region into the flank area to accommodate for better exposure for the procedure. The table should be adjusted in order to widen the space between the right iliac crest and the right costal margin in order to perform the operation via a long, right subcostal incision. If the decision between performing a portocaval and splenorenal shunt is not made prior to the operation, the patient should be put in the supine position so either procedure can be carried out by extending the initial central incision to the appropriate direction.

In terms of operative preparation, the skin is cleansed above the nipples and well below to the pubic symphysis. On the chest, particularly, the left side should be prepped as an extension of the incision into the thorax may be required.