Retinal artery macroaneurysm can be isolated/simple (only vascular ectasia) or complex (associated with hemorrhage).

The temporal part of the retina within the first three orders of bifurcations of the central retinal arterioles or at the level of arteriovenous crossings is usually affected.

The patient is usually asymptomatic unless there is macular involvement. Symptoms of metamorphosis, including decreased visual acuity, or floaters occur due to hemorrhage or macular edema. Sometimes acute and severe visual loss may also occur. The clinical symptoms and severity of visual loss depend upon the type of RAM, which can be quiescent, hemorrhagic, or exudative, as suggested by Lavin and colleagues.

**Quiescent form**- In this form, the visual symptoms are relatively infrequent. There is either no exudation/hemorrhage, or there is sparing of the macula. Hemorrhage/exudate, if present, measures less than one disc diameter.

**Hemorrhagic form**- It accounts for 50 % of the total retinal artery macroaneurysms.

These are usually present close to the disc because the arteries closer to the disc have a larger diameter and an increased flow rate that may rupture due to increased transmural stress. It is associated with multilayered hemorrhage involving preretinal, intraretinal, subretinal,  or vitreous spaces. Both preretinal and subretinal hemorrhage may be simultaneously present (hourglass hemorrhages) in some instances. The occurrence of hemorrhages at multiple levels is a result of sizeable aneurysmal dehiscence.

Antiplatelet and anticoagulant drugs like aspirin, warfarin, and clopidogrel can also lead to subretinal bleed.

**Exudative form**- There occurs a gradual deterioration in visual acuity in exudative retinal macroaneurysm.

Here, exudation measuring more than one disc diameter is seen. Lipid deposition in a circinate pattern around the aneurysm along with intraretinal edema and subretinal fluid accumulation can be seen caused by leakage from the damaged vessels surrounding the aneurysm. This leads to a collection of long-standing exudates and chronic macular edema.

Spontaneous pulsations contiguous with the arterial wall (better demonstrated using indocyanine green angiography) may be seen in the case of an isolated macroaneurysm.

The hemorrhagic form is usually associated with hypertension or cardiovascular disorder, whereas the exudative form is associated with retinal vein occlusion.

There may also be mixed variants having either a predominant hemorrhagic or an exudative component.

Retinal capillary macroaneurysms are usually associated with edema of the surrounding retinal tissue.

Retinal venous macroaneurysm may be associated with a premacular hemorrhage.