**Manufacturing, Bioavailability, and Absorption**

Calcium carbonate comes in tablet, chewable, oral suspension, or powder form. Tablets should be swallowed while drinking a full glass of water. The oral suspension should be well shaken before measuring the dose to ensure the ingestion of the proper amount. The bioavailability of calcium from calcium carbonate is higher as a powder.

Dosing depends on the indicated condition and patient age. For adult use for heartburn, dosing exceeds 1 gram (1000 mg) but should not exceed 7 grams in a day. For adult use for calcium supplementation, 1 to 1.2 grams may be taken orally per day, divided, and taken at meals. For adults with hyperphosphatemia, 1.5 to 3 grams per day effectively achieves optimal phosphate control in 65% of patients.

Beyond age and form of calcium carbonate, calcium absorption can be affected by the dose given, pH of the stomach, size of the patient, estrogen status, vitamin D level, and genetic polymorphisms.

**Distribution, Metabolism, and Elimination**

As previously mentioned, calcium storage in the body is primarily in bones and teeth. However, most of the calcium is found as the ionized, physiologically active form in the blood. Calcium carbonate is not metabolized in the traditional pharmacokinetic sense. Calcium carbonate is excreted in the feces as unabsorbed calcium carbonate, in the urine depending on glomerular filtration and renal tubule reabsorption controlled by parathyroid hormone (PTH) and Vitamin D, and as carbon dioxide from the lungs.

**Pregnancy and Breast Feeding**

Calcium can travel through the placenta and into breast milk during nursing. Calcium carbonate is safe to use for pregnant patients who have GERD, for aspiration prophylaxis before labor, and for nursing.

**Storage and Drug Interactions**

Calcium carbonate should be stored at room temperature and not frozen or exposed to heat.

Additionally, calcium carbonate will limit many drugs' effectiveness if taken together by increasing stomach pH and decreasing their absorption.