Primary thyroid disease refers to problems arising from the thyroid gland itself. In contrast, secondary thyroid disease refers to central problems arising from the anterior pituitary that indirectly affects thyroid function. A thyroid problem can exist in the form of hyperthyroidism or hypothyroidism. Hyperthyroidism occurs when there is excessive thyroid hormone synthesis or release. Hypothyroidism, on the other hand, happens due to inadequate thyroid hormone production.

In primary hyperthyroidism, the thyroid produces large amounts of T3 and T4, which, through negative feedback inhibition, suppress TSH secretion from the anterior pituitary. In primary hypothyroidism, the thyroid produces insufficient amounts of T3 and T4, which leads to loss of negative feedback inhibition, and increased production of TSH from the anterior pituitary. In secondary hyperthyroidism, the anterior pituitary produces large amounts of TSH, which, in turn, stimulate the thyroid follicular cells to secrete thyroid hormones in excessive amounts. On the other hand, if the anterior pituitary were to produce low levels of TSH, lack of stimulation of thyroid follicular cells causes T3 and T4 levels to go down, thus secondary hypothyroidism.

TSH is the first-line screening test for the majority of patients with a suspected thyroid problem. Together, with T3 and T4, it helps assess whether thyroid disease is primary or secondary. Thyroid function tests measure the levels of T3, T4, and TSH in the blood. They are critical not only for diagnosing thyroid problems but also in differentiating between a primary and a secondary cause of thyroid disease. A change in TSH that parallels T3 and T4 changes indicates a secondary problem originating in the anterior pituitary. In contrast, a TSH change that follows the opposite direction of T3 and T4 suggests a problem in the thyroid gland itself.