Heme is a 64 kDa tetrameric protein present in hemoglobin, myoglobin, respiratory cytochromes, and cytochrome P450 enzymes.

The rate-limiting enzyme in the formation of heme is the hepatic ALA synthase1 enzyme, which heme inhibits. The enzyme ALA dehydratase then catalyzes the conversion of ALA to porphobilinogen (PBG). Porphobilinogen deaminase converts PBG to hydroxymethylbilane. Uroporphyrinogen converts this to uroporphyrinogen III, which is then acted upon by uroporphyrinogen decarboxylase to form coproporphyrinogen-III; this undergoes oxidation to protoporphyrinogen IX. The last step is the conversion of this to heme in the presence of iron by ferrochelatase.

Porphyrias fall into two classes: either erythropoietic or hepatic forms depending on the site of the major enzyme deficiency. The enzyme deficiencies are inherited as either autosomal dominant (AD), autosomal recessive (AR), or less commonly as X- linked.

The liver is the source of the four acute porphyrias and also to one of the cutaneous porphyrias (PCT). The most common acute porphyria is acute intermittent porphyria (AIP). AIP is an autosomal dominant acute hepatic porphyria. The enzyme affected is porphobilinogen (PBG) deaminase also referred to as Hydroxymethylbilane synthase (HMBS.)

Pathophysiology of symptoms:

The pathogenesis of neurovisceral symptoms in acute porphyria has not been fully elucidated. One hypothesis is that the deficiency of heme affects neuronal function; the other hypothesis is that the precursors aminolevulinic acid (ALA) and porphobilinogen PBG may have direct neurotoxic effects.