Due to its close relationship with several structures, the following must be considered during total thyroidectomy,  thyroid lobectomy, or procedures involving the excision of a thyroglossal duct cyst.

- A chest radiography or mediastinal computed tomography [CT] is performed preoperatively if anatomic abnormalities or substernal extension of the thyroid are suspected.

- Due to the location of the thyroid gland, slight neck extension of the patient on the operating table facilitates access to the neck.

- The typical skin incision allowing proper access to the gland ranges from one to one and a half to two fingerbreadths above the clavicle. This incision is curvilinear and parallel or within a skin line.

**Larynx**

In re-operative cases, it is recommended to perform laryngoscopy regardless of voice symptomology asymptomatic vocal cord paralysis can occur in up to 30% of patients after anterior neck surgery.

Recurrent Laryngeal Nerve:

The two nerves of importance that pass through the thyroid are the left and right recurrent laryngeal nerves [RLN]. They are often located on the lateral aspect of the thyroid gland near the vicinity of the inferior thyroid artery. When operating on the thyroid gland, it is vital to visualize these nerves and avoid trauma. The nerve can be exposed caudal to the inferior thyroid artery or following mobilization of the superior and inferior poles. The nerve is most likely to be injured in its distal portion [2-3cm].  This distal portion of the RLN is covered by either or both the tubercle of Zuckerkandl [a pyramidal extension on the most posterior aspect of each lobe] and the ligament of Berry. Most often, it is not until the tubercle of Zuckerkandl is medially retracted that the RLN is seen. The RLN most often traverses just medial to the tubercle and is hidden from view. The distal course of the RLN is more easily identified in total lobectomies as opposed to subtotal lobectomies, in which the distal course of the RLN may not always be visualized.

Another surgical consideration is the anatomic variation of the nerves. In approximately 1% of cases, a nonrecurrent laryngeal nerve or direct vagus branch is identified on right side following retraction of the tubercle of Zuckerkandl.

Also, due to variations in which the RLN can bifurcate or trifurcate proximal to its laryngeal entrance, it is imperative to ensure that no nerve branch within the ligament of Berry is cut or clamped.

Lastly, it is important to note that the potential for nerve injury can occur from direct injury to the nerve or indirectly from heat from use of electrocautery in close proximity to the nerves

Superior laryngeal nerve:

When the superior pole of the thyroid gland is dissected, one may visualize the superior laryngeal nerve [SLN] which often runs next to the superior thyroid artery. High ligation of the superior thyroid artery should be avoided as one can easily injure the superior laryngeal nerve.  Approximately 20% of patients are at risk of injury to the external branch of the SLN when using a technique in which the superior thyroid vessels are clamped, divided, and ligated en masse. Dividing the superior thyroid vessels as they enter the capsule prevents injury to those nerves in close proximity to the artery. In practice, most surgeons do not insist on direct visualization of the superior laryngeal nerve.

In addition to direct damage from clamping, imprudent use of electrocautery brings about the potential for paresis. Due to the potential for heat damage, electrocautery should never be used to correct bleeding in the region of the cricothyroid muscle or inferior pharyngeal constrictor muscle. Bipolar cautery should still warrant caution.  Lastly, the anterior suspensory ligament may be adherent to the cricothyroid muscle, and thus, one should be cautious of direct damage to the cricothyroid muscle while dissecting the anterior suspensory ligament.

Cervical sympathetic trunk:

Rarely, the cervical sympathetic trunk may be injured. This is a consideration when the carotid sheath is mobilized in order to treat retroesophageal extension of a goiter or malignancy.

Esophagus:

Altered anatomy and displacement of the trachea can result in the exposure of the anterior esophageal surface, creating the risk of potential injury.

Carotid artery:

The carotid arteries, which course posterolateral to the thyroid gland, are rarely an issue during thyroidectomy. Excessive lateral traction in an individual with an enlarged thyroid gland may result in ocular or central nervous system damage from reduced blood flow. This is preventable with proper retraction and tissue handling.

Parathyroid glands:

The parathyroid glands are in close anatomic relationship to the thyroid gland, sitting on the posterior aspect of the thyroid gland. The parathyroid glands also share arterial supply with the thyroid gland, being supplied by an end-artery, typically the inferior thyroid artery. Due to its anatomic relationship and vascular supply, there a few considerations with regards to the parathyroid glands in thyroid surgeries.

By dividing the branches of the inferior thyroid artery beyond the parathyroid gland on the thyroid gland capsule, disruption of the end-artery can best be avoided. However, transplantation to a “dry” pocket in the sternocleidomastoid muscle, a subcutaneous area or forearm can be performed if end-artery damage does occur.

Inadvertent removal of one or more of the parathyroid glands can occur during thyroidectomy and inspection of the resected tissue should be considered to identify these glands and transplant them. With regards to total thyroidectomy, one study documented zero out of 100 patients suffered from permanent hypoparathyroidism following transplant of at least one parathyroid gland. A second study documented an occurrence of 21.4% transient hypocalcemia and 0% occurrence of permanent hypocalcemia following transplant of at least one parathyroid gland during total thyroidectomy.

Standard preoperative labs should include a serum calcium assay. It is also important to determine if a patient is normocalcemic post-operatively as well. Hypocalcemic patients should be treated with calcium and vitamin D as appropriate. Careful monitoring of calcium levels should continue in the weeks following discharge.

Thyroglossal duct cyst procedure:

Approximately 50% of thyroglossal duct cysts are close to or just inferior to the hyoid bone. Due to its relation to the hyoid bone and the rates of recurrence, surgical removal includes the cyst, the middle segment of the hyoid bone, and the tract that leads to the base of the tongue. This procedure is referred to as the Sistrunk Procedure.

Post Operative Bleeding:

Due to the location, hematomas may lead to acute respiratory problems. Insidious hemorrhage may also result in laryngeal edema and infrequently can lead to the need for tracheostomy.

Muscle Closure Following Thyroid Procedures:

Surgical considerations for wound closure are under consideration of transversely divided muscles. One must consider a closure that would create space for blood to disperse, if bleeding were to occur.

When the strap muscles are separated from midline and retracted laterally, reapproximation in the midline is performed, once again with consideration of space for possible bleeding. Additionally, some reapproximate the platysma muscle and its fascia.