Castleman disease is a rare lymphoproliferative disorder, and its clinical characteristics, laboratory findings, and radiological images do not provide much specific information about it. It is a real challenge to distinguish it from other lymphadenopathies. The subtypes can also be only differentiated on the causative factors, morphologic features of lymph nodes, and pathophysiology. The symptoms like weight loss, malaise, nausea, lymph node spleen, and hepatic enlargement are vague and can be caused by any lymph node disease. It is only with histological patterns that CD can be accurately diagnosed with radiological images. A precise diagnosis can be made in a proper clinical setting when the signs and histological features can provide enough evidence for this disease.

The clinician and histopathologist must consistently communicate to collaborate on relevant findings before diagnosing the disorder as Castleman disease. While the general surgeon is almost always involved in the care of patients subjected to surgical resection of the lesion in UCD, it is essential to consult with an interprofessional team of specialists, including an anesthesiologist, oncologist, and vascular surgeon. The nurses are also vital members of the interprofessional group as they will monitor the patient's vital signs and assist with the education of the patient and family. The pharmacist will ensure that the patient is on the appropriate analgesics, antiemetics, and appropriate antibiotics for pain and wound infection in the postoperative period.

The pharmacist also provides antiviral, chemotherapy, and immunomodulatory drugs prescribed for MCD. The radiologist also plays a vital role in determining the disorder. Without a proper history, the radiologist may not know what to look for or what additional radiologic exams may be needed. This problem gets even more complex when MCD is associated with HIV and HHV-8 or other diseases. The American College of Radiology Appropriateness Criteria is evidence-based guidelines for specific clinical disorders reviewed by an interprofessional expert committee every three years. The current guidelines have been developed after an exhaustive review of current medical literature from peer-reviewed journals to determine the committee's appropriateness of radiological imaging and treatment procedures. In cases where evidence is not definitive or minimal, expert opinion from the specialist may recommend the type of imaging or treatment.

The outcomes and prognosis of CD depend on its cause and pathogenicity. However, prompt consultation with an interprofessional group of specialists is recommended to improve outcomes.