The Ross procedure is major cardiovascular surgery, therefore it is imperative to utilize an interprofessional team working across disciplines to provide care for these patients.

The enthusiasm for this procedure has varied over the last several decades with studies demonstrating lower mortality, bleeding, thromboembolism, endocarditis compared to mechanical valve replacement but with the need for higher risk of reintervention of the auto and allograft valves because of structural deterioration. Further, operator experience and expertise are essential for achieving excellent clinical outcomes, and therefore this procedure should be performed at high volume centers of excellence. To achieve the best outcomes, a team of cardiac surgeons, cardiologists, cardiac nursing specialists, and specialty-trained cardiac pharmacists must work together to coordinate evaluation, surgical care, and long-term postoperative follow-up. The nurses must assist with monitoring the patient post-operatively and long-term to identify potential complications early. The nurses must also assist the medical team in educating the patient and the family in regards to expected outcomes and warning signs to watch for as well. The cardiac pharmacist should make sure there is no potential for drug-drug interactions and medications are appropriately dosed by the surgical team leader in the perioperative period. Communicating potential risks to the medical team, the clinical pharmacist can help prevent adverse outcomes. Only a collaborative interprofessional team approach will result in good long-term outcomes in patients undergoing the Ross procedure. [Level 5]

The American College of Cardiology/American Heart Association currently recommends Ross as a Class IIb while the Society for Thoracic Surgeons recommends this as a class III indication in patients needing aortic valve surgery. Because of the above recommendations, the utilization of the Ross procedure has been in decline. The emergence of transcatheter valve replacements for degenerating bioprosthetic valves which in the case of the Ross procedure are the auto and allografts are easily replaceable without the need for open-heart surgery. In the future, this may provide a new lease of life for the Ross procedure.