Utilizing exercise as a means of reducing obesity (i.e., reducing fat mass) has benefits beyond the reduction of fat mass. Fitness is associated with more desirable clinical outcomes in many instances, such as decreasing metabolic disease, cardiovascular disease, Alzheimer disease risk, inflammation, and many other disease states not listed here.

Exercise/physical activity is a proven modality for treating the disease of overweight and obesity. However, management of this disease is best through dietary interventions and regular exercise. Exercise is an integral part of not only weight loss, but overall health as well. A balanced hypocaloric diet, aerobic training, cognitive behavioral therapy (CBT) are helpful in reducing weight. Weight reducing pharmacotherapy is indicated in individuals with a BMI greater than 30 kg/m2 with or without comorbidities. Surgery (Bariatric) is only needed in reducing weight in BMI greater than 40 kg/m2, especially with comorbidity.

The Food Drug Administration (FDA) approved medications and their mechanism of action:

- Orlistat inhibits pancreatic gastric lipase

- Phentermine/topiramate combination, the mechanism is unknown, believed to inhibit Norepinephrine (NE) release and GABA gamma-aminobutyric acid transmission

- Bupropion/naltrexone combination, NE/Dopamine Reuptake Inhibitor (NDRI), Naltrexone is an opioid antagonist

- Liraglutide a glucagon-like peptide- GLP-1 agonist, decreases dipeptidyl peptidase-IV metabolism and appetite.

It is important to know that aerobic exercise is the only form of physical activity that has been proven to be efficacious in the management of obesity. Recommended is moderate to high-intensity aerobics involving larger groups of muscles. It should be practiced for a long duration to appreciate the effect. Hence a weekly aerobic exercise of at least 150-180 minutes can increase physical fitness. Resistance exercise has also been shown to have some meaningful impact on weight.