A widened mediastinum will often be first noted in the emergency department on a chest x-ray. The mediastinal borders are composed of the right heart, ascending aorta, superior vena cava, aortic knob, descending aorta, and the left heart. These structures are all contained between the right and left lungs. The mediastinum can be partitioned into three compartments from anterior to posterior, which is best viewed on the lateral film. The anterior compartment contains the heart, thyroid, and thymus. The middle mediastinal compartment includes the esophagus, trachea, and many lymph nodes. The posterior compartment is the paravertebral area and is primarily composed of the vertebral column.

The first consideration when a widened mediastinum is noted on x-ray is the quality of the chest film as poor technique can cause this presentation. The proper distance for taking a standard PA chest x-ray is with 6 feet between the x-ray source and the detector plate. If the distance between the detector plate and the x-ray source is closer than 6 feet, the structures in the film will appear larger and less sharp. Additionally, an AP chest x-ray, typically obtained as a portable chest x-ray, is taken at a closer distance and therefore also reveals larger and less sharp structures.  Patient positioning also plays an important role. If the patient is rotated or slouched, the mediastinum may appear falsely widened. After you have ensured the processing of an adequate film, the second consideration is to compare the chest x-ray to prior studies, if available. Typically, more chronic causes of a widened mediastinum, such as a mass or lymphadenopathy, cause focal widening, whereas acute causes of a widened mediastinum, like infection or bleeding, cause diffuse, generalized widening.