Gynecomastia is not a life-threatening disorder but it can cause significant distress because of aesthetics. There is also a small risk of breast cancer. Gynecomastia is best managed by an interprofessional team that includes the pharmacist and nurse practitioner. The first thing is to rule out any medications that are causing the disorder; thus, the pharmacist should go over the patient's medications and recommend discontinuation of the problematic drug. In addition, patients need to be educated about the harms of marijuana and alcohol, both relatively common causes of gynecomastia.

Secondly, gynecomastia is not a surgical emergency and watchful observation is recommended because some cases may resolve spontaneously. The nurse should educate the patient that most acute cases subside on their own and no treatment is required. If the patient is to be treated with antihormonal drugs, then the pharmacist should educate the patient on the adverse effects and that the results are not immediate.

Those cases that persist should be referred to a plastic surgeon. Because of fibrosis in chronic cases, liposuction may not always work and an open procedure may be required. Finally, because gynecomastia can cause severe emotional distress, a mental health nurse should provide counseling. Only through an interprofessional approach with open communication, can the morbidity of gynecomastia be lowered.

The outcomes for males with gynecomastia are fair; the condition can lead to embarrassment and isolation.