In a pregnant patient with vaginal bleeding, one should always obtain a serum quantitative hCG level and the patient's blood type. In hydatiform moles, the serum hCG levels are typically much higher than patients of the same gestational date in a normal pregnancy or ectopic pregnancy. Complete moles tend to have very high levels of serum hCG, typically greater than 100,000, whereas partial moles may be within the normal range for gestational age or even lower than expected. Blood type is important because most patients with complete or partial hydatiform moles present with vaginal bleeding. Therefore, Rh antibody screening needs to be performed to determine whether anti-D immunoglobulin needs to be administered if the patient is Rh(D) negative. Other laboratory tests include:

Complete blood count (CBC) (to evaluate for anemia and thrombocytopenia)

BMP (to evaluate for electrolyte imbalance and renal insufficiency)

Thyroid panel (if signs and symptoms of hyperthyroidism present)

Liver function tests and urinalysis (if pre-eclampsia is suspected to evaluate for transaminitis and proteinuria)

Coagulation profile including PT/INR to evaluate for disseminated intravascular coagulation in severe cases.

The imaging of choice in a suspected hydatiform mole is a pelvic ultrasound. In a complete mole, the ultrasound findings include a heterogeneous mass in the uterine cavity with multiple anechoic spaces, most commonly referred to as a "snowstorm" appearance. These small cystic areas are typically the hydropic villi described previously in the histopathology section. Furthermore, there is the absence of an embryo or fetus, and no amniotic fluid is present. In a partial mole, there typically is the finding of a fetus which may be viable, the presence of amniotic fluid, and the placenta appears to have enlarged, cystic spaces (often described as "Swiss cheese" appearance). In one study, it was noted that partial moles were diagnosed as a missed or incomplete abortion in 15% to 60% of cases.

If a molar pregnancy is diagnosed, the next step is typically a CT scan and PET scan to stage the disease. Furthermore, a chest x-ray should be obtained if the patient's initial symptoms included any signs of respiratory distress or increased breathing to evaluate for pulmonary edema.