Etomidate is the most commonly used induction agent for rapid sequence intubation. It is a nonbarbiturate-sedative, which depresses central nervous system function by activating gamma-aminobutyric acid (GABA) receptors. Advantages are its short onset of action within 30 to 60 seconds and a short half-life of 3 to 5 minutes. It does not affect systemic blood pressure and also has central nervous system (CNS) protective effects such as reduced cerebral blood flow and cerebral oxygen uptake.

Ketamine, a phencyclidine derivative, is a non-competitive antagonist of the N-methyl-D-aspartate (NMDA) receptors, because of which it has analgesic, sympathomimetic and amnestic properties. Its bronchodilator properties make it a preferable agent in patients with acute severe asthma. It has a short onset of action of 1 to 2 minutes and a half-life of 5 to 15 minutes.

Propofol has multiple mechanisms of action but primarily potentiates GABA receptors. Because it is highly lipid-soluble, it induces sedation quickly within 9 to 50 seconds and has a short half-life of 3 to 10 minutes. It also has anti-convulsive and anti-emetic properties and reduces intracranial pressure, which is beneficial in patients with traumatic brain injury and status epilepticus. Because of such a quick onset of action and short half-life, it is also commonly used as a continuous titratable infusion for sedating mechanically ventilated patients.

Neuromuscular blocking agents (NMBAs) cause skeletal muscle paralysis and facilitate laryngoscopy and rapid endotracheal intubation. NMBAs must always be used along with an induction (sedating) agent to ensure the patient is unaware of their environment since they will be unable to respond after paralysis. Succinylcholine is a depolarizing NMBA and blocks acetylcholine receptor synaptic signaling at the motor endplate. The initial depolarization leads to muscular fasciculation, in the beginning, followed rapidly by flaccid paralysis because of persistent depolarization that exhausts the receptor’s ability to respond. It has an onset of action of 30 to 60 seconds and lasts approximately 5 to 15 minutes. It is the most commonly used paralytic agent for rapid sequence intubation. Rocuronium is a non-depolarizing NMBA that competitively blocks acetylcholine receptors with an onset of action of 1 to 2 minutes but lasts for a longer period, approximately 45 to 70 minutes, because of which rocuronium is usually only used when succinylcholine is contraindicated or unavailable.

Standard endotracheal tubes (ETTs) are made of polyvinyl chloride (PVC); they can also be made from silicone, metal, or rubber, depending on the intended use. ETTs have internal diameters ranging from 2.0 mm to 12.0 mm depending on pediatric or adult patients and the estimate of what size would be appropriate for a given patient based on their anthropometry and the presence or absence of co-existing pulmonary or airway disease. In general, for average adult males, 7.5 mm to 8.5 mm, and females, 7.0 mm to 7.5 mm are preferred. It is important to be prepared with multiple sizes of ETTs during intubation as anatomic variations of the upper airway can be unpredictable. While un-cuffed ETTs are used in the newborn, beyond this age group and for all adults, ETTs have an inflatable balloon at the distal end of the tube to form a seal when inflated against the tracheal wall that prevents air leaking around the tube to allow for adequate gas exchange. The cuff also maintains the ETT in the proper position and prevents oropharyngeal and gastrointestinal secretions from entering the lower respiratory tract. A pilot balloon is present on the proximal end of the ETT outside of the patient and has a one-way valve to allow for monitoring the cuff pressure. A cuff pressure of 20 cm to 30 cm is usually recommended to provide an adequate seal without causing injury to the tracheal wall. Another key feature of standard ETTs includes a radiopaque marking all along the length of the tube to allow for tip identification and tube location on plain chest radiographs. During intubation, an indwelling stylet must be present within the ETT before inserting the ETT into the airway. Oral intubation is the recommended route of choice for placing ETTs in emergent and rapid sequence intubation. Nasal intubation may only rarely be considered for those with oral or mandibular trauma or facial deformities.