Injury to the vertebral artery is managed by an interprofessional team that consists of a vascular surgeon, radiologist, neurologist, and an internist. Once the clinician makes the diagnosis, the treatment depends on whether the patient is symptomatic or asymptomatic

Symptomatic patients who present with acute ischemic stroke due to spontaneous vertebral artery dissection without associated injuries or contraindications should be considered for systemic thrombolytic therapy if they present within 3 hours of the onset of symptoms. Patients who present up to 4.5 hours from symptom onset and those who are otherwise not candidates for systemic thrombolytic therapy should be a consideration for catheter-directed thrombolysis. Clinicians can manage patients who are not appropriate for thrombolytic therapy with anticoagulation, antiplatelet therapy, endovascular, or open operative repair depending on the grade of injury.

Asymptomatic patient management is with anticoagulation versus antiplatelet therapy based on bleeding risk, the location of the lesion, and the grade of injury. Endovascular therapy and operative repair are reserved for patients with higher-grade lesions and those with contraindications to anticoagulation or antiplatelet therapy that are at high risk for progression.

The prognosis for patients with vertebral injury varies from a stroke rate o 24% to a death rate of 8%. Mortality rates are even higher in the presence of another brain injury. Poor outcome is associated with older age, arterial occlusion, and higher stroke scores at diagnosis.

Vertebral artery injuries require the efforts of a coordinated interprofessional healthcare team. The physician (MD, DO, NP, PA) should assess the case and determine the course of treatment. If thrombolytic medication is the chosen route, coordination with a pharmacist is advisable; the pharmacist can verify dosing, perform medication reconciliation, and discuss drug agent options. If a catheter-based solution is necessary, then an interventional radiologist or a vascular surgeon should perform the procedure. Nursing will play a crucial role in quickly preparing the patient, as well as administering care and medication post-procedure. If the physician elects to use anticoagulation or antiplatelet therapy, the pharmacist will again assist in agent selection and dose verification, and nursing will administer the drugs in the inpatient setting. The pharmacist and nursing staff should all be empowered to communicate any concerns they have to the physicians and the rest of the healthcare team. This type of collaborative interprofessional team approach can lead to better patient outcomes through coordinated care. [Level V]