The epidemiology of all of the possible causes of acute hepatitis is beyond the scope of this review. There is some reporting data for specific conditions causing acute hepatitis, particularly the hepatotropic viral hepatitis A (HAV), B (HBV), C (HCV), D (HDV), and E (HEV). Other conditions causing acute hepatitis are likely under-reported such as non-hepatotropic viral infections, drug-induced liver injury (DILI), auto-immune diseases, etc. Based on reported data, viral and drug-induced liver injury are the most common causes of acute hepatitis and acute liver failure

Generally, the rates of viral hepatitis are low in high-income regions and high in resource-poor areas. The incidence of Hepatitis A virus (HAV) has significantly decreased by approximately 95% since the introduction of the hepatitis A vaccine in 1995. The past five years have seen a small increase in cases mostly from isolated food-related outbreaks, persons who use drugs, and the homeless population. Like HAV, cases of acute HBV have decreased significantly since the introduction of the vaccine in 1990. Currently, the age group 40 and older have the highest rate of acute hepatitis B, related to the risk factors of injection drug use, multiple sex partners, and lack of prior vaccination. Hepatitis C has been steadily increasing since 2010, particularly in the 20 to 40 age group, thought to be secondary to injection drug use related to the opioid crisis and improved surveillance

Worldwide, the World Health Organization estimates that 1 in 3 people have been infected with either HBV or HCV. In high endemic areas, HAV has affected more than 90% of children by age 10. Again the majority of cases are in low-income regions

The most severe complication of acute hepatitis is acute liver failure requiring liver transplantation and rarely occurs with data being reported only from liver transplant centers. These centers might select a sicker patient population and under-report patients who spontaneously recover or lack access to these specialized centers. Given these limitations, the epidemiology of acute liver failure varies in different countries. In the UK, US, and Australia, drug-induced liver failure from acetaminophen (paracetamol) causes 39 to 50% of cases, while the hepatotropic viruses cause between 7 to 15% of cases. Globally, hepatitis A, B, and E probably cause most cases of acute liver failure reported as 50% of cases in Japan, 68% of cases in India, and 91% of cases in Bangladesh