Antibiotic prophylaxis for MMS is considered for SSI, endocarditis, and prosthetic joint infection prevention. Each of these issues will be discussed and considered separately, but SSI warrants special consideration since dermatologic surgery which does not breach the oral mucosa is unlikely to cause endocarditis or prosthetic joint infection without SSI and subsequent hematogenous dissemination of the bacteria. Due to the low risk of SSI in cutaneous surgery, identifying individuals at increased risk for SSI and subsequent bacterial dissemination is imperative to direct prophylactic therapy.

Surgical site infection is defined by the United States Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) as an infection of the cutaneous and subcutaneous tissue that occurs within 30 days of the surgery.Staphylococcus aureus carriage, anatomic site, and age. Exogenous factors that are associated with increased risk of SSI include lack of sterile draping, extended operation duration (>24 min), excision size, hemostasis issues, type of reconstruction (graft versus flap), and healing by secondary intention. A recent study evaluated the effect of mask-wearing during the COVID-19 pandemic on Mohs surgical sites and found an increased risk of SSI with a propensity for gram-negative organism growth compared to matched controls in the pre-COVID-19 pandemic era.

The 2008 JAAD advisory statement reviewed several prospective studies to help guide their recommendations. In a prospective trial to find SSI rate after both MMS and dermatologic surgery that included 5091 lesions on 2424 people, they found certain scenarios to yield an unacceptable SSI rate. The rate of infection of any procedure below the knee, in the groin, wedge excisions, and skin grafts were all over 5%. Thus suggestions are to provide antibiotic prophylaxis in these circumstances.

Another prospective, multicenter study that included 3491 surgical procedures found infections were more common in flap closures, skin grafts, use of nonsterile gloves after hematoma formation, and those performed on patients with immunosuppression.

In addition to recognizing the risk factors associated with SSI, the consequences of SSI based on anatomic site should be considered when deciding on antibiotic prophylaxis. Due to the nature of MMS, the surgeries are often on cosmetically sensitive areas, which can require complex closure techniques or skin grafting. An SSI of these areas could cause more distortion or scarring than a simple surgical excision. Therefore, assessing the consequence of poor cosmetic outcomes and any existing risk factors discussed above should be considered and used to assist the Mohs surgeon in risk mitigation and selecting proper candidates and antibiotic regimens for SSIs.

Next, endocarditis prevention will be considered. In the most recent guidelines, the AHA recommended reducing the number of conditions that require preprocedural prophylaxis due to the lack of increased risk of endocarditis in those receiving and not receiving prophylaxis. Some conditions that no longer require antibiotic prophylaxis secondary to these findings include mitral valve prolapse, bicuspid valve disease, calcified aortic stenosis, and several congenital heart conditions (atrial septal defect, ventricular septal defect, and hypertrophic cardiomyopathy).

The conditions for which antibiotic prophylaxis is still indicated are prosthetic heart valves, history of infective endocarditis, cardiac transplant patients with cardiac valvular disease, cardiac valve repairs with prosthetic material or a device that has been repaired within the last six months, unrepaired congenital heart defects and repaired congenital heart defect with residual defect at or adjacent to the site of a prosthetic patch or device.

The guidelines also identify high-risk groups of orthopedic patients to acquire prosthetic joint infection. These high-risk features include being within two years of a joint replacement, previous joint infection, immunosuppression, insulin-dependent type 1 diabetes, HIV infection, malignancy, malnourishment, and hemophilia. In these high-risk groups, the guidelines recommend antibiotic prophylaxis for perforating dermatologic procedures of the oral mucosa, surgery of infected non-oral sites, or sites at high risk for SSI.

As outlined separately by the 2007 AHA guidelines and the 2003 ADA and AAOS guidelines, the antibiotic regimens were merged in the 2008 JAAD advisory statement. The purpose of merging the regimens was to simplify the implementation for dermatologic surgeons and was justified by the similarities between the two guidelines and a common underlying mechanism of infection between endocarditis and hematogenous joint infection. These antibiotic regimens apply to both endocarditis and prosthetic joint infection prevention. The AHA recommends administration of the prophylactic antibiotic 30-60 minutes before the procedure, whereas the ADA/AAOS recommends a full 60 minutes. The JAAD advisory statement does not indicate a preference for either time frame.

The suggested prophylaxis regimens for dermatologic surgical procedures that break the oral mucosa or involve infected skin are as follows. For non-oral sites, the suggested antibiotic prophylaxis is cephalexin or dicloxacillin 2 g or either clindamycin 600 mg or azithromycin 500 mg for those patients with a penicillin allergy. If the patient cannot tolerate oral medications, cefazolin or ceftriaxone 1 g may be administered intramuscularly (IM), intravenously (IV), or clindamycin 600 mg IM/IV if the patient is penicillin allergic.

If the skin is infected, the antibiotic should be tailored to the organism’s susceptibilities and the patient’s medication allergies. For those sites that breach the oral mucosa in patients without a penicillin allergy, amoxicillin, 2 g, is recommended. In those patients with a penicillin allergy and surgical breach of the oral mucosa, either clindamycin 600 mg or azithromycin 500 mg is recommended. In patients who cannot tolerate oral medications and the surgery breaches the oral mucosa, cefazolin 1 g IM/IV, ceftriaxone 1 g IM/IV, or ampicillin 2 g IM/IV may be administered. Finally, in those who are penicillin allergic and unable to tolerate oral medications, clindamycin 600 mg IM/IV may be considered.

A study was conducted to investigate whether postoperative antibiotics are linked to a reduced rate of surgical site infections (SSI). However, the study's findings were inconclusive due to limitations such as a small sample size and low infection rates observed during the study.

The most common organisms to infect a cutaneous surgical site include Staphylococcus aureus, coagulase-negative staphylococci, enterococci, Escherichia coli, Pseudomonas aeruginosa, and Enterobacter species.Staphylococcus aureus (MRSA) should be chosen.

Finally, the anatomic site should be considered. The bacteria Pseudomonas aeruginosa is a common pathogen of the ear, and second-generation fluoroquinolones are the primary treatment with ciprofloxacin, often the medication of choice to cover this gram-negative organism. The oral cavity harbors many bacterial species, with the most common infecting organisms being Streptococcus viridans and Peptostreptococcus. Any infection near the oral mucosa should be covered with amoxicillin to cover for these pathogens.