Located in the infratemporal fossa, the otic ganglion is the smallest of the four parasympathetic ganglia found in the head region. It is an oval but flat ganglion and approximately 2×1.5×0.4 mm in size. It lies inferomedial to the foramen ovale.

Morphologically, the otic ganglion is seen as a yellowish-brown oval ganglionic structure bilaterally in most cases.

- Compact type

- Lobulated type

- Disperse type based on how the nerves enter and leave the ganglion

The compact type has a classic ganglionic shape and is the most common type. As the number of leaving branches increases, the ganglion appears less lobulated and more disperse. In the same individual, two different morphological types of a ganglion can both be present.

The parasympathetic root of an otic ganglion is formed by preganglionic parasympathetic fibers that arise in the inferior salivary nucleus, located within the medulla oblongata of the brainstem. These preganglionic efferent parasympathetic fibers pass through the glossopharyngeal nerve. They then travel with its tympanic branch (Jacobson’s nerve) to form tympanic plexus in the middle ear cavity, before leaving it to form the lesser petrosal nerve.

The origin of sympathetic neurons associated with the otic ganglion arises from the plexus around the middle meningeal artery. These plexus convey postganglionic fibers arising from the superior cervical ganglion. The postganglionic sympathetic fibers pass through the otic ganglion without relay and run together with the parasympathetic fibers in the auriculotemporal nerve to provide sympathetic innervation to the parotid gland blood vessels.

The sensory route of the otic ganglion receives fibers from the glossopharyngeal nerve via the tympanic plexus and lesser superficial petrosal nerve.

The motor route originates from the mandibular nerve and passes through the otic ganglion without synapsing and enters the medial pterygoid nerve to innervate the medial pterygoid muscle, tensor veli palatini, and tensor tympani muscles.