**Short Stature**

- Girls with Turner syndrome generally have short stature, and their growth requires close monitoring. Turner syndrome does not cause growth hormone deficiency. But, the patients respond well to growth hormone therapy and should be started on treatment with growth hormone once their height falls below 5% for age. If not treated appropriately, the estimates are that the adult height would be 20 cm below the average adult female height. Growth hormone therapy should continue until the patients reach their adult height and no longer have any growth potential. Once the patient is on the growth hormone therapy, it can sometimes expose underlying scoliosis. Hence, the patients should have their spines monitored closely during the treatment. If patients develop scoliosis, then they should be referred to as orthopedic surgery for possible bracing or corrective surgery. Some other possible adverse effects of the growth hormone treatment are intracranial hypertension, slipped capital femoral epiphyses, and pancreatitis. If the patient requires further assistance for growth in addition to growth hormone, oxandrolone, or delayed, pubertal induction can be offered.

**Cardiac**

- Cardiac abnormalities are frequently associated with Turner syndrome. At the time of diagnosis, the patient should be evaluated by a cardiologist with an EKG to evaluate for prolonged QT interval. Blood pressure should be measured in the upper and lower extremities, and patients should get an echocardiogram or cardiac MRI to look for cardiac anomalies.

- For prolonged QT interval, QT-prolonging drugs (antiarrhythmics, macrolide and fluoroquinolones, metronidazole, some antifungals, and antiretrovirals, psychiatric medications) should be avoided. If coarctation of the aorta is present, it requires corrective surgery. Throughout life, the patients require monitoring for aortic dilation with echocardiograms or cardiac MRI. Blood pressure should be maintained within the normal range to help decrease the risk of aortic dilation and dissection. Blood pressure should be controlled using beta-blockers as first-line treatment, followed by an ACE inhibitor.

**Cognitive function/learning disabilities**

- Girls with Turner syndrome often have learning disabilities despite normal intelligence, which might warrant special education and assessments at school.

**Hearing loss**

- Regular monitoring of hearing, including serial audiology evaluations, is recommended throughout life, with an audiology evaluation every 3 yrs in children and every five years in adults.

**Renal**

- A renal ultrasound is necessary at the time of diagnosis. Renal abnormalities frequently present with Turner syndrome, including collecting system malformations, positional/horseshoe kidney, and mal-rotated kidneys. Obstruction due to ureteropelvic junction abnormalities can cause hydronephrosis and increase the risk of pyelonephritis.

**Ovarian Failure**

- Girls with Turner syndrome usually present with primary amenorrhea or delayed puberty secondary to premature ovarian failure. Serum FSH and AMH should be measured at around 10 to 11 years of age. Serum AMH can help predict ovarian function, and patients with detectable levels are likely to experience spontaneous puberty.

- Estrogen therapy - Almost all girls with Turner syndrome need estrogen, even if they have spontaneous puberty, which may persist for some time but is usually followed by primary ovarian insufficiency. Later, cyclic progestins are added to the regimen to induce cyclic uterine bleeding and prevent endometrial hyperplasia. Estrogen therapy should be initiated at around 11 to 12 years of age if gonadotropins are elevated or AMH level is low. The treatment can begin at doses between 1/10 to 1/8 of adult replacement dose and gradually increased every six months to simulate normal pubertal progression until reaching adult dosing.

- Turner syndrome patients will often have the option for cryopreservation of ovarian tissue or oocytes. This option is only available to those with evidence of ovarian function and is not recommended prior to 12 years of age.

- Due to ovarian follicular depletion, most women with Turner syndrome are infertile. In vitro fertilization with a donor, oocytes is an option to conceive.

**Osteoporosis/Bone Health**

- Patients with Turner syndrome have an increased risk of low bone mineral density and fractures. Their risk becomes lowered with estrogen therapy and supplemental vitamin D and calcium.

**Screening for other comorbidities**

- Celiac disease – Tissue transglutaminase immunoglobulin A antibodies should be measured at around two years of age and repeated every two years throughout childhood.

- Autoimmune thyroiditis – TSH and free or total T4 should be measured annually, beginning around four years.

- Liver disease – ALT, AST, GGT, and alkaline phosphatase should be measured annually after ten years of age. These labs are usually elevated in Turner syndrome, but if persistent and greater than twice normal, it requires further evaluation by a hepatologist.

- Metabolic syndrome – Hemoglobin A1c should be measured annually, beginning at ten years of age to screen for hyperglycemia. Patients should also have screening for dyslipidemia by measuring a lipid panel annually if at least one cardiovascular disease risk factor is present.

- Vit D deficiency – Serum 25-hydroxyvitamin D should be measured between 9 to11 years of age and every 2 to 3 years thereafter.

- Gonadoblastoma – Patients with Turner syndrome who have marker chromosome elements on karyotype or patients who develop virilization, should be screened for the Y chromosome. If the Y chromosome is present, gonads should be removed; otherwise, it increases the risk of gonadoblastoma.