**Cardiovascular System**

Keshan disease is congestive cardiomyopathy associated with heart failure, cardiac enlargement, electrocardiogram (ECG) abnormalities, gallop rhythm, and even cardiogenic shock. This is seen typically in children and women of child-bearing age. First identified in endemic regions of China associated with selenium deficiency, it carried 50% morbidity, and mortality was not uncommon. Additional stressors such as chemical exposure or presence of Coxsackievirus were often present as well. Selenium supplementation, in the form of fortified salt, was found to decrease the incidence of this condition.

**Endocrine System**

Of the 35 selenoproteins that have been identified so far, 3 of them are called Iodothyronine deiodinases, and they play a role in thyroid hormone metabolism. The thyroid contains the maximum concentration of selenium of all the organs in our bodies. One of the iodothyronine deiodinases converts inactive thyroxine to its active form. The second one is abundant in the central nervous system (CNS), brown fat and skeletal muscles and also plays a role in the activation of thyroid hormones. The third has a role in deactivating thyroid hormones.

**Immune System and Host Defense**

Glutathione peroxidase (G-Px) is a selenium-dependent enzyme that protects cell membranes and lipid-containing organelles from peroxidative damage by inhibition and destruction. It acts in combination with vitamin E to maintain the integrity of the cell membranes, participating in redox reactions with hydrogen peroxide-producing glutathione. Selenium deficiency exacerbates the redox by-product toxicity and oxidative damage to cell membranes.

Further, selenium deficiency has been shown to turn harmless viruses in hosts into virulent pathogens, a likely etiology in the development of Keshan disease. The frequent emergence of new strains of influenza virus from China with its selenium-deficient belt has new connotations from the link between immunity and selenium deficiency.

Selenium is also a crucial nutrient in HIV –infected patients. More than 20 papers have reported the loss of CD4 count that parallels the decline in plasma selenium levels. Studies indicate that selenium promotes the differentiation of CD4+ T-cells into T-helper-1 (Th1) cells. This has, in turn, been linked to decreased hospital admissions from co-infections, particularly from mycobacterial infections, in HIV infected individuals.  Selenium, therefore, is linked to the prevention of progression of HIV to AIDS.  Selenium is also protective in patients infected with Hepatitis B or C in progressing to malignancy.

Although selenium has been linked to enhanced immune response, its role in cancer prevention is limited at this time to just that. It has been known to augment the cytotoxic effect of natural killer cells and increase the activity of T-cells and macrophages. It stimulates the production of antibodies and is synergistic with vitamin E regarding the aging process of cells. It protects against the toxic effects of heavy metals such as lead, cadmium, arsenic, mercury, and organic compounds such as paraquat herbicides.

**Musculoskeletal System**

Kashin-Beck disease is a disabling deformity of bones, cartilage, and joints leading to enlarged joints and restricted movements. Seen primarily in parts of Tibet, China, Siberia, and North Korea, it has multifactorial pathogenesis amongst which selenium deficiency is one implicating cause.

Both Keshan disease and muscular syndrome have been described in patients on total parenteral nutrition (TPN) who did not have selenium added to their supplement. Symptoms described included intermittent myalgias and tenderness as well as eventual white fingernail beds.

**Neurology and Psychiatric Systems**

Studies have shown that selenium deprivation can lead to depressed mood and more hostile behavior. During selenium deprivation state, the brain receives priority supplies indicating the importance of selenium in brain health. The turnover rate of some neurotransmitters has also been found to be affected by selenium deficiency. Selenium concentration in the brain of patients with Alzheimer disease was found in one study to be about 60% of that of controls.

**Reproductive System**

Selenium is essential for testosterone biosynthesis and the formation and development of normal spermatozoa. Testicular tissue contains large concentrations of selenium and is responsible for sperm quality and male fertility health. Data regarding female fertility and selenium are sparse.