While cholesterol is vital for the functioning of our cells, elevated levels can cause serious problems. In addition, it is implicated in many genetic diseases, such as cholelithiasis, and is also the target of many therapeutic pharmacologic drugs.

**Cholelithiasis**

The formation of gallstones occurs if there is either a bile salt deficiency or excess cholesterol secreted into the bile. In other words, when the liver secretes cholesterol, there must be a proper balance of bile salts, cholesterol, and phospholipids, as an imbalance causes cholesterol to precipitate. In pathologic states of hypercholesteremia, gallstones are often formed, leading to cholecystitis or even ascending cholangitis. Understanding this precarious relationship led to the invention of two important types of antihyperlipidemic drugs: bile acid-binding resins (cholestyramine/colestipol/colesevelam) and cholesterol absorption inhibitors (ezetimibe). The former acts by blocking the reabsorption of bile acids in the small intestine, which then forces the liver to synthesize more bile acids to use up excess cholesterol in the process, thus lowering serum cholesterol levels. Ezetimibe acts similarly by blocking the absorption of cholesterol in jejunal enterocytes, allowing the body to take excess cholesterol and again secrete it into bile. It is interesting to note that Fibrates, another class of antihyperlipidemic drugs, can cause cholelithiasis. This occurs simply by causing cholesterol excretion into the bile, and as previously mentioned, if there is excess cholesterol in bile, it precipitates and forms stones.

**Statins**

These are an important class of FDA-approved drugs used for the treatment of hyperlipidemia and hypercholesterolemia. Statins are reversible competitive inhibitors of HMG-CoA reductase, the rate-limiting enzyme in cholesterol synthesis. They are structural analogs of HMG-CoA, the substrate for HMG-CoA reductase. Their action is mediated through transcriptional control of gene expression by SREBPs and by increasing the levels of LDL receptors on cells to facilitate the removal of excess LDL. When serum cholesterol levels are too high, statins may be used to stop de novo synthesis in the liver.

**Atherosclerosis**

This is a result of an increased level of circulating LDL lipoproteins. LDLs are commonly referred to as the "bad" lipoproteins as they carry a very high concentration of cholesterol. When LDL levels are pathologically high, LDL deposits in the arterial wall and oxidize. Macrophages engulf these oxidized LDL particles, leading to their transformation that appears like foam, hence the name "foam" cells. Harvesting oxLDL by macrophages triggers the activation of cytokines, growth factors, leukocytes, and neovascularization, and smooth muscle cell proliferation. This results in fatty streak formation and eventually causes the formation of atherosclerotic plaques and consequently coronary artery disease.

**Familial Hypercholesterolemia**

This inherited condition is due to mutations in certain genes such as ApoB, LDLR, LDLARP1, or PCSK9 and causes familial hypercholesterolemia. The most common defect is a mutation of the LDL receptor, where LDLR can no longer clear the LDL from the blood circulation. This results in high cholesterol levels in the blood that can deposit in the blood vessels, accumulate and cause hardening of the arteries. If left untreated, the excess build-up can cause coronary heart disease.