Asymptomatic patients with limited findings should be educated regarding the presence and potential significance of posterior polymorphous corneal dystrophy (PPCD).

- Initiate amblyopia therapy in young children with high or asymmetric refractive error.

- Initiate immediate referral to a pediatric ophthalmologist if non-clearing corneal edema is present.

- Initiate amblyopia therapy in young children that have a history of corneal edema affecting form perception.

- Long-term monitoring of the posterior corneal layers is required.

- If secondary epithelial erosions or bullous keratopathy are present a bandage soft contact lens should be considered.

- If endothelial findings are present, gonioscopy should be performed to evaluate the anatomic angle.

- If intraocular pressure is elevated, a careful glaucoma workup should be initiated.

- If findings substantiate a diagnosis of glaucoma, then initiate first-line topical glaucoma therapy.

- Monotherapy with a prostaglandin analog will control intraocular pressure (IOP) in the majority of cases.
- Changing class or adding a medication may be necessary to realize IOP control.
- Laser peripheral iridotomy (LPI) is not recommended if epithelialization of the trabecular meshwork has been identified.
- If unable to achieve or maintain rigid IOP control, glaucoma filtering surgery may be necessary.

- Minimally invasive glaucoma surgery (MIGS) offers promise.

- If there are iris or pupillary distortions a glaucoma workup should be initiated.

- Penetrating Keratoplasty (PK) has historically been successful, but has slow and challenging recovery as well as variable visual outcomes.

- Descemet membrane endothelial keratoplasty (DMEK) if the corneal stroma and epithelium are unaffected.

- Descemet stripping automated endothelial keratoplasty (DSAEK) is preferred if the corneal stroma and epithelium are unaffected.

- If iridocorneal adhesions are present corneal grafting procedures are at risk for failure.