Folliculitis is a very common condition that can easily be identified by all members of the healthcare team, including primary care physicians, nurse practitioners, physician assistants, and nursing staff. All of these individuals can play essential roles in the diagnosis and patient education of this condition.

Proper hygiene is of paramount importance to prevent recurrence as well as to facilitate the resolution of this condition. In more severe cases, medical therapy may be necessary. In these cases, the local pharmacist can be consulted to help determine correct coverage for the underlying causative agent for these patients. However, most cases of folliculitis are self-limiting and will resolve on their own with proper home care.

Should these cases prove to be too extensive, do not resolve on their own, or don’t resolve after medical management referral to a dermatologist is recommended. A pharmacist can also offer a consult on two fronts; they can verify whether the patient's medication regimen has any drugs that could result in folliculitis, and they can also assist in agent selection, antimicrobial coverage assessment, and perform additional patient counseling. Nursing must also have involvement, including monitoring for treatment effectiveness, counseling on the application of topical agents, and looking for signs of adverse drug reactions. While folliculitis is a generally benign, self-limiting condition, this does not preclude the involvement of an interprofessional team approach to diagnosis and management, resulting in better patient outcomes. [Level V]