Exercise-associated collapse is a benign condition that is on the exertional injury spectrum and includes conscious athletes who are unable to stand or walk on their own after the completion of an exertional event. It is associated with the sudden termination of prolonged endurance exercises and is believed to be caused by transcendent postural hypotension. The most significant risk factors contributing to EAC are dehydration, unfavorably hot and humid environments, alcohol consumption, and a history of chronic health issues or a previous collapse.

There does not appear to be an increase in risk associated with age, sex, or ethnicity. It is a diagnosis of exclusion, and other etiologies should be considered in individuals with vital sign abnormalities, persistent altered mental status, or electrolyte derangements. EAC is common in the prehospital setting of mass participation endurance events. Management is centered on excluding or identifying more severe etiologies like acute coronary syndrome, exercise-related injuries, and heat-related injuries that will need more advanced medical care.

Treatment is focused on maneuvers to reduce postural orthotic hypotension, such as elevating the feet above the heart and fluid rehydration. Most individuals diagnosed with EAC proceed to a full recovery with no sequelae. Individual athletes should be educated in reducing EAC risk by trying to avoid calorie restriction, dehydration, and limiting alcohol consumption before participating in an endurance event. They should also take time to a climate to the event location and weather.