Cephalosporins, along with penicillin, belong to the beta-lactam group of bactericidal antibiotics.

Structurally, these antibiotics contain a six-member dihydrothiazine ring fused to the beta-lactam portion. The substituents at C3, C4, and C7 are key factors for their antimicrobial activity. Furthermore, the carboxyl group at C4 needs to remain unchanged, and the acylamido side chain at C7 (7-aminocephalosporanic nucleus) has a pivotal role in the hydrophilic/hydrophobic features of these compounds.

Cephalosporins are produced by structural modification in the laboratory. Based on the timeline of drug development and their antimicrobial properties, these antibiotic agents are grouped into different generations, first through fifth.

In terms of antibacterial activity, first-generation cephalosporins such as cefadroxil, cefazolin, and cephalexin are solely active against gram-positive organisms. Furthermore, second-generation (e.g., cefaclor, cefotetan, cefamandole, and loracarbef) has improved activity against gram-negative and some anaerobes, although there is less activity against gram-positive microbes.

The third-generation class of cephalosporins is the most commonly prescribed group. These cephalosporins are semisynthetic analogs with different chemical substitutions on the C7 acylamido chain. The class includes ceftriaxone, cefdinir, cefixime, cefixime, cefditoren, cefpodoxime, ceftazidime, cefoperazone, ceftizoxime, ceftibuten, and others. They are broad-spectrum antimicrobial agents with activity against both gram-negative and gram-positive organisms. Nevertheless, they are more active against gram-negative bacteria and organisms resistant to the first and second regeneration cephalosporins. Furthermore, these agents seem to be less active against several gram-positive bacteria, such as Streptococcus and Staphylococcus species. In other words, they are active against some gram-positive strains, although not as active as the first-generation cephalosporins. Interestingly, third-generation cephalosporins show more stability to beta-lactamases than first or second generations, especially those produced by Klebsiella, Haemophilus influenzae, and Escherichia coli. Cefoperazone and ceftazidime are active against Pseudomonas aeruginosa, while the rest of the class is not. Despite the rising prevalence of gram-positive organisms in spontaneous bacterial peritonitis (SBP), third-generation cephalosporins appear to furnish adequate empirical treatment in patients with healthcare-associated and community-acquired SBP without hepatocellular carcinoma.

Agents of this class are used for prophylaxis and/or therapy:

- Prophylaxis: They are recommended for first-line prophylaxis against SBP, biliary infections, neurosurgery-related infections, and post-urologic procedures infections. Moreover, these drugs are recommended as alternative prophylactic antibiotics for neutropenic infections and infective endocarditis.

- Therapy:

- For Empiric therapy of central nervous system (CNS) infections, including meningitis, as they can cross the blood-brain barrier (BBB), genitourinary tract infections, bone, and joint infections, as well as community-acquired pneumonia, and skin and soft tissue infections.
- For specific therapy, they are active against gram-negative meningitis, Lyme disease, Pseudomonas pneumonia, gram-negative sepsis, Streptococcal endocarditis, melioidosis, penicillinase-producing Neisseria gonorrhea, chancroid, and gram-negative osteomyelitis.Chlamydia trachomatis.

These compounds are also useful in combination with other antibiotics such as penicillins, aminoglycosides, quinolones, or beta-lactamase inhibitors. For example, the ceftazidime-avibactam combination has been used successfully in Enterobacteriaceae infections, intra-abdominal and urinary tract infections, sepsis, pneumonia, and respiratory infections by Pseudomonas aeruginosa in cystic fibrosis patients.

In brief, the third-generation cephalosporins are used for:

- Spontaneous bacterial peritonitis

- Sexually transmitted infections (gonorrhea, pelvic inflammatory disease, epididymitis, proctitis).

- Moderate-to-severe diabetic foot infections.

- Empiric therapy of acute lower respiratory infections including community-acquired pneumonia (CAP) in adults and children.

- Empiric therapy of CAP in patients requiring intensive care unit (ICU) admission.

- Empiric treatment for suspected infection in Human Immunodeficiency Virus (HIV) patients (outpatients).

- Pyelonephritis.

- Necrotizing fasciitis.

- Lyme disease with CNS involvement and with or without parenchymal involvement.

- Mild to severe intraabdominal infections.

- Encephalitis and meningitis. In general, meningitis caused by Haemophilus influenzae, meningococci, and Enterobacteriaceae can be treated with cefotaxime, ceftriaxone, ceftazidime, or ceftizoxime. Pseudomonas aeruginosa meningitis can be treated with ceftadizime. Pneumococcal meningitis can be treated with cefotaxime, ceftizoxime, or ceftriaxone.

- Febrile neutropenia (ceftazidime).

- Alternative treatment options include syphilis, gonorrhea, acute bacterial rhinosinusitis, endometritis, pharyngitis, uncomplicated cystitis, infectious diarrhea, combat wounds.

- Endoscopic urologic procedures with mucosal trauma, vertebral osteomyelitis, skin and soft tissue infections caused by Nocardia spp., infectious diarrhea caused by Salmonella spp. or Shigella spp., infective endocarditis, and antibiotic locks (once susceptibilities for organisms are known)

- Cefotaxime is the most commonly used third-generation cephalosporin over an aminoglycoside in neonatal early-onset sepsis due to wider therapeutic index, superior cerebrospinal fluid penetration, and lower incidence of nephrotoxicity.

The fourth-generation cephalosporins (e.g., cefepime), while retaining their activity against gram-negative like third-generation, also have improved gram-positive activity. Cefepime is active on many gram-positive and gram-negative strains and is used to treat severe infections such as ICU pneumonia, abdominal infections, sepsis, and meningitidis.Staphylococcus aureus (MRSA) and various other beta-lactamase-producing organisms such as penicillin-resistant streptococci, and ampicillin-susceptible and beta-lactamase-producing Enterococcus faecalis.Pseudomonas aeruginosa. Ceftolozane/tazobactam and ceftazidime/avibactam are two beta-lactam/beta-lactamase combination antibiotics. They can be useful against multidrug-resistant gram-negative bacteria, including Pseudomonas aeruginosa. Furthermore, ceftazidime/avibactam is also active against carbapenem-resistant Enterobacteriaceae that produce Klebsiella pneumoniae carbapenemases.