**Catheters for Extracorporeal RRT**

Insertion of catheters for hemodialysis, hemofiltration, hemodiafiltration, or ultrafiltration is largely similar to other forms of central venous access. The local surface anatomy is identified; if ultrasound is available, gel and a sterile cover are applied over the probe, and the device is used to visualize the subcutaneous structures to determine the route to the target vein. A local anesthetic is injected at the insertion site, first superficially to raise a subcutaneous wheal and then more deeply to anesthetize tissues in the direction of the vein.

The introducer needle is attached to a syringe and then inserted slowly through the skin towards the vein, applying constant negative pressure to the plunger of the syringe. When a flash of blood is aspirated, the clinician stops advancing the needle and detaches the syringe, covering the aperture of the needle to prevent air from entering. An alternative version of this process involves a cannula loaded over the needle; if using this technique, the cannula is threaded into the vein at this point, and the needle and syringe are both removed. The guidewire is then gently advanced through the needle (or cannula); if resistance is encountered, the operator should stop and confirm the position of the needle tip before repeating. Another variation of the procedure uses a Raulerson syringe, a special commercially-available syringe with a built-in channel through the plunger, meaning the guidewire can be inserted directly through the needle without needing to detach the syringe.

When the guidewire is in place, the needle or cannula is removed. The clinician next uses a scalpel to make a small nick in the skin at the site of the guidewire, and the skin dilator is then advanced over the guidewire through the skin into the target vein to open up a tract for the catheter, using constant rotation while advancing it to reduce the likelihood of kinking the wire. The dilator is removed while keeping gentle pressure over the site, and the dialysis catheter is then advanced over the wire into the desired depth, making sure to keep hold of the wire at all times to avoid accidental inward migration. The wire is then removed and the catheter secured to the skin using suture material and a dressing. For internal jugular or subclavian lines, a chest radiograph should be obtained to confirm the position and rule out pneumothorax.

**Catheters for Peritoneal Dialysis**

In the percutaneous Seldinger technique, a local anesthetic is first injected at the chosen midline insertion site, approximately 1 to 2cm below the umbilicus, through the full depth of the skin and abdominal wall down to the parietal peritoneum. A scalpel is used to make a nick at the insertion site, and mosquito forceps are used to dissect bluntly down to the linea alba. Gripping onto the rectus sheath with the forceps, the abdominal wall is lifted to hold it taut away from the underlying bowel, and the cannula and needle are passed through the linea alba, stopping when there is a loss of resistance. The cannula is advanced, and the needle removed. The peritoneal space is then primed by instilling warmed fluid (such as 500mL of normal saline), which should run in smoothly if the cannula tip is in the intraperitoneal space and is not kinked. This creates a fluid-filled space into which the catheter can be passed. The guidewire is then gently advanced, and the cannula is withdrawn. A specially-designed perforated sheath is inserted in its place using a special introducer before the guidewire and introducer are then removed.

After lubricating the catheter tip with gel and soaking the cuffs in saline, the catheter is slowly inserted into the abdomen through the sheath until the first cuff is in the pre-peritoneal space; the sheath is progressively split open along its perforations while the catheter is inserted before it is eventually broken away entirely and removed. Dialysate should flow freely into the intraperitoneal space if the catheter tip positioning is correct.

A more local anesthetic is injected under the skin laterally to the midline wound, and a small nick is made with a scalpel at this site. A subcutaneous tunnel is fashioned by passing a special tool into the midline wound, through the subcutaneous tissue, and exiting at the lateral wound. The proximal end of the catheter is then passed back through the tunnel; when correctly positioned, the second cuff should come to rest under the skin about 2 to 3cm medial to the exit site. The two wounds are then closed and dressed, and the catheter is fixed to the skin with suture material.

Rigid catheters are also inserted in the midline. The abdomen must first be primed with a bolus of dialysate fluid – approximately 2000mL for an adult – that is instilled through a wide-bore needle inserted at the midline wound site below the umbilicus. After priming, the needle is removed, and the catheter with its trocar is inserted through the abdominal wall with a rotatory motion. The trocar is slightly withdrawn, and the rest of the catheter is then advanced along the midline in the direction of the coccyx, with the catheter’s external bead coming to rest on the skin. The trocar is withdrawn before warmed dialysate fluid, and a collection bag is attached to the three-way tap, and fluid is then instilled to confirm patency. The catheter is then sutured to the skin and dressed.