**External Features**

The spinal cord is a long cylindrical extension of the central nervous system within the vertebral column's cavity. It is approximately 42.3 cm in length in males and 38.9 cm in females.cervical and lumbosacral enlargements. In the cervical area, this fusiform enlargement is due to the exit of many nerves forming a plexus (the brachial plexus) supplying the upper limb's muscles. This enlargement spreads from the fourth cervical segment to the second thoracic segment. The maximum transverse diameter is present at the level of the C5 segment.

The lowermost part of the spinal cord tapers in a cone-like fashion and is thus termed the conus medullaris. From the apex of this conus medullaris, an extension of the pia mater, i.e., the filum terminale, descends and gets attached to the coccyx's posterior surface. In midline anteriorly, the cord shows the presence of a deep longitudinal cleft, which is the anterior median fissure. This fissure is the site of the presence of the anterior spinal artery. Similarly, the posterior surface demonstrates a shallow furrow in the midline, the posterior median sulcus. In combination, the anterior median fissure and the posterior median sulcus will divide the whole of the spinal cord into two symmetrical halves - the right and left half, which one can better appreciate in a transverse section.

Further, we can appreciate the shallow depressions on either side as anterolateral and posterolateral sulci. The anterolateral sulcus will be the site of exit of the ventral (motor) roots of the spinal cord. The posterolateral sulcus will be the site for the entry of dorsal (sensory) roots of the spinal cord.

**Transverse Section of the Spinal Cord**

On sectioning a spinal cord, two distinct areas are evident with the naked eyes, an inner grey matter, and an outer white matter. The grey matter indicates the collection of cell bodies of neurons. The white matter is the collection of the fibers running through the spinal cord.

**Grey Matter**: When taking a transverse section of the spinal cord, in the middle is the grey matter, which appears roughly in the form of an H (butterfly) shaped mass. The grey matter is divisible on each half of the cord into a larger ventral mass – ventral grey column (anterior/ventral horn) and an elongated dorsal grey column (posterior/dorsal horn). In some parts of the cord (thoracic and upper lumbar regions), a small lateral projection of a grey mater is present between the ventral and dorsal columns. This structure is a lateral grey column (lateral horn). The cells in the anterior horn are called anterior horn cells.****The grey matter on both the left and right halves connect by thegrey commissure, which contains the central canal. This canal communicates above into the fourth ventricle. The central canal expands at the lower end in the conus medullaris to form the terminal ventricle. The central canal contains CSF and is lined by ependymal cells.

**White Matter**: Surrounding the grey mater superficially, we find the white matter. On either side, the white matter, which is medial to the posterior grey column, forms thedorsal (posterior) funiculus. The white matter that is medial and ventral to the ventral (anterior) grey column forms the ventral (anterior) funiculus. While the white matter lateral to the anterior and posterior grey column forms the lateral funiculus. Each of these areas contains bundles of nerves in tracts that can be ascending or descending.

There is variation in the amount of the areas occupied by the white and grey matter in different spinal cord levels. The space occupied by the grey matter increases progressively, and the region for white matter decreases as we go craniocaudally.

Even the arrangement of fibers in each funiculus of the white matter is unique. When observing a transverse section of the spinal cord, we find that the posterior funiculus will have ascending sensory fibers arranged into two regions called fasciculus gracilis and fasciculus cuneatus. The anterior funiculus will contain descending motor fibers of olivospinal, tectospinal, lateral vestibulospinal, medial vestibulospinal, anterior corticospinal, anterior spinothalamic, spino-olivary, spino-tectal, and reticulospinal tracts. The lateral funiculi will contain anterior and posterior spinocerebellar, lateral spinothalamic, spino-reticular, lateral corticospinal, rubrospinal, and lateral reticulospinal tracts.

**Arrangement of the Spinal Nerves and Segments**

The spinal cord gives rise to a series of spinal nerves on either side. The spinal nerves are mixed nerves and have two roots, an anterior and posterior root.****Sometimes they are also termed asventral and dorsal root, respectively. The anterior or ventral root is motor in nature and gives efferent fibers to skeletal muscles. Sometimes they also contain preganglionic autonomic fibers to blood vessels and internal organs. The posterior or dorsal root is sensory and contains afferent fibers from peripheral receptors from the skin, bones, joints, muscles, and internal organs. Researchers discovered this in the 19th century, and it is known as Bell-Magendie Law.

Each root is an aggregation of the number of rootlets arising from a part of the spinal cord, and that area is called the spinal segment**.**The spinal nerves are 31 pairs – 8 pairs of cervical, 12 pairs of thoracic, five pairs of lumbar, five pairs of sacral, and one pair of coccygeal nerves.dorsal nerve root ganglion (spinal ganglion)**.**This ganglion contains cell bodies of pseudounipolar sensory neurons.****

Due to the vertebral column and spinal cord's developmental differences, spinal segments do not lie opposite their corresponding vertebrae. The length and obliquity of the spinal nerves increase progressively caudally before their exit through the intervertebral foramina. This knowledge is vital in laminectomy to relieve spinal cord compression due to traumas and tumors. At the conus medullaris, these roots of nerves in pairs coming from the lower lumbar, sacral, and coccygeal nerves form a bundle of nerves that resembles the tail of a horse and is thus known as cauda equina.

**Covering of Spinal Cord**

Three meninges surround the spinal cord. From outside inwards, they are the dura mater (thick fibrous membrane), the arachnoid mater, and the pia mater. The space present between the dura and the vertebral canal wall is called the extradural (epidural) space.****The space between the dura and arachnoid mater is said to besubdural space.****Subarachnoid space is present between the pia mater and arachnoid mater. This space is filled with cerebrospinal fluid. The pia mater is adherent to the spinal cord and extends along with the cord up to the lower border of the L1 vertebra where the spinal cord end. But dura and arachnoid mater extend up to the second sacral vertebra. Between these two vertebral levels, subarachnoid space has spinal nerve roots forming cauda equina. One should remember that the pia mater does not end at L1 but extends beyond this as the thin midline structure called filum terminale, and finally attached to the posterior surface of the coccyx.

The spinal cord's most important function is to receive, integrate, associate the input, and produce a reflex response.