Smith fractures are the second most common type of distal radius fractures but are significantly less common than the Colles fracture. This type of fracture may display significant volar displacement or angulation of the distal fragment and hand relative to the main shaft — the majority of patients with Smith fracture present in the emergency department. Once admitted, the emergency department physician should consult with the radiologist for appropriate imaging studies and inform the orthopedic surgeon. Nurse practitioners who see these patients in urgent care clinics should not attempt to manage these fractures on their own as any residual displacement or angulation after reduction can lead to enormous morbidity. This approach without a specialist can commonly lead to acute carpal tunnel syndrome due to compression on the median nerve or compromise of vascular status. It is essential to assess neurovascular status at primary presentation and attempt reduction if necessary. If there is significant displacement or angulation, comminution, or the fracture site remains unstable after reduction attempts; outcomes show significant improvement with open reduction internal fixation of the radius as opposed to conservative casting. This fixation typically occurs with volar plating of the radius. Irrespective of the treatment, most patients need aggressive hand rehabilitation to restore muscle strength and joint function.

Orthopedic specialty-trained nurses will participate in the treatment and subsequent management, alerting the clinician to any concerns regarding patient compliance, medication use, or lack of progress. Physical therapists may also be called upon to work with these patients to restore full function to the affected limb. Recovery is gradual, but some patients may continue to have pain and diminished mobility depending on the type of fracture and treatment. The pharmacist should educate the patient on pain management which can be significant. Only through open communication between the interprofessional team can the morbidity of Smith fracture be lowered. [Level 5]