Different treatment options for Meniere disease exist with substantial variability between countries. None of the treatment options cure the disease. As many treatments significantly impact the functioning of surrounding structures, one should start with non-invasive approaches with the fewest possible side effects and proceed to more invasive steps.

- **Sodium restriction diet**: Low-level evidence suggests that restricting sodium intake may help to prevent Meniere attacks.

- **Thiazide diuretics**: Form the mainstay of medical treatment in many centers. Evidence suggests they reduce the frequency and severity of symptomatic episodes but do not appear to prevent hearing loss.

- **Betahistine**: Substantial disagreement exists in the medical community about the use of betahistine. A Cochrane review found low-level evidence to support the use of betahistine with substantial variability between studies.

- **Intratympanic steroid injections**: May reduce the number of vertigo attacks in patients with Meniere disease while preserving auditory function.

- **Intratympanic gentamycin injections**: Gentamycin has strong ablative properties towards vestibular cells. Side effects are sensorineural hearing loss because of a certain amount of toxicity toward cochlear cells.

- **Vestibular nerve section or labyrinthectomy**: Nerve section is a therapeutic option in patients who failed the conservative treatment options, and labyrinthectomy when surgical options failed. Labyrinthectomy leads to complete hearing loss on the affected side.