The most common strategy to reduce the risk of contrast-induced nephropathy must be considered before the contrast exposure. Periprocedural hydration in chronic kidney disease patients by initiating intravenous (IV) fluid with 0.9% normal saline infusion at a rate of 1 ml/kg/hr for 6 to 12 hours before the procedure and continuing after the procedure. Some literature supports a sliding scale IV hydration protocol based on left ventricular end-diastolic pressure.

Bicarbonate alkalinizes the renal tubular fluid preventing free radical injury. Bicarbonate, by alkalinizing the environment, slows down that reaction Harber-Weiss reaction which otherwise would have resulted in free radical injury. It also helps to scavenge reactive oxygen species from NO, such as peroxynitrite.

Bicarbonate is most often given as an infusion of sodium bicarbonate at a rate of 3 mL/kg/hour an hour prior to the procedure, to be continued at a rate of 1 mL/kg/hour for six hours. However, the exact duration remains a matter of debate. According to some studies, hydration with sodium bicarbonate is more protective than normal saline alone.

In a clinical trial, there was no consistent benefit to justify the routine administration of sodium bicarbonate in patients undergoing cardiac catheterization. Similarly, the Acetylcysteine for Contrast-Induced Nephropathy trial found no difference between acetylcysteine and placebo in the prevention of contrast-induced neuropathy or need for dialysis.

It is reasonable to pretreat patients with high-intensity statin before contrast use. A meta-analysis observed that pretreatment with rosuvastatin could significantly decrease the incidence of contrast-induced nephropathy (OR 0.49, P less than 0.001). However, rosuvastatin did not appear to be effective for the prevention of contrast-induced nephropathy in patients already suffering from chronic kidney disease undergoing elective cardiac catheterization.

Fenoldopam, a dopamine receptor agonist, did not have any benefit in clinical trials. Ascorbic acid 1 g to 3 g for one to three days periprocedural has been shown to reduce contrast-induced neuropathy by 33%. The benefit of hemofiltration has been demonstrated in an isolated trial. During the procedure, one can use a smaller guide catheter, minimize contrast use, avoid ventriculogram, biplane coronary angiography, low osmolar, or iso-osmolar nonionic contrast agent, and maximum allowable contrast dose to be three times the estimated GFR.