Retinal detachment (RD) is defined as the separation of the neurosensory retina (NSR) from the underlying retinal pigment epithelium (RPE) layer. Rhegmatogenous RD (RRD) is characterized by the passage of fluid from the vitreous cavity into the potential space between the NSR and the RPE through a full-thickness retinal break. It causes a sudden painless loss of vision. Its incidence is reportedly around 6.3 to 17.9 per 100,000 population.

The history of successful management of RRD starts with Jules Gonin. RRD was considered an untreatable disease until Jules Gonin proved that it is caused by retinal break(s) and not vice versa. He also developed the first successful surgery for RRD, i.e., “Ignipuncture.” The surgery included break(s) localization, subretinal fluid (SRF) drainage through a 2 to 3 mm long scleral incision constructed beneath the retinal break, and direct thermocautery to the breakthrough of the drainage sclerostomy.

- Accurate identification and localization of retinal break(s)

- Creation of chorioretinal adhesion at the site of retinal break(s)

- Creation of appositional closure between the retinal break(s) and the RPE

Ernst Custodis performed the first scleral buckling (SB) surgery in 1949. He used a polyviol exoplant and did not drain SRF. Lincoff (1965) made multiple modifications to the Custodis procedure. He introduced using a silicone sponge instead of a polyviol exoplant, cryotherapy (for creating chorioretinal adhesions) instead of diathermy, and a spatula needle (for scleral suturing). He also did not drain SRF in almost any case.

The surgical approaches for the treatment of RRD include pneumatic retinopexy, SB, and pars plana vitrectomy (PPV). Vitrectomy has gained popularity worldwide over the last few decades due to its better ergonomics.