The treatment of urge urinary incontinence is designed to achieve a degree of decrease in bladder contractility. It also aims to acquire increased bladder capacity and decreased afferent input to the bladder.

- The first-line treatment includes teaching the patient some behavioral therapies such as bladder training and toileting habits, lifestyle modifications, voiding diary, dietary changes, and avoiding bladder irritants (such as caffeine, smoking), pelvic floor muscle training (PFMT), and biofeedback.

- The second-line treatment option includes the use of medications, namely antimuscarinic and beta 3 agonist therapy.

- Some antimuscarinic agents currently available for the treatment of urge incontinence include oxybutynin, tolterodine, fesoterodine, trospium, darifenacin, and solifenacin. At present, no substantial evidence exists for the most efficacious antimuscarinic drug. Extended-release versions have been found to cause lesser side effects compared to immediate-release versions.
- The beta-3 adrenoreceptor agonists cause direct relaxation of detrusor muscles. They achieve inhibition of spontaneous contractile activity in the bladder and reduction in bladder afferent activity. Mirabegron is the first of its class and the only beta-3 adrenoceptor agonist that is used as a second-line treatment for those who either poorly tolerate antimuscarinic agents or cannot tolerate them at all. Daily doses of mirabegron 25, 50, and 100 mg demonstrated significant efficacy in treating symptoms of urge incontinence in phase three clinical trials.

- If patients with urge incontinence meet the following criteria, they are eligible for third-line treatment (refractory cases): 1) They demonstrate a failure of response to behavioral therapy, and 2) They have either intolerance to or inadequate response to at least two second-line treatments. Third-line treatment includes the three following unique types of neuromodulations that are FDA approved: Percutaneous stimulation of tibial nerve (PTNS), temporary chemical denervation of the bladder detrusor muscle, and sacral neuromodulation. PTNS involves weekly sessions for the initial three months and then monthly maintenance treatments. Contraindications to PTNS should be carefully assessed, which include patients with pacemakers/defibrillators, nerve damage involving tibial nerve or pelvic floor function, and patients that are pregnant.****Intravesical onabotulinum toxin A injection is also approved by the FDA and requires delivery via cystoscopy every six months if symptoms recur. It results in flaccid paralysis of the detrusor muscle with consistent improvement in urge incontinence symptoms and quality of life. Other neuromodulations such as sacral, pudendal, and paraurethral nerve stimulators can be surgically implanted. Intra-vesicular onabotulinum toxin A injection was shown to be superior to neuromodulation devices for the reduction of urgency symptoms in a 2016 study.