Anticoagulation remains the primary treatment for VTE (DVT and PE). Thrombolytic therapy and intravenous filter placement are options reserved for specialized cases. In general, the use of direct-acting oral anticoagulants, such as apixaban, dabigatran, edoxaban, and rivaroxaban, is preferred over parenteral heparin and vitamin K antagonist therapy. It is imperative to note that traditional vitamin K antagonists are not effective without concomitant parenteral heparin therapy for at least 5 to 7 days. Also, dabigatran and edoxaban have not yet had testing in acute VTE without previous parenteral heparin therapy. Apixaban and rivaroxaban are both United States Food and Drug Association (U.S. FDA) approved for monotherapy for acute VTE, including both acute DVT and acute PE episodes.

The duration of therapy for the initial episode of VTE (DVT or PE) remains 3 to 6 months, except for patients with isolated distal DVT and a low risk of recurrence.

Patients without cancer should receive therapy with direct oral anticoagulants or warfarin. In obese patients who have treatment with low-molecular-weight heparin for the treatment of acute VTE, the American Society of Hematology recommends using their actual weight rather than a “capped” dose.

In pregnant patients, low molecular-weight heparin is the drug of choice for initial and long-term treatment as well. The duration of treatment in the pregnant patient is at least 6 weeks postpartum with a minimum of 3 months of the total duration of treatment.

Vena cava filters should only be a consideration if there is a contraindication to anticoagulation. Due to the inferior efficacy of these filters in preventing thromboembolic events, experts recommend a periodic reassessment of these contraindications to anticoagulation.

Thrombolytic therapy is indicated for patients with massive PE causing hemodynamic instability. However, it is essential to note the absolute and relative contraindications for the use of thrombolytic treatment before its application. DVT cases with complete obstruction of blood flow with impending compartment syndrome should also merit consideration for thrombolytic therapy.

Therapy for recurrent VTE is lifelong anticoagulation.

**Inpatient vs. Outpatient Treatment**

Given the inherent risk of hospitalizations, current guidelines increasingly recommend outpatient therapy when possible. Almost all patients with DVTs can have diagnosis and treatment without hospitalization. For PE, clinical tools have been developed to identify those patients that are safely treatable as an outpatient. The Pulmonary Embolism Severity Index (PESI) predicts clinical severity for patients with PE using a patient's age, gender, history of malignancy, history of congestive heart failure or chronic lung disease, and patient's vital signs on presentation. Patients with a low PESI score can safely receive treatment for PE as an outpatient. A simplified version of the PESI score defines low-risk patients as those who are younger than 80 years and have no significant comorbidity with a pulse rate of less than 110/min, systolic blood pressure greater than 100 mm Hg, and oxygen saturation greater than 90% on room air on presentation.