Repolarization abnormalities can occur due to a variety of reasons. One of the most common abnormalities is long QT syndrome. Long QT syndrome is often due to congenital defects in the ion channels of the heart that affects its opening and closing duration.

Long QT syndrome type 1: Here, there is a defect in the slow delayed rectifier potassium current (IKs). On ECG, this presents as a prolonged QT interval with a broad-based T wave. As discussed earlier, as there is an inherent difference in the activity of IKs between the different cells, this syndrome also increases the transmural dispersion of repolarization. Beta-adrenergic stimulation, which will increase IKs and hence a more significant decrease in action potential duration of epicardial and endocardial cells than M cells mimics LQTS 1.

Long QT syndrome type 2: Here, there is a defect in the rapid delayed rectifier potassium channel, which causes significant slowing of repolarization in all three cell types. On ECG, there is a prolonged QT interval and low amplitude T waves with a bifurcated appearance. Class 3 anti-arrhythmic like sotalol, which block IKr mimics LQTS2. There is a more significant prolongation of the action potential duration of the M cells than the epicardial and endocardial cells. Thus here also there is an increased transmural dispersion of repolarization.

Long QT syndrome type 3 – here, there is an increase in the current passing through late sodium current (INa). ECG shows QT interval prolongation and widened T waves. Here also, as this current is more active in the M cells than epicardial and endocardial cells, it can increase transmural dispersion of repolarization. Thus the proarrhythmic effects of Long QT syndromes are due to a decrease in repolarization reserve and an increase in the transmural dispersion of repolarization.

Outside factors are the more common effectors of repolarization abnormalities. Many medications can cause QT prolongation, including anti-arrhythmic such as amiodarone, specific antibiotics such as fluoroquinolones, and antipsychotics.