Infection with Campylobacter jejuni is a result of orally ingested contaminated food or water. Several factors influence infections, including the dose of bacteria ingested, the virulence of organisms, and the immunity of the host. The median incubation period is from 2 to 4 days. C. jejuni multiplies in the bile and then invade the epithelial layers and travel to the lamina propria producing a diffuse, bloody, edematous enteritis.

Pseudomembranous colitis is caused by toxin-producing Clostridium difficile. The disease develops as a result of altered normal microflora (usually by antibiotic therapy such as cephalosporin and beta-lactam antibiotics) that enables overgrowth and colonization of the intestine by Clostridium difficile and production of its toxins.

Enterotoxigenic E. coli produces heat-labile (HL) and heat-stable (ST) toxins. The HL toxins activate adenyl cyclase in enterocytes resulting in increased cAMP and stimulation of chloride secretion and inhibition of absorption. The ST toxins bind to guanylate cyclase resulting in increased cGMP and effects on cellular transporters similar to those caused by LT toxins resulting in secretory non-inflammatory diarrhea (this explains the limited histopathological changes in this infection).

Enteropathogenic E. coli can produce proteins for “attaching” and “effacing” (A/E) lesions, which enable the bacteria to get tightly attached to the enterocytes apical membranes and causing effacement or loss of the microvilli. As stated earlier, enteropathogenic E. coli does not produce toxins, and their underlying mechanisms for causing diarrhea is by attaching and effacing lesions.

Enterohemorrhagic E. coli; both of its serotypes E. coli O157: H7 and non-O157: H7 produce Shiga-like toxins similar to Shigella dysenteriae infection. However, E. coli O157: H7 strains are more likely to cause outbreaks compared to non-O157: H7 serotypes. They produce bloody diarrhea and are responsible for the development of hemolytic-uremic syndrome and ischemic colitis.

Enteroinvasive coli do not produce toxins; they invade enterocytes and cause self-limited colitis. Exact details of their pathogenetic mechanisms are still not fully understood.

Enteroaggregative E. coli produces enterotoxins related to Shigella enterotoxins and ST toxins of enterotoxigenic E. coli. They attach themselves to enterocytes via adherence fimbriae.

Immunity to Mycobacterium tuberculosis undergoes mediation via T-cells resulting in macrophage stimulation to kill the bacteria. Reactivation of infection or re-exposure to the bacillus in a sensitized individual, as it is the case in most Mycobacterium tuberculosis colitis cases resulting in rapid defense reactions and increased tissue necrosis accompanied by loss of T-cell immunity (tuberculin test in these patients becomes negative although used to be previously positive, which is consistent with fading T-cell protection).

Primary CMV infection in immunocompetent individuals is usually asymptomatic. However, in patients whose immune response is compromised, they develop symptoms in different body organs, including CMV colitis.

Research concerning genetics and molecular sciences of Entamoeba histolytica have brought new understanding about mechanisms by which the parasite impose invasive abilities and pathological lesions in the colon and extracolonic organs. Host factors predisposing to infection are also under research.