**Clean Water and Sanitation**

Access to clean water remains unobtainable for millions globally. The single largest impact on human health quality in history has been the increasing quality and access to clean water for drinking, cooking, and cleaning. Much of clean water comes from both water purification systems and sanitation and waste management systems to prevent clean water sources from becoming contaminated. Public health took a large step forward in 1854 when Dr. John Snow discovered a cholera outbreak near Broad Street in London was due to the local water pump being contaminated by cholera, not by the prevailing theory of miasma circulating at that time. To this day, clean water is pivotal to public health.

**Obesity and Nutrition**

In developed nations, obesity and nutrition now account for over half of the population's morbidity and mortality. Obesity and over-nutrition or inappropriate nutrition contribute to diseases including diabetes, hypertension, myocardial infarction, cerebrovascular accidents/strokes, renal failure, arthritis, some cancers, sleep apnea, etc. On the other end, over 2 billion individuals globally suffer from malnutrition with diseases including kwashiorkor, marasmus, scurvy, rickets, osteoporosis, beriberi, pellagra, anemia, goiter, etc.  Public health works on both decreasing obesity and the host of diseases it brings, as well as improving malnutrition through education, access, and modifications to the political, socioeconomic environment in which people live.  Malnutrition is improved not only by obtaining sources and channels to get the necessary nutrition to the affected populations but also by addressing the underlying geopolitical, social environment that contributes to or allows the malnutrition to occur.

**Gun Violence**

Gun violence is the leading cause of premature death in the United States, resulting in about 30,000 deaths and 60,000 injuries per year. Gun violence is complex. Therefore, it is deeply rooted in American culture, requiring a public health approach to ensure that families and communities remain safe (American Public Health Association, 2017). The National Violent Death Reporting System (NVDRS) is a unique source of information and reports on suicide, homicide, unintentional fatal shootings, and law enforcement-related fatalities. The NVDRS, started by the CDC in 2002 with data from six States and currently tracks data from forty states, including the District of Columbia and Puerto Rico, also reports on who the victims are and when, where, and how they were injured (American Public Health Association, 2017). The NVDRS is now considered the only state-based active surveillance system that merges, standardizes, and anonymizes data from multiple sources to a detailed picture of violent death in the United States of America. It is considered a valuable asset and partner to Public Health to expand and track data related violence in all fifty states, thereby making it an asset to policy-makers, health authorities, law enforcement agencies, researchers, and advocacy groups.

**Health Equity**

The efforts to reframing public health work to achieve better health through equity are at the core of Health People 2020, the United States of America's health objectives for the current decade that defines equity as the attainment of the highest level of health for all people (American Public Health Association, 2017). Health equity achievement involves promoting and valuing everyone equally with focused and ongoing societal efforts. This will enable increased efforts to avoid inequalities, historical and contemporary injustices, and eliminate health and health care disparities. To eliminate inequity, public health, in partnership with stakeholders both in the government and private sector, dedicate resources to serve the most vulnerable, thereby bringing life-saving care to communities that would have otherwise gone without needed health care services (American Public Health Association, 2017).

**Health Reform**

This is at the center of the debate on navigating and providing health care coverage and insurance for most Americans. The Affordable Care Act (ACA) is the nation’s health reform law enacted in March 2010 to reform both private and public health insurance systems. About 20 million Americans are estimated to be served and covered by the ACA, increasing benefits and lower costs for consumers and providing new public health funding.

**Tobacco Use and Exposure**

The American Public Health Association, in partnership with stakeholders, has championed initiatives to help Americans live tobacco-free. This initiative includes laws that create smoke-free workplaces with policies that increase smokers' efforts to quit (American Association of Public Health, 2017). Tobacco is a preventable killer, and tobacco exposure is proportionally associated with other health disparities in teens. About 90% of cigarette smokers started smoking before age 18, and 99% tried smoking before age 26 (CDC, 2017). More than 3200 youth aged 18 years or younger smoke their first cigarette each day in the United States. An additional 2100 youth and young adults become daily cigarette smokers. The flavoring in tobacco products that makes smoking appealing to young adults perhaps influences this. Seventy-three percent of high school students and 56% of middle school students reported using a flavored tobacco product in 2014 (CDC, 2017).

**Vaccination**

Vaccinations are created to help boost the immune system. Vaccinations have significantly reduced perinatal, infant, and childhood deaths since becoming widespread.  Vaccinations have globally eradicated some diseases (smallpox) while significantly limiting others in certain countries (tuberculosis, Haemophilus influenzae type B meningitis, varicella-zoster virus, tetanus, measles, mumps, rubella, hepatitis B, diphtheria).  Vaccines also decrease the global burden of disease for all populations (influenza, varicella-zoster, hepatitis A, human papillomavirus, rotavirus). Most vaccines contain weakened or killed microorganism that causes the human body to increase its immunity to certain diseases. Some vaccines contain a live, weakened version of the disease-causing agent, while others contain a killed detoxified version of the agent it is a target to protect against. Routes of administration included injection, oral, or nasal spray. Many vaccines are given in multiple doses over time. In most cases, booster shots are administered to maintain the body’s immunity against diseases of interest (American Association of Public Health, 2017).