WHO classification(2016) classifies diffuse astrocytomas as grades II, III, and IV. Grade I infiltrating astrocytoma is not mentioned. It is based on the following four characteristics: 1. Nuclear atypia: nuclear pleomorphism and hyperchromasia 2. Mitoses:

- Has to be unequivocal

- Ki67 proliferation index is used to separate grade II tumors from grade III

3. Microvascular proliferation:

- Glomeruloid type - commoner, prognostically lesser significance as it's found in lower-grade gliomas (like pilocytic astrocytoma) also

- Endothelial proliferation - in the large vessel lumen. It is less common and has more association with high-grade gliomas

4. Necrosis:

- Coagulative necrosis

- Pseudopalisading necrosis

**WHO Histological Grading: Diffuse Astrocytomas**

- Grade II (diffuse astrocytoma): nuclear atypia alone

- Grade III (anaplastic astrocytoma): nuclear atypia + focal/dispersed anaplasia. There are prominent proliferation activity and mitoses

- Grade IV (glioblastoma): nuclear atypia, mitoses, microvascular proliferation or necrosis

**WHO Histological Grading: Localized Astrocytomas**

- Pilocytic astrocytoma: corresponding to WHO-grade I

- Doesn't recommend definitive grade allotment yet for pilomyxoid astrocytoma

- SEGCA (subependymal giant cell astrocytoma): Grade I

- Pleomorphic xanthoastrocytoma: grade II and anaplastic pleomorphic:

**Glioma Treatment Recommendations Based on Grade**

Grade I (pilocytic astrocytomas)

- Uncommon, typically noninvasive and are considered benign. Potentially curable by surgery but if surgical removal is not possible completely, radiotherapy or expectant management is used

Grade II (low-grade infiltrative astrocytomas, oligodendroglioma, mixed gliomas)

- Surgery is recommended  with maximal safe resection

- Unfavorable prognostic factors: age > 40 years, dimension ≥6 cm, crossing midline and presence of neurologic deficit before resection; 3 or more factors are high risk

- Low-risk, < 40-year patients: observation

- High-risk patients: fractionated external-beam radiotherapy (EBRT) or adjuvant chemotherapy

- The standard radiation dose for low-grade astrocytomas is 45-54 Gy, delivered in 1.8 to 2.0 Gy fractions

- Adjuvant therapy includes temozolomide 150 to 200 mg/m^2/day orally on days 1-5 of a 28-day cycle (6-8 cycles)

- Recurrences or progressive, low-grade disease (previously untreated): Temozolomide 75 mg/m^2 PO daily on days 1-21 or 150 to 200 mg/m^2 PO on days 1 to 5 of a 28-d cycle until disease progression or for a maximum of 24 cycles

- Postoperative radiation therapy is often employed for unresectable, residual, or recurrent tumor

- Chemotherapy is often used for low-grade oligodendrogliomas, particularly tumors with the 1p19q deletion, which is a marker for tumor susceptibility to chemotherapy

Grade III (anaplastic astrocytoma or oligoastrocytoma)

- Standard of care: surgical resection followed by EBRT (60 Gy in 30 to 35 fractions) and adjuvant temozolomide, 75 mg/m^2/day orally on days 1 to 42, usually 1 to 1.5 hours before radiation

- Post–radiation therapy: Continue temozolomide at higher doses of 150 to 200 mg/m^2/day PO on days 1 to 5 every 28 days **or**

- PCV (procarbazine, lomustine, vincristine): lomustine (CCNU) 90 to 130 mg/m^2 PO on day 1 **plus**procarbazine 60 to 75 mg/m^2 PO on days 8 to 21**plus**vincristine 1.4 mg/m^2 IV (not to exceed 2 mg/dose) on days 8 and 29; administer every 6 weeks for up to 4 cycles with deferred radiotherapy

Grade IV (glioblastoma):

- Standard of care is surgical resection followed by EBRT (60 Gy in 30 to 35 fractions) and adjuvant temozolomide 75 mg/m^2/day orally on days 1 to 42, usually 1 to 1.5 hours before radiation

- Postradiation therapy: Continue temozolomide at higher doses of 150 to 200 mg/m^2/day PO on days 1 to 5 every 28 days

Recommendations for **recurrent**tumors: reoperation, carmustine wafers, and alternate chemotherapeutic regimens. Re-radiation is rarely helpful. Bevacizumab, a humanized VEGF monoclonal antibody, has activity in recurrent glioblastoma, increasing progression-free survival & reducing peritumoral edema & glucocorticoid use. Recurrent glioblastoma treatment decisions must take into consideration factors such as previous therapy, time to relapse, performance status, and quality of life. Whenever possible, patients with recurrent disease should be enrolled in clinical trials.

**How to Approach**

As with the rest of the malignancies, a multimodal treatment approach is undertaken, including surgical, medical, and radiation oncology.

Low-grade astrocytomas: No clear superiority of any particular modality is known. As these low-grade tumors can be quite indolent, questions arise about the risk-benefit ratio of undertaking any intervention. A study by Ishkanian et al. demonstrated the efficacy of adjuvant radiotherapy for pilocytic astrocytoma (WHOgrade I), it prolongs PFS (progression-free survival)  at 5 and 10 years as compared to observation.

Grade 2 astrocytoma: Radiotherapy and adjuvant chemotherapy are better than only radiotherapy. A trial showed that chemotherapy with vincristine, procarbazine, and lomustine following radiotherapy leads to better 10 years PFS (51% v/s 21%).

Anaplastic astrocytomas: multimodal therapy is incorporated, including surgery, radiation, and chemotherapy(adjuvant temozolomide). Data regarding concurrent temozolomide is lacking, although some studies showed improved survival (46% vs. 29%). IDH( Isocitrate Dehydrogenase ) mutation is also associated with improved 5-year survival (79% vs. 22%).

Prophylactically starting antiepileptics is controversial. Those who have a complaint of seizure should be started on antiepileptics. For seizures, the patient is usually started on levetiracetam, topiramate, lamotrigine, valproic acid, and lacosamide. These drugs interfere less with the hepatic microsomal enzyme system. Other drugs such as phenytoin and carbamazepine are used less frequently as they are potent enzyme inducers that can interfere with both glucocorticoid metabolism and metabolism of chemotherapeutic agents. Corticosteroids are also used as they lead to excellent symptomatic relief due to their anti-inflammatory action. This leads to a decrease in mass effect. Dexamethasone is the glucocorticoid of choice because of its low mineralocorticoid activity. Initial doses are typically 12-16 mg/d in divided doses orally or IV ( both are equivalent). Concurrent prophylaxis for gastrointestinal ulcers should be prescribed with corticosteroid administration.

**Surgical Care**

Surgery provides to remove/debulk the tumor. Moreover, histological diagnosis is made possible by the tissue biopsy provided by the surgeon. Other symptom-relieving procedures include ICT (intracranial tension), reducing procedures like VP shunting, EVD insertion, etc. It has been shown that complete resection (>98% based on volumetric MRI) improves median survival compared with subtotal resection (13 vs. 8.8 mo).

**Other Medications Summary**

Venous thromboembolic disease occurs in 20% to 30% of patients with high-grade gliomas and brain metastasis; hence prophylactic anticoagulants should be used during hospitalization and in non-ambulatory patients. Those who have had deep venous thrombosis (DVT) or pulmonary embolus can receive safely therapeutic doses of anticoagulation without increasing risk for hemorrhage into the tumor.

**Antineoplastic Agent**

Temozolomide (alkylating agent): Oral alkylating agent converted to MTIC at physiologic pH; 100% bioavailable; approximately 35% crosses the blood-brain barrier.

mTOR inhibitors are also proposed for the treatment of grade 1 astrocytomas.