An interprofessional team that provides a holistic and integrated approach to pain management can help achieve the best possible outcomes for the patient. If there is a specific underlying cause of a patient's pain, it must be determined. The role of the primary care providers in the management of acute and chronic pain, as well as the various comorbidities associated with pain, is essential. Specialists are often needed to manage various pain disorders. Neurologists, pain medicine specialists, orthopedic surgeons are but a few specialists who are a part of a pain assessment team. Furthermore, palliative care or supportive care medicine specialists, physical therapists, occupational therapists, and cognitive-behavioral therapists also play an integral role in pain assessment. Pain assessment tools can be used in an inpatient or outpatient setting and be incorporated into the management of multiple scenarios ranging from post-operative pain, palliative pain, acute injury, or chronic pain disorders. Adequate pain management in both an acute and chronic setting leads to better patient outcomes. It is critical to optimize a patient's care by managing their pain with various nonpharmacological, pharmacological, and interventional treatment approaches.

Collaboration, shared decision-making, and communication are key elements for a good outcome. The interprofessional care provided to the patient must use an integrated care pathway combined with an evidence-based approach to planning and evaluation of all joint activities. The earlier the signs and symptoms of a complication are identified, the better is the prognosis and outcome. The primary way to prevent chronic pain is adequate treatment and assessment of acute pain.