The only FDA-approved usage for tranexamic acid (TXA) is for heavy menstrual bleeding and short-term prevention in patients with hemophilia.

- Tooth extractions in patients with hemophilia: Two Cochrane reviews showed limited data in patients with hemophilia undergoing tooth extractions; however, TXA may reduce blood loss, postoperative bleeding, and additional need of clotting factors if given with clotting factor replacements of the known hemophilia type.

- Menorrhagia: An open non-comparative study revealed that oral TXA reduced idiopathic menorrhagia and improved quality of life in these patients.

**Off-label Uses of Oral, Topical, and Intravenous TXA**

Intravenous TXA is commonly used in severely bleeding patients requiring massive transfusion protocols (MTP) or when hyper-fibrinolysis is demonstrated. The most frequent sign is in trauma patients but may be utilized in any patient at significant risk of hemorrhage. The 2010 CRASH-2 trial was a multi-center randomized, double-blinded, controlled trial where patients either received TXA or a placebo in adult trauma patients with significant hemorrhage with systolic blood pressure less than 90 mmHg, a heart rate greater than 110 beats per minute, and within eight hours of injury. They found TXA to improve survival when administered within three hours of the injury in a patient population with significant hemorrhage.

**Off-label Intravenous Uses of TXA Are Seen in Surgical Operations to Reduce Blood Loss**

- Elective cesarean sections: A randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled study of 660 women who underwent elective cesarean showed the TXA group had less blood loss compared to the placebo group with no increase in thromboembolic events.

- Total knee arthroplasty: In a double-blind prospective trial, patients were either given TXA or normal saline to investigate if TXA decreased the need for blood transfusions. In fact, the TXA group reduced both bleeding and the need for blood transfusion. They also noted no significant thromboembolic events.

- Orthognathic surgery: A double-blind, randomized, controlled trial of elective bi-maxillary osteotomy received either TXA or normal saline. Their results revealed blood loss that was statistically significant in the TXA group; however, there was no difference in blood transfusions.

- Cardiac surgery: A trial with a 2-by-2 factorial design was performed, assigning patients undergoing coronary artery surgery into an aspirin versus placebo group or a TXA versus the placebo group. Their results revealed that tranexamic acid was associated with a lower risk of bleeding than the placebo, without a higher risk of death or thrombotic complications within 30 days after surgery.

- Spinal surgeries: 132 consecutive patients undergoing a multi-level posterior spinal segmental instrumented fusion (=5 levels) were analyzed retrospectively. The number of patients was 89 in the TXA group and 43 in the non-TXA group. Their data revealed a significant blood loss reduction in the TXA group and a decreased amount of blood transfusion when compared to the non-TXA group.

- Transurethral retrograde prostatectomy (TURP): Patients undergoing a TURP were assigned to a TXA group versus a control group. Their data revealed that the TXA group had less hemoglobin loss per gram of resected prostate tissue compared to the control group.

**Other Off-label Intravenous TXA**

Non-traumatic subarachnoid hemorrhage: A randomized, prospective, multicenter study looking into the administration of TXA and reduction of rebleeding rates. Their data did reveal a reduction of rebleeding and mortality compared to the group not treated with TXA.

Postpartum hemorrhage, as represented in the study of the WOMAN Trial Collaborators in 2017, which was a large multicenter, randomized, controlled, double-blinded study showing TXA reduces death in women with postpartum hemorrhage if given as soon as possible after bleeding onset.

Gastrointestinal bleeding: Past trials have shown a trend toward mortality reduction and less blood product use; however, these were based in concert with older therapies.  Newer trials are underway to better understand the role of TXA in patients with gastrointestinal bleeding.

**Off-label Oral TXA**

Post-procedural after cervical conization: A double-blind, randomized, controlled trial revealed that oral TXA regimen reduced post-procedural blood loss. TXA was also provided prophylactically likewise, reducing blood loss compared to the placebo group.

Hereditary angioedema (HAE): A systematic review of four medications given prophylactically to reduce HAE attacks. All four drugs, one being TXA, reduced the frequency of HAE attacks compared to a placebo.

Transurethral retrograde prostatectomy (TURP): A prospective and randomized trial where TXA was given to the treatment group, 2 g TXA three times daily, and the first day after the operation. Their data revealed that short-term oral TXA reduced intra-operative blood loss during a TURP.

Tooth extractions in patients on oral anticoagulants. A prospective randomized, controlled trial looking at a 2-day versus 5-day oral solution of TXA to prevent postoperative bleeding in patients on warfarin. The study showed that a 2-day regimen was equally effective as the 5-day course in preventing blood loss.

Total unilateral hip replacement surgery: A double-blind, randomized, controlled trial of 161 patients undergoing unilateral primary total hip replacement investigated the effect of topical (intra-articular) application of TXA on blood loss showing that intra-articular TXA reduced the need for blood transfusion versus patients not receiving TXA.

**Off-label Topical TXA**

Traumatic hyphema: A multi-database review revealed that TXA reduces secondary hemorrhage in traumatic hyphema. It also reduced fibrinolysis of the clot and showed increased corneal staining.

Nosebleed: Patients on antiplatelet agents and unmedicated patients with nosebleeds treated with packing dipped in TXA showed decreased bleeding, decreased rebleeding, decreased emergency department times, and improved patient satisfaction.

Hemoptysis: Nebulized TXA has been shown in case series to reduce hemoptysis.