**Laboratory Evaluation for Bleeding Disorders**

Laboratory testing is essential for diagnosing bleeding disorders. However, the specific panels necessary for an accurate diagnostic evaluation are not standardized and may vary significantly between hospitals and regions.  Routine laboratory analysis for clotting disorders starts with platelet count, prothrombin time (PT), partial thromboplastin time (aPTT), the international normalized ratio (INR) and bleeding time. The platelet count should not only have a sufficient quantity (normal = 150000 to 500000/ml) but must also be functional. The bleeding time assesses the function of the platelets. Bleeding times can be delayed in a patient with vWF deficiency or from specific medications that interfere with platelet function (NSAIDS, aspirin and valproic acid).   PT (normal = 11.5 to 14s) represents the function of coagulation factors II, V, VII, and X which are the hepatically synthesized vitamin K dependent factors.  The PT and INR will be affected by patients taking warfarin as it interferes with the synthesis of vitamin K dependent factors. The INR (normal= 0.8 to 1.2) is a ratio that is used to estimate the percent of functional clotting factors.  For example, an INR of between 2 to 3 correlates approximately to 10% of active clotting factors present.  It is necessary to have at least 30% of the clotting factors present for normal coagulation.  Partial thromboplastin time (normal = 25 to 40s) measures the efficacy of von Willebrand Factor and factors VIII, IX, XI, and XII.

Hemophiliacs will have an elevated aPTT and a normal PT/INR, bleeding time and platelet count.  The aPTT, a measure of the intrinsic pathway, will be elevated as a result of low levels of FVIII.  An elevated aPTT should prompt investigation by looking at individual factor levels, specifically Factor VIII and IX.

Diagnosis of von Willebrand disease is represented by increased bleeding time and a decrease in vWF levels as measured by the ristocetin cofactor collagen binding, in addition to a history of bleeding and positive family history of von Willebrand disease.  The reocmmendation is that patients are tested at least three times before making the official diagnosis as vWF levels are subject to fluctuate, changing with stress, pregnancy, exercise, and inflammatory processes.   There are also some subtle differences in vWF levels based on gender and blood type.