Frotteurism is the act of touching or rubbing one's genitals up against another person in a sexual manner without their consent, to derive sexual pleasure or reach orgasm. An essential characteristic of this disorder is that this behavior is repetitive.

According to the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual - V (DSM-5), for a diagnosis of frotteuristic disorder, the following criteria must be met:

- Over a period of at least six months, recurrent and intense sexual arousal from touching or rubbing against a nonconsenting person, as manifested by fantasies, urges, or behaviors.

- The individual has acted on these sexual urges with a nonconsenting person, or the sexual urges or fantasies cause clinically significant distress or impairment in social, occupational, or other important areas of functioning.

Specify if:

- In a controlled environment: This specifier is primarily applicable to individuals living in institutional or other settings where opportunities to touch or rub against a nonconsenting person are restricted.

- In full remission: The individual has not acted on the urges with a nonconsenting person, and there has been no distress or impairment in social, occupational, or other areas of functioning for at least five years, while in an uncontrolled environment.

- According to DSM-5, if the individual has not acted on their interest and experiences no distress or impairment, they are considered to have a frotteuristic sexual interest but not frotteuristic disorder.

As part of establishing the diagnosis and excluding other causes, routine laboratory workup, and imaging may be obtained.

Laboratory workup may include:

- The metabolic panel

- Hormone tests:

- thyroid function tests
- prolactin
- luteinizing and follicle-stimulating hormone
- testosterone tests.

- If additional sexual deviant behaviors are suspected, nocturnal penile tumescence may be considered in addition to brain scans, as indicated.

Some important points to consider that may help in arriving at a diagnosis:

- The most common form of behavior is rubbing an individual's genital against the victim's thighs or buttocks.

- The act is usually conducted in a wide variety of crowded public settings like public transportation, subways, elevators, malls, or other crowded places.

- The behaviors are usually repetitive.

- A majority of the cases are unreported. It has been suggested that frotteurs often do not face legal consequences (rarely arrested), have a large victim base, and are unlikely to serve long sentences. However, no systematic studies have verified these findings.

- The initiators of frotteuristic behaviors are not looking to have any conversation with the victim and are often surprised if they are "caught."