The Food and Drug Administration (FDA) has approved furosemide to treat conditions with volume overload and edema secondary to congestive heart failure exacerbation, liver failure, or renal failure, including the nephrotic syndrome.

For patients with acutely decompensated heart failure (ADHF) with volume overload who have not received diuretics previously, the initial dose of furosemide should be 20 to 40 mg intravenously. Later, titrate the furosemide dose according to the clinical response of the patients. However, for those patients with ADHF with a normal kidney function on chronic diuretic therapy, the initial dose of furosemide can be equivalent to or greater than the total oral maintenance dose of furosemide the patient takes daily. Subsequently, the diuretic dose adjustments are according to the patient's clinical response. Nevertheless, starting with higher doses of furosemide, at a dose of 2.5 times the total daily oral dose of furosemide per day, has shown a significant trend toward a rapid improvement in the global assessment of patient symptoms.

Although the FDA approved the use of loop diuretics alone or in combination with other anti-hypertensive medications as an alternative to thiazide diuretics to treat hypertension, however, the clinical guidelines panel report of the Eighth Joint National Committee (JNC-8) published in 2014 and the American College of Cardiology/American Heart Association (ACC/AHA) Task Force Panel Guidelines on hypertension treatment published in 2017 do not recommend the use of loop diuretic as a first-line medication to treat hypertension.

Diuretic therapy is recommended in patients with liver cirrhosis and ascites, accompanied by dietary sodium restriction. The recommended diuretics are a combination of spironolactone and furosemide, starting at a ratio of 100 mg of spironolactone and 40 mg of furosemide. They are titrated up to the dose of diuretics in an increment of the same ratio until achieving an adequate response to diuretic therapy or reaching a maximum dose of 400 mg of spironolactone plus 160 mg of furosemide.