Bile duct injury is a rare surgical complication, but it accounts for a major burden of morbidity and litigation. Bile duct injury can be the result of significant inflammation around the gallbladder or due to the variable anatomy of the biliary system. Using techniques outlined above combined with thorough documentation and even intraoperative photography can ensure that structures were adequately identified according to the standard of care. If there is a bile duct injury, the surgeon should evaluate the injury and his or her ability to manage the injury safely. Bailout procedures or simply aborting the procedure can prevent further damage, especially when the cause of the injury is severe inflammation and scarring. Bile duct injuries repaired by hepatobiliary specialists have higher success rates and lower rates of complications, so referral to a tertiary center is always an option if the surgeon is not well trained in bile duct reconstruction.

The surgeon is in charge of facilitating the appropriate diagnostic and therapeutic options in bile duct injury. The role of an interprofessional team effort is at the heart of the management of patients with biliary ductal system injuries. The nurses are a valuable part of this interprofessional group as they help monitor patient's vital signs for timely recognition of complications such as anastomotic leaks and sepsis. The diagnostic and interventional radiologist plays a crucial role in the evaluation of bile leaks suspected postoperatively using ultrasound, MRCP, or HIDA scan. The surgeon should communicate with the radiologist and discuss the patient's history and presumptive diagnosis to focus on the evaluation. Nursing will again be heavily involved post-operatively with medication administration, monitoring the patient's condition, and updating the team on progress or issues that may arise. The nurse should also assist with family and patient education. That pharmacist will work with the nursing staff and surgeons on pain control and medication reconciliation. The patient may be on antibiotics to treat potential intraabdominal infection, and appropriate consultation to the pharmacist and potentially infectious disease physicians ensures satisfactory serum levels and proper antimicrobial coverage. Such a high level of communication and coordination ensures patient safety and improves outcomes. Physicians, specialists, nursing, and pharmacy must all collaborate as an interprofessional team to ensure optimal results and patient progress in bile duct injury cases. [Level V]