Aqueous humor is synthesized by the cells of the ciliary body in a three-step process. First, blood flows into the ciliary processes. Second, the pressure gradient between blood flow and the ciliary interstitium propels the ultrafiltration of plasma into the interstitium. Finally, the ciliary epithelium actively and selectively transports plasma components from the basal to the apical surface, thereby synthesizing aqueous humor and pumping it into the posterior chamber of the eye.

Though the first step in this process depends on blood flow, it is essential to note that systemic blood pressure has been demonstrated to have no significant effect on IOP. This fact is explainable physiologically in that the percentage of plasma filtered is meager at approximately 4%. The consistency of aqueous humor synthesis is the basis for IOP generation, though IOP also varies with the outflow facility. The resistance inherent in the aqueous humor drainage system determines the outflow facility.

The exact mechanism of aqueous humor drainage from the eye is poorly understood, with conventional and unconventional drainage pathways being proposed. Both pathways begin with the synthesis of aqueous humor, as described above. The humor then flows from the posterior chamber to the anterior chamber by passing through the pupil, which is the point of divergence between the conventional and unconventional pathways.

The conventional pathway continues with the humor draining through the following sequence of structures within the angle of the eye: the trabecular meshwork, Schlemm’s canal, collector channels, and the episcleral venous system. Flow through the trabecular meshwork is entirely passive. The flow through Schlemm’s canal has been demonstrated via paracellular and intracellular pores. Resistance to outflow has been documented in the trabecular meshwork and Schlemm’s canal, though the exact mechanisms are under debate. Flow resistance through these structures has the greatest effect on the outflow facility compared to all known structures of both the conventional and unconventional pathways.

The unconventional pathway drains into the ciliary muscle interstitium via the uveal meshwork instead of the trabecular meshwork. This pathway subdivides into proposed uveoscleral, uveovortex, and uveolymphatic pathways, named for their respective vascular endpoints: orbital vasculature, vortex veins, and ciliary lymphatics, respectively. Each of these leads to the systemic cardiovascular circulation. The source of resistance in the unconventional pathway is likely ciliary muscle tone, as demonstrated in experiments involving pilocarpine, which increases tone and decreases unconventional flow, and atropine, which decreases tone and increases unconventional outflow. Further delineation of this pathway remains controversial.