Two major layers comprise the skin: the epidermis, superficially, and the dermis underneath. The epidermis itself contains four to five layers, depending on location in the body: stratum corneum, stratum lucidum (palms and soles of hands and feet only), stratum granulosum, stratum spinosum, and stratum basale. The dermis is composed of a superficial papillary layer and a deeper reticular layer. The blood supply to the skin runs vertically through perforating vessels that arise from the subdermal plexus, which is located either between the dermis and subdermal fat or deep within the reticular dermis itself. Understanding the nature and location of the skin's blood supply is critical to successful flap transfer and wound healing.

Equally critical to successful flap transfer is an understanding of relaxed skin tension lines (RSTLs) and lines of maximum extensibility (LME). Langer and Dupuytren observed the natural tendencies of cutaneous wounds to elongate in certain predictable patterns based on the orientation of dermal collagen bundles and of the underlying musculature. In the face, these lines are referred to as RSTLs, and they run perpendicular to the direction in which facial mimetic muscles contract. Perpendicular to the RSTLs is the LMEs, which determine in which direction the skin will stretch most effectively to fill a defect.

The viscoelastic properties of skin permit it to lengthen under constant tension, so-called "skin creep," and ultimately to maintain that increased length with progressively less tension required ("stress relaxation"). With these principles in mind, the surgeon can select an appropriate flap design that will maintain tissue perfusion, maximize skin extensibility, and minimize distortion of surrounding features (particularly on the face) by paying close attention to RSTLs and boundaries between aesthetic subunits (e.g., nose, perioral area, periorbital area, etc.), within which scars are best hidden.