Interstitial cystitis/bladder pain syndrome (IC/BPS), formerly called interstitial cystitis, is a chronic (>six weeks duration) pelvic condition that affects or appears to affect the urinary bladder, characterized by chronic inflammation and lower urinary tract symptoms not due to infection or any other identifiable cause.

Patients often describe pain in the bladder region (suprapubic), with a strong sensation to want to urinate (urgency). This sensation is worsened by filling the bladder and is often relieved by passing urine more often (frequency). This may be during the daytime and/or during the night (nocturia). There may also be other symptoms such as pain or burning when passing urine (dysuria) and discomfort during sexual intercourse, known as dyspareunia. These chronic symptoms have a profound impact on the emotional, psychological, and social well-being of the patient as well as their quality of life.

**Anatomy**

The urinary bladder is a hollow viscus located in the pelvis which is anterior to the rectum in both sexes and the uterus in females. It is partially covered by the peritoneum on the superior surface. It is composed of four layers.

- Mucosa, which contains the transitional epithelium, is the bladder lining and allows for the stretch of the urinary bladder. When stretched, the surface is smooth, but when relaxed, folds form in the mucosa, known as rugae. It also produces the glycosaminoglycans superficial coating that protects the mucosa from direct contact with potentially inflammatory urinary irritants.

- Submucosa, which is composed of elastic connective tissue, further assists with the stretch of the bladder.

- The muscularis layer (detrusor muscle) is composed of several layers  (inner longitudinal, middle circular, and outer longitudinal) of smooth muscle in multiple directions, which assists with the voiding of the bladder when contraction occurs. They also form a small band that encircles the area between the opening of the bladder and the urethra. This is known as the internal urinary sphincter and is controlled by the autonomic nervous system. Another distal band around the urethra controls conscious voiding, called the external sphincter, which is composed of skeletal muscle and innervated by the somatic nervous system.

- The fibrous connective tissue layer is the outermost covering of the bladder except for the superior surface, with is covered by the parietal peritoneum.

The bladder floor also contains a fixed, triangular area called the trigone. This is formed by the openings to each ureter and the outlet to the urethra. This forms three apices with a ureteral orifice in each lateral wing and the third arm entering the urethra.

The distal intramural portion of each ureter follows a shallow course as they travel through the detrusor muscle into the bladder. This anatomy acts as an anti-reflux valve to prevent reflux of urine into the kidney.