A systemic approach is paramount for interpreting an EEG recording. Before starting the analysis, certain factors including the patient's age, level of physical activity, mental state, level of consciousness, the influence of different biological factors, environmental factors, and pharmacological agents that can potentially influence the morphology of the waveforms need to be taken into consideration.

There is a wide variation in the EEG waveforms. A good understanding of the normal or benign variants is necessary to differential normal or benign variants from pathologic waveforms.

- Wicket spikes: These waveforms appear over the temporal (anterior or mid-temporal) region during relaxed wakefulness, drowsiness, or state of light sleep.

- Benign epileptiform transients of sleep (BETS): These are also called as small sharp spikes (SSS) and occur in stage 1 or stage 2 of sleep.

- 6 Hz "phantom" spike-and-wave complex (PhSW): PhSW can be considered a smaller version of the 3Hz spike and wave pattern. These waveforms have low amplitudes and appear in the frequency of 5 Hz to 7 Hz.

- Rhythmic mid-temporal theta of drowsiness (psychomotor variant) or RMTD: This pattern is usually located in the mid temporal region and appears in relaxed wakefulness and drowsiness.

- Positive occipital sharp transients of sleep (POSTS): These waveforms appear in the occipital regions during non-rapid eye movement (NREM) sleep and are asymmetrically distributed.

- Subclinical rhythmic EEG discharge in adults (SREDA): This is a very rare benign EEG pattern. It resembles ictal discharges and is, at times, interpreted as such, leading to a misdiagnosis of epilepsy.

- 14 Hz and 6 Hz positive spikes: 6 and 14 Hz positive spikes are typically seen in the younger age group.

- Presence of repetitive vertex waves, especially in children.

- Breach rhythm: These waveforms are seen over the regions that have a skull defect. Because of the skull defect, there is increased visibility of faster frequencies that are otherwise less appreciated on scalp EEG.

EEG recording of a seizure can begin with the appearance of abnormal discharges in bursts, known as ictal epileptiform discharges. The discharges increase in frequency to rapid continuous spikes and waves, progressing to numerous spikes with buried waves, at peak seizure activity. As the activity slows down, the waves reappear and progressively reduce in frequency, and finally stop.

Typically, multiple EEGs are required to record IEDs. To put things into perspective, every fourth consecutive EEG in an epileptic patient has an IED frequency between 60% to 90%. The frequency of IED in a non-epileptic patient is about 0.5% to 2.5% in healthy young men and about 12% in non-epileptic patients of all age groups with progressive cerebral disorders. Specificity is probably lower and sensitivity higher in children as compared to adults.

Activation methods like hyperventilation, sleep deprivation, and photic stimulation increase the appearance of IEDs and are useful for localization purposes and in being more assertive about the diagnosis of epilepsy.

Although surface EEG recordings are less sensitive than invasive studies, they are efficient in approximating the epileptogenic zone in most of the common epilepsies. The most commonly used invasive electrodes are stereotactically implanted depth electrodes and subdural strip or grid electrodes. Invasive studies are most useful when the scalp EEG does not yield a result, or when the focus is located adjacent to the eloquent cortex.