Thrombosis, by definition, is the formation of a clot within a blood vessel. As described earlier, Virchow's triad represents three qualities in physiology that can result in thrombosis. These include:

**Endothelial Damage**

A healthy endothelium provides an anticoagulant and anti-platelet surface with certain cell surface glycoproteins and the release of various molecules, some of which are stored pre-formed in specialized and unique Weibel-Palade bodies.

Nevertheless, since increased levels of all the plasma forms of cell surface molecules are found in atherothrombotic disease, it may be presumed that they reflect a shift towards thrombosis.

- Damage to a vessel's endothelial wall alters blood flow dynamics. Endothelial disturbance can result from insults such as smoking, chronically elevated blood pressure, and atherosclerotic disease secondary to hyperlipidemia. When an insult to the wall occurs, flow disruption or "turbulence" occurs. Turbulent flow within a vessel occurs when the blood flow rate becomes too rapid, or blood flow passes over an affected surface; this creates disordered flow and eddy currents, increasing the flow friction within a vessel. Reynold's number can represent the tendency for turbulence to occur.

- Re = (v x d x p) / n

- 
              
- Where v = mean velocity, d = diameter (in centimeters), n = viscosity (in poise), and p = density.

- Turbulence within the vessel may occur due to various factors, such as irregular atheromas from plaque formation, bifurcations in the vessel, and areas of stenosis, most prominent in patients with vascular disease.

**Alteration in Blood Flow**

In streamlined (laminar) flow, endothelial cell morphology and function are affected by the shear stresses, and accordingly, to minimize this, they elongate and align in the direction of flow.

Atherogenesis occurs preferentially at arterial bifurcations and bends; at these sites, flow separation results in areas of low-flow, low-shear recirculation of blood cells and proteins in contact with the vessel wall. Such flow conditions favor the adhesion of platelets and monocytes, as well as infiltration of plasma components such as low-density lipoprotein (LDL) cholesterol and fibrinogen causing the development of a plague.

Arterial thrombosis usually follows the rupture of atherosclerotic plaques and is the commonest pathophysiological process in acute coronary syndromes, ischaemic stroke, and critical leg ischemia.

Some examples of blood flow alteration include atrial fibrillation, LV wall akinesis, valvular heart disease, prolonged immobility such as bedridden patients or prolonged travel, surgery, and trauma.

-  When an insult to the wall occurs, flow disruption or "turbulence" occurs. Turbulent flow within a vessel occurs when the blood flow rate becomes too rapid, or blood flow passes over an affected surface; this creates disordered flow and eddy currents, increasing the flow friction within a vessel. Reynold's number can represent the tendency for turbulence to occur.

- Re = (v x d x p) / n

- 
              
- Where v = mean velocity, d = diameter (in centimeters), n = viscosity (in poise), and p = density.

- Turbulence within the vessel may occur due to various factors, such as irregular atheromas from plaque formation, bifurcations in the vessel, and areas of stenosis, most prominent in patients with vascular disease.

**Hypercoagulability of Blood**

The constituents of blood are many and varied, but soluble coagulation factors (such as fibrinogen and tissue factor) and cells (such as platelets) are implicated in the process of thrombosis. Understandably a continuum exists between healthy and hemostatic abnormalities in prothrombotic or hypercoagulable states and 'overtly' increased clotting in acute thrombosis.

**Platelets**

The role of platelets in the pathogenesis of atherosclerosis and as a constituent of atheroma is well elucidated. Platelet function can be quantified by its tendency to aggregate and measure its levels in urine and plasma. The alpha granule constituents (beta thromboglobulin, platelet factor 4 (PF-4)) and the adhesion molecule P-selectin can be measured in the plasma. The PF-4 competes with antithrombin III for binding to heparan glycosaminoglycans, thereby impairing heparan-catalyzed inhibition of thrombin. Raised levels of various platelet molecules are abnormal in cancer, peripheral disease, acute myocardial infarction, diabetes, and hypertension.

The adhesion molecule P-selectin (CD62P) is of particular interest because of its role in modulating interactions between blood cells and the endothelium and the possible use of the soluble form as a plasma predictor of adverse cardiovascular events. For example, it is known that thrombin induces surface expression of P-selection on platelets.

**Fibrinogen**

Thrombogenesis is finely balanced between coagulation and fibrinolytic pathways. The fibrinolytic system is primarily influenced by the interaction between plasminogen activators (such as tissue plasminogen activators) and inhibitors that modulate this activity (e.g., plasminogen activator inhibitor, PAI-1). Plasma fibrinogen is the primary determinant of blood viscosity and blood flow. It affects the aggregation of platelets, interacts with plasminogen binding, and mediates the final steps of clot formation after it combines with thrombi.

**Fibrin D-dimer Levels**

Raised levels of fibrin D-dimer are fibrin degradation products, an index of intravascular thrombogenesis, and fibrin turnover.