The femoral nerve can be blocked either deep to the fascia iliaca compartment caudad and medial to the anterior superior iliac spine or at the femoral crease. The fascia iliaca is a continuous band of fascia in this region, so local anesthetic injected under this fascia reliably produces a block of the femoral and lateral femoral cutaneous nerves. Anatomic, stimulator, and ultrasound-guided techniques have been described. The obturator nerve is less reliably blocked the more caudad the block is performed.

The saphenous nerve can be blocked at the mid-shaft femur in the adductor canal or with a field block at the tibial plateau. Saphenous nerve blocks have gained popularity because while sensation is blocked, motor function is spared, an ideal situation for physical therapy and rehabilitation.

A sciatic nerve block can be achieved via multiple approaches. In the classical approach, the sciatic nerve is blocked in the gluteal region between the greater trochanter and ischial tuberosity, deep to the gluteus muscles and superficial to the quadratus femoris. The anterior sciatic approach blocks the nerve as it travels through the thigh adductors. Finally, in a popliteal block, the injection is administered approximately 6 cm above the popliteal fossa before the sciatic nerve divides into the tibial and common peroneal nerves. Anatomic and ultrasound-guided approaches have been described for the blockade of the sciatic nerve at these three main locations.

A complete block of the foot can be accomplished with five injections at the ankle. The saphenous nerve is blocked anterior to the medial malleolus. The deep peroneal nerve is blocked at the anterior ankle between the extensor hallucis longus and extensor digitorum longus. The superficial peroneal nerve is blocked anterior to the lateral malleolus. The sural nerve is blocked between the lateral malleolus and the Achilles tendon. Finally, the posterior tibial nerve is blocked posterior to the medial malleolus.