**Formulations:**Zolmitriptan is available as an oral tablet, orally-disintegrating tablet, and nasal spray—all of which are available in 2.5 mg or 5 mg doses. The maximum recommended daily dose is 10 mg for adults and pediatric patients ages 12 to 17.****Zolmitriptan can be taken with food and water or in a fasting state without altering its clinical effect.

**Specific Patient Population**

**Hepatic Impairment**: Due to decreased metabolism, there was a prolonged half-life and elevated plasma levels of zolmitriptan that could cause more peripheral vasoconstrictive effects such as elevated blood pressure.

**Renal Impairment:**According to the manufacturer's labeling, clearance of zolmitriptan is reduced by 25% in patients with severe renal impairment; no significant change in clearance was observed in patients with moderate renal impairment. Consider dose adjustment in severe renal impairment.

**Pregnancy Considerations:**According to the manufacturer's labeling, there is a lack of data regarding the developmental risk of using zolmitriptan in pregnancy. Additionally, in reproductive studies in rats and rabbits, oral administration of zolmitriptan to pregnant animals resulted in fetal malformations at clinically relevant exposures. Consequently, consider alternative drugs for the management of migraine during pregnancy.

**Breastfeeding Considerations:**Preliminary evidence suggests that zolmitriptan levels in breastmilk are low. Amounts ingested by the infant are small and unlikely to affect the nursing infant, especially if the infant is older than two months. But it is important to note that concurrent use of prophylactic propranolol might substantially increase the zolmitriptan dose received by the breastfed infant.