Please see the attached composite illustration for an explanation of the following technique.

**Skin Markings**

- Based upon the degree of asymmetry of the brows and the configuration of the forehead furrows, the decision is made whether to use a horizontal incision across the entire forehead or to make separate incisions for each side. In the latter case, the incisions are placed in different rhytides on each side. Whenever an incision is not made all the way across the forehead, offset the incisions to avoid a visually obvious, long scar.

**Anesthesia**

- Supraorbital and supratrochlear nerve blocks are administered using 2% lidocaine and epinephrine mixed with sodium bicarbonate (9 to 1, respectively).

- Further injections are administered along the lines of the incision and also under the brow, and in the glabellar region. The infratrochlear nerve is blocked. Adequate vasoconstriction occurs in 10 to 15 minutes, and cool compresses are applied at this stage and continued throughout the procedure to minimize ecchymosis and edema.

- The local anesthetic injections are administered before the preparation and draping of the patient, allowing time for anesthesia and vasoconstriction to occur.

**Incisions**

- A No. 15 blade is used to make a skin incision down to the galea aponeurotica.

- Incisions carried laterally to the temporal line of fusion must be skin deep only.

**Dissection**

- The plane of dissection is subcutaneous, similar to a direct brow lift, and the galea/frontalis muscle is not violated. Elevating the inferior flap with rakes and performing a combination of sharp dissection and blunt separation with scissors is the most common approach.

- There is a loose subcutaneous aponeurotic layer; dissection is performed in this layer all the way to the superior orbital rims.

- The corrugator and procerus muscles are accessed by incising the galea horizontally about 3 cm above the nasal root and carrying the dissection deeply. Care is taken not to injure the supraorbital nerves laterally.

- The degree to which the corrugator and procerus muscles need to be weakened is based on preoperative assessment. In some patients, partial removal of the muscles with clamping and cauterization is performed. In others, surgeons aim for minimal weakening. For more aggressive weakening, the muscles can be disinserted from their bony origins while protecting the neurovascular bundles.

- Some surgeons transfer fat from the eyelids or elsewhere in the face to the area where the procerus and corrugator muscles are removed for two reasons: (1) to fill any hollows that may form and (2) to fill the preoperative glabellar rhytides.

- Because the orbital orbicularis oculi is a depressor of the brow, in some patients, surgeons weaken the depressor supercilii muscle.

- The forehead above the incision is undermined for approximately 1 cm to facilitate a tension-free closure and wound edge eversion. Should the hairline require advancement, additional undermining will be necessary. Deep forehead rhytides require partial-thickness horizontal incisions of the frontalis muscle for effective rejuvenation.

- The skin inferior to the incision is retracted superiorly until the brow is just past its ideal position and the redundant skin is excised; some degree of overcorrection is required to account for early settling of the brow, though not enough to create a surprising appearance. The subdermal layer is then closed with 4-0 polydioxanone sutures.

- Some surgeons run horizontal and vertical mattress sutures from the point of the incision to the orbital portion of the orbicularis oculi, which provides frontalis tightening and support, and reduces the tension placed on the skin closure. This approach is especially effective in males with significant ptosis of the brows.

- The dermis is sutured with 5-0 polydioxanone, and skin closure is achieved with a 6-0 polypropylene suture.

- Steristrips and a soft pad are applied. An additional pressure dressing can help minimize bruising and swelling, but care should be taken to ensure that it is neither too tight nor that it applies downward tension on the brows.

**Postoperative Care**

The dressing is removed the day after surgery, and wound closure strips and sutures are removed after seven days. More wound closure strips or skin glue can be placed if needed. Overcorrection of the brows is to be expected for the first few weeks. The forehead and the brows always settle by at least 25%. However, since the incision is closer to the brow than with the coronal or endoscopic brow lifts, early brow descent after surgery is less dramatic with mid-forehead lifting. Surgeons should obtain clinical photographs at two months and six months after surgery and observe patients for up to a year.