Treatment of anemia of chronic renal disease is directed toward improving renal function (when possible) and increasing red blood cell production. Therefore, erythropoiesis-stimulating agents (ESAs), together with iron supplementation, is the treatment of choice in anemia of CKD.

Treatment of anemia in CKD has come a long way. Before the advanced treatment options available today, the main treatment option used to be blood transfusions, which came with numerous complications, including infections, hemosiderosis, fluid overload, transfusion reactions, etc. It started with the use of androgens in the 1970s to avoid transfusion in patients with CKD.

Recombinant human erythropoietin and darbepoetin alfa are the two ESAs generally used in managing anemia in CKD. They are fairly similar in efficacy and side effect profile, except for the longer half-life of darbepoetin alfa, thus allowing for less frequent dosing.

As per KIDGO guidelines, in patients with CKD who are not on dialysis, ESAs are typically considered when hemoglobin level drops below 10 g/dl but are individualized depending on various factors, including symptoms related to anemia, dependence on transfusions, the rate of drop in hemoglobin concentration, and response to iron therapy. In these patients, erythropoietin (50 to 100 units/kg IV or SC) is usually given every 1 to 2 weeks, and darbepoetin alfa dosing is every 2 to 4 weeks.

In patients on dialysis, ESAs are usually avoided unless the hemoglobin level is between 9 and 10 g/dL. In this subset, erythropoietin is given with every dialysis, i.e., three times a week, whereas darbepoetin alfa is dosed once weekly.

Generally, the peak rise in RBCs in response to ESAs occurs at 8 to 12 weeks. However, in around 10% to 20% of cases, anemia can be resistant to ESAs. Common adverse effects of ESAs include seizures, the progression of hypertension, clotting of dialysis access, the progression of malignancy, and higher mortality in cancer patients.

In all patients with CKD, regardless of the need for dialysis, the goal hemoglobin using ESAs is less than 11.5 g/dL. Multiple trials were done to assess the superiority of target hemoglobin to 'high normal' versus lower range. These trials, including CHOIR, NHCT, and TREAT trials, demonstrated higher mortality, thrombosis, and adverse cerebrovascular and cardiovascular events due to higher levels of ESAs when used for target hemoglobin greater than 11 g/dl.

Patients with CKD have an increased risk of iron deficiency due to impaired dietary iron absorption, chronic bleeding due to platelet dysfunction from uremia, frequent phlebotomy, and blood being trapped in the dialysis apparatus. This deficiency, in addition to the depletion of the circulating iron pool by stimulation of erythropoiesis by ESAs, makes iron supplementation the core of the treatment of anemia in CKD. Due to decreased oral iron absorption, intravenous iron is preferable in hemodialysis patients.

KIDGO recommends target transferrin saturation between 20 to 30% and ferritin level 100 to 500 ng/mL in patients with CKD who are not on dialysis. In patients with ESRD on dialysis receiving intravenous iron, goal transferrin saturation of 30 to 50% and ferritin higher than 200 ng/mL.

Unlike the general population, high serum ferritin levels do not predict hemoglobin responsiveness in renal failure patients. Finally, no erythropoietin level can be considered adequate for defining renal anemia. Thus, erythropoietin levels should not be measured regularly in evaluating patients with renal anemia.