Corresponding projections to the retinal ganglion cells of the visual fields can be vertically divided into temporal and nasal halves. With respect to homonymous hemianopsia, the field deficit can be described as complete or partial/incomplete. The involvement of the entire half is complete hemianopsia, whereas any other loss is partial.

**Complete Hemianopsia**

Complete homonymous hemianopsia is a visual field deficit with loss of the complete hemifield on the affected side bilaterally, including that half of the macula. Lesions at any point of the retrochiasmal visual pathway can cause this defect.

**Partial/Incomplete Hemianopsia**

**Homonymous quadrantanopia**, often partial but may be complete, is a visual field deficit with a superior or inferior component in addition to the nasal or temporal involvement. This presents itself as a loss of ¼ of the visual field. Most often, damage to the superior or inferior banks of the primary visual cortex (e.g., infarct) will present as a bilateral quadrantanopia. Quadrantanopia may also result from unilateral superior or inferior optic radiation involvement. For instance, right-sided Meyer loop (inferior radiation) damage would cause a loss of vision in the superior-left quadrant bilaterally.

**Homonymous hemianopsia with macular sparing**presents with nearly identical field loss as homonymous hemianopsia with macular sparing. However, sparing of the macula permits a centrally localized (about 5-25 degrees) region of functional vision on the affected side. Commonly, this deficit results from infarcts/strokes involving the most posterior portion of the occipital cortex in a classic posterior cerebral artery distribution. The occipital pole, which manages macular field information, has an anastomotic vascular supply with the contralateral side. This manages to abate macular field loss while the surrounding tissue, and therefore surrounding visual field, remain involved.

**Homonymous scotomatous defects**are rare visual field losses limited to the central 30 degrees, respecting the vertical meridian, and surrounded by functional peripheral vision. These deficits are most often caused by occipital tip injury (infarct or stroke) that damages the cortex beyond the dual vascular reserve. As a result, this field loss can be described as a reversal from macular sparing hemianopsia.

**Homonymous sectoranopia**is a rare defect resulting in wedge-shaped field loss. The loss is often a result of the involvement of the lateral geniculate ganglion, which has a dual vascular supply from both anterior and posterior choroidal arteries. Anterior choroidal artery involvement characteristically causes a superior and inferior wedge-shape loss straddling the horizontal meridian. Posterior choroidal artery involvement typically spares the superior and inferior sectors and has a field loss of the wedge in between.

**Temporal crescent-sparing or unilateral loss**involves varying field loss of about 30 degrees of the farthest peripheral temporal field, which is not overlapped by the contralateral eye’s nasal field (the temporal crescent). Unilateral loss is the only mentioned defect thus far that involves retrochiasmal lesions and presents as a monocular field defect (the others are bilateral and homonymous). Temporal crescent-sparing homonymous hemianopsia is hemianopsia with the temporal crescent of the contralateral eye field being spared, often caused by injury to the occipital cortex with preservation of the anterior portion of the cortex.