Aortic valve infective endocarditis is a life-threatening condition with a poor prognosis. Despite technological advances over the past few decades, mortality remains high. Early recognition and prompt institution of antimicrobial therapy can help optimize patient outcomes. an interprofessional approach involves physicians, specialists, specialty-trained nurses, physician assistants, and pharmacists, all collaborating across disciplines to achieve optimal patient results. [Level 5]

It is vital that pharmacists, nurses, physician assistants, and primary care clinicians be aware of the latest guidelines for the prevention of subacute bacterial endocarditis. At least 25% of cases are a consequence of an invasive procedure that causes bacteremia. This antibiotic prophylaxis is vital in some patients. In addition, the patient has to be educated about maintaining good oral hygiene. If there is any doubt about antibiotic prophylaxis, a cardiology consult should be sought.

Nurses should be vigilant about central lines as they are also a cause of bacteremia. Nurses should ensure that only dedicated personnel inserts the lines under strict aseptic guidelines. When the line is not being used, it should be removed. The nurse should work with the clinical team in treating patients with endocarditis, monitoring the patients, and contacting the clinician if unexpected fever spikes occur. The pharmacist should assist the clinical team with antibiotic selection and evaluate the patient for potential drug-drug interactions or allergies that may affect treatment. The clinicians, pharmacists, PAs, and nurses should work together to coordinate patient and family education. [Level 5]

Open communication between the clinicians and specialists is vital to ensure that patients with aortic valve endocarditis are treated with the optimal standard of care- as this is one condition that often leads to medical malpractice when complications develop.