Wilson disease has no specific curative treatment and is progressive.  Without treatment it is fatal. The disorder is best managed by an interprofessional team that includes a gastroenterologist, geneticist, mental health nurse, neurologist, dietitian, nurse practitioner, pathologist, radiologist, and an internist.

The mainstay therapy for Wilson disease is copper chelation therapy with penicillamine and trientine. Some patients with early disease may be offered liver transplantation. However, it is the neurological features of the disease that are difficult to manage. The patient should be educated on the consumption of low copper-containing foods. The pharmacist should ensure that the patient is on no medication that can adversely affect the liver. Consumption of alcohol should be forbidden. The mental health nurse should periodically assess the neuropsychiatric symptoms, which may require additional drug treatments. While liver transplantation is curative, patients need to be monitored for the adverse effects of the immunosuppressant drugs. The pharmacist needs to monitor the chelation therapy because it also has many adverse effects that can worsen the symptoms. Sometimes, chelation therapy has to be discontinued. A team approach involving nursing, pharmacists, and clinicians will improve outcomes. [Level 5]

Physiotherapy and occupational therapy are beneficial in the neurologic form of the disease. Genetic counseling by a genetics nurse and clinician geneticist is necessary to prevent the transmission of the defective gene. Only with such a team approach can the mortality and morbidity of Wilson disease be reduced.

The outlook for most patients is guarded because there is no cure. The quality of life of most patients is poor.