The CT angiogram should be reviewed pre-operatively, and a handheld doppler should be used to identify and mark the perforators. The umbilicus should be isolated with a cuff of fat around the stalk. The superior abdominal incision should be carried down to rectus fascia. The inferior abdominal incision should be taken to the fascia only after the identification and dissection of approximately 5 cm of the superficial inferior epigastric vein (SIEV) bilaterally. The skin flap should be elevated in a lateral to medial suprafascial plan with care upon reaching the lateral border of the rectus abdominis as this is where you will begin to identify the lateral row perforators. You will divide the flap and proceed in a medial to lateral fashion once the size of the flap is determined. All medial and lateral row perforators will be preserved.

Intramuscular dissection is performed in a retrograde manner. The inferolateral edge of the rectus abdominis is elevated first to find both pedicles. After the inferior edge of the muscle is divided, the superior portion will be divided above the upper periumbilical perforators.

The recipient vessel is typically the internal mammary vessel. The third rib is identified, and the recipient vessels are dissected out. In some cases, the thoracodorsal artery and vein can be used as recipient vessels as they are usually exposed immediately following a mastectomy and axillary dissection. Once the recipient vessels are identified, the abdominal flap is harvested, and microsurgical anastomosis of the veins and arteries are performed.