As with any anatomical structure of the body, there exists the potential for variants. Such variants can arise as congenital malformations leading to impaired respiratory function in the neonate. One such anomaly involves the presence of laryngeal clefts in the newborn, which can pose a risk for aspiration and respiratory distress. Such clefts are a result of a failed separation of the previously mentioned laryngotracheal septum leading to a lack of separation between the larynx/trachea and the esophagus. Other considerations occur when there is incomplete canalization of the developing larynx leading to various degrees of obstruction of the airway, which should be a consideration in an infant that develops respiratory distress.

Variations also exist anatomically with the neurovascular arrangement of the laryngeal structures. Cases of a nonrecurrent inferior laryngeal nerve have been recorded on the right, representing a rare anatomical anomaly thought to be a result of the fourth branchial arch involuting instead of persisting as the subclavian artery.  The nonrecurrent laryngeal nerve then branches directly off the cervical vagus.  The positional relationship between the recurrent laryngeal nerve and the inferior thyroid artery can vary in position with the recurrent laryngeal nerve sitting either posterior, anterior, or between branches of the inferior thyroid artery. The branching pattern of the recurrent laryngeal nerve can also vary from two to many branches within the musculature and cartilaginous framework. In general, all of these varieties are important when considering thyroid or other laryngotracheal surgical operations.