Given the overlap of sphincter of Oddi dysfunction symptoms with other biliary pathology, most patients will undergo abdominal imaging (US, CT, HIDA scan, etc.). However, in the algorithm for SOD, these studies are generally low-yield. But they can be beneficial in ruling out other more sinister pathology prior to focusing on SOD as the cause of the patient's complaints. Endoscopic retrograde cholangiopancreatography (ERCP) with manometry is considered the gold standard test for sphincter of Oddi dysfunction.

Laboratory evaluation should also be performed, specifically, a comprehensive metabolic panel (CMP), amylase, and lipase, to evaluate for hepato-pancreatic dysfunction. Functional examinations, such as the Nardi test, can also help confirm the diagnosis. The Nardi test involves the simultaneous administration of morphine and neostigmine. The former causes biliary contraction, and the latter contracts the Sphincter of Oddi. The forward pulsion of bile into a contracted sphincter should reproduce the patient's symptoms if sphincter of Oddi dysfunction is the source of their symptoms.

The patient's presentation, in combination with the results of their examination, should be used to stratify them to into three classes of sphincter of Oddi dysfunction. Specific diagnostic criteria for SOD include:

- Transaminitis (greater 2 times the upper limit of normal on 2 or more occasions

- Common bile duct dilation (greater than 10 mm on US; greater than 12 mm on ERCP)

- Biliary pain

Utilizing these criteria, patients are classified as follows:

- Type I SOD: all three

- Type II SOD: biliary pain and one of the other two criteria.

- Type II SOD: biliary pain only

The results of this classification will impact the subsequent treatment plan.