**Anatomy of the Facial Nerve**

The course of the facial nerve can roughly divide into three portions - origin, intratemporal, and extratemporal.

(a) Origin

The motor nucleus of the facial nerve originates within the lower pons and emerges via the cerebellopontine angle (anterior to the anterior inferior cerebellar artery). Here in its intracranial course, it is joined by the nerves intermedius, which consists of the sensory and autonomic fibers of the facial nerve, which originate from the tractus solitaris and superior salivatory nucleus respectively.

The facial nerve then inserts into the internal acoustic meatus (IAM) to begin its meatal segment. The IAM is in the petrous part of the temporal bone between the posterior cranial fossa and the inner ear.

Within the intracranial and meatal segments, no branches are given off.

At the IAM, the facial nerve runs in the anterosuperior compartment. Important structures within the IAM are:

- Superior vestibular nerve

- Inferior vestibular nerve

- Facial nerve

- Cochlear nerve

- Labyrinthine artery

- Vestibular ganglion

(b) Intratemporal

****1. Labyrinthine segment - between the IAM+ the geniculate ganglion/first Genu.

This area forms the narrowest portion of the facial nerve (and consequently vulnerable to compromise). At the level of the geniculate ganglion, the facial nerve undergoes the first of two sharp bends (first genu).

At this genu, the greater petrosal nerve branches off from the main trunk. The greater petrosal nerve provides preganglionic parasympathetic fibers to the pterygopalatine ganglion (also known as the vidian nerve). The pterygopalatine ganglion provides postganglionic parasympathetic fibers to the lacrimal, nasal and palatine glands. Proximal lesions are associated with impaired lacrimation, hyperacusis, and loss of taste on the anterior two-thirds of the tongue.

2. Tympanic segment - between the geniculate ganglion and the second genu.

The facial nerve traverses the bony fallopian canal on the medial aspect of the tympanic cavity before its second sharp bend (genu). Important relations of the facial nerve at this point include:

Anteriorly: Processus cochleariformis (where tensor tympani tendon gets directed to the malleus).

Posteriorly: oval window (inferiorly) and the lateral semi-circular canal (superiorly).

The facial nerve runs between the malleus and incus (running medial to the malleus and lateral to the incus).

3. Mastoid segment - from the second genu to the stylomastoid foramen.

After its second genu, the nerve now runs on the posterior aspect of the tympanic cavity. It runs in front and lateral to the ampulla of the posterior semicircular canal and medial to the tympanic annulus.

Both the nerve to stapedius and chorda tympani leave at this segment. The chorda tympani runs anteriorly across the tympanic cavity to provide preganglionic parasympathetic fibers to the submandibular ganglion, which then provides parasympathetic innervation to the submandibular and sublingual glands.

To summarise the three important branches of the facial nerve given off before the nerve leaving the stylomastoid foramen are (GCS):

**Branch/Segment of facial nerve/Target**

Greater petrosal nerve/Labyrinthine/Pterygopalatine Ganglion (palatine, nasal and lacrimal glands)

Chorda Tympani/Mastoid/Submandibular Ganglion (submandibular and sublingual glands)

Stapedius/Mastoid/Stapedius

(c) Extratemporal: The nerve travels inferiorly and laterally around the styloid process. Prior to entering the parotid gland, it gives off branches to the three following muscles:

- Occipitalis

- Stylohyoid

- Posterior belly of digastric

Within the parotid gland, the nerve divides the gland into superficial and deep parts. It lies the most superficial structure traversing the parotid gland. Ordered from superficial to deep, the structures within the parotid gland are:

The facial nerve (superficial) —> Retromandibular vein —> External Carotid Artery —> Auriculotemporal Nerve (deep)

Within the substance of the parotid gland, it divides into two trunks (cervicofacial and temporofacial) and then five main branches which each are responsible for innervation of the muscles of facial expression. The five branches with their target muscle and action are below :

**Branch of facial nerve/Primary target muscle/Clinical assessment**

Temporal/Frontalis/Raise eyebrows

Zygomatic/Orbicularis oculi/Close eyes

Buccal/Puff cheeks out

Mandibular/Depressor anguli oris/Show bottom teeth

Cervical/Platysma/Clench neck

To summarise, the facial nerve innervates the following muscles:

- Stapedius

- Stylohyoid

- Posterior belly of digastric

- Occipitalis

- Muscles of facial expression

The most important factor when considering the differential diagnosis of facial nerve palsy is whether the lesion is lower motor neuron or upper motor neuron.

Due to bilateral cortical innervation of the muscles of the upper face (in particular orbicularis oculi and frontalis), only lower motor neuron lesions will result in complete facial paralysis, although this is not always the case.

Lower motor neuronal lesions are ones such as Bell palsy, Ramsay Hunt syndrome, and others further described in this article. Upper motor neuronal lesions that are responsible for causing facial nerve palsy include stroke, multiple sclerosis, subdural hemorrhage, and intracranial neoplasia.