Three distinct mechanisms of action of triptans have been described in migraine:

- Vascular mechanism: Vasoconstriction of painfully distended intracranial extracerebral arteries by a direct effect on vascular smooth muscle

- Trigeminovascular mechanism: Inhibition of nociceptive neurotransmission within the trigeminal nerve in the brainstem and upper spinal cord

- Central mechanism: Inhibition of the release of vasoactive neuropeptides by trigeminal nerve innervating the intracranial vessels and dura mater.

Triptans act as antimigraine agents by selectively binding to the serotonin receptors 5-HT1B and 5-HT1D. Triptan binding to the vascular 5-HT1B receptors leads to vasoconstriction of the cranial arteries, which painfully dilate during a migraine attack. When triptans bind to the neurogenic and central 5-HT1D receptors, they prevent the release of vasoactive neuropeptides by inhibiting trigeminal nerves' activation and blocking the transmission of pain signals to the brain.

**Salient Pharmacokinetics of Triptans**

The pharmacokinetics of triptans vary widely between individuals and could be explained by the effect of P-glycoprotein efflux transporters, triptan-metabolizing enzymes (CYP450 and MAO), and drug bioavailability.

**Sumatriptan**: Sumatriptan is available as oral tablets, nasal spray, and subcutaneous injections. Orally administered sumatriptan has a low bioavailability of around 15%, primarily due to pre-systemic metabolism and partly due to incomplete absorption. Despite nasal sprays being faster than oral formulation, their effect is more temporary. Therefore, nasal sprays are an intermediate option for oral triptans and subcutaneous sumatriptan. In vitro studies on human microsomes suggest that sumatriptan is metabolized by the monoamine oxidase (MAO) enzyme, thus prone to serotonin syndrome when administered with other serotonergic drugs. The elimination half-life (t1/2) of sumatriptan is approximately 2.5 hours.

**Rizatriptan**: Rizatriptan has the fastest onset of action among orally administered triptans (approximately 30 minutes) but with short elimination half-live (2 to 2.5 hours). For this reason, it has the highest recurrence rate at 24 hours (superior to placebo). Hence, rizatriptan seems the better option when attacks are severe with rapid onset but short-lasting. The primary route of rizatriptan metabolism is by MAO-A, which forms the indole acetic acid metabolite. The metabolite is not active at the 5-HT1B/1D receptor. Approximately 14% of an oral rizatriptan dose is excreted in urine as unchanged, while 51% is excreted as indole acetic acid metabolite, proving substantial first-pass metabolism.

**Frovatriptan**: The onset of action is delayed, but it has the longest half-life (approximately 26 hours) and the lower recurrence rate at 24 hours (7 to 25%). Frovatriptan is preferred in long-lasting attacks of migraine. In addition, frovatriptan is not an inhibitor of human monoamine oxidase (MAO) enzymes of cytochrome P450. Hence,  it is unlikely that frovatriptan will affect the metabolism of co-administered drugs metabolized by these mechanisms. Renal clearance accounted for about 40% and 45% of total clearance in males and females.

**Almotriptan**: The absolute bioavailability of almotriptan tablets is about 70%, with peak plasma levels occurring 1 to 3 hours post-administration. Food does not affect pharmacokinetics. Almotriptan is the only triptan with an FDA indication for use in adolescents. Almotriptan gets metabolized through two major and one minor pathway. Major routes of metabolism are Monoamine oxidase (MAO)-mediated oxidative deamination (around 27% of the dose), and cytochrome P450-mediated oxidation (approximately 12% of the dose), and the minor route of metabolism are flavin monooxygenase.

**Zolmitriptan**: Zolmitriptan is converted to an active N-desmethyl metabolite; the metabolite concentrations are about two-thirds that of zolmitriptan. This metabolite has 2 to 6 times the potency of the parent compound at 5HT1B/1D receptors; the metabolite contributes a substantial portion of the overall effect. Zolmitriptan is also available as a nasal spray formulation.

**Naratriptan**: Naratriptan is better in moderate but long-lasting attacks.

**Eletriptan**: Eletriptan is preferred in severe, long-lasting attacks because of its long half-life.