The differential diagnosis includes other optic nerve head anomalies. Optic nerve pits do not result from deficiencies in fetal closure of the optic fissure. The root cause may be an early developmental defect. Abnormal vitreoretinal adhesions can result in maculopathy. Visual acuity depends mostly on the degree of maculopathy that may develop. In untreated patients, visual acuity can be 20/200 or worse. There are a couple of theories regarding the source of the intraretinal fluid in maculopathy, subarachnoid, or vitreous fluid. It is postulated that cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) travels through the lamina cribrosa defect from the subarachnoid space. Or intravitreous fluid travels into the intraretinal and subretinal spaces.

Morning glory disc anomaly (MGDA) is a clinically distinct condition from optic nerve coloboma. Patients typically have excavated, conical optic disc, central glial tuft, retinal vessels that exit radially from the enlarged posterior scleral opening, and peripapillary pigment. Optic nerve coloboma does not have glial tufts or peripapillary pigment. The pathogenesis of MGDA is not clear. It may be due to the failure of closure of the terminal optic stalk. Patients have poor visual prognosis, strabismus, and are a risk for rhegmatogenous retinal detachments due to retinal breaks at the disc margin. Associated cerebrovascular findings are present in up to 45% of patients, so all patients should undergo neuroimaging for evaluation of basal encephalocele, hypopituitarism, moyamoya, midline cranial defects, and agenesis of corpus callosum.

Optic nerve hypoplasia is a more common cause of visual impairment in children than optic nerve coloboma. Bilateral disease is more common than unilateral disease. The former presents with nystagmus, whereas the latter presents with strabismus. Visual acuity can range from 20/20 to NLP. On examination the optic nerve is small. There is an area of hypopigmentation surrounding the nerve. This is an extension of the retinal and retinal pigment epithelium on the outer lamina cribrosa. This pattern is classically called the “double ring sign.” The defect may be segmental, i.e., maternal DM1 is associated with superior segmental ONH. Binocular complete ONH is more likely to have associated extraocular developmental abnormalities. Septo-optic dysplasia (deMorsier syndrome) can occur in unilateral or bilateral disease and is associated with developmental delay, an absence of septum pellucidum, agenesis of corpus callosum, and pituitary and hypothalamic function abnormalities.

Megalopapilla is defined as increased disc area associated with a normal rim area and normal retinal nerve fiber layer. It may be a physiologic variant of normal optic disc papilla. However, visual acuity may be decreased in patients with megalopapilla.