The evaluation of a patient with progressive aphasia symptoms requires obtaining a detailed history and specific testing of the patient's speech and language. A more simplified 2-step process has been developed for standardization and eases clinical diagnosis.

Beyond the patient history, the Northwestern anagram test (NAT) is a commonly used grammar test, and patients with nfvPPA will have impaired performance. Additionally, the Montreal cognitive assessment (MoCA) can be utilized to evaluate cognitive performance or decline to differentiate from symptoms of dementia. However, the MoCA must be used with caution, as patients with nfvPPA may score lower on the examination only due to reduced spontaneous verbal output and developed apraxia of speech. Depression symptoms can also affect MoCA performance. Cognitive assessment in the context of detailed, careful speech/language examination is essential. After diagnosis, the progressive aphasia severity scale (PASS) allows clinicians to track progression and characterize symptoms, specifically in PPA patients.

Imaging can also be helpful, as fludeoxyglucose positron emission tomography is often used in conjunction with brain magnetic resonance imaging to evaluate primary progressive aphasias. The dominant inferior frontal area (Broca's area) and the insular cortex are most affected in the nfvPPA; however, temporal and parietal hypometabolism is usually not seen.

**Neuroimaging Findings**

Nonfluent/agrammatic variant of PPA: The left inferior frontal gyrus (pars opercularis) is considered the syndrome-specific epicenter in nfvPPA.

The semantic variant of PPA: The anterior temporal lobes show bilateral atrophy and hypoperfusion in svPPA and are considered the syndrome-specific epicenter.

Lopogenic variant PPA: Anatomical damage in lvPPA is typically located in the posterior superior temporal and middle temporal gyri and the inferior parietal lobule.