# Introduction

A skin wound results from the breakdown of the epidermal layer integrity.

Wound healing is occasionally classified as primary healing and secondary healing. Uncomplicated healing of a noninfected, well-approximated wound is defined as primary healing. Surgical wounds are the best example for primary healing. If the wound healing course in this wound is disrupted by infection, dehiscence, hypoxia or immune dysfunction, secondary healing stage begins. During secondary healing, granulation tissue formation and epithelization over this new tissue take place. These type of wounds are more susceptible to infections and poor healing.

# Issues of Concern

The ability of an organism to repair or regenerate tissues is a definite advantage for surviving.

# Cellular Level

A perfect interplay of several cells, growth factors, and cytokines are required for a complete closure of skin during wound healing.

# Pathophysiology

Wound healing has three overlapping phases which are inflammation, proliferation, and remodeling.

**Inflammation**

This phase includes hemostasis and inflammation. An injury to the skin immediately initiates clotting cascades which provide a temporary fibrin blood clot plug to the injury site.

Neutrophils are recruited to the wounded area within the first 24 hours and stay for 2 to 5 days.

**Proliferation**

The following proliferative phase is characterized by granulation tissue formation and vascular network restoration.

On the other hand, epithelization also begins after wounding which is stimulated by inflammatory cytokines and different growth factors.

The last step of the proliferation phase is the granulation tissue formation.

**Remodeling**

Remodeling is the last phase of the wound healing, begins from day 21 and continues up to 1 year.

Additionally, wound contraction begins. TGF-beta1 stimulates the fibroblasts to differentiate into myofibroblasts.

Finally, angiogenic responses cease, the blood flow diminishes. Acute metabolic activity in the wound ends. These processes provide a full closure for injured tissue sites and restoration of the mechanical strength of the wound.

# Clinical Significance

Any disruption in wound healing phases leads to excessive wound healing or chronic wound formation.

**Excessive Wound Healing**

The pathogenesis of the excessive wound healing is not fully understood. It is an abnormal form of a wound healing which is characterized by a continuous localized inflammation. There are excessive collagen synthesis, abnormal collagen turnover and exaggerated ECM accumulation in these wounds. "Keloid" and "hypertrophic scars" are examples of excessive wound healing.

**Chronic Wound Formation**

A wound which has failed to heal in 4 weeks is defined as a chronic wound. Sometimes, the period showing chronicity can 3 months.

Age, immune status, malnutrition, infection, insufficient oxygenation or perfusion, smoking, diseases, medications, radiation, and chemotherapy are the main risk factors that can lead to chronic wound formation.

Wound healing has contrasting molecular and clinical characteristics in the fetus and elderly population.

As the immunosuppressed patients susceptible to infections and have a diminished ability for fighting infections, wound healing is delayed due to an extended inflammatory phase. Anti-inflammatory drugs (particularly in the first 3 days of healing), corticosteroids, immunosuppressants, and chemotherapy agents can alter wound healing.