Bullous pemphigoid is a common autoimmune subepidermal blistering disorder. Age of onset is 65 to 75 years of age. This typically affects the skin and presents as tense bullae on a normal or urticarial background. This less commonly affects the oral mucosa. Lesions do not cause scarring.

Epidermolysis bullosa acquisita (EBA) is a rare autoimmune subepidermal blistering disorder. The most common clinical presentation is non-inflammatory tense bullae that form on extensor surfaces usually triggered by friction or trauma. Common locations for involvement include the hands, elbows, knees, and buttocks. Blisters heal with scars and milia formation. Oral involvement can occur.

Linear IgA bullous dermatosis is rare subepidermal bullous dermatosis. Its clinical presentation varies and can mimic bullous pemphigoid, dermatitis herpetiformis, and cicatricial pemphigoid. It may have oral and, less likely, ocular involvement.

Bullous systemic lupus erythematosus is an autoimmune subepidermal blistering disorder that develops in patients with systemic lupus. The eruption consists of erythematous macules, plaques, and bullae that tend to occur in sun-exposed areas and do not typically result in scarring. Oral lesions can occur.

Paraneoplastic pemphigus is a rare autoimmune disease associated with malignancy, most commonly non-Hodgkin lymphoma and chronic lymphocytic leukemia. This is characterized by painful and erosive stomatitis and polymorphous cutaneous lesions that may resemble bullous pemphigoid, lichen planus or erythema multiforme. Indirect immunofluorescence on rodent bladder can detect serum autoantibodies directed against plakin proteins. This is rapidly progressive and often results in death.

Pseudo-ocular cicatricial pemphigoid is mimicker of cicatricial pemphigoid. This is a rare complication from the use of medicated eye drops in the treatment of glaucoma. Eye involvement is unilateral. Progression usually ceases once eye drops are discontinued.