Due to the myriad roles the face plays, the impact of facial paralysis can be pervasive, negatively affecting quality of life due to psychosocial and functional effects. While the inability to close the eye, breathe easily through the nose, or maintain oral competence can be very problematic, losing the ability to smile or even to appear symmetric at rest can be even more significant for many patients, especially young women, and may lead to depression in addition to decreased quality of life.

When the facial nerve is transected, immediate surgical repair with primary neurorrhaphy is generally the preferred treatment option.

Any technique employed other than direct coaptation of the severed facial nerve stumps at the time of injury will have associated risks. Delayed primary repair often requires a facial nerve exploration, which risks injury to other facial structures, including the parotid gland and duct, as well as other potentially intact facial nerve branches. Interposition grafting and nerve transfer introduce the potential for donor site morbidity, a critical factor when planning for and counseling patients before surgery. Regardless of the technique employed, the return of function after a facial nerve transection injury is a slow process affecting many aspects of facial function and aesthetics. For this reason, an interprofessional team consisting of not only a peripheral nerve surgeon such as a plastic or facial plastic surgeon or otolaryngologist but also an ophthalmologist and physical and speech therapists is the most effective means of providing holistic care for patients with facial paralysis.