Further evaluation of miscarriage also depends on the type suspected based on history and physical exam. As a missed abortion has no reliable symptoms or signs, it can only be diagnosed by measurement of beta-human chorionic gonadotropin (beta-hCG) levels and pelvic ultrasound. A beta-hCG level is useful initially, as it helps determine the likelihood of intrauterine pregnancy. For example, when the beta-hCG level is more than 1,500-3,000 mIU/mL (the discriminatory level), intrauterine pregnancy should be evident on transvaginal ultrasound. If an intrauterine pregnancy is not seen on ultrasound with a beta-hCG above the discriminatory level, either early pregnancy loss or ectopic pregnancy should be suspected.

In the setting of a viable pregnancy, beta-hCG levels increase at a relatively predictable rate. However, as the beta-hCG level increases, its rate of rising gradually decreases until reaching a plateau at ten weeks gestation. For example, an initial beta-hCG level of less than 1500 will increase by 50% over 48 hours, while an initial level greater than 3000 will only increase by 33% over the same period.

The events of early pregnancy follow a predictable pattern and any variation from this sequence concerns spontaneous abortion. For example, a gestational sac with a mean diameter of at least 25 mm should contain a viable embryo, and an embryo with a crown-rump length of at least 7 mm should demonstrate detectable cardiac activity. Besides, the development of the yolk sac follows the appearance of the gestational sac and is usually accompanied by the presence of an embryo with cardiac activity.

Therefore, when there is evidence of prior intrauterine pregnancy, spontaneous abortion can be diagnosed if the mean gestational sac diameter is greater than or equal to 25 mm on pelvic ultrasound but contains no embryo or if the crown-rump length of the embryo is greater than or equal to 7 mm, but there is no cardiac activity. Early pregnancy loss can also be diagnosed if there is no embryo with cardiac activity at least 14 days after prior ultrasound demonstrated a gestational sac or at least 11 days after a previous ultrasound revealed a gestational sac with a yolk sac. However, some ultrasound findings, such as an embryonic heart rate of fewer than 85 beats per minute, are suspicious but not diagnostic for early pregnancy loss. When the diagnosis of spontaneous abortion is uncertain, trending beta-hCG levels every 48  to 72 hours and repeating the pelvic ultrasound in 7-10 days are recommended.

Threatened abortion can be diagnosed in the setting of cramping and vaginal bleeding but with a closed cervical os on exam and evidence of a viable intrauterine pregnancy on ultrasound. Inevitable abortion is diagnosed in the presence of cramping, vaginal bleeding, an open cervical os on the physical exam but no passage of the products of conception. The intrauterine pregnancy may be either viable or nonviable on ultrasound. Incomplete abortion can be diagnosed in the instance of cramping, bleeding, an open cervical os, and partial passage of conception products. Retained products of a nonviable pregnancy will be evident on ultrasound. Complete abortion is diagnosed in the case of resolving cramp and bleeding, either an open or closed cervical os and no intrauterine conception products on ultrasound.

Septic abortion is diagnosed when cramping, and bleeding is followed by purulent cervical or vaginal discharge, fever, and an open or closed cervical os. If an induced abortion was performed with poor technique, then pelvic ultrasound may reveal retained conception products, exudative fluid, an extra-uterine extension of the infection, or uterine perforation.

Besides beta-hCG measurement and ultrasound, a hemoglobin and hematocrit level should be obtained to rule out acute blood loss anemia. If unknown, maternal blood type and Rh status should be determined to prepare for possible blood transfusion or administration of Rh (D)-immune globulin. Since spontaneous abortion can be precipitated by infection, wet mount examination and screening for gonorrhea and chlamydia should also be considered.