There is no cure for polycythemia vera (PV); treatment goals are aimed at symptom relief and reducing the risk of disease complications, including thrombosis, bleeding, and hematologic transformation. There are currently no means for preventing transformation into myelofibrosis or acute leukemia/myelodysplastic syndrome, but there are known agents to avoid that can increase this risk.

**Medical Treatment**

Patients under the age of 60 without a history of thrombotic events are considered low risk, and treatment recommendations include:

- Phlebotomy: Target hematocrit to less than 45%. Each unit of phlebotomized blood (500 mL) should drop the hematocrit by 3% in an average-sized adult. Men may tolerate up to the removal of 1.5 to 2 units a week. Whereas women, the elderly, those who weigh less than 50 kg, or those with cardiovascular disease may only tolerate removal of 0.5 units a week. The goal of phlebotomy is to deliberately induce an iron-deficient state, which will, to some degree, limit the marrow's capacity for erythropoiesis; therefore, patients should not take iron supplements. Patients with hematocrits maintained at less than 45% have significantly fewer cardiovascular and thrombotic events compared to when the goal hematocrit is 50%.

- Low dose aspirin (40 mg to 100 mg) once or twice daily should be given, if no contraindications, to lower thrombotic risk.

- Treat aspirin refractory symptoms.

- Optimizing cardiovascular health such as weight loss, exercise, tobacco cessation, blood pressure control.

Patients 60 years of age or older and/or who have a history of thrombosis are considered high risk. In high-risk patients, cytoreductive therapy is recommended in addition to phlebotomy and aspirin. The first-line agent is hydroxyurea (HU) due to its safety profile, cost, and efficacy.

The FDA approved a JAK inhibitor (ruxolitinib) in 2014 to treat patients with PV who have an inadequate response or are intolerant of hydroxyurea. A great proportion of patients on ruxolitinib achieved complete hematological remission.

To manage pruritus, initial treatment should include antihistamines and selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors (SSRIs). If ineffective, INF-a can be attempted, followed by JAK2 inhibitors for highly resistant cases.

**Surgical Treatment**

Splenectomy may be appropriate in the setting of painful splenomegaly or recurrent splenic infarcts.

Budd-Chiari syndrome, or hepatic venous outflow thrombosis, is a potential complication requiring surgical intervention such as transjugular intrahepatic portosystemic shunt (TIPS), portocaval shunt, mesocaval shunt, portocaval/cavoatrial shunt, or mesoatrial shunt.