During the early stages of life, passively transferred maternal IgG provides protection against various infections. From 6 to 12 months of age, these antibodies start depleting, causing children with XLA to present with recurrent sino-pulmonary infections such as otitis media, sinusitis, bronchitis, and pneumonia. More than 50% of children with X-linked agammaglobulinemia have had serious infections within their first two years of life.

Pyogenic encapsulated bacteria, such as Streptococcus pneumoniae and Haemophilus influenzae, are the most commonly isolated pathogens in patients with XLA. Other commonly encountered infectious organisms include Staphylococcus aureus, Pseudomonas, and Mycoplasma species. Less commonly, some patients can acquire opportunistic infections from the Pneumocystis jirovecii and other fungi.

Patients with XLA are also at higher risk of developing bloodborne bacterial infections. About 3% to 4% of patients with XLA have been reported to develop bacterial meningitis, caused predominantly by Streptococcus pneumoniae and Haemophilus influenzae type B. Other less commonly reported causative bacteria were Pseudomonas, Neisseria meningitidis, Staphylococcus aureus, Escherichia coli, and Listeria monocytogenes. Septic arthritis and osteomyelitis are other common associations reported among patients with XLA.

Patients with XLA have frequent gastrointestinal infections, and Giardia lamblia is a frequently isolated pathogen from the stool samples of these patients; it can sometimes be difficult to eradicate. Persistent infection can result in chronic diarrhea and malabsorption. Another unusual pathogen, Campylobacter jejuni, is known for causing gastrointestinal manifestations, bacteremia, and skin lesions.

The physical evaluation may reveal signs of recurrent and chronic sinopulmonary infections, which include postnasal discharge, tympanic membrane perforation, digital clubbing, and bronchiectasis. One of the greatest clinical clues in the diagnosis of XLA is absent or atrophied tonsils and lymph nodes. Some patients may also show signs of growth failure.