The normal reference range for RAIU will vary by laboratory, partly depending on local geographic dietary iodine intake. Sample normal RAIU ranges could be 6-18% at 4 hours and 10 to 35% at 24 hours.

Thyrotoxicosis can be defined as a clinical state in response to an elevated thyroid hormone, which may be due to inappropriately elevated secretion or synthesis of thyroid hormone. Many disease states can cause an abnormally elevated thyroid hormone level. Regarding nodules, hyperfunctioning nodules or nodules that have increased radiotracer uptake are rarely malignant, and no cytologic evaluation is indicated.

**Graves Disease**

Graves disease classically presents as hyperthyroidism with a suppressed TSH. Graves disease is an autoimmune disease caused by an antibody targeted at the TSH receptor. This antibody mimics TSH, causing excessive stimulation of the thyroid gland. The I-123 exam would demonstrate a diffusely enlarged thyroid gland with increased RAIU.

Occasionally, the 24 hours radiotracer uptake of the thyroid gland will be normal in a patient with Graves disease. This finding is due to the rapid turnover of the thyroid hormone, which depletes the radiotracer taken up by the thyroid gland. RAIU at 4-6 hours will demonstrate increased radiotracer, which can help diagnose Graves disease with rapid iodine turnover.

A variant of Graves disease, termed Marine-Lenhart syndrome, can be seen when cold thyroid nodules are also present in the setting of Graves disease.

**Toxic Autonomous Nodule**

A thyroid nodule may act independently of TSH and continually excrete the thyroid hormone. This thyroid nodule will demonstrate increased radiotracer uptake, while the remaining thyroid may demonstrate normal or decreased radiotracer uptake depending on the extent of excretion from the toxic autonomous nodule. The toxic nodules are histologically adenomas and oftentimes demonstrate mutated TSH receptors, which are perpetually activated.

**Toxic Multinodular Goiter**

Multinodular goiter is usually a diagnosis initially found on physical exam or ultrasound of an enlarged thyroid with multiple nodules. These nodules can eventually progress to hyperplasia and possibly become autonomous. There is often low to subnormal TSH, and the radiotracer uptake is heterogeneous with areas of increased uptake representing hot nodules along with areas of decreased uptake representing cold nodules. The extent of thyrotoxicosis is usually milder when compared to Graves' disease. Overall, thyroid gland RAIU may be mildly decreased, normal, or mildly elevated in toxic multinodular goiter.

**Iodine-induced Hyperthyroidism**

The body's natural mechanism to prevent excess thyroid hormone production is known as the Wolff-Chaikoff effect, which works by preventing the organification of thyroglobulin to T3 or T4. The Wolff-Chaikoff effect regulates thyroid hormone production when an excess amount of iodine is administered, which can be seen with iodine-containing medications (most commonly amiodarone), iodine-containing contrast administration, or even excess dietary intake, more prominently seen in areas of iodine deficiency. Occasionally, the thyroid may develop autonomous nodules, which are able to bypass the Wolff-Chaikoff effect and induce hyperthyroidism in the setting of iodine repletion. This effect, called the Jod-Basedow phenomenon, is more commonly seen in regions of iodine deficiency. I-123 scans demonstrate uniformly low radiotracer uptake, and the RAIU is decreased.

**Subacute Thyroiditis**

Subacute thyroiditis, also known as giant cell thyroiditis or de Quervain thyroiditis, is classically characterized as thyrotoxicosis with neck pain and fever, which is often preceded by a viral upper respiratory infection. The post-infectious inflammatory response leads to giant cell invasion of the thyroid tissue, causing disruption and leakage of thyroid hormone. As the thyroid hormone is no longer concentrated in the thyroid tissue, the RAIU is diminished. Clinically, the patient will have a suppressed TSH.

**Silent Thyroiditis**

Silent thyroiditis, an autoimmune disease, is characterized by lymphocytes infiltrating the thyroid gland, causing disruption of the thyroid gland and subsequent release of thyroid hormone. Thyroid peroxidase (TPO) is also classically elevated in silent thyroiditis. Unlike subacute thyroiditis, silent thyroiditis is painless. Silent thyroiditis can also be seen postpartum, where symptoms may be seen 2-6 months following delivery and are usually self-limiting, lasting 2-6 weeks. The elevated released thyroid hormone causes a low TSH. The thyroid gland demonstrates reduced RAIU, similar to subacute thyroiditis.

**Hashimoto Thyroiditis**

Hashimoto thyroiditis is an autoimmune disease in which there is lymphocytic infiltration of the thyroid tissue with autoimmunity to thyroid antigens. These antibodies may include antithyroglobulin (seen in 55-90%) and antibodies to TPO (seen in 90-95%). Lymphocytic and plasma cell infiltration eventually lead to the destruction of the thyroid follicles followed by fibrosis. The fibrosis leads to enlargement of the thyroid gland. As the disease progresses, more thyroid tissue is replaced with fibrosis, leading to depressed thyroid hormone production and a hypothyroid state. Radiotracer uptake is dependent on the phase of disease imaged. During the early disease, there is an increased release of thyroid hormone due to the destruction of the thyroid follicles, and RAIU is increased. With the progression of the disease, the body eventually becomes hypothyroid with consistent scintigraphy findings of decreased RAIU and an elevated TSH. The decreased radiotracer uptake is nonuniform as areas of fibrosis do not uptake radiotracer.

**Thyrotoxicosis of Extrathyroidal Origin**

There are multiple sources of extrathyroidal thyroid hormone, including exogenous thyroid hormone ingestion seen in factitious hyperthyroidism, thyroid hormone-producing metastatic thyroid cancer, and struma ovarii, a teratomatous ovarian mass that contains functional thyroid tissue. Another extrathyroidal cause of thyrotoxicosis includes TSH-induced thyrotoxicosis, which is caused by an autonomous TSH secreting pituitary adenoma, the only extrathyroidal cause associated with an elevated RAIU. Clinically, patients can have varying levels of thyrotoxicosis, depending on the level of excretion the exogenous source releases. Factitious hyperthyroidism can often be difficult to diagnose as the patients rarely disclose exogenous thyroid ingestion. Oftentimes the ingested thyroid hormone is T4, which may yield a higher than normal T4 to T3 ratio. Thyroid hormone production from metastatic thyroid malignancy is not very common as it requires a well-differentiated metastatic malignancy, which is usually less efficient at producing and excreting thyroid hormone. These metastases are usually seen in the setting of known thyroid cancer on I-131 imaging. Similar to metastasis, struma ovarii does not efficiently excrete thyroid hormone and rarely produces significant amounts of thyroid hormone. Struma ovarii is often found incidentally when pathology of an ovarian mass returns with thyroid tissue. RAIU of the overall thyroid gland in the neck is decreased, while the lesion may have elevated RAIU.

**Neonatal Hypothyroidism**

If RAIU is reduced by at least 10% after administration of sodium perchlorate, an iodine organification defect is identified as the cause of neonatal hypothyroidism.