**Pectus Excavatum**

Surgical correction is achieved with open and MARPE surgery with satisfactory results (86% to 98.1%), from a functional standpoint, cardio-pulmonary fitness performance improve at 6 to 12 months after surgery.

**Pectus Carinatum**

Highlighting that minimally invasive surgery still needs more evidence support and acceptance, pectus carinatum surgical repair results are based on the modified Ravitch repair principles, therefore in several series, outcomes, and prognosis (esthetic satisfaction and symptomatology improvement) homogeneity results between both pectus deformities have been demonstrated. For bracing treatment, anatomical changes can be observed within 2 to 3 months of its use, bracing treatment duration is from 2 to 2.5 years; however, there are reports that the bracing device is poorly tolerated.

**Poland Syndrome**

Prognosis will depend on age, gender, phenotype severity, associated cancer if coexisting, and type of surgical reconstruction if indicated.

**Sternal Clefts**

Prognosis and outcomes will depend on defect phenotype, age, and associated anomalies. Superior sternal clefts commonly present as an isolated feature with an orthotropic hearth without significant intra-cardiac abnormalities, so they have a good prognosis. In general, a better prognosis is achievable with an appropriate surgical repair timing (neonatal period); however, survival will depend more on the associated anomalies than sternal cleft.

**Ectopia Cordis**

Ectopia cordis general prognosis is poor. Thoracic ectopia cordis, complex congenital cardiac defects, and Cantrell pentalogy have the poorest prognosis. Thoracoabdominal ectopia cordis has been reported with a better prognosis due to the non-malrotated ectopic heart.

**Jeunes Syndrome**

Generally, Jeune's syndrome prognosis is poor, and it has a reported mortality rate of 60 to 80%; however, some centers have reported up to a 50% chance of survival with surgery in mild cases. Survival prognosis may improve with age progression.

**Jarcho-Levin syndrome**

Prognosis will depend on phenotype. Spondylothoracic dysostosis generally is considered a lethal condition and surgery has no benefit; however, in some cases series, mild forms have been reported with up to 56% survival with aggressive medical treatment focused on respiratory function.