Mitigation of surgical risk occurs through proper planning and good technique, but untoward events can still manifest intraoperatively or during the postoperative period. Most are not unique to root extractions and are just as likely to present in simple or surgical exodontia cases. Complications of all tooth extractions include:

- Pain

- Bleeding

- Infection

- Fracture of bone or jaws

- Osteomyelitis

- Osteonecrosis

- Alveolar osteitis

- Prosthetic defects

- Impaired wound healing

- Burns

An important point to consider when planning to extract any tooth is the proximity of root tips to adjacent anatomical landmarks like the maxillary sinus floor or the inferior alveolar nerve (IAN). Though uncommon, one of the most unfavorable outcomes of any extraction is accidentally displacing teeth or root segments into nearby anatomic spaces. This complication usually results from inadequate pre-surgical evaluation, excessive force application during extraction, poor surgical site visibility, and an under-reflected mucoperiosteal flap.

Roots of posterior maxillary teeth commonly contact or protrude through the floor of the ipsilateral maxillary sinus. Maxillary molars demonstrated protrusion through the maxillary sinus in greater than 50% of cases, with the mesiobuccal root of maxillary second molars showing the most significant depth of protrusion of all maxillary posterior tooth roots.

Maxillary posterior teeth can even be displaced as far posteriorly as the infratemporal fossa, often requiring alternative surgical approaches for retrieval.

Iatrogenic nerve injury is another rare but serious complication associated with tooth and root removal, particularly with mandibular third molars. In some patients, the roots of the mandibular third molar can be in direct contact with the mandibular canal that houses the IAN. One study showed that the frequency of intimate positioning between the mandibular third molar roots and the mandibular canal was as high as 7.1%.

Another study showed that the location of the canal relative to the third molar apex was predominantly inferior (77%) but presented on the lingual side in 11.8% of cases and on the buccal side in 8.9% of cases.