The incidence of gallstones causing biliary obstruction is approximately 5 in 1000 people, whereas 10% to 15% of the adult U.S. population will develop gallstones in their lifetime.

Women are at greater risk of developing gallstones than men and hence increased risk for choledocholithiasis. This is likely secondary to estrogen increasing hepatic uptake of cholesterol, which increases bile production and some degree of cholestasis.

Gallstones are the most common cause of biliary obstruction in Hispanics, Northern Europeans, and Native Americans. Northern Native Americans have the highest reported rates of cholelithiasis at 64% for females and 29% for males. Asian and African Americans have an intermediate prevalence of cholelithiasis, with 13.9% in women and 5.3% in men. The lowest prevalence of cholelithiasis is in sub-Saharan Black Africa, with an overall prevalence of less than 5%. White race North Americans have an overall prevalence of cholelithiasis of 16.6% and 8.6% in females and males, respectively.

In developed countries, choledocholithiasis secondary to cholesterol stones is the most common cause of biliary obstruction, whereas brown pigment stones from infectious etiologies or hemolysis are the most common etiology in Asia. Other etiologies like recurrent pyogenic cholangiohepatitis are characterized by recurrent bacterial cholangitis, dilatation, and stricture of the biliary tree, the presence of calculi within the intrahepatic bile ducts, and an increased risk for cholangiocarcinoma is common in Asia but rare in the west. Gallbladder malignancy is more common in Central and South America, Central and Eastern Europe, the northern Indian subcontinent, and East Asia.