- Pre-cachexia, when weight loss more than 1kg but less than 5%

- Cachexia, when weight loss is more than 5% or when weight loss is more than 2% with BMI less than 20kg/m

- Refractory cachexia, when weight loss is more than 15% with body mass index (BMI) less than 23kg/m or when weight loss is more than 20% with BMI less than 27 kg/m

Although the prognostic usefulness of these definitions has not been established, it would appear that addressing cachexia at an earlier stage might ameliorate the destructive effects of the primary condition.

A multimodal approach aimed at improving appetite, reducing the inflammatory response, improving outcomes and quality of life is the focus of ongoing research. Currently, no proven therapy accomplishes all of these goals. Most of the research has focused on improving appetite. Adequate nutrition remains an important aspect of this multimodal approach. However, increasing calorie–protein intake by definition does not reverse this abnormal metabolic state. Reversing the metabolic derangement through attenuation of tumor-related.

Factors and inflammatory mediators remain of central importance. Studies indicate that interleukin-6 has a primary role in initiating inflammatory cascade along with the contribution of tumor necrosis factor-alpha and other cytokines. Interventions that are used or that are under current investigation may be useful theoretically due to their effects on this inflammatory cascade, abnormal hormone responses, and/or the hypermetabolic derangements seen in cachexia.

Physical activity may attenuate the effects of cachexia by altering muscle metabolism through increased protein synthesis and reduced degradation pathways. In addition, exercise may increase insulin sensitivity, reduce oxidative stress, and reduce response to inflammation. Both aerobic exercise and resistance exercise have proven beneficial. Resistance exercise supplemented with branched-chain amino acids can reduce sarcopenia and cachexia.

The most studied and effective treatment for anorexia has been megestrol acetate and a dose of 320 mg to 800 mg per day. The literature supports that 30% of patients demonstrate an increased appetite associated with an increased body mass index primarily through increased fat and some associated improvement in the quality of life. However, no study has demonstrated improved survival. Side effects include adrenal suppression and increase the incidence of DVT in a minority of patients. Corticosteroid has been shown to have a positive effect on appetite but, due to side effect profile, is only indicated for short-term (less than 4 weeks) treatment. In addition to appetite stimulation, steroids theoretically may reduce the inflammatory state.

Other medications that require additional confirmation includes cannabinoids (only effective in AIDS so far), non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs, and omega-3 fatty acids. Existing evidence suggests it is reasonable to initiate a trial of omega-3 fatty acids in patients with life expectancies longer than 8 weeks. Other medications including Ghrelin, beta-2 agonists, selective androgen receptor modulators, aliskiren, resveratrol, leucine, and thalidomide are all under active investigation with some positive early trends.

In patients with cardiac cachexia, treatment with the beta-blocker carvedilol has demonstrated meaningful reversal of cachexia. This may be in part due to improvement in the hypermetabolic state seen in cachexia. Pre-clinical studies suggest that ACE-inhibitors and angiotensin II receptor blockers have muscle-protective properties related to mitochondrial function, insulin sensitivity, and local inflammation.