Trauma is the most common mechanism of injury, and blunt trauma involving the left-upper quadrant, left rib cage, or left flank should raise suspicion for splenic involvement. The absence of substantial trauma cannot exclude the possibility of splenic injury, as individuals with a history of splenomegaly require less force for traumatic rupture.

It is important to ask focused questions regarding previous surgical history, hepatic disease process, recent infections, anticoagulant, aspirin or nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory usage and bleeding disorders. Visual inspection for signs of external trauma such as abrasions, lacerations, contusions, and classic seatbelt sign on the abdomen is helpful. The absence of external visual findings does not exclude intra-abdominal pathology, as up to 20% of patients with intra-abdominal injury may not display these findings upon initial examination. Also, examination on arrival may not reveal severe tenderness, rigidity, or abdominal distention in spite of rupture.

Severally ill patients may present with hypovolemic shock manifesting as tachycardia, hypotension, and pallor. Other findings include tenderness to palpation in the left upper quadrant, generalized peritonitis, or referred pain to the left shoulder (Kehr sign).

Evaluation for splenic injury is therefore warranted if left lower rib fractures are identified. Up to 20% of adults with left lower rib fractures may have a subsequent splenic injury. The chest wall plasticity in children makes severe underlying injury to the spleen a possibility in the absence of rib fracture.