The following are FDA guidelines for administering inamrinone by intravenous injection and infusion in the short-term management of congestive heart failure. These guidelines only apply to adult patients.

- An initial undiluted inamrinone loading dose of 0.75 mg/kg is injected slowly over 2 to 3 minutes. After that, a maintenance dose of diluted inamrinone may be infused at 5 to 10 mcg/kg/min with a 2.5 mg/mL concentration. The infusion rate can be titrated depending on the patient’s cardiac response.

- If the cardiac output has not elevated sufficiently or symptoms of heart failure have not been alleviated, a secondary loading dose of 0.75 mg/kg may be injected slowly over 2 to 3 minutes, at least 30 minutes after the initial loading dose.

- The peak effect of an inamrinone loading occurs within 10 minutes of administration, regardless of the dosage. It has an elimination half-life of greater than 2 hours, lasting approximately 8 hours in some instances. The total daily dose of inamrinone should not exceed 10 mg/kg.

- An equivalent volume of normal (0.9%) or half-normal (0.45%) saline should be used to dilute inamrinone for the maintenance infusion. Dextrose (glucose)-containing diluent should never be used due to the potential for a chemical reaction between the drug and diluent, which may occur over 24 hours.

- The FDA also highlights that furosemide should not be administered to the patient in the same intravenous lines used for inamrinone due to the instant chemical reaction between the two drugs.

- The FDA has not approved inamrinone for the safe and effective treatment of congestive heart failure in pediatric populations.

**Specific Patients Population**

- **Patient with Hepatic Impairment:**There is no dose adjustment guidance in the manufacturer label for patients with hepatic impairment. However, to date, hepatotoxicity has rarely been observed in clinical settings after intravenous administration. If an acute hypersensitivity reaction occurs in patients with hepatic impairment, then therapy should be discontinued promptly.

- **Patient with Renal Impairment:**There is no dose adjustment guidance in the manufacturer label for patients with renal impairment. However, in patients with congestive heart failure and compromised renal functions, the drug plasma level may be increased, and it may be necessary to monitor the plasma drug level in these patients.

- **Pregnancy Considerations:**Inamrinone is a former FDA pregnancy category C medicine. In a few animal studies, oral doses of 16 mg/kg and 50 mg/kg in rabbits showed adverse effects of fetal skeletal and gross external malformations. However, in other animal studies, inamrinone intravenously dose of 15 mg/kg/day showed no malformations. The safety and efficacy of inamrinone are not adequately and systematically studied in pregnant women. Therefore, the use of inamrinone during pregnancy should only be considered after the potential benefit over risk to the fetus. The recommendation is also that if inamrinone administration is necessary during pregnancy, its use should strictly be if the benefits outweigh the risks.

- **Breastfeeding Considerations:**The cation should be taken while administering inamrinone to breastfeeding women, as it is unknown if the drug is excreted in milk.

- **Pediatric Patients:**The safety and efficacy of inamrinone are not established for use in pediatric patients.

- **Geriatric Patients:**The safety and efficacy are not systematically studied in geriatric patients by the manufacturer. However, based on the clinical trial reported in the literature, inamrinone may be used in geriatric patients with congestive heart failure to improve hemodynamics.