As noted above, many clinical manifestations of pain syndromes are associated with fascial tissue. Fascia surrounds and penetrates skeletal muscle, organs, joints, nerves, and vascular beds. Therefore, fascial tissue forms a whole-body structural support system and is of great clinical significance.

Stiffening of connective tissue can be seen in the clinical setting as runner's knee, tennis elbow, golfer's elbow, adhesive capsulitis, and plantar fasciopathy. Recent data suggests fascia as a central participant in the pathogenesis of sport-induced delayed onset muscle soreness and injuries. Unspecific back pain, especially the thoracolumbar fascia, is suggested to be mediated in part by fascial structures. As fascia is rich in nociceptive nerve endings, any stretch, tear, or laxity in the fascial system may be accompanied by irritation and pain.

Of specific clinical interest is the role of fascia in chronic neck pain. An ultrasound examination of patients with chronic neck pain revealed a greater fascial thickness at the sternal end of the sternocleidomastoid and the lower and upper side of the medial scalene muscle. This thickening of fascia was associated with a reduction in active and passive cervical range of motion.

Out of the vast array of symptoms patients report, pain is the most common and most debilitating. To treat a patient's pain, the etiology must be known and researched. In many different studies, fascia has been elicited as a potential cause of pain and, therefore, is of great clinical importance.