The risk of intraoperative and postoperative complications is always present with the extraction of unerupted teeth. Common complications associated with the surgical removal of unerupted teeth include alveolar osteitis, bleeding, nerve damage, root displacement, and oral-antral communications.

Alveolar osteitis or a dry socket occurs when the blood clot in the extraction socket is replaced with granulation tissue, causing a disturbance in the normal healing process. The exact etiology of alveolar osteitis is unknown; however, it is thought to occur due to increased fibrinolytic activity.

Common signs of alveolar osteitis include foul taste, malodor, and throbbing pain. It is more common in females, and associated risk factors include smoking, oral contraceptives, increased procedure lengths, the experience of the surgeon, and premature mouth rinsing.

Treatment options for alveolar osteitis include irrigation of the wound site with saline or chlorhexidine, sedative dressing placement, and oral pain medications. Antibiotics may be indicated if a patient presents with fever or swelling or is refractory to packing changes.

Postoperative bleeding is a common complication after surgical extraction. When bleeding is suspected, the surgeon should carefully examine the surgical site and determine the source of the bleeding. If the bleeding is a simple oozing, direct pressure with a gauze may be sufficient to control bleeding. Hemostatic agents such as local anesthesia with vasoconstrictor, silver nitrate, or tranexamic acid rinse can also promote hemostasis.

IAN and lingual nerve injury can complicate the extraction of impacted mandibular third molars. Damage to these nerves can result in temporary or permanent paresthesia. Although temporary and permanent paresthesias are relatively rare, temporary paresthesia is more commonly seen than permanent paresthesia.

A patient with a nerve injury should have a close follow-up with a surgeon. Generally, patients with IAN injuries recover within 6 to 8 weeks, but full recovery may take up to two years.

When a root fragment or a root tip is left in the socket, a surgeon should attempt to retrieve it if possible. A root tip can be left in the socket if it is less than 5mm long, the root is embedded in bone, and the tooth involved is not infected. Retained root requires a postoperative image and close follow-up for evaluation of healing. While attempting to retrieve a root fragment, it can be displaced to adjacent anatomical landmarks. A mandibular root tip is commonly dislodged to the cancellous bone space, the inferior alveolar canal, or the submandibular space. A maxillary root tip is commonly dislodged to the maxillary sinus and the infratemporal fossa.

If displacement is suspected, obtain a CBCT to determine its size and location. If the root is visualized, a surgeon can attempt to retrieve the root. If the root cannot be visualized, it is recommended to delay the retrieval.

OAC is a common complication associated with the extraction of impacted maxillary molars. The most common cause of OAC is the proximity of a tooth apex to the antral floor or the maxillary root projection into the maxillary sinus.