These are posterior approach osteotomies, and a proper understanding of spinal anatomy is critical. This includes bony anatomy, facet complex, disc, and ligament structures. Furthermore, it remains important to understand the 3D anatomical component of the deformity in a sagittal, coronal, axial, and rotational view.

PCO (SPO or Ponte osteotomy) refers to the removal of the facet joints, lamina, and posterior ligaments (supraspinous, intraspinous ligaments, and ligamentum flavum). The correction is through the disc space and is considered an anterior column lengthening procedure.

The SPO generally is labeled as an SRS-Schwab classification 1 and the Ponte osteotomy an SRS-Schwab classification 2. Often used interchangeably, the nomenclature regarding Ponte Osteotomy is specifically for more aggressive posterior resection of the thoracic spine, generally for kyphosis. SPO historically addresses the lumbar spine for ankylosing spondylitis.

PSO represents a three-column osteotomy in which the pedicles and portions of the body are resectioned in a wedge-type fashion. The posterior spine is shortened as the osteotomy is closed and compressed in its final stages. This is an SRS-Schwab classification 3. An extended PSO would fall into SRS-Schwab classification 4.

A VCR represents an aggressive removal of the vertebral body. A thin rim of bone can be left anteriorly to protect the great vasculature. This is an SRS-Schwab classification 5 with an extended version into the adjacent disc space as an SRS-Schwab classification 6.