Supportive treatment: Blood transfusions are the best supportive therapy for Fanconi anemia. Packed RBCs and platelet transfusions have an immediate effect. RBCs transfusion from family members should be avoided due to alloimmunization and graft-versus-host disease. Leukopenia has a good response to granulocyte-colony-stimulating factor, but this is reserved for those patients with ANC<200/mL. Extensive transfusion has poor outcomes in patients with hematopoietic cell transplantation.

Hematopoeitic stem cell transplantation (HCT): Cure of aplastic anemia and prevention of myelodysplastic syndrome can be achieved through bone marrow, peripheral blood cells, and cord blood transplantation. Bone marrow is the preferred method over the others from an HLA-matched sibling. It is essential to do chromosome breakage testing of siblings or other related donors to exclude FA in donors. This method is not accessible for everyone and is reserved only for patients with severe myelodysplastic syndrome and leukemia, and failure of medical treatment. 50% - 75% of patients respond, and it is a more permanent treatment.

Androgen therapy: It is performed in those who are not suitable for HCT. Oxymetholone is the most commonly used androgen. Other androgens less commonly used are danazol and oxandrolone. Androgens stimulate the hematopoietic stem cell proliferation, but it is not curative. Oxymetholone is used with a starting dose of 2-5mg/kg/day, but it is tapered to avoid toxicity. Patients with severe bone marrow hypocellularity have a poor response to androgen therapy. RBCs respond well, but platelets and leukocytes are less likely to respond.

Surgical treatment: Surgery is performed only for the management of structural deformities. Splitting of anomalies of the hand should be repaired early in life to avoid functional delays. Other surgeries include congenital heart defect surgery, repair of trachea-esophagus fistulas, and imperforate anus. Surgery may be required for cancers as well.

Gene therapy: The replacement of an abnormal gene by a normal gene is the modern developing technique. The correction of CD34+ in affected cells is now feasible.