The determination of treatment for AUB-O is through the etiology of the anovulation and the patient's therapeutic goals. Underlying endocrine abnormalities should be corrected. Normalization of eating disorders or stress, while challenging, can be achieved. If medications are causing ovulatory dysfunction, the patient should receive counsel regarding the indication for that medication, the risks/benefits of any alternatives, and any ways in which there can be mitigation of the effects of the drug. The choice of management often hinges on a patient's reproductive desires. Ultimately, patient safety is paramount, as ovulatory dysfunction may lead to endometrial hyperplasia or malignancy.

Medication management is the mainstay of treatment for AUB-O. The medical treatment options include progestin-only therapy and combined hormonal contraception. Progestin therapy is available in several forms, including an intrauterine device (IUD), intramuscular injection, and oral progestin-only hormonal pill. Non-contraceptive progestins can be prescribed in a cyclic manner (7 to 10 days each month) to induce regular withdrawal bleeding. The levonorgestrel-releasing IUD is appropriate for treatment in all age groups. Combined hormonal contraception is available as an oral pill, transdermal patch, and intravaginal ring. All of these options can protect the endometrium from hyperplasia or malignancy. Cyclic progestins or combined hormonal contraceptives may also improve the regularity of patients' bleeding if that is their desire.

If the patient desires fertility, contraceptives no longer align with her treatment goals. Brief courses of the above may be a strategy until the patient is ready to try to actively achieve pregnancy. Correction of underlying disorders, again, is essential. For women with polycystic ovarian syndrome, weight loss has been shown to lower circulating androgens. A reduction in body weight of as little as 5% may lead to the spontaneous resumption of normal menses.

Surgical management for AUB-O is indicated in cases of medication treatment failure and/or medication contraindication. Laparoscopic ovarian drilling has been an option in patients with PCOS who desire fertility but have been resistant to medications such as clomiphene citrate. Unfortunately, there is no conclusive evidence that this procedure significantly improves clinical pregnancy rates, live birth rates, or miscarriage rates in these patients.

Due to the risk of hyperplasia and malignancy, endometrial tissue sampling, such as with endometrial biopsy or dilation and curettage, should be performed as a first-line test in women with AUB who are older than 45 years.

Alternatively, endometrial ablation is a surgical procedure that has the potential to help many patients with abnormal uterine bleeding. However, endometrial ablation is not a recommendation in patients who have endometrial hyperplasia or malignancy.