External ear anatomy includes the external auditory canal, auricle (or pinna - comprised of the helix, antihelix, and lobule), the antitragus, the tragus, and the concha. The sensory innervation arises from the great auricular and lesser occipital nerves, both branches of the second (C2) and third (C3) branches of the cervical plexus, the auriculotemporal nerve from the mandibular branch of the trigeminal nerve, and the auricular branch of the vagus nerve known as Alderman's or Arnold's nerve. More specifically, the great auricular nerve is derived from the cervical plexus (C2, C3), coursing around the posterior aspect of the sternocleidomastoid muscle and becomes most superficial at the level approximately 6 to 7 cm below the external auditory meatus. It arborizes into an anterior and posterior branch toward the front and underside of the ear, respectively. The lesser occipital nerve (C2, C3) courses around the posterior edge of the sternocleidomastoid at the level approximately 4 to 5 cm below the external auditory meatus and heads toward the backside of the ear. The auriculotemporal nerve originates from the 3rd branch of the trigeminal nerve, the mandibular nerve. The nerve ascends in front of the ear anterior to the tragus. The auricular branch of the vagus nerve exits the temporal bone at the tympanomastoid suture, deep to the concha.

Sensory innervation to the auricle is regional. The helix, concha, and lobule receive their innervation from the great auricular nerve. The antihelix, antitragus, tragus, and concha are innervated by mainly the great auricular nerve and, to a lesser degree, by the auricular branch of the vagus nerve. The superomedial helix (the crus and spine) is innervated primarily by the auriculotemporal nerve. The back side of the auricle is innervated by three nerves: the great auricular nerve, the lesser occipital nerve, and the auricular branch of the vagus nerve. Variable sensory distributions and patterns between these nerves have been described. These regional distributions overlap to a greater degree in the more medial aspects of the EAC, and achieving necessary anesthesia in this area is challenging with directed nerve blocks alone. If anesthesia in the medial EAC is required, topical application of concentrated lidocaine or a formal 4-quadrant subcutaneous injection may be necessary.