Occupational exposure to toxins, such as metals and metal fume fever, presents a clear opportunity for interprofessional communication and a healthcare team approach. Welding and metal-to-metal bonding are necessary industrial activities, but they must exist in a safe environment. Clinicians (MDs, DOs, NPs, and PAs) and nurses must be astute at picking up the weekly variations in symptoms such as fever and wheezing. Occupational histories are the most crucial element, considering that adults generally spend about one-third of every day involved with their occupation. Often there is a need to maximize safety measures with well-fitting masks and minimize exposures to toxins, such as fresh zinc oxide. In addition, smoking cessation should also be pursued for these workers.

Patients working in conditions where metal oxides may be generated should have a well-fitted mask, and employers should provide appropriate time limits for exposure while welding. Also, other workers may be exposed at the same workplace, and some may have symptoms but not seek medical attention. A conscientious employer will seek those co-workers who may also be exposed and experiencing symptoms. An astute provider can communicate with the employer. In the USA, the National Institute of Occupational Safety and Health may initiate a Health Hazard Evaluation (HHE) for an entire workplace, as can similar agencies in other parts of the world. These safety processes can be initiated by alert clinicians, nurses, and pharmacists, among others, and can spare an entire workplace from further injury. In addition, advice to the patient about protective gear for a home welder or recreational "do-it-yourselfer" may be crucial in preventing this condition, especially since the hobbyist welder may not reveal their exposure and may not exhibit the weekly cyclical pattern seen in professional welders.

Clinicians and other healthcare providers must remain vigilant for these workplace injuries. The weekly variation in peak expiratory flow rate and the exposure to welding oxides may be all that is necessary to institute precautions and evaluate the workplace. Any interprofessional team member who detects these symptoms or discerns the weekly cyclical nature of this condition should reach out to other medical team members so appropriate interventions can take place in the workplace, leading to improved immediate and long-term health outcomes. [Level 5]