Most systemic drugs are potential causes of cutaneous adverse reactions. Contrast media and certain drug classes are known to be common offenders, such as antibiotics, anticonvulsants, antineoplastic drugs, nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs, and allopurinol. Antibiotics and anti-epileptics develop toxidermia complications in 1% to 5% of treatments.

There are multiple mechanisms that account for the variability in drug reactions. They can be classified into two general categories: immunologic and nonimmunologic.

It is often necessary to test for potential allergens to further classify drug reaction etiology. The most common testing methods include epicutaneous patch testing, prick testing, and intradermal testing. In vivo or in vitro tests are unable to confirm the drug causality. To determine the cause of a drug eruption clinically, a logical approach based on clinical characteristics, chronologic factors, and generation of a focused differential diagnosis is required. It is essential to report serious suspected CADR to a pharmacovigilance network if the involved drug is a newly marketed medication or unusually related to cutaneous reactions.

Cutaneous adverse drug reactions are a common public health problem. They affect about 10% of hospitalized patients and occur in 1% to 3% of multi-medicated patients.

Severe reactions (fatal outcomes, severe sequelae), including bullous reactions (Stevens-Johnson syndrome, toxic epidermal necrolysis-also known as Lyell syndrome), acute generalized exanthematous pustulosis (AGEP), and drug reactions with eosinophilia and systemic symptoms (DRESS), represent 2% of CADR.