The etiology of most gastric perforations is secondary to peptic ulcer disease but can also be caused by trauma, malignancy, interventional procedures, and intrinsic gastric pathology or can occur spontaneously in the newborn.

**Peptic Ulcer Disease (PUD)**

PUD is the most common cause of stomach perforation. Owing to the advancement of medical management; the incidence of gastric perforation occurs in less than 10% of patients with peptic ulcer disease. It occurs most commonly in elderly patients taking NSAIDs and in patients consuming excess alcohol. Perforation of gastric ulcer or duodenal ulcer into the peritoneal cavity causes initially chemical peritonitis as opposed to bacterial peritonitis, unlike more distal bowel perforation. If posterior wall gastric ulcers perforate, they leak gastric contents into the lesser sac, which tends to confine the peritonitis. These patients may present with less marked symptoms.

**Spontaneous Gastric Perforation**

Spontaneous perforation of the stomach is an uncommon event mainly seen in the neonatal period, the first few days of life, as a cause of pneumoperitoneum. Beyond the neonatal period, perforation is rare and usually secondary to trauma, surgery, caustic ingestion, or peptic ulcer.

**Trauma**

Traumatic perforation is more frequently the result of a penetrating injury or instrumentation of the stomach, although perforation and organ rupture can occur with severe blunt abdominal trauma. Injuries of the stomach can occur in association with any penetrating trauma of the abdomen, such as gunshot and stab wounds. About 8% of abdominal wounds involve the stomach, and in approximately five percent the stomach is the only organ injured. The type of gastric wound produced by a bullet or sharp instrument is a function of the size, shape, course, and velocity of the missile. With penetrating wounds, both the anterior and posterior walls of the stomach may be injured, and the posterior wall of the organ should always be visualized at the time of surgery. With blunt trauma to the upper abdominal region, the stomach may become lacerated, or it may even rupture if the organ is filled and distended at the moment of impact. The stomach is relatively protected by its anatomical location and is the third most frequently injured hollow intra-abdominal organ after small bowel and colon and then stomach.

**Malignancy-Related Gastric Perforation**

Neoplasms can perforate by direct penetration and necrosis, or by producing obstruction. Perforations related to tumors can also occur spontaneously, following chemotherapy or as a result of radiation treatments. It can be related also to interventions like stent placement for malignant gastric outlet obstruction.

**Iatrogenic**

The stomach may be injured in the course of a number of procedures. Upper endoscopy is the main cause of iatrogenic perforations. The incidence of perforation related to endoscopy increases with procedural complexity and perforation is less common with diagnostic than with therapeutic procedures. The proximal stomach is at the greatest risk as this is where its wall is the thinnest. The overall perforation rate is 0.11% for rigid endoscopy compared to 0.03% for flexible endoscopy. Iatrogenic perforations are more frequent in patients with pre-existing gastric pathology. Rupture of the stomach due to excessive insufflation of the stomach can occur in the course of endoscopy or even unrelated procedures, such as cardiopulmonary resuscitation, and is typically located on the lesser curve, where the organ is least distensible.

**Causes of Endoscopy-Related Gastric Perforation**

- Polypectomy

- EMR-ESD

- Dilation of anastomotic stricture

- Scope or barotrauma

- Medications, other ingestions, foreign body: medications or other ingested substances (caustic injury) and foreign bodies such as sharp objects (toothpicks), food with sharp surfaces, for example, chicken bones, or fish or gastric bezoar.