# Continuing Education Activity

Acute pulmonary embolism is a common clinical condition with a variable clinical presentation, making its diagnosis challenging. This activity outlines the clinical features, diagnosis, and treatment of acute pulmonary embolism and highlights the role of the interprofessional healthcare team in improving the care and outcomes of patients with pulmonary embolism.

**Objectives:**
- Identify the etiology of acute pulmonary embolism.
- Describe the pertinent findings for the diagnosis of patients with acute pulmonary embolism.
- Explain the management options available for acute pulmonary embolism.
- Outline the importance of collaboration and coordination among the interprofessional team members to diagnose and manage acute pulmonary embolism early and enhance the delivery of care for patients.

# Introduction

Pulmonary embolism (PE) occurs when there is a disruption to the flow of blood in the pulmonary artery or its branches by a thrombus that originated somewhere else. In deep vein thrombosis (DVT), a thrombus develops within the deep veins, most commonly in the lower extremities. PE usually occurs when a part of this thrombus breaks off and enters the pulmonary circulation. Very rarely, PE can occur from the embolization of other materials into the pulmonary circulation such as air, fat, or tumor cells.

# Etiology

Most pulmonary embolisms originate as lower extremity DVTs. Hence, risk factors for pulmonary embolism (PE) are the same as risk factors for DVT. Virchow's triad of hypercoagulability, venous stasis, and endothelial injury provides an understanding of these risk factors.

Risk factors can be classified as genetic and acquired. Genetic risk factors include thrombophilia such as factor V Leiden mutation, prothrombin gene mutation, protein C deficiency, protein S deficiency, hyperhomocysteinemia, among others. Acquired risk factors include immobilization for prolonged periods (bed rest greater than three days, anyone traveling greater than 4 hours, whether by air, car, bus, or train), recent orthopedic surgery, malignancy, indwelling venous catheter, obesity, pregnancy, cigarette smoking, oral contraceptive pill use, etc.

Other predisposing factors for VTE include:

- Fracture of lower limb

- Hospitalization for heart failure or atrial fibrillation/flutter within the previous three months

- Hip or knee replacement

- Major trauma

- History of previous venous thromboembolism

- Central venous lines

- Chemotherapy

- Congestive heart failure or respiratory failure

- Hormone replacement therapy

- Oral contraceptive therapy

- Postpartum period

- Infection (specifically pneumonia, urinary tract infection, and HIV)

- Cancer (highest risk in metastatic disease)

- Thrombophilia

- Bed rest greater than three days

- Obesity

- Pregnancy

Cancer carries a high risk for thrombus formation and hence, PE. Pancreatic cancer, hematological malignancies, lung cancer, gastric cancer, and brain cancer carry the highest risk for VTE.

**Types of Pulmonary Embolism**

It is extremely crucial to divide PE based on the presence or absence of hemodynamic stability.

Hemodynamically unstable PE (previously called massive or high-risk****PE) is PE which results in hypotension (as defined by systolic blood pressure (SBP) less than 90 mmHg or a drop in SBP of 40 mm Hg or more from baseline or hypotension that requires vasopressors or inotropes), the old term "massive" PE does not describe the size of the PE but describes its hemodynamic effect. Patients with hemodynamically unstable PE are more likely to die from obstructive shock (i.e., severe right ventricular failure).

Hemodynamically stable PE is a spectrum ranging from small, mildly symptomatic or asymptomatic PE (low-risk PE or small PE) to PEs, which cause mild hypotension that stabilizes in response to fluid therapy, or those who present with right ventricle dysfunction (submassive or intermediate-risk PE), but is hemodynamically stable.

# Epidemiology

The incidence of pulmonary embolism (PE) ranges from 39 to 115 per 100 000 population annually; for DVT, the incidence ranges from 53 to 162 per 100,000 people.

# Pathophysiology

Pulmonary embolism occurs when clots break off and embolize into the pulmonary circulation.

Pulmonary emboli are typically multiple, with the lower lobes being involved more frequently than the upper, and bilateral lung involvement being more common.

Large emboli tend to obstruct the main pulmonary artery, causing saddle embolus with deleterious cardiovascular consequences. In contrast, smaller sized emboli block the peripheral arteries and can lead to pulmonary infarction, manifested by intra-alveolar hemorrhage. Pulmonary infarction occurs in about 10% of patients.

PE leads to impaired gas exchange due to obstruction of the pulmonary vascular bed leading to a mismatch in the ventilation to perfusion ratio because alveolar ventilation remains the same, but pulmonary capillary blood flow decreases, effectively leading to dead space ventilation and hypoxemia.

Also, mediators, such as serotonin, are released, which cause vasospasm and further decreased pulmonary flow in unaffected areas of the lung. Local accumulation of inflammatory mediators alters lung surfactant and stimulates respiratory drive resulting in hypocapnia and respiratory alkalosis.

In PE, pulmonary vascular resistance (PVR) increases due to the mechanical obstruction of the vascular bed with thrombus and hypoxic vasoconstriction. Pulmonary artery pressure (PAP) increases if thromboemboli occludes greater than 30% to 50% of the total cross-sectional area of the pulmonary arterial bed.

Increased PVR increases the right ventricular afterload, which impedes right ventricular outflow, which, in turn, causes right ventricular dilation and flattening or bowing of the interventricular septum. The desynchronization of the ventricles may be increased by the development of the right bundle branch block. The decreased RV outflow and concomitant RV dilation reduce left ventricular filling, thereby compromising cardiac output.

# History and Physical

A timely diagnosis of a pulmonary embolism (PE) is crucial because of the high associated mortality and morbidity, which may be prevented with early treatment. It is important to note that 30% of untreated patients with pulmonary embolism die, while only 8% die after timely therapy.

The most common symptoms of PE include the following: dyspnea, pleuritic chest pain, cough, hemoptysis, presyncope, or syncope. Dyspnea may be acute and severe in central PE, whereas it is often mild and transient in small peripheral PE. In patients with preexisting heart failure or pulmonary disease, worsening dyspnea may be the only symptom. Chest pain is a frequent symptom and is usually caused by pleural irritation due to distal emboli causing pulmonary infarction.

Less common presentations include arrhythmias (e.g., atrial fibrillation), syncope, and hemodynamic collapse.

Apart from symptoms of PE, it is crucial to look for the risk factors for venous thromboembolism (VTE) to determine the clinical probability of a PE.

On examination, patients with PE might have tachypnea and tachycardia, which are common but nonspecific findings. Other examination findings include calf swelling, tenderness, erythema, palpable cords, pedal edema, rales, decreased breath sounds, signs of pulmonary hypertension such as elevated neck veins, loud P2 component of second heart sound, a right-sided gallop, and a right ventricular parasternal lift might be present on examination.

PE is a well-recognized cause of sudden cardiac arrest (8%).

# Evaluation

**Diagnostic Workup**

**Arterial Blood Gas (ABG) Analysis**

Unexplained hypoxemia with a normal chest radiograph should raise the clinical suspicion for pulmonary embolism (PE). Widened alveolar-arterial gradient for oxygen, respiratory alkalosis, and hypocapnia are commonly seen findings on ABG, as a pathophysiological response to pulmonary embolism. It is important to note that hypercapnia, respiratory, or lactic acidosis is not common but can be present in patients with massive PE associated with obstructive shock and respiratory arrest.

**Brain Natriuretic Peptide (BNP)**

Elevated BNP has limited diagnostic importance in patients suspected of having PE.

**Troponin**

Serum troponin I and T levels are beneficial prognostically but not diagnostically.

**D-dimer**

D-dimer levels are elevated in plasma whenever there is an acute thrombotic process in the body because of the activation of coagulation and fibrinolysis pathways at the same time. D-dimer testing has high negative predictive value; hence, a normal D-dimer level makes acute PE or DVT unlikely. But since the positive predictive value of elevated D-dimer levels is low, D-dimer testing is not useful for confirmation of PE. As many D-dimer assays are available, providers should become aware of the diagnostic performance of the test used in their clinical setting. The quantitative enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA) has a diagnostic sensitivity of at least 95%. It can be used to exclude the diagnosis of PE in patients with either low or intermediate pretest probability. A negative ELISA D-dimer, along with low clinical probability, can exclude PE without further testing in approximately 30% of suspected patients.

The specificity of D-dimer decreases steadily with age to approximately 10% in patients greater than 80 years of age. The use of age-adjusted cut-offs for patients older than 50 may improve the performance of D-dimer testing in the elderly. In one study, the use of the age-adjusted cut-off instead of the standard D-dimer cut-off of 500 ng/mL or more increased the number of patients in whom the possibility of PE could be ruled out from 6.4% to 30%, without additional false-negative findings.

The formula is age (years) x 10 mcg/L for patients more than 50 years of age. Example: Patient age 75 = age-adjusted d-dimer of 750 mcg/L.

**Electrocardiography (ECG)**

ECG abnormalities, in patients with suspected PE, are nonspecific.

**Chest Radiograph (CXR)**

In PE, CXR is usually normal or might show nonspecific abnormalities such as atelectasis or effusion. It helps to rule out alternative diagnoses in patients presenting with acute dyspnea.

Hampton's hump is a shallow, hump-shaped opacity on CXR in the periphery of the lung, with its base lying against the pleural surface and hump towards the hilum (Figure 1). Westermark's sign is the sharp cut-off of pulmonary vessels with distal hypoperfusion in a segmental distribution within the lung; both of these findings are rare but specific for acute PE.

**Computed Tomographic Pulmonary Angiography (CTPA)**

Multidetector CTPA is the diagnostic modality of choice for patients with suspected PE. It allows appropriate visualization of the pulmonary arteries down to the subsegmental level.

The present data suggest that a negative CTPA result is adequate for the exclusion of PE in patients who have a low or intermediate clinical probability. Besides, it remains controversial whether patients with a negative CTPA and a high clinical probability should be further investigated.

CTPA may be relatively contraindicated in moderate to severe iodinated contrast allergy or renal insufficiency (eGFR less than 30 mL/min per 1.73-meter square). The risk of these contraindications must be measured against the clinical significance of performing the CTPA examination and the availability of other imaging modalities (e.g., V/Q scan). If clinically feasible, CTPA should be postponed for premedication for a history of allergy or intravenous hydration for renal insufficiency.

CTPA can detect RV enlargement and other indicators of RV dysfunction. Enlarged RV has prognostic value, and it is supported by the results of a prospective multicentre cohort study in 457 patients.

**Lung Scintigraphy**

The planar ventilation/perfusion scan (V/Q scan) is an established diagnostic test for suspected PE. V/Q scanning is mostly performed for patients in whom CTPA is contraindicated or inconclusive, or when additional testing is needed. A normal chest radiograph is usually required before V/Q scanning. Scans performed on patients with abnormal chest radiographs are most likely to be false positives because the images do not appear normal or low probability of PE in such patients.

For those with a normal chest radiograph, V/Q scanning remains the test of choice for the diagnosis of PE in pregnancy. Other groups of patients include those who have a history of contrast medium-induced anaphylaxis and patients with severe renal failure.

Planar lung scan results are frequently classified into three-tiers: normal scan (excluding PE), high-probability scan (considered diagnostic of PE in most patients), and nondiagnostic scan.

**Pulmonary Angiography**

In pulmonary angiography, contrast is injected via a catheter introduced into the right heart under fluoroscopy, which was the gold standard in the past for the diagnosis of PE. The diagnosis of acute PE is made on the evidence of a thrombus either as amputation of a pulmonary arterial branch or filling defect.

**Magnetic Resonance Angiography**

Magnetic resonance angiography (MRA) has been assessed for several years regarding suspected PE. However, the results of large-scale studies show that this technique, although promising, is not recommended as a first-line test for the diagnosis of PE due to its low sensitivity, low availability in most emergency settings, and the high proportion of inconclusive MRA scans.

**Echocardiography**

Transthoracic echocardiography can very rarely diagnose PE definitively when the thrombus is visualized in the proximal pulmonary arteries. The diagnosis of PE on echocardiography is supported by the presence of clot in the right heart or new right heart strain, especially in hemodynamically unstable patients with suspected PE wherein echocardiogram may be useful to establish a possible diagnosis and justify the emergency use of thrombolytic therapy.

There are significant considerations with using echocardiography to establish a diagnosis of PE. Given the peculiar shape of the RV, there is no single echocardiographic parameter that gives quick and accurate information on RV size or function. That is why echocardiographic criteria for the diagnosis of PE have varied between different studies. Because of the negative predictive value of 40% to 50%, a negative result cannot exclude PE.

RV dilation is seen in 25% or more of patients with PE on echo and is useful for risk stratification of the disease.

**Compression Ultrasonography (US)**

PE originates from a lower limb DVT in a majority of patients, and only rarely from upper-limb DVT (mostly following venous catheterization). In one study, DVT was found in 70% of patients with proven PE.

Wells criteria and Geneva score are scoring systems most commonly used to estimate the pretest probability of having a PE. This allows the classification of patients with suspected PE into categories of clinical or pretest probability, based on which the diagnostic tests are chosen and interpreted.

**The Revised Geneva Clinical Prediction Rule**

Items/Clinical decision rule points (Original version)(Simplified version)

- Previous PE or DVT-3/1

- Heart rate

- 75–94 beats per minute-3/1
- ≥95 beats per minute-5/2

- Surgery or fracture within the past month-2/1

- Hemoptysis-2/1

- Active cancer-2/1

- Unilateral lower-limb pain-3/1

- Pain on lower-limb deep palpation and unilateral edema-4/1

- Age >65 years-1/1

**Clinical Probability**

Three-level score

- Low/0–3/0–1

- Intermediate/4–10/2–4

- High/≥11/≥5

**Two-level Score**

- PE-unlikely/0–5/0–2

- PE-likely/≥6/≥3

**Wells Criteria and Modified Wells Criteria**

Items/Scores

- Clinical symptoms of DVT-3.0

- Other diagnoses less likely than pulmonary embolism-3.0

- Heart rate >100 beats per min-1.5

- Immobilization for three or more days or surgery in the previous four weeks-1.5

- Previous history of DVT-PE1.5

- Hemoptysis-1.0

- Malignancy-1.0

**Probability/****Score**

**Traditional Clinical Probability Assessment (Wells criteria)**

- High/>6.0

- Moderate/2.0 to 6.0

- Low/<2.0

**Simplified Clinical Probability Assessment (Modified Wells Criteria)**

- PE likely/>4.0

- PE unlikely/≤4.0

Since symptoms of PE are very nonspecific, The Pulmonary Embolism Rule-out Criteria (PERC) was developed for emergency department patients to select patients whose likelihood of having PE is so low that diagnostic workup should not even be initiated.absence of PE.

The PERC rule has eight criteria:

• Age <50 years

• Heart rate <100 beats per minute

• Oxyhemoglobin saturation ≥95 percent

• No hemoptysis

• No estrogen use

• No prior DVT or PE

• No unilateral leg swelling

• No surgery/trauma requiring hospitalization within the preceding four weeks

Patients having a low probability of PE who fulfill all eight criteria, the likelihood of PE is sufficiently low that further testing is not indicated.

PERC is only valid in clinical settings with a low prevalence of PE (<15 percent).

**Diagnostic Approach to Hemodynamically Stable Patients with Suspected Pulmonary Embolism**

For most patients with suspected PE who are hemodynamically stable, an approach that combines clinical and pretest probability assessment, D-dimer testing, and definitive diagnostic imaging is usually applied.

**For a Patient with a Low Probability of PE (Wells Score****<2)**

If PERC criteria are fulfilled, there is no need for further testing, and PE can be excluded. If PERC criteria are not met, then D-dimer should be obtained. If D-dimer is negative(<500 ng/ml), PE can be ruled out if D-dimer is positive (>500 ng/ml) in patients age <50 or high after age-adjusted D-dimer value, CT pulmonary angiography should be performed. If CTPA is inconclusive or contraindicated, V/Q scan should be performed.

For a patient with intermediate probability of PE (Wells score 2 to 6)

Measure D-dimer levels, if negative, PE can be excluded. If positive, then CTPA is done. If CTPA is inconclusive or contraindicated, V/Q scan should be performed.

**For a Patient with a High Probability of PE (Wells Score >6)**

CTPA should be performed emergently. Feasibility requires adequate scanner technology, and the patient must be able to lie flat, to cooperate with exam breath-holding instructions, have a body habitus that can fit into the scanner, and no contraindications for iodinated contrast. If inconclusive or not feasible, perform a V/Q scan. V/Q scan could be normal, ruling out PE. It could also have resulted as a "high probability for PE," which would be diagnostic of PE if V/Q scan results as intermediate probability, further testing with lower extremity compression ultrasonography with Doppler is appropriate.

For patients who are hemodynamically unstable and in whom definitive imaging is unsafe, bedside echocardiography or venous compression ultrasound may be used to obtain a presumptive diagnosis of PE to justify the administration of potentially life-saving therapies.

# Treatment / Management

**A) Initial Management**

**1) The Supportive Measures**

The initial approach to patients with pulmonary embolism (PE) should focus on supportive measures.

Supplemental oxygen is indicated in patients with oxygen saturation <90%. Mechanical ventilation (non-invasive or invasive) should be utilized in unstable patients, but providers should be mindful of the adverse hemodynamic effects of mechanical ventilation.

Acute RV failure is the leading cause of death in patients with hemodynamically unstable PE. Aggressive volume resuscitation in such patients can over distend the RV, worsen ventricular interdependence, and reduce cardiac output (CO). Hence, in patients with massive PE, intravenous fluid resuscitation should be tried only in patients with collapsible IVC/intravascular depletion. Vasopressors might be needed for hemodynamic support.

Mechanical cardiopulmonary support devices, such as extracorporeal membrane oxygenation (ECMO), may be used in hemodynamically unstable patients with pulmonary embolism.

**2) Anticoagulation**

It is vital to remember that the mainstay of treatment of acute PE is anticoagulation.

It is important to note that either low-molecular-weight heparin (LMWH) or fondaparinux or unfractionated heparin (UFH) can be used for anticoagulation in acute PE. LMWH and fondaparinux are preferred since they have a less incidence of inducing major bleeding and heparin-induced thrombocytopenia.

For patients with suspected PE, the treatment is stratified according to the type of PE ( whether it is hemodynamically stable or unstable PE) and according to the suspicion of PE in an individual patient. Patients are classified into low, intermediate, or high suspicion for PE based on either revised Geneva or Wells score.

**Hemodynamically Stable Patients:**

Patients with a high clinical suspicion for PE, anticoagulation is started even before diagnostic imaging is obtained.

For patients with a low clinical suspicion for PE, if diagnostic imaging can be performed within 24 hours, then wait for imaging to establish a definitive diagnosis before starting treatment with anticoagulation.

For patients with an intermediate clinical suspicion for PE, if diagnostic imaging can be performed within 4 hours, then wait for imaging to establish a definitive diagnosis before starting treatment with anticoagulation.

For patients in whom anticoagulation is contraindicated, IVC filter placement should be considered once the diagnosis of PE is confirmed.

**Hemodynamically Unstable Patients:**

Patients with a high clinical suspicion for PE who are hemodynamically unstable, emergent CTPA, portable perfusion scanning, or bedside transthoracic echocardiography should be performed whenever possible.  Primary reperfusion treatment, usually, thrombolysis, is the treatment of choice for patients with hemodynamically unstable acute PE. Surgical pulmonary embolectomy or percutaneous catheter-directed therapy are alternative reperfusion options in patients with contraindications to thrombolysis. Following reperfusion treatment and hemodynamic stabilization, patients recovering from high-risk PE can be switched from parenteral to oral anticoagulation.

**3) Reperfusion Strategies**

**Thrombolysis:**

Thrombolysis has shown an effective reduction in pulmonary artery pressure and resistance in patients with PE when compared with UFH alone; these improvements are assessed by a decrease in RV dilation on echocardiography.

Pulmonary Embolism Thrombolysis (PEITHO) trial identified the benefits of thrombolysis in hemodynamically stable patients with intermediate-risk PE.

Absolute contraindications to thrombolysis include any prior intracranial hemorrhage, known structural intracranial cerebrovascular disease (e.g., arteriovenous malformation), known malignant intracranial neoplasm, ischemic stroke within three months, suspected aortic dissection, active bleeding or bleeding diathesis, recent surgery encroaching on the spinal canal or brain, and recent significant closed-head or facial trauma with radiographic evidence of bony fracture or brain injury.

**Catheter-Directed Treatment:**

Involves the insertion of a catheter into the pulmonary arteries, which is then used for ultrasound-assisted thrombolysis, suction embolectomy, rotational embolectomy, thrombus aspiration, or combining mechanical fragmentation with pharmacological catheter-directed thrombolysis. Different studies have shown a success rate of up to 87%  for catheter-directed therapies.

**Surgical Embolectomy**

It****is usually indicated in a patient with****hemodynamically unstable PE  in whom thrombolysis (systemic or catheter-directed) is contraindicated, or in patients who have failed thrombolysis.

**Vena Cava Filters**

These block the path of travel of emboli and prevent them from entering the pulmonary circulation. Filters are indicated in patients with venous thromboembolism who have an absolute contraindication to anticoagulants, and in patients with recurrent VTE despite anticoagulation. Retrievable filters are preferred, such that once the contraindication has resolved, the filter can be removed, and patients should be anticoagulated. This is because, the Prevention of Recurrent Pulmonary Embolism by Vena Cava Interruption (PREPIC) study showed that the insertion of a permanent vena cava filter was associated with a significant reduction in the risk of recurrent PE and a substantial increase in the risk of DVT, without a remarkable difference in the risk of recurrent VTE or death.

**B) Chronic Treatment and Prevention of Recurrence**

The aim of anticoagulation after the acute management of PE is to complete the treatment of the acute episode and also prevent the recurrence of VTE over the long-term. Clinical trials have assessed various durations of anticoagulant therapy with vitamin K antagonists (VKAs) for VTE.

In conclusion, the optimal duration of anticoagulation remains uncertain and has to be considered on a case to case basis. A minimum of 3 months is usually recommended, but a more extended period is required if the  PE was unprovoked or if there are persistent risk factors.

Special considerations are required for patients with active cancer, given their increased risk for a VTE event. Hence, cancer patients should receive an extended duration of anticoagulation if their bleeding risk remains acceptable ( low or moderate bleeding risk). For cancer patients with PE, LMWH, and DOACs (apixaban, rivaroxaban) are preferred over VKA.

# Differential Diagnosis

Since pulmonary embolism has a very heterogeneous clinical presentation ranging from dyspnea to sudden cardiac arrest. The differential diagnosis of PE is extensive and includes:

- Acute coronary syndrome

- Stable angina

- Acute pericarditis

- Congestive heart failure

- Malignancy

- Cardiac arrhythmias

- Pneumonia

- Pneumonitis

- Pneumothorax

- Vasovagal syncope

# Prognosis

Shock and right ventricular dysfunction confer a poor prognosis and predict mortality in patients diagnosed with PE.

Original and simplified Pulmonary Embolism Severity Index

- Parameter- original version

- Age-1 point (if age >80 years)

- Male sex- +10 points/ –

- Cancer- +30 points/1 point

- Chronic heart failure- +10 points/1 point

- Chronic pulmonary disease- +10 points/1 point

- Pulse rate ≥110 b.p.m- +20 points/1 point

- Systolic BP <100 mmHg- +30 points/1 point

- Respiratory rate >30 breaths per min- +20 points/–

- Temperature <36°C- +20 points/–

- Altered mental status- +60 points/–

- Arterial oxyhaemoglobin saturation <90%- +20 points/1 point

Risk stratification in PESI

- Class I: Points less than or equal to 65; low 30-day risk of mortality from 1 to 6 percent.

- Class II: Points 66–85; low mortality risk from 1.7 to 3.5%

- Class III: Points 86–105; moderate mortality risk from 3.2 to 7.1 percent.

- Class IV: Points 106–125; high mortality risk from 4.0 to 11.4%.

- Class V: Points more than 125; very high mortality risk from 10.0 to 24.5%.

Risk stratification in sPESI

If 0 points then 30-day mortality risk 1.0%

If one or more than one point(s) then 30-day mortality risk 10.9%

# Complications

The major complications associated with pulmonary embolism (PE) include the following:

- Recurrent thromboembolism

- Chronic thromboembolic pulmonary hypertension

- Right heart failure

- Cardiogenic shock

PE, if left untreated, is associated with mortality of up to 30 percent. Studies have also suggested an increased risk of stroke, thought to be due to paradoxical embolism via a patent foramen ovale (PFO) in patients with acute PE.

1) Recurrent Thromboembolism

In the one to two weeks following diagnosis, patients may deteriorate and experience recurrence. Inadequate anticoagulation is the most common reason for recurrent venous thromboembolism while on therapy.

2) Chronic Thromboembolic Pulmonary Hypertension (CTEPH)

The development of persistent or progressive dyspnea, particularly during the first three months to two years of diagnosis, should prompt the provider to investigate for the development of CTEPH (affects up to 5 percent of patients). Follow-up computed tomography, ventilation-perfusion scans, or echocardiography should be performed in patients who remain persistently symptomatic months to years after an acute PE. In CTEPH, these modalities demonstrate pulmonary hypertension.

On the V/Q scan, patients with CTEPH generally have at least one segmental or more significant mismatched ventilation-perfusion defects. For those patients with evidence of CTEPH on V/Q lung scanning, right heart catheterization and pulmonary angiography are indicated to confirm pulmonary hypertension, quantify the degree of pulmonary hypertension, exclude competing diagnoses, define the surgical accessibility of the obstructing thrombotic lesions, and confirm that an acceptable component of the elevated pulmonary vascular resistance is due to surgically accessible disease and not from distal obstruction or a secondary arteriopathy. For all patients with CTEPH, lifelong anticoagulant therapy is recommended. Also, early referral for evaluation for pulmonary thromboendarterectomy is highly recommended.

# Pearls and Other Issues

A timely diagnosis of pulmonary embolism (PE) is crucial because of the high associated mortality and morbidity, which may be prevented with early treatment. Patients should be made aware of the signs and symptoms of VTE and PE since the incidence of recurrent thromboembolism is high. It is important to note that 30% of untreated patients with pulmonary embolism die, while only 8% die after timely therapy.

# Enhancing Healthcare Team Outcomes

Some hospitals are establishing multidisciplinary pulmonary embolism response teams (PERTs) to facilitate prompt diagnosis and timely treatment of patients with pulmonary embolism. A PERT is a treatment model composed of providers from different specialties involved in the treatment of PE, including pulmonary, critical care, cardiology, and cardiothoracic surgery, among others. The establishment of PERT has proven effective in multiple studies by improving communication and coordinating treatment efforts among providers.