# Continuing Education Activity

Necrolytic migratory erythema (NME) is a characteristic skin rash most often associated with glucagonoma, an alpha-cell tumor of the pancreatic islets. It is usually seen as a part of the glucagonoma syndrome, a paraneoplastic syndrome that includes the triad of diabetes mellitus, NME, and weight loss. However, more rarely, NME can also be seen as a part of other clinical entities such as liver disease and intestinal malabsorption; here, it is termed the pseudoglucagonoma syndrome. The skin rash is characteristically extremely erythematous, shows superficial epidermal necrosis, and often spreads in a centrifugal pattern. The condition is frequently misdiagnosed due in part to its rarity. It is the presenting symptom of the pancreatic islet neoplasm. Thus, timely recognition and treatment can help prevent morbidity from the epidermal dysfunction and mortality from the tumor burden itself if the neoplasm is identified before metastasis. This activity reviews the cause, pathophysiology, and presentation of necrolytic migratory erythema and highlights the role of the interprofessional team in its management.

**Objectives:**
- Identify the etiology of necrolytic migratory erythema.
- Review the presentation of necrolytic migratory erythema.
- Outline the management options available for necrolytic migratory erythema.
- Describe some interprofessional team strategies for improving care coordination and outcomes in patients with necrolytic migratory erythema.

# Introduction

Necrolytic migratory erythema (NME) is a characteristic skin rash most often associated with glucagonoma, an alpha-cell tumor of the pancreatic islets.

The skin rash is characteristically extremely erythematous, shows superficial epidermal necrosis, and often spreads in a centrifugal pattern. The condition is frequently misdiagnosed due in part to its rarity. It is the presenting symptom of the pancreatic islet neoplasm. Thus, timely recognition and treatment can help prevent morbidity from the epidermal dysfunction and mortality from the tumor burden itself if the neoplasm is identified before metastasis.

# Etiology

The exact cause of necrolytic migratory erythema remains unknown. However, it is almost ubiquitous with glucagonoma, where it can be the presenting symptom of the neoplasm in roughly 70% of cases.

NME also occurs outside the context of a glucagonoma; in these cases, it is termed “pseudoglucagonoma syndrome.” Pseudoglucagonoma syndrome has been seen to occur with a variety of different disease states, such as intestinal malabsorption (celiac disease), liver cirrhosis, inflammatory bowel disease (Crohn disease), chronic pancreatitis, and other malignancies (small cell lung cancer, duodenal neoplasms).

# Epidemiology

Necrolytic migratory erythema as a part of the glucagonoma syndrome is an exceedingly rare disease process with an estimated incidence of 1 in 20 million per year.

Rarely has it been seen in patients with MEN1, and in these cases, the onset of the disease is earlier.

NME in the context of pseudoglucagonoma syndrome is an even rarer phenomenon; as such, data on its incidence and prevalence in this setting is not currently available.

# Pathophysiology

The exact pathogenesis of necrolytic migratory erythema (NME) has yet to be elucidated; however, hyperglucagonemia undoubtedly plays an important role, having been implicated in most cases. This is evident as tumor resection or medical therapy with glucagon antagonists often results in complete resolution of the skin symptoms, often within one week of treatment.

To explain the interrelationship of the previously mentioned factors in the pathogenesis of NME, the multifactorial malnutrition model was created. This model is a prevailing theory of how excess glucagon induces changes in this disease state. The premise of this theory is that the catabolic state induced by excess serum glucagon results in the derangement of a common metabolic pathway involving zinc, protein, amino acids, and essential fatty acids. This pathway is likely affected by the depletion of one or more of the nutrients mentioned above; thus, one can classify NME as a deficiency dermatosis.

Zinc is likely of major importance in the pathogenesis of NME, as its supplementation has been shown to resolve the skin lesions in those with glucagonoma syndrome.

Hypoproteinemia and hypoaminoacidemia are seen in NME and glucagonoma syndrome and are likely a result of the catabolic state induced by excess glucagon. Hypoaminoacidemia is a result of the physiologic effect of glucagon on the liver to increase gluconeogenesis via amino acid catabolism. It is thought that the diminished availability of amino acids causes a decrease in peptide synthesis in tissues such as the epidermis, which predisposes it to rapid cycling and destruction. The reduced pool of amino acids is also shown to lead to increased arachidonic acid production and an increased tendency toward inflammation in the epidermis.

The deficiency of essential fatty acids that occurs in glucagonoma syndrome can be directly secondary to the hypoalbuminemia seen in the disease process; however, this may be only one aspect of the phenomenon. The deficiency of fatty acids may also be secondary to the enhanced peripheral lipolysis resulting from the physiologic actions of glucagon on hormone-sensitive lipase in adipose tissue.

This increase in inflammatory mediators is thought to be exacerbated by the hypoaminoacidemia and hypoproteinemia present in glucagonoma syndrome, as albumin normally sequesters fatty acids released by trauma and prevents their conversion to prostaglandins and leukotrienes.

The pathogenesis of NME in the context of pseudoglucagonoma syndrome has been less extensively studied due to the rarity of this condition. However, there are similarities to classical NME. One disease in which NME has been seen without the presence of a glucagonoma is hepatic cirrhosis. It is well known that in the presence of cirrhosis, the synthetic capacity of the liver is markedly reduced, resulting in hypoproteinemia and hypoaminoacidemia, which, as noted above, are likely related to the pathogenesis of NME seen in glucagonomas. In addition, the liver is involved with glucagon degradation, and in the presence of liver dysfunction, glucagon levels can become elevated, leading to NME.

Another spectrum of diseases that pseudoglucagonoma syndrome and NME occurs in are ones involving gastrointestinal dysfunction. Celiac disease, inflammatory bowel disease, and pancreatic insufficiency have all been reported to cause NME in the absence of glucagon-secreting tumors.

# Histopathology

Although no histologic features are pathognomic for necrolytic migratory erythema, some are very distinctive and help separate them from other dermatoses. It is important to recognize that the histopathologic changes are limited entirely to the epidermis and, particularly, the superficial epidermis.

Other prominent findings seen in NME include confluent parakeratosis and irregular acanthosis, with loss of the granular layer. Ballooning epidermal cells showing vacuolar degeneration, particularly in the upper spinous layer, are seen at higher power.

# History and Physical

The glucagonoma syndrome is heralded by the triad of weight loss, diabetes mellitus, and necrolytic migratory erythema. NME is thought to be the presenting symptom of the disease in roughly 70% of patients.

On physical examination, patients with necrolytic migratory erythema will show erythematous scaly lesions with centrifugal growth, often with concomitant lesions in different stages of healing. The rash is prominent in areas of increased friction and pressure, such as the intertriginous areas (i.e., inguinal creases, popliteal fossa), perineum, buttocks, groin, lower abdomen, and distal extremities. It is also commonly seen in a periorificial distribution. Patients will often complain of intense pruritus and/or pain associated with the rash. NME often appears first as intensely erythematous, well-demarcated plaques or patches with irregular edges.

These lesions will then blister centrally, forming flaccid bullae that erode and crust, eventually healing with hyperpigmentation. As the central portion of the wound heals, the surrounding erythema may expand outward, with new vesicles developing along the advancing serpiginous edges; eventually, these lesions may coalesce. The lesions of NME are cyclical, typically waxing and waning for about ten days; upon inspection, various lesions are seen in different stages of healing.

The lesions of NME can be complicated by superimposed infection, most commonly by Staphylococcus aureus and Candida albicans.

Commonly associated with the characteristic skin lesions are the mucocutaneous findings of angular cheilitis, glossitis, and stomatitis, which are present in roughly 30% of patients. Onychoschizia and other nail changes have also been seen in association with NME.

The other systemic findings in glucagonoma syndrome include diarrhea, neuropsychiatric changes, anemia, and a tendency toward venous thrombosis.

# Evaluation

As with many disease states, a thorough history, and physical exam, with particular attention to the skin, is necessary for proper diagnosis. In addition, patients with suggestive skin lesions should have multiple biopsies performed at the edges of active lesions in order to increase diagnostic yield, as the histopathologic changes representative of necrolytic migratory erythema may only be focally present.

Among laboratory tests, a serum glucagon level is of paramount importance and will be highly elevated, often to levels greater than 1000 pg/nL (reference range is 50 to 200 pg/nL).

Other laboratory tests may be used to detect the presence of a neoplasm as the root cause of elevated glucagon. Serum chromogranin A levels may be measured, as this is a sensitive marker for glucagonoma.

Since glucagonoma syndrome may rarely be a part of MEN1, it is also important to screen for this disease if clinically suspected (specifically in younger patients), with serum levels of fasting insulin, calcium, parathyroid hormone, vasoactive intestinal peptide, and prolactin.

Imaging the abdomen is also indicated to help determine the presence of a tumor or metastases, as this helps guide treatment. A majority of glucagonomas, roughly 87%, are located in the pancreatic tail, as this is where the concentration of pancreatic islets is the highest.

One may also use selective angiography of the celiac axis to determine both the center of the neoplasm and the presence of hepatic metastases simultaneously. In fact, due to their relative hypervascularity, selective angiography of the celiac axis is the most reliable means of diagnosis and localization of glucagonoma in the face of unrevealing CT scans.

Lastly, somatostatin receptor scintigraphy, classically with indium-111 octreotide (In-D-Phe1-octreotide), can be used for the detection of metastases, as nearly all glucagonomas reported in the literature have been somatostatin receptor positive.

# Treatment / Management

The treatment of necrolytic migratory erythema and glucagonoma syndrome can be broadly divided into curative treatment, which is surgical, and palliative treatment which is medical.

Curative treatment of glucagonomas and its accompanying paraneoplastic syndrome is centered around early surgical excision of the tumor, which, as previously mentioned, is located in the tail of the pancreas in the majority of cases. Removal of the tumor in the setting of no distant metastases generally completely cures the dermatosis and the accompanying symptoms, often within a week.

Although surgery can be curative in localized disease, many times, the tumor has spread distantly at presentation, with reports of 50% to 100% of patients exhibiting metastases at the time of diagnosis.

Medical therapy is the cornerstone for those with metastatic disease upon presentation or who are poor candidates for surgery. Patients may be treated palliatively with either long-acting somatostatin analogs (i.e., octreotide, lanreotide) or interferon-alpha.

Treatment with somatostatin analogs helps palliate symptoms and improve survival. However, treatment with somatostatin analogs must continue indefinitely as NME and other symptoms of glucagonoma promptly return when treatment is withdrawn. Chemotherapy with agents such as streptozotocin and 5-fluorouracil can be considered to palliate metastatic disease; however, this is not preferred due to the tumor's poor response to current chemotherapeutic agents.

As necrolytic migratory erythema is considered a deficiency dermatosis, the repletion of various nutrients has been utilized in the literature to target this entity specifically. In particular, supplementation of zinc, essential fatty acids, and amino acids have been shown in some cases to resolve NME.

Lastly, in the case of treating NME outside of glucagonoma (i.e., pseudoglucagonoma syndrome), therapy is mainly aimed at treating the underlying condition. However, as malnutrition seems to be a common theme in pseudoglucagonoma syndrome, one may consider nutritional repletion with zinc, amino acids, and essential fatty acids.

# Differential Diagnosis

The following is the list of differentials that should be considered when making the diagnosis of necrolytic migratory erythema:

- Acrokeratosis paraneoplastica

- Cellulitis

- Erythrokeratoderma

- Eczematous dermatitis

- Psoriasis

# Prognosis

Skin manifestations, such as necrolytic migratory erythema, are significant because they often lead to an earlier diagnosis of glucagonoma syndrome and could prevent metastatic disease.

# Complications

Necrolytic migratory erythema itself does not lead to any common complications; however, the following are the complications of NME associated with glucagonoma syndrome:

- Diarrhea associated with dehydration

- Nutritional deficiency

- Hypoaminocdemia

- Hypoalbuminemia

- Weight loss

# Deterrence and Patient Education

As necrolytic migratory erythema is a skin manifestation that can help diagnose glucagonoma syndrome earlier, an early referral from primary care providers should be emphasized. Patients should be made aware that an early diagnosis has a better prognosis. Patients should undergo blood sugar testing to diagnose diabetes associated with this syndrome. The patient's nutritional status should be taken care of, as this syndrome can lead to malnutrition. Patients should be made aware of the dietary requirements in this case.

# Enhancing Healthcare Team Outcomes

In managing necrolytic migratory erythema, coordination between the entire interprofessional medical care team, including but not limited to the dermatologist, oncologist, surgeon, and radiologist, is imperative. Nurses round out the interprofessional team, providing patient assessment,  counseling patients, assisting in surgery, and coordinating the activities of the various Timely recognition of the disease is of utmost importance. This can often be at the hands of the dermatologist, who may receive a referral for the rash of NME, as it is often a presenting symptom of the underlying pancreatic malignancy. Delayed recognition, treatment, or relaying of information between specialists and others involved with the care of the patient can result in worsened outcomes, including mortality, for the patient. Thus, it is of utmost importance to recognize this characteristic dermatitis and begin the appropriate testing and surgical referrals, as prompt surgery prior to tumor metastasis can cure the patient. In this sense, educating the interprofessional team on the rash of NME and its accompanying symptoms can help prevent disability and death due to this relatively rare entity. [Level 5]