**The Scaffold**

Stents can be classified according to characteristics like metallic basis and design.

Stainless steel or tantalum was used in early BMS.

Later on, nitinol, a combination of nickel and titanium, was introduced into clinical practice as it exhibited elastic properties and thermal shape memory.

Recent stent backbones are made from chromium combinations with either cobalt or platinum as they allow thin strut structure. Cobalt chromium stents are a choice in higher-risk lesions due to their high radial strength, low profile and increased elasticity.

Due to improved scaffold materials having higher radial strength, strut thickness decreased from around 140 micrometers in thick-strut stents to around 70 micrometers in thin-strut stents. The ISAR-STEREO trial showed the superiority of thin-strut stents with lower restenosis.

The problem of metal allergy plays no role in the pathogenesis of restenosis, but its influence on outcome shows contradictory evidence.

Apart from the metallic basis, scaffold design has clinical implications as relates to vessel injury during implantation, and different designs result in different injury patterns with greater injury leading to increased tissue proliferation and platelet adhesion.

Multicellular stents can subdivide into closed-cell and open-cell designs. Closed-cell stents show a more uniform drug delivery but are less flexible, whereas open-cell stents have a non-uniform drug distribution but improved alignment to the vessel.

Bioabsorbable stents are non-permanent implants avoiding caging vessels and obstructing side branches and allow vasomotion.

**The Therapeutic Agent**

Antiproliferative drugs stop vascular smooth muscle cell proliferation and thus, neointimal hyperplasia. Sirolimus and paclitaxel were used in first generation DES. Paclitaxel inhibits microtubule disassembly and thus interferes with the cell cycle, leading to cell cycle arrest in G0-G1 and G2-M phases.

Therefore, later generation stent therapeutic agents evolved from sirolimus. Changes to the sirolimus structure created compounds such as everolimus (SDZ RAD) which showed anti-arteriosclerotic features and prevented graft rejection.

Other investigated therapeutic agents are

- Dual drug-eluting stents DDES, which carry two therapeutic agents to combine their mechanism of action, for example antiproliferative and additional anti-thrombotic effects. The modification of the coating allows time controlled release of the drugs targeting the different timing of bio-response to stent implantation.

- Phytoncide (PTC), which shows the same anti-inflammatory and antiproliferative effects in vitro as sirolimus and thus might serve as an alternative to sirolimus

- Glucocorticoids, which are useful to suppress inflammatory changes that lead to restenosis

- Gene eluting stents, which deliver plasmid DNA to express appreciated proteins inside cells. The expression of VEGF, for example, supports healthy endothelialization of the stent luminal surface

- Galangin, which up-regulates p27KIP1 that arrests cell cycle in the G0-G1 phase, inhibits proliferation of vascular smooth muscle cells

- Tacrolimus reduces restenosis via the calcineurin/NFAT/IL-2 pathway but is inferior in head-to-head comparison to other stents eluting rapamycin agents

- Stem-cell carrying stents to support healthy reendothelialization

- Radioactive stents

- Actinomycin

- Probucol

- 7-Hexanoyltaxol

**The Coating**

Stent coating serves different purposes. It facilitates drug stent adhesion, drug-release, biocompatibility, and modulates thrombogenicity. Polymers are repeating sequences of chemical connections. Drug delivery via polymers follows the principle of diffusion, dissolution or ion exchange.

- Organic or inorganic

- Bio-erodable or permanent

- Uniform or nonuniform drug delivery

- Luminal or abluminal coating

- Active or passive

First generation DES used synthetic polymers such as poly(ethylene-co-vinyl acetate) (PEVA) and poly(n-butyl methacrylate) (PBMA) or tri-block copolymer poly(styrene-b-isobtylene-b-styrene) (SIBS). PEVA and PBMA coat SES whereas SIBS coats PES. SIBS allows early burst release of the drug which is ideal for controlling the early vascular injury following stent implantation. Observations of late stent thrombosis with PEVA and PBMA triggered investigations to find the underlying causes. Hypersensitivity arose as a factor as tissue surrounding stents became infiltrated by inflammatory cells.

Other coating options include

- Gold-coated stents, which exhibited an increased risk for restenosis

- Heparin

- Endothelial cells or its progenitors

- CD34 antibodies

- Natural glycocalyx

To further reduce the inflammatory response, stent coatings employed bioabsorbable polymers such as poly-lactic acid (PLA), poly(lactide-co-glycolide) (PLGA) and polycaprolactone (PCL).

The problems associated with coating polymers such as inflammation or hypersensitivity can be avoided altogether by using drug reservoirs stents or nanoparticles.