The pathophysiology of ulcerative colitis involves defects in the epithelial barrier, immune response, leukocyte recruitment, and microflora of the colon.

The epithelial barrier has a defect in colonic mucin, and possibly tight junctions, leading to increased uptake of luminal antigens. The lamina propria of the mucosa also has an increased number of activated and mature dendritic cells which include a large number of toll-like receptors (TLR), specifically TLR2 and TLR4. There also seems to be an atypical T-helper (Th) cell response in patients with ulcerative colitis, specifically Th2, which exerts a cytotoxic response against epithelial cells. Other immune-related factors that play a role in the pathophysiology of ulcerative colitis include tumor necrosis factor-alpha (TNF-alpha), interleukin 13, and natural killer T-cells. Levels of IgM, IgA, and IgG are elevated in inflammatory bowel disease; however, a disproportionate increase in IgG1 antibodies is found in patients diagnosed with ulcerative colitis.

Leukocyte recruitment is affected on two fronts. There is an upregulated release of the chemoattractant CXCL8 in ulcerative colitis so that leukocytes are recruited to the mucosa from systemic circulation. Additionally, there is an upregulation of mucosal addressin cellular adhesion molecule-1 (Mad-CAM1) on the endothelium of mucosal blood vessels which promotes leukocyte adhesion and extravasation into mucosal tissue.

Studies have shown that enteric microflora is important in the pathogenesis and severity of inflammation and disease phenotype. Ulcerative colitis seems to also result, in part, from a homeostatic imbalance between enteric microflora and the host's mucosal immunity. This results in an aberrant response to non-pathogenic bacteria.