As the diversity of drug delivery continues to expand to accommodate patient needs, the risk of prescribing errors will increase. Nuanced differences between medication labels or different doses of the same drug with different routes of administration can be an ignition for human error. In the most objective sense, the physiologic manifestation of these errors can be traced to aberrant changes in basic pharmacokinetic principles. A focus on bioavailability can serve as a logical hinge to consider drug-patient and drug-drug interactions.

The first step toward mitigating medical errors associated with bioavailability is a shared knowledge of the basic principles of bioavailability between members of the interprofessional team caring for the patient. Including this knowledge as part of staff training can be fruitful. Nurses with an augmented appreciation for bioavailability can use the patient’s history, vitals, and medication list more effectively and become another barrier to adverse drug events (ADEs). This knowledge may provide additional confidence to nurses executing drug administrations to patients.

With more opportunities for medical mistakes, the impetus falls on creating and maintaining a system that mitigates these mistakes as best possible. Avid communication among members of the interprofessional team can significantly reduce the risk of prescription errors. Utilizing pharmacists regularly in pharmaceutical decision support has been shown to effectively reduce the risk of adverse drug events.

After drug administration, scheduled checkpoints for patient monitoring can provide a safety net for unanticipated pharmacologic responses. One important checkpoint is obtaining laboratory values at regular intervals. It is a safety measure to ensure a prescribed drug is maintained within the therapeutic range. In addition to ensuring drug efficacy through adequate plasma drug concentration, this checkpoint can serve as a method to prevent drug accumulation and toxicity. Between these intervals, checking patient vitals more frequently in patients with complex illnesses and medication lists is a useful method in monitoring acute physiologic reactions secondary to changes in drug bioavailability.

Ultimately, obtaining and recording a complete medical history is critical in forming the breadth of medical background required to make safer prescription decisions. A previous study showed that 61% of patients (n=304) have one or more prescriptions not recorded.