**General:**Antibiotics and immunosuppression regimens based on transplant physician recommendations are administered during the day of surgery. The surgeon will perform back-table preparation of the donor organ.

**Kidney Transplant**

**Dialysis**

The patient may or may not be dialysis-dependent. An anesthesiologist should evaluate the patient's volume, electrolytes, and uremia status on the day of surgery. Initially, hemodialysis was avoided 24 hours before transplant to decrease heparin in circulation. However, with the evolution of anesthesia care, point-of-care diagnostic test, and technique, it is no longer required.

**Intra-operative**

- Maintain normothermia, position the patient, and secure the dialysis access site

- Induction, muscle relaxants and inhalational agent:

Induction agents: The nephrotoxic drugs and opioids (morphine, meperidine, and codeine) are avoided. The opioids, as mentioned above, have active metabolites excreted by the kidney, which can accumulate.

Muscle relaxant and reversal agents: succinylcholine can cause an increase in serum potassium level, which can be detrimental in ESRD patients. Cisatracurium is metabolized by Hofmann elimination and can be used in renal failure patients. Laudanosine is one of the breakdown products of atracurium and cisatracurium. Kidneys eliminate it. Cisatracurium is more potent than atracurium. Hence the amount of laudanosine generated is significantly less and below the toxic amount. The kidney partially excretes rocuronium. Sugammadex is cleared from the kidney. However, it is found to have a complete reversal in kidney failure. Though clearance of sugammadex rocuronium complex takes time, no rebound muscle weakness is observed.

Inhalational agents: Oxygen and air or oxygen and nitrous oxide combination are routinely used with the inhalational agent. Sevoflurane administration can lead to the accumulation of inorganic fluoride ions and compound A in patients with renal insufficiency. However, the FDA (Food and drug administration) has approved safe sevoflurane administration with fresh gas flows > 1 liter/minute. Isoflurane and desflurane can be used as an alternative to sevoflurane.

**Fluid Status**

Depending on the volume status of the patient pre-operatively, volume replacement is performed. Using the acetated or lactated solution can lead to an increase in potassium levels in ESRD patients. Normal saline causes hyperchloremic acidosis, taking longer to normalize the acid-base status. Adequate graft perfusion is vital to avoid delayed graft function or ischemia-perfusion injury. The auto-regulatory mechanism is not present in the transplanted kidney. Colloids are not the preferred choice for volume replacement.

Depending on the volume status of the patient pre-operatively, replace volume. There were concerns regarding using acetated or lactated solution, causing an increase in potassium level in ESRD patients. Normal saline causes hyperchloremic acidosis, taking longer to clear acid. Adequate graft perfusion is vital to avoid delayed graft function or ischemia-perfusion injury. The auto-regulatory mechanism is not present in the transplanted kidney. Colloids are not the preferred choice for volume replacement.  Dynamic blood pressure monitoring with stroke volume variation and pulse pressure variation assists in maintaining adequate volume resuscitation. Vasopressors like norepinephrine with alpha and beta-blocker activity have shown decreased elevation in the renal resistive indices. Previously, low-dose dopamine was preferred. However, it has shown to be harmful to renal graft and is no longer used.

**Immunosuppression**

Mycophenolate and methyl-prednisolone are given before surgery. Thymoglobulin is given intra-operatively. The rate is adjusted based on the blood pressure of the patient. If the initial dose causes hypotension, the rate is reduced to half.

**Pancreatic Transplant**

- Thorough airway examination becomes vital in a diabetic patient as there is an increased incidence of the stiffness of the atlantoaxial joint.

- Pancreatic transplant surgery is done under general anesthesia with an inducing agent, muscle relaxant, and opioids. If there are concerns for cardiovascular instability, etomidate is preferred for induction. Diabetic patients can have gastroparesis; if it is present, rapid sequence induction is done. After pancreas transplantation, the pancreas starts functioning within 5 minutes. Strict glucose monitoring is required to avoid pancreatic cell dysfunction. Frequent glucose level tests every 15 minutes for an hour followed by every 30 minutes. No major fluid shift is anticipated in pancreatic transplant surgery. The blood pressure goal is to maintain baseline to a little high after transplant to maintain adequate blood flow to graft.

**Liver Transplant**

- Induction, muscle relaxant and inhalational agents:

Induction: Rapid sequence induction is preferred if there is a concern for aspiration, especially if the recipient is not fasting, has gastroparesis or ascites. Pharmacodynamics and pharmacokinetics of drugs are altered in liver transplant recipients due to decreased serum albumin, increase in the volume of distribution of drugs, changes in the metabolization of drugs via the liver. The inducing agent should be carefully administered as they impact systemic blood pressure and hepatic blood flow. Etomidate has been shown to decrease hepatic blood flow with unpredictable clinical recovery. Propofol is a vasodilator with a moderate decrease in hepatic blood flow.

Muscle relaxants: Atracurium and cisatracurium are used as they are metabolized via Hofmann degradation. Rocuronium can be used if sugammadex is unavailable.

Inhalational agents: Desflurane and sevoflurane do not affect hepatic blood flow.

2. Vasopressors and inotropes:

They should be kept available as hemodynamic fluctuations are anticipated. Common reasons being coagulopathy, extensive blood, decrease in preload, third space loss, and reperfusion syndrome. Epinephrine, norepinephrine, and dopamine are used first. Vasopressin is used in refractory hypotension.

3. Intravenous volume resuscitation:

Albumin synthesis is affected in end-stage liver disease. Albumin has shown decreased mortality, crystalloids requirements, the need for vasoactive drugs, the incidence of pulmonary edema, and post-reperfusion syndrome. With hydroxyethyl starch, there is an increase in coagulopathy, decreases platelet aggregation, and factor VIII level. Isotonic K crystalloid is preferred. Normal saline used in large volumes can cause a rapid rise in sodium level, which increases the incidence of central pontine myelinolysis. Lactated ringers in liver failure can lead to the accumulation of lactate, leading to lactic acidosis. Cell savers are used for autologous blood transfusion; however, their use is contraindicated in infection and neoplasia.

4. Different phases in liver transplantation are prehepatic, anhepatic, and neohepatic phases. Each phase is associated with its own set of pathophysiological changes. It is essential to recognize it and anticipate complications with a plan in place.

**Pre Hepatic Phase**

It begins from the incision of the skin till the clamping of the inferior vena cava (IVC). Hypotension is expected in this phase. It can be due to sudden loss of ascitic fluid, portal hypertension, portopulmonary shunts, and bleeding from the surgical site, worsened by coagulopathy associated with end-stage liver disease. Mindful administration of fluids (choice of fluid as above) is essential. TEG studies are beneficial. Excessive volume resuscitation should also be avoided as it can lead to dilutional coagulopathy and thrombocytopenia. Octreotide infusion can be used in portal hypertension and requires careful monitoring. It reduces the need for blood transfusion and improves renal function. If, despite all these efforts, hypotension persists, consider veno-venous bypass.

**Anhepatic Phase**

It begins with the clamping of hepatic vein flow till vascular anastomosis is achieved. Hypotension is a common complication in this phase due to a decrease in preload, causing decreased cardiac output. In refractory hypotension, portosystemic shunt or veno-venous shunt should be considered. It is essential to ensure that cerebral blood flow is not compromised in this stage. Lactate, citrate, and other metabolites accumulate in the body, causing acidosis, hypocalcemia, and hyperkalemia. For hyperkalemia, insulin with dextrose, bicarbonate, loop diuretics, and tromethamine is administered. Renal replacement therapy should be considered as a last resort. Coagulopathy is not uncommon during this stage; TEG studies will assist in correction. Consider correction only if clinically indicated, as correction does occur in the neohepatic stage. In hepatitis B positive recipients, hepatitis B hyper immunoglobulin is administered in this stage. Monitor for allergic reactions to hepatitis B hyper immunoglobulin.

**Neohepatic Phase**

It begins with reperfusion of the liver until blood flow resumes to the portal vein and IVC. It is preferred to keep mean arterial pressure between 80-100 mm Hg before revascularization is established. Post-reperfusion syndrome (PRS), worsening pulmonary hypertension, right heart failure, and malignant arrhythmia need to be monitored in this stage. Volume resuscitation, autologous blood transfusion (preferred overpacked red blood cells due to low potassium content), and inotropes are administered as clinically indicated. After re-establishing blood flow, a sudden release in metabolites and vasodilatory substances can occur, leading to a sudden fall in blood pressure and malignant arrhythmias. In case of hyperkalemia causing ECG changes, intravenous calcium chloride helps to stabilize the cardiac membrane. In the event of a cardiac arrest, an incision should be made in the diaphragm, and an internal cardiac massage should be delivered. TTE can assist in diagnosing volume status, cardiac clots, cardiac function and treat accordingly. If cardiac clots are detected, and concerns for pulmonary thromboembolism, heparin, and tissue plasminogen activator are administered.