**Embryogenesis: Weeks 2 to 8**

Beginning with the trilaminar germ disc, which refers to the epiblast and hypoblast, the epiblast cells undergo an epithelial-mesenchymal transition that replaces the hypoblast. They also proliferate in the middle layer to form the mesoderm where it will remain mesenchymal to form connective tissue. The primitive streak then starts to appear superiorly from the thickened region of the ectoderm. It grows caudal to the cranial and induces notochord formation. The ectoderm then invaginates as cells migrate to form the primitive node and primitive pit where the notochordal process is formed.

- The primitive
pit is a depression at the center of the primitive node, which is an opening in the notochordal canal.

- Neurulation refers to the folding of the neural plate. The neural plate folds, via induction from the notochord, into the neural tube, which then becomes the neuroectoderm, which finally forms the CNS, namely the brain and spinal cord; the brain from cranial two-thirds of the segment and spinal cord from caudal one-third of the segment)

- Neural Crest cells form dorsal root ganglia and connective tissue in the head and neck.

- 
Notochord:

- Defines longitudinal axis

- Forms parts of the intervertebral discs, and not the spinal cord or spine

- The notochordal process formed on top of the primitive node

- Elongation of the notochordal process occurs caudally and goes upward to the cranial end

The CNS is derived from the neuroectoderm: notochord induces the formation of the neural plate (thickening of the ectodermal layer), which further differentiates to form neural folds with a neural groove in between, leading to the formation of the neural tube (via neurulation).

**Spinal Cord**

The spinal cord is formed from the neural plate, now contains 3 layers:

- Ventricular layer that lines the central canal

- Mantle layer that contains neuronal bodies, which will eventually form the gray matter

- Marginal layer that contains axons, and will eventually form the white matter

While this article summarizes the embryological changes that occur within the CNS, the peripheral nervous system (PNS) is formed from neuroepithelial cells. These cells travel from the pia mater to the ventricular layer of the spinal cord, where they differentiate and migrate to form glioblasts (for example, support cells, Schwann cells), neurons, and ependymal cells. As this information is often tested on boards, that myelin sheath, a sheath composed of support cells, wraps around axons and insulates neurons to increase the speed of neuronal conduction.

- Myelination of peripheral axons occurs via the neurolemma, which comes from Schwann cells (which come from neural crest cells).

- Myelination of CNS axons occurs via oligodendrocytes, which are neuroepithelium derivatives.

Three membranous layers cover the whole CNS:

- Dura mater: derived from surrounding mesenchyme and is tough and durable.

- Arachnoid mater: derived from neural crest; forms as a single layer with Pia mater.

- Pia mater: derived from neural crest; intimately covers the CNS.

**Brain**

During brain formation, there are 3 primary brain vesicles that differentiate into 5 secondary brain vesicles. See image.

- Prosencephalon, which becomes the forebrain: This later develops into the cerebral hemispheres which contain structures underneath such as the epithalamus, thalamus, and hypothalamus. This section of the brain is responsible for consciousness, sensorimotor transformation, and sensory integration.

- Mesencephalon, which becomes the midbrain: This part of the brain undergoes little structure reorganization compared to the spinal cord and other brain vesicles.

- Rhombencephalon, which becomes the hindbrain: This part can be further divided into 3 segments:

- Metencephalon: The dorsal growth of the cerebellum (integrates sensory information to fine-tune output)

- Caudal myelencephalon: Similar to the structure of the spinal cord with “closed” central canal of Medulla

- Rostral myelencephalon: “Open part” of medulla; cerebrospinal fluid (CNF) is produced via choroid plexus and leaks into the subarachnoid space.

Finally, the hypophysis gives rise to the pituitary gland, which has 2 origins. The posterior pituitary is an outgrowth of the hypothalamus, and, therefore, has a direct connection. On the other hand, the anterior pituitary is an ectodermal growth from the mouth. It depends on a dense capillary network and communicates with the brain via the vascular system.