Neoadjuvant therapy often is not an option due to the advanced disease at diagnosis and is not considered a standard of care in resectable cases. Referral for early clinical trials should merit consideration.

Surgery is the only curative treatment for patients with Stage II or less and no contraindications (see evaluation). Surgical resection of gallbladder cancer will include cholecystectomy with a marginal hepatectomy with regional lymphadenectomy or common bile duct resection (extended organs may require removal). For gallbladder cancer incidentally found on cholecystectomy pathological specimen with stage T2 or higher, the recommendation is to return for further exploration and re-resection.

Postoperative chemotherapy should be offered within 8 to 12 weeks and requires baseline laboratory and imaging to re-stage disease before therapy initiation.

The National Comprehensive Cancer Network (NCCN) consensus-based guidelines suggest the following

- Chemotherapy alone for six months with gemcitabine [1000 mg/weekly for three of every four weeks] or 5-FU (fluoropyrimidine) [leucovorin 20 mg/m followed by FU 425 mg/m intravenous [IV] bolus days 1 through 5 every 28 days] published in the ESPAC-3 trial with median overall survival for CT 43.1 months versus 35.2 months in the observation group without statistical significance (data extrapolated from pancreaticobiliary malignancies).

- In addition to the above, another regimen includes four cycles of capecitabine (Cap) [1,500 mg/m per day on days 1 to 14] plus gemcitabine (Gem) [1,000 mg/intravenously on days 1 and 8] every 21 days, followed by CRT [Cap 1330 mg/per day divided into two daily doses and RT 45 Gy to regional lymphatics; 54 to 59.4 Gy to tumor bed] published in a single-arm SWOG-S0809 trial with expected medical outcomes (mOS) of 35 months without a comparison group.

- Lastly, 5-FU [225 mg/m daily]-based ACRT from other gastrointestinal malignancy extrapolation data. At ASCO 2017, the BILCAP study was presented as first phase 3 randomized adjuvant therapy for patients with no post-surgical complications and Eastern Cooperative Oncological Group of two or less (ECOG < 2), 447 patients were randomized 1:1 Cap N 223[1250mg/m D1-14 every 21 days, for eight cycles] or observation (Obs) N224 from 44 UK sites between 2006 to 2014, it included 18% GC, and results showed an mOS for Cap 53mo when compared to observation for 36 months (HR 0.75 p0.028). Hence, Cap soon will be adopted as the new standard of care.

Surveillance by NCCN recommendations includes imaging every six months for two years, if clinically indicated, then annually up to five years. Oncologists may monitor patients closely with liver function test and tumor markers (CEA and CA19-9) every three to four months for two years, then every six months up to five years. All other investigations can take place when clinically indicated.

Unresectable locally advanced and metastatic gallbladder cancers are candidates for palliative goals/chemotherapy. Locally advanced may be managed with external beam radiation therapy and usually involves a radiosensitizer, such as 5-FU, but this modality rarely will achieve tumor control. Patients who are fit (ECOG 0-1) for chemotherapy could consider the first-line option of Gem [1,000 mg/m] plus cisplatin (cis) [25 mg/m] on days 1 and 8 every three weeks with acceptable toxicity as published in ABC-02 randomized trial which included 148 patients with gallbladder cancer and had an mOS of 11.7 months in the combination arm when compared to 8.3 months of Gem alone (HR, 0.70; p0.002).