When a patient presents after a fall on an outstretched hand, the clinician should consider the possibility of a SLIL injury. These injuries can be seen in isolation, in the absence of fractures, but they can be present in association with distal radius and/or scaphoid fractures. Up to 30% of distal radius fractures have some degree of injury to the SL region. Aside from wrist trauma, SLIL secondary injuries may occur from other falls on the ipsilateral extremity (e.g., a fall on the elbow, for example), SLIL compromise secondary to underlying inflammatory arthritis, or SLIL iatrogenic compromise that may occur following excessive capsular excision when removing dorsal ganglion cysts.

Patients will likely present with some degree of pain although not all SLAC wrists are symptomatic. Pain is common and may be aggravated by heavy use and is sometimes associated with a clunking sensation during movement.

The external appearance of scapholunate instabilities may not be evident. Even in the acute phase, swelling may be moderate. When the patient presents with scapholunate advanced collapse, however, pain with provocative movements will usually be present. A scaphoid shift test is the passive mobilization of the dysfunctional scapholunate joint. This test is valuable not only in determining the presence of abnormal radioscaphoid subluxation but also in reproducing the patient's pain and the reason they are presenting to the doctor.

To perform the (Watson) scaphoid shift test, firm pressure is applied to the palmar tuberosity of the scaphoid while the wrist is moved from ulnar to radial deviation. In normal wrists, the scaphoid cannot flex because of the external pressure by the examiner's thumb. A positive test is seen in a patient with a scapholunate tear or a patient with a lax wrist. When pressure on the scaphoid is removed, the scaphoid goes back into position, and a typical snapping occurs.

A scapholunate ballottement test can also be performed.