Primary adverse effects for naproxen include dyspepsia, nausea, dizziness, elevated liver enzymes, increased blood pressure, diminished renal function, rash, increased bleeding risk, and GI ulcers. Serious but rare adverse effects include blood dyscrasias, Stevens-Johnson syndrome, myocardial infarction, stroke, heart failure, and anaphylaxis. The following are several mechanisms of the above adverse effects:

**GI Effects:**COX-1 and COX-2 inhibition lead to decreased prostaglandin synthesis in the gastric mucosa. The prostaglandins maintain mucosal integrity, therefore decreased synthesis causes reduced protection to the tissue. However, studies indicate COX-1 has a more significant effect on the integrity of the mucosa; consequently, selective COX-2 inhibitors such as Celecoxib do not have as much of an effect on gastric tissue.

**Renal Effects:**Prostaglandins produced by both COX-1 and COX-2 are important regulators of renal function, hemodynamics, and sodium and water reabsorption in the kidneys. When renal blood flow is dependent upon prostaglandin synthesis, NSAID administration can significantly decrease renal blood flow, leading to acute kidney injury and renal failure. Also, alterations in sodium and water reabsorption may increase blood pressure, especially in patients with pre-existing hypertension.

**Platelet Effects:**Platelet aggregation inhibition with naproxen is due to the dose-dependent inhibition of COX-1 in platelets. This action leads to decreased levels of platelet thromboxane A2 and an increase in bleeding time. This inhibition is reversible upon discontinuation of naproxen. Despite the known inhibition of platelet function, studies examining an increase in clinical bleeding time have shown mixed results.