Distal radial fractures are very common either in isolation or in concert with other fractures and injuries. For example, in the United States, there is an incidence of around 67 upper extremity fractures per 10,000 people annually. Distal radial and ulnar fractures account for approximately 25% of these fractures. With the exception of the 18 to 34-year-old age group, DR fractures are the most common upper extremity fracture. The overall incidence of DR fractures occurring each year is increasing worldwide. For example, a 1998 study by Melton et al., from Rochester, Minnesota in the United States documented a 17% increase in DR fractures between 1945-1994.

It is difficult to attribute the growing incidence of DR fractures to any single cause. However, the general thinking is that increased childhood obesity and the overall potential for people to live more years with comorbidities such as osteoporosis have primarily contributed to this problem. Another theory advanced is that increased participation in organized sports has led to more childhood DR fractures. It is also possible that increased access to care has led to an apparent increase in fractures while the true incidence has remained stable.

DR fractures can occur at any age. However, there is largely a bimodal distribution of these injuries based on age and sex. The two most common age groups are children less than 18 years old, and adults greater than 50 years old.

In children, the peak incidence of DR fractures is 12-14 years old in boys and 10-12 years old in girls. These peaks relate to the decreased level of skeletal mineralization and density that exist during pubertal growth spurts. During these times the rate of bone lengthening exceeds the rate of mineralization, which leaves these children more susceptible to fracture with even minor trauma.  The majority (64%) of these fractures occur in males, primarily in the spring.  “Fall” was listed as the primary mechanism in one large retrospective study by Ryan et al. Older adolescent athletes can also experience DR fractures. However, these patients have greater bone strength than younger, older, or more sedentary populations. There is usually a higher energy mechanism for these fractures that can lead to more severe injuries. Interestingly, the location of pediatric radial shaft fractures tends to occur more distally with increasing age.

The second peak for DR fractures occurs in adults greater than 50 years old. After hip, they are the second most common fracture in the elderly. Peak incidence is in Caucasian women who are greater than 65 years of age. Osteoporosis is a common risk factor and occurs in 40% of postmenopausal women. The “T-score” is a measure of bone mineral density (BMD) that compares a patient’s BMD relative to that of a healthy 30-year old. The definition of osteoporosis is a T-score of less than -2.5. A T-score of less than -2.5 conveys a 10-year fragility fracture risk of around 15%. Other significant risk factors for DR fractures in patients older than 50 include prior falls, prior fragility fractures after 50 years of age, corticosteroid use, and advanced age. Dementia is also a risk factor in patients greater than 75 years of age. In older patients, each additional risk factor conveys increased probability of suffering a DR fracture. DR fractures extending into a joint space are twice as common in women with diabetes.