Patients with CTEPH should be evaluated and treated in an experienced center by a specialized team of experts. All patients with suspected CTEPH should start on anticoagulation for at least three months. During this period, the disease can regress, and significant hemodynamic improvement or even full resolution of pulmonary hypertension may occur.  After this period, the diagnosis of CTEPH is considered to distinguish it from the subacute episode of PE. Then, upon completing the evaluation, CTEPH is confirmed, and the clinician can make clinical decisions regarding treatment strategy.

Treatment may be either surgical or medical therapy.

Pulmonary endarterectomy (PEA) is a complex surgical intervention in selected operable patients. It results in the normalization of pulmonary hemodynamics, improves exercise capacity, and survival.

The University of California, Sandiego (UCSD) proposed a classification of CTEPH, which helps in guiding the surgeons regarding the level of complexity and expertise needed for the treatment. With increasing complexity, the level of the category increases. Level 0 includes patients with no surgical evidence of chronic thromboembolic disease; level 1 denotes blockage at the level of main pulmonary arteries; levels 2, 3, and 4 show blockage at lobar, segmental, and subsegmental levels of pulmonary artery branching respectively.

PEA removes obstructive and hardened thrombus and markedly improves the hemodynamic measures such as mean pulmonary artery pressure, pulmonary vascular resistance, and cardiac output. Thus, reversing right ventricular remodeling with normalization of right-sided cardiac function.

More than 30% of the patients are inoperable, for whom pulmonary balloon angioplasty is a promising alternative.

Current guidelines recommend the use of anticoagulants, diuretics, and oxygen if needed for optimal medical treatment of CTEPH. Anticoagulation aimed at the prevention of in situ pulmonary artery thrombosis should be lifelong.

The medical treatment of CTEPH is based primarily on PAH-targeted therapy, which includes the use of endothelin receptors antagonists, phosphodiesterase type-5 inhibitors, and prostanoids. Among them, treprostinil and macitentan were extensively studied and proven to be beneficial in these patients.