The major complications associated with pulmonary embolism (PE) include the following:

- Recurrent thromboembolism

- Chronic thromboembolic pulmonary hypertension

- Right heart failure

- Cardiogenic shock

PE, if left untreated, is associated with mortality of up to 30 percent. Studies have also suggested an increased risk of stroke, thought to be due to paradoxical embolism via a patent foramen ovale (PFO) in patients with acute PE.

1) Recurrent Thromboembolism

In the one to two weeks following diagnosis, patients may deteriorate and experience recurrence. Inadequate anticoagulation is the most common reason for recurrent venous thromboembolism while on therapy.

2) Chronic Thromboembolic Pulmonary Hypertension (CTEPH)

The development of persistent or progressive dyspnea, particularly during the first three months to two years of diagnosis, should prompt the provider to investigate for the development of CTEPH (affects up to 5 percent of patients). Follow-up computed tomography, ventilation-perfusion scans, or echocardiography should be performed in patients who remain persistently symptomatic months to years after an acute PE. In CTEPH, these modalities demonstrate pulmonary hypertension.

On the V/Q scan, patients with CTEPH generally have at least one segmental or more significant mismatched ventilation-perfusion defects. For those patients with evidence of CTEPH on V/Q lung scanning, right heart catheterization and pulmonary angiography are indicated to confirm pulmonary hypertension, quantify the degree of pulmonary hypertension, exclude competing diagnoses, define the surgical accessibility of the obstructing thrombotic lesions, and confirm that an acceptable component of the elevated pulmonary vascular resistance is due to surgically accessible disease and not from distal obstruction or a secondary arteriopathy. For all patients with CTEPH, lifelong anticoagulant therapy is recommended. Also, early referral for evaluation for pulmonary thromboendarterectomy is highly recommended.