Child abuse is a public health problem that leads to lifelong health consequences, both physically and psychologically. Physically, those who undergo abusive head trauma may have neurologic deficits, developmental delays, cerebral palsy, and other forms of disability. Psychologically, child abuse patients tend to have higher rates of depression, conduct disorder, and substance abuse. Academically, these children may have poor performance at school with decreased cognitive function. Clinicians need to have a high index of suspicion for child maltreatment since early identification may be lifesaving. Nurses, doctors, pharmacists, and other healthcare workers should not hesitate to report suspected child abuse.

When it comes to child abuse, all healthcare workers have a legal, medical, and moral obligation to identify the problem and report it. The majority of child abuse is identified in the Emergency Department; hence healthcare workers in the ED must be aware of the signs and symptoms of abuse. Allowing abused children to return home may lead to more violence and sometimes death. If child abuse is suspected, the social worker must be informed so that the child can be followed as an outpatient. The law favors the clinician for reporting child abuse, even if it is only a suspicion. On the other hand, failing to report child abuse can have repercussions on the clinician. Unfortunately, despite the best practices, many children continue to suffer from child abuse.

**Evidence-based Outcomes**

Child abuse is a serious problem in many countries. While there is an acute awareness of the problem, many children fail to be referred or reported and consequently continue to suffer abuse, sometimes even death. In a busy emergency room, signs of child abuse may be missed; thus, healthcare workers must be vigilant of abuse in any child who presents with injuries.