# Continuing Education Activity

Isolated lateral wall myocardial infarction (LMI), similar to other acute myocardial infarctions (MI), is caused by acute atherosclerotic plaque rupture with subsequent thrombus formation in the left circumflex (LCx) coronary artery or one of its branches. More commonly the left anterior descending (LAD) coronary artery is involved in the ensuing anterolateral MI. In patients with recent drug-eluting stents, medication non-compliance can cause stent restenosis resulting in acute MI. This activity reviews the medical team's role in evaluating acute lateral wall myocardial infarction and in treating this condition.

**Objectives:**
- Describe the causes of a lateral wall myocardial infarction.
- Review the electrocardiogram (ECG) findings in a lateral wall myocardial infarction.
- Outline the treatment options of a lateral wall myocardial infarction.
- Summarize the interprofessional coordination of management of a patient with a lateral wall myocardial infarction.

# Introduction

The collaborative expert consensus of the European Society of Cardiology (ESC)/American College of Cardiology (ACC)/American Heart Association (AHA) and World Heart Federation (WHF) released the fourth universal definition of Myocardial Infarction (MI) in August 2018. Diagnosis of type I MI focuses on the detection of a rise and/or fall of cardiac Troponin (cTn) with at least one value above the 99th percentile and with the presence of at least one of the following factors:

- Symptoms of acute MI

- New signs of ischemia on electrocardiogram (ECG)

- The occurrence of pathological Q waves

- New wall motion abnormality or loss of viable myocardium as evident on imaging

- Coronary thrombus identification on angiography

MI can further be classified based on presenting EKG findings and the location of ischemia. The left ventricular lateral wall is supplied by branches of the left anterior descending artery (LAD) and left circumflex artery (LCx). Lateral and posterior walls together form the left ventricular free wall which is a common site for free-wall rupture (FWR) post-MI. Isolated lateral wall involvement is sporadic and is usually seen as part of multi-territorial infarction such as anterolateral, posterolateral, and inferolateral MI. Occlusion of the obtuse marginal branch of the LCx or diagonal branch of LAD can cause isolated lateral myocardial infarction (LMI).

# Etiology

Isolated LMI, similar to other acute MI, is caused by acute atherosclerotic plaque rupture with subsequent thrombus formation in LCx or one of its branches. More commonly, LAD is involved in the ensuing anterolateral MI. In patients with recent drug-eluting stents, medication non-compliance can cause stent restenosis resulting in acute MI.  On rare occasions, patients can present with myocardial infarction with non-obstructive coronary arteries (MINOCA). The prevalence of MINOCA is estimated at around 6% based on a meta-analysis done in 2015.

- Coronary artery spasm

- Spontaneous coronary artery dissection (SCAD)

- Coronary artery embolism (CAE): Atrial myxoma, atrial fibrillation, infective endocarditis, rheumatic valve disease, mitral stenosis

- Autoimmune conditions such as Takayasu arteritis

- Myocardial bridging

# Epidemiology

Recent trends suggest that the incidence of ST-elevation myocardial infarction (STEMI) has declined and incidence of non-ST-elevated MI (NSTEMI) has increased.

# Pathophysiology

Atherosclerotic plaques with large lipid-rich core and covered by a thin, fibrous cap are extremely unstable and susceptible to rupture. Such plaques may not necessarily cause obstruction. Metalloproteases and cytokines released by T-lymphocytes and macrophages present at the site of plaque weaken the fibrous tissue rendering it vulnerable to erosion.

# History and Physical

Most MI, regardless of location, present with a similar array of symptoms. Some of the common presenting symptoms include left-sided chest pain radiating to arm/neck, shortness of breath, nausea, vomiting, palpitation, diaphoresis, and fatigue. People with a history of previous MI can relate current symptoms to previous episodes and tend to seek care sooner. Silent MI refers to a group of patients presenting with no acute signs or symptoms. The prevalence of silent MI is reported as high as 23%.

All patients suspected of having LMI should have a thorough history and physical exam performed. Details regarding the nature of chest pain including onset, aggravating/relieving factors and radiation can help make an important clinical decision. Patients should be examined for signs of excessive lipid accumulation such as xanthoma and xanthelasma.

# Evaluation

Patients suspected of having acute LMI should have a prompt evaluation with an electrocardiogram (ECG) and measurements of serial cardiac troponins.

**ECG Findings**

- ST-Elevated LMI: ST elevation in lead I, aVL, V5, and V6; Reciprocal ST depression in inferior lead III and aVF

- High lateral STEMI: High lateral STEMI can present as ST-elevation involving lead I and aVL. Subtle ST elevation in V5, V6 and reciprocal changes in lead III and avF may be present. This is usually caused by occlusion of the first diagonal branch of LAD and is sometimes referred to as the South African flag sign.

- 
Old LMI presents with deep and broad Q waves I leads I and aVL

- Inferolateral STEMI presents with ST-elevation involving lateral (I, aVL, V5, V6) and inferior leads (II, III, aVF): This is usually seen with occlusion of the proximal LCx artery.

- Anterolateral STEMI presents with ST-elevation involving lateral (I, aVL, V5, V6) and anterior leads (V1, V2, V3): This is highly indicative of proximal LAD occlusion.

In patients with normal troponin and non-diagnostic ECG, a quick evaluation with an echocardiogram can be done. Echocardiogram has high sensitivity and low specificity when diagnosing MI.

# Treatment / Management

LMI presenting as STEMI should be treated immediately. Early reperfusion has shown benefits with improved clinical outcomes.

Additionally, symptomatic management includes the usage of Morphine, Oxygen (in patients with hypoxemia), and nitrates (nitroglycerin).

LMI patients presenting as NSTEMI should receive initial medical therapy with oxygen (if hypoxic, Saturation of oxygen <94%), beta-blockers (Carvedilol, Metoprolol, Bisoprolol), and a statin (Rosuvastatin or Atorvastatin). Antithrombotic therapy including antiplatelet medications (using aspirin and a P2Y12 inhibitor such as Ticagrelor, Clopidogrel or Prasugrel) and anticoagulants such as unfractionated heparin should be initiated as soon as possible. NSTEMI patients have also shown better outcomes with early reperfusion strategy.

All patients with LMI should be placed on life-long therapy with aspirin, beta-blockers, and high intensity-high potency statins.

# Differential Diagnosis

Patients presenting with chest pain will have the following in the differential diagnosis:

- Acute pericarditis

- Acute gastritis

- Peptic ulcer disease

- Aortic dissection

- Esophagitis

- Cardiac tamponade

- Costochondritis

- Myocarditis

- Pneumonia

- Pneumothorax

- Prinzmetal’s angina

- Pulmonary embolism

- Cocaine-induced vasospasm

# Prognosis

LMI has overall favorable outcomes. Long-term outcomes in patients with STEMI and NSTEMI have improved over the last decade.

Prognosis tends to be worse in patients presenting with life-threatening complications such as arrhythmias, sudden cardiac arrest, free wall/papillary muscle rupture and cardiogenic shock. Risk stratification using TIMI scores can help identify patients with increased in-hospital mortality.****after 30 days, as compared to STEMI.

# Complications

- Left ventricular free wall rupture

- Pericarditis (Fibrinous)

- Dressler Syndrome

- Ventricular aneurysm

- Acute mitral regurgitation

- Left ventricular thrombus

- Congestive heart failure

- Ventricular fibrillation

- Ventricular tachycardia

- Sudden cardiac arrest

- Cardiogenic shock

- PCI related complications

# Deterrence and Patient Education

Patient education is the cornerstone of preventing future MI events. Interventions such as smoking cessation, weight reduction, medication adherence, and dietary modification have all been well established in improving overall cardiovascular mortality.

# Enhancing Healthcare Team Outcomes

An interprofessional approach has been shown to improve health care outcomes in patients admitted with MI.