**Capsules of Thyroid**

Two capsules entirely cover the thyroid gland.

- True – peripheral condensation of the glandular tissue

- False – the pre-tracheal layer of deep cervical fascia

The gland is surrounded by a thin fibro-elastic (true) capsule. This capsule, in turn, is covered by a pre-tracheal fascia from the outside and acts as a false capsule. The true capsule gives rise to septa deep into the parenchyma dividing the gland into lobules. The septa give passage for the blood vessels, nerves, and lymphatics into the gland.

Each lobule is made of aggregation of follicles, which are the structural and functional units of the thyroid gland. The follicles are lined by follicular cells (simple) that rest on the basement membrane and have a cavity filled with a homogenous gelatinous material called the **colloid**. The collide is composed of thyroglobulin, an iodinated glycoprotein, which is an inactive storage form of thyroid hormone.

**Follicular Cells**

The follicular cells are the lining cells of a thyroid follicle. They vary in size, depending on the activity. When the follicles are in the resting (inactive) stage, the follicular cells are flat simple squamous, with abundant collide within the cavity.

They secrete two hormones that influence the rate of metabolism

- T3 (tri-iodothyronine) and

- T4 (tetra-iodothyronine or thyroxine)

T3 is more active than T4, even though both affect the target cells.

**EM features:**Electron microscopy of follicular cells shows apical microvilli, abundant granular endoplasmic reticulum, supranuclear Golgi complex, lysosomes, microtubules, and microfilaments. The activity of these cells is influenced by thyroid-stimulating hormone (TSH) secreted by hypophysis cerebri.

**Parafollicular Cells (C–cells)**

These are also known as clear cells or light cells. The C stands for calcitonin or clear.

**EM features:**When seen under the electron microscope, the C-cells are visibly filled with electron-dense secretory granules (100 to 200 nm in diameter) of hormone calcitonin. The action of calcitonin is antagonistic to that of the parathyroid hormone. It lowers serum calcium by suppressing bone resorption by inhibiting osteoclastic activity and stimulating osteoblastic activity.