There is no one specific test to diagnose food protein intolerance. The condition is evaluated primarily based on a detailed history and physical examination. The clinicians need to recognize and differentiate immunological from non-immunological food protein intolerance to prevent and manage symptoms. In IgE-mediated food allergies, positive skin prick test responses to food proteins along with the detection of food-specific IgE antibodies are usually evident. However, most food protein intolerances are not IgE mediated.

When food protein intolerance is suspected, the following measures and tests are helpful in diagnosis:

- Food diary: Keeping a food diary is important as it helps the clinicians to map the symptoms and find out the relationship of food to the patient's symptoms.

- Skin prick test: This test screens for IgE-mediated food protein allergies. Although a positive test result may show the presence of IgE antibodies, it has a low predictive value, whereas a negative test result has high predictive accuracy.

- Atopic patch test: The test is used to screen for delayed intolerances to food proteins (cell-mediated reactions).

- Serum specific IgE assay: It is also done to screen for antigen-specific IgE in the patient's serum.

- Diet elimination: If food protein intolerance or allergy is suspected, the patient should consume a diet free of the suspected protein for 2 to 4 weeks. If symptoms improve, an oral food challenge test may be performed as a diagnostic test.

- Oral food challenge test: It is a gold-standard test performed under medical supervision to diagnose or rule out food allergy. A diagnosis of food protein intolerance can be made when symptoms subside following dietary elimination of the concerned food, and then symptoms recur after the introduction of the same food. The reactions and symptoms must be reproducible with repeated diet elimination and food challenge tests. Some GI reactions may demonstrate delayed-onset reactions, causing symptoms to occur hours or days after the ingestion.

- Radioallergosorbent test (RAST): This test detects allergen-specific Ig-E antibodies via radioimmunoassay. It is useful in determining the causes of allergies and is frequently positive in immediate GI hypersensitivity.

- Differential leukocyte count: This test supports the diagnosis of allergic eosinophilic gastritis, allergic eosinophilic gastroenteritis, and other allergic conditions when peripheral eosinophilia is seen.

- Stool test: Stool tests may show occult blood or fecal leukocytes and indicate the presence of inflammation.

- Biopsy: In allergic eosinophilic esophagitis, gastritis, and gastroenteritis, a biopsy shows eosinophilic infiltration of the mucosa and submucosa. Jejunal biopsy in enterocolitis syndrome and celiac disease shows villous atrophy and intestinal infiltration by lymphocytes.