The body has inherent counter-regulatory mechanisms to prevent hypoglycemic episodes. All of these counter-regulatory mechanisms include an interplay of hormones and neural signals to regulate the release of endogenous insulin, to increase hepatic glucose output, and to alter peripheral glucose utilization. Among the counter-regulatory mechanisms, the regulation of insulin production plays a major role.  Decrease in insulin production as a response to low serum glucose isn't the body's first line of defense against hypoglycemia. For endogenous glucose production to take place, particularly hepatic glycogenolysis, low insulin levels are necessary. As plasma glucose levels decline, beta-cell secretion of insulin also decreases, leading to increased hepatic/renal gluconeogenesis and hepatic glycogenolysis. Glycogenolysis maintains serum glucose levels over 8 to 12 hours until glycogen stores are depleted. Over time, hepatic gluconeogenesis contributes more to maintaining euglycemia when required.

The decrease in insulin production occurs while the glucose level is in the low-normal range. This serves as a distinctive feature compared to other counter-regulatory measures. Additional counter-regulatory measures typically occur once the serum glucose levels decrease beyond the physiologic range. Among the additional counter-regulatory mechanisms, pancreatic alpha cell secretion of glucagon is the next line of defense against hypoglycemia. Should increased glucagon fail to achieve euglycemia, adrenomedullary epinephrine is secreted.

On occasions the previously mentioned counter-regulatory mechanisms may fail to resolve the hypoglycemia. At this point, further counter-regulatory measures are employed in the form of growth hormone and cortisol. Both the release of growth hormone and cortisol are seen in prolonged hypoglycemic state.