In healthy patients, dietary vitamin B12 binds to a protein called R-factor, which is secreted from salivary glands. Once the complex arrives at the small intestine, B12 is cleaved from R-factor by pancreatic enzymes, allowing it to bind to a glycoprotein called intrinsic factor, which is secreted by gastric parietal cells. The newly formed complex of B12 and intrinsic factor can then bind to receptors on the ileum, which allows for absorption of B12. Once absorbed, B12 is involved in metabolic pathways important in both neurologic and hematologic functions. If B12 cannot be absorbed, regardless of the etiology, many impairments may occur.

Vitamin B12 is a cofactor for the enzyme methionine synthase, which is used in the conversion of homocysteine to methionine. As a byproduct of this reaction, methyl-THF is converted to THF, which is converted to intermediates used in the synthesis of pyrimidine bases of DNA. In B12 deficiency, homocysteine cannot be converted to methionine, and thus, methyl-THF cannot be converted to THF. As a result, homocysteine levels accumulate, and pyrimidine bases cannot be formed, slowing down DNA synthesis and causing megaloblastic anemia. The anemia then leads to symptoms such as fatigue and pallor that are commonly seen in patients with B12 deficiency. The impaired DNA synthesis causes problems for other rapidly proliferating cell lines, such as polymorphonuclear leukocytes (PMNs). Thus, B12 deficiency characteristically results in the formation of hypersegmented neutrophils.

Vitamin B12 is also used as a cofactor for the enzyme methylmalonyl-CoA mutase, which converts methylmalonyl-CoA to succinyl-CoA. In patients with B12 deficiency, methylmalonic acid (MMA) levels will accumulate, as it cannot be converted to succinyl-CoA. It is hypothesized that elevated levels of MMA, along with elevated levels of homocysteine, contribute to myelin damage, accounting for the neurologic deficits, such as neuropathy and ataxia, seen in these patients. The damage to the myelin results in a condition known as subacute combined degeneration of the spinal cord (SCDSC). This condition affects various parts of the spinal cord, including the dorsal columns, the lateral corticospinal tracts, and the spinocerebellar tracts, resulting in a loss of proprioception, ataxia, the development of peripheral neuropathy, and dementia.