The differential diagnoses of healthcare-associated infection (HAI) depend on the presenting symptoms, type of infection, and risk factors for developing a specific kind of infection. Differentiating a community-acquired infection versus one that is attributed to healthcare acquisition is essential because associated pathogens and anti-microbial resistance patterns differ between HAI and non-HAI.

Having a correct distinction between HAI and community-acquired infections guides the clinician to treat and manage the patient appropriately. For this reason, a careful review of symptom onset is essential. Different types of infections develop after a specific exposure, for example, broad-spectrum antibiotic use, presence of a CVC, or urinary catheter. The timing of symptoms can tell us if the infection was present before or after the specific intervention or hospitalization. In this way, many types of HAI can mimic the community-acquired version of the infection.

**Central Line-Associated Blood Stream Infection (CLABSI):**Bacteremia in the absence of CVC should be investigated and search for any underlying source that can produce bacteremia. If bacteremia develops in the setting of indwelling CVC, other causes of infection should be ruled out. Bacteremia may arise from a variety of sources, for example, wound infection, urinary tract infection, pneumonia, and endocarditis. The clinical presentation and timing of symptoms onset should be carefully evaluated, and symptoms should have started in the presence of a CVC or within 48 hours after removal.

**Catheter-Associated Urinary Tract Infection (CAUTI):**It is crucial to differentiate CAUTI from community-acquired urinary tract infection, the latter of which occurs in the absence of urinary catheter use. Urinary tract infections may present as lower urinary tract infections, such as acute cystitis or urethritis, or upper urinary tract infections, pyelonephritis, nephrolithiasis, and ureteritis.

**Skin and Soft Tissue Infection (SSI):**Post-operative fever may occur in atelectasis with pneumonia, urinary tract infection, medication side-effect, or drug reaction. Other localizing conditions may produce pain at the surgical site but are not necessarily considered SSI, such as wound dehiscence, wound herniation, cellulitis, burns, gas gangrene or myonecrosis, tumor or neoplastic process, and septic thrombophlebitis. SSI typically develop within 30 to 90 days after surgery. The diagnosis of SSI requires both clinical features of infection plus diagnostic criteria, such as purulent drainage, positive cultures, or radiographic imaging. The criteria vary depending on the class of infection.

**Pneumonia:**As with other HAI, the timing of onset of respiratory symptoms should guide the clinician to diagnose community-acquired versus hospital-acquired pneumonia. HAP will have a symptom onset after 48 hours of hospitalization or ventilation. The differential diagnosis for HAP is COPD, asthma, pulmonary edema, bronchiectasis, and pulmonary emboli. Upper respiratory tract infections may also mimic pneumonia symptoms. Differential diagnoses for VAP include acute respiratory distress syndrome, pneumonitis, pulmonary hemorrhage, pulmonary embolism, infiltrative tumor, and drug reaction.

**Hospital-Acquired C. difficile Infection (HO-CDI):**Symptoms of diarrhea should be differentiated between other infections or noninfectious causes. Antibiotic-associated diarrhea not associated withC. difficile, inflammatory bowel disease, irritable bowel syndrome, malabsorptive diarrhea, microscopic colitis are differential diagnoses of noninfectious causes of diarrhea. Infectious diarrhea may be associated with viral, fungal, or bacterial pathogens. Antibiotic-associated diarrhea may also be due to S. aureus, Salmonella, Bacteroides fragilis, Clostridium perfringens, or Klebsiella oxytoca.

Other types of HAI outside of the five major groups of HAI, such as soft tissue, upper respiratory tract, central nervous system, and reproductive tract infections are less common but may occur. In general, any infection in which the symptoms begin after healthcare delivery may be attributed to HAI. The differential is broad and would mimic the community-acquired version of the infection.