All suspected corneal foreign bodies, or ocular trauma in general, should be evaluated in a systematic, thorough, and meticulous. It is recommended to develop a standard routine eye examination to avoid the common mistake of focusing on the most obvious finding and missing something more subtle.

First, all ocular trauma patients should be administered adequate pain control to assist in obtaining an accurate and thorough exam.

Following pain control, the exam should start with what is often referred to as the three vital signs of the eye. This exam criterion is well documented as the visual acuity, pupillary exam, consisting of shape, reactivity, equality, accommodation, as well as any afferent pupillary defects seen. The third is the pressure of the anterior chamber. This should be obtained with care, although it may be skipped in some cases where globe perforation or rupture is highly suspected.

All patients suspected of having a corneal foreign body should also undergo a slit lamp examination. Care should be taken to inspect the entire eye as well as flipping the upper lid, as foreign bodies can hide under the tarsal plate and introduce micro-trauma with every blink of the eye. This should first be without fluorescein dye, inspecting the lids and lashes, the conjunctiva, the sclera, looking for injection, chemosis, anterior chamber depth, cell and flare within the anterior chamber, and as well as any readily apparent foreign bodies.

Upon adding the fluorescein, a general inspection should be performed again, looking for any corneal abrasions or lacerations. The dye will also allow you to perform the Seidel test, which, when positive, indicates globe perforation. In a positive test, you would expect to see a flow of aqueous humor as a waterfall appearance at the site of trauma. Another more subtle finding which indicates a positive Seidel test is a lighter color dye in one location due to the dilution of the dye by the aqueous humor. This is a finding in very small globe perforations.

Once the slit lamp examination is completed, there are other exams and diagnostics that you may choose to obtain as an adjunct. This may include a full dilated funduscopic exam or CT imaging to assess for intraocular or even intracranial foreign body. Limited bedside ultrasound is also useful to assess for vitreous hemorrhage or retinal detachment. However, extreme caution is recommended again, as any pressure to the globe may cause extrusion of inner contents through a possible globe perforation.