Time is the golden resource in managing a case of organophosphate poisoning. It is, therefore, imperative to make a provisional diagnosis as early as possible by assessing the relevant clues from history like occupation, history of clinical depression and prior suicide attempts, and the typical smell of pesticides from clothes. Timely diagnosis and rapid initiation of treatment require flawless interprofessional teamwork and communication and coordination between an emergency department clinician, anesthesiologist, intensivist, nurse practitioner, poison control center, pharmacists and nursing staff, and other specialists depending on the particular organ system involved. Each area must be able to provide input on the case and contribute from their area of expertise.

This process can be streamlined by equipping the hospitals in high incidence areas with the necessary drugs and supportive equipment, including adequate protection for doctors themselves. Specialized training and drills for tackling hazards like a chemical attack are essential at regular intervals. In instances where significant time has elapsed since the exposure, aging should be assumed. The intensive care unit must be alerted without delay, but pralidoxime administration is still recommended due to the reasons mentioned above. Interprofessional care coordination and information sharing are crucial to success in OP poisoning and optimizing pralidoxime therapy, driving improved patient outcomes. [Level 5]

Meanwhile, efforts can be directed at reducing the incidence of organophosphate poisoning by educating farmers about the toxic nature of these compounds and the proper safety measures necessary while using these chemicals. Highly toxic pesticides, like chlorpyrifos, should be banned. The psychiatry team also holds an important place in the management as patients with a history of depression and prior suicide attempts must be counseled aggressively.

In recent years several randomized control trials and meta-analyses have questioned the advantage of the addition of pralidoxime over atropine alone in the management of OP poisoning.

With hundreds of thousands of fatalities each year, the socioeconomic impact of organophosphate poisoning cannot be ignored. Until the shortcomings mentioned above are addressed in future studies, and until we have unequivocal evidence that pralidoxime is ineffective, we must continue to include it in the current therapeutic regimen.