# Continuing Education Activity

Stereotactic radiosurgery is a type of radiation therapy that is increasingly an option within neurosurgery in the treatment of tumors, vascular pathologies, and functional disorders (e.g. movement disorders, trigeminal neuralgia). This activity reviews the mechanism of stereotactic radiosurgery, evaluates the different devices available, and gives an overview of the indications, procedural technique, and complications. Additionally, this activity highlights the role of the interprofessional team in enhancing care for patients undergoing stereotactic radiosurgery.

**Objectives:**
- Describe the mechanism of stereotactic radiosurgery and explain the differences from conventional radiotherapy.
- Identify the types of devices available for stereotactic radiosurgery and their key differences.
- Explain the indications for stereotactic radiosurgery.
- Outline the importance of the interprofessional team in enhancing the delivery of optimal care for patients receiving stereotactic radiosurgery.

# Introduction

Radiation therapy aims to destroy abnormal tissue, notably tumor cells, with minimal damage to surrounding normal tissue. Lars Leksell introduced stereotactic radiosurgery (SRS) in 1951 as an alternative treatment option to conventional whole-brain radiotherapy (WBRT).

SRS uses multiple, convergent beams of high energy x-rays, gamma rays, or protons, delivered to a discrete, radiographically-defined, treatment volume.

Stereotactic radiosurgery works by radiation-induced DNA damage by ions and free radicals. The vascular endothelium is the primary target with contribution from endothelial-cell apoptosis, microvascular dysfunction, and T-cell response.

# Indications

Stereotactic radiosurgery is appropriate for patients with brain metastasis and primary tumors, including meningiomas, vestibular schwannomas, pituitary tumors, and those resistant to conventional whole-brain radiation therapy (WBRT).

Brain metastases are the most common intracranial tumors in adults, they can occur in up to 30% of patients with cancer, and this incidence is increasing.

Meningiomas and vestibular schwannomas are extra-axial and have clear, defined margins, lending themselves to conformal SRS techniques. Meningiomas are commonly treated with 12 to 13 Gy in a single fraction, with control rates of 90 to 98% and toxicity less than 10%.

Vestibular schwannomas commonly receive treatment with 12 to 13 Gy in a single fraction.

For pituitary adenomas with invasion of the intrasellar region or cavernous sinus, surgery may only achieve a subtotal resection. In such cases, SRS or fractionated therapy is appropriate.

For primary gliomas, studies have looked at the impact of SRS combined with traditional therapy as a means of dose escalation and to shorten treatment time in patients with limited life expectancy.

Stereotactic radiosurgery can be used to treat vascular pathologies including arteriovenous malformations (AVMs), dural arteriovenous fistulas, and cavernomas. Rates of complete obliteration for AVMs have been quoted as 76% for low-grade Spetzler-Martin I and II, 69% for grade III, and for high-grade IV-V AVMs, obliteration rates range from 0 to 61%.

SRS was originally developed to treat functional disorders, including intractable pain, epilepsy, and movement disorders. The first procedure performed was a thalamotomy for a patient with trigeminal neuralgia.

Stereotactic radiosurgery are useful for seizure control for mass lesions, including tumors, AVMs (mean seizure remission rate of 70%), and cavernous malformations (50%).

Stereotactic radiosurgery is an option for spinal and paraspinal lesions due to its not invasive and targeted approach, including intramedullary and intradural spinal tumors.

Stereotactic body radiosurgery has been in use since the 1990s, including pulmonary and hepatic tumors.

# Contraindications

Contraindications include an excessively large target lesion or too many lesions for practical use. Single fraction stereotactic radiosurgery is usually limited to small lesions (typically less than 4 cm) although increasingly fractionated radiosurgery is useful for larger lesions.

For newly diagnosed glioblastoma, a randomized trial comparing SRS followed by external beam radiotherapy and carmustine chemotherapy versus only radiotherapy and carmustine showed no difference in overall survival, improvement in local control, or quality of life.

SRS pallidotomy yielded a high complication rate, including visual field defects and is not routinely in use.

# Equipment

**Types:**

There are different devices in operation for stereotactic radiosurgery, which differ in both the type of radiation delivered and the method of focusing the beams to the target.

Ionizing radiation is electromagnetic or particulate radiation, which can produce ions when passing through matter. A photon is a discrete packet of electromagnetic energy and includes radio waves, infrared, visible light, ultraviolet, and X-rays depending on the energy level. X-rays are the only type of photon capable of producing ions, and therefore can be used for SRS. Photon beams can be generated from radioisotope sources (at present, cobalt-60) or from x-ray generating machines (the linear accelerator). Radioactive isotopes are atoms with unstable nuclei that emit ionizing radiation through radioactive decay to stabilize themselves.

Focused gamma beams are the simplest and older stereotactic radiosurgery device, first used on in 1967.

The cobalt sources are arranged in a spherical array via collimator helmets to focus the beams to converge at a single target, which can generate ‘hot spots’ within the treatment volume.

Linear accelerator radiosurgery was introduced clinically in the early 1980s.

Another system is intensity-modulated radiation therapy (IMRT), a linear accelerator-based application which can vary the shape and intensity of the beam; this allows non-uniform dose distribution with steep dose gradients between target volumes and normal brain tissue.

Protons, which are positively charged particles found in the nucleus of an atom, are used for particulate radiosurgery. A synchrotron or cyclotron-based device can generate proton beams by ionizing hydrogen. The proton beam can have energy between 20 and 190MeV depending on the device.

To date, no randomized controlled trial exists to compare devices, so physician expertise and machine availability guide practice. Comparative studies are inconclusive, although commonly demonstrate equivalence.

**Dosimetry**:

Dosimetry is a vital but difficult component of SRS. With SRS, small fields are used, typically 0.3 x 0.3 cm up to 4 x 4 cm. By definition, a small field is when at least one of three conditions are satisfied: (1) loss of lateral charged particle equilibrium on the beam axis; (2) partial occlusion of the photon source by the collimator; (3) the size of the detector is similar or larger than the beam dimensions.

The use of the IAEA/AAPM (International Atomic Energy Agency/American Association of Physicists in Medicine) protocol for reference and relative dosimetry based on Alfonso et al. (2008) is recommended.

The dose is in gray (Gy), which is the absorption of one joule of radiation energy per kilogram of matter. The SRS dose is biologically equivalent to five to six weeks of daily conventional radiation therapy.

FSR is usable for eloquent areas, for larger lesions and for lesions close to critical structures (e.g., the optic chiasm, ventral cochlear nucleus, and the brain stem which have lower tolerance).

Deciding on SRS or FSR for brain metastases is multifactorial. Physical factors (tumor size, margins, optimal dose, etc), biological factors (histology of the metastases, use of systemic agents) and clinical factors (life expectancy, co-morbidities, concurrent treatments required) all play a role in decision making.

# Personnel

- Neurosurgeons

- Radiation oncologists

- Neuroradiologists

- Medical physicists

- Dosimetrist

- Radiation therapist

- Nurse specialists (oncology nurse)

# Technique or Treatment

Stereotactic radiosurgery is a non-invasive, outpatient procedure, which does not require a general anesthetic. The first step is to localize the target. Focused gamma rays involve a specialized helmet surgically fixed to the patient’s skull under local anesthetic. The patient is immobilized with a head frame, secured with screws that pierce the scalp. A frameless version of the technology is also available. A fiducial reference box is placed onto the frame to provide coordinates, and magnetic resonance imaging (MRI), computed tomogram (CT) or angiogram is performed to define the target in three dimensions. With focused gamma-ray treatment, the patient and the machine remain stationary throughout the procedure.

With the linear accelerated surgery, either the patient or the gantry can move in space to change the delivery point. In the past, a stereotactic frame was used to restrict movement. However, newer frameless approaches have been developed, with improved patient comfort.

Next, an individualized treatment plan is developed to focus the radiation as precisely as possible. A computerized treatment planning system is used and requires depth doses, tissue maximum ratio (the ratio of the dose at a given point in a phantom to the dose at the same point at the reference depth of maximum dose), off-axis factor and collimator output factor for each stereotactic collimator.

Once quality assurance is guaranteed, and an independent output check performed, the patient gets positioned on a treatment couch, and the radiation is delivered.

# Complications

Radiation causes vascular endothelial damage and demyelination of the white matter, leading to necrosis.

SRS has a better side effect profile than WBRT.

FSR is emerging as a valuable treatment option. It has a lower rate of radiation necrosis than SRS and a reduced risk of radiation-induced optic nerve neuropathy.

# Clinical Significance

Stereotactic radiosurgery is an invaluable treatment option for brain and spine metastasis, primary tumors, vascular and functional conditions. As the techniques develop further, the indications are growing.

Stereotactic radiosurgery is a superior treatment option to WBRT, which is associated with significant neurological complications, including neurocognitive impairment, which limits its use.

The advantage of SRS over surgery is its minimally invasive nature. It is an outpatient procedure, which doesn’t require a general anesthetic, and can treat multiple lesions in the same session with short recovery times. It is useful for deep, surgically inaccessible lesions or those in eloquent areas.

# Enhancing Healthcare Team Outcomes

Stereotactic radiosurgery requires the involvement of both the surgical and radiation oncology teams who collaborate effectively to evaluate and treat each patient. Effective implementation of stereotactic radiosurgery involves the use of the interprofessional team, including neurosurgeons, radiation oncologists, neuroradiologists, medical physicists, dosimetrist, radiation therapist, nurse specialists, and the patient.

Radiation oncology nurses are vital for patients receiving stereotactic radiosurgery. These nurses need to work collaboratively with physicians and specialists to coordinate care for optimal patient outcomes. Pre-procedurally, they assess the patient and provide a point of contact and information to the patient and their family. Proper communication and education of the patient, regarding the procedure and risks involved, is of paramount importance. On the day of treatment, the nurse's roles include assisting the clinician with set-up, head ring placement, positioning, maintaining patient immobilization during the treatment session, patient monitoring, maintaining comfort, and discharge planning.

# Nursing, Allied Health, and Interprofessional Team Monitoring

- Monitor the vital signs

- Assess post-procedural pain and communicate the pain score to the clinician

- Watch for any immediate adverse events after the procedure and get back to the clinician

- Communicate discharge orders to the patient and make sure they have the necessary contact information

- Communicate with the interprofessional team if any untoward changes in vital signs or any other issues develop