Preoperative evaluation of those patients is of paramount importance. This includes an anatomical and a detailed medical evaluation to assess the risk of postoperative complications properly.

This usually starts with pulmonary function testing, which includes spirometry, lung volume measurements, and diffusing capacity of lungs for carbon monoxide (DLCO). FEV1 and DLCO provide the most accurate predictors of postoperative morbidity and mortality, as mentioned previously.

Functional capacity should always be properly assessed, and cardiac risk assessment with an EKG, echocardiography, or a stress test should be performed when deemed necessary. In patients with active or high-risk cardiac conditions, other treatment modalities should be sought.

Lung imaging with a CT or PET scan is usually required within 6 to 8 weeks of the planned surgery. A set of routine labs, including a complete blood count, renal function panel, and coagulation profile, is usually drawn. Chronic kidney disease is associated with an increased risk of worsening kidney injury and mortality after pneumonectomy.

Before the start of surgery, a thoracic epidural is sometimes placed to help with postoperative pain management. Other regional techniques like paravertebral block or intercostal nerve block may still be performed with acceptable risk in patients with abnormalities in hemostasis.

Standard American Society of Anesthesiologist monitors and invasive hemodynamic monitoring is used for the procedure. Then general anesthesia is usually induced in the supine position. Single lung ventilation is almost always required for such a procedure. This is usually achieved by a double-lumen tube (DLT) or a single lumen tube with a bronchial blocker or advancing a single lumen tube into a mainstem bronchus.

Double lumen tubes have tracheal and bronchial lumens.

DLTs are usually advanced under direct laryngoscopy guidance with the tip of the endobronchial lumen directed anteriorly. After the tip passes the vocal cords, the stylet is taken out, and the tube is rotated 90 degrees to the left or right side, depending on the type of DLT used. The tube is then advanced till resistance is encountered. A flexible bronchoscope (FOB) is then used to confirm the proper position of the DLT. It is usually first passed through the tracheal lumen. The balloon of the bronchial lumen should be visible beyond the carina without herniation into the trachea. The flexible bronchoscope is then passed through the bronchial lumen to ensure that it has not been advanced so far. Repeat FOB should be done whenever there is a change in the patient's position.

The other option available for single-lung ventilation is the use of a bronchial blocker. It is usually advanced with FOB guidance through a single lumen endotracheal tube. Compared to DLT, they take a longer time for proper positioning and are more likely to require repositioning during surgery.

The third option is using a single lumen tube, which is directed to the main stem bronchus under FOB guidance. A special long ETT is preferred for this purpose to avoid obstruction of the upper lobe bronchus with the ETT cuff if a conventional ETT was used.

An arterial line is usually placed for hemodynamic monitoring and lab draws. Patients with a poor hemodynamic reserve may need an arterial line placed before induction of anesthesia to ensure adequate perfusing pressure during induction. Depending on the patient's comorbidities, a central venous line may also be required. Transesophageal echocardiography or pulmonary artery catheter may also be used in selected patients with severe RV dysfunction, pulmonary hypertension, or severe valvular disease.

The patient is then usually positioned in a lateral decubitus position with the operating side up. Proper positioning of the DLT or the bronchial blocker is usually reconfirmed with the FOB, and single lung ventilation is then started. Care should be taken to ensure proper positioning to avoid perioperative nerve injury.