The DSM-5 gives the following criteria for reactive attachment disorder:

- The patient demonstrates a chronic pattern of being emotionally withdrawn and inhibited, which is demonstrated by rarely seeking or responsive to comfort when distressed.

- There is evidence of a chronic social and/or emotional perturbation characterized by at least two of the proceeding: social withdrawal and minimal responsiveness to others, negative affect, unfounded or inexplicable episodes of irritability, fearfulness, or sadness--or out of proportion reactions to normative stress.

- The patient presents with a history of extremely insufficient care, entailing of one of the following: deprivation or social neglect of basic emotional needs for stimulation, comfort, and affection by caring caregivers; the constant flux of caregivers, resulting in a destabilized home environment; growing up in an unusual setting which limits the ability to form selective attachments

- The child cannot also meet the diagnostic criteria for autism spectrum disorder as the two diagnoses (autism spectrum disorder and reactive attachment disorder) are mutually exclusive

- The behavioral perturbation should manifest prior to the age of 5 years of age

- The child must have a developmental age of at least nine months in order to qualify for the diagnosis

These diagnostic criteria provide an outline of symptoms; however, providers must also recognize the global impact on cognition, behavior, and affective functioning.

**Cognition**

Abuse in childhood has been correlated with difficulties in working memory and executive functioning, while severe neglect is associated with underdevelopment of the left cerebral hemisphere and the hippocampus.

**Behavioral**

Social skills are below what would be expected of either their chronological age or developmental level. Children with RAD may respond to ordinary interactions with aggression, fear, defiance, or rage.  Affected children are more likely to face rejection by adults and peers, develop a negative self-schema, and experience somatic symptoms of distress. Psychomotor restlessness is common, as is hyperactivity and stereotypic movements, such as hand flapping or rocking.

**Affective**

RAD increases the risk of anxiety, depression, hyperactivity, and reduces frustration tolerance. Ailing children are likely to be highly reactive, even in non-threatening situations.