Interleukin-17 is a proinflammatory cytokine released by T-helper-17 (Th17) cells. Under the action of interleukin-6 and transforming growth factor-ß, CD4 T cells differentiate into Th17 cells and induce the expression of interleukin-23 receptors (IL-23R) and IL-17. Apart from T-cells, mast cells and neutrophils also secrete IL-17.

Interleukin-17 encompasses a group of cytokines, IL-17A to IL-17F, with IL-17A being the key effector cytokine. Furthermore, IL-17A is 10-30 more potent than IL-17F displaying a greater affinity to the interleukin-17 receptor (IL-17R).

The efferent pathway from binding to IL7R involves the secretion of chemokines (CCL20, CXCL1m CXCL8) that augments the inflammatory response while activating the innate immune system. The known effects of IL-17 become amplified by other cytokines such as tumor necrosis factor-a.

Another effect of IL-17 is seemingly contradictory, being a stimulator of cancer cell invasion while promoting T-cell mediated tumor rejection. The significance is unknown due to a lack of evidence confirming a carcinogenic or protective.

The basic concept underlying the usage of biologics is to block the disease process at a very early stage, being more specific and reducing the side effects of therapy. The number of IL-17A-producing lymphocytes resulting in raised IL-17A concentrations is observed in psoriatic arthritis and ankylosing spondylitis. Treatment with secukinumab can potentially reduce IL-17A levels in psoriatic plaques. Secukinumab specifically targets IL-17A, thereby blocking its binding with IL-17R and the expression of cytokines. This blockade normalizes the inflammatory processes and thus combats epidermal hyperproliferation, T-cell infiltration, and excessive expression of pathogenic genes.

**Pharmacokinetics:**Pharmacokinetics (PK) of secukinumab is similar in patients with ankylosing spondylitis, psoriatic arthritis, plaque psoriasis, and non-radiographic axial spondyloarthritis.

**Absorption:**Following a single subcutaneous dose of 150 mg or 300 mg in plaque psoriasis subjects, Cmax for secukinumab is approximately achieved after six days of administration. Steady-state concentrations of secukinumab are observed by week 24 following the 4-week dosing regimens. Bioavailability ranged from 55% to 77% following the subcutaneous dose of 150 mg (one-half the recommended dose) or 300 mg.

**Distribution:**The concentration of secukinumab in interstitial fluid in lesional and non-lesional skin of plaque psoriasis patients varied from 27% to 40% of those in serum at one and two weeks after a single subcutaneous dose of 300 mg. It is important to note that secukinumab clearance and volume of distribution increase as body weight increases.

**Metabolism:**The metabolism of secukinumab has not been well defined. However, as secukinumab is a human IgG1 monoclonal antibody, it is hypothesized to be degraded into small peptides and amino acids via catabolic pathways in the same manner as IgG.

**Excretion:**In clinical trials, after intravenous and subcutaneous administration, the systemic clearance (CL) varied from 0.14 L/day to 0.22 L/day, and the mean half-life varied from 22 to 31 days in patients with plaque psoriasis. The study also pointed out that injections of secukinumab into the abdomen or thigh using different delivery systems resulted in similar pharmacokinetic parameters.