The annular ligament is a strong fibro-osseous circular structure that has attachments to the anterior and posterior margins of the radial notch (lesser sigmoid cavity) of the ulna. The annular ligament forms about four-fifths of a circle. The ligament subdivides into three layers:

- Deep capsular structure

- Intermediate layer (annular ligament proper)

- Superficial structure

The annular ligament proper is composed of a superior oblique band and an inferior oblique.

**Lateral collateral ligament (LCL) complex of the Elbow**

Four ligaments form the LCL complex of the elbow. These ligaments include the annular ligament, accessory collateral ligament, lateral ulnar collateral ligament, and the radial collateral ligament. The LCL complex originates on the lateral humeral epicondyle.

While the annular ligament plays a static stabilizing role against excessive varus stress at the elbow, the annular ligament's primary stabilizing role functions at the proximal radioulnar articulation. The annular ligament stabilizes the radial head within the radial notch of the ulna as it rotates during supination and pronation of the forearm.

The proximal, central, and distal band of the interosseous membrane also assists in proximal radial head stabilization. Under transverse displacement, the annular ligament along with the central and proximal band of the interosseous membrane equally contribute to stabilizing the radius. However, during forearm pronation and supination, the central band of the interosseous membrane contributes more to the stabilization of the radial head than the annular ligament and proximal band.