Buprenorphine is a partial agonist at the mu receptor, meaning that it only partially activates opiate receptors. It is also a weak kappa receptor antagonist and delta receptor agonist. It is a potent analgesic that acts on the central nervous system (CNS). The partial agonism at the mu receptor is a unique quality of buprenorphine. The feature gives its many unique properties, specifically that its analgesic effects plateau at higher doses, and then its effects become antagonistic. Buprenorphine exhibits ceiling effects on respiratory depression, which means that it is safer than methadone for agonist substitution treatment in addiction.

Buprenorphine has high-affinity binding to the mu-opioid receptors and slow-dissociation kinetics. In this way, it differs from other full-opioid agonists like morphine and fentanyl, allowing withdrawal symptoms to be milder and less uncomfortable for the patient.

When administered orally, buprenorphine has poor bioavailability because of the first-pass effect. The liver and intestine break down the majority of the drug. Sublingual administration is the preferred route of administration. The absorption is fast, and this route also avoids the first-pass effect. Upon placing the tablet under the tongue, it has a slow onset of action, with the peak effect occurring 3 to 4 hours after administration.

Once in the body, buprenorphine is broken down by the cytochrome CYP 34A enzymes to an active metabolite (norbuprenorphine) with weak intrinsic activity. The average half-life of buprenorphine is about 38 hours (25 to 70 hours) following sublingual administration. Potent inhibition of the 3A4 enzyme by drugs (such as ketoconazole or protease inhibitors) may cause increased levels of buprenorphine, while inducers of this enzyme (such as carbamazepine, topiramate, phenytoin, or barbiturates) may cause lower levels.

The majority of the drug and the metabolite get excreted in the feces, and the kidneys excrete less than 20%. Because of the slow onset of action and prolonged duration of action, the drug is useful in treating opioid dependence. It may be prescribed on alternate days once the patient has stabilized on the daily dose.