The majority of thoracolumbar junction fractures result from high impact trauma, including motor vehicle accidents and falls. A detailed patient history helps contextualize the type of mechanism involved in the injury. This will be most relevant in the neurologically stable patient.

If the patient is critically ill and on mechanical ventilation, history will have to be obtained from family members, paramedics, other clinicians, and the patient's medical chart. Associated back pain with details such as location, quality, character, duration, and aggravating factors are standard attributes to be assessed and critical for associated injuries in other systems.

The patient who suffered a thoracolumbar junction fracture may present on a physical exam with intact function, incomplete deficits, or complete neurological deficits. The level of injury at the conus region can determine the deficit that the patient presents with. If the affected area is in the transition area, it can cause symptoms of both upper and lower motor neuron dysfunction.

If the lesion is above the conus, only upper motor signs and symptoms will be elicited; if the lesion is below, then lower motor signs and symptoms will be found. Patients usually have a mix of upper and lower motor neuron symptoms due to many exiting nerve roots from the conus medullaris in this region. Injuries that occur above T10 are more likely to result in complete neurological deficits, while injuries below L1 are more likely to result in radicular symptoms. This is due to the anatomic position of the spinal cord, where the conus medullaris usually do not extend below the level of L1.

There may be overt signs on the physical exam such as widened spaces between spinous processes or displacement of spinous processes from the midline, which can be seen in the patient's physical exam on palpation and inspection when the patient is rolled over in the primary trauma survey.

A complete motor and sensory examination is performed with the cooperative patient. Once this information has been obtained, the American Spinal Injury Association (ASIA) score can be assigned to the patient's neurological physical exam.