Typical treatment involves weaning the patient off the overused acute headache medication while simultaneously focusing on preventative treatment. Several studies show that complete 100% weaning of overused acute medication shows the best results compared to continuing on the same acute medication responsible for medication overuse headache but placing frequency limits on its use. Note that patients can be prescribed a new acute medication from a different class. Patients can wean from the offending medication abruptly ("cold turkey") or gradually over several weeks. Preventative treatment can include prophylactic medication and/or non-pharmaceutical treatments (i.e., cognitive behavioral therapy, biofeedback, relaxation training, lifestyle modification with trigger avoidance).

Educating the patient and their family on the importance of limiting acute medication use is vital in preventing medication overuse headaches. Initial worsening of a headache within the first few days of weaning is relatively common. Withdrawal symptoms are thought to typically last up to 10 days, then eventually followed by improvement in medication overuse headache. Weaning patients off medication overuse headache-related medication can be done in an outpatient or an inpatient setting. Most cases can be managed in the outpatient setting mainly through educating patients to cut down on their acute medication use. It is important to address and treat co-morbid psychiatric conditions, especially anxiety and depression, which are often associated with medication overuse headaches, but without potentiating the boosting effects, anxiolytic medication has in maintaining the headache.

Following successful weaning, about half of patients relapse after five years; thus, it is essential to have the patient follow-up regularly. Once the patient's medication overuse headache has resolved, tapering them off the preventative medication may be considered. There are no specific guidelines, but some professionals suggest tapering prophylactic medication after one year.