Diagnosis of MEN1 is established if the index case has at least two of the primary manifestations of MEN1 Syndrome (tumor of parathyroid glands, anterior pituitary gland, and a neuroendocrine component of gastro-entero-pancreatic tissue) or at least one MEN1-related tumor and a first-degree relative with confirmed MEN1 (positive MEN1 gene mutation), or finally, the index case has the pathologic mutation in the MEN1 gene.

MEN1 Syndrome is rare, with an incidence of 0.25% and an estimated prevalence between 0.02 to 0.2 per thousand. MEN1 has been shown to affect both males and females equally, which was demonstrated in the study by Gaudet et al., in which of the total 734 MEN1 patients, there was a slight female preponderance (57.8%). The prevalence of pancreatic tumors was higher in men, with the most common manifestation being gastrinoma. The prevalence of pituitary tumors was slightly higher in women, and thymic tumors were exclusively found in men.

Clinical and biochemical manifestations develop in greater than 94% of the patients by the fifth decade of life. Regardless, the disorder affects all age groups and has even been reported in children as young as five years of age. Cushing disease may be the first presentation in children with MEN1, as reported by Makri et al. in their retrospective chart review of 238 patients admitted to the National Institute of Health (NIH) for evaluation of hypercortisolemia. Of the cohort, six patients were diagnosed with MEN1, in which 5 cases were familial and one case was sporadic.