Considering the symptomatic aspect, trigeminal neuralgia can classify as

- **Type 1**- Presence of paroxysmal pain alone

- **Type 2**- Paroxysmal pain along with constant pain in the background

The pain in trigeminal neuralgia occurs in paroxysms and is usually maximal at or near onset. Sometimes, with severe pain, facial muscle spasms can be seen. Hence, TN is also known as 'tic douloureux.'

The majority of the patients describe the pain as electric shock-like pain, lasting from one to several seconds. Pain in TN is typically unilateral. Occasionally, it is bilateral, but very rarely occurs simultaneously on both sides.

V2 and V3 divisions of the trigeminal nerve are usually involved in the pain distribution.

Trigger zones may be present in the distribution of the affected nerve. These are usually located near the midline. They have been mostly reported in the nasal and perioral regions. TN pain is triggered by lightly touching these zones.

Other triggers reported causing trigeminal neuralgia paroxysms include brushing teeth, shaving, washing the face, smoking, chewing, talking, grimacing, or exposure to cold air.

In younger patients, who present with symptoms of TN, other neurological conditions like multiple sclerosis should merit consideration in the differentials. Such patients should be asked about other neurological symptoms like focal weakness, vision changes, dizziness, and ataxia.

In patients with TN, the physical examination is generally normal. Hence, the physicians should perform a detailed physical examination of the head, neck, eyes, ears, teeth, mouth, and the temporomandibular joint to rule out other causes of facial pain. The finding of typical trigger zones is suggestive of TN.

In patients with classic TN, the neurologic examination is normal. Hence, physical examination showing a sensory loss in trigeminal nerve distribution, loss of corneal reflex, or weakness in facial muscles should prompt the physician to consider secondary TN and other differentials.

Several patients with TN complain of toothache and pain with brushing teeth. A detailed oral examination can help in differentiating the dental causes of pain from trigeminal neuralgia.