Cortisol is a steroid hormone produced by the zona fasciculata of the adrenal cortex. After production the cortisol is carried to different parts of the body by cortisol binding protein, almost 90% of cortisol binds to this (CBG) protein and has a bioavailability of 60% to 100%. Synthetic corticosteroids have varying bioavailability and potency, but all affect similar pathways. It is a catabolic hormone that is released under stressful conditions. The excess of cortisol results in an increased rate of gluconeogenesis, glycogenolysis and increases insulin resistance. Cortisol is a steroid hormone, and it directly affects the transcription and translation of enzyme proteins involved in the metabolism of fats, glycogen, proteins synthesis, and Kreb's cycle. It promotes the production of free glucose in the body, elevating glucose levels, while simultaneously increasing insulin resistance. The destruction of protein yields amino acids which are used in gluconeogenesis. The prolonged catabolism of proteins causes purplish striae of the torso, osteoporosis, and poor wound healing. All these processes involve collagen which is a three amino-based protein. High cortisol levels also cause immune disruptions; this hormone leads to a decrease in lymphocyte levels and increases the neutrophils. It causes detachment of marginating pool of neutrophils in the bloodstream and increases the circulating neutrophil levels although there is no increased production of the neutrophils. This mechanism explains the typical picture of raised TLC where there is decreased lymphocyte number and increased neutrophils. The corticosteroids mediate the downregulation of NF-kappaB, regulation of AMP kinase, glycogen phosphorylase, superoxide dismutase, and many other enzymes. Cortisol inhibits the production of IL-2, TNF alpha, IFN alpha, and gamma. Decreased IL-2 levels prevent the proliferation of T-lymphocytes.