The investigation of secondary polycythemia includes a complete blood count, which shows a raised hemoglobin and hematocrit. After an initial raised lab value, it is necessary to repeat labs once after a reasonable time interval in order to rule out a single elevated lab value. Further testing with renal function tests, liver function tests, ferritin levels, abdominal ultrasound, and a chest x-ray should also be performed.

In order to establish the diagnosis of polycythemia, chromium 51-red cell mass can be evaluated along with plasma volume. However, the test is not widely available and is rarely performed inroutine clinical practice.

Early in the investigative workup, an erythropoietin assay must be obtained to assess the levels of EPO as it guides the further workup strategy. It differentiates between primary and secondary polycythemia.

In addition to these, a JAK2 mutation must be investigated for polycythemia vera.

Pulse oximetry is essential. Oxygen saturation less than 92% suggests hypoxia, which is one of the common causes of secondary polycythemia. Measurement of arterial oxygen saturation is necessary for patients with carboxyhemoglobinemia. This is usually present in patients that smoke. In these patients, although the arterial oxygen tension is normal, oxygen saturation levels are decreased.

In patients with hemoglobinopathies that have high oxygen affinity, the oxygen dissociation curve can aid in the diagnosis. A better test in these patients is a PaO2-50, which is less than 20 in these patients.

Renal diseases are also closely associated with secondary polycythemia. In order to evaluate the presence of any renal etiology, an intravenous pyelography, renal ultrasound, renal function tests, and computed tomography (CT) scan are required. In addition to that, liver ultrasonography, CT scan abdomen, and radionuclide scan are also warranted with possible hepatic etiology. A CT scan of the brain with special attention to the posterior fossa can detect a cerebellar hemangioblastoma.

Gene mutations testing for EPOR, VHL, PHD2, and HIF2A can help to diagnose a congenital etiological factor.

A frequently encountered difficulty is the avascular nature of adipose tissue that is abundant in obese individuals, making the interpretation of these results cumbersome. Studies have shown that RBC mass expressed on the basis of body weight is lower in obese individuals. As a result, the RBC mass is expressed in relation to body surface area or utilizing a formula that standardizes the red cell mass with the height and weight of the patient.

If investigations reveal that red cell mass is normal, whereas the plasma volume is decreased, the raised value of hematocrit can be attributed to relative polycythemia.