Stone localization is done with ultrasound or fluoroscopy.

To maximize the efficiency of extracorporeal shock wave lithotripsy (ESWL), proper positioning of the patient is necessary. Skeletal structures should not interfere with the delivery of shockwaves. Usually, the patient is placed in the supine or modified supine position, but if it is not possible or recommended, then prone positioning must be done.

For the effective delivery of shockwaves, there should be no impedance. It is done by coupling the shock head and the skin using ultrasound gel, silicon oil, or other media, abolishing the air barrier to prevent scattering. The introduction of air bubbles in the coupling zone may attenuate the delivery of shockwave and reduce the efficacy of ESWL.

Proper analgesia or anesthesia is necessary to minimize the movement of the patient, to avoid the introduction of air bubbles in the coupling medium, and also to allow maximum delivery of shockwaves to the targeted location.

The optimal shock wave rate is not clear. Studies suggest that when compared to 120 shocks/min, SWL at 60 to 90 shocks/min has better fragmentation and decreased risk of renal injury.

The total number of shocks delivered per session depends on patient habitus and stone characteristics, including stone location, stone density, stone composition, etc., and ranges between 2000 and 4500 shocks per session.

The energy voltage is gradually “ramped up” to minimize the injury to renal tissue, and to better manage the pain during the procedure.

Stone passage after the procedure is facilitated by using nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs, alpha-blockers, calcium channel blockers, and corticosteroids.