A percutaneous liver biopsy is performable using three different techniques: (1) palpation/percussion guided, (2) image-guided, (3) real-time image-guided. The palpation/percussion technique is based on physical examination and is the most common practice. The image-guided technique involves using ultrasound (US) to mark the biopsy site before needle insertion. The real-time image-guided technique involves using the US simultaneously with tissue sampling.

The patient is positioned supine on the bed, with his or her right side near the edge of the bed. The patient’s right arm is then placed above the head, and the lower extremities should be moved away from the body to best allow for intercostal space expansion. The skin is exposed, and percussion over the right upper quadrant is performed. The biopsy site is typically between the seventh and eighth intercostal space at the mid-axillary line, which is the point of maximal dullness. After marking the site, a bedside ultrasound can confirm the appropriateness of the site and eliminate the chances of bowel overlying the biopsy tract. The skin is then prepped and draped in a sterile fashion. Lidocaine solution (1% or 2% solution are options) is injected along the upper border of the rib to avoid neurovasculature that crosses along the lower border of each rib. A small incision with a surgical blade is made at the biopsy site. The biopsy needle of choice is then passed through the skin incision in the direction of the xiphoid process and parallel to the ground. The tissue sample is taken during the expiratory phase of respiration. After removing the needle, pressure is applied to the biopsy site for a few minutes, and a bandage is applied. The patient is then placed in the right lateral decubitus position, presumably to limit bleeding by allowing the liver to have pressure placed against the abdominal wall.

Following the procedure, the patient’s blood pressure, heart rate, and pain level are measured every 15 minutes for the first hour, 30 minutes for the next hour, and every hour thereafter until ready for discharge. Patients are typically observed between 2 to 4 hours post-procedure, according to the American Association for the Study of Liver Diseases (AASLD). Postoperative instructions include telling the patients to avoid lifting more than 10 to 15 pounds (4.5 to 7 kg) for one week.

There is also a method called a plugged biopsy, which is a variation of the percutaneous biopsy. It is an option in patients deemed high risk for bleeding (i.e., those with coagulopathy and/or thrombocytopenia or a small cirrhotic liver).