**Use of SGLT2 Inhibitors and GLP-1RAs with Insulin in Patients with Type 2 Diabetes**

For patients with persistent hyperglycemia despite initiation of metformin and lifestyle modifications, further intensifying pharmacologic therapy is recommended. According to data, the greatest reduction in hemoglobin A1C in patients with uncontrolled diabetes mellitus type 2 is the addition of glucagon-like peptide 1 (GLP-1) receptor agonists, premixed insulin, basal-bolus insulin, basal insulin, or prandial insulin.

As stated above by the ADA guidelines, insulin is effective and preferred in patients with catabolic diabetes. In the absence of catabolic symptoms (weight loss or hemoglobin A1C greater than 10%), GLP-1RAs are an alternative to insulin. When hemoglobin A1C is markedly elevated but less than 10%, both basal insulin or a GLP-1RA can be used as add-on therapy to metformin, as they have been shown to have good glycemic efficacy in these patients.

The use of SGLT2 inhibitors and GLP-1RAs in combination regimens has been studied to some degree, and the following evidence-based recommendations are made:

- Combination treatment with GLP-1RAs and DPP-4 inhibitors is not recommended due to minimal increase in efficacy with this combination

- If insulin is added to the treatment regimen of patients with type 2 diabetes mellitus, metformin, GLP-1RAs, DPP-4 inhibitors, and SGLT2 inhibitors can be continued while sulfonylureas and pioglitazone should be discontinued.

- The addition of GLP-1RAs has been associated with decreased insulin requirement and warrants frequent blood glucose monitoring when these agents are added to insulin regimens to prevent hypoglycemia.

- GLP-1RAs may benefit patients with high insulin requirements due to insulin resistance.