**Dantrolene**

Dantrolene works by inhibiting calcium ion release from the sarcoplasmic reticulum. Its mechanism of action is through antagonizing the ryanodine receptors, which lessens the excitation-contraction coupling of muscle cells.

Dantrolene is currently the only specific medication used for treating a malignant hyperthermia crisis. Dantrolene is available in two different formulations. These two formulations differ in the amount of sterile water required to reconstitute each vial and the dantrolene concentration within each vial. One formulation is available in 20 mg vials that must be reconstituted with 60 mL of sterile water per vial, while the other is available in 250 mg vials that must be reconstituted with 5 mL of sterile water per vial. Regardless of which formulation of dantrolene is administered, a dose of 2.5 mg/kg is recommended to treat a malignant hyperthermia episode. Dantrolene is a highly lipophilic drug with low solubility in water, making the reconstitution of the drug in sterile water challenging. The newer formulation that combines nanosuspension technology with a lyophilized formulation resulting in a much faster reconstitution of the drug, which can greatly improve the time to treatment and may be especially useful in locations where only one provider is available to treat the patient.

Keep in mind that additional doses of dantrolene might be necessary to treat malignant hyperthermia triggering events adequately; a dose of 1 mg/kg every 4 to 6 hours is recommended for the first 24 to 48 hours after an episode of malignant hyperthermia.

Dantrolene should not be combined with verapamil, as it may lead to hyperkalemia and hypotension.

All facilities where malignant hyperthermia triggering anesthetics are administered are recommended to stock an adequate amount of dantrolene and other medications and rescue equipment needed to treat a malignant hyperthermia crisis.

**Malignant Hyperthermia Links to Strenuous Exercise, Heat Exposure, or Elevated Body Temperature**

Malignant hyperthermia susceptible patients are found to experience a metabolic crisis without exposure to triggering agents. Exposure of these patients to strenuous exercise, heat exposure, or high internal body temperatures (e.g., infections) may precipitate this crisis. Research is currently underway to evaluate this possible link.

**Other Issues**

Life-threatening laryngospasm is a much more common event than malignant hyperthermia that can be quickly treated with low dose succinylcholine. Many office-based procedural facilities do not stock succinylcholine due to the risk of malignant hyperthermia and the need to stock expensive dantrolene in cases of malignant hyperthermia triggering events. The Society for Ambulatory Anesthesia offered an opinion on the dilemma by stating that succinylcholine could be stocked at these locations for emergency use only with the caveat that procedures should never be done on known malignant hyperthermia susceptible persons in those facilities.

Patients and their families should be referred to the Malignant Hyperthermia Association of the United States (MHAUS) for information about this disorder and receive follow-up from specialists in this area.

**North American Malignant Hyperthermia Registry**

The North American Malignant Hyperthermia Registry of the Malignant Hyperthermia Association of the United States (MHAUS) is a database of information about patients and their families that have experienced malignant hyperthermia episodes. Healthcare providers are encouraged to report malignant hyperthermia and malignant hyperthermia-like episodes to the registry.