# Continuing Education Activity

Botulinum toxin is a medication used in the management and treatment of therapeutic and cosmetic purposes. Therapeutic uses include chronic migraine, spastic disorders, cervical dystonia, and detrusor hyperactivity. It is in the neurotoxin class of medications. This activity reviews the indications, action, and contraindications for Botulinum toxin therapy as a valuable agent for therapeutic and cosmetic treatment in the clinical setting. This activity will highlight the mechanism of action, adverse event profile, and other key factors pertinent to members of the healthcare team in the management of patients with spastic muscle disorders and related conditions.

**Objectives:**
- Identify the mechanism of action of Botulinum toxin.
- Describe the possible adverse effects of Botulinum toxin.
- Summarize the indications for Botulinum toxin.
- Review interprofessional team strategies for improving care coordination and communication to advance Botulinum toxin and improve outcomes.

# Indications

Botulinum toxin is a highly potent neurotoxin that is produced from the bacteria Clostridium botulinum.

**FDA-approved Use**

- Chronic migraine

- Cervical Dystonia

- Blepharospasm

- Strabismus

- Hyperhidrosis

- Cosmetics

- Urinary incontinence from detrusor overactivity

- Hemifacial Spasms

**Off-label Use**

- Neurogenic thoracic outlet syndrome

- Epicondylitis

- Post-stroke pain

- Post-herpetic neuralgia

- Diabetic neuropathy

- Trigeminal neuralgia

- Neuropathic pain

- Spinal cord injury

- Myofascial pain

- Bladder pain

# Mechanism of Action

The potent zinc proteinase neurotoxin binds to extracellular receptors on cholinergic nerve terminals, cleaving one of the three (SNARE) soluble N-ethylmaleimide-sensitive factor attachment receptor proteins. This action causes reversible inhibition of the release of acetylcholine by presynaptic vesicles intracellularly, leading to a transient restraint of neurotransmitter release at the neuromuscular junction.

# Administration

Botulinum toxin has a longer duration of its action once administered. It takes approximately two weeks to thoroughly develop efficacy and the last three to five months in cosmetic practice.

**FDA-approved Preparations**

- OnabotulinumtoxinA

- AbobotulinumtoxinA

- IncobotulinumtoxinA

- RimabotulinumtoxinB

**Dilution**

OnabotulinumtoxinA suggested dilution:

- 100 U of powder form in 1 to 8 mL of saline.

AbobotulinumtoxinA suggested dilution:

- 300 U of powder form in 0.6 to 2.5 mL of saline.

The pharmaceutical form is packaged and distributed in powder form for all four preparations.

**FDA-approved Dose for Aesthetic Glabellar Lines**

- AbobotulinumtoxinA 50 U

- OnabotulinumtoxinA cosmetic 20 U

- IncobotulinumtoxinA 20 U

FDA-approved labels advise against performing potency conversions.

# Adverse Effects

Adverse effects are frequently moderate and self-limited.

Other complications include

- Headache

- Infection

- Cocked eyebrow

- Ectropion

- Decreased strength of eye closure

- Xerophthalmia

# Contraindications

Botulinum toxin contraindications include

- Keloidal scarring

- Neuromuscular disorders

- Botulinum toxin allergies

- Body dysmorphic disorder

- Pregnancy

- Breastfeeding

- Amyotrophic lateralizing sclerosis myopathies

# Monitoring

The continuation of the paralysis and muscle relaxation effect is based on the temporary restraint of neurotransmitter release. The half-life differs among the serotypes and relies on when the SNARE protein regains function and releases neurotransmitter acetylcholine. Studies suggest that botulinum neurotoxin serotype A has the most prolonged half-life.

# Toxicity

The human LD50 for inhalation botulism is 1 to 3 ng/kg body mass.

**Toxicity Treatment**

- Antitoxin

- Vaccine

- F(ab')2 immune fragment therapies

These treatments are in addition to supportive therapy.

# Enhancing Healthcare Team Outcomes

Botulinum toxin is an FDA-approved medication indicated for therapeutic and cosmetic treatments. Managing the care of patients prescribed botulinum toxin for therapeutic purposes requires excellent communication between the patient and an interprofessional team of healthcare providers. These providers include a primary care clinician, a neurologist, a gynecologist, a urologist, and a nurse with their respective therapeutic uses for chronic migraine, post-stroke pain, cervical dystonia, and urinary incontinence from detrusor overactivity. Meanwhile, cosmetic treatments require technique and skill for facial injections, which can be administered in an outpatient clinic setting by a highly skilled nurse or clinician. The recommendation is that site injections are under the clinician's guidance to assure patient safety in case complications do arise. The primary care, specialist, and nurses should be familiar with botulinum toxin, its implications, and adverse effects. The clinicians and nurses require excellent patient rapport, and the patient needs thorough education on the treatment and symptoms of adverse effects. Botulinum toxin injections require routine checkups every three to five months to keep desired outcomes in an optimal range.