# Continuing Education Activity

Obesity is a chronic disease having a major public health concern. Obesity is a mild state of chronic inflammation of adipose tissue and a state of malnutrition by excess, which leads to a defective hormonal and immune system. This activity reviews the pathophysiology of obesity, inflammatory markers secreted by excessive fat deposition in adipose tissue, and their effects on chronic diseases such as hypertension, diabetes, and dyslipidemia.

**Objectives:**
- Describe obesity as a mild state of chronic inflammation of adipose tissue.
- Explain the role of inflammatory markers released by adipose tissue in worsening chronic conditions such as hypertension, diabetes, and dyslipidemia. 
- Describe obesity in light of hormonal considerations and as an immune disease. 
- Explain the role of the interprofessional team in managing patients with obesity.

# Introduction

Obesity is one of the most common preventable diseases.

Obesity measurement can also be used to estimate morbidity and mortality. Body mass index (BMI) has been used to screen overweight and obese individuals. However, waist circumference is the best anthropometric indicator of visceral fat and a better predictor of metabolic disorders such as diabetes, hypertension, and dyslipidemia.

Compared to the Body Mass Index (BMI), the Visceral Adiposity Index (VAI) is a more specific and sensitive examination tool. The VAI is, therefore, a reliable indicator of increased patient risk for cardiometabolic diseases.

Obesity has inflammatory components, directly and indirectly, related to major chronic diseases such as diabetes, atherosclerosis, hypertension, and several types of cancer.

It is well-documented that obesity and its inflammatory markers have significant effects on hypertension, diabetes, and other chronic conditions. This review provides detailed insight into chronic inflammation, immune and hormonal disturbance related to the pathophysiology of obesity and their effects on chronic conditions.

# Issues of Concern

**Obesity: An immune Disease?**

Obesity is a state of malnutrition by excess that leads to defective immune function. Excess body fat is associated with changes in leukocyte count such as monocyte, lymphocyte, and neutrophil counts but lower B- and T-cell mitogen-induced proliferation.

There are two types of phenotypic macrophages described that have been related to obesity: M1 (classically activated) acts as pro-inflammatory, and M2 (alternatively activated) acts as an anti-inflammatory. In obesity, there is a switch from M2 to M1 phenotype, which is pro-inflammatory.

**Obesity and Inflammatory Markers**

Obesity is also referred to as chronic-low grade inflammation or “metabolic inflammation,” which is often the focus in the pathogenesis of several diseases such as coronary artery disease, atherosclerosis, and insulin resistance, etc.

Adipocytes produce and secrete several proteins called adipokines which play important roles in inflammation. These adipokines include TNF-α, leptin, resistin, visfatin, IL-6, and adiponectin.

The role of increased pro-inflammatory cytokine secretion in obese patients is currently unknown. It is speculated that the answer to this question is correlated with the enlarged, lipid-rich adipocytes seen in obese individuals. Physiological processes likely exist within the adipose cells that allow for the maintenance and restoration of energy homeostasis in the occurrence of an overwhelmingly large introduction of nutrients. A regulatory mechanism should exist in which the local production of certain adipokines limits the hypertrophied adipocyte(s) from storing excess lipids.

**Role of Hormones in Obesity**

Several studies suggest adipose tissue can collectively secrete more than 50 hormones and signaling molecules termed adipokines. These adipokines play a vital role in immunity and glucose metabolism.

Leptin, a hormone that plays a role in appetite and energy balance regulation, along with pro-inflammatory cytokines, such as tumor necrosis factor-alpha (TNF-alpha), are secreted by adipose tissue cells.

Both leptin and adiponectin are associated with the cardiovascular risk profile. The ratio of leptin and adiponectin has been associated with adipose tissue malfunction. Another hormone secreted by adipose tissue is resistin, a pro-inflammatory adipokine characterized as an insulin antagonist.

A key difference in resistin production in different species is that humans produce adipokine by only mononuclear cells, such as macrophages and peripheral blood mononuclear cells. In rodents, resistin production can come from both macrophages and adipocytes.

The concentration of visfatin in circulation is positively correlated with the amount of white adipose tissue (WAT). There are a number of other hormones and cytokines produced by adipose tissue. We still do not know the role of increased cytokine production in obesity. We can only speculate that there must be mechanisms operating within and from the adipose cell to maintain or restore energy homeostasis in a situation of excessive energy storage. There should be a regulatory mechanism constituted by the local production of these cytokines to stop lipid-loaded adipocytes from storing more lipids. The problem arises when this becomes a systemic chronic state from a local reaction when the inflammatory response cannot be resolved due to sustained obesity. The mechanisms between obesity and chronic inflammation are not completely understood, but different likely explanations have been proposed.

# Clinical Significance

Multiple organ systems maintain metabolic homeostasis. Adipose tissue and muscles are a few of them. Adipocytes secrete hormones/chemicals known as adipokines which act on multiple cells or organs to regulate metabolism. Further research needs to be done to understand better the concentrations of these hormones in different populations, including elderly and overweight/obese people, and the role these hormones play in obesity.

It is also important to understand how lifestyle choices such as dietary intervention, regular exercise (aerobic or resistance), supplementation, or combination of any of these affect adipokines/hormones concentrations so there is a better insight into their regulation and pathophysiology.

# Enhancing Healthcare Team Outcomes

Having a better understanding of the pathophysiology of obesity is important to all the health professionals involved in curbing obesity. To manage and prevent obesity requires an interprofessional healthcare team to be involved in patient management, such as physicians, nurses, nutritionists, dieticians, and exercise physiologists.

As is known, obesity is an autoimmune disease and a chronic low-grade inflammation, and the inflammatory markers secreted by adipose tissue in an obese person lead to other chronic diseases such as hypertension, diabetes, dyslipidemia, and cancer or worsen them, prevention is better than cure. To prevent obesity, the interprofessional team needs to educate patients regarding diet and exercise as a lifestyle change. To make it happen, every interprofessional team member, including clinicians, mid-level practitioners, nurses, dieticians, and pharmacists, needs to understand the pathophysiology of obesity and its consequences to contribute from their specialties and drive better patient outcomes. [Level 5]