Credentialing requires an effort of an interprofessional team. Typically each hospital has a credentialing specialist who works for medical staff. The physician submits the application and supporting documents to the credential specialist. The hospital conducts primary source verification. For primary source verification, Hospital gathers information directly from original sources like ECFMG, medical school, residency training program, state medical board, etc.  Credentialing specialist brings reports to the hospital credentialing committee. Credentialing Committee is usually made up of members elected from different departments to serve on the committee. When a physician has a malpractice claim or any other negative facts in the application, credential committee members discuss the application on individual bases and make recommendations based on hospital needs and physician qualification. If the application is clear from all sources, then the credentialing committee approves the application. Typically credentialling committee meets every 1 to 3 months. The application is then forwarded to the medical executive committee meeting for review. The medical executive committee is usually made up of the chiefs of different sections, legal department, risk management, and administrative personnel. The hospital board of directors reviews the application only after approval from the medical executive committee. The hospital board of directors gives final approval to grant privileges so the physician can work in the hospital.