The majority of all CRC are carcinomas, and more than 90% of those are adenocarcinomas and others not frequently seen (adenosquamous, spindle, squamous and undifferentiated). CRC adenocarcinoma can be further differentiated in cribriform comedo-type, medullary, micropapillary, serrated, mucinous and signet-ring cell. Adenocarcinomas are categorized by the percentage of gland formation into well (more than 95%), moderately (more than 50%) and poorly (less than 49%) differentiated, but further divided in two-tier low-grade (well-moderate)/high-grade (poor) with prognostic significance. Mucinous or signet ring cells classification describe that more than half of the stain cells posses that particular characteristic. Differential clinicopathological diagnosis is neuroendocrine, hamartomas, mesenchymal, and lymphomas. Cytokeratin 20 (CK20) and caudal-type homeobox 2 (CDX2) immunohistochemistry (IHC) can accurately identify CRC adenocarcinoma origin, except medullary carcinoma with MSI-H expressing other markers such calretinin, CK7, SABT2, and CDH17.

The tumor, node, metastasis (TNM) staging system of the American Joint Committee on Cancer/Union for International Cancer Control (AJCC/UICC) 2017 is the preferred staging system for CRC. Worth noticing, peritoneal carcinomatosis (M1c) and nodal micrometastases (cluster greater than 0.2 mm) are included as poor prognostic factors. Other prognostic indicators that the classification continues to exclude are extramural deposits, lymphovascular invasion (LVI), perineural invasion (PNI), poor histological grade, diagnostic serum CEA, MSI-H and RAS/BRAF mutation status. The most important prognostic indicator is the pathological stage at presentation supported by data from the SEER observed overall survival (OS) at 5-years rates for colon in stage I includes 74%; stage IIA, 66%; stage IIB, 58%; stage IIC, 37%; stage IIIA, 73%; stage IIIB, 46%; stage IIIC, 28%; and stage IV, 5%.

Complete surgical resection (R0) with all negative circumferential resection margins (CRM) is an important goal to avoid local-distant recurrence (38% CRM+ versus 10% CRM-) and furthermore increase survival. Lymph node involvement is the strongest outcome predictor and the total number resected directly influence prognosis on Stage II (node-negative) and Stage III (node-positive) disease. The current guideline recommends a minimum of 12 nodes surgical resection. Lymph node ratio from the INT-0089 trial showed a 5-year overall survival (OS) of 80% with less than 0.05 LNR versus 50% more than 0.4 ratio. LVI, PNI, poor histological grade, T4, bowel perforation and insufficient node sampling (<12) are consider a high-risk feature of stage II Cca according to the American Society of Clinical Oncology (ASCO), National Comprehensive Cancer Network (NCCN), and European Society for Medical Oncology (ESMO), supporting the use of adjuvant chemotherapy.

The NCCN and the College of American Pathologists among other associations recommend universal MMR/MSI status (15% to 20% sporadic CRC), BRAF p.V600 E (less than 10% sporadic CRC) and RAS mutational (12% to 75% sporadic CRC) testing for prognostic and predictive of chemotherapy efficacy. hMLH1 and hMSH2 IHC provides a high sensitive (92.3%), and specific (100%) method, and positive (96.7%)/negative (100%) predictive value method for screening for MMR/MSI status. MSI-H is synonymous with dMMR, and MSI-Stable will refer to proficient MMR state. The prevalence of MSI-H in CRC is about 15% in stage II, 8% in stage III, and 4% to 5% in stage IV. BRAF gene mutation testing is indicated after a negative MLH1 IHC indicating MLH1 gene down-regulation through somatic methylation.

Recently, six independent classification systems coalesced into four consensus molecular subtypes (CMSs) with distinguishing features:

- CMS1 (MSI- immune, 14%), hypermutated burden, dMMR, microsatellite unstable and strong immune activation

- CMS2 (canonical, 37%), high chromosomal instability, epithelial, marked WNT and MYC signaling activation

- CMS3 (metabolic, 13%), epithelial and evident metabolic dysregulation, KRAS mutation

- CMS4 (mesenchymal, 23%), CpG hypermethylation, prominent transforming growth factor-beta activation, stromal invasion and angiogenesis.

CMSs classification had a prognostic value, CMS1 good, CMS4 poor and CMS2/3 intermediate.