Depending on the infectious agent producing endophthalmitis, two important categories are recognized, bacterial and fungal endophthalmitis. In a recent study on microbial causes of all types of endophthalmitis, 85.1% of all isolates were due to gram-positive bacteria, 10.3% due to gram-negative bacteria, and 4.6% of all cases were due to fungi.Staphylococcus epidermidis (30.3%), other coagulase-negative Staphylococcus (9.1%), Streptococcus viridans (12.1%), Staphylococcus aureus (11.1%), Enterobacteriaceae (3.4%), and Pseudomonas aeruginosa (2.5%).

The predominant organism depends on the source (vegetable matter or retained intraocular foreign body), route of spread (post-surgery, trauma, or delayed onset or hematogenous dissemination), geographic location, and patient characteristics.

In cases of **post-traumatic endophthalmitis**,Staphylococci and Bacillus cereus are the most common isolates.

**Acute postoperative endophthalmitis**(within 6 weeks of surgery) results most commonly due to contamination of the intraocular structures with normal bacterial flora of the adnexa such asStaphylococcal epidermidis.

**Delayed or chronic post-cataract surgery endophthalmitis**(after 6-week of surgery) is characterized by slow course and panuveitis like picture with granulomatous keratic precipitates, inflammatory deposits over the IOL (intraocular lens), white capsular plaque, anterior chamber reaction, vitritis, and cystoid macular edema (CME) which may respond to periocular or systemic steroid but usually recurs.Propionibacterium acnes followed by Coagulase-negative Staphylococcus), though fungal infections (including Aspergillus, Candida, and others) can also occur.

In cases of **delayed onset, endophthalmitis**associated with bleb (trabeculectomy)/glaucoma drainage implants Streptococci species, andHaemophilus are the predominant culture isolates.

The most common organisms isolated in **post intravitreal injection endophthalmitis**are coagulase-negative staphylococci followed by streptococci.

In certain conditions, **exogenous endophthalmitis**can occur without a full-thickness breach in ocular coats. For example, after scleral buckling (due to buckle exposure or secondary infections), secondary to contact lens keratitis, and post LASIK.

Most cases of **endogenous endophthalmitis**are secondary to fungemia (predominantly Candida species). Among bacterial causes, staphylococcal species predominate in the western population, and among the East Asian population,Klebsiella pneumoniae predominates.

**Endophthalmitis after infectious keratitis**is usually bacterial (usuallyPseudomonas aeruginosa, Staphylococcus sp, and Streptococcus sp), though fungal endophthalmitis (including Aspergillus sp, Fusarium sp) may also occur.