Treatment of the underlying cause often resolves the atrioventricular dissociation. If the AV dissociation is a consequence of supraventricular or ventricular tachycardias, termination of the arrhythmia is warranted. Careful consideration should be taken in junctional arrhythmias as terminating it would also eliminate the sole source of conduction. Digitalis toxicity can be treated with a combination of digoxin immune Fab. Medications such as isoproterenol and atropine can be considered to increase the SA nodal rate. In the case of a complete heart block, atropine will be ineffective in increasing the heart rate, as it works on the AV node. Reversible causes of heart block should be treated. Lyme carditis is self-limiting; however, antibiotics can shorten the disease course.

Potassium replacement therapy, including the use of beta 2 agonist agents and insulin, along with calcium gluconate for cardiac protection, should be undertaken if there are ECG and laboratory evidence of hyperkalemia induced complete heart block. Once reversible causes are ruled out, complete heart block patients require pacemaker placement. A transcutaneous pacemaker is the fastest way to ensure cardiac pacing. If this is not successful in achieving electric and mechanical capture, a transvenous pacemaker should be considered.

- Single chamber pacemakers, a single lead in either the right atrium or ventricle.

- Dual chambered pacemaker, with two leads implanted in right atrium and ventricle.

- Biventricular pacemaker, similar to the dual chamber but with an additional lead advancing into the coronary sinus for left ventricular epicardial pacing.

Among these three, the dual-chambered pacemaker is the most common and effective in cases of AV block. Though recent studies now indicate the superiority of biventricular pacemakers to reduce future incidence of heart failure from pacing.