# Continuing Education Activity

Essential thrombocytosis is also known as essential thrombocythemia (ET) and was formerly known as hemorrhagic thrombocythemia and is one of the myeloproliferative neoplasms. Myeloproliferative neoplasms include polycythemia vera, primary myelofibrosis, and essential polycythemia; these neoplasms are similar and share the same mutations. Essential thrombocytosis is characterized by thrombocytosis and megakaryocytic hyperplasia of the bone marrow. According to the World Health Organization, essential thrombocytosis can be diagnosed when the platelet count is over 45,0000 and there is either a Janus kinase 2 (JAK2), Calreticulin (CALR) or myeloproliferative leukemia virus oncogene (MPL) mutation, lacking clonal or reactive causes. This activity describes the presentation, cause, management, and potential complications of essential thrombocytosis and reviews the role of the interprofessional team in caring for patients with this disease.

**Objectives:**
- Identify the typical presentation of essential thrombocytosis.
- Describe the evaluation of a patient with
essential thrombocytosis.
- Summarize the treatment options for essential thrombocytosis.
- Explain the role of the interprofessional interprofessional team in coordinating the evaluation and management of this condition.

# Introduction

Essential thrombocytosis is also known as essential thrombocythemia (ET). It was first recognized in 1934; however, at that time, it was described as hemorrhagic thrombocythemia. Essential thrombocytosis is one of the myeloproliferative neoplasms. It was classified as a myeloproliferative neoplasm in 1951 by Damesheck.

# Etiology

The primary cause of essential thrombocythemia is the overproduction of hematopoietic cells due to the mutation of JAK2, CALR or MPL gene. These genes are known as driver mutations due to the role they play in the development of a myeloproliferative neoplasm.

# Epidemiology

Essential thrombocytosis is the most common type of myeloproliferative neoplasm. Reports are that 1.0 to 2.5 individuals per 100000 have essential thrombocytosis yearly.

# Pathophysiology

The driver genes JAK2, CALR, and MPL, have specific functions which when mutated cause myeloproliferative effects. In 2005, research showed that a single point mutation of the JAK2 leads to a myeloproliferative neoplasm.

# Histopathology

The bone marrow cellularity helps define essential thrombocytosis. In essential thrombocytosis, the bone marrow microscopic examinations show clustered enlarged megakaryocytes with matured cytoplasm containing multilobulated nuclei.

# History and Physical

Essential thrombocytosis patients could present with variable symptoms. In asymptomatic patients, thrombocytosis is usually an incidental finding on complete blood count. For symptomatic patients, the most common symptoms are migraines, headache, and dizziness.

# Evaluation

The evaluation of patients with essential thrombocytosis includes getting a complete blood count, a bone marrow biopsy and genetic testing to evaluate for gene mutations. Platelet count should be more than 450000. The bone marrow biopsy should show evidence of increased proliferation of the megakaryocytic cell lines with increased numbers of enlarged, matured megakaryocytes. Because the symptoms of myeloproliferative neoplasms overlap, it is important to also rule out other causes of thrombocytosis, including clonal and reactive causes, before reaching a definite diagnosis of essential thrombocytosis.

It is helpful to recognize which genetic mutation a patient has whether it is JAK2, CALR or MPL because each of these mutations determines the clinical features, complications, and survival of myeloproliferative neoplasm.

# Treatment / Management

The goal of treatment of essential thrombocytosis is to prevent vascular complications such as thrombotic and hemorrhagic events; this is because thrombosis and hemorrhage are the leading causes of morbidity and mortality.

Hydroxyurea is the first line cytoreductive therapy used. If not well tolerated or patient is resistance to hydroxyurea, then anagrelide is used. Hydroxyurea has been shown to reduce both the number of platelets and the number of leukocytes causing a reduction in thrombosis and myelofibrosis.

# Differential Diagnosis

The differential diagnosis of essential thrombocytosis is broad. Differential diagnosis includes other causes of clonal neoplasms, reactive and spurious thrombocytosis. Clonal causes include different types of myeloproliferative disorders including polycythemia vera and primary myelofibrosis. The presentation of essential thrombocytosis and other myeloproliferative disorders overlap considerably, and the only way to be sure of the diagnosis is to rule out the other myeloproliferative disorders.

# Prognosis

Essential thrombocytosis is an indolent disease and has a good prognosis. The reported life expectancy of patients with essential thrombocytosis was as high as 33 years in patients younger than 60 years.

# Complications

The most common cause of mortality and morbidity in patients with essential thrombocytosis is thrombosis. Thrombosis occurs 20% of the time followed by hemorrhage which is reported to be 10%, and the estimates of risk for conversion are less than 1%.

Essential thrombocytosis is also associated with pregnancy complications. Complications could include eclampsia, placental abruption intrauterine growth retardation, and stillbirth.

# Deterrence and Patient Education

Essential thrombocytosis is not curable; however, patients should be aware that to prevent complications from the disease, they have to be compliant with recommended medications. It is also vital for patients to follow up with their health care providers for close monitoring of their platelets values. Some patients with extreme thrombocytosis could also be required to get hydroxyurea because of the high risk of thrombosis so patients should follow up their platelet levels.

# Enhancing Healthcare Team Outcomes

Essential thrombocytosis usually presents as an incidental finding. Once diagnosed, the most important step is to risk-stratify patients. Patients could be categorized under low, intermediate or high risk. This stratification guides healthcare professionals to decide what treatment strategy to perform. Educating patients on their risk of thrombosis and hemorrhage is imperative as this could encourage patient compliance. Some low-risk patients are only required to take aspirin daily. It is essential that a patient who is younger than 12-years-old should not be treated with aspirin to avoid Reye syndrome.

Although the cytoreductive medications currently available help to reduce thrombotic, hemorrhagic events and conversion to myelofibrosis or acute leukemia, more research needs to be done by pharmaceutical companies and physicians to find a cure. The current goal of managing essential thrombocytosis is to prevent vascular events. It is imperative to find a cure as complications due to stroke, and myocardial infarction could be deadly and cause untimely deaths in high-risk patients.

Treatment and management of essential thrombocytopenia require an interprofessional team approach, involving physicians, nursing staff, and pharmacy, working together to achieve optimal patient outcomes. [Level V]