The Bishop scoring system is based on a digital cervical exam of a patient with a zero point minimum and 13 point maximum. The scoring system utilizes cervical dilation, position, effacement, consistency of the cervix, and fetal station. Cervical dilation, effacement, and station are scored 0 to 3 points, while cervical position and consistency are scored 0 to 2 points (see chart below).

- Cervical dilation is the measure of how dilated the cervix is in centimeters.  This is performed by estimating the average diameter of the open cervix.

- Effacement is the thinning or shortening of the cervix expressed as a percentage of the whole cervix.  Zero percent effacement means the cervix is a normal, pre-labor length. Fifty percent effaced means the cervix is at half of the expected length. If the cervix is 100% effaced, it is paper thin.

- The station is the position of the fetal head relative to the ischial spines of the maternal pelvis. The ischial spines are halfway between the pelvic inlet and outlet. At zero station, the fetal head is at the level of the ischial spines. Above and below this level are divided into thirds, by which station is denoted with negative numbers above and positive numbers below the zero station. As a fetal head makes its descent, the station changes from -3, -2, -1, 0, +1, +2, +3. In 1989, the American College of Obstetrics and Gynecology redefined station from -5 to +5, using centimeters instead of thirds as a measurement from the ischial spines. The Bishop score, however, uses the -3 to +3 system.

- Position refers to the position of the cervix relative to the fetal head and maternal pelvis.

- The consistency of the cervix refers to the feel of the cervix on the exam. A firm cervix has a consistency similar to the tip of the nose, while a soft cervix has a consistency similar to the lips of the oral cavity.

A Bishop score of 8 or greater is considered to be favorable for induction, or the chance of a vaginal delivery with induction is similar to spontaneous labor.  A score of 6 or less is considered to be unfavorable if an induction is indicated cervical ripening agents may be utilized.

The most common modification to the Bishop score is a simplified scoring system that just takes into account dilation, effacement, and station (each scored 0 to 3 points). In this shortened modification, a score of more than 5 is considered favorable.