For infants, potential causes of dysphagia include premature birth, congenital hiatal hernia, bronchopulmonary dysplasia, oesophageal atresia, trachea-oesophageal fistulas, congenital heart disease, gastro-oesophageal reflux, and neurological disorders

Oropharyngeal cancers (more common in the 5th and 6th decades of life) can cause dysphagia via obstruction by the primary tumor or by the reduced movement of the mandible or tongue. Management options for oropharyngeal cancer are also known to cause dysphagia- surgical resection and subsequent reconstruction (for example, the base of tongue resection) removes the normal anatomy involved in moving food boluses and reconstructs it with immobile or hypo-mobile tissue. Radiotherapy of the head and neck region causes physiological changes (e.g., mucositis, hyposalivation, and tissue fibrosis) that impair normal bolus formation and propulsion mechanisms

Neurological causes of dysphagia can occur acutely, for example, in stroke or traumatic brain injury. Conversely, they can progress more slowly over time as part of neurodegenerative conditions such as Parkinson disease.

Approximately 780,000 individuals in the US have a stroke in any given year, with aspiration pneumonia affecting one-third of stroke sufferers

With traumatic brain injuries, a common cause for dysphagia is the motor pattern reorganization following injury. This may be further prolonged by vocal cord paralysis following a long period of endotracheal tube intubation while in intensive care.

An estimated 80% of patients diagnosed with Parkinson disease have some degree of dysphagia (caused by both dopaminergic and non-dopaminergic disease pathways).

Iatrogenic causes include endotracheal intubation (which can cause damage to the recurrent laryngeal nerve supplying the vocal cord) and surgeries involving the head and neck or cardiothoracic surgery.

With aging, abnormalities in the cough reflex may develop as a result of the reduction of sensitivity in both the pharynx and larynx. Coupled with a delay in the initiation of the swallowing reflex and the slowing of food boluses passing along the oral and pharyngeal stages of swallowing, illness can cause the elderly to be more prone to dysphagia and aspiration pneumonia. An estimated 13% of nursing home residents are deemed to have some degree of dysphagia. Carer providers need to liaise with speech and language therapists to identify individuals who are considered vulnerable.

Other causes of dysphagia include:

38% of patients with multiple sclerosis, ALS (80% of patients are affected by the advanced stages of this disease. One in three patients demonstrates dysphagia from bulbar palsy.