The goal is to provide an optimal environment for the growth of the femoral head and acetabulum. So a high index of suspicion and routine surveillance is needed to detect DDH and prevent complications.

To provide this optimal contact between the femoral head and acetabulum, various treatment modalities like abduction splinting, closed reduction, open reduction are available.

Double diapering is most likely harmless, but efficacy is close to zero.

**0 to 4 Weeks**

- Mild instability without a dislocatable hip can be watched.

- Early referral to an orthopedic surgeon experienced treatment of DDH will be optimal if the hips are dislocatable. The application of abduction splints (Pavlik harness) will be up to the orthopedic surgeon who manages it. But a study done by Larson JE et al. concluded waiting up to 30 days before initiation of treatment shows no significant difference in the outcome.

**1 to 6 Months**

Abduction devices like Pavlik harness, Von Rosen splint, Lausanne-developed abduction brace, Ilfeld orthosis, and Frejka pillow can be tried. Pavlik harness is the widely used device for DDH. It consists of an anterior strap that flexes the hip at 90 degrees and prevents extension, posterior strap to prevent adduction. Its worn 23 hours per day for at least six weeks or until the hip is stable. The US of the hip is done every 3- 4 weeks to monitor the position of the femoral head. The success rate is about 90 % for Barlow's positive hip.

The failure rate is high with the following conditions:

If the hips are not reduced by three weeks, semi-rigid, non-flexible abduction devices like Ilfed orthosis to keep the hip in abducted position can be tried in a study by Sankar et al. 82 % success rate with Ilfed orthosis after Pavlik harness failure.

**6 to 18 Months**

For infants who are diagnosed with DDH at this age or patients who failed with abduction devices, closed reduction with hip spica cast is preferred. Under general anesthesia (GA), the hip is placed in 90-100 degrees flexion and 40-50 degrees abduction. The failure rate is about 13.6 %.

The main complication is avascular necrosis of the head. CT or MRI is needed to confirm the position of the hip position. In a study by Gornitzky AL et al., MRI with contrast can identify perfusion abnormalities following closed reduction, thus preventing AVN.

**18 Months to 8 Years**

Open reduction is preferred for children diagnosed with DDH over 18 months and infants who failed closed reduction. Open reduction can be used to correct anatomical abnormalities like inverted labrum, neolimbus, pulvinar, hypertrophied ligamentum trees. Capsulorrhaphy and release of tight iliopsoas tendon can also be done. The two preferred approaches are anterior (Smith-Peterson) and medial. Medial is less invasive, but anterior is classical and will help correct most of the anatomical abnormalities. A femoral shortening osteotomy can be added to children if needed. The main complication is AVN. After open reduction, a spica cast applied and reduction is confirmed with CT or MRI.

**Acetabular Dysplasia**

Children with shallow or vertical acetabulum lead to osteoarthritis due to edge loading. Patients presenting with acetabular dysplasia up to age 5, without dislocation can be treated with part-time or full-time abduction orthosis.

After age 5, pelvic osteotomies (Salter, Pemberton, and Dega) use a single cut to increase anterior or anterolateral coverage. If the patient has an open triradiate cartilage center, triple cut (triple innominate osteotomy) can be performed.

Salvage pelvic osteotomies: Shelf procedure is indicated for patients >8 years old with a subluxated femoral head. By placing an extra-articular buttress of bone to the lateral weight-bearing aspect of the acetabulum. Chiari procedure is indicated for patients with inadequate femoral head coverage with a concentric reduction that cannot be obtained. It medializes the acetabulum via iliac osteotomy.

**Adolescent/Adult Hip Preservation Surgery**

Patients who are presenting with hip pain and with shallow acetabulum (radiographic femoral head undercoverage), and closed triradiate cartilage but without signs of hip degeneration can be treated with a periacetabular osteotomy (PAO). Bernese PAO is a technique in which multiple cuts are made to modify and reorient acetabular cartilage while maintaining an intact posterior column.