Chronic kidney transplant rejection poses a risk of allograft loss, increasing patient morbidity, and mortality. Acute rejection is a significant risk factor for chronic rejection. Thus, an interprofessional team approach to diagnosis and management is crucial.

Evaluation starts with a thorough history taking and ordering the necessary lab tests ordered by the specialist/clinician. Immunosuppression medication levels need regular monitoring; this should include the services of a board-certified pharmacotherapy pharmacist. The pharmacist can also verify dosing and perform medication reconciliation. Renal ultrasonography is an inexpensive and non-invasive tool that can aid diagnosis. A biopsy is often necessary for definitive diagnosis and ruling out other causes of allograft injury. The management of chronic kidney transplant rejection remains challenging, mainly due to irreversibility at the time of diagnosis. Management, therefore, focuses on the prevention and early management of acute rejection rather than treating chronic rejection. Patient adherence to immunosuppressive medications is essential in preventing acute rejection and late allograft loss; nursing staff is critical to following and assessing patient compliance. Improving health care professionals' knowledge of how to promptly evaluate and treat this condition will help improve patient outcomes. Early and effective communication between the patient, primary care clinician, pharmacist, and transplant nephrologist is crucial for early diagnosis and treatment to prevent allograft loss. Transplantation nurses monitor patients, provide education, and document these for the team. These interprofessional case dynamics are vital to achieving optimal outcomes for patients with CKTR. [Level 5]