Acyclovir administration may be oral or intravenous.

For limited mucocutaneous lesions, acyclovir administration can be via the oral route. In cases with disseminated, visceral, or CNS involvement, the acyclovir administration should be intravenous.

When taken orally, acyclovir may be taken with or without food 2 to 5 times a day for 5 to 10 days and up to 12 months to prevent outbreaks of genital herpes.

Intravenous administration should be done via IV infusion only, over 1 hour, at a constant rate to prevent renal damage. Medication should be in a diluted D5W solution or 0.9% NaCl to a final concentration of less than or equal to 7 mg/mL.

The following is a non-exhaustive list of dosing regimens:

- **HSV Encephalitis**- 10 mg/kg IV every 8 hours for 21 days; use ideal body weight for obese patients

- **Genital HSV**(immunocompetent patients):
- Mild or moderate infection, initial episode - 400 mg orally three times daily for 7 to 10 days
- Severe infection, the first episode - 5 to 10 mg/kg IV every 8 hours for 10 days; use ideal body weight for obese patients
- Recurring infection - 400 mg orally three times a day for 5 days. May also use 800 mg orally twice daily for 5 days

- **Genital HSV**(immunocompromised patients):
- Initial episode - 400 mg orally three times daily for 5 to 10 days
- Recurring infection - 400 mg orally three times a day for 5 days. May also use 800 mg orally twice daily for 5 days

- **Varicella-zoster - Chickenpox**
- Immunocompetent patients - 800 mg orally four to five times a day for 5 to 7 days
- Immunocompromised patients - 800 mg orally 5 days daily for 7 days

- **Varicella-zoster - Shingles**
- Immunocompetent patients - 800 mg orally five times a day for 7 days
- Immunocompromised patients - 10 mg/kg IV every 8 hours for 7 days; use ideal body weight for obese patients

Acyclovir has poor bioavailability, which is about 10 to 20%.

Acyclovir plasma protein binding is low at about 15% and can penetrate the blood-brain barrier. Acyclovir is primarily renally eliminated unchanged by glomerular filtration and active tubular secretion. The mean half-life for acyclovir after I.V. administration ranges from 2.5 to 3 hours. The patient’s renal clearance correlates well with the creatine clearance.

Therefore, patient variability in the safety and efficacy of acyclovir is significantly based on the patient’s age and renal function, which requires careful monitoring. Renal impairment can dramatically increase the half-life of acyclovir, eg, up to 10 times. The pharmacokinetics of acyclovir is similar in pediatric patients. Variants in the NUDT15 and ABCC4 genes might impair the efficacy of acyclovir.