Calcineurin inhibitors are immunosuppressants used in the management of autoimmune conditions such as lupus nephritis, idiopathic inflammatory myositis, interstitial lung disease, atopic dermatitis, and many more. In addition, they are used as mainstays for immunosuppression in solid organ transplants.

**Cyclosporine**

- The most common FDA-approved indication is its role as an adjuvant to glucocorticoids in the treatment and prevention of allogeneic post-organ transplant rejection in patients who undergo kidney, heart, liver, and bone marrow transplantation.

- Cyclosporine modified formulations are FDA-approved for treating patients with severe and active rheumatoid arthritis when the disease hasn’t adequately responded to methotrexate. It could be combined with methotrexate in patients with rheumatoid arthritis who do not respond adequately to methotrexate alone.

- Cyclosporine modified formulations are also indicated for treating adult, nonimmunocompromised patients with severe and recalcitrant plaque psoriasis when they have failed to respond to at least one systemic therapy (e.g., retinoids, PUVA, or methotrexate) or when other systemic therapies can’t be tolerated or contraindicated.

- The ophthalmic formulation of cyclosporin is FDA-approved to increase tear production in patients diagnosed with keratoconjunctivitis sicca due to ocular inflammation and is also used in vernal keratoconjunctivitis.

- Non-FDA-approved indications include its role in the treatment of allergic conjunctivitis, alopecia, chronic urticaria, aplastic anemia, and interstitial cystitis. It is used off-labeled for several autoimmune diseases, including ulcerative colitis, systemic lupus erythematosus, Sjogren disease. It is also used in many glomerular diseases, including lupus nephritis, focal segmental glomerulosclerosis, minimal change disease, membranous nephropathy, and idiopathic nephrotic syndrome, particularly the steroid-resistant variety. It is used as prophylactic therapy for the prevention of graft vs. host disease.

**Tacrolimus**

- It is approved by the FDA in its oral formulation for the prevention of allogeneic post-organ transplant rejection in combination with other immunosuppressants like azathioprine and mycophenolate mofetil in patients undergoing kidney, liver, or heart transplants. In addition, IV formulation is offered for the same indications for patients who cannot take the drug orally.

- The topical form of tacrolimus comes in 2 concentrations: 0.03% for children aged 2 to 15 years and 0.1% for adults. It is approved for use as a second-line treatment of moderate to severe atopic dermatitis in children who are nonresponsive to other topical treatments and in adults with a very severe disease involving a large body surface area.

- Non-FDA-approved uses that have been reported for tacrolimus include its use as a prophylactic agent for the prevention of graft vs. host disease, prophylaxis for prevention of corneal, pancreatic, renal, and small intestine transplant rejection, induction therapy of lupus nephritis, treatment of Crohn disease, membranous glomerulonephritis, and myasthenia gravis, and to reduce the incidence of pancreatitis in patients undergoing liver transplantation after endoscopic retrograde cholangiopancreatography.

**Pimecrolimus**

- It is approved as a 1% topical formulation and is FDA-approved for the treatment of mild to moderate atopic dermatitis. It has many non-FDA-approved uses, including oral lichen planus, psoriasis on the face and intertriginous areas, vitiligo, lichen sclerosis of the vulva, and seborrheic dermatitis.

**Voclosporin**

- It is a novel drug of the class and got FDA approval in 2021 in its oral form to be used with other immunosuppressants for the treatment of active lupus nephritis in adults.