- Pyodermatitis pyostomatitis vegetans: Clinically and histologically look similar to pemphigus vegetans, but is often associated with inflammatory bowel disease and should have a negative DIF.

- Bullous pemphigoid: Typically presents with tense blisters, urticarial plaques, and pruritus. Mucosal involvement is rare. The histopathological evaluation shows a subepidermal cleft, and DIF shows IgG and/or C3 deposition at the basement membrane. Circulating IgG and IgE autoantibodies are detected against hemidesmosomal proteins.

- IgA pemphigus: A subacute autoimmune intraepidermal blistering diseases associated with circulating IgA antibodies. DIF shows intracellular IgA deposits within the epidermis.

- Hailey-Hailey Disease: Hailey-Hailey disease is an autosomal dominant genodermatosis that often forms chronic inflammatory plaques in intertriginous areas. The plaques appear as crusted macerated erosions with dry, velvety fissures. Histologic evaluation of the epidermis demonstrates the characteristic “dilapidated brick wall” appearance, which consists of suprabasal clefting and acantholysis.

- Pyoderma vegetans: Rare vesiculopustular disease, characterized by vegetative plaques with exudate, classically located in the inguinal and axillary folds. It is generally found in immunocompromised patients and is associated with bacterial infections. Histologically, there is pseudoepitheliomatous hyperplasia with sub and intraepidermal microabscesses.

- Paraneoplastic pemphigus: Similar findings to pemphigus vulgaris, often with severe mucosal involvement. It is always associated with underlying malignancy, most commonly a hematopoietic malignancy such as chronic lymphocytic leukemia, or other B-cell lymphomas.

- Epidermolysis bullosa acquisita (EBA): EBA is an autoimmune blistering disease, with mucosal involvement. It is caused by circulating autoantibodies against type VII collagen, which is responsible for maintaining the dermal-epidermal junction.  The clinical picture is variable, and linear deposits of IgG, IgA, and/or C3 along the dermal-epidermal junction and identification of serum autoantibodies against type VII collagen confirm the diagnosis.

- Porphyria: Porphyrias are genetic diseases of the heme biosynthesis pathway.  Porphyria cutanea tarda (PCT) is the commonest, characterized by defective uroporphyrinogen III decarboxylase enzyme. Dermatological manifestations include erosions, vesicles, and bullae in areas exposed to sunlight.

- Pemphigus foliaceus (PF): PF is similar to pemphigus vulgaris, but autoantibodies direct their activity against desmoglein (DSG) 1, and it does not involve the mucosal membranes.  The blister is often more superficially located in the epidermis.

- Disseminated Herpes infection: May cause vesiculobullous eruptions, but due to viral infection. Histopathological evaluation, viral studies, and culture are key for diagnosis.

- Stevens-Johnson Syndrome and Toxic Epidermal Necrolysis (SJS/TEN): Spectrum of desquamative disorders characterized by prodromal upper respiratory symptoms, followed by a rash that progresses to full or partial thickness epidermal loss. Most often caused by medication, but has also been associated with infectious etiologies.

- Desquamative gingivitis- may be seen in herpes, oral lichen planus, erythema multiforme, and SJS/TEN.