**EKG**

Commonly seen EKG findings in pulmonary regurgitation in the absence of pulmonary artery hypertension (PAH) are rSR configuration in the right precordial leads, which reflects RV diastolic overload. If it is secondary to PAH, then a P-pulmonale (tall p waves- indicating right atrial enlargement), increased r to s ratio in the right precordial leads along with right axis deviation can be seen. These findings are secondary to RV hypertrophy.

On a chest X-ray, both pulmonary artery and right ventricular enlargement are visible, but these signs are nonspecific. Fluoroscopy may demonstrate pronounced pulsation of the main pulmonary artery.

**Echocardiography**

Right ventricular dilation, along with hypertrophy, appears in two-dimensional echocardiography in patients with pulmonary hypertension. Abnormal motion of the septum characteristic of volume overload of the right ventricle in diastole and/or septal flutter may be evident. The motion of the pulmonic valve may point to the cause of the PR. The absence of a wave and systolic notching of the posterior leaflet suggests pulmonary hypertension; large a wave indicate pulmonic stenosis. Doppler echocardiography is extremely accurate in detecting PR and in helping to estimate its severity.

- Mild PR - Normal right ventricular dimensions with thin (less than 10mm in length) regurgitant jet width by color doppler

- Moderate PR - Normal or dilated right ventricle with intermediate regurgitant jet width (less than 50% of pulmonic valve annulus)

- Severe PR- Dilated right ventricle (except in acute PR) with large regurgitant jet width (greater than 50% of pulmonic valve annulus)

**Angiography**

In PR, opacification of the right ventricle is noticed following the injection of contrast into the pulmonary artery due to the regurgitant jet.

Cardiac magnetic resonance helps in assessing pulmonary artery dilation and the severity of PR.