Angioplasty is the treatment of choice for acute myocardial infarction. Two main approaches used for catheterization are transfemoral: classical and transradial. The transbrachial approach is not routinely done; however, the choice of procedure depends on patient’s characteristics and expertise available.

**Transradial Approach**

The radial artery is very superficial so it can be easily punctured, and manual compression controls bleeding. Anatomically, there are no nearby major nerves or vessels present. Thus, there is a minimal risk of neurovascular injuries. However, the diameter of the radial artery is very small and small size catheters are required. Compared to transfemoral approach, transradial approach is cost-effective and associated with early discharge from the hospital. With advancement in interventional cardiology’s hardware, transradial approach emerged as a good alternative to classical transfemoral approach. Transradial approach is associated with low risk of access site bleeding or hematoma formation, pseudoaneurysm formation, morbidity and mortality, and lower risk of hand ischemia due to the good collateral blood supply of hand by ulnar artery via palmer arch. Assessment of palmar arches can be done with the help of Allen’s test or pulse oximetry examination. Transradial approach is associated with longer duration of the procedure, greater radiation exposure, anatomical variations leading to catheterization failure, and radial artery spasm which can be managed with local injection of vasodilatory medication such as nitrates and calcium channel blockers.

**Transfemoral Approach**

The transfemoral approach is the more classical procedure and associated with easy access, less radiation time, and less contrast use. However, access site complications are more common, especially in obese patients. The complexities include access site bleeding, hematoma, major retroperitoneal bleeding requiring a blood transfusion, arteriovenous fistula formation and pseudoaneurysm and neurovascular injuries. The femoral artery is the only source of blood to the leg, so there are more chances of ischemia compared with the transradial approach.