Injuries to the pelvis signify a high energy mechanism of injury, and therefore a thorough trauma evaluation is needed. All patients should undergo routine assessment as described by the American College of Surgeons (e.g., as per the Advanced Trauma Life Support protocol) which includes evaluation for any potentially life-threatening injuries, whether related to the hip or not.

Pelvic ring fractures are commonly associated with injuries to the axial or appendicular spine. Therefore, the spine and extremities should also be examined assessing for limb length discrepancies and obvious angular or rotational deformities. Neurovascular structures crossing the pelvis may also be involved with injuries to the pelvis, and a thorough initial neurological examination is critical for appropriate management and monitoring.

Medical practitioners should carefully monitor the hemodynamic status of patients with pelvic fractures, as there is frequently concomitant blood loss, even in closed fractures. Intraabdominal bleeding is present in up to 40% of cases, but there also may be intrathoracic, retroperitoneal, or compartmental bleeding in such injuries. Within the pelvis, bleeding is usually caused by shearing of the venous plexus and can lead to hematomas holding up to 4L of blood.  Posterior pelvic fractures may also result in an arterial injury to the superior gluteal artery, which constitutes a surgical emergency.

Assessment of soft-tissue injuries may provide further insight into the degree of impact sustained by the patient.  It is particularly important to assess for any lacerations of the perineum (e.g., rectum or vagina) as this would indicate a severe injury and fractures potentially contaminated by urine, stool, or other environmental contaminants.

Neurologic injuries associated with pelvic fractures typically involve the L5 or S1 nerve roots.  If there is a sacral fracture involved, this may also include an S2-S5 sacral nerve root injury which could result in bowel or bladder incontinence and sexual dysfunction.