Most nontraumatic ischemic events are related to vascular occlusion from atherosclerosis or other thromboembolic diseases. This risk is usually from hereditary factors that, along with advanced age and gender, cannot be controlled by preventive measures. Many associated risk factors can be controlled, often with the management of a primary care provider. Diet, activity, alteration of nutritional balance for weight loss as needed, and moderation of alcohol intake may help mitigate some additional risk. Medication may be appropriate to help diabetic patients maintain good glycemic control.

Iatrogenic causes can also contribute to ischemic tissue occlusive events, including postoperative reactive inflammatory responses or sudden hypotensive responses to medical management. Air-gas embolisms can arise from insufflation during endoscopic procedures or delivery of anesthetic gases due to over-pressurization of poorly compliant lungs. Any of these actions may be enough to cause a vaso-occlusive occurrence.

Additional endothelial damage may occur with the complete occlusion of flow, thereby inhibiting oxygen delivery in any concentration to the affected tissue. Early intervention with oxygenated hemoglobin may mitigate some of this risk by activation and increased production of protective antioxidants such as superoxide dismutase, catalase, heme oxygenase-1, nitric oxide synthase, and heat shock proteins.

Hyperbaric oxygen therapy is a relatively safe treatment with a primary risk (greater than 1%) of barotrauma to the middle ear and sinus cavities. The only direct contraindication for treatment is the presence of a pneumothorax. The risk for treatment-induced pneumothorax, however, is less than 0.01%. The potential benefits of hyperbaric oxygen therapy outweigh the risks.