To understand the presence of bilirubin in the urine, it is important to understand the physiology behind bilirubin metabolism which can be divided into three phases: prehepatic, hepatic, and posthepatic.

**Prehepatic**

The body produces 4 mg per kg of bilirubin from the metabolism of heme. 80 percent of heme is generated from the catabolism of RBC, and the remaining 20 percent is generated from ineffective erythropoiesis and breakdown of muscle myoglobin.  Through a series of reactions, heme becomes biliverdin, which is then transformed into bilirubin and transported from the plasma to the liver for conjugation.

**Hepatic**

The bilirubin released from the reticuloendothelial system that reaches the hepatocyte is unconjugated/insoluble and is bound to albumin. Once it reaches the hepatocyte, the albumin-bilirubin bond is broken, and the bilirubin is taken by the hepatocyte using a carrier-membrane transport. Once in the hepatocyte, the unconjugated bilirubin is taken to the endoplasmic reticulum, where it is conjugated with a sugar via the enzyme glucuronosyltransferase and is then soluble in the aqueous bile. The conjugated bilirubin is then excreted into bile. The canalicular excretion of bilirubin is the rate-liming step of hepatic bilirubin metabolism; accumulation of conjugated bilirubin in blood signifies hepatocellular dysfunction when the canalicular excretion of bilirubin is overwhelmed or obstruction of the bile duct.

**Posthepatic**

The conjugated/soluble bilirubin is transported through the biliary and cystic ducts to the gallbladder where it gets stored, or it passes through the ampulla of Vater to enter the duodenum. In the intestines, the bilirubin gets metabolized by the colonic bacteria into urobilinogen, eighty percent of which gets excreted into feces as stercobilin, given its unique color. From the remaining twenty percent, ten percent of it is excreted in the urine as urobilin, given the urine its unique color, and ninety percent of it is unconjugated and undergoes enterohepatic circulation.

In a normal physiological state, conjugated bilirubin is not passed in urine. If there is hepatocellular dysfunction or biliary obstruction, some of the direct conjugated bilirubin escapes into the bloodstream, gets filtered by the kidneys, and excreted in the urine. Thus, bilirubinuria is an important early sign of a pathological process.