The most frequent clinical manifestations of Lambert-Eaton myasthenic syndrome are proximal muscle weakness, autonomic dysfunction, and absent deep tendon reflexes. Symptoms are usually insidious in onset and progress more rapidly in SCLC-LEMS.

- Muscle weakness: As it typically involves proximal leg, patients complain of difficulty arising from a seated position. Muscle involvement is usually symmetrical, and the pattern of progression has been described to be proximal to distal, and caudal to cranial, finally reaching the oculobulbar region. Patients also describe a dull aching or stiffness. On examination, areflexia is present in the absence of significant muscle atrophy.

- Postexercise or post-activation facilitation which is characterized by the return of tendon reflexes and muscle strength with repeated muscle contraction is associated with Lambert-Eaton myasthenic syndrome. The exam is more evident if tested after the patient rests for a brief period.

- Oculobulbar weakness: Cranial nerve involvement may be seen in up to 70% of patients with Lambert-Eaton myasthenic syndrome. Ocular symptoms, particularly ptosis and diplopia, are the most common cranial nerve manifestations of Lambert-Eaton myasthenic syndrome. Dysphagia and dysarthria also are seen. These symptoms typically appear in later stages of the disease.

- Autonomic dysfunction is reported in 80% to 96% of the patients. Dry mouth is the most commonly reported symptom. Other symptoms are erectile dysfunction in men, constipation, orthostatic dysfunction, and altered perspiration.

- Respiratory failure infrequently occurs in the later stages of a patient with Lambert-Eaton myasthenic syndrome.