Corneal dystrophies (CD) are a group of genetically determined diseases that are restricted to one or more layers of the cornea. These can be characterized as bilateral, symmetric, slowly progressive and have no systemic manifestations. Most often these are inherited as a dominant trait. Recessive inheritance occurs seldomly in a limited number of pedigrees. Ocular symptoms of CD can include blurred vision, foreign body sensation, eye pain, photophobia, and lacrimation

Posterior polymorphous corneal dystrophy (PPCD) was described first by Koeppe in 1916. PPCD is a rare, hereditary condition passed on in an autosomal dominant manner. Manifestations of this condition are highly variable. Affected family members may have distinctly different ocular presentation. The Descemet basement membrane laid down by endothelial cells is abnormally thickened in PPCD.  Corneal edema associated with PPCM may be evident at a very young age. However, the majority of patients are asymptomatic and diagnosis occurs years later at the time of a routine ocular health examination

Bilateral presentation is typical for corneal dystrophies but an asymmetric appearance is not uncommon with PPCD. Corneal findings are either nonprogressive or very slowly progressive

PPCD may also involve the iris and the anatomical angle. Rather than confining themselves to the posterior surface of the cornea, the aberrant endothelial cells can migrate erratically across the chamber angle and onto the peripheral iris surface. Abnormal basement membrane is secreted, creating iridocorneal adhesions and a glass-like appearance that can be appreciated gonioscopically. On the iris surface, this membrane can lead to corectopia and pupillary ectropion. Areas of peripheral anterior synechiae (PAS) with segmental zones of angle-closure can occur, increasing the risk for glaucoma