Patients with a bicornuate uterus can present with several unfortunate complications.

The most common complication associated with the bicornuate uterus is preterm labor. A cervical length of less than 25 mm on transvaginal ultrasound has 13 times higher risk of preterm delivery.

A pregnancy in a bicornuate uterus can also be succeeded by postpartum hemorrhage. Postpartum hemorrhage is manageable by an assortment of surgical and nonsurgical alternatives. The nonsurgical methodology of utilizing Bakri Balloon is proved to be viable in the bicornuate uterus. However, the surgical approach, for instance, B lynch suturing, and conduit ligation can harm the neighboring structures. Moreover, ligation may not be effective with the collateral blood supply of uterus in pregnancy.

A bicornuate uterus is a risk factor for rupture of the uterus even in a primigravida. The explanation could be an abnormal development of the lower fragment of the uterus or the presence of a fibrous band between the corpora of the uterus. This band restrains the uterus, unable to expand, and hence gets inclined to rupture.

Due to the association of uterine anomalies with renal anomalies, a woman is at high risk for pregnancy-induced hypertension during her gestational period. Thus it is essential to monitor blood pressure during pregnancy in a woman with bicornuate uterus.

Although bicornuate uterus is not an independent risk factor for endometrial cancer but cancer in endometrium can go undetected. If taken from the healthy uterine cavity, a biopsy can give false-negative results, leading to a delay in diagnosis and worsening the prognosis of the patient. MRI can play an essential role in diagnosing the disease if a patient with bicornuate uterus presents with uterine bleeding.