Unilateral cases of choroidal folds have a higher chance of orbital disease and more severe ocular disease than bilateral presentations.

Idiopathic cases can be observed as they are usually asymptomatic. Cases of acquired hyperopia with choroidal folds can usually be observed as no active treatment is required. Management of choroidal tumors varies depending on the suspected tumor.

Observation with lifestyle modification is usually the first line of treatment in most cases of CSCR. Chronic or recurrent cases can be treated with argon laser or green 532 nm frequency-doubled Nd-YAG laser photocoagulation, or micropulse diode laser to point of leakage. Photodynamic therapy is another modality. Carbonic anhydrase inhibitors and anti-corticosteroid therapy have also been tried with variable results.

Cases of severe uveal effusion can be treated with scleral flaps excision and decompression of vortex veins.

Cases of papilledema should be evaluated for causes of raised intracranial tension and managed accordingly.

Management in cases of hypotony should be directed to find out the underlying cause. Posterior scleritis cases can be started with oral analgesics and corticosteroids. Refractory cases can be given intravenous corticosteroids. High-dose systemic corticosteroids and immunomodulatory therapy are important in the management of VKH disease. Cases of active choroidal neovascularization are treated with anti-VEGF (vascular endothelial growth factor) agents. Choroidal scars may be observed. Cases of space flight-associated neuro-ocular syndrome should be managed similarly to papilledema. Space anticipation glasses can be used to counteract the hyperopic shift on the International Space Station. Acetazolamide and venoconstrictor thigh cuffs to counteract cephalad shift of fluid and lower body negative pressure techniques have also been tried.

Management of Graves ophthalmopathy requires a multidisciplinary approach of both endocrinologists and ophthalmologists. Though converting the patient to a euthyroid state is important, it is not necessary if ophthalmic complaints require urgent treatment. Hyperthyroidism can be treated with anti-thyroid drugs, radioactive iodine, or thyroidectomy. Graves’ ophthalmopathy can be treated with supportive measures like lubricants and smoking cessation. Corticosteroids and radiation therapy can also be tried. Surgery may be done for orbital decompression, strabismus, and eyelid retraction.