Prognosis also depends on the duration of disease and the underlying cause. In otherwise healthy individuals with cases of hypovolemia, the prognosis is pretty good. However, it is essential to note that patients with prerenal kidney failure do have a higher risk of developing chronic kidney disease, and then the end-stage renal disease. There are certain factors, which do put individuals at increased risk for mortality.

Factors that lead to increased risk of morbidity and mortality include:

- Male sex

- Race (lower mortality in black patients compared to white patients)

- Increased age (odds ratio increases 1.13 every decade)

- Sepsis

- Presence of underlying liver failure

- Thrombocytopenia

- Acute respiratory distress syndrome

- Poor nutritional status

In patients who are recovering from an AKI, the risk for an irreversible decline in renal function is also associated with certain risk factors. Examples of risk factors that can lead to this decline are; age higher than 65 yrs, low albumin state, low baseline GFR, and co-morbidities, including heart failure, and hypertension. Also, the more elevated the serum creatinine is at discharge, and the severity of AKI, the greater is the risk for progression to CKD. Studies have also shown that severe in-hospital AKI has been associated with cardiovascular mortality. This increased cardiovascular disease is thought to be secondary to an increase in hypertension and a rise in the development of CKD. Similarly, patients who have AKI are also at increased risk for hypertension.