Treatment for the plethora of cutaneous manifestations of Crohn disease is extensively varied. Each of the manifestations that were discussed above will be briefly discussed below.

Specific lesions: lesions with histopathological findings consistent with Crohn disease on biopsy

- The cutaneous lesion occurs due to a direct extension of bowel disease to the skin. In general, surgical intervention is required.

- Metastatic Crohn disease: Treatment of metastatic Crohn disease often proves to be significantly difficult. Few therapeutic options are available with very limited information regarding the efficacy of the therapies. Case reports have suggested the use of immunomodulators, such as anti-TNF biologics or topical or systemic corticosteroids.

Reactive lesions:****inflammatory lesions that do not share the same histopathological findings but are believed to share similar pathogenesis with Crohn disease.

- Pyoderma gangrenosum (PG): Goals of treatment should include reduction of the inflammatory process to promote healing, pain reduction, and control of underlying IBD (particularly if PG lesions seem to parallel Crohn disease course). Patients should be educated about daily wound care, and referral to a wound care center may be helpful. Generally, the first-line systemic therapy for PG is systemic corticosteroids (0.5 to 2 mg/kg/day), and concurrent use of local corticosteroid therapy may be implemented as well. Should the PG prove refractory to corticosteroids, oral or intravenous (IV), cyclosporine, or anti-TNF agents should be considered. Surgery and debridement should be avoided as a treatment for PG due to potential pathergy. Unfortunately, remission may be short-lived because as many as 25% of patients will experience recurrent disease.

- Sweet's syndrome: Disease is self-limited, and most lesions completely resolve without scarring in 1 to 3 months, but recurrence occurs in about one-third of patients. Oral corticosteroids such as prednisone (0.5 to 1 mg/kg/day) may be used for 4 to 6 weeks, and lesions generally improve or resolve quickly. For localized disease, topical or intralesional steroids may be more appropriate.

Associated lesions: likely arise due to shared HLA-gene types or secondary to a chronic inflammatory response.

- Erythema nodosum: Disease is self-limited and resolves without scarring. As the presence of erythema nodosum tends to parallel the activity of intestinal disease, treatment directed at achieving better control of the patient's Crohn disease is recommended. Leg elevation, compression hose, and pain control should be implemented as well. In severe or refractory cases, systemic corticosteroids (0.5 to 1 mg/kg/day) should be initiated. Anti-TNF agents may be required if there is an absence of an adequate response to prednisone.

- Oral lesions: Oral lesions such as aphthous ulcerations, pyostomatitis vegetans, and periodontitis disease activity are positively correlated to underlying intestinal disease activity. First-line management should aim to achieve better control of Crohn disease with supportive care with antiseptic and analgesic mouthwashes plus or minus local corticosteroids.

Treatment-induced: A novel category of cutaneous findings most commonly associated with Crohn disease treatment using anti-TNF biologics.

- Anti-TNF-associated skin lesions: As previously stated, withdrawal of the anti-TNF should resolve the lesions; however, this is often not necessary as the eczematous or psoriasiform skin changes may be managed with various topical treatments, including topical corticosteroids, emollients, vitamin D analogs, and phototherapy.