Islets are isolated from the donor, but first, the duodenum and spleen are detached from the pancreas as well as lymph nodes, vessels, and peri-pancreatic fat. The head of the pancreas is then transected, and the catheters are placed into the main pancreatic duct. The pancreas is then perfused with the collagenase solution. The pancreas undergoes 10 minutes of cold perfusion and is then sliced into smaller pieces before being placed into the inferior portion of the Ricordi chamber. The digestive, enzymatic solution is then infused into the chamber. Hank's solution is subsequently released as a pump cycles the mixture.

The temperature is manipulated, and the solution circulated until islets are cleared from acinar tissue. The islets are collected and then stained with dithizone to evaluate them. Once the purity, viability, potency, and stability are verified through digital computer analysis, the islets are ready for the infusion process. Islet cells have a stability time of 72 hours after the harvesting process. They must be infused within 72 hours of harvesting to promote the best chance at survival.

The donor islets must not exceed a tissue volume of 5 ml, which are then diluted with heparin and 40 to 60 ml of a solution, such as lactated Ringer. Graft implantation can be in multiple ways. Mini laparotomy with cannulation of one of the mesenteric or omental veins is one method performed by transplant surgeons. Another technique that is typically performed by interventional radiologists is accessing the portal vein under image guidance. It takes approximately 15 minutes to infuse the bag of islets, heparin, and solution once a vein has been cannulated. The portal vein pressure is monitored and must be kept at or below 22 mmHg. Once the infusion is complete and the catheter is removed from the vein, the gelatin sponges and coils are placed into the cannulation site.