Egg allergy is common in society but is not easy to cure. Avoiding eggs is not always easy as egg products are common. Parents often get carried away with food preparations and this only leads to more social isolation of the child.

As egg allergy most common in the pediatric population, open communication is essential between the patient’s primary caregivers, physicians, education personnel and pharmacist is vital.  It is essential to instruct parents on the importance of avoiding eggs and to evaluate any food item for the presence of egg products.

Patients with a high risk for anaphylaxis should be prescribed epinephrine and educated on administration. Epinephrine is the most effective treatment for anaphylaxis as it directly counteracts the effects of histamine by promoting smooth muscle relaxation and by decreasing vascular permeability.  Parents and caregivers should be educated that Benadryl or other anti-histamines are NOT appropriate alternatives to epinephrine.

Although hospitalizations exclusively due to egg allergy are not as frequent, nursing personnel taking care of an inpatient with egg allergy should be educated on the signs and symptoms of an allergic response and to be mindful of potential anaphylaxis.  Nursing staff should also be instructed on the proper administration of IM epinephrine should anaphylaxis be observed.

As mentioned previously, hen egg is an excellent source of protein and patient’s with egg allergy, as with other food allergies, may pose a risk of malnutrition.  Discussions with a dietician may be of benefit in order to address this issue and to incorporate other dietary sources of protein, vitamin D, etc.

Finally, patients need to be educated by the nurse practitioner that children with egg allergies can safely undergo immunization. Many studies have shown that the influenza vaccine is safe in children with egg allergies.

**Outcomes**

There is no cure for egg allergies but with proper education, most people can live a good quality of life.