Patients with ventricular premature complexes in the setting of underlying structural heart disease should receive guideline-directed medical therapy (GDMT) as indicated in their specific disease process. Treatment is a consideration in patients who are symptomatic with a high burden of ectopic beats or who have frequent episodes of nonsustained ventricular tachycardia. Most notably, VPCs that transform into ventricular fibrillation (usually mediated by the R-on-T phenomenon) should receive immediate defibrillation. If treatment is indicated, beta-blockers are typically first-line therapy. Catecholamine-sensitive or exercise-induced VPCs have an excellent response to the initiation of beta-blocker therapy. VPCs in the setting of CHF or myocardial infarction should be treated with beta-blockers as first-line therapy, as directed by GDMT.

Similarly, non-dihydropyridine calcium channel blockers can be a consideration in patients with a contraindication for beta-blockers. Patients can start antiarrhythmic treatment with class Ic agents (flecainide or propafenone) when their symptoms have not improved after initiation of beta-blocker or calcium channel blocker therapy. However, these agents are proarrhythmic, increase mortality, and are contraindicated in patients with pre-existing coronary artery disease. For this specific patient population, amiodarone has proven to be effective in suppressing VPCs; however, due to side effect profile, the administration should generally be reserved under close clinical monitoring for patients with underlying structural heart disease or coronary disease and significant symptomatology.

Patients who cannot tolerate the therapy, as mentioned earlier, should be referred to an electrophysiologist for consideration of ablation. VPC ablation is also the recommended intervention in patients who develop VPC-induced cardiomyopathy, especially in those with a significant VPC burden.

The accepted thinking is that cardiomyopathy is more likely in patients whose ventricular premature complexes have a very wide QRS complex, the beats arise from the epicardium, or in patients with VPC occurring higher than a quarter of all beats on 24-hour Holter monitor (VPC burden of over 25%). This cardiomyopathy is generally considered to be reversible after ablation; however, some degree of left ventricular systolic dysfunction may rarely persist after the ablation of the ectopic focus.

Several cardiology societies have provided guidelines on the utilization of ablations for patients with VPCs. The 2019 AHA/ACC/HRS Guideline for Management of Patients with Ventricular Arrhythmia and the Prevention of Sudden Cardiac Death recommends that catheter ablation may be useful for patients with reduced left ventricular ejection fraction suspected to have been caused by frequent VPCs (defined as more than 15 percent of all beats) who failed to respond or could not tolerate antiarrhythmic medications.