The function of any given vessel depends on its structure and anatomic locations. There are general functions observed in both arteries and veins.

Arteries are responsible for the perfusion of every tissue in the body, and Veins work to return blood and waste from tissue to the heart and excretory organs, respectively. The presence of one-way valves allows veins to pump blood against gravity despite their relative lack of ability to contract. The lack of smooth muscle in veins is also what allows them to hold around 70% of the total blood volume. This is the degree of distensibility known as high compliance.

In the vascular system, arterioles are so-called “resistance vessels” and essential in the production of peripheral resistance. By contracting one or two layers of smooth muscle in the tunica media, the large arteriole system can generate tremendous resistance in an expansive parallel network. This function at baseline is important in defending capillaries and venules against large pressure flows.

To understand the functional aspect of capillaries, you must first consider how massive the parallel network of capillaries is. Fenestrated capillaries, found in endocrine organs, the GI tract, and kidneys, are an important capillary subtype that performs filtration of luminal contents. Their filtration is selective and does not allow free blood flow like discontinuous capillaries. Pinocytotic vessels present in the endothelial cells allow for the uptake of luminal contents. The fenestrations and pinocytotic vessels can be appreciated on an electron microscope only. Discontinuous capillaries have large, irregularly spaced gaps that function for blood and large protein uptake in the liver, spleen, and bone marrow. This type of large molecule transport is not possible in other capillaries.

Housed in the basement membrane of the smallest vessels in the body, both capillaries and venules are pericytes. Pericytes, also known as Rouget cells, are circumferentially arranged inside the microvascular wall and communicate via both direct contact to the endothelial cells and paracrine signaling. They are essential in regulating the maturation of the endothelial cells and are crucial components of the neurovascular unit. Pericytes aid in maintaining microvascular blood flow, clearing cellular debris, and maintaining the integrity of the blood-brain barrier.

The blood-brain barrier is another unique function of the vascular system. It insulates the parenchyma from increased edema in its confined space while also limiting chemical traffic. This strict barrier is due to the tight junctions present in endothelial cells as well as a denser basement membrane.