When diagnosing this disease, there are a number of broad manifestations that could occur. But to summarize, a set of features evident include arthralgia, purpura, skin ulcers, glomerulonephritis, and peripheral neuropathy. Caution must be given if any of these previously mentioned symptoms arise in conjunction with a clonal hematologic disease.

By far, the most predictive measure for cryoglobulinemia is based on the measurement of cryoglobulin coupled with a low C4 complement level. This combination is typical of cryoglobulinemia syndromes.

In lab detection of cryoglobulins, approximately 10 to 20 mL of blood is collected and prepared at 37°C without the addition of anticoagulants. The serum is then centrifuged and then refrigerated to allow precipitation of cryoglobulin. Type I cryoglobulinemia presents as a precipitate within 24 hours with a 3 to 5-day window. Type II/III present with precipitation approximately 5 to 7 days after initial refrigeration.

As a general rule, the cryocrit in individuals without cryoglobulinemia is close to zero, and a cryocrit greater than 0.5 to 1 percent or concentration over 50 mcg/mL is significant.

Another common method of evaluation for cryoglobulinemia is through immunochemical analysis. Immunofixation is performed on dissolved cryoglobulin by antibodies with specified heavy/light chains. This test allows specified categorization of the type after initial diagnosis. Other lab testing techniques include urinalysis, complement serum analysis, rheumatoid factor levels, viral serologies, and analysis of acute-phase reactants.

In special cases, specific testing is performed for further evaluation. One such test is the biopsy of organs impacted by the disease that is used to acquire additional information. Type 1 is generally seen in the skin, kidney, and bone marrow with affiliation to thromboses. Type II/III presents itself within the skin, kidney, and peripheral nervous system. Another test used in situations where the neuromuscular disease is evident is electromyography (EMG). Lastly, imaging studies are also used for further confirmation of the presence of cryoglobulinemia. However, it is important not to use imaging information as the sole means of evaluation, and the specified clinical presentation should guide these tests.