The majority of patients with reflux esophagitis may present to the primary care provider. The public and patients require education about common presenting symptoms of reflux esophagitis and preventive measures. Because patients may present with atypical symptoms or complications, healthcare workers, including providers, gastroenterologists, pulmonologists, otolaryngologists, nurses, and pharmacists, all operating as an interprofessional team, need to be aware of the diagnosis, sequelae, and complications. Dentists should be aware of dental changes associated with reflux esophagitis. Patients presenting with atypical symptoms such as chronic cough, asthma, laryngitis, or dysphonia may seek medical advice from pulmonologists and otolaryngologists, not aware that esophageal reflux is the primary disease. Performing endoscopy may be indicated in high-risk groups, particularly overweight, over 50, with chronic esophageal reflux. Also, it is indicated in patients at high risk of complications, including Barrett esophagus, dysphagia, and weight loss. Using new classifications to stage reflux esophagitis patients should improve patient management.

While the providers listed above will drive therapeutic interventions, they should enlist the pharmacist's assistance. Pharmacists can help determine which agents would best suit the patient's presentation and counsel the patient regarding appropriate administration and dosing and what adverse effects might occur. Nursing can answer patient questions, assess compliance, evaluate treatment progress, and inform the provider staff of any concerns they encounter. This type of interprofessional teamwork will improve patient outcomes with reflux esophagitis. [Level 5]