In general, ocular hypotony occurs following multiple causes, including a leak of intraocular fluid through ocular surgical wounds, reduction in aqueous humor production, use of some topical or systemic medications, and proliferative vitreoretinopathy (PVR). Hypotony occurs due to loss of aqueous humor which can be external following surgery and trauma or internal in cyclodialysis cleft or rhegmatogenous retinal detachment.

The most common clinical scenario for ocular hypotony is after filtration surgery for glaucoma (trabeculectomy), especially following the use of adjuvant antimetabolites such as mitomycin C (MMC) or 5 fluorouracil (5FU) to prevent postoperative fibrosis.**Figure 1**is a photograph of an eye showing leakage of aqueous from the anterior chamber through an atrophic cystic bleb several years after a trabeculectomy. There is a positive Seidel test in the upper frame of the photograph. The lower frame of the picture shows cessation of aqueous leakage and a negative Seidel test after revision of the filtering bleb. Other causes of ocular hypotony include intraocular inflammation, trauma, and other forms of ocular surgery such as vitreoretinal surgery.

A good understanding of aqueous humor dynamics is essential to determine the etiology of ocular hypotony.

Normally the aqueous humor is secreted into the posterior chamber from where it passes through the pupil into the anterior chamber and baths the avascular structures, i.e., crystalline lens and cornea, acting as a surrogate for blood by providing much-needed oxygen and nutrients and removing the waste. Aqueous exits from the anterior chamber through the trabecular meshwork and the uveoscleral pathway. Therefore, causes of ocular hypotony can be broadly categorized into two, as indicated below. In addition, some systemic medications can result in ocular hypotony.

**Decreased Aqueous Humor Production**

- Intraocular inflammation

- Hypoperfusion

- Drug-induced (use of topical or systemic aqueous humor suppressants)

- Reduced ciliary body perfusion (ocular ischemic syndrome)

- Scarring or traction to the ciliary body, e.g., following trauma, proliferative vitreoretinopathy (PVR), chronic uveitis

- Cyclodestructive procedure

**Increased Aqueous Humor Drainage**

- Glaucoma filtering surgery

- Glaucoma drainage devices

- Angle-based surgery

- Iatrogenic creation of cyclodialysis cleft.

- Post-traumatic open globe injury

- Sequestration into intraocular spaces, such as in rhegmatogenous retinal detachment and cyclodialysis cleft

- Other surgeries, e.g., vitreoretinal surgery; corneal surgery (including full-thickness cornea transplant, corneal tear repair, and keratoprosthesis), scleral-fixated intraocular lens

**Systemic Medications**

- Carbonic anhydrase inhibitors acetazolamide and methazolamide

- Antihypertensive drugs, e.g., clonidine, beta-blockers

- Nitrates

- Antivirals like Cidofovir

- Hyperosmotic agents, e.g., mannitol

**Systemic Causes**

- Pregnancy

- Dehydration

- Uremia

- Diabetic coma

- Congenital weakness of the sclera, e.g., Marfan syndrome

- Other hereditary diseases, e.g., Myotonic dystrophy

More than one mechanism may account for the ocular hypotony in some cases. For instance, after glaucoma filtering surgery, hypotony may be because of over filtration of the surgical bleb or leakage from the bleb or elsewhere in the surgical wound. Hypotony after glaucoma surgery could also be due to mitomycin toxicity to the ciliary body.

Careful examination is required to determine the exact mechanism of the postoperative hypotony as the management of each of these causes differs considerably. In the same light, after trauma, hypotony could arise from any of the following, open globe injury, cyclodialysis, ciliary body detachment, retinal detachment, and iridocyclitis. Rahman et al. have categorized the causes of post-glaucoma filtering surgery ocular hypotony based on postoperative timing as a. early and b. chronic. The causes of early postoperative hypotony after glaucoma surgery include the following:

- Over-filtration

- Wound leak

- Reduced aqueous production

- Ciliochoroidal detachment

- Retinal detachment

- Globe perforation

- Iridocyclitis

Multiple causes can lead to chronic postoperative hypotony, including the following:

- Leaks in the conjunctiva

- Over-functioning bleb (excessive filtration)

- Avascular thin cystic bleb

- Cyclodialysis cleft

- Ciliary body detachment

- Retinal detachment

- Ciliary body atrophy

- Cyclitic membrane

Lastly, some systemic conditions can be associated with bilateral ocular hypotony, including dehydration, uremia, diabetic coma, myotonic dystrophy, and pregnancy. Systemically administered medications, as listed above, can be associated with ocular hypotony.