Commotio cordis plays a distressing role as a leading cause of sudden cardiac death in young athletes. Reported cases remain relatively infrequent (less than 30 cases are reported each year), although it is increasingly recognized. The US Commotio Cordis Registry (Minneapolis, MN) has been established to facilitate the aggregation of information.

Children appear to be at the highest risk for commotio cordis. The mean age reported in the registry is 15 years, and very few cases have been reported above 20 years old. This may be a result of a combination of a thinner chest wall relative to an adult and an increased likelihood to participate in activities where they are likely to be hit in the chest.

Ninety-five percent of reported cases occur in boys, which is likely again a reflection of selection for participation in sports which provides the risk factors necessary for commotio cordis to occur. However, the anatomical differences in the chest wall thickness may also play a role.

The reported survival rate among African Americans is lower than in whites (4% vs. 33%). This may be a result of a higher rate of delayed resuscitation (44% vs. 22%) and less frequent use of automated external defibrillators (AEDs) (4% vs. 8%).

One would expect survival to be similar to other cases of ventricular fibrillation, if not even higher, because of the lack of structural heart disease. While initial cases reported very low survival, a significant increase in reported survival has been noted in recent years, likely due to improved recognition and early treatment.