There several different cryogens including nitrogen gas, carbon dioxide gas, and other compressed gases, but the most common cryogen by far is liquid nitrogen. The boiling point of liquid nitrogen is -196 C. Liquid nitrogen is typically stored in heavily insulated long-term storage tanks called dewars. Dewars can range in size from 4 to 50 L and can be used to store liquid nitrogen for up to 2 months. Devices that generate liquid nitrogen are also available if needed.

Cryosurgical devices are 300 to 500 mL units can temporarily hold liquid nitrogen and typically come with a number of different attachments based on the desired treatment technique. Several different treatment approaches will be discussed below, but the equipment necessary for those treatments will be discussed here. For open techniques that require spraying liquid nitrogen, there are cryosurgical units that come with a spray gun-type design that comes with a variety of different sized tips that can be used based on the size of the treatment area. Cones that look like an otoscope tip and plates of various-sized cutouts can provide more targeted delivery of liquid nitrogen. There are also variously sized probes that can be attached to the cryosurgical units to when direct contact treatment is desired. In addition, forceps or needle drivers can be dipped into the cryosurgical units and frozen for approximately 20 to 30 seconds and then used to grasp pedunculated lesions.

If treatment of malignant lesions is performed, it is advisable to use a device to determine the temperature of the tissue. For probes, a thermometer may be built into the probe and can, therefore, give the physician an idea of the temperature at the tip of the probe. There are also infrared thermometers that can be used in conjunction with spray cans to give the physician an idea of the temperature at different isotherms.