**Optical Coherence Tomography (OCT) Scanning**

OCT scanning helps detect complications such as an epiretinal membrane, cystoid macular edema, vitreoretinal traction, choroidal neovascularization, and serous retinal detachments. Active TRC displays a highly reflective signal that obscures the underlying choroid. The posterior hyaloid is usually thickened and detached over the lesion

**Fluorescein and Indocyanine Green Angiography**

An active TRC lesion will be associated with early hyperfluorescence fluorescein angiography (FA) followed by progressive hyperfluorescence. Indocyanine green (ICG) is associated with early hypofluorescence as well. ICG can provide additional information in that it can image hypofluorescent satellite lesions that are not visible with either FA or during clinical examination. These hypofluorescent lesions are thought to be a noninfectious, inflammatory reaction. Acute choroidal ischemia may be visualized with ICG in conjunction with serous retinal detachment

**Ultrasonography**

Ultrasonography is required when vitreous inflammation obscures a view of the fundus. Findings associated with TRC are punctiform echoes within the vitreous as well as thickening of the posterior hyaloid membrane. A partial or total posterior vitreous detachment and focal retinochoroidal thickening are commonly observed as well

**Vitreous or Aqueous Sample**

Atypical cases may require either a vitreous or aqueous sample. Anti-Toxoplasma immunoglobulin G or A (IgG or IgA) antibodies may be detected in these samples. A ratio of 8:1 of anti-Toxoplasma antibody in the eye versus serum is consistent with active ocular toxoplasmosis