**Kwashiorkor**

The main differential for marasmus is kwashiorkor. The name for kwashiorkor is derived from the Ga language from Ghana and is used to describe the sickness that occurs in a child following weaning. It results in children suffering from a diet with a sufficient calorie intake but insufficient protein intake.

A child suffering from kwashiorkor will have a normal weight for height associated with generalized edema and dermatoses. Skin changes occur over areas of high friction or pressure, such as the perineum, limbs, ears, and armpits, which become hyperpigmented and then desquamate.

Kwashiorkor can be differentiated from marasmus by the presence of overt edema.

**Marasmic Kwashiorkor**

Marasmic kwashiorkor presents with the features of both marasmus and kwashiorkor. The child will have growth stunting associated with wasting and edema. The hair and skin changes associated with marasmic kwashiorkor are typically less severe than kwashiorkor. Abdominal distension may occur secondary to edema and an enlarged fatty liver.

**HIV Wasting Syndrome**

HIV wasting syndrome refers to the involuntary weight loss of more than 10% of the baseline associated with chronic diarrhea or weakness in a person suffering from HIV with no other explainable cause of weight loss.

It is thought that HIV wasting syndrome occurs as a result of malabsorption, hypermetabolism, endocrine dysfunction, and decreased appetite leading to a reduction in oral intake.

**Chronic Pancreatitis**

Potential causes of pancreatitis in children include viruses such as Coxsackie B and mumps, traumatic injury, cystic fibrosis, and obstruction of the pancreatic ducts secondary to roundworms.

This may lead to the development of chronic pancreatitis, which may mimic protein-energy malnutrition. Malabsorption due to the insufficiency of pancreatic enzymes may lead to a reduction in calorie supply despite sufficient oral intake.