Becker muscular dystrophy has to be distinguished from other myopathies with muscle weakness as presenting symptoms.

**Duchenne Muscular Dystrophy**: More severe and early onset than BMD. The patient becomes wheelchair-bound earlier, and the length of survival is shorter. Patients usually have lower dystrophin concentration.

**Polymyositis**: This is the idiopathic inflammatory myopathy characterized by bilateral proximal muscle weakness that may confuse this condition with BMD, but the absence of distal pseudohypertrophy helps in differentiating it from BMD.

**Spinal Muscular Atrophy**: This is an autosomal-recessive inherited disorder with hyporeflexia, tongue fasciculations, weakness in bulbar, or brainstem muscles are more common but have less cognitive impairment. The absence of dystrophin gene mutation in a DNA probe provokes spinal muscular atrophy as an alternative diagnosis.

**Limb-girdle Muscular Dystrophy**: This condition is hard to differentiate from BMD; however, calf muscle pseudohypertrophy is absent.

**Dilated Cardiomyopathy**: Muscular dystrophy results in cardiomyopathy, which is one of the most serious complications and the leading cause of mortality. But dilated cardiomyopathy can be a separate entity with a different genetic etiology or from other causes apart from muscular dystrophy.

**Emery-Dreyfuss Muscular Dystrophy**: Early contractures and cardiac defects help to distinguish it from BMD. Humeroperineal muscle weakness and wasting begin in the first and second decades of life.

**Myasthenia Gravis**: Fluctuating skeletal muscle weakness simulate the clinical presentation of BMD, but facial weakness, ptosis, and diplopia are common. However, infrequent proximal muscle weakness alone may occur.

**Metabolic Myopathies**: Metabolic myopathies are the storage diseases caused by the deficiency of enzymes required for the metabolism of glycogen, lipids, and mitochondrial diseases. Most patients complain about muscle weakness and pain during physical activity rather than during rest.