Some treatment approaches for dissociative identity disorder include basic structures from work with personality disorders in a three-pronged approach:

- Establishing safety, stabilization, and symptom reduction;

- Confronting, working through, and integrating traumatic memories

- Identity integration and rehabilitation.

The first step focuses on the safety of patients with DID as many patients present with suicidal ideation and self-injurious behavior.

The most common approach is via psychodynamic psychotherapy steps which are broken down above. Recent approaches include the use of trauma-focused cognitive behavioral therapy (CBT) and dialectical behavioral therapy (DBT).

Another mode of treatment is the use of hypnosis as therapy. DID patients are more hypnotizable than other clinical populations according to literature.

Another mode of treatment has been the use of Eye Movement Desensitization and Reprocessing (EMDR). The guidelines however advocate for EMDR to be used as part of integrative treatment. EMDR processing is recommended only when the patient is generally stable and has adequate coping skills.EMDR interventions for symptom reduction and containment, ego strengthening, work with alternate identities, and, when appropriate, the negotiation of consent and preparation of alternate identities.

Psychopharmacology is not the primary treatment for DID. Medications may be used to target certain symptoms reported. Most commonly used medications include medications for mood disorders and PTSD (post-traumatic stress disorder).