Because surgical fires are preventable, surgeons are a necessary component in that prevention. Many recommendations have been put forth by the Food and Drug Administration, in conjunction with The Joint Commission, to assist in the prevention of surgical fires. Prevention can be broken down into two categories, preoperative and intraoperative strategies.

Education and knowledge are essential elements of preoperative prevention. The prevention begins with the monitoring of surgical equipment for damage or electrical concerns as well as the utilization of manufacturer specifications on device usage and maintenance for OR machines. Individual’s awareness and assessment of devices and the specific risks with devices such as laser, fiber optic light cord, electrocautery, are another necessary component for prevention. Knowledge regarding fire risks, including the fire triangle, as well as proper protocols for response to surgical fires, can help staff both eliminate the risks and address situational concerns if a fire arises.

Intraoperatively, prevention also requires specific actions and knowledge on the part of all individuals within the OR suite. For example, within the fire triangle, oxidizers used by anesthesia decreases ignition point temperature, which increases the risk of preventable fires. The fire triangle provides a simple system within the OR settings that can illuminate potentially unnoticed or unrecognized risks. This knowledge can be applied, for example, to result in the use of the lowest amount of oxygen to maintain the required oxygen saturation.