**Acoustic Neuroma**

An acoustic neuroma is a benign tumor of the myelin sheath of the vestibulocochlear nerve. As the facial nerve and vestibulocochlear nerve both lie in the internal auditory meatus, surgery to remove an acoustic neuroma can also potentially damage the facial nerve. A study based on microsurgery reported significant damage to the facial nerve requiring reconstruction in 6.6% of cases.

**Parotid Gland Surgery and Anesthesia**

During parotid gland surgery, branches of the facial nerve may be damaged as the nerve branches off within the parotid gland. After parotid surgery, around 50% develop temporary facial weakness, while 7% end up with permanent facial palsy.

**Cervicofacial Rhytidectomy ("Facelift")**

Cervicofacial rhytidectomy may be performed in the subcutaneous plane, the deep plane, the subperiosteal plane, and the sub-superficial musculoaponeurotic system (SMAS) plane. As the facial nerve branches run below the SMAS plane, the deep plane technique, which necessitates the release of facial ligaments and tissue repositioning with suspension between the facial nerve branches, surgical dissection as performed using the deep plane facelift carries the highest risk of damage to branches of the facial nerve. The most commonly injured nerve during facelift surgery is the greater auricular nerve (a sensory nerve) and not the facial nerve. The greater auricular nerve should be marked before performing a facelift at the McKinney point, which is 6.5 cm caudal to the external acoustic meatus with the head turned 45 degrees. At this point, it crosses the anterior border of the sternocleidomastoid muscle. The commonest branch of the facial nerve that can suffer injury during a facelift is the buccal branch. Because of the collateral innervation demonstrated by the buccal branches, damage to the buccal branch is typically asymptomatic and, when seen, may show recovery over several months.