**Decreased platelet production**

- Bone marrow failure presents in aplastic anemia, PNH

- Bone marrow suppression is a feature with exposure to certain drugs, such as valproic acid, daptomycin, certain chemotherapy agents, and irradiation

- Chronic alcohol abuse

- Inherited thrombocytopenia)

- Viral infection

- Systemic conditions like nutrient deficiencies (folate, vitamin B12), sepsis, myelodysplastic syndrome impairs platelet production in the bone marrow - these conditions also associated with decreased production of other cell lines leading to anemia and leukopenia

**Increased platelet destruction**

In normal conditions, platelets get removed by monocytes/macrophages of the reticuloendothelial system. The life span of platelets is 8 to 10 days.

In immune-mediated thrombocytopenia, anti-platelet autoantibodies bind to platelets and megakaryocytes, resulting in increased platelet destruction by the reticuloendothelial system and decreased platelet production.

Anti-platelets antibodies are present in primary ITP, drug-induced ITP, lymphoproliferative disorders, autoimmune conditions like SLE and in chronic infections like HEP C, HIV, and Helicobacter pylori.

Non-immune mediated increased platelet destruction occurs in mechanical valve replacement patients, preeclampsia/HELLP syndrome, DIC, and thrombotic microangiopathy. In conditions like DIC and thrombotic microangiopathy, increased platelet consumption within thrombi takes place.

**Dilutional thrombocytopenia**

Dilutional thrombocytopenia presents in massive fluid resuscitation and massive blood transfusion.

**Redistribution of platelets**

In normal individuals, one-third of platelet mass is in the spleen. In conditions that cause splenomegaly and increases spleen congestion (cirrhosis) results in increased platelet mass in spleen and a decrease in circulating platelets.