Quinolones are a class of broad-spectrum antibiotics with excellent oral bioavailability and can be used to treat a wide variety of bacterial infections. Their clinical utility is restricted, particularly in the outpatient setting, due to their potential for severe side effects. Due to these safety concerns, quinolones are not recommended as first-line agents by the FDA if there are other available antibiotic options with less potential for severe adverse events. There are currently four generations of quinolones. While initial quinolones were effective only against Gram-negative bacteria, succeeding generations gained activity against Pseudomonas sp., Gram-positive, and atypical bacterial strains. Many different quinolones have undergone development, and among them, the ones currently approved by the FDA for systemic use include moxifloxacin, ciprofloxacin, gemifloxacin, levofloxacin, delafloxacin, and ofloxacin. A few key differences exist in the spectrum of activity between the quinolones. Ciprofloxacin is ineffective against S. pneumoniae. Moxifloxacin lacks sufficient activity against Pseudomonas aeruginosa but is effective in treating anaerobes (along with delafloxacin). Delafloxacin is the only quinolone effective against methicillin-resistant S. aureus (MRSA).

FDA-approved indications for certain quinolones in adults include treatment of urinary tract infections, pyelonephritis, sexually transmitted infections, prostatitis, gastrointestinal and intraabdominal infections, skin and soft tissue infections, community-acquired and nosocomial pneumonia, and bone and joint infections. Additionally, quinolones such as moxifloxacin, gatifloxacin, and levofloxacin are seeing increased off-label usage in the treatment of drug-resistant tuberculosis or cases of intolerance to other anti-tuberculosis drugs.

Pediatric-approved uses for quinolones are limited due to their potential adverse effects on immature cartilage. Hence, the FDA has only approved the use of specific quinolones (ciprofloxacin and levofloxacin) for the treatment of inhalation anthrax and the plague. Ciprofloxacin is also FDA-approved for the pediatric treatment of complicated urinary tract infections. Other non-FDA-approved indications for quinolone use in pediatric patients include treating multidrug-resistant infections (particularly in cystic fibrosis patients), intra-abdominal infections, and complicated or recurrent urinary tract infections.

Further studies are currently underway to extend the use of quinolones into other therapeutic fields, such as cancer treatment and as an anti-protozoan agent.