The airway in the pediatric population is markedly different compared to that of an adult. In a young child, the epiglottis is located more superiorly and anteriorly than in an adult. There is also a more oblique angle with the trachea. The narrowest portion of the infant and pediatric airway is the subglottis, while in adults it is the glottis. Furthermore, the infant epiglottis is comprised of cartilage that is far more pliant when compared to that of an adult, whose epiglottis is more rigid (this is the natural progression of cartilage maturation, and explains why laryngomalacia is more prevalent in very young children). It is not surprising, then, that an infectious process that leads to edema and increase in weight and mass of the epiglottis is more likely to cause symptoms in a child - the pliancy of the cartilage allows a ball-valve effect, where each inspiration pulls an edematous epiglottis over the laryngeal airway, causing symptoms. In adults, whose cartilages are stiffer, an isolated epiglottic infection and the resultant increase in epiglottic mass may be resisted by the more rigid laryngeal/epiglottic cartilage; but an infection that encompasses more of the tissues of the supraglottis, leading to edema, can lead to symptoms and an unstable airway.

H. influenzae and other, infections of the epiglottis can lead to marked edema and swelling 0f the epiglottis and supraglottis of patients of any age. This edema can rapidly spread to adjacent structures leading to the rapid development of airway obstruction symptoms. While H. influenzae remains the most common pathogen in both adults and children, other organisms such as S. Pneumoniae, S. aureus, and beta-hemolytic Streptococcus sp. are important pathogens also in both adults and children. In immunocompromised patients, the list of potential causes is much longer and must include Mycobacterium tuberculosis, as well as a litany of others, though the relative frequencies remain the same.