According to 2019 data collected by the US Department of Justice, sexual assault occurs every 73 seconds in the United States and every nine minutes for pediatric victims. The lifetime rates of sexual assault are between 17 to 18% for women and 3% for men. These numbers are likely under-estimations of the true values and do not account for rates of LGBT sexual assaults, for which the rates are higher. This demonstrates that sexual assault has a clinically significant impact on patients of which physicians, nurses, and other healthcare practitioners need to be cognizant, especially in the documentation and forensic examination of these patients. Particularly because a SANE response team is not available at every healthcare location, providers should be familiar with the process and locations that patients can receive a referral for examination.

Initial evidence for SANE programs has suggested improved outcomes in patient psychological recovery, treatment, evidence collection, and prosecution of cases. However, there is still a need for more rigorous and standardized procedures for SANE program assessment.

Forensic examination demonstrates the intersectionality of medicine and law. One of the most multifaceted issues facing the medical and judicial systems is obtaining just outcomes for victims of sexual assault. Even with the availability of specialized forensic evidence collection, many survivors of sexual assault do not complete a sexual assault evidence kit, and even fewer release the evidence to police for investigation.