The different pathologies of the eye need different slit lamp lenses for proper visualization. The posterior pole disorders such as glaucomatous disc and maculopathy need a high magnification lens.

The superfield lens provides wide-field imaging up to the periphery. It is beneficial in these conditions. In many patients, the pupil is non-dilating. Visualization of internal structures is difficult in a constricted pupil. The super pupil XL lens can be used in a small pupil. It is essential to document the ocular signs. The clinical photographs should be clicked and stored. The digital 1.0x lens has a distinct curvature. Its special antireflective coating decreases the slit lamp glare and distortion. Its high-resolution image has greater clarity compared to other lenses. Thus it is a perfect lens for slit lamp photography and documentation.

It is important to examine the fundus of all patients with diabetes under slit-lamp with auxiliary lenses as indirect ophthalmoscopy with a +20D lens may miss early retinal changes (microaneurysms) due to diabetic retinopathy. However, the cost of these lenses is a challenge, especially in areas with poor resources. Most of the ophthalmological diagnostic work may be done with a +90D or +78D for slit lamp examination of the fundus and a +20D lens for examination of the retina with an indirect ophthalmoscope. A +28D lens is commonly used to examine the peripheral retina in babies, specifically in patients with retinopathy of prematurity.

These lenses can also estimate the size of the optic disc.

However, these methods cannot be applied in a routine clinical setting. The slit lamp lenses can easily determine the size of the optic disc by overcoming the high focal convergence of the cornea. However, these magnify the image by a certain factor. While evaluating the optic disc, the disc and cup size has to be noted while calculating the cup disc (C:D) ratio. The lens's magnification factor must be considered while estimating the true optic disc size.

The super 66 lens has a magnification factor of 1.0. This simplifies measurements of the optic disc size without the need for conversion. The magnification factor is also taken into consideration in retinal lasers.

**Retinal Laser Lenses**

Laser is used in the treatment of various retinal disorders. A slit lamp with a contact lens delivers laser energy to the retina. Proper use of ophthalmoscopic contact lenses for retinal photocoagulation requires knowledge of their magnification, spot size, resolution, and field of view.

**Goldmann lens**: It was the first lens introduced for retinal photocoagulation. The Goldmann fundus lens or the Goldmann three-mirror lens was used. It has a flat anterior surface and produces an erect, virtual image located near the posterior surface of the lens. The main disadvantage of the Goldmann lens is its limited field of view.

**Yannuzzi fundus lens**: It has a concave corneal surface which produces an erect, virtual image at the anterior vitreous. The concave corneal surface transmits the lens pressure to the sclera without corneal distortion.

**Volk area centralis lens**is an indirect contact lens that provides a good field of view with high magnification. The field of view is 70/84 (static/dynamic) degrees. Image magnification is 1.06x. Laser spot magnification is 0.94x (around 1).

**Volk HR centralis lens**is another lens used to laser macular leaking lesions. The image spot magnification is around 1 (0.94x, to be exact). The image is real and inverted.

**Volk PDT lens:**The field of view is 115/137 degrees. Image magnification is 0.67x. Laser spot magnification is 1.5 x.

**Volk transequator lens**: It is designed for focal laser treatment and peripheral fundus evaluation. Its unique design provides a wide field of view up to the equator. The field of view is 110/132 degrees. Image magnification is 0.70x. Laser spot magnification is 1.44x. This lens may also be used for panretinal photocoagulation.

**Mainster lens**: It was introduced in 1986. It has a 58% greater field of view than the Goldmann lens. It has a biconvex, an aspherical anterior lens surface, and a concave lens surface to fit the corneal curvature. It produces an inverted, real image located in front of its biconvex aspheric anterior lens element.

**Mainster standard lens focal/grid (ocular)**: This lens is designed for focal and grid laser treatment. The field of view is 90/121 degrees. Laser spot magnification is 1.05x. Its high resolution and high magnification provide clear retinal details. So, it is used to diagnose and treat choroidal neovascular membrane, macular edema, and branch retinal vein occlusion.

**Pan-retinal Photocoagulation (PRP) Lenses**

**Mainster wide field lens (ocular):**It has an excellent ophthalmic resolution. It is used for pan-retinal photocoagulation. The field of view is 118/127 degrees. Image magnification is 0.68x. Laser spot magnification is 1.50x.

**Mainster PRP 165 lens (ocular)**: This lens has the widest field of view available for pan-retinal photocoagulation. The field of view is 165/180 degrees. Image magnification is 0.51 x. Laser spot magnification is 1.96x (around 2x).

**Rodenstock panfundoscopic lens**: It was introduced in 1969 by Schlegel. It is used for pan-retinal photocoagulation. It gives a wider view and produces an inverted, real image located in its spherical biconvex anterior lens element. The field of view is 84% greater than a Goldmann, but lateral magnification is 24% less. The laser spot magnification is 1. 4x. One disadvantage is that it causes peripheral distortion, which results in laser beam astigmatism while treating the peripheral retina. These disturbing reflexes compromise the retinal image and cause oblong burns when treated through the periphery of the lens.

**Volk quadraspheric lens**: It has four aspheric surfaces with superior antireflective coatings that reduce astigmatism across the entire field of view. It can be used in a small pupil. It produces an inverted and reversed image. The laser spot magnification is 1.97x (around 2x), and the image magnification is 0.51x.

**Volk super quad 160 lens**: This lens offers a vast field of view. Its 0.5x image magnification provides simultaneous visualization of the posterior pole to the peripheral retina providing a greater margin of safety even during extreme wide-angle pan-retinal photocoagulation. The field of view is 160/ 165 degrees, image magnification is 1.97x (around 2x), and laser spot magnification is 2.0x. This has become the ideal lens for treating peripheral retinal holes and tears, proliferative diabetic retinopathy, and ischaemic retinal vein occlusion.