**Anderson Classification**

Turf toe is diagnosed depending on physical exam and imaging findings. It is graded on a scale of 1 to 3 according to the Anderson classification system.

- Grade 1: Acute sprain without bony pathology or joint instability.  The patient will have normal ROM and should be able to weight bear.

- Grade 2: Partial tear of the plantar plate or joint capsule. The patient will have painful ROM, ecchymosis, swelling, and pain with weight-bearing.

- Grade 3: Complete tear with the loss of continuity of the plantar plate or capsule. Examiners may notice the migration of sesamoid bone on physical exam. There will be marked tenderness to palpation, decreased ROM, swelling, ecchymosis, and difficulty weight-bearing.

**Treatment**

Regardless of the grade, initial treatment for most injuries should consist of basic RICE principles (rest, ice, compression, and elevation). A stiff sole shoe or rocker bottom sole can also help limit motion. For more severe injuries, a controlled ankle motion (CAM) boot or walking cast can help minimize motion at the joint to allow the plantar plate to heal. Once the injury is stable, it is important to begin progressive motion.

Grade 1 injuries typically take a week or 2 to heal before a patient returns to play as tolerated.

Grade 2 injuries typical recovery time is 4 to 6 weeks. The patient may require taping when they return to play as tolerated. Taping for these injuries, once the swelling has abated in the acute phase, should focus on resisting hyperextension of the MTP joint. Corticosteroid and/or anesthetic injections are not advised for this injury.

Grade 3 injuries are more severe but usually respond to conservative treatment, albeit of longer duration. Immobilization in a CAM boot or short-leg walking cast for 4 to 6 weeks may be enough time for the healing process to begin. Progressive, gentle range of motion should follow initial immobilization with continued protected ambulation with modified shoe wear or inserts like a carbon-fiber, foot-plate extension, commonly used for hallux rigidus. Progression of activity should be as tolerated. It is expected that this injury will take 6 to 12 months to heal.

If the patient fails conservative management, surgical repair is an option. Characteristics of injuries that could benefit from surgical intervention are large capsular avulsion with unstable joint, diastasis or retraction of sesamoids, vertical instability, traumatic hallux valgus deformity, chondral injury, intra-articular loose body, sesamoid fracture, and failed conservative treatment.

**Surgical Technique**

Medial plantar incision: Identify the plantar medial digital nerve and protect; identify and assess soft tissue injury.

- Assess FHL for longitudinal split tears

- Plantar plate tears are all distal ruptures. If there is enough distal stump, the surgeon may attempt a direct repair. If soft tissue is inadequate, use suture anchors or drill holes in the proximal phalanx to pass suture.

- If there is a sleeve avulsion from a sesamoid, the surgeon may drill in a hole in the distal sesamoid to pass the suture.

- With diastasis or fracture of the sesamoids, the surgeon may need to excise one or both poles and repair soft tissue defects. The surgeon may attempt repair of sesamoid fracture with a headless screw or suture repair.

Joint synovitis or osteochondral defects often require debridement or cheilectomy. If the plantar plate or flexor tendons cannot be restored, abductor hallucis transfer may be required.

**Postoperative Management**

Begin gentle passive motion at 7 to 10 days with a physical therapist, then be non-weight bearing in removable splint or boot with hallux protected for 4 weeks. At 4 weeks, increase active motion and allow ambulation in the boot. The patient should wear a modified shoe at 2 months and return to contact activity with protection from excessive dorsiflexion at 3 to 4 months. Expect 6 to 12 months for a full recovery.