Headache is a widespread neurologic complaint. Health care providers can create an effective treatment plan when they partner with their patients to elucidate the qualities of that headache experience better. Triptans have the highest efficacy when taken at the beginning of the headache phase, not the prodrome. Patients who received education on their medication use reported a greater understanding of the circumstances for treating their headache pain and contraindications.

Furthermore, providers must consider the ability of patients to afford the medication due to variations in medication coverage by health insurers. Zolmitriptan is the generic formulation of two branded products. Generics are more likely to be covered by commercial and government health insurers, while brand triptans are more likely to be covered by commercial insurers. Insurance plans can limit the formulation type and require meeting step therapy criteria before covering individual formulations.

**Recommendations**

In 2006, the FDA issued an alert about serotonin syndrome associated with the concomitant use of triptan drugs with SSRIs or SNRIs; however, many have been skeptical of the actual prevalence of this adverse event

The American Headache Society and the American Academy of Neurology provide evidence-based guidelines on headache treatment that health care providers can use to guide their decisions on treatment. Though the FDA may not currently approve zolmitriptan for the treatment of cluster headaches, the American Academy of Neurology has a Level A recommendation for using both oral and intranasal zolmitriptan for the acute treatment of cluster headaches. Multiple healthcare providers are involved in managing the patient with headaches on zolmitriptan therapy. Hence, clinicians (MDs, DOs, PAs, NPs), specialists, pharmacists, nursing staff, and other healthcare providers should collaborate closely. An interprofessional team approach improves efficacy, minimizes adverse drug reactions related to zolmitriptan therapy, and improves patient outcomes. [Level 5]