Evaluation of patients with isolated thrombocytopenia includes obtaining a CBC, peripheral blood smear, HIV, and HCV tests.

- Repeat CBC to confirm that thrombocytopenia is real.

- Anemia and thrombocytopenia occur with infections, DIC, sepsis, thrombotic microangiopathy, autoimmune disorders like Felty syndrome.

- Leucocytosis and thrombocytopenia can present in infection, malignancy, chronic inflammatory conditions.

- Pancytopenia occurs in myelodysplastic syndromes.

- In patients with symptoms or signs of autoimmune disorders like SLE, antiphospholipid antibody syndrome (APS), obtain anti-nuclear antibodies and antiphospholipid antibodies, respectively.

- In patients with thrombosis, one should consider heparin-induced thrombocytopenia (obtain platelet factor 4 antibodies), APS (check antiphospholipid antibodies ), DIC and PNH (check PT,aPTT, fibrinogen, LDH)

- Check liver enzymes and coagulation tests in patients with liver disease.

- Bone marrow biopsy is indicated in conditions when the cause of thrombocytopenia is unclear, and when a hematologic disorder is suspected.

- A normal number or rise in megakaryocytes in bone marrow is a presenting feature in conditions with increased platelet destruction.
- The decrease in megakaryocytes, along with an overall reduction in other cells, is seen in aplastic anemia.
- In SLE, severe reduction or absence of megakaryocytes is seen due to an autoantibody directed against the thrombopoietin receptor.
- Megaloblastic changes in RBC and granulocytes occur in vitamin B12, folate, and copper deficiency. In myelodysplasia, cells are dysplastic.