The breast development initiates at 6 weeks of development followed by the appearance of a linear elevation, called the 'milk line'. The milk line in the area of the breast gives rise to the mammary gland starting in the eighth week. The basal cells proliferate and invade the underlying mesoderm. Simultaneously, there will be the regression of a mammary segment, leading to the formation of a papillary primordium. Beyond the 31st week of gestation, the papillary bag becomes occluded, creating the Nipple-Areola Complex. The nipple appears at the time of birth.

The breast is made of glandular and adipose tissue anchored together with the framework created by Cooper's ligaments. The glandular tissue basically consists of alveoli and ducts. The lobes are made of lobules, which in turn are made of clusters of alveoli, which are small sacs lined by mammary secretory epithelial cells. Adipose tissue of the breast is located between lobes rather than within lobules. The alveoli end into minuscule ducts that join to form bigger ducts draining the lobules. The alveoli are surrounded by a basket of myoepithelial, or muscle cells, which contract and make the milk flow along the ducts. The breast milk is produced and stored in the alveoli and then pumped through the ducts during lactation. The ducts widen into lactiferous sinuses under the areola before narrowing at the base of the nipple and terminating at their orifices on the surface of the nipple. The areola also contains branched glands of Montgomery, which secrete an oily fluid that protects the skin of the nipple and areola during breastfeeding and produce a scent that attracts the baby to the breast.

During pregnancy, the mother undergoes stage II mammogenesis due to high progesterone; this increases secretory tissue in the breast. The high levels of chorionic gonadotropin form type three lobules in the breast alveoli. These lobules consist of epithelial cells and acini of increased size and number. During the latter part of pregnancy, the acini atrophy and give leeway for colostrum storage in the lumen.