**Corneal Polysynpatic Reflex**

The corneal polysynaptic reflex results in bilateral closure of the eyelids following light touch to the cornea. Efferent input is from the ophthalmic division (V1) to the trigeminal ganglion projecting to the spinal trigeminal nucleus. There is then an indirect connection with the facial nuclei via lateral reticular formation interneurons, which project to the orbicularis oculi muscles, both ipsilateral (direct) and contralateral to corneal stimulation (consensual corneal response).

**Jaw-Jerk Monosynaptic Reflex**

The jaw jerk reflex results in the closure of the jaw following sudden stretching of the masseter muscle. The trigeminal mesencephalic nucleus receives afferent impulses from the masticatory muscle spindles, which project onto the trigeminal motor nucleus. Efferent output is from the motor trigeminal nucleus through V3 to reach the masticatory muscles.

**Trigeminal Neuralgia**

Trigeminal neuralgia is a clinical condition characterized by sharp, electrical, shock-like, paroxysmal lancinating pain within the distribution of one or more of the trigeminal nerve branches. Most cases are due to compression of the trigeminal nerve at the root entry zone by the superior cerebellar artery. Other etiologies of trigeminal neuralgia include compression from an adjacent aneurysm, arteriovenous malformation, tumor, or due to intrinsic abnormality such as demyelinating multiple sclerosis plaques. Diagnosis is made based on the combination of clinical presentation and radiographic imaging, typically in the form of magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of the brain with particular attention to the cisterns, which can be aided with MRI sequences such as Fast-Imaging-Employing-Steady-state-Acquisition (FIESTA).

Treatment of trigeminal neuralgia depends on the underlying etiology. First-line treatment is carbamazepine, and second-line medications include lamotrigine, oxcarbazepine, phenytoin, gabapentin, pregabalin, and baclofen.

**Cluster Headache**

Cluster headaches have a similar presentation to trigeminal neuralgia. Cluster headaches most often present as severe headache on one side of the head that affects the territory of the trigeminal nerve occurring in short intervals, often multiple times within the same day. These headaches can be accompanied by autonomic symptoms such as nasal congestion, swelling, and lacrimation on the affected side. While the cause of cluster headaches is currently unknown, there is often an external stimulus that triggers the onset of symptoms. Prophylactic treatment usually includes a combination of trigger avoidance and pharmacotherapy. Acute attacks can be remediated with fast-acting triptans and oxygen.

**Lateral Medullary Syndrome (Wallenberg Syndrome)**

The lateral medullary syndrome is a clinical syndrome that occurs when the lateral portion of the medulla in the brainstem becomes damaged, typically due to a stroke of the posterior inferior cerebellar artery or vertebral artery. A lesion in this region of the brain stem results in an ipsilateral sensory loss in the territory of the trigeminal nerve and contralateral sensory loss in the rest of the body, among other signs/symptoms, including vertigo, ataxia, horner syndrome, dysphagia, and hoarseness among others.