The muscles of the tongue function together to permit a variety of shapes and functions to facilitate the production of speech and aid in the process of swallowing and manipulation of food before ingestion. The tongue must elevate posteriorly to push the bolus posteroinferiorly towards the hypopharynx and esophagus to swallow a food bolus efficiently.

There are a number of disorders of the tongue described in the literature. These include but are not limited to:

Ankyloglossia, informally known as “tongue-tie,” caused by an aberrantly short lingual frenulum, is a disorder that may manifest as difficulty with the articulation of words due to restricted manipulation of tongue movements. A surgical procedure to split the lingual frenulum is often undertaken, although many people are able to swallow and articulate normally with a short lingual frenulum. Additionally, in some areas, frenulotomy (also known as frenotomy or frenuloplasty) is performed with increasing frequency, particularly when first-time mothers have difficulty breastfeeding, despite inadequate trials of conservative treatment preoperatively.

A non-malignant condition of the tongue known as migratory glossitis is an asymptomatic disorder in which the dorsum of the tongue produces red patches surrounded by a white peripheral border. This can occur due to general inflammation of the tongue and often results in loss of the lingual papillae on the surface of the tongue.

A fissured tongue features small grooves on the dorsum of the tongue, which are non-tender; this condition has been linked with psoriasis and Melkersson-Rosenthal syndrome.