**Traumatic Retroperitoneal Hematoma**

Approach to the patient with traumatic retroperitoneal hematoma begins with the standard history and physical exam used to care for any trauma patient. The practitioner should obtain as much detail as possible regarding the exact mechanism of injury to determine the risk of specific injury patterns. In stable patients able to provide a history, complaints of abdominal, flank, or back pain could be indicative of retroperitoneal hematoma. However, these complaints could also be consistent with intra-abdominal or musculoskeletal injuries as well. The clinician must maintain a high degree of clinical suspicion for retroperitoneal hematoma, as there are no reliable historical features that are helpful in ruling in or out the diagnosis. Most of the presenting signs and symptoms of retroperitoneal hematoma are based upon the specific organs that are injured.

The physical examination should start with the evaluation of the airway, breathing, and circulation in a standard advanced trauma life support fashion. Immediate life threats should be addressed, and primary and secondary surveys completed.

Specific physical exam findings such as an unstable pelvis are suggestive of potential pelvic retroperitoneal hematoma, while penetrating trauma to the back or flank may be suggestive of renal or great vessel injury. The classically taught flank bruising or “Grey-Turner” sign is of little to no clinical use in the acute trauma presentation.

Hemorrhage should be suspected as the primary cause of hypotension/shock in the trauma patient. Identification of potential bleeding sources based upon history, mechanism of injury, and the physical exam are helpful to identify potential etiologies. The clinician should consider retroperitoneal bleeding as a source for shock in the trauma patient that has no other clear source for blood loss.

**Non-traumatic Retroperitoneal Hematoma**

Presenting signs and symptoms of spontaneous retroperitoneal hematomas are often vague and nonspecific. In several retrospective studies, abdominal pain seems to be the most common complaint (46-67.5%). Other complaints include pain in the back, flank, and hip. Nonspecific complaints such as generalized weakness were observed in other cases. Symptoms of hypovolemia were commonly observed as well, such as syncope, pallor, and dizziness. There are even reports of femoral nerve palsy being a presenting symptom of retroperitoneal hematoma.

A comprehensive physical exam should be conducted in the evaluation of all patients. Findings consistent with hypovolemia/anemia are common in patients with ongoing blood loss from a retroperitoneal hematoma. These can include tachycardia and hypotension/poor peripheral perfusion. Abdominal tenderness may or may not be present. Findings such as flank ecchymosis (Grey-Turner Sign) are of poor sensitivity, present in 6.5% of cases in one cohort, and 1% in another.

Findings in patients who suffer retroperitoneal hematoma after undergoing PCI are similar to the above, including abdominal, flank, and back pain. Inguinal tenderness and swelling following the femoral approach are noted as being present in a majority of retroperitoneal hematoma cases in one study. Another common finding reported is that of femoral neuropathy, likely caused by nerve compression due to hematoma formation.