Hydrazine's pathophysiology depends on the route of exposure and the system it affects.

Inhalation exposure causes direct pulmonary injury due to the caustic nature of hydrazine and may also lead to an increased incidence of lung cancer.

The pathophysiology of dermatological injury of hydrazine toxicity is mostly derived from animal studies and a few human case reports. Hydrazine can cause contact dermatitis or caustic injury.

Ingested oral exposure to hydrazines has the potential to cause systemic symptoms, mostly secondary to taking medications that have hydrazine as a metabolite. Asymptomatic patients taking isoniazid (INH) at therapeutic doses (300 mg/day) for two weeks showed elevated levels of hydrazine in their blood and plasma.

Hydrazine's neurotoxicity occurs from disrupting the equilibrium between gamma-aminobutyric acid (GABA) and glutamate (the human body's primary inhibitory and excitatory neurotransmitters, respectively). Through various mechanisms, hydrazine-containing compounds inhibit pyridoxine (vitamin B6) and its downstream metabolite, pyridoxal 5' phosphate (P5P), the essential cofactor for glutamic acid decarboxylase and GABA synthesis, resulting in reduced GABA levels and subsequent clinical effects of seizures. Hydrazine metabolites are found in INH and gyromitrin mycotoxin (from the gyromitra mushroom species).

Isoniazid toxicity stems from several mechanisms of its downstream metabolites. INH hydrazine, 1,1-dimethylhydrazine, and hydrazones directly inhibit the enzyme pyridoxine phosphokinase by complexing its essential cofactor, pyridoxine.

Additionally, in animal studies, hydrazine has been shown to affect the urea cycle by increasing the activity of argininosuccinase and inhibiting ornithine-ketoacid transaminase, leading to hyperammonemia which can contribute to its neurotoxicity.

Secondary to these mechanisms, hydrazine-induced neurotoxicity can present as any of the following: twitching, hyperreflexia, clonic movements, restlessness, violent behavior, altered mental status, ataxia, paresthesias, lethargy, seizures, and coma.

Similarly, hydrazine's hepatotoxicity is mainly known from isoniazid toxicity. Hydrazines metabolized from isoniazid by direct hydrolyzation or metabolism by N-acetyltransferase type 2 to acetylhydrazine are oxidized by CYPE1 to reactive metabolites that induce oxidative stress and alter lipid metabolism, causing hepatotoxicity.

Gyromitrin compounds from the Gyromitra species of mushrooms are metabolized to monomethylhydrazine and inhibit the conversion of glutamate to GABA by similar mechanisms.

Hydrazine's hemotoxicity is known through in vitro studies with human red blood cells. This showed the development of hemolytic anemia, methemoglobinemia, and Heinz body formation.