In preparation for national health emergencies, the United States government has created medical countermeasures (MCMs). MCMs include FDA-regulated products that consist of biologics, drugs, and devices stockpiled by the government and some private sector partners. Some types of drugs that may be included in MCM stockpiles are antimicrobials and antiviral drugs.

Since all drugs are required by law to have an expiration date and are not approved for use past their expiration date, the U.S. Department of Defense (DoD) began administrating the Shelf-Life Extension Program (SLEP) in 1986. The purpose of SLEP is to prevent the need to replace stockpiles of medications every few years. The SLEP is a fee-for-service program where MCM medications can be selected to undergo stability testing performed by the FDA to increase their shelf lives. The FDA’s Office of Regulatory Affairs Field Science Laboratories is in charge of performing these stability studies on selected medications. Currently, testing medications for expiration dating extensions focuses on military-significant products or drugs purchased in large quantities. Two drugs that are stockpiled in large quantities are ciprofloxacin and doxycycline. The SLEP program extended the expiration dates of eighty-eight percent of 122 medications stored in ideal conditions by 66 months.

Another way drugs can be authorized for use past their expiration date is through an Emergency Use Authorization (EUA). Before a drug can be authorized for use, the HHS Secretary must issue a declaration justifying the use of a drug past the expiration date. For a drug to be authorized for emergency usage, it must first go through five steps. The steps include determining an emergency, declaration of an emergency, reviewing the request for EUA by FDA, issuance of the EUA or denial of the request, and termination of the EUA. The Pandemic and All-Hazards Preparedness Reauthorization Act of 2013 (PAHPRA) also gives the FDA full authority to use a drug past the stated expiration date. Both EUA and PAHPRA are intended to be used in chemical, biological, radiological, and/or nuclear emergencies.