**Epidural Hematoma**

Treatment begins with advanced trauma life support (ATLS) including airway control, ensuring adequate ventilation and circulation. Intravenous (IV) access should be secured. If the patient has a Glasgow Coma Score (GCS) of 8 or less or worsening neurologic status, intubation should be performed. Immediate neurosurgical consultation should be obtained for patients with epidural hematomas as they may expand over time due to continued bleeding. Definitive treatment is an evacuation of the hematoma and stopping the bleeding source. Some smaller epidural hematomas may be managed non-surgically and watched closely for resolution.

**Subdural Hematoma**

Treatment begins with ensuring adequate airway, breathing, and circulation. Intubation should be considered if the patient has a deteriorating GCS or GCS of 8 or less. Immediate neurosurgical consultation should be obtained as emergency surgery may be required to evacuate the subdural hematoma. The definitive treatment for subdural hematomas is an evacuation, but depending on the size and location some subdural hematomas may be watched for resolution.

Non-surgical management options include repeat imaging to ensure subdural stability, the reversal of anticoagulation, platelet transfusions for thrombocytopenia or dysfunctional platelets, observation with frequent neurologic assessments for deterioration, and/or controlling hypertension. There is controversy about whether steroids can help stabilize the size of the subdural hematoma while giving it time to resorb or until surgical treatment.

Surgical management options include a twist drill hole, burr hole(s), and craniotomy for evacuation. Data suggests that a twist drill hole has the lowest surgical complication rate with the highest recurrence rate. A craniotomy has the highest surgical complication rate with the lowest recurrence rate of the surgical options, and burr hole(s) evacuation falls somewhere between a twist drill hole and a craniotomy for complication rate and recurrence rate.

**Subarachnoid Hemorrhage**

Subarachnoid hemorrhage may depend if it is a traumatic or non-traumatic subarachnoid hemorrhage. For traumatic subarachnoid hemorrhage, the ABCs of medicine must occur first. Early consultation with neurosurgery should be considered. If the patient is on anticoagulation or antiplatelet agents consideration should be given to reversing their effects. Care is typically conservative with close assessments of vitals and neurologic status. In obtunded patients, there may be a need for intracranial pressure (ICP) monitor and/or external ventricular drain (EVD). Patients should be monitored for hydrocephalus or cerebral swelling. Repeat imaging can verify the improvement of the traumatic subarachnoid hemorrhage. Sometimes aneurysmal rupture or incompetence of other intracranial vascular malformations can masquerade as traumatic subarachnoid hemorrhage. If there is no clear and convincing history of a traumatic origin, then a non-traumatic etiology for the subarachnoid hemorrhage should be sought.

In non-traumatic subarachnoid hemorrhage, the etiology of the hemorrhage must be ascertained and addressed. Early consultation with neurosurgery should be considered. Treatment varies depending on the etiology of the hemorrhage but can include treatment of an aneurysm or arteriovenous malformation or other etiology. Additionally, there should be a low threshold for placement of an external ventricular drain (EVD) due to the risk of hydrocephalus.

**Intraparenchymal Hemorrhage**

Intraparenchymal hemorrhage can be life-threatening and treatment starts with the ABCs of medicine and stabilization of the patient.  Blood pressure should be controlled to decrease the risk of further hemorrhage. Early consultation with neurosurgery should be considered. The treatment of intraparenchymal hemorrhage depends on the etiology of the hemorrhage. Treatment options are variable and include aggressive surgical evacuation, craniectomy, catheter-based dissolution, or observation. Surgical evacuation is controversial for some forms of intraparenchymal hemorrhage. Although many intraparenchymal hemorrhages are secondary to cerebrovascular disease and hypertension, the surgeon should anticipate encountering other underlying pathology including an aneurysm, AVM, and/or tumor when evacuating an intraparenchymal hemorrhage. Sometimes evacuation of the hematoma may be more detrimental than the hematoma itself, and a craniectomy is performed instead to allow for cerebral swelling. There are a number of catheter-based systems which try to dissolve the hemorrhage. A discussion of these is beyond the scope of this article. Smaller and non-operable hemorrhages may be managed medically with control of blood pressure, the reversal of anticoagulation or antiplatelet agents, and neuroprotective strategies to prevent and/or mitigate secondary cerebral injury.