Treatment of radial dysplasia should start soon after birth. Initial management consists of stretching, manipulation, and splinting. This stretches tight soft tissues and radial-sided structures to help with passive correction of the deformity and allows the hand to become aligned with the ulna. Stretching should be done until the time of surgery, as preoperative soft-tissue stretching is necessary for any successful surgical procedures. This can be done by application of various splints or with serial casting. A stretching program may be conducted at home in combination with night splinting.

Additionally, the application of an external fixation device may aid with stretching tight radial tissues. This type of distraction with external fixation prior to surgery is especially helpful for children with more severe stages of radial dysplasia.

Children with mild radial dysplasia may require only stretching and splinting. Nonsurgical treatment is also indicated for children with stable joints and minimal deformity, as well as children with abnormalities that would preclude surgery. Surgery is avoided if a child has an elbow extension contracture, as the radial deviation of the wrist is necessary for the child to bring the hand to their face.

Surgical treatment of radial dysplasia aims to straighten the forearm axis and increase upper limb length, as well as either reconstructing or ablating the thumb with pollicization of the index finger. The thumb and forearm corrections are done as staged procedures. The first procedure is to align the hand and wrist onto the distal ulna, and this is generally done before one year of age. The next stage, thumb reconstruction or ablation with index pollicization, is done approximately 6 months afterward.

There are two general methods to align the wrist onto the distal ulna: wrist centralization and radialization. Bringing the wrist into alignment with the distal ulna aims to increase stability and functional use of the hand and wrist. Both centralization and radialization require soft-tissue releases to be able to translate the carpus ulnarly. This often requires shaving the distal ulna or carpal resection or may require the application of an external fixator and completion of wrist realignment at a later procedure.

Wrist centralization aligns the distal ulna with the third digit metacarpal with fixation of pins for stability.

In radial dysplasia, the affected forearm is significantly shorter than the unaffected forearm. This difference in length can be corrected by lengthening the ulna with distraction techniques. This correction can be done after centralization in older children. These procedures can affect ulnar growth, however, and additional lengthenings may be required to maintain the correct ulnar length.

Mild thumb hypoplasia that has adequate function and stability for pinch, grip, and prehension may not need surgical correction. Worse thumb deformity and function may require various reconstructive procedures.