Before any surgical intervention, the patient needs to be adequately resuscitated with intravenous fluids and electrolyte imbalances corrected. A nasogastric tube helps to decompress the stomach in those patients with an incompetent ileocecal valve. In a patient with sigmoid volvulus, decompression should be attempted with a rectal flatus tube by the bedside, or during a flexible endoscopy if the bedside decompression fails. Those patients who cannot be decompressed will need surgical intervention.

Patients with malignant obstruction will require surgery for definitive management. The procedure depends on the stage of the disease. In patients with metastatic disease, a defunctioning stoma is a preferred option, as this will ensure the timely start of chemotherapy. Patients without metastatic disease should undergo a definitive resectional and restorative procedure, followed by adjuvant therapy as necessary. In those patients planned for curative resection, a colonic stenting procedure or a defunctioning stoma in the emergency setting can allow elective resection of cancer and is a good option to offer the patient a laparoscopic resection once the colon is decompressed and the patient has resumed normal oral intake. A decompressive procedure, however, is only an option in patients without bowel ischemia and perforation, and should not be attempted in patients who are peritonitis or septic.

Patients with impending perforation, cecal ischemia or fecal peritonitis will require an emergency laparotomy and resection of the perforated colon as well as the obstructing lesion.