To fully understand the nasogastric tube placement, it is best to understand the human anatomy that the practitioner traverses during the procedure. Insertion begins at the nares, the outermost part of the nose, also referred to as the nostrils. Once the tube enters the nose, it progresses into the anterior nasal vestibule. The nasal septum, comprised of cartilage, separates the two sides. Beyond the vestibule, the tube has reached the concha. On either side of the concha are the nasal sinuses. This area is approximately 5 to 7 cm posterior to the nares, and it ultimately connects to the nasopharynx posteriorly.

The nasopharynx connects to the oropharynx. The oropharynx runs from the uvula to the mid-epiglottis. From the mid epiglottis to the inferior aspect of the cricoid process is the laryngopharynx. The pharynx, comprised of all three regions, runs approximately 12 to 14 cm in length: from the base of the skull to the start of the esophagus.  The esophagus is about 25 cm in length. At the distal end of the esophagus, the practitioner encounters the gastroesophageal sphincter. Once passed through this sphincter, the tube has reached the stomach. Just beyond the gastroesophageal opening is the cardia region of the stomach. The left and highest portion of the stomach is known as the fundus. The fundus is the area of the stomach that is closest to the diaphragm anatomically.

The pylorus is the furthest portion of the stomach, connecting it to the duodenum, where gastric contents exit.  The gastric outlet opens and closes via the pyloric sphincter.