Fluoxetine is a commonly prescribed antidepressant by primary care providers, nurse practitioners, psychiatrists, and internists, but effective therapy requires the effort of an interprofessional team. When treating pregnant women during the third trimester with fluoxetine, the prescriber should consider the potential benefits and risks of treatment. In addition, clinicians should consider that women who stopped antidepressant medication while pregnant were more likely to experience a relapse of MDD than women who continued to use antidepressant medications.

Nursing staff and clinicians should monitor children and adolescent patients for suicidal ideation, especially when starting fluoxetine or increasing doses. Nursing staff, particularly specialty training in psychiatric health, can counsel the patients on proper dosing and administration. For example, it is crucial to educate patients that they should not combine the drug with alcohol or other antidepressants. The patient should have regular followup regarding depression and suicidal thoughts. The pharmacist should verify dosing, especially check for drug interactions, given fluoxetine's extensive list of interactions, and report these to the prescriber if present. All interprofessional team embers are responsible for monitoring the patient, offering counsel, and noting any changes in patient status. If they note any issues, they should be documented in the patient's health record for all team members to see, and the new information should be communicated to other team members so changes can be made if necessary. With close monitoring from all interprofessional team members, fluoxetine can be an effective drug for numerous psychiatric conditions, including major depression. It can also be administered for long periods, leading to optimal patient results. [Level 5]