The severity and duration of clinical manifestations are variable and dependent on the parasitic burden. Most patients have spontaneous resolution of the symptoms with conservative measures. The goal is to decrease the meningeal inflammation and lower the intracranial pressure through the removal of the spinal fluid and symptomatic relief of headache. Administration of steroids (prednisolone or dexamethasone) to depress the inflammatory reaction has been associated with decreasing the duration of headache and requirement for serial CSF drainage.

Ocular angiostrongyliasis has been reported in about 1% of all reported case reports. It occurs when the larva enters the anterior or posterior chamber. The exact mechanism of entry into the eye is unclear but has been thought to be secondary to travel along the retinal artery between the optic nerve and sheath. Usually, only one larva is present and symptoms include blurred vision, blindness, and pain. Usually, eosinophilic meningitis is also present in these cases. Ocular involvement requires laser treatment to kill the larva before surgical removal.

There are no official guidelines for treatment however on the premises of evidence-based medicine the following recommendations are followed. In Hawaii, a real-time PCR test can be performed on CSF fluid that detects DNA from A. cantonensis. If negative during early states of infection, this test and repeat LP should be done if strong suspicion is present. Serological testing against antibodies in the serum or CSF is not recommended. Albendazole if added may provide benefit but should be used in combination with steroids to dampen the intense inflammatory response created by the dying parasites. Careful attention should be paid to adequate glycemic control in this case in diabetic patients.