**COGNITIVE AIDS**

The use of cognitive aids or algorithms is helpful in the retrieval of information during high-acuity situations that demand quick, yet efficient action by a healthcare provider and/or team of providers.  In industries such as aviation and nuclear energy, the use of cognitive aids is practically mandated, given the nature of regulations in these industries.  Limitations to the use of cognitive aids in healthcare include, but are not limited to, the complexity of steps listed in the aids, unclear or incomplete instructions, the stigma that utilizing a cognitive aid implies a suboptimal fund of knowledge and the extra steps involved in using the aid in a crisis.

An extensive review of the existing literature involving the use of cognitive aids in anesthetic emergencies demonstrates improvement in technical skills. Although the impact of these aids on team coordination is not clearly established and requires further study.

**DEBRIEFING**

Debriefing can be learner-guided or facilitator-guided, the latter being more commonly used and better studied.

In one study that looked at the rates of debriefing that occurred after critical events at a large academic medical center, roughly half of the events were debriefed.

**COMMUNICATION**

Teamwork is paramount to anesthesia crisis resource management, especially when it relies on multidisciplinary decision-making. In response to the institute of medicine's report, to err is human, as well as the public demand for improvement in patient safety, the agency for healthcare research and quality (AHRQ) and the department of defense (DOD) have developed a curriculum dubbed TeamSTEPPS (team strategies & tools to enhance performance and patient safety) in 2006.