The symptoms of rhino-orbital cerebral mucormycosis are often non-specific with varying spectrum and severity. Background history of diabetes mellitus or underlying immunosuppression is usually revealed. Fever, headache, nausea, and generalized weakness may be the initial complaints. Purulent discharge with or without epistaxis might be present with the onset of sinusitis, along with congestion and decreased sensation inside the nose. Nasal ulceration and necrosis are often reported. Facial symptoms include pain and numbness. Periorbital or retro-orbital pain, double or blurred vision, and partial or complete loss of vision in one or both eyes might progress to blindness. The involvement of the brain can manifest with altered consciousness, unstable gait, and/or seizures. Rare reports of rhino-orbital cerebral mucormycosis leading to mucormycosis of the retina misdiagnosed as coats disease in young patients exist.

Nasal or palatine findings of rhino-orbital cerebral mucormycosis include grey or reddish mucosa, which will progress to black areas of eschar as necrosis ensues. Eschar may be seen in the nasal septum, palate, eyelid, face, or orbital areas. The absence of eschar does not rule out rhino-orbital mucormycosis. Examination of the eyes may reveal tenderness and swelling of the eyelids, and evidence of orbital invasion in the form of painful proptosis. Ptosis, abscess of eyelids, and corneal numbness with edema are often noticed. A closer examination may reveal features of vitritis and/or endophthalmitis, and optic disc edema. Evidence of ophthalmoplegia (internal as well as external) with the latter being partial or complete, afferent pupillary abnormalities, fixed pupils, nystagmus, and a loss of vision secondary to fungal invasion or retinal artery occlusion can occur. Superior orbital fissure syndrome and superior ophthalmic vein thrombosis have been known to occur. A painless orbital apex syndrome has also been well described. Cranial nerve palsies with varying involvement of II, III, IV, V, VI, and VII nerves are common. Cerebral edema may lead to coma, and vascular occlusion progresses to cerebral infarcts. Cavernous sinus thrombosis with loss of vision is believed to be a characteristic feature of mucormycosis where cavernous sinus thrombosis without loss of vision is observed in bacterial infections.