Hypercalcemia seen on routine lab work performed for other purposes is the most common initial sign of hyperparathyroidism. In most patients, this hypercalcemia is mild and may even be intermittent and is usually less than 1.0 mg/dL above normal upper limits. Unexplained hypercalcemia on a repeated set of lab work warrants further investigation. PTH level should be subsequently measured, and it may be elevated or even within normal limits, although inappropriately so given the patient’s hypercalcemia. Twenty-four-hour urinary calcium may also be measured, but it is not essential for diagnosis.

The next step in evaluation is radiographic imaging. Imaging is essential because it not only guides operative planning but distinguishes a single adenoma from a multi-gland hyperplastic disease.

Normal parathyroids are generally too small to be seen on ultrasound; therefore, visualization of this gland should raise suspicion for a pathologic process. If an adenoma identifiable on ultrasound, it should appear as a homogeneously hypoechoic extrathyroidal oval mass with a fat plane separating it from normal thyroid tissue. A feeding artery may also be visualized entering the superior or inferior pole of the adenoma. Ultrasound alone has a sensitivity of only 60 to 80% because it is operator-dependent. It may be used as an adjunct nuclear imaging.

The gold standard of parathyroid localization is single-radioisotope scintigraphy with technetium-99m (99mTc) combined with single-photon emission computed tomography (SPECT) imaging. SPECT is a 3-dimensional sestamibi scan that improves the visualization of parathyroid glands. The combination of these methods has a 91 to 98% sensitivity for identifying parathyroid adenomas.

An alternative is dual-radioisotope imaging, in which both 99mTc pertechnetate and thallium-201 (201Tl) are given. Thallium is taken up by both the thyroid and parathyroid, while pertechnetate only has avidity for the thyroid. Subtraction imaging is then used to visualize the glands. Drawbacks to this method include the necessity of a subtraction program, long imaging times, and limited views.

Four-dimensional CT and MRI have also been used in parathyroid imaging. However, they are only 75% and 40% to 85% sensitive, respectively. For that reason, nuclear imaging for preoperative localization. Four-dimensional CT and MRI may have a more beneficial role in localizing ectopic glands after failed parathyroidectomy. In a study of 45 patients who had undergone previous neck exploration, 4-dimensional CT had 88% sensitivity for abnormal parathyroid glands compared with sestamibi SPECT or neck ultrasound (54% and 21%, respectively).