For over 50 years, suicidality research was dominated by efforts to identify single and groups of risk factors that would reliably predict an individual's risk for long-term (lifetime) or near-term (imminent) suicide. As it turned out, thousands of risk factors were very weakly associated with having suicidal ideation (SI), but no single or combination of risk factors are clinically useful to predict a particular individual's suicide risk. There are data that suggest various factors may weakly increase the lifetime risk of suicide within populations, but there is no way to reliably predict an individual's lifetime or imminent risk for suicide.

One of the reasons for the inconclusive findings and low-quality evidence from decades of studies is because there is no typical SI presentation. The heterogeneity of ideators has implications for both researchers and clinical practitioners. Each individual presents differently, with their own unique experiences, risk factors, and protective factors. Therefore, a person-centered approach is crucial to achieving positive outcomes.

More recently, researchers turned their focus to the social and healthcare-related factors that may contribute to rising rates of SI and suicide. Literature shows that social stigma, media coverage, and traditional healthcare practices all contribute to poor outcomes. Studies of people who sought treatment for SI and suicidal behaviors suggest how healthcare professionals respond and treat patients when they disclose their suicidal ideas is vitally important. When the ideator feels negatively judged or if there is a delay in follow-up care, their outcomes worsen. There is also abundant evidence that individuals who die by suicide were seen by healthcare professionals in the days, weeks, and months preceding their death. This means that opportunities exist in most situations for healthcare professionals to impact outcomes by assisting the ideator during a crisis.

Many healthcare professionals, regardless of their discipline, are doubtful they have sufficient knowledge and skills to intervene. More training is recommended by professional associations, researchers, and the Joint Commission to increase evidence-based knowledge, the proper use of objective instruments, and to increase healthcare professionals' self-confidence in assessing and treating ideators. Counseling to limit access to lethal means is recommended, but at present, there is a lack of research evidence to guide training programs. Further research to identify the best strategies and which professionals are best able to provide this counseling is needed.

Because suicidality is believed to arise in response to a complex interplay of an individual's unique bio-psycho-social-cultural-spiritual risk factors, it follows that outcomes can be improved through a holistic approach that incorporates the expertise of each discipline. Traditionally, this has not occurred. For example, there are dozens of clinical guidelines that have been published by each healthcare profession, but the recommendations differ. This is largely due to the low quality of evidence that supports recommendations and the lack of gold standards for prevention, assessment, and treatment. However, it has become clearer in recent years that quality and safety are improved when an interprofessional approach is used. Therefore, using an interprofessional approach that includes comprehensive strategies to address social and healthcare practices as well as individual patient factors will have the most positive impact on patient outcomes.

Universal screening for SI by ED nurses has been recommended by the Emergency Nurses Association to detect individuals who have occult SI but whose presenting problem is medical and not behavioral.

**Zero Suicide**

- **Lead**system-wide culture change committed to reducing suicides

- **Train**a competent, confident, and caring workforce

- **Identify**individuals with suicide risk via comprehensive screening and assessment

- **Engage**all individuals at-risk of suicide using a suicide care management plan

- **Treat**suicidal thoughts and behaviors using evidence-based treatments

- **Transition**individuals through care with warm hand-offs and supportive contacts

- **Improve**policies and procedures through continuous quality improvement

**The Therapeutic Risk Management of Suicidal Patient (TRMSP)**model, a legally and clinically sound framework to aid psychiatrists in suicide risk assessment and treatment management, was adapted for use with interprofessional teams.

Advocates of the TRMSP interprofessional model suggest that incorporating it into practice would increase the evidence-based knowledge and skills of nurses, social workers, and physicians. It would increase the number of providers who are knowledgeable of suicide risk assessment, thereby improving access to care and reducing existing gaps. Most ideators are not under the care of a psychiatrist, so limiting requisite knowledge and skills to psychiatrists limits the quality and timeliness of care that ideators receive.

Reducing communication gaps during transitions in care settings and between disciplines is recommended as a strategy to improve outcomes. Adapting the TRMSP model for interprofessional use improves the quality of communication by providing opportunities for better information exchange and more consistent documentation (including both quantitative and qualitative information in the electronic medical record). Ultimately, the continuity of care can be enhanced if all disciplines understand and share a common model that permits better collaboration and teamwork. The creation and documentation of acute and chronic suicide risk stratification enable all disciplines to better understand the patient's status over the trajectory of care.

**Interprofessional TRMSP Model of Care**

**1. Risk Assessment Based on Objective Measures**

The use of standardized, valid, and reliable SI and suicide risk assessment measures can be used by a wide array of healthcare providers as long as they are taught how to use the tool and what the strengths and limitations are for each instrument. Regardless of who completes the risk assessment, a detailed interview that gathers and documents the patient's explanation of their situation is essential. Thus, interviewing skills and gathering relevant information from the patient, family/friends, and medical histories is imperative to establishing the context because scores alone, from any standardized measure, are inadequate. These authors suggested that the C-SSRS is a richer tool than some of the others, but even with the C-SSRS, clinical judgments need to be based on more than the standardized risk assessment results. The authors stated, "From the medicolegal perspective, these instruments can and should populate the medical record, but must be balanced with individualized narratives of the patient’s situation."

**2. Acute and Chronic Suicide Risk Stratification**

The assessment and documentation of the level of both acute suicidal risk as well as long-term risk is important. This provides all providers with a more thorough, nuanced, and accurate depiction of the patient's suicide risk. By documenting a stratified suicide risk assessment, it becomes easier for all healthcare professionals to understand the patient's fluctuations in risk. For example, an individual with a low acute suicide risk designation but who has a high chronic suicide risk may require additional safety precautions if distressing life circumstances arise. The stratified assessment documentation enables other healthcare professionals to better predict how acute risk may suddenly increase given certain triggers.

**3. Development of an Individualized Safety Plan with Collaboration of the Patient**

Safety plans are considered best practices and have replaced suicide contracts (which are no longer recommended).

There is low-quality research evidence from cohort studies and expert consensus to support these guideline recommendations.