**Absence Seizures with Eyelid Myoclonus**

Childhood absence epilepsy has an onset in the same age range as motor tics. Considering that the first motor tic typically involves eye blinking, it could be difficult to differentiate between these two. Motor tics are not associated with altered consciousness or staring and are usually much shorter in duration than absence seizures. Anxiety does not typically exacerbate seizures. Routine EEG is not usually indicated for children with motor tics, but if there is a concern for altered consciousness, this study should be able to differentiate between the 2 diagnoses.

**Stereotypies**

Rare, rhythmic, repetitive, fixed, predictable, purposeless movements that occur in children who are otherwise developing normally. Examples of primary motor stereotypies are flapping and waving of the arms, hand flapping, head nodding, and rocking back and forth. The difference is that these typically start before 3 years of age, often in infancy. Children tend to have a single repetitive movement, as opposed to multiple motor tics. These are easier to voluntarily control and tend to occur primarily when the child is excited. They significantly decrease in frequency as the child reaches elementary school age.

**Chorea**

Characterized by jerky, involuntary movements affecting especially the shoulders, hips, and face. The movements can be erratic but are more constant than motor tics. This occurs much less in childhood than do motor tics.

**Paroxysmal Dyskinesias (PDK)**

Abnormal movements often precipitated by a startle or a sudden movement. The attacks are usually short, only lasting seconds or minutes. An unusual sensation in the limbs may precede the symptoms. Most people with PKD have dystonia, and some have a combination of chorea and dystonia or ballism. This is usually autosomal dominant but can be sporadic.

**Akathisia**

Movement disorder characterized by a feeling of inner restlessness and inability to stay still. This is commonly a side effect of antipsychotic, antidepressant, or antiemetic medications. Typically, akathisia occurs in adults but is being seen more frequently in children as these medications are being regularly prescribed.

**Obsessive-Compulsive Disorder**

Distinguishing between motor tics and repetitive movements of OCD can be very difficult, and there is often overlap between these two illnesses. OCD movements are performed to relieve significant anxiety and are often associated with compulsive thoughts (“If I don’t do this exactly right, something terrible will happen”). Motor tics are typically preceded by a vague urge that is not as clearly defined and are usually more subconscious. The treatment approach is similar, so distinguishing between each movement is not usually necessary.