Antibiotic use during cutaneous surgery, including Mohs micrographic surgery (MMS), should be used judiciously in the appropriate patient populations. Skin surgery has a low risk of surgical site infection (SSI); therefore, antibiotics are not routinely prescribed. A systematic review and meta-analysis of SSI following MMS without prophylactic antibiotics of various anatomic locations and closure methods found a mean infection range between 1.4% and 2.7%.

Special consideration for antibiotic prophylaxis is given to patients with specific risk factors for infection or bacterial dissemination from the surgical site. A recent survey found that most American College of Mohs surgery surgeons queried did not use topical (62.8%) or oral (67.7%) antibiotics in routine cases.

Prophylactic antibiotics were given for the following circumstances in decreasing order: artificial cardiac valves (69.4%), anogenital surgery (53.0%), wedge excision (42.2%), artificial joints (41.0%), inflammatory skin disease (40.1%), immunosuppression (38.9%), skin grafts (36.4%), leg surgery (34.2%), and nasal flaps (30.1%).

Although specific guidelines for antibiotic administration in the setting of Mohs micrographic surgery are lacking, there is a recognized role for antibiotics in certain situations. Guidelines for antibiotic usage in cutaneous surgery exist primarily for the prevention of endocarditis and prosthetic joint infection. The most current practices rely on guidelines established by The American Heart Association (AHA) in 2007 and The American Academy of Orthopedic Surgeons (AAOS) in conjunction with The American Dental Association (ADA) in 2003. These guidelines identify patients with an increased risk of endocarditis or prosthetic joint infection following dental procedures.

Subsequently, a 2008 advisory statement published in the Journal of the American Academy of Dermatology (JAAD) presented updated indications for antibiotic prophylaxis in cutaneous surgery, considering endocarditis, joint infection, and surgical site infection (SSI). These updated indications were formulated based on a comprehensive analysis of the existing literature, expert opinions, and the aforementioned guidelines.

The advisory statement can be used as a guideline for the Mohs surgeon, but one must carefully consider the risk-to-benefit ratio when selecting patients for antibiotic prophylaxis. The low risk of the patient acquiring an infection from a Mohs surgical site or bacterial dissemination to a heart valve or prosthetic joint must be weighed against the risks of the antibiotic, such as drug reactions, allergies, and increasing antimicrobial resistance. In addition, selecting the appropriate antibiotic regimen is imperative for effectiveness and is determined by the patient’s risk factors, surgical site, and most likely organism to cause infection. The following discussion includes a review of the function and selection of antibiotic prophylaxis, issues of concern, clinical significance, and other issues for MMS.