The human ear has a dual function of hearing and maintaining balance, and it is broadly divided into three parts: The outer ear, comprised of the auricle (pinna) and the external auditory canal, the middle ear, and the inner ear (cochlea). For this topic, the focus is on the middle ear.

The Middle Ear: The middle ear is contained within the aerated middle ear cavity of the petrous aspect of the temporal bone. It functions as a transmitting medium for acoustic sounds collected from the external ear via the pinna and tympanic membrane (TM) to the ossicles, and then to the fluid-filled inner ear structures and finally to the eighth cranial nerve.

The middle ear contains the following structures:

- The ossicles (the malleus, the incus, and the stapes)

- Muscles: the stapedius and the tensor tympani muscles

- Chorda tympani nerve

- The tympanic nerve plexus

The middle ear embryology is complex, and the details are beyond the reach of this article, but a brief overview is included. The ossicles of the middle ear originate from neural crest cells of the 1st and 2nd arch mesenchyme while the tympanic cavity itself originates from the 1st pharyngeal pouch and it maintains an embryologic connection to the nasopharynx via the Eustachian tube. The mesodermal layer of the 1st and 2nd arches gives rise to the muscles of the middle ear (stapedius and tensor tympani). The tympanic cavity is also made up of 2 parts, the tympanic cavity proper, and the epitympanic recess. Both are in continuity with the air cells of the mastoid bone.

Tympanic Membrane:

The tympanic membrane (TM) is an oval-shaped, thin, semitransparent membrane. It measures approximately 1 cm in diameter in adults and forms a separation between the external acoustic meatus and the middle ear cavity. The tympanic membrane is divided into two main parts: the pars flaccida (Shrapnell membrane - located in the posterior superior portion of the eardrum above the malleolar folds. The chorda tympani lies on the internal surface of the TM in this area) and the pars tensa (the remainder of the eardrum, comprised of three layers - external squamous, middle fibrous, and internal mucosal. This is the portion of the TM connected to the malleolus surrounding the umbo that participates most in sound transmission). The manubrium of the malleus bone is connected to the middle portion of the TM, allowing direct transmission of acoustic vibrations of the tympanic membrane to the subsequent ossicles. Needle placement in tympanocentesis is through the pars tensa, ideally in the anterior inferior or posterior inferior quadrant of the membrane. The posterior superior quadrant should not be instrumented as damage to the underlying ossicles (incus and stapes) can occur.

Physiology:

Chronic negative pressure, such as that due to Eustachian tube dysfunction, can lead to transudate fluid accumulating in the middle ear space. As the TM is solid, the only means of equalization of middle ear pressure with environmental pressure is via the Eustachian tube. The presence of such a fluid collection will dampen the TM and lead to hearing loss, but also provides a nidus for infection as microorganisms can colonize this space via the Eustachian tube. If such fluid persists for long periods, the aqueous component will be gradually resorbed by the middle ear mucosa, but the mucoid proteins will remain, yielding a sticky-textured fluid that is unlikely to resolve without manual removal. This is sometimes termed "glue ear." There is also indirect communication between the middle ear and the inner ear via the round window (and to a lesser extent, the oval window, which is occupied by the stapes footplate). This allows osmotic transmission of inflammatory and other molecules to and from these two spaces. One theory as to the development of SSNHL is such transmission of viral reactive particles from the middle ear space during an upper respiratory infection to the inner ear, damaging the cochlear nerve fibers.