Xeroderma pigmentosum results from a mutation in nucleotide excision repair. The nucleotide excision repair system is capable of removing ultraviolet-induced damage to DNA, such as pyrimidine dimers and pyrimidines 6-4 pyrimidones. The progression of xeroderma pigmentosum is due to the accumulation of unrepaired DNA damage. Eight different mutations have been found to associate with different subtypes and clinical presentations of xeroderma pigmentosum. Research has described the subtypes of XP A-G and XP variants, each with varying mutations in nucleotide excision repair. A mutation in the gene XPC results in the most common subtype in the United States.

XPC gene codes for an endonuclease and is on chromosome 3p25. The mutated endonuclease is unable to sense damage in DNA, resulting in severe sun sensitivity and malignant tumor formation of the skin and mucous membranes. The XPC subtype of xeroderma pigmentosum has no neurologic manifestations compared to the XPA subtype, which is the most common form in Japan.

The XPA gene codes for DNA damage binding protein 1 (DDB1) is on chromosome 9q22. DDB1 normally senses damage in DNA and assists in the unwinding of DNA. These patients present with both skin and neurologic manifestations of the disease.

XPB, XPD, XPE, XPF, and XPG are all rare subtypes of xeroderma pigmentosum. The XPB gene codes for excision-repair cross-complementing 3 (ERCC3) found on chromosome 2q21. ERCC3 is part of a 9-subunit protein complex (TFIIH) needed for open complex formation in DNA repair. The XPB subtype correlates with both Cockayne syndrome and trichothiodystrophy. The XPD gene codes for ERCC2 and is on chromosome 19q13. The XPD subtype has correlations with XP-Cockayne complex and trichothiodystrophy. The XPE gene codes for DDB2. The XPF gene is on chromosome 16p13 and codes for ERCC4, which normally forms an endonuclease with ERCC1 that incises damaged DNA. The XPG gene codes for ERCC5 and is on chromosome 13q33.

Mutations in the XPV gene results in the variant subtype of xeroderma pigmentosum, which accounts for about 30% of all cases. The XPV gene product is not considered part of nucleotide excision repair but is involved in postreplication repair. The XPV gene codes for polymerase eta found on chromosome 6p21. There are no neurologic manifestations seen in the XPV subtype of xeroderma pigmentosum.