**Intravenous (IV) Versus Oral Biphosphonates**

Osteonecrosis of the jaw is mainly reported with the use of more potent nitrogen-containing BPs like pamidronate and zoledronic acid. However, the incidence is higher with the latter - zoledronic acid causes a higher antiresorptive activity, leading to decreased bone turnover.

Oral biphosphonates rarely cause osteonecrosis of the jaw. They are less aggressive than intravenous BP, and the osteonecrosis caused by oral BP responds better to treatment. Oral BPs are less liposoluble, limiting their intestinal absorption, resulting in a lower accumulation in the bone.

**Dose and Duration**

The incidence of osteonecrotic events increases with a higher dose of potent BPs administered for a longer duration.

**Osteoporosis and Oncology Patients**

The frequency of biphosphonate-induced osteonecrosis in osteoporosis is very low, ranging from 0.15% to less than 0.001% person-years of exposure, and is only slightly higher than in non-osteoporotic patients. In oncology patients with bone metastasis, the risk is much higher as they are exposed to more intensive osteoclast inhibition and high-dose intravenous BPs. Also, the incidence varies according to the underlying condition. Wang et al. conducted a 5-year retrospective study of 292 patients treated with IV BPs that develop osteonecrosis. They found that 3% to 8% of patients had multiple myeloma, 2% to 5% breast cancer, and 2.9% prostate cancer.

**Location**

Osteonecrosis occurs most frequently in the mandible than the maxilla. It almost always begins in the alveolar bone due to its greater bone turnover rate, which relies on osteoclast-related remodeling due to occlusion and denture wearing pressure and tension forces.

Incidence of BP-induced ON of the jaw increases with:

- More potent nitrogen-containing IV BPs

- High dosage and more prolonged duration

- Oncology patients with bone metastasis

- Areas with a high bone turnover rate like the alveolar bone of the mandible