Managing anorexia associated with weight loss in patients with AIDs/HIV and nausea and vomiting that can accompany chemotherapy in patients who have not responded to traditional conventional antiemetics requires an interprofessional team of healthcare professionals that may include clinicians of various types (MDs, DOs, NPs, and PAs), palliative care specialists, oncology specialists, pharmacists, nursing staff, and other clinicians from other specialties. The interprofessional model will involve open communication and information sharing, with each interprofessional team member empowered to contribute to the patient case from their own expertise to drive optimal patient outcomes. [Level 5]

**Anorexia Associated with Weight Loss in Patients with AIDs/HIV**

Level 1: Treatment of AIDs-related anorexia and weight loss was proven effective in a randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled study with 139 patients. A statistically significant difference between dronabinol and placebo was observable in appetite. Additional measured trends included improved body weight and mood and decreases in nausea. Recent metanalyses have also shown dronabinol to be efficacious.

**Nausea and Vomiting Associated with Chemotherapy in Patients Who Have Not Responded to Traditional Conventional Antiemetic**

Level 1: Treatment of chemotherapy-induced nausea and vomiting ('CINV') with dronabinol has been extensively studied as monotherapy and combined with other more traditional antiemetics such as ondansetron. Recent metanalyses have also shown dronabinol to be efficacious.