The vast majority of post-intubation laryngeal edema is asymptomatic and does not need any intervention. The degree of severity of edema and the occurrence of associated injuries varies from patient to patient. The overall incidence of post-extubation laryngeal edema is noted to be between 5 to 54 % in various studies, and only about 10.5 % of the patients with post-extubation laryngeal edema will need reintubation. It should be noted that every reintubation event is known to increase the risk of morbidity as well as mortality. Laryngeal edema with resultant restricted vocal cords mobility was the cause for post-extubation stridor in almost two-third of the cases in a study on 136 patients.

If CLT is negative (less than 110 cc), then the extubation is postponed, and the patient is reassessed for extubation after about 4 hours of administration of a single dose of 40 mg IV methylprednisolone. IV steroids have been known to prevent post-extubation stridor in patients who fail the CLT in the select group of high-risk patients.

If the patient still develops post-extubation stridor, measures including IV steroids, nebulized steroids, and adrenaline nebulization are started, and the patient is reintubated if he/she is not improving after close monitoring up to an hour. If reintubated, IV steroids and nebulizations are continued for 24 to 48 hours, and extubation is considered after a repeat CLT. If no improvement is seen in cuff leak volume after 24 to 48 hours, tracheostomy may have to be considered, especially in view of failed previous extubation. The patient will also require a fibreoptic endoscopic evaluation to assess the larynx and tracheal areas in the meantime.