Foot drop is an inability to lift the forefoot due to the weakness of dorsiflexors of the foot. This, in turn, can lead to an unsafe antalgic gait, potentially resulting in falls.

The etiologies behind this presentation are varied and include muscular, neurologic, spinal, autoimmune, and musculoskeletal disorders. Depending on the etiology, treatment options differ.

A thorough understanding of the underlying pathophysiology is necessary before designing a treatment plan. This article will review the etiology, clinical features, diagnosis, and treatment.

**Anatomy**

**Lumbar Nerve Roots**

There are 5 lumbar vertebrae. The lumbar nerve roots emerge from the lateral spinal recess formed by the inferior facet of the rostral vertebrae and the superior facet of the caudal vertebra.  The L5 nerve root exits between the L5 and S1 vertebrae.

**Lumbar Plexus**

The lumbar plexus is composed of the anterior rami of spinal nerves L1-L4. Multiple nerves emerge from this plexus. The iliohypogastric and ilioinguinal nerves supply the transverse abdominis and internal oblique muscles. The obturator nerve supplies the adductors of the thigh. The femoral nerve is a large nerve that supplies the quadriceps femoris group and continues as the saphenous nerve, which is the sensory nerve to the medial leg.

**Sciatic Nerve**

The sciatic nerve is the largest branch of the lumbosacral plexus and consists of nerve roots L4 to S4. It travels in the posterior thigh to the popliteal fossa. Here it divides into 2 branches: the tibial and the common fibular (historically peroneal) nerves. The tibial innervates hamstrings, plantar flexors, and invertors of the foot.

**Common Fibular Nerve**

The common fibular nerve is the lateral terminal branch of the sciatic that runs laterally across the lateral head of the gastrocnemius muscle. It then continues around the fibular head, where it is subcutaneous and so is vulnerable to compression. As it passes between the fibula and fibularis longus muscle, it divides into the deep and superficial fibular nerves. The deep fibular nerve innervates ankle and toe-extensors and supplies sensation to a small area at the first web space between the first and second toes.