Acetylcholine performs its actions by binding the cholinergic receptors (muscarinic and nicotinic). Acetylcholine performs various functions through cholinergic muscarinic receptors.

In the cardiovascular system, it determines generalized vasodilation; decrease in heart rate (negative chronotropic effect); reduction of cardiac contraction force (negative inotropic effect), at the ventricular level, this effect is less pronounced; decrease in the speed of conduction in the specialized tissue of the sinoatrial and atrioventricular nodes (negative dromotropic effect).

- In the gastrointestinal system, through stimulation of the vagus nerve, the tone, the amplitude of contractions, and the secretory activity of the stomach and intestine increase, sphincters are released.

- In the respiratory system, it determines bronchoconstriction and stimulation of the chemoreceptors of the aortic and carotid glomus, with consequent reflex hyperpnea.

- In the urinary system, parasympathetic sacral stimulation causes contraction of the detrusor muscle of the bladder, increasing the emptying pressure and ureteral peristalsis, the release of sphincters.

- In the exocrine glands, it stimulates the secretion of all the exocrine glands that receive a parasympathetic innervation, including the lacrimal, tracheobronchial, salivary, digestive glands, and the exocrine sweat glands.

- In the eye, it determines miosis and accommodation of the lens in close vision, inducing the contraction of the sphincter muscle of the pupil and the ciliary muscle.

- In the male reproductive system, it causes erection.

However, through the nicotinic cholinergic receptors, acetylcholine allows for skeletal muscle contraction; in the adrenal glands, the release of adrenaline and norepinephrine; and in the peripheral sympathetic ganglia, activation of the sympathetic system with the release of norepinephrine.