The formation of a human limb is a complex process embryologically, with numerous molecular signaling pathways and factors being involved. Limbs arise from limb buds, which are small buds of undifferentiated lateral plate mesoderm cells surrounded by ectoderm cells. The lateral plate mesoderm cells give rise to the connective tissues of the limb, such as bone, cartilage, muscle, and tendon. Cells that migrate from the somites to the lateral plate mesoderm also gives rise to muscle cells. The limb buds are located bilaterally, on two distinct levels of the anterior-posterior (AP) axis. The limb buds located by the cervical-thoracic transition give rise to the upper limbs (forelimbs), while the limb buds located by the lumbar-sacral transition give rise to the lower limbs (hindlimbs). Specific genes, Pitx1 and Hox, have been found to determine the identity of limbs; whether they will be forelimbs or hindlimbs. Pitx1 has been found in the lateral plate mesoderm, and regulates Tbx4 expression, helping to form a hindlimb identity. Hox4 and Hox5 regulate Tbx5 expression and help to form a forelimb identity. Hox genes also contribute to the development of the interlimb region, including the vertebral column.

Signaling regions in the limb buds control the growth of the lateral plate mesoderm in three different positional planes: dorso-ventral (from the back of the hand to the palms), AP (from the thumb to the 5th digit), and the proximo-distal (from the shoulder to the fingertips).

- Dorso-ventral growth: dorsal growth is controlled by the dorsal ectoderm, which produces Wnt7a, while ventral growth is controlled by the ventral ectoderm, which produces bone morphogenic proteins (BMPs).

- AP growth: controlled by the mesoderm cells by the posterior aspect of the limb bud, known as the zone of polarizing activity (ZPA), which produces the Sonic hedgehog protein (Shh) controlling AP growth. Additionally, Hox genes are involved in AP growth of the forelimbs, with Hox5 contributing to anterior forelimb growth and Hox9 contributing to posterior forelimb growth.

- Proximo-distal growth: controlled by the apical ectodermal ridge (AER), which produces fibroblast growth factors (FGFs). The apical ectodermal ridge is where the dorsal and ventral ectoderm meets and is a thickening of the ectoderm.