**Anatomy**

The penis consists of three cylindrical chambers: the paired corpora cavernosa and the corpus spongiosum. The corpora cavernosa are contained within a bilayered, collagenous sheath called the tunica albuginea and are composed of variously sized sinusoids supported by a fibrous skeleton. The fibrous skeleton provides structural support and is constructed of tunica albuginea surrounded by smooth muscle trabeculae (which regulate blood flow in and out of the sinusoids), elastic fibers, and collagen. This arrangement allows for blood to fill the sinusoids of corpora cavernosa and maintain rigidity during an erection. The tunica albuginea also helps sustain erections by restricting venous outflow by compressing the emissary veins that drain the sinusoids. The corpora cavernosa start proximally as two separate crura covered by the ischiocavernosus muscle. The contraction of this muscle forces blood distally from the cavernous space in the crura to the corpora cavernosa and provides additional rigidity during the rigid erection phase. The corpus spongiosum is the ventrally located chamber that contains the urethra and distally becomes the glans. This chamber also holds a tunica sheath that is less dense and not present in the glans. The sinusoids of the corpus spongiosum are larger than that of the corpora cavernosa. Engorgement of the corpus spongiosum constricts and pressurizes the urethral lumen to allow for forceful ejaculation. The bulbospongiosus muscle surrounds the bulb of the penis and, like the ischiocavernosus muscle, forces additional blood into the penis during the rigid erection phase. The bulbospongiosus also functions to compress the urethra to help expel semen during ejaculation.

**Vascular Supply**

The internal pudendal artery provides the main blood supply to the penis. This artery is a branch of the internal iliac and becomes the common penile artery distally. The common penile artery has three distinct branches, including dorsal, cavernous, and bulbourethral. The dorsal artery is responsible for supplying blood to the glans of the penis during engorgement. The bulbourethral artery supplies the corpus spongiosum and the bulb of the penis. The cavernous artery supplies the corpora cavernosa and branches into helicine arteries throughout the length of each corporal body. The helicine arteries supply the trabecular tissue and sinusoids of the erectile chambers. In the flaccid state, the helicine arteries are tortuous and constricted. In the erect state, they are straight and dilated, allowing blood to fill the corpora cavernosa. The venous drainage of the penis is mainly via the internal pudendal veins. Blood from the peripheral sinusoids travels in the trabecular network and drains via the subtunical venous plexus and eventually exits via emissary veins. The emissary veins will either drain via the internal pudendal veins or communicate with veins that converge on the deep dorsal vein and drain via the periprostatic plexus. During an erection, the emissary veins are compressed between the sinusoids and tunica albuginea to limit venous drainage from the sinusoids and maintain tumescence.

**Neuroanatomy**

The penis has both somatic and autonomic (i.e., sympathetic and parasympathetic) innervation. The pudendal nerve supplies the somatic innervation, which is responsible for the sensation of the penis and the contraction of the bulbospongiosus and ischiocavernosus muscles. The glans, corona, and penile skin contain numerous free nerve endings, whose fibers proximally converge to form the dorsal nerve of the penis. The penis's dorsal nerve is a distal branch of the pudendal nerve that originates from the ventral horn of S2 to S4. These nerves are responsible for receiving signals of touch, temperature, and pain. The somatomotor penile nerves originate from spinal cord segments S2 to S4 in the Onuf nucleus. These nerves travel through the sacral and pudendal nerves to innervate the ischiocavernosus and bulbospongiosus muscles. The somatomotor penile nerves are responsible for the contraction of these muscles during the rigid erection phase and ejaculation.

The chain ganglia from T11 to L2 supply the sympathetic innervation, which is responsible for vascular smooth muscle contraction of the penis. The sympathetic fibers travel through the spinal cord and exit as the superior hypogastric plexus. These nerves end terminally in the pelvic plexus and as cavernous nerves. The sympathetic innervation is responsible for the baseline tonic contraction of the helicine arteries and trabecular smooth muscle, maintaining a flaccid state—the intermediolateral nuclei of the S2 supply the parasympathetic innervation to S4 sacral spinal cord segments. The parasympathetic fibers are pro-erectogenic and responsible for vascular smooth muscle relaxation of the penis. The preganglionic fibers provided by the parasympathetic nuclei of the spinal cord pass through the pelvic nerves and join the sympathetic nerves from the superior hypogastric plexus at the pelvic plexus and cavernous nerves. The course of the autonomic nerves and its proximity to the aorta, prostate, bladder, and rectum make them vulnerable to damage during procedures. The injury could result in impaired seminal emission during ejaculation and cause iatrogenic erectile dysfunction.