Mortality from cardiovascular causes has gone down with advances in science and technology in modern medical science. The rate of decline in cardiovascular mortality has unfortunately stagnated, but recently, rates are going up in 35 - 46-year-old males and females in the United States. This stagnation is primarily linked to rising obesity rates and unhealthy lifestyles, including unhealthy diet, lack of physical activity, chronic psychosocial stress, and poor sleep quality.

Western diet is typically rich in refined carbohydrates (mainly from refined grains), sugar, salt, animal fats, processed meats, food additives, and preservatives. It is also characterized by a lack of fibers, vitamins, antioxidants, and micronutrients, likely because of inadequate intake of fruits and vegetables. This dietary pattern accounts for high-caloric intake resulting in insulin resistance and weight gain. Western diet has been associated with elevated serum markers of inflammation.

Unfortunately, the wide availability of calorie-dense nutritionally poor processed foods, high prevalence of sedentary lifestyle, chronic psychosocial stress, and sleep deprivation create an obesogenic environment with the modern lifestyle. Genetic influences might also be responsible for food preferences. Chronic overnutrition on top of a sedentary lifestyle is the perfect recipe for weight gain, chronic inflammation, and metabolic disorders. The combination of chronic inflammation and metabolic disorders is known as metaflamation.