A widely accepted set of clinical criteria for the reliable diagnosis of Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis is the revised El Escorial criteria. Most recently updated in 1998, the criteria involve both specific findings that must be present and others that must be absent. The diagnosis requires evidence of both upper and lower motor neuron degeneration, together with the progressive spread of symptoms or signs. Also, there can be no evidence (electrophysiological, pathological, or radiological) of other disease processes that may be causing the aforementioned signs and symptoms.

Specifically, the revised El Escorial criteria state that the diagnosis of ALS requires the presence of:

- Clinical, electrophysical, or neuropathologic evidence of lower motor neuron degeneration,

- Clinical, electrophysical, or neuropathologic evidence of upper motor neuron degeneration,

- Evidence of progressive spread of symptoms or signs within a region or to other regions,

Combined with the absence of:

- Electrophysiological or pathological evidence of other disease processes that might explain the patient’s motor neuron degeneration,

- Neuroimaging evidence of other diseases that might explain the observed clinical and electrophysiological signs.

While the diagnosis of ALS has historically been primarily clinical, electrodiagnostic studies can further support the diagnosis if the clinical picture is unclear. Electromyography (EMG) is useful in detecting the findings of acute denervation (fibrillation and positive sharp waves), chronic denervation (long-duration, complex motor unit action potentials [MUAP]), and chronic reinnervation (large amplitude MUAP).

The Awaji criteria also include fasciculation potentials as evidence of acute denervation, along with the previously established electrodiagnostic signs, fibrillation, and sharp waves. In addition, electrodiagnostic evidence is considered of equal weight to clinical exam findings of lower motor neuron abnormality. These changes increase sensitivity while preserving specificity from the revised El Escorial criteria.

Motor nerve action potential amplitudes may be low before weakness is clinically evident.

The World Federation of Neurology (WFN) has also set forth categories that aid in the description of ALS. Although the verbiage would seem to imply degrees of certainty, these categories instead reflect the degree of clinical involvement evident at the time of an examination. They are as follows:

- Clinically definite ALS: UMN and LMN signs in at least 3 body segments.

- Clinically probable ALS: UMN and LMN signs in at least 2 body segments with some UMN signs in a segment above the LMN signs.

- Clinically probable, laboratory-supported ALS: UMN and LMN signs in 1 segment or UMN signs in 1 region coupled with LMN signs by EMG in at least two limbs.

- Clinically possible ALS: UMN and LMN signs in 1 body segment, UMN signs alone in at least 2 segments, or LMN signs in segments above UMN signs.

- Clinically suspected ALS: Pure LMN syndrome with other causes of LMN disease adequately excluded.

Neither the El Escorial nor the Awaji criteria include specific radiologic findings in their diagnostic models. Therefore, while the role of radiology in the evaluation of ALS is mainly the exclusion of other possible etiologies of a patient’s clinical picture, a few subtle imaging findings have been associated with the upper motor disease found in ALS. Neuroimaging of ALS relies solely on magnetic resonance imaging (MRI). Studies have shown patients with ALS to demonstrate iron accumulation within the precentral gyrus.

Findings indicative of upper motor neuronal disease have also been elucidated utilizing advanced MRI techniques such as spectroscopy and diffusion tensor imaging (DTI).

Once the diagnosis has been established, genetic testing is encouraged, particularly for the SOD1 and C9ORF72 genotypes, due to emerging genotype-specific therapies in clinical trials. For patients who have a family history of the autosomal dominant disease, genetic testing can be used both as a screening tool and to provide prognostic information. For patients who have a family history of unclear inheritance, genetic testing can be useful to elucidate reduced penetrance or when information about family members is limited.