Recurrent urinary tract infections are usually new infections with different bacterial organisms. (If the organism continues to be the same, this is a relapsing infection and suggests an inadequately treated source such as an abscess, urinary stone, or prostatitis.) The source of these recurrent infections is the same as for any simple cystitis. Typically, the rectal bacterial flora contaminates the periurethral area and urethra. From there, bacteria can easily ascend and reach the bladder. Research demonstrates a complex relationship between the intestinal, vaginal, and urinary microbiome, which is not well understood.

It is important to differentiate rapid reinfection (a different organism) from a relapse (the same organism which was not completely treated). A relapse is further defined as a recurrence within two weeks of completing therapy with the same organism. It is considered reinfection if the new infection is more than two weeks after completion of therapy even if the organism is the same. The vast majority of recurrent UTIs typically seen in medical offices and clinics are reinfections and do not warrant an extensive urological evaluation or imaging. Indications for imaging include persistent hematuria, history of kidney stones, repeatedly finding Proteus (often associated with urolithiasis), and relapsing infections. Risk factors for recurrent UTIs are given listed below. Of these, the most significant include the use of a diaphragm with spermicide, untreated atrophic vaginitis, and frequent sexual intercourse. Spermicides and lack of estrogen effect will disrupt the normal vaginal flora, while sexual intercourse tends to introduce vaginal bacteria into the urethra and bladder.

**Risk Factors for Recurrent Infections****include**

- Any spermicide use within the previous year, especially if used with a diaphragm

- Atrophic vaginitis

- Chronic diarrhea

- Cystocele

- First UTI when young (prior to 16 years of age)

- Genetic predisposition (usually through bacterial/vaginal mucosal adherence factors)

- Higher frequency of sexual intercourse

- Increased post-void residual urine (incomplete bladder emptying)

- Inadequate fluid intake (low urinary volumes)

- New or multiple sexual partners

- Mother with a history of frequent or multiple UTIs

- Urinary incontinence

- Use of spermicide coated condoms

**Personal Hygiene Factors**

- Not washing hands before wiping vaginal area after voiding

- Taking baths instead of showers

- Wiping and washing the vaginal area (incorrectly) from back to front

- Not using clean, soft washcloths to clean the vaginal area when washing

- Not cleaning bladder opening area first when washing

- Failing to use a gentle, liquid soap when washing the vaginal area

- Not using vaginal estrogen, when appropriate, in post-menopausal women