There are many indications for office-based cystourethroscopy. Most office cystoscopy is performed for diagnostic purposes. One of the most common reasons for a patient to be referred to a urologist is the presence of hematuria, gross or microscopic. Gross hematuria is defined as blood in the urine that can be seen with the naked eye. Microscopic hematuria is defined as 3 or greater red blood cells per high-powered field. Another common indication for regular cystoscopy is any history of malignancy, including urethral, bladder, or upper tract UCC. This is often done on a surveillance basis with intervals depending on the type of cancer. Lower urinary tract symptoms (LUTS) are another indication of cystourethroscopy. These symptoms can include obstructive voiding symptoms, irritative voiding symptoms, urinary incontinence, chronic pelvic pain syndrome, or recurrent UTIs. Any trauma in which there is a concern for injury to the lower urinary tract necessitates cystourethroscopy, as well as any bladder abnormalities discovered during imaging studies. Removal of foreign bodies, for example, if a patient has an indwelling urinary stent that requires removal, hematospermia, azoospermia, or concern for a bladder or lower urinary tract fistula are also reasons for cystourethroscopy.

Rigid cystoscopy in the operating room is indicated for more therapeutic indications. In this setting, it is possible to have fluoroscopy and perform retrograde pyelography. There is also the ability to use multiple additional instruments, including resectoscopes, to perform procedures such as transurethral resection of bladder tumors, transurethral resection of the prostate, direct vision internal urethrotomy, injection of Botox into the detrusor muscle, and numerous other interventions. Further discussion of these different procedures is beyond the scope of this article.

Indications include:

- Hematuria, gross or microscopic

- Surveillance/evaluation of malignancy (bladder, urethra, upper tract UCC, abnormal cytology)

- Lower urinary tract symptoms (LUTS): The irritative voiding symptoms, obstructive voiding symptoms, urinary incontinence, chronic pelvic pain syndrome, recurrent UTIs

- Trauma, abnormal imaging of bladder, concern for fistula, removal of foreign body, hematospermia, azoospermia