Phenobarbital administration is via a variety of routes. These include

- **Oral Elixir:**20 mg/5 mL

- **Oral Tablets:**15 mg, 16.2 mg, 30 mg, 32.4 mg, 60 mg, 64.8 mg, 97.2 mg, 100 mg

- **Intramuscular (IM)/Intravenous (IV) Solution:**65 mg/mL , 130 mg/mL

When phenobarbital is given intravenously, it should be for emergency cases. If possible, other routes of administration should be accessed first. When given IV, check for any indurations. Studies have shown that an induration at a site of infusion results in a decreased bioavailability of phenobarbital.

**Specific Patients Population**

- **Patient with Hepatic Impairment:**There is no dose adjustment guidance in the manufacturer label for patients with hepatic impairment. However, phenobarbital may induce liver microsomal enzyme activities. Therefore, it should be taken with caution in patients with severe hepatic impairment.

- **Patient with Renal Impairment:**There is no dose adjustment guidance in the manufacturer label for patients with renal impairment. However, approximately 25 to 50% of phenobarbital is eliminated in the urine, so the drug should be used with caution in patients with severe renal impairment.

- **Pregnant Women:**It is considered a pregnancy Category D medicine. There are no systematic and well-controlled studies reported for pregnant women. In animal studies, there has been no evidence of any harm to the fetus or any fertility impairments due to phenobarbital. This drug should be used with caution only if clearly needed during pregnancy.

- **Breastfeeding Women:**The manufacturer recommends exercising cautions for phenobarbital therapy in nursing mothers as the drug presents in breast milk. It is also recommended to limit or discontinue phenobarbital if excessive drowsiness and poor weight gain are observed for infants.

- **Pediatric Patients:**It is reported that phenobarbital is associated with cognitive deficits in pediatric patients who were taking it for complicated febrile seizures. It is recommended to use dose as per manufacturer label.

- **Geriatric Patients:**The safety and efficacy of phenobarbital are not systematically studied in geriatric patients. However, it is recommended to use the drug cautiously as it may cause excitement, depression, or confusion in some geriatric patients.