Surgical conditions are to be differentiated from other more common complaints. When the psoas muscle is inflamed or irritated, it can cause low back pain by compression of the thoracic and lumbar discs. Also, inflammation of the psoas muscle can also lead to entrapment and compression of the nerve branches of the related lumbar plexus. Lumbar neuralgias may present as a sensation of water or heat running down the anterior aspect of the thigh. Surgical procedures approaching anteriorly to the psoas muscle can lead to nerve injury.

In thin people, the psoas muscle may is palpable with the hip in active flexion or 30° flexion, medial to the anterior superior iliac spine. When manual therapists palpate the psoas muscle, care should be taken to avoid injury to the colon. Reproducing the patient's pain on palpation is a reliable indicator of myofascial pain; then evaluation of the related structures must be completed.

Clinically psoas major myofascial pain presents symptoms similar to low back pain, pain in the groin and pelvis, radiating pain towards knee; the primary function of psoas muscle that is hip flexion (hence difficulty walking) and sustaining fully erect posture is difficult to achieve. Extended sitting is a cause of shortening/cramping of the muscle with pain; the many flexor muscles can compensate for a weak psoas muscle. A psoas dysfunction and psoas spasm can cause a restriction in the movement of the thoracic diaphragm that potentially causes more disability in the back muscles than other conditions.