Access for angiography is gained via a large or medium-sized artery, and location varies according to the procedure. The femoral route is usually used as a retrograde approach for procedures involving the iliac vessels, the abdominal and thoracic aorta, the upper limbs, and the head and neck. Due to its large caliber, it allows for larger devices such as stents or occlusive aortic balloons. The radial approach is now commonly used in coronary angiography, as it comes with a lower risk of complications compared to the previous femoral or brachial routes. Larger size sheaths are easily accommodated via the femoral route, and often percutaneous suture devices and collagen plugs are used.  For angiography of the lower limbs, an antegrade femoral approach or a popliteal approach is used.

An appropriate catheter is introduced via the access site, using a system of guide wires, and advanced to the appropriate vessel depending on the particular procedure. A contrast medium is introduced to outline the vasculature distal to the catheter tip. The X-ray images taken may be still or fluoroscopic, using digital subtraction angiography (DSA) technique, which is obtained by taking the images at 2 to 3 frames per second. The degree of stenosis or other abnormalities is identified by visual assessment.

Imaging of the thoracic aorta begins by looking at the aortic root, the ascending aorta, the aortic arch, and the proximal descending aorta. The patient's head is tilted to the right and in the chin-up position for better access to the branches. An image of the arch at 40° LAO (left anterior oblique) is commonly acquired at the start of the procedure as it allows to describe the type of aortic arch which predicts the difficulty of the procedure, as type II and III arches make cannulation of the common carotid more difficult.

In imaging of the abdominal aorta, the patient lies in the supine position, and PA and 90° lateral views are used. The field of view includes the top of the diaphragm to the border of the iliac wings, and the first angiogram run is acquired with the pigtail catheter positioned at the level of the first lumbar vertebra (L1). Following this, the catheter is traditionally advanced to the level of the aortic bifurcation (L4), and the iliac vessels are imaged using anterior oblique projections.