Diagnoses associated with an elevated PTT include:

**Hemophilia A (Factor VIII deficiency)**

Factor VIII deficiency characterizes Hemophilia A, also known as classical hemophilia. This produces an intrinsic coagulation pathway defect, and thus elevated PTT on laboratory studies. It is an X-linked recessive bleeding disorder, thus it is more commonly seen in males. However, about one-third of cases result from a spontaneous genetic mutation. The treatment varies depending on the severity of the disease. Some patients are treated with desmopressin to stimulate the release of Von Willebrand factor (WVF) from endothelial cells, which is protective of factor VIII.

**Hemophilia B (Factor IX deficiency)**

Hemophilia B is an X-linked recessive bleeding disorder characterized by factor IX deficiency. This produces an intrinsic coagulation pathway defect and thus elevated PTT on laboratory studies. Patients are usually identified by family history or after evaluation for prolonged bleeding time with dental procedures or minor injury. Unlike hemophilia A, desmopressin has no benefit for these patients.

**Vitamin K Deficiency**

PT and PTT are elevated with severe deficiency.

Deficiency of vitamin K, a fat-soluble vitamin, causes decreased synthesis of factors II, VII, IX, X, and proteins C and S. Newborns are administered an injection or oral supplementation of vitamin K shortly after birth to prevent risk hemorrhagic disease of the newborn (HDN) from this fat-soluble vitamin deficiency. Oral supplementation of vitamin K reverses coagulopathy in 24 hours; intravenous formulation reverses coagulopathy in 6 hours.

**Liver Disease**

PT and PTT are elevated with severe disease.

In mild liver disease, only the PT will be elevated. With more severe disease, both the PT and PTT will be elevated due to decreased synthesis of vitamin K-dependent clotting factors which include factor II, factor VII, factor IX, and factor X. Correct with fresh frozen plasma (FFP), not vitamin K.

**Von Willebrand Disease (VWD)**

PTT can be normal or elevated depending on the severity of the disease.

Von Willebrand disease is an autosomal dominant deficiency in functional VWF. VWF has 2 functions: binding platelets to the endothelium and protecting Factor VIII. There are 3 types of Von Willebrand disease. Type 1 is the most common (85% of patients). In type 1 VWD, there is a deficiency of normal-functioning VWF. Type 2 is characterized by a decreased amount of VWF that does not function properly. Type 3 is the least common and most severe; these patients have a total or near-total absence of WVF and low levels of factor VIII.

**Disseminated Intravascular Coagulation (DIC)**

DIC is characterized by elevations in PT, PTT, and bleeding time (BT) with a decrease in platelet count (PC). It is a consumptive coagulopathy with coagulation and clot lysis occurring simultaneously. Patients suffer consumptive thrombocytopenia, hemolytic anemia, local tissue ischemia and hemorrhage.