There is no cure for FXS.

Medications used for symptom-based treatment aim to minimize some behavioral and mental health challenges associated with FXS. Stimulants may target hyperactivity, impulsivity, and attention issues. Antidepressants may treat anxiety, obsessive-compulsive behaviors, and mood disorders, and antipsychotics are an option if self-injurious or aggressive behaviors are present. Anticonvulsants help to control seizures. Drugs targeting the mGluR5 (metabotropic glutamate receptors) linked with synaptic plasticity have been demonstrated to be particularly beneficial. Adverse effects specific to the FXS population may occur with most of the agents listed above. Therefore, medication management is best done by practitioners familiarity with both the particular drug and the FXS population.

Furthermore, it is essential to provide help and support to caregivers, as they bear a significant personal and economic burden. A significant portion of caregivers suffered injuries, required increased hours off from work, needed additional paid help around the house, and suffered from depression, stress and anxiety.

Understanding the molecular mechanisms for FXS could provide valuable insights into potential therapies. As mentioned above, FXS is associated with increased activation of the ERK and mTORC1 pathways, which are both inhibited by metformin, a drug widely used to treat type 2 diabetes. Promising behavioral and biochemical results in an FXS animal model (FMR1 knockout mice) suggest that metformin could be a potential therapy for FXS, and a follow-up clinical trial is planned.