In this section, let us get into some more detailed study of a few of the essential structures of the lung, which can be appreciated better under an electron microscope.

****Respiratory Bronchiole:****

This is the region of transition between conducting and respiratory portions (where the exchange of gases begins). Structurally respiratory bronchiole is very similar to terminal bronchiole, except its walls are interrupted by numerous sac-like alveoli for gaseous exchange. It is lined by ciliated cuboidal epithelium. The cilia may be absent in more distal portions. A small number of non-ciliated Clara cells are also present. These Clara cells become dominant cells in the distal part. The epithelium is devoid of goblet cells. Underlying tissue consists of smooth muscle and elastic fibers. Distally the respiratory bronchioles divide, become narrower, and the number of alveoli increases.

Clara cells have three functions,

- Produce one component of Surfactant,

- Act as stem cells and

- Contain enzyme systems that detoxify noxious substances

****Alveolar ducts:****

Respiratory bronchioles divide distally to form alveolar ducts. Alveolar ducts do not have walls of their own but are created by several openings of alveoli. These terminate into clusters of alveoli known as the alveolar sac, which opens into the atrium and finally into alveoli. Alveolar ducts are surrounded by small aggregations of smooth muscle cells, collagen, and elastic fibers. Sphincter-like smooth muscles (knob) embedded in type III collagen around respiratory bronchioles and alveolar ducts regulate air movements within alveoli. Smooth muscle totally disappears at the distal end of alveolar ducts. Rich matrix of elastic and reticular fibers provides the only support for duct and alveoli

****Alveoli:****

The alveoli are the specialized air-sacs (outpouching) of 200 µm diameter. These are the structural and functional unit of the respiratory system. These are the primary site of exchange of oxygen and carbon dioxide. There are 300 million alveoli in the lungs, and these give approximately 140m surface area for the exchange of gases. The alveoli are responsible for the spongy nature of the lung. These alveoli are lined by flattened epithelial cells called pneumocytes with a single opening. The alveolar wall or septum is made up of three tissue components: surface epithelium, supporting tissue, and an extensive network of continuous capillaries. Centrally it has capillaries surrounded by a vibrant network of elastin, reticular, and collagen fibers with a layer of squamous epithelial of two adjacent alveoli on either side. In certain places, the basement membrane of the capillary endothelium comes in direct contact with the basement membrane of the surface epithelium of alveoli, with the absence of supporting tissue, thus reducing thickness (0.1-1.5µm) for better exchange of gases. Hence air in alveoli is separated from the blood in the capillary by three components, surface lining and cytoplasm of alveolar cells, fused basal laminae of closely apposed alveolar, and endothelial cells and their cytoplasm. This is called **the blood-gas barrier (air blood barrier)**. Capillaries are continuous with its endothelial cells, which are extremely thin due to the clustering of nuclei and other organelles, increasing the efficiency of exchange. Occasionally small openings, alveolar pores (of Kohn) (10-15µm in diameter) are seen which equalize air pressure within alveoli and allow air movement between alveoli in case of the bronchiole obstruction. Elastic fibers enable alveoli to expand during inspiration and contract passively during expiration. The reticular fibers serve as supportive structures that prevent over-distention and damage to delicate capillaries and alveolar septa. Two types of epithelia form a continuous lining around each alveolus. They are type I pneumocytes (alveolar lining cells) and type II pneumocytes.

**Type I Pneumocytes (Alveolar lining cells)**

The type I Pneumocytes are simple squamous cells that are highly attenuated with a dense, small, and flattened nucleus. These cover most of the surface area, approximating around 95-97% of the total surface area. Golgi complex, endoplasmic reticulum, and mitochondria are grouped around the nucleus, leaving a large area of cytoplasm free of organelles, thus reducing it to a fragile blood-air diffusion barrier (25nm). The thin cytoplasm shows numerous pinocytotic vesicles. The surfactant lines the luminal surface. A basal lamina covers the adluminal side of these cells. The adjacent cells are connected by tight (occluding) junctions, which prevent leakage of tissue fluid into the alveolar lumen. During fetal development, the surfactant appears in the last few weeks of gestation and coincides with the appearance of lamellar bodies in the type II cells.

**Type II Pneumocytes (Great alveolar or septal cells)**

The type II Pneumocytes are the cuboidal cells grouped in 2-3, large, a central, and plump nucleus with dispersed chromatin and prominent nucleoli. They occupy about 3-5% of the surface area of alveoli interspersed among type I cells with which they have occluding and desmosomal junctions. The apical surface is dome-shaped and shows numerous small microvilli associated with surfactant secretion. These type II pneumocytes secrete **Surfactant**, a surface-active material that reduces surface tension, thus preventing alveolar collapse during expiration. The mitotic activity of the lining cells is 1% per day and can differentiate to type II, as well as type I pneumocytes in response to damage to alveolar lining epithelium. The cytoplasm has abundant rough endoplasmic reticulum, well developed Golgi apparatus, free ribosomes, and a moderate amount of elongated mitochondria. A typical feature of these cells is the presence of **lamellar bodies.** These lamellar bodies are vesicles containing phospholipid (dipalmitoyl phosphatidylcholine) (1-2µm). These, when discharged by exocytosis into alveoli, spreads on alveolar surface and combines with other carbohydrate and protein-containing secretory products (some secreted by Clara cells) to form surfactant, which is a tubular lattice of lipoprotein known as **tubular myelin**, which overcomes effects of surface tension. The reduction of surface tension means a reduction of work of breathing. The surfactant is not static but continually being turned over and removed. The removal is by pinocytotic vesicles of type II pneumocytes, macrophages, and type I pneumocytes.

**Alveolar Macrophage (Dust cells):**

The alveolar macrophages are derived from blood monocytes and sometimes by mitotic division of macrophages of the lung. They contain numerous secondary lysosomes and lipid droplets. They phagocyte and remove unwanted materials such as inhaled particulate matter (carbon), dust, and bacteria. They are present free within alveolar spaces and some in inter-alveolar septa (spaces). One hundred million macrophages daily migrate to bronchi. The phagocytosed macrophages get trapped in mucus, transported by ciliary action to the pharynx, and come out in sputum. Some alveolar macrophages also go via lymphatics to hilar lymph nodes. Industrial lung disease like silicosis is because of inhalation of silica into air sacs (as tiny particles) that are phagocytosed by macrophages. Silicated macrophages stay for a long time and convert silica into silicic acid, which stimulates the proliferation of fibroblasts and collagen, leading to fibrosis of lung and node. A particular form of silica, like asbestos, when inhaled extensively stimulates lung fibrosis producing asbestosis and sometimes malignancy of pleura (mesothelioma). Sometimes macrophages phagocytose extravasated RBCs in alveoli (especially in conditions like pulmonary congestion and congestive heart failure). These erythrocyte phagocytosed macrophages are called **heart failure cells**.