The overall incidence of nephrolithiasis is increasing. According to the National Health and Nutrition Examination Survey, about 6.3% of men and 4.1% of women were affected by urolithiasis in 1994. By 2012, this had increased to 10.6% of men and 7.1% of women. The reason for this is likely to be dietary. As socioeconomic status improves, people tend to "upgrade" their eating by converting to a more Western-style diet high in salt and meat. Men have a higher overall kidney stone risk due to their larger average body size and increased average daily food ingestion that results in larger amounts of urinary chemicals. Obesity and diabetes are also independent risk factors for stone disease.

Specific customized medical management with appropriate dietary modifications based on properly performed and interpreted 24-hour urinary chemistry profiles in nephrolithiasis patients can not only identify chemical risk factors in the vast majority of patients but can significantly improve the urinary chemistry as well as reduce overall kidney stone related events.

When tested, the most common major urinary chemical abnormalities that promote kidney stone formation include hypercalciuria, hyperoxaluria, hyperuricosuria, hypocitraturia, high urinary sodium, and low urinary volume.

**Who Should Be Tested?**

All patients who have had at least one documented instance of a kidney stone should be informed about 24-hour urine prophylactic testing. The testing is specifically recommended for all pediatric nephrolithiasis patients and adult stone formers who have significant renal failure or high anesthetic/surgical risk factors. The 24-hour urine test is also recommended in urolithiasis patients with a history of multiple stones and repeated urolithiasis surgeries, renal transplants, ureteral reimplantations or solitary kidneys, chronic diarrhea (irritable bowel syndrome, short bowel syndrome, or post gastrointestinal [GI] bypass surgery), and all cystine stone formers.

Those who receive the most benefit from 24-hour urine testing are the most strongly motivated to follow a long-term course of preventive therapy even if they do not necessarily feel better with treatment. These patients should be encouraged to understand that there is no guarantee that preventative measures, even if followed precisely, will prevent all future stones. Patients should be warned that producing another stone while on prophylactic therapy does not mean the preventive treatment plan is not working, only that it is not perfect.

The single most critical component of a successful preventive treatment plan is the patient's motivation, discipline, and the likelihood of long-term compliance. Any stone patient who is strongly motivated to follow a long-term course of preventive treatment and understands its limitations and sacrifices and the need for long-term compliance should not be denied 24-hour urine testing for kidney stone prophylactic therapy. The challenge for physicians is to identify that individual patients' treatable risk factors and provide effective dietary advice, medications, and supplements that will reduce that person's future stone risk while making minimal changes to their preferred diet and lifestyle.