Some of the factors that induce post-transplant hyperglycemia are postoperative surgical stress, pain, and high doses of immunosuppressants. Early detection of hyperglycemia is crucial because early optimization of inpatient plasma glucose has a beneficial effect on the long-term patient and graft survival. The goal for management is adequate glycemic control to minimize hyperglycemia complications. The first steps for glycemic control should focus on non-pharmacological factors that elevate blood glucose. These steps include switching from more diabetogenic immunosuppressants to the less diabetogenic ones or alter the dose of the immunosuppressants with the view of optimizing glycemic control, e.g., reducing corticosteroid dose. Sometimes by simply tapering the corticosteroids soon after transplant can control without medical therapy.

However, clinicians should be thoughtful about the possibility of acute rejection. If lifestyle modification and immunosuppressants adjustment are insufficient to control hyperglycemia, then pharmacotherapy should be initiated. Significant numbers of the patients require insulin therapy to manage postoperative hyperglycemia while in the hospital. In hospitalized patients, as a result of frequent changes in immunosuppressants doses and varying nutritional intake, fluctuations of blood glucose levels are common. Intravenous (IV) insulin is a good initial choice since it is easily titratable, which results in tight plasma glucose control and is safe, particularly post-transplant when graft function is still unstable. Choosing between insulin and oral hypoglycemic agents depends on the severity of hyperglycemia. Based on the IV insulin infusion requirement, subcutaneous insulin doses can be calculated after proper glycemic control or discharge. Oral hypoglycemic therapy at the time of discharge is an option in patients who required low-dose insulin therapy in the inpatient setting. There are no known drug-drug interactions between immunosuppressants and oral antidiabetic agents.

Metformin is one of the more popular agents which improves insulin sensitivity. Often the glomerular filtration rate increases adequately with well-functioning grafts so it can be used safely for most patients and is the first-line oral agent in NODAT management. Sulfonylureas enhance insulin secretion and are used in NODAT extensively. Their side effects can be post-transplant weight gain and hypoglycemia. Thiazolidinediones are selective agonists of the peroxisomal proliferator-activated receptor gamma and improve glucose tolerance and insulin sensitivity in NODAT. Thiazolidinediones are contraindicated in congestive heart failure and should be used with caution if there is graft malfunction. Repaglinide is a safe drug among the meglitinides and acts by inducing insulin secretion. Dipeptidyl peptidase-4 (DPP-4) antagonists act by inhibiting the degradation of glucagon-like peptide 1, which results in pancreatic insulin secretion. Among the DPP-4 antagonists, sitagliptin is a good choice in NODAT. Using incretin-based therapy such as vildagliptin and sitagliptin needs to be avoided in liver impairment and renal insufficiency; their safety in NODAT is still under study.

Because patients with transplants are at increased risk of hypoglycemia and frequently have a concurrent history of heart disease, guidelines recommend an HbA1c goal of 7 to 7.5% in these patients. Studies demonstrated that in patients with hypertension and congestive heart failure, using ACEIs or ARBs has a significant role in reducing the incidence of NODAT. Treatment of infections such as HCV should be a consideration before transplant.