Initial treatment involves improving general health status through lifestyle modifications. This not only improves erectile function but reduces cardiovascular risk. Recommended lifestyle modifications would include increased physical activity, switching to a Mediterranean diet and/or nutritional counseling, stopping smoking, drugs, and alcohol, gaining good control of diabetes, lipids, and cholesterol. The patient's drug history should be carefully reviewed to remove or alter the doses of any offending medications.

Men who have a psychological cause should be offered psychosexual counseling. With the patient’s consent, this should be offered to the partner as well.

L-Arginine is an amino acid supplement that is the essential substrate for the production of Nitric Oxide Synthase, the enzyme that produces nitric oxide in the body. Supplemental L-arginine has been shown to increase nitric oxide synthase levels which should theoretically improve erection function.  In fact, several studies have actually shown some efficacy in treating mild to moderate ED with L-arginine supplementation (1,500 mg to 5,000 mg).

Oral phosphodiesterase-5 inhibitors (PDE-5 inhibitors), such as sildenafil and tadalafil, are usually the first-line treatment of erectile dysfunction. They are effective in a wide range of etiologies including cardiovascular disease, diabetes, and hypogonadism.

Side effects will occur in about 40% of patients but are usually mild. The most common side effects are headache, indigestion, nasal stuffiness, and mild visual changes such as temporary light sensitivity or bluish coloration to vision. There have been rare reports of permanent blindness from non-arteritic anterior ischemic optic neuropathy with PDE-5 inhibitors.

Different PDE-5 inhibitors have varying half-lives, which can influence the patient’s final selection. It is important to note that these drugs should be used with some caution with antihypertensives and alpha-blockers. They should not be used at all with nitrates due to potentially dangerous, profound hypotension. Patients who fail PDE-5 inhibitor therapy should try at least one other PDE-5 medication as up to 50% of initial treatment failures will respond to a different PDE-5 drug. Testosterone levels should be checked in patients who fail PDE-5 therapy, if not measured earlier. Those who are hypogonadal might benefit by adding testosterone supplementation to their PDE-5 inhibitor therapy.

It is important to instruct patients on how to correctly take their medication. For example, sildenafil is poorly absorbed and might be totally ineffective if taken with food. It also frequently requires several therapeutic tries before it begins working successfully.

Studies of adding daily L-arginine supplements to sildenafil or tadalafil therapy demonstrate a significant improvement in IEFF scores and erectile function compared to sildenafil or tadalfil monotherapy.

Testosterone supplementation appears to be more effective as a treatment for low libido than for ED.

External Vacuum Devices are a good, non-surgical option for many ED patients. The outer cylinder of the device is placed over the penis and pressed to the body to create an airtight seal. The patient then uses a small, hand-operated (or battery-powered) vacuum pump to create negative pressure around the penis, which engorges the corpora with blood. This artificial erection is then maintained by placing an elastic band around the base of the penis. The vacuum can then be released leaving the artificial erection which can be maintained for up to 30 minutes. Practice with the device seems to improve outcomes and some degree of manual dexterity is required. The efficacy rates of these devices have been high, generally about 70% to 80%, but the patient satisfaction rates are lower.

External vacuum device therapy is safe, effective, and is also the most inexpensive long term therapy for ED. It can also be used frequently if desired. However, the use of the device initially requires practice for optimal performance and is impossible to hide completely. It remains a good, safe, and effective noninvasive option for patients who deem it practically acceptable.

Intraurethral Prostaglandin E1 (alprostadil) pellets (also called Medicated Urethral System for Erection or MUSE) are available for use as urethral suppositories. The pellets are small, about the same size as a grain of rice. The patient first voids and then places the tip of the insertion device inside the urethral meatus and pushes the plunger. This deposits the prostaglandin E1 pellet into the pre-moistened distal urethra where it will dissolve with a gentle hand massage. The medication is absorbed through the urethra and makes its way to the corpora cavernosa where it causes muscle relaxation resulting in an erection. Overall efficacy is reportedly good, generally at about 50% to 65%.

Intraurethral prostaglandin E1 pellets are commercially available in 4 different strengths, but the 2 largest dosages are used most often (500 and 1,000 mcg.) Side effects include urethral burning and somewhat variable efficacy even from the same dosage, possibly depending on the precise site of pellet application. It is used relatively infrequently due to its high cost, the variability of efficacy and the frequent need for patients to purchase at least six doses at a time as that is how they are supplied to the pharmacy.

Intracavernosal Injections with prostaglandin E1 (alprostadil) are frequently the next choice of therapy if oral PDE-5 inhibitors are unsuccessful.

The single-agent used most frequently today is prostaglandin E1 as it has fewer systemic side effects and good efficacy while offering reduced priapism risk and less fibrosis compared to other agents. It's the body's most effective, natural smooth muscle relaxant. It works via its effects on increasing cavernosal cyclic AMP levels.

A single injection is done on the side of the penile shaft near the base, to avoid the urethra (ventrally) and the dorsal neurovascular bundle. A single injection is sufficient as the corpora cavernosa share vascularity.

Intracavernosal injection therapy has been shown to be highly effective in up to 94% of patients.

The initial trial dosage is usually 0.2 to 0.25 cc's. This is slowly increased to give the patient a rigid erection for a reasonable time period, which should be no more than 90 minutes and optimally only about 45. Patients need to be carefully counseled not to exceed the recommended dosage for them as it is extremely tempting to inject more medication "just to be sure" or because the initial effect appeared sub-optimal. Physicians should be prepared to offer a priapism antidote (usually a diluted phenylephrine solution) either in their office or in the Emergency Department.

If the corpora cavernosa are healthy with good vascularity, intracavernosal injections are almost always going to be successful. Failure of intracavernosal injection therapy is a good diagnostic indicator of vasculogenic ED.

Side effects from intracavernosal injections include pain, priapism, bleeding or bruising at the injection site, and scarring of the tunica.

**It is absolutely critical that patients be warned not to increase the injected dosage without the approval of their physician, not to mix it with other ED agents such as PDE-5 inhibitors, and to go to the nearest Emergency Department for reversal therapy if their erection lasts longer than 4 hours to prevent permanent damage to the corpora.**

Combined therapy with both intracavernosal injections (or intraurethral prostaglandin pellets) plus the addition of a PDE-5 inhibitor can be very effective if neither treatment alone is successful.

Penile prostheses are a surgically invasive treatment; this is typically offered when all other, less intrusive measures fail or are otherwise unacceptable. These devices are surgically inserted into the corpora cavernosa in order to restore erectile function artificially. There are two main types available: malleable and inflatable. The malleable prosthesis can be physically manipulated into a straight or bent position, in accordance with the patient’s wishes. The inflatable type becomes erect by activating a small pump in the scrotum which fills the inflatable penile balloon cylinders from a hidden fluid reservoir surgically implanted in the lower abdomen. Older men, with limited manual dexterity or mental issues, find the malleable prostheses more manageable while most men, especially from younger generations, typically prefer the inflatable devices due to their more natural operation and function. Patients with diminished pelvic or penile sensation are probably better served by inflatable devices to avoid possible ulcers and erosions due to excessive pressure from the malleable rods on the skin which they would not be able to feel.

Complications from these devices include erosion, leakage, infection, and possible mechanical failure. Early inflatable penile prostheses had many problems including infections, penile deformities, aneurysm formation, leakage, pump failures, and other mechanical issues. Current devices have fixed these problems and are quite reliable mechanically. The current mechanical failure rate for inflatable prostheses are <5% over 5 years.

Although many men will not wish to have surgery, penile prosthesis implantation procedures are found to have very high patient satisfaction scores (about 90%).

Penile revascularization surgery can be considered in a small, minute subgroup of patients, estimated at about 5% of all ED patients.

Arterial balloon angioplasty has been done successfully for focal arterial stenosis of the pudendal or penile arteries, but improvement does not usually last due to recoil arterial narrowing and restenosis unless drug-eluting stents are also used. This is not yet the standard of care and is only useful in men with focal, identifiable, arterial stenosis in vessels large enough to accept a stent.

Venous ligation surgery can be done for veno-occlusive dysfunction. This involves embolizing or ligating the penile veins (e.g. the deep dorsal vein). Currently, this surgery is not recommended as long term results do not show lasting efficacy.

Low-intensity shockwave therapy has shown efficacy, particularly in patients with severe ED not responding to PDE-5 inhibitors.

**Penile Rehabilitation Therapy After Prostate Cancer Treatment**

There are a number of studies looking at penile rehabilitation therapy after radical prostatectomy surgery that suggest a benefit, but there is no consensus on the exact treatment selection, duration, or timing. The majority of the published studies suggest a combination of PDE-5 inhibitors together with external vacuum device therapy offers the best results although intraurethral pellet therapy and intracavernosal injections have also been used successfully. Tadalafil offers a theoretical benefit over sildenafil based on its longer half-life and pharmacokinetics, but there is insufficient data to make any formal recommendation. Early use of penile rehabilitation treatment is recommended lasting up to 1 year after surgery, but the exact timing has not been adequately studied.

It also seems reasonable that penile rehabilitation techniques should also help prostate cancer patients who select definitive radiation therapy, but again there is insufficient data to support any recommendation. Nevertheless, with sildenafil and tadalafil now being generic and available at low cost, there seems to be little harm in recommending their early use after either definitive prostate cancer treatment.