Dyskinetic cerebral palsy, like all forms of cerebral palsy, is a clinical diagnosis. The history should identify risk factors for athetoid cerebral palsy, such as perinatal asphyxia or severe hyperbilirubinemia in the perinatal period.

The physical exam is an important part of evaluating a patient with dyskinetic cerebral palsy. It is important, especially in identifying the disease as the dyskinetic subtype versus the other subtypes of cerebral palsy. The subtypes are characterized by the distribution as well as the tone of the abnormal musculature.

Common clinical findings in dyskinetic cerebral palsy include the following:

In early infancy: Delayed motor development, reduced spontaneous movements, variable tone with movements while hypotonic at rest, and persistence of primitive reflexes.

By age 2 to 3: Involuntary movements are more apparent along with abnormal posturing. This includes head being persistently turned to one side, extension in the supine position, flexion, and shoulder retraction while prone.

The involuntary movements can be characterized by the type of movements they are. Within dyskinetic cerebral palsy, there is choreathetotic CP, which consists of chorea and athetosis. Chorea involves irregular and rapid contractions of muscles, including those of the face, proximal extremities, and toes and fingers. Athetosis involves slow, writhing movements of the distal extremities. These movements can be induced or worsened by emotions, stress, and illness. Dystonic CP consists of repetitive and patterned movements that are sustained, such as twisting of the limbs and trunk. These movements can be slow or fast. There is a sudden increase in tone that occurs during movement or with emotions.