# Continuing Education Activity

Posterior reversible encephalopathy syndrome (PRES) is a neurologic disorder in which a person presents with visual disturbance, seizure, headaches, and altered mentation. This activity reviews the clinical presentation, etiology, epidemiology, pathophysiology, evaluation, differential diagnosis, treatment and management, prognosis, and complications of PRES. This article also highlights the role of the interprofessional team in recognizing and treating PRES promptly to improve patient safety, quality of care, and outcomes.

**Objectives:**
- Describe the symptoms and risk factors of PRES to initiate prompt evaluation and treatment.
- Summarize potential emergent conditions that emulate PRES, and outline the evaluation of such diseases to improve patient outcomes.
- Outline a few treatment considerations for people with PRES.
- Explain the importance of education and communication among the interprofessional team to enhance the care, safety, and outcomes of patients with PRES.

# Introduction

Posterior reversible encephalopathy syndrome (PRES) is an illness in which a person can present with acutely altered mentation, drowsiness or sometimes stupor, visual impairment (e.g., visual hallucinations, cortical blindness, hemianopia, quadrantanopia, and diplopia), seizures (focal or general tonic-clonic), and sudden or constant, non-localized headaches.

# Etiology

People who are at risk for developing PRES tend to have one or more of the following risk factors, triggers, or etiologies: hypertension; preeclampsia; kidney disease (such as nephrotic syndrome, which can lead to hypovolemia and secondary hypertension via activation of the renin-angiotensin system; renal failure; liver disease; exposure to cytotoxic medications or immunosuppressants; autoimmune disorders (such as thrombotic thrombocytopenic purpura, eosinophilic granulomatosis with polyangiitis, and systemic lupus erythematosus); or sepsis.

# Epidemiology

PRES has been a syndrome that has been underdiagnosed, perhaps due to limited awareness; however, given the increasing availability and improvement in the quality of imaging, awareness of PRES has improved, and an understanding of the epidemiology of PRES has been emerging. Based on several reports and studies, PRES affects people of all ages but mostly middle-aged females.

In a retrospective study involving the review of demographics, risk factors, and clinical presentation of 113 patients with PRES, Fugate and colleagues found that 51 individuals (45%) had an autoimmune disease.

# Pathophysiology

The pathophysiology of PRES remains unclear, but some proposed mechanisms center around the dysregulation of cerebral autoregulation, the brain’s ability to maintain constant cerebral blood flow over a range of blood pressures via the constriction or dilation of the cerebral blood vessels.

One critique of the hypertensive-hyperperfusion hypothesis above is that there have been cases where individuals exhibited PRES. Still, their blood pressures were not high enough to surpass the autoregulative capability of the brain.

Not only can immunosuppressants affect the blood-brain barrier, but also neuroinflammation, such as in the context of sepsis and autoimmune disorders. Astrogliosis, microgliosis, and endothelial activation occurring in sepsis or endothelial injury in anti-neutrophil cytoplasmic antibody (ANCA) associated vasculitides can enhance blood-brain barrier permeability, allowing for extravasation of intravascular fluid and potential for developing PRES.

# History and Physical

PRES is a clinical and radiographic diagnosis. Performing a thorough history and physical examination are indispensable. While obtaining a history, asking about the presence of headache, visual impairment (e.g., binocular diplopia, vision loss, no light perception vision, hemianopia, or quadrantanopia), seizure and seizure history, and medications taken are crucial.

# Evaluation

Obtaining imaging is essential since the assessment of radiographs is the gold standard for the diagnosis of PRES.

Part of the work-up for PRES also includes evaluation of potential etiologies since their identification will be crucial for management. Obtaining blood work can help evaluate electrolyte imbalances, hypoalbuminemia, protein deficiency, an underlying infection (for example, herpes simplex virus type 1 or 2, which can cause herpes simplex encephalitis), and autoimmune etiologies. Blood work can also help exclude severe hypoglycemia as a potential diagnosis. A lumbar puncture is sometimes done in immunocompromised individuals to assess for encephalitis.

Obtaining an electroencephalogram (EEG) in people with PRES can be helpful. For instance, if there is persistently altered mentation in the absence of tonic, clonic, or tonic-clonic movements, an individual may have subclinical seizure activity that can be captured on EEG. EEG patterns, however, are generally non-specific.

# Treatment / Management

Identifying, treating, and managing the underlying etiology, in addition to careful treatment of hypertension, is crucial for the management of PRES. There is no specific, established antihypertensive regimen for the treatment of acute hypertension in people with PRES.

Sometimes individuals with PRES develop life-threatening complications, such as status epilepticus or coma, and treatment and management of such complications at an intensive care unit (ICU) should follow.

If PRES is attributed to an immunosuppressant, reduction of the dose or substitution of the agent is recommended.

# Differential Diagnosis

The differential diagnosis of PRES is broad and includes the following:

- Intracranial hemorrhage

- Subdural hemorrhage

- Subarachnoid hemorrhage

- Cerebral sinus venous thrombosis

- Posterior circulation ischemic or hemorrhagic stroke

- thrombosis of the basilar artery

- Vasculitis of the central nervous system

- Herpes simplex encephalitis

- Autoimmune encephalitis

- Uremic encephalopathy

- Hypoglycemia

# Prognosis

The prognosis of PRES is typically favorable if recognized and treated early, with symptom improvement or resolution in a few days to several weeks.

# Complications

Complications of PRES develop if the disease is not treated promptly. Complications include focal neurologic deficits from ischemic injury, epilepsy, and life-threatening conditions, such as transforaminal cerebellar herniation, as reported in children.

# Deterrence and Patient Education

Early recognition and treatment of PRES can help reduce the incidence of complications and improve patient outcomes. Awareness and education are instrumental for the proper management of PRES and its risk factors and etiologies. For instance, educating patients about blood pressure management can decrease the likelihood of cerebral autoregulation dysfunction, leading to PRES and other complications. Knowledge about the effects of cytotoxic immunosuppressants on the blood-brain barrier, even in non-hypertensive patients, can help care providers become more mindful about the development of PRES in patients taking these medicines.

# Enhancing Healthcare Team Outcomes

Enhancement of healthcare team outcomes for PRES rests on education and effective communication among physicians, nurses, technicians, therapists, and every member involved in patient care, especially patients themselves. With effective communication, awareness and recognition of PRES improve, and prompt team action can ensue, preventing lethal complications and enhancing patient safety, quality of care, and outcomes.