Many lesions can occur in the mediastinum, and diagnosis can be challenging. An interprofessional approach including a primary care clinician (MD, DO, NP, or PA), oncologist, radiologist, thoracic surgeon, anesthesiologist, and intensivist is recommended. Placing these individuals under general anesthesia also can cause respiratory obstruction and cardiovascular collapse because of the mass effect on the trachea. Anyone looking after patients with a mediastinal mass should follow the recommendations on diagnosis, treatment, and post-treatment care.

Specialty trained nurses should educate the patient and the family on the lesions and their post-treatment care. Some lesions like lymphoma may be treated with radiation, whereas most other lesions require surgery and/or chemotherapy. In the postoperative period, these patients need pain control, incentive spirometry, and ambulation to prevent early complications. The perianesthesia, critical care, and medical-surgical nurses should monitor the patient and inform the team about major changes or issues. Pharmacists should evaluate medication choices and drug interactions and educate the patients when appropriate.

**Outcomes**

The outcomes for most localized lesions of the mediastinum in children and adults are good. However, if the lesions are large and invade local tissues, surgery may require the removal of important tissues like the phrenic nerve and innominate vein. Only via an intradisciplinary approach and communication with the different specialists can the morbidity of surgery and treatment be decreased.