Epidemiological estimates depend on the disease definition. A definitive diagnosis of gout is accepted in the presence of monosodium urate monohydrate crystals in the joint fluid or the presence of tophus. Since identification by this definition is impractical, a number of case definitions have been developed like self-reports, Rome criteria, the New York criteria, the American College of Rheumatology criteria(ACR), and the 2015 ACR/European League Against Rheumatism (EULAR) criteria. The 2015 ACR/EULAR criteria have a sensitivity of 92% and specificity of 89% and are superior to all previous criteria.

In men, adult serum urate levels of 5 to 6 mg/dL are usually reached at puberty, with a slight increase thereafter due to age alone.

The prevalence of gout can vary by age, sex, and country of origin. In general, the prevalence of gout is 1 to 4%. Older age and male sex are two common risk factors noted globally. In Western nations, the prevalence of gout in men (3 to 6%) is 2 to 6 fold higher than in women (1 to 2%). Prevalence increases with age but plateaus after 70 years of age. From 2007 to 2008, around 3.9% of U.S. adults received a diagnosis of gout.

**Prevalence (%) by age range (years)**

Location 20-29  30-39 40-49 50-59 60-6970-79 80-85 >85

The incidence rates of gout have seen an increasing trend over the past several decades, with a higher incidence noted in men than women, and the incidence increased with age. In a study in Olmsted county, MN, the incidence of gout and comorbidities increased over the 20 years from 1989-2009.

**Comorbidities**

Hypertension, diabetes mellitus, hyperlipidemia, and metabolic syndrome are often associated with gout. Individuals with psoriasis have increased urate production and are prone to gout. On the other hand, patients with renal insufficiency have decreased urate excretion, resulting in gouty attacks. The prevalence of gout is also higher among individuals with chronic diseases such as hypertension, chronic kidney disease, diabetes mellitus, obesity, congestive heart failure, and myocardial infarction.