Failure of a spinal blockade is not a complication per se but needs to be assessed and managed appropriately. Block failure may occur due to the needle's movement during injection, incomplete entry of the needle into the subarachnoid space, or injection into a nerve root. If failure of spinal with a local anesthetic occurs, it is advisable to proceed with general anesthesia, as there may be a partial effect and re-injection of the second dose of local anesthetic may result in a high spinal, with the attendant risks of severe hypotension, bradycardia, respiratory arrest, and cardiac arrest.

Post-dural puncture headache (PDPH), a moderate complication of spinal, is influenced by the size of the spinal needle and patient demographics. It has a higher incidence among women

Major complications are rare, especially when the proper procedure has been followed. They include direct needle trauma, infection, peripheral nerve injury, and SEH. Needle insertion into the spinal cord or nerves can cause neurologic injury. When the patient experiences paresthesia, the needle may be adjacent to or penetrating neural tissue. A retrospective analysis found 6.3% of patients experienced paresthesia with needle insertion, yet only 0.67% of these patients had persistent paresthesia postoperatively.

While the possibility of respiratory depression from spinal opioids is dose-related and is impacted by IV narcotic administration, it needs to be appreciated that local anesthetic used for surgical anesthesia may result in a high spinal and associated bradycardia, hypotension, respiratory arrest, and even cardiac arrest. If these signs occur, they must be treated with atropine, ephedrine or phenylephrine (depending on the heart rate) or epinephrine, with intubation and/or advanced cardiac life support as indicated. Of note, in patients who suffer cardiac arrest after spinal, the most important treatment to prevent the development of brain injury is the rapid administration of epinephrine.

Meningitis may occur after spinal anesthesia. Sources of infection could be contaminated spinal trays and medication, oral flora of the provider performing the spinal, and underlying patient infection. Still, after a diagnostic lumbar puncture, meningitis incidence is not significantly different compared with the spontaneous incidence of meningitis.

The most severe complication of spinal is SEH. If new neurologic symptoms develop after spinal, neurosurgical consultation and an MRI of the spine should be obtained immediately, as patients who develop SEH are more likely to have a favorable outcome if operated on within 24 hours of symptom onset.

In a recent study conducted to assess the risk of SEH after spinal surgery – in patients in whom spinal was not performed- a 50 mm Hg or greater increase in systolic blood pressure after extubation, and high body mass index, were identified.