The TNM staging system is used for staging carcinoma of the penis. It is currently in its 8 edition and is used to define prognostic stage groups and to develop an appropriate treatment plan.

**Primary Tumor (T)**

- Tx: Primary tumor cannot be assessed

- T0: No evidence of primary tumor

- Tis: Carcinoma in situ

- Ta: Noninvasive localized SCC

- T1:

- Glans: Tumor invades the lamina propria

- Foreskin: Tumor invades dermis, lamina propria, or dartos fascia

- Shaft: Tumor invades connective tissue between epidermis and corpora, regardless of location

- T1a: Tumor is without lymphovascular invasion or perineural invasion and is not high grade

- T1b: Tumor exhibits lymphovascular invasion and/or perineural invasion OR is high grade

- T2: Tumor invades into corpus spongiosum (either glans or ventral shaft) with or without urethral invasion

- T3: Tumor invades into corpa cavernosum (including tunica albuginea) or with or without urethral invasion

- T4: Tumor invades into adjacent structures (scrotum, prostate, pubic bone)

**Regional Lymph Nodes (N)**

Clinical N (cN)

- cNX: Regional lymph nodes cannot be assessed

- cN0: No palpable or visibly enlarged inguinal lymph nodes

- cN1: Palpable mobile unilateral inguinal lymph node

- cN2: Palpable mobile greater than or equal to 2 unilateral inguinal nodes or bilateral inguinal lymph nodes

- cN3: Palpable fixed inguinal nodal mass or pelvic lymphadenopathy unilateral or bilateral

Pathological N (pN)

- pNX: Lymph node metastasis cannot be established

- pN0: No lymph node metastasis

- pN1: less than or equal to 2 unilateral inguinal metastasis, no extranodal extension

- pN2: Greater than or equal to 3 unilateral inguinal metastases or bilateral metastases

- pN3: Extranodal extension of lymph node metastases or pelvic lymph node metastases

**Distant Metastasis (M)**

M0: No distant metastasis

M1L Distant metastasis

**Anatomic Stage/Prognostic Groups**

Stage 0

- TiS, N0, M0

- Ta, N0, M0

Stage I

- T1a, N0, M0

Stage II

- T1b, N0, M0

- T2, N0, M0

- T3, N0, M0

Stage IIIA

- T1-3, N1, M0

Stage IIIB

- T1-3, N2, M0

Stage IV

- T4, any N, M0

- Any T, N3, M0

-  Any T, Any N, M1

**Staging Approach**

The clinical exam is essential for the initial evaluation of a patient with suspected penile carcinoma. A thorough examination of the inguinal LNs is necessary, with attempts to evaluate and assess for palpability of nodes, number of inguinal masses, if the masses are unilateral or bilateral in location, dimension, mobility or fixation of nodes or masses, relationship to other structures, and edema of the patient’s penis, scrotum and/or legs. It is necessary to describe the diameter of nodes/masses, unilateral or bilateral location, number of nodes identified in each region and whether these nodes are mobile or fixed.

If a patient has a clinically negative inguinal exam, the extent of staging is based on the risk for occult nodal metastases. The European Association of Urology and NCCN guidelines have created the following guidelines to follow in this situation. Men with low-risk disease (PTis, Ta, or T1a, histologic grade1) should undergo surveillance rather than nodal assessment by dynamic sentinel lymph node biopsy (DSNB) or superficial ILND. Men with intermediate-risk disease (pT1a, histologic grade 2), should undergo either a DSNB or superficial ILND. Men with high-risk disease (>pT1b) should undergo superficial or modified ILND, or DSNB depending on surgical expertise. CT/MRI or inguinal ultrasound may be useful in preoperative planning.

In men with the clinically suspicious inguinal exam, it is suggested to obtain an FNA for pathologic assessment. In men with low-risk disease (pTis, pTa, pT1a) with clinically suspicious adenopathy but negative FNA, it is recommended to proceed with excisional biopsy for definitive evaluation. For men with high-risk disease (greater than pT1b) with clinically suspicious adenopathy but negative FNA, it is recommended to proceed with superficial or modified ILND.

Men with penile cancer who present with bulky, fixed inguinal nodes or pelvic LNs have relatively low survival rates when treated with surgery alone and are candidates for multimodal treatment strategies.