The prognosis for athletes diagnosed with cardiac disease depends on the specific illness, the degree of pathology, and the treatment regime.

Hypertrophic obstructive cardiomyopathy: Near normal life expectancy, often asymptomatic. ICDs are highly effective in those at risk of sudden cardiac death.

Coronary artery anomaly: Pathological anomalies have an unknown risk of sudden death. Other anomalies are benign, and no evidence exists to show a shorter than normal life expectancy.

**Arrhythmogenic Right Ventricular Dysplasia**

Good long-term outcome in those who are treated and do not have left ventricular involvement. ICD can drastically improve the prognosis. Many athletes may be forced to abstain from sports.

Congenital long QT syndrome: Low risk of sudden cardiac death if adequately treated. The risk drops lower after the age of 40.

Wolff-Parkinson-White syndrome: Sudden cardiac death is a rare occurrence if treated.

Brugada syndrome: Risk stratification is done to assess the need for interventional treatment. Asymptomatic patients have a near-normal life expectancy, whereas symptomatic patients can have a life expectancy as low as 40 years old. No strong and direct association to athletics.

**Catecholaminergic Polymorphic Ventricular Tachycardia**

Poor prognosis if it is not diagnosed early as it often presents in childhood. ICDs and beta-blockers drastically improve outcomes.

Other conditions may either have an unknown prognosis or have a highly variable prognosis dependent on response to treatment. Lastly, compliance with treatment is also a concern, especially in younger athletes. Many athletes may need to abstain from sports for some time until they receive a thorough evaluation and a treatment regime is finalized. Compliance with the period of abstinence, adherence to the treatment regime, and avoidance of other aggravating factors are all instrumental in the prognosis.