The Hedgehog pathway regulates cell growth and differentiation in embryogenesis. This pathway is not active in adult tissue. PTCH1 is a tumor suppressor gene involved in the SHH pathway. SMO is a G-protein-coupled transmembrane receptor involved in signal transduction of the SHH pathway. Mutations in the smoothened (SMO) and PTCH1 genes appear to lead to abnormal up-regulation and activation of the SHH signaling pathway. Protein patched homolog 1 (Patched) is produced by the gene PTCH1 and functions as a transmembrane receptor that, when activated, suppresses the migration of the SMO receptor to the cell membrane. When the SHH ligand binds to Patched, the SMO receptor is released into the cell membrane, after which activation of cell proliferation occurs. In basal cell carcinoma, mutations in the Hedgehog pathway can result in an unrestricted proliferation of basal cells; researchers have noted that this pathway is relevant in more than 90% of basal cell carcinoma cases. One of the mechanisms believed to be involved in tumorigenesis involves ligand-independent pathway activation by SMO.

Vismodegib is a selective Hedgehog pathway inhibitor that binds to and competitively inhibits SMO. Inhibition of SMO results in transcription factors GLI1 and GLI2 remaining inactive; this prevents the expression of tumor-mediating genes within the Hedgehog pathway.

Mutations in PTCH1 have correlations with nevoid basal cell carcinoma syndrome (Gorlin syndrome), trichoepitheliomas, squamous cell carcinoma of the esophagus, transitional cell carcinoma of the bladder, and holoprosencephaly. Medulloblastoma is a nervous system tumor associated with Hedgehog pathway mutations in as much as 30% of cases.

**Pharmacokinetics/Pharmacodynamics**

Vismodegib has a bioavailability of approximately 32% and has time-to-peak levels of approximately 2.4 days. Greater than 98% of the drug circulates as the original compound. Once absorbed, it has a volume of distribution (Vd) between 16 and 26.6 liters and is highly protein-bound (greater than 99%) to serum albumin and alpha acid glycoprotein (AAG). Vismodegib undergoes metabolism by oxidation, glucuronidation, and ring cleavage. It is a minor substrate for CYP2C9 and CYP3A4. The half-life of elimination after a single dose is approximately 12 days, but with continuous daily dosing, it becomes four days before it is eliminated primarily in the feces (82%) and urine (4%).

It is also noteworthy that vismodegib concentrates in the semen of men.