Management begins with the acute intervention of heart failure. Depending on the severity, treatment should be directed towards acute respiratory failure from volume overload and hypotension if present. The initial management can range from intermittent diuretic therapy and oxygen supplementation to continuous diuretic infusion, non-invasive positive pressure ventilation, or intubation. If hypotension and decreased organ perfusion are evident, inotropic medications are warranted. Once patients are stabilized and are no longer in a decompensated state, management can be directed at the underlying etiology. The treatment for specific etiologies is only briefly described further.

Treatment of hyperthyroidism is focused on symptomatic therapy with the goal to decrease the circulating thyroid hormones, either by medications and/or the use of radiotherapy or surgery if necessary. Myeloproliferative diseases are treated according to the specific underlying disease and may involve hematopoietic cell transplantation depending on the severity. Treatment is largely variable, depending on the disease and severity of symptoms. Sepsis treatment is guided by the Surviving Sepsis Campaign guidelines and involves early recognition, immediate and aggressive intravenous fluid resuscitation, and antibiotic therapy with an investigation to determine the source of infection. Thiamine deficiency causing beriberi is treated with thiamine replacement for a minimum of 2 weeks. Chronic lung disease is a progressive disease with treatment catered to the underlying pulmonary disease. In general, hypoxia and hypercapnia are addressed, and management is symptomatic therapy and slowing the progression of the underlying disease. Acquired AVFs are treated with either closure or reduction of blood flow. It is more pertinent in patients on hemodialysis, who need access; however, if presenting with high-output cardiac failure, it may be necessary to close, and alternative access sites should be obtained. Treatment of congenital AVFs can involve medical therapy, invasive embolization, or surgical excision, depending on the exact cause. Liver cirrhosis that is advanced enough to cause high-output cardiac failure is end-stage and treatment involves liver transplantation. Medical therapy has a role in fluid management for hypervolemia, involving the use of combined loop diuretics and anti-mineralocorticoids, which may limit the flow through shunts.