There is no consensus about the conservative or surgical management of pars injury.

To gain an increased understanding of healing rates and to stratify patients, Morita et al. and Sairyo et al. attempted to assess the relationship between bony healing and the radiographic stage of the pars lesion.

Both of these studies, plus the study by Blanda et al., revealed higher healing rates for unilateral pars defects than for bilateral lesions.

Young patients with spondylolysis or low-grade spondylolisthesis generally receive conservative management as their initial treatment.

The treatment regimen of the brace varies widely; it usually consists of 23 hours a day of usage for six months, with a subsequent six-month weaning period and physical therapy. TLSO bracing indications include when an acute pars stress reaction spondylolysis is present, for isthmic spondylolysis, and low-grade spondylolisthesis that has failed to improve with physical therapy.

Physical therapy should be done for six months and include hamstring stretching, pelvic tilts, abdominal strengthening, and close follow-up of low-grade dysplastic lysis as there is a higher chance of progression.

Surgical treatment for spondylolysis is generally only for patients who fail to respond to conservative treatment or those in the terminal stage. Surgery is necessary in about 9 to 15% of cases of spondylolysis and/or low-grade spondylolisthesis.

The most common surgical options are direct repair of the pars defect or fusion of the lumbar segment. Direct repair is the preferred surgical treatment as it avoids a decreased range of motion and adjacent segment disease reported in fusion surgery, with rates from 5.2 to 18.5%.

Of the surgical treatment options listed here, the most favorable option is the pedicle screw hook technique and the pedicle screw rod technique. This success is due to the high success rate, low rate of hardware failure, the lack of required postoperative bracing, and sufficient maintenance of reduction during flexion, extension, torsion, and side bending.

L5-S1 in-situ posterolateral fusion with bone grafting is the recommended approach in patients with L5 spondylolysis or low-grade spondylolisthesis (Meyerding Grade I and II) that have failed nonoperative treatment or demonstrated progression, neurologic deficits, and dysplastic changes with a high propensity for progression. The fusion is possible with or without instrumentation. Postoperative immobilization in a TLSO is a suggested approach, and decompression is indicated if clinical symptoms of stenosis or radiculopathy are present.

L4-S1 posterolateral fusion, with or without reduction, is considered for high-grade isthmic spondylolisthesis (Meyerding Grade III, IV, V). The reduction is extremely controversial, with no accepted guidelines. It may take place with instrumentation or positioning. It is possible to restore sagittal alignment and reduce lumbosacral kyphosis, even though there is a significant risk of complications (8 to 30%), including L5 nerve root injury as the most common complication, sexual dysfunction, or catastrophic neurologic injury. Fusion is usually an instrumented intervention.

Lately, low-intensity pulsed ultrasound (LIPUS), in addition to conservative treatment, appears to be very promising for achieving a higher rate of bony union. LIPUS requires more supporting studies but may become a standard of care in the future.