Diagnosis of acute transfusion reactions begins by recognition of the signs and symptoms by the bedside. Common signs and symptoms and differential diagnosis are listed below.

- Urticaria/Itching

Urticaria (hives) and/or itching can be the presenting sign of a mild allergic reaction, but can also be associated with the onset of a life-threatening anaphylactic reaction. The transfusion should be stopped, and the patient should be carefully monitored for progression of symptoms.

- Fever/Chills

Fever and/or chills are most commonly associated with a febrile, non-hemolytic reaction, however; they can also be the first sign of a more serious acute hemolytic reaction, TRALI, or septic transfusion reaction. If the temperature rises 1 C or higher from the temperature at the start of transfusion, the transfusion should be stopped. Acute hemolytic reaction or bacterial contamination should be suspected if there is a greater rise in temperature, or more serious symptoms (e.g., rigors).

- Respiratory Distress/Dyspnea

Dyspnea, or shortness of breath, is a concerning sign that can often be seen with more severe reactions including anaphylaxis, TRALI, and TACO. It can also be seen by itself without accompanying symptoms.

- Hypotension

Hypotension can be seen with an acute hemolytic reaction, septic transfusion reactions, anaphylaxis, and TRALI. They have also been reported without the presence of any other associated transfusion reaction.

- Hypothermia

Hypothermia can be seen with large volume transfusions of refrigerated products. The only intervention needed is warming the patient and/or blood product.