The faculty and state of being able to qualitatively and quantitatively visualize or see, as well as fine spatial recognition regarding space, constitutes the major backbone of most activities. To achieve this, parallel light rays running via the entrance pupil are focused on the retina after undergoing fine refraction by the ocular refractive apparatus. Like every other tissue, the human crystalline lens undergoes an age-related regression in differentiation, replication, and function depreciation.

The human crystalline lens contributes about one-third of the dioptric power in the emmetropic eye. When the ciliary muscle contracts, the elastic nature of the lens fibers enables it to thicken and increase in steepness to produce a change in the dioptric power proportionate to the distance of regard. This ensures a clear, focused image of the object on the retina. This process is known as accommodation, and it is usually measured by assessing the change in the subjective response of a viewer when objects are moved from the far point to the near point (punctum proximum).

Theoretically, the punctum remotum of the eye can be considered as the point where vergence of incoming light results in a maximum of 0. 17 DS stimulus to accommodation. The vergence of light from the punctum remotum is usually considered negligible or zero. There is no blur produced by such vergence of light (in an emmetrope), and this subsequently causes the relaxation of the ciliary muscle and relaxation of accommodation. Dynamic accommodation gradually recedes with age.

The age-related variation of accommodative amplitude is mostly induced by age-related changes in the lens proteins, which mostly influence variation in refractive error in presbyopic adults.