The major differential for osteitis condensans ilii (OCI) is sacroillitis. Sacroiliitis refers to inflammation of the sacroiliac joint. This a nonspecific term that includes a multitude of etiologies with varying clinical presentations ranging from unilateral, bilaterally symmetric, or bilateral asymmetric.

- Unilateral 

- Infection: In the setting of unilateral sacroiliitis, the infection has to be excluded as delay in diagnosis is associated with severe morbidity. The patients generally present with severe pain, decreased range of motion, fever, elevated inflammatory markers, and purulent fluid on joint aspiration. Risk factors include recent therapeutic injection, bacteremia, IV drug users, or immunocompromised states. Delayed diagnosis can lead to severe joint destruction leading to long-term disability, sepsis, or death in extreme cases. However, most patients have a positive outcome.
- Destructive neoplastic process: Although uncommon, a primary osseous lesion or metastatic disease can involve the iliac wing or sacrum and mimic sacroiliac disease. In young patients, the primary considerations would include osteosarcoma, Ewing sarcoma, or lymphoma. In adults, metastatic disease is more common.
- SAPHO: This is a rare condition that presents with the constellation of findings to include synovitis, acne, pustulosis, hyperostosis, and osteitis.

The unilateral processes can be distinguished from osteitis condensans ilii (OCI) primarily based on the distribution as OSI is most commonly bilateral symmetric. An infection will most commonly present with elevated laboratory values and fever in addition to surrounding soft tissue and bone marrow edema on advanced imaging. All of those features are absent in OSI. A neoplastic process will be easily distinguished based on history in the setting of a known primary malignancy or advanced imaging as neoplasm will commonly be a destructive process, and not have the symmetric triangular sclerotic appearance.

- Bilateral Asymmetric

- Gout: This is a crystalline arthropathy most commonly affecting middle-aged men. The most common joints involved are the hands and feet, specifically the first metatarsophalangeal (feet) and radiocarpal (hands). Patients may have elevated serum uric acid levels on laboratory analysis. On imaging, gout is an erosive process, so there should be periarticular erosions, soft tissue swelling, and in some cases, a soft tissue mass (tophus). The demographics, involvement of the hands/feet, and inflammatory changes are key distinguishing features.
- Psoriatic arthritis (PA): PA is a seronegative inflammatory arthropathy that most commonly affects the hands and feet. Most patients will have a precedent diagnosis of psoriasis with skin manifestations. Unlike gout or rheumatoid arthritis, there is no gender predilection. The involvement of the hands and feet is distal more than proximal. In other words, the interphalangeal joints are more commonly involved than the joints of the midfoot or wrist. There is commonly soft tissue swelling, erosive changes, periostitis, joint subluxations, or ankylosis. The characteristic imaging features and multifocal involvement distinguish it from OSI.
- Osteoarthritis: The hallmarks of osteoarthritis are sclerosis, osteophyte formation, and subchondral cystic change. Osteoarthritis involvement of the sacroiliac joints will manifest as changes of both sides of the joint with small osteophytes. In addition, it will not have the classic triangular sclerosis seen in OSI.

- Bilateral symmetric

- Ankylosing spondylitis (AS): AS is seronegative spondyloarthropathy most commonly in young adult males. Unlike other arthropathies discussed previously, this is a process that predominately involves the large joints, specifically the sacroiliac joints and spine, but can also involve the hips and shoulders. Patients will commonly be HLA-B27 positive, unlike OSI. Like OSI, the process is bilaterally symmetric. However, the gender predilection is male, and the dominant imaging feature is ankylosis starting in the sacroiliac joints progressing to the spine. OSI does not involve the joint space, will not result in ankylosis, and does not involve the spine.
-  Rheumatoid arthritis (RA): RA is a chronic inflammatory arthropathy more commonly involving women than men with peak presentation in middle-age. The hands and feet are most commonly involved; however, other joints such as the knee, shoulder, hip, sacroiliac, and spine can be involved. It is rare for a patient to have the involvement of a large joint without the involvement of the hands or feet. The patients will commonly present with periarticular osteopenia and erosions, unlike OSI.
- Enteropathic arthritis: The association with inflammatory bowel disease is the distinguishing feature from OSI in these patients.

Other differential considerations would include spondylosis of the lumbar spine, osteoarthritis of the femoroacetabular joints, piriformis syndrome, trochanteric or iliopsoas bursitis, muscle strain, or tendinosis. Low back and hip pain can have similar clinical presentations and physical exam findings; however, these processes can be easily distinguished from OSI on advanced MRI imaging of the lumbar spine and pelvis.