Fosphenytoin is the prodrug formulation of the commonly used drug phenytoin. Although it is considered a safer formulation of phenytoin, it still maintains a similar adverse drug reaction profile. Fosphenytoin carries a black box warning for severe cardiac outcomes. Severe hypotension and cardiac arrhythmias are significant risk factors of fosphenytoin overdose exceeding 150 mg phenytoin equivalents per minute. In such cases, clinicians should provide support as per ACLS guidelines.

All the healthcare providers involved in taking care of the patient receiving fosphenytoin should be accurate with its indications, pharmacology, adverse effects, monitoring, and toxicity. Internists, neurologists, or intensivists should prescribe fosphenytoin for appropriate indications. Nurses should check IV compatibility and administer fosphenytoin according to product labeling. Pharmacists should ensure proper dosing and report to clinicians in case of drug overdose or interactions. Management of severe hypotension and cardiac arrhythmias requires ICU care under critical care physician supervision. The nephrologist consultation is necessary for severe acute overdose requiring hemodialysis or exchange transfusion.

Clinicians should suggest that pregnant patients register in the North American Antiepileptic Drug (NAAED). This registry gathers information about the adverse drug reactions of antiepileptic drugs during pregnancy, enhancing patient safety and outcomes.

As illustrated above, multiple healthcare providers, including clinicians(MDs, DOs, NPs, PAs), specialists, and nurses, are involved in caring for patients receiving fosphenytoin. Therefore an interprofessional team approach would achieve maximum efficacy and minimize adverse drug reactions translating to better patient outcomes. [Level 5]