Only symptomatic lesions need treatment; lesions less than 2 centimeters rarely require any treatment. In some cases of Zenker diverticulum associated with achalasia, botulinum toxin may help relieve symptoms of dysphagia. For all other large Zenker diverticulum, surgery is indicated. However, since Zenker diverticula occur in the elderly population, great care is required in selecting patients for surgery. The Zenker diverticulum can be treated by an open procedure or via an endoscopic approach. During surgery, it is vital to divide the cricopharyngeus muscle to relieve the elevated pressure zone and eliminate the pouch of the diverticulum. A 1-cm myotomy is adequate in most cases.

However, myotomy alone is associated with a high recurrence of symptoms. Hence, the myotomy should be combined with a more definitive procedure.

Recently lasers have been used during upper endoscopy to resect the diverticulum instead of staples. Overall, lasers have been shown to have fewer recurrences and faster improvement in symptoms compared to the use of staplers. Open surgery usually is more invasive and requires longer hospitalization but does provide rapid symptom relief and low rates of recurrence. Complications of surgery include injury to the laryngeal nerve, bleeding, esophageal perforation, and trauma to the oral cavity.

**Pros and cons**

**Diverticulectomy with myotomy**

- Is a definitve procedure and removes the diverticulum

- Tissue is available for histopathological analysis

- Symptom relief is immediate

- Recurrence of symptoms is low

- Surgery can take time and patients do need to be admitted. Initiation of an oral diet is delayed until the suture line has healed.

- There is a risk of RLN injury, esophageal stenosis, fistula formation, esophageal perforation and mediastinitis.

**Endoscopic diverticulectomy with**stapler

- Short surgery and can be repeated

- Hosptial stay is short and oral diet can be started quickly

- Effective and safe procedure

- However, endoscopy surgery may not be possible in all patients and does not remove the diverticulum. There is no tissue for analysis but recurrences can be managed by a repeat procedure. There is a risk of RLN injury, esophageal stenosis, fistula formation, esophageal perforation and mediastinitis.