This section will discuss evidence-based use and outcomes associated with flecainide in various clinical settings.

**CAST Trial (Cardiac Arrhythmia Suppression Trial)**

Initially, it was thought to be effective in the treatment of PVCs/NSVT after myocardial infarction to reduce the incidence of sudden death. However, multicenter randomized placebo-controlled trial on patients after myocardial infarction, the use of flecainide was associated with increased mortality due to fatal arrhythmias. So, flecainide is considered in patients without coronary artery disease and left ventricular dysfunction. Currently, contraindications to flecainide include patients with left ventricular hypertrophy, ischemic heart disease, HOCM, high degree AV block, and complete heart block.

**PITAGORA Trial**

A multicenter, single-blind prospective randomized trial compared amiodarone with class IC (propafenone and flecainide) in patients with atrial fibrillation and pacemaker due to sinus node disease for maintaining sinus rhythm as a goal. Flecainide was found to be non-inferior and also equally efficacious in preventing episodes of more than 10 minutes or one day.

**Pill in the Pocket Approach**

According to the NEJM study published in 2004, flecainide is one of the drugs apart from propafenone used in outpatient or emergency department settings to treat symptomatic atrial fibrillation. In some patients, oral prophylaxis or catheter ablation may not be feasible; a single dose of antiarrhythmic at the time of onset of symptoms is appropriate. The dose of flecainide was 300 mg for patients of more than 70 kg or 200 mg otherwise. Around 165 patients were followed for two years; 94% were successfully treated after the onset of symptoms within 2 hours. Recurrences were successfully treated for up to 84 percent. The number of emergency room visits and hospitalizations was significantly lower during the study period compared to the year before the treatment period.

**Acute Cardioversion in Emergency Departments**

Based on recent meta-analyses, IV flecainide is superior to other antiarrhythmics like ibutilide, amiodarone, sotalol, propafenone, and procainamide. Eleven randomized controlled trials were analyzed and found that flecainide had high efficacy with cardioversion within 2 hours. No statistically significant difference in proarrhythmic behavior compared to placebo or other antiarrhythmics.

**Effect on Atrial Remodeling**

Structural changes in atria occur due to atrial fibrillation leading to myocardial remodeling and mitochondrial dysfunction due to oxidative stress. Atrial activation rapidly leads to intracellular calcium accumulation due to the Na+/Ca2+ exchanger during atrial fibrillation. Flecainide inhibits intracellular Ca2+ accumulation, which reduces atrial remodeling and oxidative stress.

**Fetal Tachycardia**

Flecainide is proven to be useful in the transplacental treatment of fetal tachycardia. Flecainide was found to be superior to digoxin and sotalol in the termination of fetal tachycardia, especially supraventricular tachycardia. The placental transfer is not affected in hydrops fetalis.

**Catecholaminergic Polymorphic Ventricular Tachycardia**

As discussed above, flecainide inhibits cardiac ryanodine receptors in their open state, which is responsible for the release of calcium, leading to CPVT. Flecainide suppresses 76% of exercise-induced ventricular arrhythmias in 33 genotype-positive patients. It is also found to be efficacious in suppressing ventricular tachyarrhythmias in genotype-negative patients.

**Practical Aspects Before and During Initiation of Flecainide**

- Exercise stress test before initiating to rule out coronary artery disease and during the treatment when there is resting QRS prolongation

- EKG to monitor for QRS prolongation; the dose should be reduced to half the initial dose if QRS increases by 25%

- Screen for sinus and AV node disease

- Concurrent use of negative chronotropic agents like beta-blockers

While pharmaceutical therapy with flecainide should only be initiated by a cardiologist, it requires an interprofessional team approach, including the patient, other clinicians and specialists, specialty-trained nurses, and pharmacists, all collaborating across disciplines to achieve optimal patient results. As a narrow therapeutic index medication, all healthcare team members must be aware of the patient's therapy, understand the signs of toxicity or inadequate response, and communicate openly with other interprofessional team members regarding treatment progress or adverse events to optimize therapeutic outcomes and improve the patient's condition. [Level 5]