Assessing the use of methadone in different clinical scenarios requires specialized knowledge regarding its pharmacologic attributes and its legal limitations. Deaths associated with the nonprescription use of opioids are a leading cause of mortality in the United States. Federal programs for detoxification and maintenance using methadone or buprenorphine-naloxone are considered crucial in reducing those numbers.

Close communication between a patient's healthcare team will be vital to providing the best outcomes. Identifying patients who would benefit from methadone requires an interprofessional team of physicians, nurses, pharmacists, lab technicians, therapists, and social workers to then provide a safety net for monitoring the risks of its use. Monitoring can prevent overdose, toxicity, withdrawal, drug diversion, and assess comorbid psychiatric diseases or other social determinants related to better patient outcomes. The interprofessional team should be cognizant of the following when caring for patients who require methadone

- Have clear communication regarding the risks and benefits of opioid use with patients [Level 1]

- Methadone use is recommended only after the failure of other opioids for chronic pain. [Level 1]

- Understand legalities for prescribing methadone depending on state and federal laws, and cross-reference state prescription drug monitoring program (PDMP) databases [Levels 1-2].

- Assess current opioid use status and monitor with regular urine drug screens [Level 2]

- Assess baseline clinical function with cardiac clearance, serum glucose, and psychiatric assessments and determine benefit vs. harm ratios depending on other comorbidities. [Levels 1-3]

- Obtain medication recommendations regarding drug interactions if the patient uses other medications. [Level 1-2]

- Assess social support, accessibility to methadone clinics, and the likelihood of retention in methadone programs if being treated for opioid use disorder.

- Provide adjunct therapy or addiction specialist consultations to patients who are at high risk of adverse outcomes.

- Monitor patients regularly for adverse effects and adjust medications accordingly [Level 1]

- In overdose situations, administer naloxone to prevent fatalities [Level 1]

Patient care involving methadone is still an evolving subject, and knowledge of regular updates to the literature is essential to establishing the best patient care possible. Physicians must determine whether methadone is an appropriate drug to prescribe, follow through with patient care, and communicate clearly and effectively regarding a patient's consent and understanding of the risks and benefits of methadone use.

Nurses are first-line in administering drugs, monitoring patients for adverse reactions, and are purveyors of overall patient clinical status, adherence, and improvement. Pharmacists must advise the team regarding medication interactions and assess dosing requirements for patients with comorbidities to prevent adverse events and provide proper analgesia. Lab technicians will run tests evaluating adherence, abuse, and overdose in patients.

Psychiatrists, mental health therapists, and addiction specialists can provide behavioral therapy, treat comorbid psychiatric diseases, and monitor adherence as part of medication-assisted treatment programs.

Social workers can help provide support outside hospital settings, connecting patients to the right resources, and evaluate social determinants of opioid abuse and retention in maintenance programs. A team of healthcare professionals is essential to cover all aspects of patient care when prescribing methadone. Clear communication amongst the team will be vital to maintaining an accurate plan of care for patients that reduces associated risks, improves patient outcomes, and provides the best quality of care possible.