A personal health record (PHR) refers to the collection of an individual's medical documentation maintained by the individual themselves, or a caregiver, in cases where patients are unable to do so themselves. This personal information includes details such as:

- The patient's medical history

- Applicable diagnoses

- Historical and ongoing medications, including over-the-counter and alternative treatments

- Past medical and surgical interventions

- Immunization status

- Allergies and other relevant medical conditions that can impact the delivery of emergency care (e.g., Type 1 diabetes, etc.)

- Blood type

- Whom to contact in the event of an emergency

- Insurance information

- Contact information for the patient's regular health providers

Any other information the patient feels is pertinent may also be included. This contrasts with electronic medical records and electronic health records (EMR and EHR), which are usually maintained by the treating physician or hospital to provide medical care and for billing purposes.

A PHR may be either physical or, as has become increasingly common moving forward, electronic. It includes all self-reported and self-recorded health data, including health issues and treatments, records of vital signs and activity recorded with personal devices including smartphones and smartwatches, nutritional data such as diet composition and calorie intake, etc. Several commercial applications are available that allow an individual to maintain a PHR, and some also allow integration of this data with the individual's EMR/HER, allowing them to take better charge of their own health.

The goal of a PHR is to allow the patient to keep their health data on hand for ready access for both themselves and anyone involved in their care while maintaining the privacy and security of this data. A PHR can hence assist in providing tailored medical care.