Mesenteric venous thrombosis is considered primary when there is no etiology or predisposing factor. Primary mesenteric venous thrombosis represents 0% to 49% of all mesenteric venous thrombosis cases and has declined with an increased index of suspicion and improved diagnosis of hypercoagulation disorders. Characteristic risk factors cause secondary mesenteric venous thrombosis.

Various conditions can lead to mesenteric venous thrombosis with many patients experiencing a multifactorial origin of thrombosis. Unlike arterial thrombosis, mesenteric venous thrombosis usually occurs with thrombophilia. Prothrombotic states and primary hypercoagulable states are the most common causes of secondary mesenteric venous thrombosis. Specific hypercoagulable states are identified in 60% to 75% of patients with mesenteric venous thrombosis. These include heparin-induced thrombocytopenia, essential thrombocythemia, post-splenectomy thrombocytosis, polycythemia vera, and neoplastic disorders. Combined mesenteric and portal venous thrombosis are more often associated with non-systemic pathologies, such as local abdominal inflammatory conditions (e.g., inflammatory bowel disease, pancreatitis, diverticulitis), myeloproliferative neoplasms, and malignancies (e.g., hepatocellular carcinoma, pancreatic adenocarcinoma).

Genetic abnormalities also contribute to venous thrombosis and primary hypercoagulable states. These include defects in antithrombotic proteins (antithrombin III, protein C, protein S) and increased prothrombotic protein (e.g., activated protein C resistance, G20210A prothrombin gene mutation).