**Trigger Thumb**

The flexor pulley system has clinical significance because if a pulley constricts the FPL tendon this can result in trigger thumb. Trigger thumb is an inability of the FPL tendon to smoothly move through the pulley system. Pulley stenosis is most often the result of tenosynovitis, and most commonly involves the A1 pulley. Initial management of trigger thumb is activity modification, corticosteroid injections, NSAIDs, and splinting. These conservative treatment options are successful in 50% to 92% of patients. For patients that do not respond, surgical transection of the involved pulley provides relief in 60% to 100% of patients.

**Volkmann's Contracture**

Volkmann’s contracture is a debilitating condition that occurs secondary to untreated acute compartment syndrome. While it can occur in the leg, Volkmann’s contracture most often occurs within the forearm.

The most common causes of acute compartment syndrome of the forearm are fractures and significant soft tissue damage, such as from a crush injury.

Prevention of Volkmann’s contracture through early diagnosis and treatment of acute compartment syndrome is essential. The “Six Ps” system is helpful in assessing patients with injuries that are high risk for the development of compartment syndrome

- Pain out of proportion on physical exam; Pain with passive stretch of the compartment involved

- Paresthesia

- Paresis

- Pallor

- Pulselessness

- Poikilothermia

While compartment syndrome is typically diagnosed clinically, depending on the cognitive status of the patient, a measurement of the intra-compartmental pressure can provide a diagnosis. If the difference between the diastolic blood pressure and the intra-compartmental pressure is 30 mm Hg or less, urgent open fasciotomy and revascularization are required.

Two classification systems are used in conjunction to describe Volkmann’s contracture: Seddon (Grade I-Grade III based on contracture severity) and Tsuge classification systems (Mild, Moderate, and Severe based on muscles and nerves involvement as well as presentation). Conservative therapy consisting of stretching and splinting is the initial treatment for Mild and Grade I contractures. Surgical intervention can be utilized for Mild contractures, however, is required for Moderate and Severe contractures. Surgical intervention consists of tendon lengthening, muscle slides, and free functional muscle transfers.