Rifampin, isoniazid, pyrazinamide, and ethambutol are first-line antitubercular medications, which are FDA-approved and indicated for the treatment of Mycobacterium tuberculosis infections. The care for patients suffering from tuberculosis prompts critical care from an interprofessional team of healthcare professionals as the preventable infectious disease can lead to medication resistance and mortality. These healthcare professionals include a primary care clinician, an infectious disease specialist, a nurse, and a pharmacist. The primary care physicians and specialists should educate the patients about the consequences of non-adherence to pharmacotherapy for the full duration and how resistance to treatment can further develop into MDR-TB and cause mortality.

Primary care clinicians should routinely monitor labs, as all four agents are hepatotoxic drugs. Counseling and careful monitoring should be conducted during pregnancy, as some second-line medications are teratogenic. Clinicians should be up to date with the newly FDA-approved MDR-TB and their effects in the event drug resistance develops. Interprofessional communication between all team members is key to building patient rapport and developing a therapeutic alliance, so the patients adhere to therapy adequately to eradicate the bacteria and prevent further spread. This interprofessional approach with open communication channels between team members will drive better patient outcomes with fewer adverse events. [Level 5]