The mainstay of treatment for EVALI is supportive care. Supportive care usually includes supplemental oxygen to maintain oxygen saturation of 88 to 92 % via nasal cannula or high-flow oxygen or high-flow nasal cannula (HFNC). The severity of symptoms serves as a guide to whether the patient needs a hospital admission or can be managed on an outpatient basis. Respiratory distress, comorbidities that compromise pulmonary reserve, or decreased oxygen saturation (less than 95% while breathing room air) are strong indications that the patient will require hospital admission. If hypoxemia is severe, the management may require mechanical ventilation (26%) with a lung protective strategy simial to acute respiratory distress syndrome.

It is essential to rule out any infectious etiology by maintaining a high clinical suspicion for common respiratory pathogens. Early institution of therapy is key to the management of influenza and other infectious pathologies. Therefore, influenza testing should be strongly considered, particularly during the influenza season. Empiric antiviral or antimicrobial treatment should be considered by local antimicrobial resistance patterns. Patients with severe lung injury without any identifiable cause and a strong suspicion of EVALI have responded well to systemic corticosteroids.

There is limited evidence to support the use of corticosteroids in patients with milder symptoms being managed on an outpatient basis. Corticosteroids can potentially worsen an underlying respiratory infection; therefore, it is important to involve the pulmonologist when starting the patient on corticosteroids. These patients can deteriorate very rapidly and may end up requiring assisted mechanical ventilation.

When discharging patients with EVALI, it is crucial to ascertain the patient's clinical stability as dictated by stable oxygenation and exercise tolerance for 24 to 48 hours before planned discharge. These patients should follow up with their primary care provider or pulmonologist within 48 hours. Furthermore, follow-up testing with spirometry and chest X-ray may be required for some patients, as recommended by the pulmonologist.