The management is discussed under the headings of definitive and supportive. The prognosis remains poor with both the above measures once a diagnosis of pulmonary lymphangitic carcinomatosis is established. If pulmonary lymphangitic carcinomatosis is the initial mode of presentation of underlying malignancy & underlying malignancy has subsequently been confirmed, attempts at definitive therapy involve consideration for surgical resection/chemotherapy /radiotherapy after a definite diagnosis & staging of the underlying tumor is made.

Only tumors with effective anti-tumor agents will respond to chemotherapy (e.g., Wilms tumor/trophoblastic tumors). There are isolated reports of considerable remission of pulmonary lymphangitic carcinomatosis in various malignancies with hormonal therapy, chemotherapy, tyrosine kinase inhibitors(eg.apatinib), and certain monoclonal antibodies(e.g., bevacizumab, cetuximab).

Supportive care involves the organ support measures (e.g., oxygen, non-invasive ventilation/mechanical ventilation, or inotropes) provided during attempts at diagnosis or definitive therapy is made. Many patients with a history of advanced underlying malignancy and poor quality of life who present with signs and symptoms of pulmonary lymphangitic carcinomatosis often opt for non-invasive radiology based presumptive diagnosis and end up receiving a course of empiric antibiotics along with oxygen supplementation.

Intravenous steroids are prescribed by many physicians for symptomatic relief of symptoms, although there is no scientific evidence for this traditional practice. Opiates & benzodiazepines could be used judiciously for control of dyspnoea & anxiety. Diuresis and pulmonary vasodilators are considered if there is evidence of heart failure. Focus on palliative measures are initiated once comfort care decision is finalized in a given patient with advanced progressive non-responsive malignancy.