**Surgical**

Historically, it was thought that removal of the injured eye within 14 days of ocular trauma would protect the contralateral eye from the onset of sympathetic ophthalmia.

Sympathetic ophthalmia has been described to occur in the sympathizing eye despite removing the traumatic globe.

The decision of when to remove and when to save a severely traumatized eye can be a difficult one. In a study of 660 traumatic globe injuries, over 98% of injuries could be successfully repaired surgically, and only 13% suffered no light perception (NLP) vision. Indication for primary removal of the globe only occurred in 1.7% due to the inability to repair the globe.

Furthermore, the negative psychological impact of losing an eye cannot be understated and should be considered prior to enucleation or evisceration. Patients often experience body dysmorphia, depression, and increased anxiety from losing an eye.

In cases where the ruptured globe is beyond repair, removal of the eye via evisceration or enucleation may be the only option. Significant debate exists as to which procedure is more appropriate. Critics of evisceration argue that evisceration poses a potential risk for disseminating unsuspected uveal malignancy and a theoretical risk of causing sympathetic ophthalmia due to remnant uveal tissues.

Evisceration is often favored since it is technically easier, and the preservation of the sclera can provide a barrier in preventing the orbital spread of infection. Evisceration may also provide a cosmetic and functional advantage for the patient.

**Medical**

Patients with sympathetic ophthalmia who receive prompt treatment with high-dose steroids and immunomodulatory agents have a better chance for good visual outcomes.

Improvements in retinal findings on OCT have been noted soon after the initiation of corticosteroids.

Other immunosuppressive agents may be warranted if a patient experiences recurrence or worsened inflammation. Systemic corticosteroids may have significant complications, including uncontrolled diabetes, adrenal insufficiency, osteoporosis, and increased infection risk. Intravitreal steroids can be considered to avoid some of these systemic complications and enable a targeted high concentration of the drug at the site of the disease. Studies have shown intravitreal steroid therapy to effectively control uveitic macular edema.

Immunomodulators can be considered in patients with contraindications to steroid use, significant or intolerable side effects, or uncontrolled disease despite steroid therapy. Up to 70% of patients with sympathetic ophthalmia need some form of immunomodulatory therapy.

Most of these medications have significant systemic toxicities and require close monitoring; therefore, consultation with rheumatology or internal medicine specialists may be recommended for the co-management of these patients. Types of immunomodulators used for sympathetic ophthalmia management are as follows:

- Cyclosporine is a calcineurin inhibitor that inhibits T-cell function. The recommended starting dose is 2.5 to 5 mg/kg/day. If improvement in a patient is noted for more than three months, a slow taper may be initiated, decreasing by 0.5 mg/kg/day every 1 to 2 months.

- Azathioprine is an inhibitor of purine synthesis, affecting B and T-lymphocytes, and is effective in managing sympathetic ophthalmia.

- Mycophenolate mofetil is an inhibitor of purine synthesis, potentially better tolerated than azathioprine, with fewer side effects.

- Alkylating agents like chlorambucil and cyclophosphamide have been shown to control inflammation in sympathetic ophthalmia.

- Anti-TNF-alpha biologic agents such as infliximab and adalimumab are gaining traction as potential first-line corticosteroid-sparing agents since they target the specific inflammatory cytokine involved in the pathogenesis of sympathetic ophthalmia. Adalimumab offers the convenience of a subcutaneous injection every two weeks, which can significantly improve a patient's quality of life receiving care.