Enflurane is a clear, colorless liquid at room temperature, requiring a vaporizer for administration, although it vaporizes quite readily. ZIts boiling point at 1 atmosphere is 56.5 degrees  Celsius. The patient then inhales it via a face mask. Enflurane is a non-flammable, nonexplosive liquid. The boiling point is 56.5 degrees C at 760 mm Hg, and the vapor pressure (in mm Hg) is 175 at 20 degrees C, 218 at 25 degrees C, and 345 at 36 degrees C. The delivery of continuous enflurane causes drug accumulation within the alveoli. Through gas exchange in the lungs, enflurane is carried on red blood cells and distributed to the rest of the body.

The minimal alveolar concentration (MAC) of enflurane is 1.68% in pure oxygen, 0.57 in 70% nitrous oxide with 30% oxygen, and 1.17 in 30% nitrous oxide with 70% oxygen. The MAC-Awake (the concentration at which appropriate voluntary responses to commands are lost; for example, the opening of the eyes) was 0.27 with slow alveolar washout and 0.20 with fast alveolar washout.

Induction. A hypnotic dose of a short-acting barbiturate or propofol followed by the mixture of the inhaled anesthetic with oxygen and air can be used to induce the loss of consciousness (LOC). In general, enflurane concentrations from 2.0% to 4.5% cause surgical anesthesia in 7 to 10 minutes. When using enflurane to induce LOC, the recommendation is to start the induction phase with enflurane at a concentration of 0.5% and gradually increase by another 0.5% every few respiratory acts until surgical anesthesia is reached. The concentration at this level must be less than 4%. The inhaled agent has a mild, sweet odor and may induce a mild stimulus to salivation or tracheobronchial secretions. Again, pharyngeal and laryngeal reflexes are readily obtunded.

Maintenance. Surgical anesthesia levels are maintainable with 0.5 to 3% enflurane concentrations. Maintenance concentrations should not exceed 3.0%.

Emergence. The concentration of enflurane can be reduced to 0.5% towards the end of the surgery or suspended at the beginning of the surgical suture.