Ampicillin administration can be oral, intramuscular, or intravenous. Parenteral administration is preferable for severe or moderately severe infections. The oral route should not be the initial therapy in life-threatening conditions but can follow after parenteral therapy.

**Oral Administration**

- When administered orally, it should be on an empty stomach with 1 or 2 full glasses of water to increase absorption.

**Intravenous Administration**

- For intravenous administration, ampicillin may be administered as an IV bolus. Reconstitution of vials containing 125, 250, or 500 mg of the drug with 5 ml sterile water is recommended.

- Vials containing 1 or 2 g should be reconstituted at 7.4 or 14.8 ml of bacteriostatic or sterile water.

**Intramuscular Administration**

- If administering ampicillin intramuscularly, the injection should be into a large muscle mass. Reconstitute with bacteriostatic or sterile water to create solutions containing 125 or 250 mg/ml.

**Rate of Administration**

- Formulations reconstituted from 125, 250, or 500 mg vials must be given over 3 to 5 minutes by intravenous injection.

- Formulations reconstituted from 1 or 2 g vials must be given over 10 to 15 minutes by intravenous injection.

**GI Tract Infection**

- Bodyweight less than 40 kg: IV/IM 50 mg/kg/day every 6 to 8 hours

- Bodyweight more than 40 kg: IV/IM 500 mg every 6 hours

**GU Tract Infection**

- Bodyweight less than 40 kg: IV/IM 50 mg/kg/day every 6 to 8 hours

- Bodyweight more than 40 kg: IV/IM 500 mg every 6 hours

**Respiratory Tract Infection**

- Bodyweight less than 40 kg: IV/IM 250 to 500 mg/kg/day every 6 to 8 hours

- Bodyweight more than 40 kg: IV/IM 25 to 50 mg/kg/day every 6 hours

**Urinary Tract infection**

- Caused by ampicillin susceptible enterococcus

- IV/IM 1 to 2 g every 4 to 6 hrs

**Bacterial Meningitis/Septicemia**

- IV 150 to 200 mg/kg/day every every 6 to 8 hours

**Listeria**
**Species**

- IV 2 g every 4 hours

**Endocarditis Prophylaxis (off-label)**

- In the respiratory tract, oral or dental procedure: IM, IV: 50 mg/kg as a single dose 30 to 60 minutes before the procedure.

- In gastrointestinal or genitourinary procedure: Only for patients at risk for endocarditis: IV/IM 2g 30 minutes before the procedure, followed by 1 g, 6 hours later with an aminoglycoside.

**Endocarditis (off-label)**

- Endocarditis caused by Listeria species

- IV/IM 200 mg/kg/day every 6 hours for 4 to 6 weeks

**Gonorrhea (not CDC recommended)**

- IV 3.5 g administered once with 1 g probenecid

**Streptococcus agalactiae (off-label)**

- Maternal prophylaxis to prevent newborn infection

- IV first dose 2 g followed by 1 g every 4 hours till delivery

**Use in Specific Patient Populations**

**Patients with Hepatic Impairment:**No dose adjustment has been provided in the manufacturer's labeling.

**Patients with Renal Impairment:**The dosing frequency should be adjusted based on patient CrCl.

- CrCl <10 mL/min: Administer every 12 to 24 hours

- CrCl 10-50 mL/min: Administer every 6 to 12 hours

- CrCl >50 mL/min: Administer every 6 hours.

**Pregnancy Considerations:**Ampicillin is widely used during pregnancy(Former FDA category B). ACOG guidelines recommend that pregnant mothers with preterm PROM(premature rupture of membranes) should be treated with intravenous ampicillin and erythromycin, followed by oral antibiotics to decrease neonatal complications.

**Breastfeeding Considerations:**Clinical data suggest that administration of ampicillin during lactation produces low levels in milk that are not anticipated to cause adverse effects in breastfed infants. However, alteration of the infant's gastrointestinal flora has been reported; consequently, when ampicillin is used during lactation, monitor for diarrhea and thrush.