The priority is the ABCs and appropriate treatment of the presenting complaints. However, once the patient is stabilized, emergency medical services personnel may identify problems associated with violence.

**Prehospital Care**

The priority is the stabilization of injuries. Once this is achieved, prehospital professionals should consider the following:

- Emergency medical services personnel enter the environment where victimization occurs and may see evidence of the domestic and sexual violence that needs to be reported to the clinicians and possibly police.

- Reporting may be considered even when called into a home for a problem that is not necessarily directly related to abuse.

- Domestic violence victims may refuse ambulance transport after evaluation. Emergency Medical Service (EMS) health professionals may recognize domestic violence and suggest an appropriate intervention in such situations.

All EMS personnel should be trained to recognize the signs of domestic violence and offer guidance.

**Emergency Department and Office Care**

Interventions to consider include:

- Make sure a safe environment is provided.

- Diagnose physical injuries and other medical or surgical problems.

- Treat acute physical or life-threatening injuries.

- Identify possible sources of domestic violence.

- Establish domestic violence as the diagnosis.

- Reassure the patient that he is not at fault.

- Evaluate the emotional status and treat.

- Document the history, physical, and interventions.

- Determine the risks to the victim and assess safety options.

- Counsel the patient that violence may escalate.

- Determine if legal intervention is needed and report abuse when appropriate or mandated.

- Develop a follow-up plan.

- Offer shelter options, legal services, counseling, and facilitate such referral.

**Evaluation and Management of Emotional Status**

The patient needs to feel respected, cared for, listened to, and encouraged to make choices to the extent legally allowable. The victim should be informed:

- There is no excuse for domestic violence.

- Violence is not the patient's fault.

- No one deserves to be abused.

- It is challenging to face the situation, but resources like support, shelter, and legal advice are available.

- Appropriate intervention decreases the likelihood of anxiety, depression, substance abuse, counterphobic behavior, and PTSD.

- Use plain language to explain procedures.

- Explain the reactions expected during the post-trauma period

- When examining the patient, respect modesty; touch the patient only with permission.

- Discuss the evaluation of sexually transmitted infections and pregnancy.

**Medical Record**

The medical record is often evidence used to convict an abuser. A poorly document chart may result in an abuser going free and assaulting again.

Charting should include detailed documentation of evaluation, treatment, and referrals.

- Describe the abusive event and current complaints using the patient's own words.

- Include the behavior of the patient in the record.

- Include health problems related to the abuse.

- Include the alleged perpetrator's name, relationship, and address.

- The physical exam should include a description of the patient's injuries, including location, color, size, amount, and degree of age bruises, and contusions.

- Document injuries with anatomical diagrams and photographs.

- Photographs should include close-ups of all wounds and contusions of the face and torso.

- Include the name of the patient, medical record number, date and time of the photograph, and witnesses on the back of each photograph.

- Torn and damaged clothing should also be photographed.

- Document injuries that are not shown clearly by photographs with line drawings.

- Preserve physical evidence that may be used for prosecution.

- With sexual assault, follow protocols for physical examination and evidence collection.

- Consent the patient, parent, or legal guardian.

- Perform legally required notifications.

- Make referrals.

- Assure a safe environment.

The immediate concern is for the safety of the abused patient and any immediate family. If there is any concern that the batterer or an individual who will report to the batterer is present, treat the patient alone, or have proper authorities present.

The patient needs to know that health and safety are being taken seriously by healthcare professionals.

**Joint Commission on Accreditation of Healthcare Organizations Requirements**

Patients who are victims of alleged abuse or neglect have specialized needs during the assessment process. The Joint Commission requires hospitals to have policies for identifying, evaluating, managing, and referring victims.

- The hospital must safeguard information and potential evidence that may be used in future actions as part of the legal process.

- Hospitals must have policies and procedures that define responsibility for collecting these materials.

- Hospital policy must define activities and specify who is responsible for their implementation.

**Risk Determination Before Discharge**

- Determine if the patient will be in danger if returning home.

- Evaluate any threats by the perpetrator.

- Evaluate the patient's state of mind.

- Determine what type of help the patient is willing to accept.

**Disposition**

If the patient does not want to go to a shelter, provide telephone numbers for domestic violence or crisis hotlines and support services for potential later use. Provide the patient with instructions but be mindful that written materials may pose a danger once they return home.

- A referral should be made to primary care or another appropriate resource.

- Advise the patient to have a safety plan and provide examples.

**Safety Plan Elements**

- Avoid arguments in small rooms or rooms without access to an outside door.

- Avoid alcohol and drugs that decrease the ability to protect or think logically.

- Develop escape routes through doors, windows, or fire escapes.

- Practice escape routes.

- Ask friends or neighbors to call the police if they hear suspicious noises.

- Arrange a code word for children or friends, so they know when to call for help.

- Teach children to use the telephone to contact the police or fire.

**The Patient Should be Instructed to Have the Following Available in An Emergency**

- Driver's license, birth certificates, social security cards, green cards, passports, school and health records, welfare identification, insurance records, automobile titles, lease or rental agreements, mortgage papers, marriage license, address book, protective or restraining orders, divorce or custody papers, court documents, money, checkbook, bankbook, and credit card

- Prescription medicines

- Clothing, toys, and other items for children

- Keys to the car, house, office, and safe-deposit box

- Change the locks on doors and windows.

- Install safety devices, such as extra locks, window bars, and electronic security systems

- Install smoke detectors, purchase fire extinguishers, and rope ladders for upper floor window

**Shelters and Referral**

In an emergency department setting, the primary goal after treating acute injuries is to bring the victim into contact with domestic violence shelters, social services, legal assistance, and support groups.

- The patient should be assisted in locating a safe haven; if an outpatient facility is not available, and there is no safe haven, overnight hospitalization could be considered, emphasizing that this for the patient's protection.

- The patient should be provided with the options available, including emergency shelter, contacting the police to obtain a restraining order, and services offered through support groups and hotlines.

- Some patients will choose to return to the relationship after seeking healthcare; nevertheless, the patient should be made aware of the options available to extricate the person from violence.

**Consultations**

- Obtain a consultation with a social worker, psychologist, or psychiatrist if the patient is suicidal or homicidal.

**Deterrence**

If an individual returns to a domestic violence situation she may be reinjured, sometimes with fatal outcomes.

- Appropriate suspicion, documentation, and referral can prevent further abuse.

- Prevention programs are available in many communities and typically target high-risk families.

- Long-term assessment and care vary with the needs of each patient.

- Follow-up assessment involves a visit to the home to evaluate the ongoing living environment, the family, and the condition of caregivers.

- Stress to competent patients who refuse help that abuse usually escalates.

- Inform patients that a number of programs can provide help; provide phone numbers and addresses.

- Encourage patients to develop safety and follow-up plans before they are discharged.

**Remember**

- Forty percent of domestic violence victims never contact the police.

- Of female victims of domestic homicide, 44% had visited a hospital emergency department within two years of their murder.

- Health professionals provide an opportunity for victims of domestic violence to obtain help.