The neurological exam can be intimidating and challenging to perform for most physicians. It is particularly challenging to perform in certain age groups like infants, younger children, and older uncooperative adults.

The assessment of how a patient feels about their symptoms can provide a better insight into their quality of life.

Physicians encounter an extensive range of patients with different illnesses daily. These can range from relatively benign to life-threatening conditions. This range of potentials highlights the importance of a physician's ability to recognize red flags early on in the disease processes. These red flags are picked up in history or during a neurological examination. A good example would be a patient who presents with chronic headaches, which can be a benign condition like migraine or life-threatening like a tumor. The presence of nausea and vomiting in the patient's history may still be present in migraines or may be a sign of increased intracranial pressure. An abnormal neurological examination can then direct the physician to the diagnosis (e.g., ataxic gait in this patient points to a cerebellar lesion). The physician can then refer the patient for appropriate diagnostic imaging and direct the management.

Recognizing red flags can be challenging for physicians, particularly when it comes to neurologically related disorders. The complexity of the neurologic examination, the interpretation of results, and the correlation to the neuroaxis are often challenging. This fact highlights the need for increased awareness of what constitutes a proper neurological examination and what each specific finding suggests. It is also important to note that some positive results, especially in isolation, can be a normal variant.

A neurological examination should also be tailored and focused on specific disease presentations. Certain maneuvers can be incorporated to increase the sensitivity of an exam for a certain symptom; an elderly patient with memory deficits will require a more in-depth cognitive assessment than a young patient with ptosis.