The number of anal cancer cases has been on the increase over the past 3 decades. Tragically, many people seek medical help late, and by the time the diagnosis is made, both local and distant spread is not uncommon. Healthcare workers should make it a habit of asking about lifestyle (smoking) and anal sex. The anal area should be examined as part of the admitting history and physical in people over the age of 50. Once the cancer is diagnosed, the treatment is a combination of chemotherapy and radiation. The role of surgery is limited in this malignancy. Anal cancer can be unpredictable and is known to progress fast or slow in some people- the reason for these differences remains unknown. The overall 5-year survival is only 66%, but for those with metastatic disease, less than 30% are alive at 5 years. So far, no reliable marker for this cancer has been discovered, and until then, awareness is the key. Patients should be educated that if they have any anal/rectal symptoms, they should see a healthcare provider promptly.

Anal cancer is best managed by an interprofessional team including surgeons, oncologists, radiation oncologists, nurse practitioners, pharmacists, and specialty-trained nurses. Oncologic and radiologic specialty-trained nurses are often involved in the coordination of care and patient education. The nurse should report any untoward changes in the vital signs of the patient to the clinician. The oncologic pharmacist reviews the chemotherapy, checks for drug-drug interactions, and provide patient education. The nurse should clearly communicate with other members of the interprofessional team, to ensure the optimal standard of care for their patients. [Level 5]