The laboratory evaluation of ischemic gangrene is focused on identifying clinical risk factors such as renal failure, hyperlipidemia, and diabetes, which would impact the treatment plan. Assessments for concurrent infection are also appropriate, though wound cultures are less helpful without additional signs of infection such as localized erythema and swelling.

Other tests recommended for ischemic gangrene are focused on identifying the arterial disease's level and complexity, which will help narrow down treatment options. Non-invasive testing like an ankle-brachial index (ABI) is essential for early identification of PAD in a patient with tissue loss and is considered abnormal if less than 1.0. Ankle pressure below 40-60 mmHg is also consistent with critical ischemia, and in the presence of tissue loss, <70 mmHg is considered abnormal.

Multiple classification systems exist for the staging of critical limb ischemia/chronic limb-threatening ischemia (CLI/CLTI). The recently developed WIfI (wound, ischemia, foot Infection) system by the Society of Vascular Surgery uses a combination of wound classification, ischemia severity, and the presence of foot infections to provide prognostic guidance regarding treatment recommendations and the anticipated response to revascularization.

If gas or wet gangrene is suspected, Gram stain and wound cultures can help identify the bacterial cause to guide antibiotic therapy, but the diagnosis is typically made clinically. Surface wound swabs are rarely helpful due to potential contamination of skin bacteria, and the sample should be obtained from deep swabbing or aspiration of purulent discharge.

Additionally, X-rays may be able to identify subcutaneous gas, which is always pathologic, and found with gas gangrene and type I necrotizing skin infections.