Unruptured abdominal aortic aneurysms are detected more than ever before primarily because of more frequent use of accessible imaging tools and asymptomatic patient screening. The majority of patients with an abdominal aortic aneurysm are asymptomatic or present with nonspecific symptoms. Screening of asymptomatic patients has shown reduced mortality. Hence, educating first primary care physicians on the criteria for screening and followup for an abdominal aortic aneurysm is highly important.

**Screening Recommendation**:

- All men above age 65 years should be screened with ultrasound, at least once in a lifetime.

- Women above age 50 with a first-degree family member with a history of AAA should be considered for AAA screening in 10 years intervals.

- Men or women with a peripheral aortic aneurysm should be considered for AAA screening, every 5 to 10 years.

Referral to a vascular surgeon at the time of initial diagnosis of aortic aneurysm, of any diameter is recommended. Furthermore, abdominal aortic aneurysm patients’ significant risk for another cardiovascular event. Hence, lifestyle changes, smoking cessation, and referral for cardiologists can improve patients' outcomes.

The biggest risk of abdominal aortic aneurysm is the risk of rupture. However, less than half of the patient presents with the classical triad of hypotension, pulsatile mass, and abdominal and back pain. Moreover, it has been shown that more than 30% of ruptured AAA are misdiagnosed.

The mortality rate of emergency surgical intervention following rupture is ten-fold higher than the mortality of patients undergoing planned intervention under specialist vascular surgeons. Hence it is important to educate patients regarding the importance of elective surgery. Moreover, once the decision for repair has been made, a multidisciplinary approach involving a cardiologist and pulmonologist should be utilized for risk stratification and medical optimization before repair to reduce negative outcomes.