The pathophysiology of major neurocognitive disorder, or dementia, varies depending on the subtype. Most types of dementia, except vascular dementia, are caused by the accumulation of native proteins in the brain.

Alzheimer disease is characterized by widespread atrophy of the cortex and deposition of amyloid plaques, and neurofibrillary tangles of hyperphosphorylated tau protein in neurons which contribute to their degeneration.

Lewy body dementia and Parkinson disease dementia are characterized by the intracellular accumulation of Lewy bodies, which are insoluble aggregates of alpha-synuclein protein in the brain.

Frontotemporal dementia is characterized by various mutations leading to the deposition of ubiquitinated TDP-43 and hyperphosphorylated tau proteins in the frontal and temporal lobes leading to dementia, early personality, behavioral changes, and aphasia depending on the subtype.

Huntington disease is caused by an autosomal dominant inherited gene mutation.

Prion-related dementias are caused by misfolded prions, which are proteinaceous particles that are infectious in nature and self-spreading. Prion dementias include Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease and kuru, among other syndromes.

HIV infection is associated with the development of neurocognitive disorders, in part due to the activation of macrophages and toxic inflammation leading to neurodegeneration in the brain.

Alcohol consumption, particularly high dose and prolonged use, is associated with multiple cytotoxic processes within the brain.

Vascular dementia is caused by ischemic injury to the brain (e.g., stroke), leading to permanent neuronal death.