**Antibiotic Resistance**

Antibiotics work through a variety of mechanisms:

- DNA synthesis inhibitors

- Protein synthesis inhibitors

- Cell wall synthesis inhibitors

- RNA synthesis inhibitors

- Mycolic acid synthesis inhibitors

- Folic acid synthesis inhibitors

When an antibiotic loses the capacity to kill or control bacterial growth, antibiotic resistance occurs. This can occur in two ways:

- Through genetic mutation

- Acquisition of resistance from other bacteria

These circumstances exacerbate under selective pressure (i.e., the use of antibiotics). Antibiotic resistance can spread both vertically and horizontally through a population. Horizontal transfer is considered the primary mediator of antibiotic resistance. The following are non-comprehensive examples of how two of the classes of antibiotics mentioned above encounter resistance mutations.

**DNA Synthesis Inhibitor**

In gram-negative bacteria, such as Helicobacter pylori, mutation resistance occurs relatively quickly to fluoroquinolones and thereby poses clinical issues for these therapies. Levofloxacin, moxifloxacin, and ciprofloxacin, examples of fluoroquinolones, inhibit DNA synthesis by targeting two homologous enzymes (DNA topoisomerase II and IV).

Gram-negative bacterial resistance to fluoroquinolones includes the accumulation of substitution mutations in the coding regions for particular subunits of DNA topoisomerase II. Resistance can be enhanced further by efflux pump modification.

Combination therapy for Helicobacter pylori typically includes clarithromycin (protein synthesis inhibitor), metronidazole (DNA synthesis inhibitor), amoxicillin (Cell wall synthesis inhibitor), or tetracycline (protein synthesis inhibitor), and a proton pump inhibitor.

**Protein Synthesis Inhibitor**

Linezolid prevents protein synthesis and is active against resistant Gram-positives.S. aureus, and coagulase-negative staphylococci has mutations in the central loop of the domain V region of the 23S rRNA gene. More specifically, clinical isolates had a substitution of Thymine for Guanine at the 2576 position.

Intrinsically, resistant bacteria have a characteristic resistance within all members of a species or genus. Such resistance may arise because:

- Glycopeptides are too large to penetrate the outer membrane (gram-positive bacteria)

- Antibiotics lack affinity for the target (penicillin-binding proteins of gram-positive bacteria)

- Presence of efflux pumps expression (multi-drug efflux pumps of Pseudomonas aeruginosa)

- Other chromosomal resistance mechanisms

Antibiotic resistance mechanisms can also occur by incorporating resistance genes into plasmids, transposons, and integrons. These genes spread through horizontal transfer by conjugation, transformation, or transduction mechanisms. However, the mutation is essential for the evolution or assortment of these genes.