The release of glucocorticoids is pulsatile throughout the day, peaking in the morning at around 8 am. Glucocorticoids are necessary for normal bodily functions. However, any form of stress (physical, psychological) is an acute inducer of cortisol secretion. Due to its role in stress, cortisol also called the stress hormone of the body.

**Metabolic Functions**

Cortisol acts on glucose metabolism to cause hyperglycemia. This effect is not only involved in maintaining normal glucose homeostasis but at times of stress, glucose happens to be the only substrate that provides energy to the critical organs of the body such as the brain and skeletal muscles during times of stress such as an illness or exercise. Hyperglycemia is caused by increasing the synthesis of enzymes involved in glycogenolysis and gluconeogenesis.

Cortisol upregulates or activates or induces enzymes involved in gluconeogenesis and glycogenolysis. It antagonizes the actions of insulin and decreases the cellular uptake of glucose to increase the availability of glucose for the brain, red blood cells, and skeletal muscles. Cortisol increases gluconeogenesis by inducing the gene expression of the PEPCK enzyme. This step occurs in the cytosol; fructose-1,6-bisphosphate converts to fructose-6-phosphate. By antagonizing the actions of insulin, it decreases (a) glycogen synthesis and (b) glucose uptake by glut four transporters.  Glucocorticoids, to further increase the gluconeogenetic substrates, establish a catabolic state in muscles, inducing peripheral muscle breakdown and mobilizing amino acids towards the liver to be used in gluconeogenesis (formation of glucose from amino acids).

Furthermore, glucocorticoids activate hormone-sensitive lipase (HSL) in the adipose tissue resulting in increased availability of free fatty acids for beta-oxidation. These metabolic actions of glucocorticoids explain many of the effects of exogenous glucocorticoid medication. Glucocorticoids result in decreased muscle mass; skin gets thinner, fragile, and easy to bruise. Glucocorticoids also result in hyperglycemia and lipodystrophy (redistribution of fat in the back of the neck- buffalo hump, face -moon face- and decrease of adipose tissue in extremities). The mechanism of this fat redistribution is unknown.

**Αnti-inflammatory and Immune-suppressive Function**

Glucocorticoids result in a net increase in the WBC count. The increased WBC count, is a combination of a decrease in neutrophil migration in tissues, an inhibition of neutrophil apoptosis, and promote WBC maturation in the Bone Marrow, and release in circulation. With regards to eosinophils, glucocorticoids induce apoptosis and sequestration of eosinophils in the periphery. Inhibition of interleukin-2 (IL-2) signaling (inhibition of T cell proliferation), the impaired release of cells from lymphoid tissues, T lymphocyte apoptosis, inhibition of NF-kB (decrease in cytokine gene expression) and degranulation inhibition of mast cells are effects of glucocorticoids in lymphatic tissue. In the setting of increased glucocorticoid levels in the blood, the macrophages of the reticuloendothelial system fail to recognize and phagocytose antigens (even opsonized antigens). A sequela of these effects is the regression in size of lymphoid tissue (thymus, spleen and lymph nodes.)

**Neurologic Effects**

Several individuals who present with hypercortisolemia ( by receiving exogenous doses of glucocorticoids or suffer from Cushing syndrome) may present with depression. This effect of hypercortisolemia, a possible result of glucocorticoid-induced neuronal excitation, may have a role in the pathogenesis of the major depressive disorder. Affected hypercortisolemic patients present with difficulty falling asleep, a decrease in REM sleep latency, and slow-wave sleep. Also, alterations in electroencephalogram patterns are frequent in these individuals. Conversely, cortisol insufficiency is associated with an inability to perform tasks requiring mental concentration.

HPA axis feedback control regulates levels of endogenously produced glucocorticoids and prevents such drastic effects in the bodily functions. Chronic exogenous glucocorticoid administration has such detrimental effects.