**Intravenous Anesthetics**

General anesthesia is most commonly achieved via IV sedatives and analgesics induction, followed by volatile anesthetics maintenance.  Patients better tolerate intravenous (IV) induction, but inhalational induction is often used in children or where IV access is problematic.  All IV anesthetics can produce rapid unconsciousness depending on dosage and rate of administration.  Redistribution from the brain to muscle and adipose tissue and metabolism leads to awakening.  Propofol is a phenol agent with rapid onset and a short duration of action and can be used for induction and maintenance of anesthesia.  An induction dose can cause profound respiratory depression. However, Propofol offers the advantage of effortless awakening with minimal residual sedation, even with a prolonged infusion.

Additionally, it has antiemetic properties making it popular for outpatient procedures.  Etomidate is an IV anesthetic related to the antifungal drug ketoconazole.  Etomidate is usually limited to induction; repeated doses or infusions should not be used.  Pain and phlebitis are common side effects that can be reduced with prior IV lidocaine injection.  The risk of nausea or vomiting makes etomidate a less ideal drug for use in an ambulatory setting.  Ketamine is a dissociative anesthetic that distorts the perception of sight and sounds and produces feelings of detachment from the environment and self.  Unique among IV anesthetics, ketamine produces intense analgesia. Significant side effects of ketamine include increased secretions, the risk of laryngospasm, and hallucinations.  Dexmedetomidine is a selective alpha-2 receptor agonist with sedative, sympatholytic, and analgesic properties.  The advantages of dexmedetomidine include better patient tolerance, hemodynamic stability, and preservation of the patent airway.  These qualities make it a preferred agent for conscious fiberoptic intubation.

**Inhalational Anesthetics**

Inhalational anesthetics are liquids at ambient temperature and pressure.  These liquids are transformed by vaporization into gas for rapid absorption and elimination by the pulmonary circulation.  These medications are absorbed in the alveoli, and the anesthetic concentration in the brain is directly related to alveolar concentration.  Inhalational agents are commonly used for the maintenance of anesthesia.  A key measure of these medications is the minimal alveolar concentration (MAC), which is the concentration that will prevent movement in 50% of patients in response to a painful stimulus like a surgical incision.  Importantly, nitrous oxide MAC is very high (104%), which is unlikely to produce general anesthesia as a single agent.  Nitrous oxide (NO) is an odorless nonhalogenated agent that can be combined with a halogenated anesthetic to hasten induction and emergence.  NO can support combustion, primarily if delivered with a high oxygen concentration; thus should be avoided in laser endoscopy.  Halothane was a commonly used agent historically but has been replaced by other halogenated agents like sevoflurane, which offers smoother mask induction, quicker emergence, and less myocardial depression and arrhythmogenic potential than halothane.  Halothane also carries a risk of allergic hepatitis.  Sevoflurane and desflurane are non-flammable, volatile halogenated agents which are completely fluorinated analogs of isoflurane.  The fluorinated agents produce rapid awakening compared to isoflurane, especially in obese patients following prolonged surgery.  Isoflurane, which contains fluoride, is not completely fluorinated.  Desflurane can notably cause coughing or laryngospasm.  Small concentrations of inhalational agents may severely depress ventilatory response to acute hypoxia, so patients should be closely monitored during transport to the post-anesthetic care unit.  Halogenated volatile anesthetics are potent triggers of malignant hyperthermia (MH) and must be avoided in patients with a personal or family history of MH due to the high risk of morbidity and mortality associated with MH.  Malignant hyperthermia is an inherited genetic condition resulting from an abnormal ryanodine receptor in muscle tissue.  MH is triggered by volatile anesthetics and succinylcholine and results in muscle rigidity, rhabdomyolysis, high temperatures, acidosis, organ failure, and possibly death.  MH is treated with dantrolene.

**Intravenous Sedatives**

Benzodiazepines are often used as a premedication for general anesthesia or anxiolysis in patients undergoing regional anesthesia.  Midazolam (Versed) is the most commonly used preoperative sedative and can provide anxiolysis, sedation, and amnesia.  Diazepam (Valium) causes veno-irritation on injection in contrast to midazolam which is painless.  Midazolam also offers quicker onset and shorter duration of action than lorazepam.  Lorazepam is a long-acting sedative hypnotic not commonly used for anesthesia. All benzodiazepines suppress the ventilatory response to hypercarbia. Therefore, providers must be careful with patients with COPD or respiratory insufficiency.

**Synthetic Opioids**

Synthetic opioids are particularly potent opioids, which restricts their routine use to the operating room, where ventilatory support is readily available.  As with other opioids, these drugs can cause meiosis, respiratory depression, bradycardia, constipation, and urinary retention. Synthetic opioids include alfentanil, sufentanil, remifentanil, and fentanyl. Semi-synthetic opioids include hydromorphone, hydrocodone, and oxycodone.  Synthetic opioids in IV form produce rapid and intense analgesia.  Fentanyl is one hundred times more, and sufentanil is one thousand times more potent than morphine.  Remifentanil is an expensive, ultrashort-acting opioid resulting in minimal “drug hangover” and no residual analgesia.  These qualities can be beneficial in procedures requiring rapid anesthesia emergence; however, rapid tolerance can occur, resulting in increased opioid requirements postoperatively.  All opioids can cause profound respiratory depression and chest wall rigidity.

**Neuromuscular Blocking Drugs**

Neuromuscular blocking drugs (NMBDs) act on the postsynaptic membrane of nicotinic cholinergic receptors.  These can be subclassified into competitive (non-depolarizing) and non-competitive (depolarizing).  Succinylcholine is a noncompetitive NMBD that binds strongly to the receptor site and mimics the effects of acetylcholine, leading to fasciculations.  It can cause prolonged paralysis or bradycardia if used as an intermittent bolus or infusion.  It carries a risk of malignant hyperthermia in susceptible patients.  It should only be used in pediatrics with a clear indication, as it can cause rhabdomyolysis, hyperkalemia, and cardiac arrest in patients with undiagnosed myopathy.  Succinylcholine reaches a maximum block in less than one minute and has a short duration of action (less than 10 minutes).  This makes succinylcholine a commonly used agent in rapid sequence intubation.  Competitive NMBDs bind loosely with nicotinic cholinergic receptors and compete with acetylcholine at the neuromuscular junction.  These drugs include the following: atracurium, cisatracurium, pancuronium, vecuronium, and rocuronium.  The maximum block is reached in 1 to 3 minutes, and the duration of action is greater than 40 minutes with each of these medications, depending on the dose and drug used.