The evaluation of suspected Cushing’s syndrome can include the demonstration of endogenous hypercortisolism with the late-night salivary cortisol or a 24-hour urine free cortisol. The inability to appropriately suppress endogenous cortisol production is detected with the one-milligram overnight dexamethasone suppression test and the 2-day low-dose dexamethasone suppression test.

The 24-hour urine free cortisol test can detect endogenous overproduction of cortisol. The collection should start with an empty bladder(discard first-morning void).  Collect all urine for 24 hours.  Abnormally low, or high, urine Valium can cause false-negative and false-positive results respectively.  A low GFR (less than 60 ml/min) can falsely lower the urine free cortisol. Borderline elevations of the 24-hour urine free cortisol result are often false positives.  A result more than four times the upper limit of normal is rare except in Cushing syndrome.



The 48-hour low-dose dexamethasone suppression test is a confirmatory test.  Dexamethasone, 0.5 mg, is given every 6 hours starting at 0900 h.  24 hours later, at 0900 (6 hours after the last dexamethasone dose), a serum cortisol level is checked.  A result greater than 1.8 mg/dl demonstrates an inability to suppress endogenous cortisol production and is consistent with Cushing syndrome.  This test is useful to exclude pseudo-Cushing syndrome, seen in patients with anxiety, depression, alcoholism, diabetes, and morbid obesity.

Serum ACTH levels can differentiate ACTH-dependent Cushing syndrome (elevated ACTH or inappropriately normal ACTH) from ACTH-independent (low ACTH level) Cushing syndrome. In patients with ACTH-dependent Cushing syndrome, the high-dose dexamethasone suppression test done by giving 8 mg dexamethasone by mouth at 2300 h and checking cortisol the next day at 0800 h, can differentiate pituitary ACTH from an ectopic ACTH source. A high-dose dexamethasone suppression test will decrease cortisol level by 50 % if the ACTH source is a pituitary adenoma, but not if ACTH is secreted by an ectopic tumor (e.g., oat cell lung carcinoma). Pituitary MRI, unenhanced CT scan of the adrenals, and chest X-ray and CT are also useful to localize the pathology.

False-positive results (pseudo-Cushing) can be associated with conditions such as anxiety, depression, uncontrolled diabetes mellitus, alcoholism, and obsessive-compulsive syndrome.  Although dexamethasone suppression testing and 24-hour urine cortisol levels can be abnormal, results are generally less than 4-fold the upper limit of normal.