**Waveforms**

Figure 1 demonstrates a typical CO2 waveform that might be seen from a mainstream capnograph. Phase A represents the first step of exhalation as gas from the dead space arrives at the detector. This dead space gas contains no CO2 introduced from the lungs and therefore is seen as a flat, zero concentration of CO2 over time. Phase B demonstrates the rapid rise in CO2 as the expiratory phase continues and the concentration of CO2 rises. This phase reflects a mixing of the dead space gas which lacks CO2 and the alveolar gas. Phase C represents the alveolar plateau phase where the concentration of CO2 becomes more constant over time. The rate of rising of this phase can change in certain pathological states, for example with bronchospasm where the rise is steeper. Point D represents the “end-tidal CO2” level, this is the highest concentration of CO2 during the cycle and occurs at the end of expiration. Phase E shows the rapid decline in CO2 concentration that begins with inspiration as external gas is now entering the lungs. This external gas has a low concentration of CO2, and the waveform returns to baseline.

Alterations to this typical waveform can be used as clues that alert the clinician to changes in the status of their patient. Hyperventilation typically produces a pattern of increased respiratory frequency associated with a depressed waveform. Hypoventilation is known to occur in at least 2 common types. Bradypnea hypoventilation is caused by a decreased respiratory rate and produces a waveform pattern with low respiratory frequency and elevated ETCO2. Hypopneic hypoventilation, in contrast, reveals a decreased ETCO2 and is caused by the patient taking shallower breaths than normal. Although these are both forms of hypoventilation, one results in an elevation of ETCO2 and the other causes a decrease in ETCO2.