Rapidly progressive glomerulonephritis is very rare worldwide. The incidence in the United States of America is around 7 cases per 1 million person-years, while it is 2 cases per 1 million person-years reported in the United Kingdom. There are other reported clusters all over the world, suggesting a possible environmental influence on the pathogenesis.

It is more common among the white population, and some reported incidences in the Asian population. It is relatively uncommon in African Americans.

The male-to-female ratio in most of the studies is approximately 1:1. The disease represents a bimodal distribution related to the mean age for clinical manifestation. In most of the series, the mean age is around 30 years and the second peak in the late sixty to seventies. But the prevalence has been reported from the age group 2 years to 92 years, although it is very rare in the pediatric population.

For anti-glomerular basement membrane (GBM) disease: 10 to 15% of all diffuse crescentic glomerulonephritis, with an incidence of 0.5-0.9/million/year, mainly seen in white patients. It has a slight male predominance M: F 3:2 and has a bimodal distribution, and the mean age is around 30 years and the second peak in the late sixty to seventies.

Immune complex glomerulonephritis comprises 25 to 30% of all cases of rapid progressive glomerulonephritis.

Pauci-immune disorder: most common type of crescentic glomerulonephritis 65 to 70%, mainly white patients, with peak age 60 to 85 years, the majority of patients have anti neutrophilic antibody ANCA positive.

The cause of mortality in RPGN is usually pulmonary involvement in ANCA-associated disease. The younger population is more associated with this kind of presentation, but once immunosuppressive treatment started, the infection is the commonest cause for mortality.

RPGN is a very rare cause of end-stage kidney disease (ESKD) in various case studies.