Differential diagnosis of spinocerebellar ataxia is complex due to its wide range of clinical presentations.

**Nongenetic Ataxia**

One of the most distinctive features of SCA is ataxia. Ataxia can be caused by diverse etiologies, such as Wilson disease, Vitamin B12 deficiency, hypothyroidism, radiation exposure, Arnold-Chiari malformation, alcohol use disorder, metastatic tumors, paraneoplastic diseases, several enzyme deficiencies, etc. Further evaluation for cancer, endocrine dysfunction, metabolic derangements, nutritional deficits, toxins, and multisystem involvement is essential to rule out the diseases.

**Drug-induced Movement Disorder**

Neuroleptic drug-induced dystonia (blepharospasm, torticollis) may be confused with dystonia associated with SCA. Benzodiazepines, diphenhydramines, dopamine antagonists, etc. are a few examples of these drugs that induce dystonia as their side effects.

**Acute Viral Cerebellitis and Postinfectious Ataxia**

Viral infection (Epstein-Barr virus, coxsackievirus) resulting in cerebellitis and several bacterial infections affecting cerebellum such as Lyme disease, syphilis, legionella though rare, may lead to cerebellar ataxia.

**Focal Ataxia**

Vascular insults such as infarction, hemorrhage, subdural hematoma culminate ipsilateral focal cerebellar ataxia along with other relevant symptoms.

**Other Autosomal Recessive Ataxias**

Clinically ataxia is the dominant sign, whether it is autosomal recessive or autosomal dominant. Friedreich's ataxia, mitochondrial ataxia, and ataxia-telangiectasia are the main recessive ataxias.  It is difficult to distinguish recessive ataxia from SCA clinically since most of the clinical signs and symptoms are similar and overlapping, which necessitates the genetic testing for differentiation.

**Dentatorubral Pallidoluysian Atrophy**

It has variable manifestation such as progressive ataxia, dystonia, myoclonus, choreoathetosis, seizures, dystonia, etc. which are similar to SCA. It also involves CAG triplet repeat anticipation.

**Fragile X Associated Tremor Ataxia Syndrome**

It mainly occurs in older age groups and caused by the expansion of GCC repeat in the FMR1 gene. Besides tremor-ataxia, other specific signs present in this syndrome are a premature ovarian failure, which is not present in SCAs.

**Gerstmann-Straussler-Schenker Syndrome**

It is a group of prion diseases, presents with the ataxia mimic with SCA. It is differentiated by the presence of pathologic prion-protein containing amyloid plaques.

**Episodic Ataxia**

Type 1 and type 2 episodic ataxias are dominantly inherited disorders, which usually precipitated by certain stimulants such as exercise or the sudden change in posture.

**Chorea**

Huntington chorea, Sydenham chorea, chorea acanthosis are associated with motor, oculomotor, cognitive disorders, and dystonia like in SCA.

**Immune-mediated Ataxia**

It is a group of rare diseases that manifest cerebellar ataxia. In these diseases, autoantibodies are found in serum. Some of the diseases include gluten ataxia, Hashimoto encephalopathy, multiple sclerosis, etc.