The enteric nervous system (ENS), which allows for intrinsic innervation of the gastrointestinal tract derives from neural crest cells. The enteric nervous system has two ganglion plexus layers: the myenteric plexus, which occupies a position between the circular and longitudinal muscles and the submucosal plexus. The development of the ENS begins at week four of development when neural crest cells develop in the foregut. These cells then migrate distally and reach the hindgut around week seven. Smooth muscle in the gastrointestinal tract also matured in a proximal to distal fashion starting at week eight and concluding around week eleven. Interstitial cells of Cajal, which serve as the pacemaker cells of the ENS, are found in the bowel wall by eleven weeks.

The gastrointestinal epithelium is also changing during this time from simple epithelium to a thick, pseudostratified epithelium that nearly occludes the lumen. The epithelium then becomes stratified and secondary lumina for throughout the epithelium. These secondary lumina fuse to form a continuous lumen creating a patent gastrointestinal tract, and the epithelium reorganizes into the simple columnar epithelium. Villi also begin to form from mesenchyme that pushes through pushes into the epithelium. The development of crypts, which are the site of stem cells, Paneth cells, and goblet cells, follows villi formation when endoderm invaginates into the mesodermal layer.

Lgr5 + stem cells (leucine-rich repeat-containing G-protein coupled receptor 5) develop during the growth of intestinal villi and crypts and are essential for the biochemical balance of the intestine. These stem cells are also present in the formed intestine.