At a cellular level, the distribution of the various fluid compartments in the body is paramount for the maintenance of health, function, and survival. For the average 70 kg man, 60% of the total body weight is comprised of water, equaling 42L. The body's fluid separates into two main compartments: Intracellular fluid volume (ICFV) and extracellular fluid volume (ECFV).

- Of the 42L of water found in the body, two-thirds of it is within the intracellular fluid (ICF) space, which equates to 28L.

- The ECFV is comprised of two spaces: The interstitial fluid volume (ISFV) and the plasma volume (PV). One-third of the total body water is the ECFV, which is equivalent to 14L. Out of the extracellular fluid volume, 75% or 10.5L of the volume is present in the interstitial space, and 25% of that water is in the plasma, which is equivalent to 3.5L.

Each space works in unison with each other and has different functions paramount for normal physiological function.

- The intracellular fluid is comprised of at least ten separate minuscule cellular packages. For the sake of simplicity and to make the analysis of the intracellular space viable, the concept of a united intracellular “compartment” has been created as these collections have important unifying similarities such as location, composition, and behavior, which provides practical utility in the study of physiology.

- The interstitial fluid consists of fluid, which lies in the space between and around bodily tissue. Although technically a “virtual” space, the interstitial fluid bathes all the cells in the body and links between intracellular fluid and the intravascular compartment. ISF contains nutrients, oxygen, waste, chemical messengers, and contains a small amount of protein. The ISF also contains the lymphatic system, which returns protein as well as excess ISF into the circulation.

- Plasma is the only fluid compartment that exists as a real fluid collection all in one space. It differs from the interstitial fluid by its higher protein content and its function in transportation. Plasma is a component of blood and is said to be the “interstitial fluid of the blood” as it bathes the suspended red and white cells, which also reside in the blood.