Tuberculosis has a global distribution, and over two billion people (around 30% of the world's population) are suspected to be infected with M. tuberculosis. In 2003, the global incidence of tuberculosis reached its peak but had been declining slowly ever since. Most new cases of the disease in 2016 were reported from Asia (around 45%), followed by Africa (around 25%). The WHO reported in 2016 that approximately 10.4 million people became infected with tuberculosis, of which approximately 1.7 million died.

Although present globally, the epidemiology of tuberculosis varies significantly depending on the region.

- India, sub-Saharan Africa, Micronesia, and the islands of Southeast Asia had the highest rates (100 per 100,000 people or higher)

- China, Eastern Europe, Central, and South America, and northern Africa had intermediate rates (26 to 100 cases per 100,000 people)

- The United States, Canada, Japan, Western Europe, and Australia recorded the lowest rates (less than 25 cases per 100,000 people)

Although about 90% to 95% of the people infected with M. tuberculosis do not develop the active disease and remain asymptomatic, around 5% to 10% of those infected develop the disease. In 2012, this amounted to around 8.6 million cases of active tuberculosis worldwide. In the United States, tuberculosis is commonly seen among the immigrant population. Whereas infections with nontuberculous mycobacteria are not uncommon in the US, especially among the susceptible and immunocompromised patients, many times the clinical differentiation among M. tuberculosis and nontuberculous mycobacterium (NTM) becomes challenging as they possess similar clinical and pathophysiologic mechanisms. Nevertheless, it is important to distinguish among tuberculosis, and nontuberculous mycobacteria as the management is drastically different for both

Young adults have the highest rates of active tuberculosis globally, but in developed countries, older individuals experience the highest rates of disease. Adults of all age groups are at risk of progressing to active disease. Risk factors in contracting active disease include

- Coinfection with HIV is 20 to 30 times more likely to develop active tuberculosis.

- Presence of other immunocompromised states, including immunosuppressive agents such as long-term corticosteroids and anti-TNF medications.

- Chronic lung diseases.

- Use of tobacco products.

- Malnutrition indicates a higher risk of progressing to active disease, making tuberculosis one of the major illnesses of poverty.

- Diabetes also has an increased risk of progressing to active tuberculosis and experience worse treatment outcomes.

- The use of alcohol (greater than 40 g per day).

- Intravenous drug abuse.

- Indoor pollution.

- Silicosis

- End-stage renal disease.

- Intestinal bypass surgery or gastrectomy.

- Chronic malabsorption syndromes.