Evaluation of a patient with suspected bowel perforation must focus on a thorough history and physical exam. Laboratory and radiographic workup should mimic that of any patient presenting with abdominal pain. Labs may include a complete blood count, basic metabolic panel, liver function tests, lipase, amylase, and inflammatory markers such as C-reactive protein. However, common findings such as a leukocytosis or elevated amylase or elevated CRP level are non-specific for diagnostic purposes.

Upright chest radiography (50% to 70% sensitive) can help detect free intraperitoneal air below the diaphragm suggestive of bowel perforation. The likelihood of diagnosing free air is higher if the patient has been sitting upright for at least 15 minutes prior to the film. Lateral decubitus films can be used if the patient is unable to sit upright.

Up to 40 percent of patients will demonstrate greater than 2 cm of free gas at 24 hours post laparoscopy, without any clinical evidence of bowel perforation. After laparotomy, however, free intra-abdominal gas often may be present for a longer duration postoperatively (up to one week), but the volume should be gradually decreased.

Computer tomography (CT) scan is the modality of choice for not only diagnosing free air but also for localization of the site of perforation. A CT scan can also help to determine if the area has spontaneously walled off if there has been a progression to abscess formation or if there is an inflammatory involvement of surrounding structures.

Ultrasound has been used to localize gas collections suggestive of perforation. However, this modality is especially dependent on the experience level of the operator.

Surgical consultation should be pursued early in any patient with abdominal pain and signs of clinical deterioration.