Vitamin D insufficiency (level between 20 and 29.9 ng/mL) and deficiency (a level below 20 ng/mL) are widespread worldwide. Spreading awareness among healthcare professionals regarding the importance of regular vitamin D level monitoring as well as patient education about vitamin D is crucial. Groups that have been shown to have the highest prevalence of vitamin D deficiency include African Americans (82.1%), Hispanics (62.9%), obese adults, pregnant women, and children between 1 and 11 years of age.

Adequate supplementation of vitamin D to children is especially important, not only to prevent rickets and osteomalacia but also because there has been growing evidence that vitamin D deficiency has links to chronic diseases in adulthood such as coronary artery disease, hypertension, diabetes, and cancer.

Even though it is a vitamin and available as a supplement, cholecalciferol use and dosing benefit greatly from the efforts of an interprofessional healthcare team approach; the clinician will be responsible for prescribing or recommending the drug, based on testing or clinical signs/patient history. Patients may not be aware of the various forms of vitamin D, and as a result, either over or underdose because of this knowledge gap, so the pharmacist should help guide them in making a selection in tandem with the wishes of the treating clinician. Nursing can perform a follow-up and assess patient compliance and therapeutic effectiveness. All team members need to coordinate their efforts to optimize patient outcomes with cholecalciferol therapy. [Level 5]