Neuropsychological evaluations require the use of standardized instruments to assess cognitive functions, behavior, social-emotional functioning (i.e., mood, personality), and in certain cases, adaptive functioning and academic achievement. More specifically, cognitive functions can be organized into specific major domains such as intelligence, attention/concentration, learning and memory, language, visuospatial and perceptual functions, executive functions, psychomotor speed, and sensory-motor functions. Given the complex nature of cognition, most standard test instruments measure more than one functional domain, though neuropsychologists have methods of differentiating strengths and weaknesses. Many neurologic and psychiatric disorders have been empirically shown to have specific patterns of dysfunction. Though more common with pediatric evaluation, adult evaluations may also require assessment of academic achievement skills in addition to cognitive and social-emotional functioning. The neuropsychological battery is typically chosen based on the referral question(s) and the suspected condition or conditions that need to be ruled out. An important part of neuropsychological evaluations is the use of Performance Validity Tests (PVTs) and Symptom Validity Tests (SVTs) in order to measure for the deleterious effects of suboptimal effort, to feign, and malingering, all of which can impact the outcome of exam results and interpretation. PVTs and SVTs are used in both pediatric and adult evaluations, even when there is no initial suspicion of possible exaggeration or concern for the fabrication of cognitive dysfunction.

Comprehensive assessment typically begins with a detailed medical record review, including medical and psychiatric history, medications, laboratory results, and neuroimaging reports, and in-depth clinical interviews. The clinical interview includes behavioral observations and may last one to two hours. A wide variety of neuropsychological test instruments (primarily paper-pencil tests) are then administered; most are done sitting at a table in an outpatient clinic or private office or bedside in a hospital. Evaluations can vary from less than one hour to 6 to 8 or more hours of direct face-to-face examination, depending on the information sought and the patient’s stamina and motivation. In general, pediatric and more comprehensive adult evaluations are longer and are usually performed on an outpatient basis.

The neuropsychological evaluation is tailored to the needs of the individual patient. The neuropsychologist selects, administers, and interprets the particular battery of tests that will yield the most comprehensive understanding of an individual's strengths and weaknesses and help to answer the referral question(s). Following the explanation of the primary problem areas and diagnosis, the neuropsychologist then provides tailored recommendations for the patient. Test batteries can be either "flexible" or "fixed." Flexible test batteries are more common and may revolve around a core set of tests with additional tests employed, as needed to address specific issues. A flexible battery approach permits test selection on a case-by-case basis. However, some clinical neuropsychologists utilize a fixed battery approach, such as the Halstead-Reitan Battery (HRB) or the Luria-Nebraska Neuropsychological Battery (LNNB), although this is less common.

Tests are administered in a standardized manner (meaning each test is administered according to the methods outlined in the respective test manuals for every patient), and scores are interpreted by comparing the patient’s scores to an appropriate normative group. Depending on the test, norms should be selected to match the patient's gender, age, education, and ethnicity. The reader should note that neuropsychological evaluations are thorough examinations with multiple components and involve much more than the administration of a few tests. A neuropsychological evaluation is not limited to testing but also involves, as mentioned above, a clinical interview, review of medical records, testing current cognitive and academic abilities, tests of social-emotional functioning and personality, adaptive functioning, estimates of premorbid functioning, behavioral observations, and integration of all these components. In addition, the clinician may also need to obtain educational and employment records and conduct collateral interviews with family members.