There is significant intraindividual variability in CD4 count measurement. In a pre-ART (antiretroviral therapy) study, researchers found the intraindividual coefficient variation in 1020 untreated HIV patients to be at 25% on average. This variability was found even in healthy adult subjects. Several factors contribute to this variability. Any factors that lead to an increase or decrease in WBC count may cause changes to the measured absolute CD4 count. These factors include infection, medications, or other chronic conditions. Leukocytosis may increase the absolute CD4 count, while leukopenia may result in a decreased count. Patients with a history of splenectomy tend to have higher absolute CD4 cell counts, while patients with advanced liver disease and splenomegaly tend to have lower counts, which may be related to splenic sequestration. In these cases, the CD4 percentage usually has less variation. Therefore, any discordant changes between the absolute CD4 count and CD4 cell percentage should lead the clinician to investigate for possible factors that may be causing the changes, and caution should be used in CD4 count interpretation since it may not truly reflect the patient’s immunologic status.

Certain viral and bacterial infections have correlations with a mild decrease in CD4 cell count. These have been documented in viral infections such as Ebstein Barr Virus (EBV), cytomegalovirus (CMV), and HTLV-1 and bacterial infections such as tuberculosis. Patients with Hepatitis C virus (HCV) cirrhosis tend to have lower CD4 cell counts, and HIV patients with HCV co-infection seem to have reduced immune recovery upon initiation of antiretroviral therapy.