# Continuing Education Activity

Cushing disease is an endocrine disorder characterized by excessive adrenocorticotropic hormone (ACTH) production by the anterior pituitary, leading to the release of an excess of cortisol from the adrenal glands. This activity explains the evaluation and treatment of Cushing disease as well as the interprofessional team's role in managing patients with this condition.

**Objectives:**
- Summarize the etiology of Cushing disease.
- Describe the actions of ACTH in the pathophysiology of Cushing disease.
- Review the physical exam findings associated with Cushing disease.
- Outline some interprofessional team strategies that can improve increase collaborative care and improve patient outcomes.

# Introduction

Cushing disease is an endocrine disorder characterized by increased adrenocorticotropic hormone (ACTH) production from the anterior pituitary, leading to excess cortisol release from the adrenal glands.

A key feature is that many patients with Cushing disease do not present with bitemporal hemianopsia, and the reason is that most lesions are pituitary microadenomas (less than 10mm size).

# Etiology

Patients with Cushing disease almost always have a pituitary adenoma, often not evident by imaging. However, rare cases may result from diffuse corticotroph cell hyperplasia, even in the absence of ectopic secretion of corticotropin-releasing hormone (CRH). The tumors are usually microadenomas (less than 10 mm in size); only about 5 to 10 percent are macroadenomas. Macroadenomas are more likely to produce abnormally high ACTH concentrations when compared to microadenomas (83 versus 45 percent).

# Epidemiology

Cushing disease is the second most commonly seen cause of Cushing syndrome, the first cause being exogenous use of steroids. The average incidence of new cases is about 2.4 cases per million people per year.

# Pathophysiology

In Cushing disease the frequency of ACTH production remains the same, but the normal circadian rhythm is lost. The increased plasma ACTH causes bilateral adrenal hyperplasia and a consequent increase in the production of cortisol. Therefore, the normal circadian rhythm of cortisol is also lost.

Cortisol functions primarily as a glucocorticoid; however, in high concentrations, cortisol can also exhibit mineralocorticoid activity, leading to hypertension and hypokalemia through the renin-angiotensin-aldosterone system (RAAS).

# Histopathology

Histologically, the pituitary adenomas that secrete ACTH are usually basophilic on hematoxylin & eosin (H&E) staining and are strongly positive with periodic acid-Schiff (PAS) staining. The cytoplasm is granular, and the nucleus is large, with a prominent nucleolus and coarse chromatin.

# History and Physical

Patients with hypercortisolism present with weight gain (50%), hypertension, easy bruising, striae, acne, flushing, poor wound healing, lower limb edema, fatigue, impaired glucose tolerance, osteoporosis, hyperpigmentation of the skin, mood and memory changes, amenorrhea, hirsutism, decreased sexual drive, or frequent infections. Clinical manifestations vary widely among patients; thus, a high index of clinical suspicion must be maintained to diagnose this correctly.

Although uncommon, large pituitary tumors (macroadenomas) can also present with mass effects on surrounding structures.

# Evaluation

On presentation, more than half of the patients with Cushing disease have a microadenoma with a diameter of less than 5 mm.

Biochemical diagnostic tests to confirm hypercortisolism include salivary and blood serum cortisol testing, 24-hour urinary-free cortisol testing, and low-dose overnight dexamethasone suppression testing.

The low-dose dexamethasone, 1 or 2mg, suppression tests (DSTs) are standard screening tests to differentiate patients with CS of any cause from patients who do not have Cushing Syndrome (CS).

The overnight 1 mg DST consists of administering 1 mg of dexamethasone at 11 PM to midnight and measuring the serum cortisol at 8 AM the next morning. A cortisol level of less than 1.8 mcg/dL (or 50 nmol/L) is considered a normal response.

In 2 mg DST, dexamethasone 0.5 mg is administered by mouth at six-hour intervals for 48 hours. The serum cortisol level is measured 6 hours after the last dose of dexamethasone is given. Like 1 mg DST, a cortisol level of less than 1.8 mcg/dL is considered a normal response. This test's sensitivity and specificity are 100% and 88%, respectively, with a positive predictive value of 92% and a negative predictive value of 89%.

Two or more positive initial screening tests in a patient with a high pretest probability of Cushing disease confirm the biochemical diagnosis of Cushing syndrome.

For the high-dose 48-hour dexamethasone suppression test, a plasma cortisol level above 1.8 mcg/dL (measured 48-hours after either administration of dexamethasone 2 mg by mouth every 6 hours for 48 hours, or 48-hours after one dose of 8 mg is given) is indicative of Cushing disease.

Pituitary MRI may show the ACTH secreting tumor if present. However, MRI fails to detect a tumor in 40% of patients with Cushing disease. The average size of the tumor that was detected on MRI was about 6 mm.

The most accurate test used to differentiate a pituitary adenoma from ectopic or adrenal Cushing syndrome is inferior petrosal sinus sampling.

# Treatment / Management

If a primary ACTH secreting tumor is found, first-line treatment is surgical resection of the adenoma via trans-sphenoidal surgery (TSS).

Alternatively, pituitary radiation therapy can be used after an unsuccessful TSS.

Lastly, bilateral adrenalectomy can be used to provide an immediate reduction of cortisol levels in patients with Cushing disease. However, these patients will then require lifelong administration of glucocorticoid and mineralocorticoid replacement therapy.

Post-treatment testing with 24-hour urine and blood samples are used to detect the level of cortisol.

In cases of recurrent or remnant Cushing disease pharmacological therapy can control the associated hormonal imbalances.

Centrally acting agents include pasireotide and cabergoline that have been shown to control Cushing disease in 35-40% of the cases.

Adrenal steroidogenesis inhibitors include ketoconazole, metyrapone, etomidate, mitotane, and osilodrostat. Ketoconazole that is the most commonly prescribed medication for Cushing has shown lab normalization in over 60% of cases that is lasting over 24 months. Its use is limited by hepatotoxicity that presents in 10-20% of the treated patients but it is easily reversible after reducing the dose or stopping the medication in the majority of those patients.

Lastly, mifepristone can be used as a glucocorticoid-receptor blocker. It has shown to normalize several symptoms and signs of Cushing disease, including the hyperglycemia, in over 60% of patient in recent studies. The cortisol levels remail high and so this test cannot be used to monitor its adrenal effect, but better the use of clinical presentation is needed for diagnosis adrenal insufficiency and treat the patients with appropriate cortisol replacement therapy. This medication also caused irregular vaginal bleeding in female patients due to the anti-progesterone effect. Close monitoring of other hormone levels, like the thyroid also needs to be done regularly.

Other medications, like retinoic acid and silibinin, have shown some promising results but its use is limited by high cost and side effects, but more studies are conducted and further results are expected in the near future.

# Differential Diagnosis

The differential diagnosis for Cushing disease includes Cushing syndrome, ectopic ACTH secretion, exogenous corticosteroid use, pseudo-Cushing syndrome, or physiologic hypercortisolism.

# Prognosis

Without treatment, Cushing disease is ultimately fatal. The mortality is due to the excess production of glucocorticoids, which can lead to many medical problems, including cardiovascular problems and impairment in immune function.

# Complications

Complications of untreated Cushing disease include:

- Osteoporosis, which can lead to pathological fractures, often appearing in the foot bones and ribs.

- Hypertension

- Type 2 diabetes mellitus

- Infections resulting from an impaired immune response

- Reduced muscle mass

- Depression and other psychological problems

# Deterrence and Patient Education

Patients need to understand that often Cushing disease is secondary to another pathophysiology and that they must comply with the treatment regimen for both conditions to help alleviate their disease.

# Pearls and Other Issues

Medical therapy has been gaining popularity in the treatment of pituitary tumors quite recently. Although surgery is still considered the first-line treatment, the variety of medications studied in Cushing disease offer further treatment options for the patients who are not good surgical candidates or they have remnant disease after surgery.

# Enhancing Healthcare Team Outcomes

Cushing disease is a rare pituitary gland disorder best managed by an interprofessional team that includes a neurosurgeon, radiation consultant, endocrinologist, radiologist, primary care provider, nursing staff, internist, and pharmacist. These patients are prone to several complications, including peptic ulcer disease, weight gain, osteoporosis, diabetes, depressed immune system, and hypertension. Hence they have to be closely monitored. The interprofessional approach will drive improved outcomes by connecting aspects of all pathophysiology present with valuable input from all disciplines. [Level 5]

Large pituitary lesions usually require resection, but small lesions may be treated with medications. These patients need lifelong follow-up with regular monitoring of cortisol levels. Recurrence of disease is not uncommon, and too much or too little cortisol can be life-threatening.

The prognosis for a lot of patients may be guarded.