Bursitis can be treated through many interventions including rest, stretching and physical therapy, Non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs such as ibuprofen, aspirin, naproxen, COX-2 inhibitors, topical medications such as lidocaine patches, NSAIDs, or analgesics, aspiration to drain the excess fluid to relieve bursa pressure, corticosteroid injections, antibiotics, RICE: rest, ice, compression, elevation, and in some cases- surgery.

Sub-acromial bursitis is a common diagnosis in patients presenting with shoulder pain, particularly in a young and active population. Often their symptoms are exaggerated with over-head activities. A thorough clinical examination supported with appropriate imaging is vital in confirming the diagnosis and drawing up a treatment plan. The vast majority of patients notice improvement with activity modifications, rest, analgesics, and appropriate physiotherapy. Referral to specialists for surgical intervention is the recommended next step when these modalities fail.

Clinicians can adequately manage trochanteric bursitis with anti-inflammatory medications, rest, and physiotherapy. Ultrasound-guided steroid injections are proven to provide good relief in a few patients while there is increasing evidence for injecting platelet-rich plasma.

Additionally, steroid injections require precise pre-procedural evaluation, technique, and post-procedural guidance. The research completed on these injections proves the effectiveness of the current methods to treat pathological bursae in most anatomic locations.

The steroids used during ultrasound-guided injections consist of different concentrations and properties, so it is important to know which steroids to use in different anatomical locations. The common steroids used include methylprednisone, betamethasone, or triamcinolone.

To confirm the correct anatomical location, a small amount of lidocaine may be injected into the surrounding areas of the bursa prior to the steroid injection.

Although ultrasound-guided bursal injections are difficult to execute, these procedures establish more accurate results compared to injections into bursae by palpation of certain body sites.