Treatment of EIMs of IBD requires a multidisciplinary approach and comprises medical treatment and lifestyle modifications. IBD treatment generally results in the resolution of the EIMs that are associated with intestinal-IBD activity. The first step in the management of mild IBD is to reduce inflammation via anti-inflammatory drugs. These include corticosteroids and aminosalicylates. Immunosuppressant drugs are used for moderate disease activity unresponsive to anti-inflammatory medication. These include methotrexate, azathioprine, and mercaptopurine that suppress the immune system and help resolve the inflammatory response towards the different tissues affected in IBD. Severe IBD requires treatment with newer drug treatments called biological agents such as anti-tumor necrosis factor agents. Antibiotics like metronidazole and ciprofloxacin are used for the treatment of secondary infectious complications of IBD. Vitamin supplements, anti-diarrheal medication, and analgesics are prescribed for symptomatic relief of symptoms.

EIMs independent of IBD activity require specific treatment to improve quality of life and reduce morbidity and mortality. Musculoskeletal EIMs of IBD are treated with a combination of physiotherapy, analgesic, and anti-inflammatory medication such as nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs and systemic corticosteroids. Cutaneous manifestations like pyoderma gangrenosum require topical corticosteroid therapy with wound care. Ocular manifestations, including scleritis and uveitis, require treatment with topical corticosteroids. Currently, there is no treatment available for the resolution of PSC. Hence patients with progressive disease course eventually require hepatic transplantation.

Lifestyle modifications like smoking cessation, physical activity, adequate hydration, stress management, and avoiding dairy products improve IBD symptoms. Patients are encouraged to join IBD support groups and seek a therapist as IBD is a chronic disease having long-term physical and mental effects. Routine colonoscopy surveillance is done due to the risk of colon carcinoma associated with IBD.