**Adrenal Hypoplasia Clinical Presentation**

**Adrenal Insufficiency**

The hallmark of adrenal hypoplasia is adrenal insufficiency, which is a decrease in adrenal gland function. Patients often present in infancy or childhood, but there are reports of adult-onset cases. Females are mostly carriers and are generally unaffected. Undiagnosed patients usually present with adrenal crisis, but adrenal crisis can also occur in patients who are taking glucocorticoid replacement therapy. Patients usually present early in infancy or childhood with the salt-wasting crisis. Non-specific symptoms of adrenal insufficiency like feeling unwell, nausea, vomiting, lethargy, fatigue, anorexia, feeding difficulties, poor weight gain, and abdominal pain are present early in life or slightly later. The patient may have a fever, convulsions, and altered consciousness. These varied symptoms can cause misdiagnosis in these children. There is hypoglycemia, hyperkalemia, hyponatremia, and metabolic acidosis. Patients have associated mineralocorticoid deficiency and can present with hypotension, hypovolaemia, dehydration, and shock.

**Hypogonadotropic Hypogonadism**

Apart from adrenal insufficiency, affected males can lack male sex hormones, which can lead to hypogonadotropic hypogonadism, underdeveloped reproductive tissues, cryptorchidism, and infertility (azoospermia). Patients may have central precocious puberty.****

- Short height can occur due to associated growth hormone deficiency.

- Adrenal hypoplasia can rarely present as respiratory symptoms, such as chronic respiratory distress.

- Triple-A syndrome causes esophageal achalasia, alacrima (absence of tears), and various types of central, peripheral, and autonomic neurological defects.

- Other unusual presentations include excessive pigmentation, hearing loss, and monosomy.

- Various other rare syndromes and mutations that can cause adrenal hypoplasia/aplasia can present with cardiac defects, central nervous system malformations, pulmonary hypoplasia, polydactyly, and other anomalies.