**History**

Heart failure is mainly a clinical diagnosis. It is essential to consider the following during the history and physical.

1. The presentation of heart failure may vary based on each patient. If the patient has a history of heart failure in the past, ask them if this is the same presentation as when they had previous episodes of heart failure or an acute decompensation.

2. Consider non-cardiac and other causes for the patient's symptoms.  It is important to ensure that there is a broad differential diagnosis and to avoid anchoring bias, premature closer, and diagnostic inertia.

3. Heart failure symptoms:

- Increasing dyspnea (on exertion, on lying flat or at rest, exercise intolerance)

- Increasing leg swelling, ascites, edema

- Increased body weight -ask patients if they have been tracking their weight at home and if it has increased since their symptoms have become worse.

- What are the patient's baseline symptoms, and are the current symptoms worse or similar to when they had previous heart failure exacerbations?

- Palpitations, automatic implantable cardioverter-defibrillator (AICD) shocks (associated with worse prognosis)

- Chest pain, fatigue

- Duration of Illness, recent or frequent hospitalizations for heart failure

- Medications or diet changes

- Anorexia, cachexia, or early satiety (associated with worse prognosis)

- Symptoms of transient ischemic attack (TIA) or thromboembolism (indicate a possible need for anticoagulation)

- Social history and family history (to assess for possible familial cardiomyopathy, alcohol or other cause

- Travel history (exposure risk some tropical diseases)

**Physical Examination**

The physical examination should include the following:

- Vital signs - assess blood pressure, heart rate, temperature, oxygen saturation, and respiratory rate. Vital signs are important in helping develop and refine the differential diagnosis and help the healthcare provider to better tailor the physical examination.

- Check patient weight – The patient's weight and BMI should be checked during each office visit. The information can be used to track response to treatment and the potential progression of heart failure or ADHF.  Losing weight can also be a warning sign of worsening HF.

- Assessment of jugulovenous distension – Jugulovenous distension can be a marker for fluid overload. The patient should be lying at a 45-degree angle in bed to get an accurate assessment.

- Pulse - Assess the regularity and strength of the pulse

- Cardiac Examination

- Extra heart sounds (i.e., S3 is associated with a worse prognosis), murmurs
- Size and location of maximal cardiac impulse (can suggest ventricular enlargement if displaced)
- Presence of right ventricular heave

- Pulmonary Examination - Respiratory rate, rhonchi, rales (note: pleural effusions can mask reduce breath sounds, and rhonchi or rales may be less prominent)

- Abdominal examination - check for ascites, hepatomegaly, hepatojugular reflux

- Lower extremity examination - assess for peripheral edema, the temperature of skin (cool lower extremities may be suggestive of worse cardiac output)