Typically, patients are asymptomatic, and the drusen are noticed incidentally on examination. However, up to 10% of patients may report transient visual obscurations, and up to 25% may present with visual field defects, including enlarged blind spots.

On physical exam, superficial drusen can be seen without the aid of imaging modalities. The nerve is classically described as having a "lumpy, bumpy" appearance. The drusen appear as round, refractile bodies which may be yellow or white in color and located on the surface of or buried under the nerve. Drusen are most commonly located on the nasal aspect of the disc. Additionally, if there is asymmetric nerve involvement, patients may have an afferent pupillary defect. Spontaneous venous pulsations and tortuous or anomalous vessel branching and caliber can be seen.

In some cases, the irregular border of the nerve secondary to drusen may give the appearance of edema, creating diagnostic confusion. Clinically, true edema from pseudo edema can be distinguished based on the appearance of the nerve. Particular attention should be paid to the disc microvasculature as there will often be peripapillary flame hemorrhages and a reddish hue of the disc in cases of true disc edema. Additionally, in true edema, both retinal vessels and vessels at the disc margin may be obscured, while vessels are clearly visible in pseudo edema. In borderline situations and cases of suspected deeper drusen, further investigation is warranted through other imaging modalities to confirm the presence of drusen.