Eliciting a thorough history can be valuable in the diagnosis of guttate psoriasis. Assessing the presence of risk factors can aid in diagnosing guttate psoriasis. Guttate psoriasis classically follows a preceding streptococcal infection, typically pharyngitis or perianal streptococcus.  The patient should be questioned regarding recent use of TNF- alpha inhibitors, as they have been implicated in guttate psoriasis.

On physical exam, guttate psoriasis manifests as numerous, small scattered papules and plaques. These are often referred to as “drop-like” and typically manifest as 2 to 6 mm papules. These lesions exhibit an isomorphic response or the Koebner phenomenon. The Koebner phenomenon refers to the appearance of lesions in areas of trauma (e.g., excoriations, sunburn, lesions of other eruptions such as Varicella or pityrosporum folliculitis), as wound healing triggers hyperproliferative changes in the skin. Although psoriasis is the prototype of koebnerization, this response can also be seen in pityriasis rubra pilaris, lichen planus, verruca plana (flat warts), lichen nitidus, vitiligo, lichen sclerosus, elastosis perforans serpiginosa, systemic lupus erythematosus, and other dermatological conditions.

In addition to Koebner phenomenon, all variants of psoriasis share certain characteristics that are reflected on histology, for example, erythema (elongated and dilated capillaries on histology), thickness (acanthosis with cellular infiltrates on histology), and silver scale (reflects abnormal keratinization). All lesions of psoriasis exhibit Auspitz sign, or pinpoint bleeding when the surface of a psoriatic lesion is removed. This reflects elongated vessels in the dermal papillae, together with thinning of the epidermis.