# Definition/Introduction

Decorticate posturing is a specific pattern of response shown in neurological and neurosurgical patients in whom the pathological processes have led to intracranial hypertension and already initiated the herniation syndrome. There will be flexor posturing along with internal rotation of the upper limbs with extensor posturing of the lower limbs. The painful stimulation should be given over supra eye-brow region or on other dermatomal distribution of cranial nerves only, to prevent the confounding bias from response seen from the spinal reflexes.

# Issues of Concern

The rubrospinal tract will mediate the flexion attitude of upper limbs and extensor posturing of the lower limbs.

# Clinical Significance

The evidence of decorticate posturing suggests late stage of cerebral herniation and, therefore, of paramount importance for urgent corrective therapeutic intervention to be undertaken in the patient to reverse the herniation syndrome.

**Differential Diagnosis**

- Decerebrate posturing - There will be extensor posturing with internal rotation of both upper and the power limbs.

- Lazarus reflex in brain death patient - There will be flexion and crossing over of the upper limbs over the chest, similar to attitude seen in ancient mummies.

# Nursing, Allied Health, and Interprofessional Team Interventions

It is prudent early recognition of decorticate posturing response in neurological and neurosurgical patients for initiating early corrective interventions to reverse the herniation syndrome and prevent the patient from transitioning into decerebrate posturing and finally into tonsillar herniation.