The treatment of patients with ADPKD includes managing high blood pressure with medications, a low-salt diet, dietary protein restriction, and statins which may reduce disease progression.

Selected patients may receive treatment with a vasopressin receptor antagonist, tolvaptan. Few randomized clinical trials have shown convincing results of tolvaptan in checking the progression of kidney disease in ADPKD.

Targeted therapies for hereditary renal cystic diseases are undergoing extensive clinical studies. Drugs targeting mTOR signaling pathways like rapamycin, by checking cellular proliferation are under their Phase II/III clinical trials. A variety of drugs like methylprednisone, urine alkalinization, lovastatin, epidermal growth factor tyrosine kinase receptor inhibitor and cyclin-dependent kinase inhibitor are undergoing animal studies to assess utility in this group of patients.

For example, combined somatostatin and tolvaptan blocks the effect of cyclic adenosine monophosphate and inhibit fluid secretion and cell proliferation. Triptolide, which affects calcium signaling, also exhibits antiproliferative effects. A number of other agents may prove helpful in halting the progression of autosomal dominant polycystic kidney disease.

Patients with ADPKD who ultimately progress to end-stage renal disease require renal replacement therapy which includes hemodialysis and renal transplantation.

ARPKD: Management depends on the severity of the clinical manifestations and the organs involved; this involves monitoring respiratory function, renal function tests, liver function tests, infant growth evaluation and blood pressure monitoring, and symptomatic treatment. Dual organ transplant (liver and kidney) depending on the severity of portal hypertension and end-stage renal disease has shown promising results in a significant number of cases.

Finally, genetic counseling is of paramount value for both patients and families.