While not highly sensitive or specific, the clinician can perform a physical exam to test for splenomegaly. Laboratory work that can help assess splenic activity is a complete blood count (CBC) complimented by a peripheral blood smear. Abnormalities in quantity or quality of cell types can provide evidence of pathology involving the spleen. In addition to the physical exam and laboratory testing, there is a variety of imaging modalities to visualize the spleen.

A focused assessment with sonography in trauma (FAST) exam uses ultrasound to assess for the presence of fluid where it should not be in trauma evaluation. A FAST exam looks at four windows: pericardial window, Morrison’s pouch (right upper quadrant between liver and right kidney), left upper quadrant (between the spleen and left kidney), and the suprapubic region to look at the bladder and pelvis. The exam is considered positive with fluid in any of these spaces, and combination with hemodynamic instability is an indication for exploratory laparotomy. With positive fluid in the pericardial window, a pericardiocentesis is an appropriate followup.

Computed tomography (CT) and magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) are beneficial tools to visualize and characterize the spleen. Both modalities function to measure the spleen and identify physical abnormalities. While not necessary, the use of contrast can aid in tracing blood flow and help identify any leaks or pathologic fluid collection.

A biopsy of the spleen is rarely necessary secondary to concerns of a risk of bleeding. More often, a blood marrow biopsy is preferable for the evaluation of blood cells for cancer.