Vasogenic cerebral edema, the most common form,  results from the disruption of the blood-brain-barrier.  With the disrupted blood-brain-barrier ions and proteins flow more freely into the extravascular space which causes osmotic draw of fluid into the brain interstitium.  For example, vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF), glutamate, and leukotrienes produced locally increase the permeability of vessels around tumors.

Cellular or cytotoxic edema often results within minutes of the insult/injury and affects glial, neuronal, and endothelial cells within the brain.  In cytotoxic edema, the cells lack hemostatic mechanisms, and primarily sodium enters the cell freely, with the failure of the export mechanism.  Anions then follow, attempting to return neutrality to the cell, resulting in intracellular edema as the cells swell with increased water following the ions into the intracellular compartment.

Interstitial cerebral edema results from the outflow of cerebrospinal fluid from the intraventricular space to the interstitial areas of the brain. Patients with hydrocephalus or meningitis are examples of those affected by this etiology.  The increased pressure, against the cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) and brain, drives fluid into the brain parenchyma.  The fluid accumulates in the extracellular space of mostly the white matter causing the cerebral edema.

Osmotic edema generally stems from derangements affecting osmolarity, such as hyponatremia, diabetic ketoacidosis (DKA), or similar metabolic pathologies.  The cells of the brain pull water from the plasma in these instances, resulting in widespread edema.