Sepsis is a clinical state that falls along a continuum of pathophysiologic states, starting with a systemic inflammatory response syndrome (SIRS) and ending in multiorgan dysfunction syndrome (MODS) before death.

The earliest signs of inflammation are heralded by the following:

- Fever (temperature higher than 38 C or hypothermia (temperature less than 36 C)

- Tachycardia (heart rate more than 90 beats per minute),

- Tachypnea (respiratory rate more than 20 breaths per minute)

- Leukocytosis (WBC greater than 12,000/cu mm) / leukopenia (white blood cells (WBC) less than 4,000/cu mm) with or without bandemia (more than 10%).

The presence of two of these four clinical signs is necessary for the diagnosis of systemic inflammatory response syndrome. After that, systemic inflammatory response syndrome with an infectious source suffices the clinical definition for sepsis.

With the development of hypotension, tissue demands are not adequately met by tissue oxygenation, and the patient is now defined to be in severe sepsis.

When sepsis-induced hypotension remains refractory to initial management with fluid resuscitation, septic shock ensues.

Clinically, patients, have a dynamic precordium with tachycardia and bounding peripheral pulses. They are warm to the touch and have a reduction in capillary refill (flash cap refill). This is described as warm shock. As shock progresses, elevated catecholamine production leads to an increase in peripheral vascular resistance as the body attempts to shunt blood away from non-vital tissues (gastrointestinal (GI) tract, kidneys, muscle, and skin) to the vital tissues (brain and heart). This is described as cold shock. Understanding the pathophysiology and continuum of septic shock is imperative in initiating appropriate treatment measures.

Functionally, septic shock is defined by persistent hypotension despite adequate fluid resuscitation from 60 ml/kg to 80 mL/kg of either crystalloid or colloid fluid. At this point, the initiation of appropriate vasoactive medications such as beta-adrenergic or alpha-adrenergic drugs is of utmost importance. The progression of organ dysfunction despite high-dose vasoactive administration defines the state of multi-organ dysfunction syndrome (MODS) which carries mortality as high as 75%. While the exact circumstances predicting poor prognosis and death have been difficult to determine, immunologic dissonance (exaggerated pro-inflammatory response) versus immunologic paralysis (exaggerated anti-inflammatory response) have been purported to play a role.