The patient is positioned comfortably on the exam table, EKG (electrocardiogram) leads are attached to the chest wall, and a blood pressure cuff is wrapped around the arm. Baseline heart rate, EKG, and blood pressure are recorded before starting the test and then monitored closely during the entire exam.

The scan requires the tagging of the patient's red blood cell (RBC) with the radiotracer (99m-technetium), which could be done in vivo or in vitro and then injecting it (around 20 mCi as per patient's weight) through an intravenous line. After that, the study can proceed using one of three different methods, including first-pass study, gated equilibrium ventriculography, or gated SPECT image acquisition. The EKG gating is done by dividing the cardiac cycle into 16 or 32 frames and using R wave as a trigger to obtain proper sampling. One prerequisite for the EKG gating is less than 10% of premature ventricular contraction at baseline. A variation in the heart rate or rhythm, such as sinus arrhythmia, results in distortion of the data. The exercise scan can be done with a stationary bicycle or a pharmacological agent (dobutamine).

In the first pass study, the gamma camera acquires the imaging of the heart, lung, and great vessels in a rapid sequence during the initial rapid transit of the radioactive bolus with a 30-degree RAO projection.

In a gated equilibrium radionuclide ventriculography, images are taken after the radiotracer achieves a state of equilibrium. It acquires images in three different views, including an anterior view, a left oblique view (at 45 degrees) to visualize the septum, and a left lateral oblique view.  While during exercise, only the left anterior oblique view is obtained at different stages of exercise.

In a gated SPECT acquisition, the structure of interest can be isolated precisely to assess the ventricular segment contractility accurately. It creates long axis, short axis, and three-dimensional volumetric images. The ejection fraction assessed with the SPECT images is more accurate than the planar method due to atrial interference in the planar method, which would underestimate the ejection fraction.

**Qualitative and Quantitative Assessment**

To analyze the data qualitatively and quantitatively, different images, including functional, stroke volume, paradox, and amplitude images, are obtained. In the qualitative assessment, the cinematic display on the screen allows the visual evaluation of the ventricular contractility and wall motion abnormality. While in the quantitative analysis, the computer counts the change in radioactivity in the region of interest (ROI) during a cardiac cycle, which is proportional to the change in the blood volume in that area.  From this, the time-activity curve can be generated to obtain the end-systolic and end-diastolic volume.  The accuracy of calculation depends on the precise selection of the region of interest. Additionally, the regional ejection fraction and contractility undergo an assessment by dividing the ventricle into segments.