Treating hyperhidrosis has become easier for clinicians as more treatment options have become available, and a stepwise approach is often effective. There are many topical and systemic agents available to treat hyperhidrosis.

First-line therapy for hyperhidrosis includes over-the-counter aluminum chloride hexahydrate 20% for 3 to 4 nights, then nightly as needed. Skin irritation can occur, and patients often become intolerant of it in the long term.

Recently topical glycopyrronium tosylate (premoistened cloth containing 2.4% glycopyrronium solution) was approved to treat sweating.

Axillary sweating can be managed with aluminum chloride gel. While it does work, it is a potent irritant.

All topical agents can cause skin sensitization, and some, like tannic acid and potassium permanganate, can also cause skin discoloration. These agents appear to decrease sweating by denaturing keratin and thus occluding the pores of the sweat glands. The duration of the effect is very short.

If a patient does not respond to topical treatment or there are more generalized symptoms, oral anticholinergic medications, including oxybutynin 5 mg to 10 mg per day or topical glycopyrrolate 0.5% to 2.0%, should be considered.

Iontophoresis two to three times weekly and botulinum toxin A injections every 3 to 4 weeks are effective if patients fail topical and oral drug therapy. Iontophoresis is a long-term treatment, and at best, its effects are mild. Many agents can be added to the water, but compliance with this treatment is low.

Botulinum toxin is effective; however, it is expensive, and repeat treatments are required. Some experts recommend botulinum toxin plus lidocaine for injection into the axilla. Botulinum toxin A acts by cleaving the SNAP-25 protein. This prevents the binding and presynaptic fusion of the acetylcholine vesicles with the nerve terminus and thus blocks the release of acetylcholine. It is the most appropriate treatment after failing topical antiperspirants and oral anticholinergics. Decreased perspiration can last from 6 to 24 months. Injections are usually performed in both axillae; however, they also can be useful in the palms and soles. These locations are less practical and will likely require local anesthesia to limit discomfort.

More invasive therapeutic measures are available, including sympathectomy or local excision as a last resort. Many surgical procedures have been developed to manage hyperhidrosis, including sympathectomy, radiofrequency ablation, subcutaneous liposuction, and surgical excision of affected areas. Of all these, sympathectomy appears to be the best treatment that is somewhat permanent. It involves excision of the ganglia (T2-T4) responsible for sweating. Resection of T1 ganglia is done for facial sweating, T2 and T3 for palmar sweating, and T4 for axillary sweating. The procedure can be done thoracoscopically, but complications are common. Compensatory sweating, gustatory sweating, Horner syndrome, pneumothorax, pain, and intercostal neuralgia have all been reported.

If a secondary cause is suspected, treatment of the underlying disorder or discontinuing the suspected medication is recommended in addition to regular therapy.