Heart disease in athletes involves a combination of general treatments and specific treatments. From a lifestyle standpoint, many athletes may be asked to avoid strenuous exercise and other aggravating factors for a brief period. Physical and/or mental stress increases cardiac demand but also may trigger potentially fatal arrhythmias. Upon establishing a long-term treatment regime, there should be a process of shared decision-making in regards to the athlete returning to their sport of choice. The athlete will undergo a phase of risk stratification, and many variables will play a role in determining their risk of sudden death and the appropriate treatment regime. Aside from the athlete's physiology, their specific sport also can significantly affect the long-term risk. Although earlier views in literature were that many forms of heart disease in athletes should end their athletic careers, the literature in 2019 holds the view that many athletes can safely return to their sport of choice if they undergo a correct treatment process.

Medical management generally involves the goal of increasing blood flow and lowering the risk of arrhythmias. Hence, beta-blockers are a commonly used medication in these patients. Calcium channel blockers may also be an option. Surgical and percutaneous choices also exist for certain structural defects, such as surgical septal myomectomy or alcohol septal ablation in HOCM. In congenital arrhythmias, ablation may be performed to eradicate the electrical source of the arrhythmia. When the risk of sudden death is appreciated, an implantable cardioverter-defibrillator (ICD) may be placed in case the patient goes into cardiac arrest. ICD placement has dramatically improved the prognosis in all athletes with congenital heart defects and has even allowed for continued sports participation. The last option in certain defects is a heart transplant.

In all patients affected with congenital heart disease, it is also essential to maintain adequate hydration, electrolyte levels and to follow up with a physician routinely. Unfortunately, a specific diagnosis may warrant abstaining from sports, but this should always be a result of a shared decision-making process between the physician and the patient.