Etiologies of inflammatory arthritis include:

**Infectious or septic arthritis:**Organisms causing infectious arthritis includeStaphylococcus aureus, Streptococcal pneumoniae, Neisseria gonorrhea, anaerobic bacteria, mycobacteria species, brucellosis, Borrelia burgdorferi, sporotrichosis, coccidioidomycosis, viruses (Parvovirus, Enterovirus, and Rubella). Septic arthritis is usually monomicrobial. Polymicrobial infections are usually less common and occur in the setting of penetrating trauma involving joint space. Septic arthritis due to gram-negative bacteria is usually observed in the setting of trauma or intravenous drug abuse.

**Crystalline arthritis:**Crystal-induced arthritis includes gout, pseudogout, and basic calcium phosphate (BCP) disease. Hyperuricemia leading to deposition of monosodium urate crystals in the joint space causes gout. Hyperuricemia is a predisposing factor of gout, although 80% of the hyperuricemic individuals never develop gout. Hyperuricemia can be caused by primary or secondary overproduction or underexcretion of uric acid, an end product of purine metabolism. Pseudogout is caused by synovial inflammation caused by deposited calcium pyrophosphate crystals in the cartilage. Most of the cases of calcium pyrophosphate deposition (CPPD) are idiopathic, but disorders of calcium, phosphorus, or magnesium metabolism, familial chondrocalcinosis, and hemochromatosis can be associated with the illness. Basic calcium phosphate disease is rare and can be seen in association with hypothyroidism and diabetes mellitus.

**Autoimmune inflammatory arthritis:**This is a broad category that can be further divided into several categories:

- Rheumatoid arthritis - seropositive or seronegative.

- Juvenile idiopathic arthritis.

- Seronegative spondyloarthritis - This family of HLA-B27 associated arthropathies includes psoriatic arthritis, ankylosing spondylitis, reactive arthritis, arthritis associated with inflammatory bowel disease, and non-radiographic spondyloarthritis.

- SAPHO syndrome - synovitis, acne, pustulosis, hyperostosis, and osteitis.

- Arthritis associated with underlying connective tissue or autoimmune diseases - arthritis is a common clinical manifestation of several rheumatic and autoimmune diseases such as:

- Systemic lupus erythematosus
- Drug-induced lupus
- Sjogren syndrome
- Mixed connective tissue disease
- Systemic sclerosis
- Inflammatory myopathies
- Behcet's disease
- Vasculitis: Henoch Schnolein Purpura, ANCA-associated vasculitis
- Sarcoidosis
- Relapsing polychondritis

- Arthritis associated with malignancy - Inflammatory arthritis can be a frequent paraneoplastic phenomenon associated with underlying malignancies. 

- Palmar fasciitis and polyarthritis (PFPA) syndrome - frequently associated with ovarian cancer but can be seen in association with any malignancy.