For adults, the procedure is performed in the following steps:

- The patient is placed supine on a bed/gurney, and the head is placed 8-10 inches beyond the edge supported by a head positioner (usually included with a halo application kit).

- The largest circumference of the cranium is measured in the coronal plane, which provides the appropriate halo ring size. This circumference is usually located 0.5 to 1 cm above the ears. Once measured, hold the appropriate sterilized ring over the head to confirm the measurement is correct. This is performed with sterile technique; providers must be wearing sterile gloves.

- Halo vest size is determined by measuring the circumference of the chest at the xiphoid process.

- Identify the pin-site locations while holding the ring in place. The ring should be placed one-half centimeters above the eyebrows. Make sure the ring is centered, with equal space from ring to cranium circumferentially.

- The posterior pins should be placed directly opposite the anterior pins bilaterally (from the safe zone) and prepare the skin for all four pin sites with a povidone-iodine solution or other antiseptic solutions with sterile technique.

- The skin at each pin site should then be anesthetized with 1% lidocaine hydrochloride, using a 22 gauge needle with a 10 or 20 mL syringe, depending on the amount of anesthetic required.

- Once ring position is satisfactory, the positioning pins (already on the halo ring) are then advanced by hand to hold the halo ring temporarily in place.

- Sterile pins are then advanced through the circles in the halo ring and onto the skin at all four points. The patient is asked to close his/her eyes tightly before the anterior pins are advanced through the skin and onto the cranium. This will help prevent patients from having permanent open eyes and not being able to close them from anterior pins causing skin tension.

- Simultaneously, tighten one anterior pin along with the diagonal opposite posterior pin by hand, making sure that the pins are being advanced perpendicular to the cranium. Once all four pins are finger tight and at ninety-degree angles to the cranium, use the preset torque screwdriver provided with the halo application set/kit. Tighten pins with the torque screwdriver at 2 in-lb increments, making sure to proceed in a diagonal alternating fashion onto all 4 pins. The torque screwdriver has the in-lb measurement displayed so that the exact measurement in increments can be recorded. All 4 pins must be fixed with 8 in-lb of torque.

- Once this is reached, apply the locknuts to each pin. At this time, the temporary positioning pins can be removed.

- The vest application starts with the posterior portion fitted first (divided into an anterior and a posterior portion connected by straps). To do so, the provider holds/stabilizes the head (maintaining reduction) while the assistant applies the posterior vest underneath.

- Once applied and centered, the posterior vest is attached bilaterally to the fixed halo ring with uprights. For maximum stability, the upright bars must be parallel to each other (anterior crossbar being parallel to the posterior).

- Apply the anterior vest portion, and connect it to the posterior portion with the appropriate straps. Next, attach the anterior uprights to the halo ring.

- Connect the anterior and posterior uprights with crossbars bilaterally. Make sure all uprights are at ninety-degree angles to the crossbars for added equal stability as required.

- Adjust the flexion and extension of the ring to the uprights as required.

- Recheck all screws, pins, nuts, and make sure everything is tightened appropriately.

- Tape all wrenches and necessary tools to the anterior vest shell (allows for accessibility in case of an emergency for vest removal is needed or for bolt/pin tightening as needed by provider physician).

- Pin sites must be uncovered to allow for cleaning with hydrogen peroxide or betadine solution every day or every other day. It is recommended to use a cotton swab to mobilize the surrounding skin around each pin site. This will help minimize the risk of pin site infection.

- Retorque each halo pin again at 24 hours after application, to 8 in-lb. Recheck halo fixator 2 days after original application followed by every 3 to 4 weeks thereafter to make sure pin sites are at appropriate tightness.

For pediatric patients, certain Technique modifications include:

- The torque applied to each pin is lower, with insertional torque ranging from 1-5in-lb of pressure (reduce the risk for pin perforation through cranium).

- The Number of pins used ranges from 8 to 12, allowing for increased surface area, reducing the risk of pin perforation.

- Pin Location is still at the safe zone anteriorly. Place posterior pines opposite from anterior pins.

- Brace/vest usually requires to be custom fitted for children more than 2 years old. For toddlers less than 2 years of age, it is recommended to use a Minerva cast.

- Computed tomography (CT) may help pin placement by avoiding cranial sutures and thin regions of the skull. However, CT scans provide a lot of radiation exposure to the pediatric patient, where the risk may outweigh the benefit.