None of the clinical features are pathognomonic of herpes simplex encephalitis (HSE). Therefore, the workup has to be expedited without delaying the treatment. A high index of suspicion needs to be there, especially in immunocompromised presenting with febrile encephalopathy. Cognitive, behavioral, or personality changes could be easily misdiagnosed as a psychiatric illness. Routine blood tests might show evidence of infection or detect renal impairment where the drug dosages may have to be modified. Focal neurologic deficits, computed tomography (CT) or magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) findings, and CSF changes might also take time to manifest. A definite diagnosis can be achieved only by the HSV polymerase chain reaction (PCR) test or rarely via a brain biopsy.

MRI will be almost 80 to 90% sensitive in detecting abnormalities in HSE. MRI with diffusion-weighted images and flair sequences is the most sensitive. The classic abnormality is the involvement of the temporal lobe (sometimes associated with bleed) with associated early white matter changes. Inferomedial temporal lobe changes are most commonly observed, with occasional abnormalities in the cingulate gyrus. Basal ganglia are typically spared.

CT is less sensitive than MRI and can detect abnormalities only in half to two-thirds of the patients. It may take 3-4 days to manifest the changes in the temporal or frontal lobes. Hypodensities, hemorrhage, and edema are often noted, while contrast enhancement may take almost a week.

Single-photon emission computed tomography (SPECT) and dynamic technetium 99 ethyl cysteinate dimer single-photon emission computed tomography (T-99-m ECD SPECT) were helpful in small studies.

CSF may show xanthochromia in the acute setting. A lymphocytic pleocytosis in the range of 10 to 500 leukocytes/microliters could be seen, and red blood cells (RBCs) could also be high (10 to 500/microliters) because of underlying hemorrhagic pathology. The glucose level will be normal or slightly low. The CSF profile could initially be normal in about 5 to 10% of patients, especially children.

The cell count and protein values were found to increase in serial evaluations. CSF pleocytosis may be absent in immunocompromised patients. CSF PCR has to be sent for both HSV-1 and HSV-2. The PCR test has a sensitivity of 94 to 98%, with the specificity being 98 to 100%. CSF PCR usually becomes positive within 24 hours of the onset of symptoms and will remain detectable for 5 to 7 days even after initiation of acyclovir therapy. False-negative tests may result from lower viral load in the initial 72 hours or due to the presence of blood in the CSF with hemoglobin interfering with the PCR. A false negative PCR could also be caused by acyclovir therapy ongoing for more than 48 hours. A negative PCR obtained in a patient with a high pretest probability obtained within three days of onset of symptoms should be repeated to rule out HSE. in the case of high pretest probability with an initially negative HSV PCR, the 2008 Infectious Diseases Society of America (IDSA) guidelines recommend continuing acyclovir therapy and repeating CSF PCR within 3-7 days. HSV PCR positivity in the blood has been reported in neonates and immunocompromised with HSE. This may help in indirect diagnosis in patients where lumbar puncture (LP) may have to be temporarily deferred due to various issues.

CSF antibodies to purified HSV glycoprotein B have a sensitivity of 97% and a specificity of 100%. Though a four-fold rise in viral antibody titers is expected to occur during the course of the illness, its initial detection is possible only after 10 to 14 days of illness, thereby helping only in retrospective diagnosis.

Electroencephalogram (EEG) has good sensitivity to abnormal patterns but has low specificity. Focal abnormalities are seen in more than 80% of cases. Periodic waveforms or paroxysmal lateralizing epileptiform discharges (PLED) are highly consistent with HSE in the appropriate clinical settings, though their absence does not rule out HSE. EEGs may also display prominent intermittent high-amplitude slow waves over the affected temporal areas. Diffuse slowing patterns are also described.

Brain biopsy is rarely performed in modern days due to the availability of HSV PCR tests in CSF, which are highly sensitive and specific. Procedure-related complications have been reported in 3% of patients with a brain biopsy. Moreover, the currently available antiviral drugs have good safety profiles. Even empirical treatment with IV acyclovir could be initiated at least for a short duration in suspected cases until and unless the diagnosis is disproved. A rare case of corticosteroid-responsive vasocentric granulomatous inflammation in HSV-1 encephalitis in 2 adult patients detected only by brain biopsy has been reported.

Tzanck smears from vesicular lesions may sometimes show positive results in neonates.