Autosomal dominant tubulointerstitial kidney disease is a group of inherited kidney disorders caused by different gene mutations that share the same histological findings. Occasionally, nephronophthisis may appear in young individuals with features suggestive of ADTKD; however, autosomal recessive inheritance differentiates it from ADTKD3.

The clinical manifestations are widely variable and gene-dependent. The following is a discussion that encompasses the most likely observed clinical features with each gene mutation:

ADTKD-MUC1 was previously called medullary cystic kidney disease type 1. This disease is characterized by progressive tubulointerstitial fibrosis that ultimately leads to ESRD. ESRD typically starts in adulthood, but it may occur at any age, from 20 years old to 70 years old. There are no other systemic manifestations. Since this disease is transmitted in an autosomal dominant manner, a family history of chronic renal insufficiency is an important key point to figuring out this disease.

ADTKD-UMOD was known historically as familial juvenile hyperuricemic nephropathy type 1 (FJHN1), uromodulin-associated kidney disease (UMOD-associated kidney disease), and medullary cystic kidney disease type 2 (MCKD2). The clinical manifestation is slowly progressive chronic kidney disease, usually noticed in the teen years, and progression to ESRD between the fourth and seventh decades of life. Other important clinical features are gout and hyperuricemia, resulting from inappropriately decreased fractional urate excretion that usually occurs as early as the teenage years.

ADTKD-REN was known previously as familial juvenile hyperuricemic nephropathy type 2 (FJHN2). This disease is characterized by hypo-proliferative anemia with a low hemoglobin concentration in the first decade of life. The clinical symptoms of CKD and hyperuricemia start in childhood or adolescence. This condition is also characterized by bland urinary sediment, mildly elevated serum potassium concentration, slightly decreased blood pressure, polyuria, and low plasma renin activity. Patients usually progress to ESRD in their fourth to sixth decade of life.

ADTKD-SEC61A1 is a newly discovered disease caused by a mutation in SEC61A1. Since it is a new disease, the whole clinical picture is not conspicuous. To date, very few families have been identified with this disorder. In one family, dysplastic kidneys, anemia, and intrauterine growth retardation were present. In another family, anemia, neutropenia with abscess formation, and chronic kidney disease were documented.

A mutation in the TCF2 gene causes ADTKD-HNF1B. The kidney and the pancreas express the homeodomain-containing transcription factors hepatocyte nuclear factor 1 alpha and 1 beta. Research has identified that mutations in this gene may cause the maturity-onset diabetes of youth (MODY), but further studies explicate that mutations in this gene may also lead to renal manifestations. The varied clinical manifestations and the fact that these clinical manifestations are not present consistently in all affected family members made diagnosing this condition difficult. The non-renal manifestations may include maturity-onset diabetes mellitus of the young, abnormal liver function tests of unclear etiology, genito-urinary tract malformations, and hyperuricemia with gout. In adolescence, hypomagnesemia may occur in some individuals. The renal manifestations are common in adulthood and often involve numerous renal cysts, congenital solitary kidney, congenital anomalies of the kidney and urinary tract system, renal dysplasia, and hypoplastic kidneys.