There is a wide array of presentations for BI, with many of them directly resulting from the syndrome it may be associated with, such as a Chiari malformation, which is suboccipital at a rate of 33% to 38%. The degree of cephalad migration of the dens-atlas-clivus weightlifting determines the neurologic sequelae, as this creates significant crowding at the foramen magnum as well as at the medulla oblongata. Also, this crowding could obstruct cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) flow leading to syringomyelia. In the event of medullary dysfunction, a patient may exhibit ataxia, dysmetria, nystagmus, dysphagia, or cranial nerve palsies.

Interestingly there have been well-documented associations between exertional cough headaches (almost exclusively at the occipital or suboccipital, not migraine in a pattern) and BI. In a study of 97 patients evaluated for a cough, exertional, or sexual headaches, advanced imaging noted an intracranial defect in 45% of cases, and up to 80% of the secondary cough headaches were associated with Chiari I. The authors recommended that every patient with a cough headache have a craniocervical MRI. In addition to coughing, these headaches can be brought on by laughing, weight lifting, or head postural changes. Other sometimes more apparent findings, while not exclusive to basilar invagination, is a short neck (reported in 78% of cases) and asymmetric face/skull or torticollis (reported in 68% of cases).

One of the frequent causes of the secondary-type basilar impression is rheumatoid arthritis. The basilar impression resulting from rheumatoid arthritis was originally termed “cranial settling” when Mathews and others interpreted odontoid migration to result from cranial descent due to eroded lateral atlantal masses. Approximately 8% of rheumatoid patients demonstrate these changes. These changes may lead to sudden death as a result of instability and require surgical fixation.

**The predominant signs and symptoms in patients with BI can be broadly categorized as follows:**

- Pyramidal symptoms

- Altered Kinesthetic sensations

- Spinothalamic dysfunction

Constellation of presenting signs and symptoms include:

- Weakness

- Numbness

- Paresthesia

- Neck pain

- Gait instability

- Spasticity

- Dysphagia

- Dysarthria

Neck pain is the most common (approximately 80%) presenting symptom. Torticollis is observed in around 40% of them.

**BI can be associated with other concurrent anomalies like:**

- Atlantoaxial dislocation

- Chiari malformation

- Atlas occipitalization, and

- Klippel-Feil syndrome.

- Atlanto-occipital hypoplasia

- Clival hypoplasia

- Os odontoideum

- Platybasia

**Telescoping of the spinal segments, in the event of chronic atlantoaxial instability, try to confer natural protection, thereby leading to:**

- Short neck

- Torticollis

- Dorsal kyphoscoliosis

- Klippel-Feil alteration

- C2–3 fusion

- Assimilation of atlas

- Bifid arches of atlas and axis

- Platybasia

- Chiari formation

- Syringomyelia

These natural protective sequelae are most often reversible following atlantoaxial stabilization in group A BI and foramen magnum decompression in group B BI.