Before an endomyocardial biopsy, the patient should have discontinued any anticoagulation therapy for 16 hours prior to the procedure, as well as for 12 hours post-procedure. The patient's INR (international normalized ratio) must also be less than 1.5 before the procedure. After the patient is provided with anesthesia and sedation, they should be put into a supine position with a 3-lead electrocardiogram (ECG), blood pressure cuff, and oxygen saturation monitoring.

To reduce discomfort during the procedure, analgesia and sedation are necessary. The biopsy procedure takes several minutes on average. To reduce sampling error, several tissue samples should be taken. The preparation of histologic samples begins just after the biopsy sample is taken. The different tissue samples are stored in formaldehyde, glutaraldehyde, and liquid nitrogen for evaluation using light microscopy, electron microscopy, immunofluorescence, or viral nucleic acid studies. For histologic examination, the samples are stained using hematoxylin-eosin, Masson trichrome, Congo red for identifying amyloidosis, and Prussian blue to detect iron deposition. The following characteristic changes are identified:

- Inflammation (myocarditis)

- Myocyte hypertrophy and disarray (idiopathic restrictive cardiomyopathy)

- Myocyte degradation and necrosis (necrotizing myocarditis)

- Fibrosis (ischemic or non-ischemic insults)

- Fibrofatty infiltration (ARVC)

- Iron deposition (hemochromatosis)

- Amyloid deposition (amyloidosis)

- Vascular abnormalities (vasculitis)

- Artifacts (no clinical significance)

To quantify the extent of inflammation, a severity index has been defined, which includes the number of mononuclear cells (CD3, CD45, CD68) and HLA activation (HLA-ABC, HLA-DR). Frozen tissue samples are analyzed for viral nucleic acid using the polymerase chain reaction (PCR) technique to identify cardiotropic strains of enteroviruses (coxsackievirus and echovirus), parvovirus, adenovirus, and herpes simplex virus.

The International Society for Heart and Lung Transplantation (ISHLT) grading evaluates cardiac transplant tissue samples for signs of inflammation and myocyte damage allowing classification of allograft rejection reaction and better interobserver agreement.

The procedure of EMB may influence microscopic findings and cause artifacts. These include contraction bands, mitochondrial massing, sarcolemmal folding, cell swelling, and membrane disruption with the displacement of glycogen and lipids. Contraction bands can be produced artificially by biopsy taking, whereas in the postmortem study, it can reflect pathology.