**Anatomic Position of the Heart**

The heart is normally positioned within the middle mediastinum with one-third of its mass located to the right side of the midline, and its own long axis is directed from the right shoulder (base of the heart) towards the left hypochondrium (apex of the heart). There are variations in this cardiac position related to the patient's body habitus, and minor changes may occur with respiration.

At other times, diseases of the lung or pleura or other mediastinal structures can displace the heart, making image acquisition and interpretation a challenging proposition. On echocardiographic parasternal long-axis views, the right ventricular free wall is the anterior-most structure while the left ventricular posterior (inferolateral) wall is the posterior-most structure. (Figure 1)

**Ultrasound Physiology**

Echocardiographic probes utilize ultrasound waves (sound waves) of frequencies ranging from 1.5 to 7.5 MHz. The velocity of these waves depends on the nature of the material in which the sound travels. The normal velocity of sound in air is 330 m/s, while in the heart tissue, the velocity is around 1540 m/s.

Ultrasound waves are produced due to the transformation of electrical oscillations into mechanical (sound) waves by the crystals in an echocardiographic probe. In contrast, the reflected mechanical waves are converted back to electrical signals. This phenomenon of inter-conversion of electrical and mechanical oscillations is called the piezoelectric effect. Each echocardiographic machine probe has this piezoelectric crystal transducer. On applying varying voltages, it vibrates and transmits ultrasound. On receiving the reflected ultrasound waves, the transducer generates an electrical signal analyzed by the echo machine.

The ultrasound probe transmits sound waves to the body part which is being imaged. The tissues and the boundaries between them reflect the waves back to the probe. Distance from the probe to the tissue is calculated using the speed of sound in the tissue and the time of each echo's return. The two-dimensional image is formed by displaying the intensities of the echos and the distances calculated.