The clinician must obtain a thorough history when assessing a male patient for sexual dysfunction. A detailed history includes inquiring about sexual history, libido, and erectile function.

It is essential to obtain a thorough medical history and perform a complete physical examination.

Physicians should be aware of the severe embarrassment many patients feel when discussing intimate details of their sexual problems with anyone, even their doctor. Overcoming this great difficulty can be challenging for physicians. To minimize this obstacle, physicians should remain professional and include an open-ended questions about sexual function and satisfaction during their routine intake discussion. It is suggested that this question be left until close to the end of the visit so there is some time to develop an interpersonal relationship before tackling this problematic issue.

If erectile dysfunction (ED) is present, it is crucial to determine the time of onset of the erectile dysfunction, evaluates possible performance anxiety as a contributing factor, and assess for any additional potential risk factors or reversible causes of ED if present.

A sample question might be, "How is your sex life? Is everything working OK for you and your partner?" Anything other than a quick and emphatic "everything's fine" suggests a possible sexual problem and should prompt the physician to inquire further. A comment such as "Well, it's not like it used to be" could also indicate a sexual disorder such as erectile dysfunction or premature ejaculation. More focused and detailed questioning would then be able to identify the specific sexual problem correctly. The patient should be informed that these sexual disorders are common and can be treated.

Some helpful questions to ask a patient with suspected premature ejaculation might include the following:

- On average, how long does it take after vaginal penetration before ejaculation?

- How often do you experience premature ejaculation?

- Is it just once in a while or pretty much all the time?

- How long have you had this problem?

- Did it come on gradually or start suddenly?

- Have you ever had a bad sexual experience before the development of premature ejaculation?

- Does this happen with only one partner or with every partner?

- Do you experience premature ejaculation with every sexual encounter?

- What type of sexual activity (i.e., masturbation, foreplay, intercourse, use of visual cues, etc.) do you engage in, and how often?

- How has this affected your sexual activity?

- Does it happen with masturbation?

- Do your erections work OK? Some of the time or all the time?

- Do you lose your erection before ejaculation?

- Does an orgasm feel normal to you?

- How are your personal relationships?

- What does your partner think about this problem?

- Is it affecting your relationship?

- Do you and your partner avoid sexual intimacy because of this?

- Is your partner willing to work with you to help overcome this problem?

- What remedies have you tried already, and how did they work?

- How much does this problem bother you?

- Are you willing to consider any therapy or treatment that can resolve or improve this issue?

- Is there any particular treatment you have heard or read about that you wish to consider trying?

- Is there anything that makes it worse or better? (i.e., drugs, alcohol, etc.)