Angiostrongylus spp. are classically endemic to the Asia-Pacific regions with the highest incidence in Thailand and Malaysia. Additional areas of inhabitance include the Pacific basin, including China, Vietnam, Phillippines, Taiwan, and Hawaii. Dissemination of infected rats has contributed to the spreading of the parasite to non-endemic areas such as Africa, S. America, Australia, Caribbean islands, New Orleans, and Louisiana. Travel-related exposures have attributed to sporadic cases detected in Europe and the United States.

Angiostronglyiasis is known as the rat lungworm. It is a nematode. In its natural transmission lifecycle, it is passed between rodents and slugs/snails. However, it can still infect sea animals as crabs, shrimp frogs. In these organisms, there is no reproduction of the parasite, but transmission to humans is possible by the consumption of the affected organisms. Humans are dead-end hosts.

Given that the concentration of this infection is mostly in east Asia, the likely method of transfer to the western countries would be by the travel of contaminated rats and mollusks by ship. Typical mollusks include the giant African land snail and Achatina fulica and Parmoarion martensi (from southeast Asia), which have become prominent in Hawaii. In Hawaii, infection with A. cantonensis is a reportable disease, and there have been several outbreaks reported. To support this, there is also retrograde movement noted from South America during ship transport to Taiwan and China with subsequent disease outbreaks of A. cantonensis.