The education, examination, and process for licensure are often state-dependent despite efforts to ensure national uniformity.

In 1996, the EMS Agenda for the Future was published with the intent to provide principles to guide the continued development of EMS by obtaining input from a broad range of stakeholders.

The education agenda specifically delineates a goal to promote national uniformity, thus increasing state reciprocity, while still allowing and meeting local needs. Within the agenda are five specific components, including the National EMS Scope of Practice Model. The other components include National EMS Core Content, National EMS Education Standards, National EMS Program Accreditation, and National EMS Certification. Leaders in the development of these components included physicians from the National Association of EMS Physicians (NAEMSP) and the American College of Emergency Medicine (ACEP), the National Association of State EMS Officials (NASEMSO), and the National Association of EMS Educators (NAEMSE) among other stakeholders.

The National EMS Core Content defines the content base and educational standards for various EMS providers.  This component is outlined to mimic a physician education program defining a specialty scope of practice. The National EMS Education Standards outlines more specific content for curriculum development. The National Registry of Emergency Medical Technicians (NREMT) developed the initial education plan for prehospital practitioners in the 1980s and has continued to provide the national certification exam and sponsor the standard curriculum. To ensure adherence to the national curriculum endorsed by the above organizations, the National Registry has a formal accreditation policy, which requires advanced level education (paramedic) to be conducted by institutions accredited by the Committee on Accreditation of Educational Programs for the EMS Profession (CoAEMSP).

The previously mentioned National EMS Scope of Practice Model published by NHTSA was developed based on the educational core content. The National Scope model outlines the recognized “levels” of EMS practitioners eligible for licensure after successful completion of an accredited educational program, certification exam, and state licensure requirements. NHTSA recognizes four levels of care, each with a unique scope of practice and associated skills. These levels of care include Emergency Medical Responder (EMR), Emergency Medicine Technician-Basic (EMT-B), Advanced Emergency Medical Technician (AEMT), and Paramedic (EMT-P).

The education and skills competency is demonstrated via a certification exam. Most states utilize the National Registry of EMT standardized written and psychomotor examinations to ensure educational standardization and competence. Each state will then determine, based on certification, if a license to practice may be issued. Credentialing is done at the individual agency level by the system medical director.