As part of the orientation to the simulation environment, educators should clarify the objectives and expectations for the simulation. When learners clearly understand what to expect and what is expected of them, they are more willing to engage and more likely to meet those expectations.

Educators should then state the intended learning objectives of the course.

Instructors should also discuss matters of confidentiality with the simulation participants. This may include a review of who will be observing the simulation activity and who will be informed of the learners’ performance. Faculty should obtain permission from learners if they wish to record or conduct research on the session. At the same time, participants should be instructed to refrain from divulging the details of the simulation experience to other learners. Addressing these privacy issues provides learners with clear expectations and empowers them to fully engage in the simulation and debriefing.

After reviewing the session goals and expectations, instructors should collaborate with learners to optimize the realism of the simulated environment. First, it is important to establish a “fiction contract,” an explicit agreement between faculty and participants to contribute to the success of the simulation experience.

Next, instructors should provide an orientation to the physical components of the simulation environment. This should include a detailed description of the features and limitations of the various simulation technologies (e.g., mannequins, task trainers) that might be utilized in the simulation exercise.

The faculty should provide clarification on the learners’ roles within the simulated environment.

Another key element of the prebriefing is to review the logistical details of the simulation session.

Faculty should also orient learners to the physical space in which the simulation experience will take place. It is important to highlight the specific locations of the simulation scenario and the accompanying debriefing, so that learners can move efficiently from one space to the next and minimize the gap time between their performance and the subsequent review of that performance.

Some learners must temporarily suspend their clinical work to participate in the simulation session. As such, instructors should clarify what learners should do if they receive pages or phone calls related to the care of real patients.

Finally, the orientation to the simulation environment should include a promise to respect learners’ intentions and perspectives.