The process of ketogenesis begins with fatty acyl CoA molecules. These molecules arise from the lipolysis of long-chain fatty acids via hormone-sensitive lipase. Triglycerols and amino acids may also be sources for Acetyl CoA; however, these sources usually add up to less than 10% of the total. The regulation of hormone-sensitive lipase (HSL) is via negative feedback from increases in insulin and glucose concentration. Positive feedback from glucagon and beta-adrenergic catecholamines increase HSL activity to provide more fatty acyl CoA molecules. HSL regulation takes place via phosphorylation by protein kinase A (PKA). PKA is activated by cyclic AMP (cAMP), which is directly downstream from the cell surface receptor affected by hormones. Fatty acids pass through the cell membrane and circulate in the blood. Certain tissues of the body, such as skeletal muscle, myocardium, and liver can use fatty acids as an energy source, which contrasts with the fact that the brain cannot utilize fatty acids for energy and must use ketone bodies as a means of energy transport from fat stores.

Fatty acids in the blood are converted to ketone bodies when insulin is low, and the fatty acid concentration is high. Fatty acyl CoA is transported into the liver mitochondria by the carnitine shuttle system. This system involves two transmembrane proteins to move fatty acyl CoA molecules across the mitochondrial membrane. The first protein is carnitine palmityl transferase I (CPT I), this protein on the cytosolic side of the mitochondrial membrane transfers the fatty acyl CoA across the outer membrane. During this process, a carnitine molecule is attached to the fatty acyl CoA molecule to make an acylcarnitine. The acylcarnitine is carried through the mitochondrial matrix by a transporter protein called carnitine/acylcarnitine translocase. At the inner mitochondrial membrane, the acylcarnitine molecule is converted back to acyl CoA and carnitine by CPT 2.

Ketone synthesis in the liver produces acetoacetate and beta-hydroxybutyrate from two acetyl CoA molecules. This process begins in the mitochondria of the liver after transporting the fatty acyl CoA molecule into the inner mitochondrial membrane by the carnitine shuttle. The fatty acyl CoA molecules undergo beta-oxidation to become acetyl CoA molecules. Acetyl CoA molecules are either converted to malonyl CoA by acetyl CoA carboxylase or acetoacetyl CoA by 3-ketothiolase. Malonyl CoA serves as negative feedback to the liver CPT-1. Acetoacetyl CoA is further converted to 3-hydroxy-3-methylglutaryl CoA (HMG CoA) by HMG CoA synthase. HMG CoA synthase is essential to this process, as it is the rate-limiting step for the synthesis of ketone bodies. HMG CoA synthase regulation is influenced positively by glucagon and negatively regulated by insulin. HMG CoA is finally converted to acetoacetate by HMG CoA lyase. At this point, acetoacetate may be converted to 3-B-hydroxybutyrate (3HB) by 3HB dehydrogenase. Acetoacetate and 3HB are organic acids that diffuse freely across cell membranes into the blood and other organs of the body.

Upon arrival to the mitochondria of distant organs, ketone bodies become utilized for energy. The first step involved is an enzyme that converts acetoacetate to acetoacetyl CoA. The enzyme responsible for this conversion is called succinyl CoA-oxoacid transferase (SCOT), and it is the rate-limiting step for the utilization of ketones for energy. High concentrations of acetoacetate feedback negatively on SCOT to decrease ketone conversion. Finally, acetoacetyl CoA is converted to acetyl CoA by methylacetoacetyl CoA thiolase.

Acetyl CoA may be turned into citrate and churned through the citric acid cycle to produce FADH2 and NADH, or it can be converted to oxaloacetate and used in gluconeogenesis.