If there is clinical suspicion for MFS and/or GBS, a lumbar puncture with appropriate cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) studies is warranted to narrow the differential diagnosis further. A hallmark of GBS and MFS, if present, is an albuminocytologic dissociation, or a combination of normal cell count and raised protein level in the CSF found in approximately 90% of patients at peak disease. There are, however, certain caveats: only half of the patients have albuminocytologic dissociation on initial analysis, and a normal protein level, especially early in the disease, does not exclude the diagnosis. Approximately 10% of patients with GBS have normal CSF studies. Approximately 15% to 20% have a mild increase in cerebrospinal fluid cell count (5 to 50 cells/microliter). Furthermore, nerve conduction studies can support the diagnosis and provide prognostic information.

For MFS, electrodiagnostic studies may show reduced or absent sensory responses without slowing of sensory conduction studies.

The Brighton criteria are a validated, quantitative tool that uses clinical history, physical exam, laboratory, and imaging findings to diagnose GBS and its variants, including MFS. The scoring system is based on the following features:

- Bilateral and flaccid weakness of limbs (100% of patients)

- Decreased or absence of deep tendon reflex in distal extremities

- Monophasic course and time between onset and nadir is 12 hours to 28 days (97% of patients)

- Decreased or absent deep tendon reflexes in weak limbs (91% of patients)

- Cerebrospinal fluid cell count fewer than 50/microliter (100% of patients)

- Cerebrospinal fluid protein concentration greater than reference range (49% of patients initially, 88% at 3 weeks

- Nerve conduction study results consistent with 1 of the Guillain-Barré syndrome subtypes (99% of patients)

- Lack of an alternative diagnosis for weakness

The Brighton criteria range from level 1 (highest level of diagnostic certainty) to level 4 (Guillain-Barre syndrome diagnosis of exclusion, alternative possible).