Cosmeceuticals have undoubtedly taken over the personal care industry across the globe. Despite the prevalent confusion about its definition and scope, it would not be an exaggeration to state that almost 30% to 40% of any dermatologist's prescription count across the world consists of a cosmeceutical. The term was coined in 1984 by Dr. Albert Kligman of the University of Pennsylvania describing a hybrid category of products mid-way on the spectrum of 'cosme'tics and pharma'ceutical.'

**DEFINITIONS & CONTROVERSIES**

The most practical definition of this term may be - a cosmetic product that is purported to have therapeutic action capable of affecting the skin positively beyond the time of its application. Although the term cosmeceutical is steeped in dermatology literature and dominates academic discussions, symposia, and lectures around the world, it is strangely interesting that almost four decades after coining the term, this category of skincare products is still not formally recognized by the United States Food and Drug Administration (US-FDA) or the European Union. This disparity stems from the differentiation between 'cosmetics' and 'drugs' by the Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act (FD&C Act) based on their intended use and ability to affect the structure and function of the cutis. Both in the United States and the European Union, a drug is defined as "an article intended for the use in the diagnosis, mitigation, treatment or prevention of disease or intended to affect the structure or any function of the body."

Currently, cosmeceuticals are a segregated subclass within the domain of a cosmetic or drug. In Europe and Japan, cosmeceuticals are a subclass of cosmetics; however, in the US, cosmeceuticals can only be considered as a subclass of drugs.

**REGULATION & LICENSING OF COSMECEUTICALS**

Ideally, the registration protocol for a cosmeceutical should not be as complicated as for drugs. Of course, as per Good Clinical Practices [GCP], clinical studies with adequate power should be essential to demonstrate the intended activity of the cosmeceutical for treatment of the particular minor skin disorder or 'condition,' and there must be an assurance that safety requirements are optimal and that there are no expected side effects.

**CONCENTRATION OF ACTIVE INGREDIENT & LABELLING**

The issue becomes more convoluted when the basis of the drug vs. cosmetics differentiation centers on the concentration of the active ingredient. At the moment, sunscreen-containing products are classified as cosmetics, provided the sun protection factor (SPF) is below 4,

**WORKING DEFINITION**

For this activity, backed by a plethora of literature on the issue, a cosmeceutical may be characterized as:

- The product has pharmaceutical activity and is usable on normal or near-normal skin.

- The product should possess a defined benefit for minor skin disorders (cosmetic indication).

- The product possesses a very low-risk profile.

**WHAT'S A NUTRACEUTICAL?**

The term “nutraceutical” was coined in 1989 by Stephen De Felice from “nutrition” and “pharmaceutical.”

Although nutraceuticals cover most of the therapeutic areas such as anti-arthritic, digestive problems, prophylaxis, and treatment for cancers, lipid and sugar control, osteoporosis, blood pressure, and depression among others, in context of skin, one can grossly regard a nutraceutical an orally consumed product with cosmeceutical benefits.

**COSMECEUTICALS INDICATIONS**

- Anti-aging in general

- Treatment of photomelanosis and photo tanning

- Treatment of pigmentation-related disorders like melasma or freckles

- Rhytide reduction

- Anti-inflammatory

- Fat loss

- Hair growth

- Hair fall prevention

- Maintenance of skin tone and clarity of complexion