Aortic dissection is a medical emergency with very high mortality if it is undiagnosed. The majority of patients present to the emergency department and hence an interprofessional team is the key.

Once the patent with an aortic dissection presents to the emergency room, a standardized system must be in operation to ensure that the diagnosis and management are done without any delay. The triage nurse should be fully aware of the importance of immediate admission of the patient and consult with the emergency physician and cardiac surgeon. The decision on how to make the diagnosis depends on patient stability and the availability of imaging tests. The two options include an ECHO or a CT scan. An unstable patient should never be sent to the radiology suite. Instead, a cardiologist should be consulted for a bedside echo. The intensivist should be notified as there is an urgent need to lower blood pressure. The operating room should be notified that a patient with a dissection has been admitted. Nurses should be fully aware of the potential complications of aortic dissection and know what medications to use to lower the blood pressure. In addition, nurses should monitor fluid input and output and keep the patient NPO. After surgery, the nurses need to closely monitor the patient for complications. Open communication between the team members is vital to improving outcomes.

**Outcomes**

Several studies show that patient outcomes are improved when managed by an interprofessional team of healthcare professionals that include a cardiologist, intensivist, pulmonologist, nephrologist, cardiac surgeon, interventional radiologist, and anesthesiologist. In addition, the pharmacist must educate the patient about the importance of blood pressure control and compliance with medications. The outcomes of aortic dissection tend to be better in high volume centers compared to small centers which do less than 5 cases a year.