Militarized use of napalm typically results in a clear exposure history either by the victims themselves or by general situational awareness.  Homemade napalm combustion might not be obvious.

The physical exam of survivors of ignited napalm exposure will vary depending on the exposure type. Direct contact exposure will cause full-thickness burns, occasionally with ongoing active combustion if first responders arrive rapidly.  The intense heat from a napalm blast may burn off all clothing. Those with second-degree burns will have severe pain, while some with third-degree burns will appear potentially pain-free.  Napalm dropped by aircraft, as opposed to flamethrower deployed, will include a blast component which may cause typical blast injuries. A thorough physical exam may find blunt and penetrating injuries due to blast effect that may cause life-threatening internal or external hemorrhage, cardiac tamponade, tension pneumothorax, or open pneumothorax requiring immediate treatment. The impressive nature of the burns may distract clinicians from traumatic injuries requiring more immediate interventions and clinicians should use a structured trauma approach to blast-burn injuries.

Initial assessment of the airway consists of evaluation for mucosal burn injuries such as charred facial and nasal hair and soot or fire debris in the oropharynx or nasopharynx.  Careful repeated assessment of the appearance of the uvula, tongue, lips, and palate for signs of edema that portends impending airway compromise is vital.

Some patients not exposed to direct contact with flaming napalm may present with altered mental status from blast effect induced head trauma or from hypoxia, carbon monoxide, or carbon dioxide toxicity.