There is an extensive number of complications that can occur following MCA stroke. Most stroke patients will develop some type of complication at some point during their recovery. According to one study of over 300 patients, 85% experienced at least one complication during their hospital stay alone, and most of the remaining individuals developed at least one complication within 6 weeks following their stroke. The patients were then followed over 30 months. The most common complications to occur in stroke patients while they are still hospitalized include infections, particularly pneumonia or urinary tract infections; falls; and pain. Less common complications include pressure sores, seizures, recurrent stroke, thromboembolism, and psychological complications, particularly depression. Following discharge and in the 30 months over which the patients were followed for this study, the most common complications continued to be infections, falls, and pain, but depression and anxiety also rose in prevalence. Concern for seizures and recurrent stroke persisted, and hospital readmission joined the list, while thromboembolism was only seen in one case.

The explanation as to why falls, pain, and infections are the most common complications has to do with the functions that MCA strokes impact most. Mobility is affected, particularly in the setting of decreased sensation and strength, which makes falls more likely to occur. Complications such as dysphagia can lead to aspiration, while decreased mobility can contribute to atelectasis, and both of these can promote the development of pneumonia. This decreased mobility is a large contributing factor to pressure sores and pain as well. This is why interdisciplinary teams are crucial in the recovery and improvement of quality of life of stroke patients.

Patients who suffer more severe strokes tend to suffer more dangerous and potentially fatal complications. These include cerebral edema, depression of consciousness, severe dysphagia, and inability to protect their airway. When cerebral edema occurs, which typically peaks around day 3 to 5 following acute stroke, this can put pressure on the ventricles and cause midline shift. If the patient does not have significant atrophy or just has very significant swelling, this can quickly progress to herniation and death. If it does not get to this point, it can still lead to severe depression of mental status, which can cause patients to be unable to protect their airway or swallow safely. This then leads to the difficult question of whether the patients should get tracheostomies or percutaneous gastric tubes placed, and these themselves can then lead to further complications and infections, while not getting these performed can lead to fatal outcomes as described previously in the section on prognosis.