The treatment of cerebral salt wasting (CSW) and syndrome of inappropriate secretion of antidiuretic of hormone (SIADH) is very different, so it is critical to have the correct diagnosis prior to initiating treatment.

As cerebral salt wasting typically occurs after aneurysmal subarachnoid hemorrhage, the first treatment strategies are targeted at treating the underlying subarachnoid hemorrhage and aneurysm or another CNS insult. This treatment is covered in the StatPearls article on acute subarachnoid hemorrhage. Secondly, the patient must be volume repleted while treating the hyponatremia. Typically, the patient is started on isotonic saline for mild to moderate cases of hyponatremia of cerebral salt wasting. The isotonic fluid provides the fluid for the hypovolemic patient as well as helps to restore the body's sodium stores. For moderate to severe cases of hyponatremia, more aggressive sodium replenishment may be required with either hypertonic saline such as 3% hypertonic saline and/or salt tabs (1 to 2 grams up to three times daily) as well as limiting free water intake. Some have advocated for the use of fludrocortisone as well for the treatment of cerebral salt wasting.

When correcting the hyponatremia, the serum sodium should be monitored frequently. Overcorrection of the serum sodium can lead to hypernatremia which can cause muscle twitching, lethargy, seizure, and death. Additionally, hyponatremia should not be corrected too quickly. There is the risk of central pontine myelinolysis if the hyponatremia is corrected too quickly, especially for long-standing hyponatremia. Most experts recommend correcting no more than 10 meq/L/24 hours or 1 meq/L every 2 hours.

The most important issue is to distinguish between cerebral salt wasting and syndrome of inappropriate secretion of antidiuretic of hormone (SIADH) as they are treated with opposite approaches. In cases of SIADH, the treatment is typically fluid restriction, hypertonic saline, demeclocycline, and/or furosemide.  If the patient truly has cerebral salt wasting, they are hypovolemic, and the SIADH treatment modalities would be detrimental by exacerbating the hypovolemia.