There are three possible sites for CVL placement in adult patients: namely, the internal jugular, femoral, and subclavian. The right internal jugular and subclavian valves are the most direct paths to the right atrium via the superior vena cava. The femoral veins are compressible sites and, as such, may be more appropriate for patients who are at high risk of bleeding. The subclavian vein approach is at higher risk for pneumothorax than the internal jugular vein approach. Ultrasound guidance can benefit all approaches and is recommended for every CVL placement. However, when ultrasound guidance is not feasible, CVLs may be placed using anatomical landmarks without ultrasound.

**Internal Jugular Vein Access**

The internal jugular vein exits the skull base from the jugular foramen collecting blood from the sigmoid sinus. It is contained within the carotid sheath and travels with the carotid artery and the vagus nerve. As it travels towards the chest, it assumes an anterolateral position to the common carotid artery beneath the sternocleidomastoid muscle.

Right internal jugular venous access allows a straight and direct path to the superior vena cava and has a low rate of catheter malposition during placement.

**Subclavian Vein Access**

Lateral to the suprasternal notch, the clavicle has an anterior convexity in the medial two-thirds of the bone and an anterior concavity in the lateral third. The center of this anterior convexity is known as the "bend" of the clavicle and is an essential landmark in the infraclavicular approach to subclavian vein access. The subclavian vein can be found by inserting the needle 2 to 3 cm inferior to the midpoint of the clavicle, which is 1 to 2 cm lateral to the "bend" of the clavicle.

The subclavian vein access site is incompressible and, as such, should be avoided in patients with severe coagulopathy and an increased risk of bleeding.

**Femoral Vein Access**

The common femoral vein is located superficially at the femoral triangle, just distal to the inguinal ligament. It is located within the femoral sheath and lies medial to the femoral artery within the femoral triangle. The femoral artery pulsation is used as an anatomic landmark to find the common femoral vein. The mid-inguinal point between the anterior superior iliac spine and the pubic tubercle is lateral to this pulsation. This landmark can be used when the femoral artery is not palpable.

The femoral vein access site is more prone to catheter-related deep vein thrombosis when compared with jugular or subclavian access sites.