As stated previously, prolactin-related pathologies are either associated with prolactin deficiency or prolactin excess.

**Prolactinoma**

Prolactinoma is the most common secreting pituitary adenoma. It is characterized by the proliferation of pituitary lactotrophic cells in the anterior pituitary gland.  Most prolactinomas (90%) are microadenomas (less than 1 cm in diameter) and are asymptomatic. The classic presentation of prolactinoma is a young female with menstrual irregularities, galactorrhea, and infertility. Men may report a decrease in libido and erectile dysfunction as a result of hypogonadism caused by reduced secretion of LH and FSH. If the prolactinoma is large (i.e., macroadenoma greater than 1 cm), the patient may present with compressive symptoms, such as bitemporal hemianopsia, as the tumor compresses the optic chiasma. Dopamine agonists such as bromocriptine and cabergoline are both considered a first-line treatment option in prolactinoma cases. Cabergoline is preferable to bromocriptine due to fewer side effects and longer half-life. Furthermore, cabergoline normalizes prolactin in up to 95% of patients, reduces tumor size by about 90%, and controls symptoms in most patients.

**Medication-induced Prolactinemia**

First-generation antipsychotics such as haloperidol and fluphenazine can cause symptoms of prolactin excess, such as galactorrhea and gynecomastia, through their dopamine blockade. The specific mechanism involves non-selective D2 dopamine-receptor inhibiting in multiple dopaminergic pathways, including the tuberoinfundibular tract where dopamine tonically inhibits prolactin resulting in disinhibition of prolactin release. The loss of dopamine-mediated disinhibition allows for constitutively active lactotrophic cells.

**Sheehan Syndrome**

Sheehan syndrome is characterized by infarction of the anterior pituitary, which often occurs during delivery but does not manifest until the post-partum period with various endocrinopathies. The pathophysiology of Sheehan syndrome involves a significant blood loss during childbirth, which compromises the blood supply to the enlarged anterior pituitary gland. Prolonged ischemia progresses to ischemic necrosis of the pituitary gland. This damage results in failure to produce the hormones made by the cells within the anterior pituitary gland, such as prolactin-secreting lactotrophs. Symptoms may not manifest until months after the infarction event; thus, a sense of heightened clinical suspicion is necessary when evaluating post-partum mothers with new-onset endocrinopathies or an inability to lactate. The most common presenting symptom of Sheehan syndrome is the failure to lactate (agalactorrhea). Other symptoms are related to the functions of the hormones made by the anterior pituitary such as amenorrhea, decreased sex drive, or symptoms of thyroid insufficiency. Sheehan syndrome represents one of the pathology scenarios where prolactin deficiency is apparent.

**Other Conditions**

Prolactin deficiency can be secondary to other etiologies that primarily affect the anterior pituitary. The anterior pituitary function to produce hormones can become impaired due to mass effect (i.e., craniopharyngiomas) or infections such as tuberculosis and histoplasmosis. Infiltrative disease processes like sarcoidosis and hemochromatosis are also hypoprolactinemic etiologies. Lastly, autoimmune conditions like SLE, antiphospholipid syndrome, rheumatoid arthritis, multiple sclerosis, systemic sclerosis, autoimmune thyroid disease, and celiac disease can also impact prolactin production.