**Development and Sex Determination of Gonads**

The beginning of testicular development is with the formation of the genital ridge. The origin of the genital ridge is from the intermediate mesoderm. The intermediate mesoderm forms paired structures that reside beside the dorsal mesentery, specifically in the coelomic cavity.

The proliferation of coelomic epithelial cells found on the ventromedial surface of the mesonephroi initiates the formation of the genital ridge. The mesonephros contains the mesonephric duct (Wolffian duct). This structure is a primordial urogenital tissue that contributes to the formation of the epididymis, seminal vesicles, and vas deferens after male sex determination.

The paramesonephric duct (Mullerian duct) is also found in the mesonephros and runs in parallel to the mesonephric duct. This structure is essentially the female equivalent of the mesonephric duct (Wolffian duct) and contributes to the formation of the uterus, fallopian tube, and vagina following female sex determination. The mesonephros and genital ridge form a structure known as the urogenital ridge (UGR).

A dense layer of pseudostratified epithelial cells forms following the proliferation of coelomic epithelial cells, which are present on the ventromedial side of the mesonephros. Basement membrane fragmentation facilitates the migration of epithelial cells dorsally towards the mesonephros.

Primordial germ cells (PGC) originate from an area around the yolk sac. PGCs begin to colonize the gonads by approximately five weeks of gestation. By the sixth week of gestation, the PGCs will have invaded the genital ridges. Primordial germ cells divide to reach approximately 3000 cells and undergo further specialization with the activation of gametogenic genes and inactivation of pluripotency genes; this is a process known as licensing.

Following this process of the activation of gametogenic genes and inactivation of pluripotent genes, the primordial germ cells are known as gametogenesis-competent cells, which will either differentiate into male or female specialized cells in response to cues from the cells of the mesonephric tissue.

In genetically male embryos, the primordial germ cells have an XY chromosome complex. In males, there is a sex-specific gene that initiates the determination of gender by activating the production of regulatory sex-determining proteins. This testis-determining factor (TDF) is also known as the sex-determining region of the Y chromosome (SRY). It is the gene resting on the Y chromosome, specifically on its short arm (Yp11).

The SRY gene encodes for a transcription factor that activates the testis-specific enhancer (TESCO) of a related autosomal gene known as SOX9 (SRY-Box Transcription Factor 9). The SOX9 gene is essential for the initiation of Sertoli cell differentiation from supporting cell precursors. These supporting cells would otherwise differentiate into follicle cells (specifically granuloma cells).

SRY upregulates levels of SOX9. Once the cellular/tissue levels of SRY and SOX9 are high enough, the SOX9 protein begins to maintain its transcription at high levels in Sertoli cells. Once there are enough SOX9 positive cells in the gonad, it begins to undergo morphological changes, which will lead to the formation of the testes.

By approximately the fifth to the sixth week, the gender of the embryo is determined.

**Testicular Descent**

There is a biphasic model for the explanation of testicular descent. This process divides into two morphologically and hormonally distinct stages.

**Transabdominal Stage**

The transabdominal phase of testicular descent consists of the movement of the testes from their starting position on the posterior abdominal wall adjacent to the kidney down to the internal inguinal ring. This phase is dependent on a non-androgenic hormone and starts by the eighth gestational week. Between the eighth and fifteenth gestational weeks, the gubernaculum enlarges causally, leading to the formation of the gubernacular bulb, whereas between the 10th to 15th gestational weeks, the cranial suspensory ligament (CSL) regresses. Regression of the CSL is a necessary step for testicular descent; however, regression of the CSL alone is not sufficient to initiate gonadal descent.

The gubernaculum anchors the testes to the future inguinal region by traction. The gubernaculum shortens as it progressively incorporates into the gubernacular bulb.

**Inguinoscrotal Stage**

The second stage of testicular descent (inguinoscrotal) begins by the 26th gestational week. This stage is androgen-dependent and consists of the passage of the testes from the internal inguinal ring down into the scrotum.

The scrotum is effectively a continuation of skin and subcutaneous tissue lining the anterior abdominal wall. As the testes descend through the inguinal canal, it takes layers of the abdominal wall with it. The layers of the abdominal wall involved in testicular descent continue as analogous layers in the scrotum. The processus vaginalis obliterates through a process of programmed smooth muscle cell death in response to a decrease in androgen levels in the third trimester.

In the majority of fetuses, the testes will have descended into the scrotum by the 33rd gestational week.