The two most important steps to prevent radial graft failure are using the “no-touch technique” and removing the graft as a pedicle that contains the radial artery, the surrounding veins, and fatty tissue.

The nondominant hand is prepared and draped for the procedure. An arm board is applied to avoid traction on the arm during the change in the height of the table. A curvilinear incision made extending from one finger breath distal of the biceps tendon to one finger breath proximal to the radial styloid crease.

The tissues to the deep fascia are separated with the help of diathermy. It is vital to avoid injury to the lateral cutaneous nerve, which overlies the radial artery at the distal end of the incision. Then deep fascia is separated medially to the brachioradialis muscle. This reduces injury to the radial artery side branches.  Once the brachioradialis muscle is retracted, the side branches are visible.

Neurovascular fascia lies under the brachioradialis muscle covering the radial artery and its surrounding veins. It is simple to harvest the radial artery after this fascia is separated. The radial artery pedicle dissection becomes more straightforward when it started from the middle of the forearm as the artery cross underneath the brachioradialis muscle. The radial artery carefully lifts from its muscular bed. The side branches become visible once the radial artery pedicle is lifted. Then gentle upward traction to the vessel loop is done. After that, side branches are ligated with a harmonic scalpel.

Once the radial artery is mobilized, it is prepared for the proximal and distal divisions. The distal division is done first by putting a 2.0 silk suture around the artery at the point where the radial styloid combines with the radial pedicle, followed by ligation of the distal end of the radial artery. Once a distal division is complete, the distal stump of the radial artery is palpated to assure ulnar artery contribution to the collateral supply of the hand. Then proximal division is then performed. The radial artery is carefully lifted perpendicular to the forearm. The artery is first ligated with silk 2.0 suture and then divided. The proximal end of the graft is cannulated and flushed with the papaverine. The whole radial artery graft is covered with papaverine soaked gauze and detached from the operative site.

Electrocautery is used to achieve hemostasis of the radial artery graft. Before wound closure, hand examination is performed to confirm hemostasis. It helps to reduce the risk of postoperative compartment syndrome. It is essential to close the wound before giving systemic heparin. The deep fascia is sutured with running 2-0 polyglycolic suture and the skin with running 4-0 polyglycolic suture.