All patients diagnosed with CLL will not require treatment because CLL is a heterogeneous disease. Certain patients receiving no treatment have survival rates similar to that of a normal population; current treatment regimens cannot cure CLL except for allogeneic hematopoietic stem cell transplantation (HCT). Randomized control trials between immediate versus delayed treatments found no significant improvement in long-term survival with early treatment initiation.

**According to the International Workshop on Chronic Lymphocytic Leukemia (iwCLL) criteria for "active disease," indications for treatment include****:**

- Constitutional symptoms in patients such as fevers >100.5 degrees F or 38.0 degrees C for ≥2 weeks without evidence of infection, night sweats for ≥1 month without evidence of infection, unintentional weight loss of ≥10% within the previous 6 months, extreme fatigue, and early satiety.

- Progressive lymphocytosis with >50% increase in lymphocytes over a 2-month period or lymphocyte doubling time (LDT) of <6 months. LDT is obtained by linear regression extrapolation of absolute lymphocyte counts at every 2 weeks interval period over a time span of 2 to 3 months. Patients with initial blood lymphocyte counts of <30,000/mcL may need to be observed for a longer time period to help determine the LDT. Also, other lymphocytosis/lymphadenopathy contributing factors (e.g., infection) other than CLL should be excluded.

- Patients with rapid disease progression such as massive (i.e., ≥6 cm below the left costal margin)/progressive/symptomatic splenomegaly or massive nodes (i.e., ≥10 cm in longest diameter)/progressive/symptomatic lymphadenopathy.

- Autoimmune hemolytic anemia and/or autoimmune thrombocytopenia that is poorly responsive or unresponsive to corticosteroids.

- Evidence of progressive bone marrow failure by developing/worsening/symptomatic anemia and/or thrombocytopenia.

- Patients with recurrent infections.

****Treatment of CLL is further classified into;****

**A. Patients without "active disease":**This is further divided into early-stage asymptomatic CLL and localized SLL.

**1.  Early-stage asymptomatic CLL**

- **Initial observation as standard care: CLL patients who are asymptomatic, or patients with early-stage disease (e.g., Rai stage <3, Binet stage A or B), the standard of care is observation, as they do not require treatment.**During this observation period, the clinical examination of the patient and blood counts should occur every 3 months.  Based on these evaluations, at the end of 12 months, a decision is to be made whether the patient requires aggressive treatment or to continue observation of the patient.  Several randomized control trials support observation over aggressive treatment in patients with asymptomatic/early-stage CLL.

- **International Prognostic Score for Early-stage CLL (IPS-E):**Some early-stage CLL patients may require treatment within the first few years of diagnosis, while others remain asymptomatic without treatment for many years. The International Prognostic Score for Early-stage CLL (IPS-E) uses three variables (unmutated IGHV, lymphocytes >15,000/mcL, palpable lymph nodes) to further divide patients with early-stage CLL into three groups based on the number of risk factors to evaluate treatment requirement at one and five years:
- Low risk (no risk factors) – <1 percent treated at 1 year; 8 percent treated at 5 years
- Intermediate risk (one risk factor) – 3 percent treated at 1 year; 28 percent treated at 5 years
- High risk (two or three risk factors) – 14 percent treated at 1 year; 61 percent treated at 5 years

**2.  Localized SLL**

- Some patients present with small lymphocytic lymphoma (SLL), which involves a single lymph node site.  First-line management for localized SLL is similar to patients with early-stage asymptomatic CLL, which is observation unless there is clear evidence of "active disease" for which radiation therapy (RT) is used. In patients with stage I SLL contemplating radiation therapy, extensive pretreatment staging evaluation with imaging, and bone marrow biopsy is required to rule out an extensive disease involvement.  Limited data is available from small retrospective studies regarding the use of radiation therapy and localized SLL.

**B. Patients with Active Disease**

The main purpose of systemic therapy is for symptomatic relief, prolonged remission, and prolonged survival in patients. Symptomatic CLL is treated, and despite many recent advances, it remains an incurable disease. For those patients for whom treatment is considered, a pre-treatment assessment should be done, including gathering information about age and general health, other features such as TP53 abnormalities or adverse cytogenetics, relapsed disease, or treatment-naive status. The selection of initial therapy in patients with symptomatic/advanced CLL is based on the patient, patient preference, tumor characteristics, and therapy goals.  Various treatment approaches for CLL use different combinations of the following agents. These agents significantly differ in their rates of time to progression, measurable residual disease (MRD), complete remission, and toxicities of drugs. There have been studies comparing different treatment modalities, and an individualized approach needs to be considered. Hence, patient preference plays a vital role in the ultimate treatment decision. Various drugs utilized in the management of CLL include;

- Bruton tyrosine kinase inhibitors (ibrutinib, acalabrutinib)

- BCL-2 inhibitor (venetoclax)

- Purine analogs (fludarabine, pentostatin)

- Alkylating agents (cyclophosphamide, chlorambucil, bendamustine)

- Monoclonal antibodies (rituximab, ofatumumab, obinutuzumab)

- PI3K inhibitor (idelalisib)

**Choice of Therapy:**The preferred initial treatment choice is based upon genetic risk stratification of the tumor along with patient fitness assessment.

**1. Genetic risk stratification is described as following:**

- 
**Very high-risk disease: 17p deletion and/or TP53 mutations**

- 
**High-risk disease: IGHV unmutated (without 17p deletion and TP53 mutation)**

- 
**Standard-risk disease: IGHV mutated (without 17p deletion and TP53 mutation)**

**2. Fitness Assessment:**includes an assessment of comorbidities and the impact of these comorbidities on general function, liver function, and kidney function. Tools used for this assessment include the Eastern Cooperative Oncology Group performance status (ECOG PS), Cumulative illness rating scale (CIRS), geriatric assessment tools, and creatinine clearance to estimate renal function. Eligibility for targeted agents varies, depending upon the toxicity of the agent being used and the predicted tolerability based upon the patient's general fitness and comorbidities. Eligibility is more restrictive for chemoimmunotherapy. Patients are usually considered unfit for chemoimmunotherapy with intense regimens such as fludarabine, cyclophosphamide, and rituximab (FCR) if they have one or more of the following findings: ECOG PS of >/=2, CIRS >6, significant hepatic impairment (Child-Pugh class B or C), and creatinine clearance (CrCl) <70 mL/min.

**a. Very high-risk disease: 17p deletion and/or TP53 mutations:**These patients are at high risk of not responding to initial treatment with chemoimmunotherapy, or relapsing immediately after achieving remission. Initial treatment options include:

- Single-agent ibrutinib until progression (all ages)–is preferred based upon good tolerability of the drug, longer follow-up, and high response rates.

- Ibrutinib plus rituximab until progression (younger patients)– studies have shown that the addition of rituximab improved outcomes in younger adults compared to older adults.

- Fixed duration venetoclax plus obinutuzumab for one year (all ages)

- Single-agent venetoclax until progression (all ages)

- Single-agent acalabrutinib until progression (all ages)

**b. High-risk disease: IGHV unmutated (without 17p deletion and TP53 mutation):**These patients do respond to initial treatment with chemoimmunotherapy; however, targeted agents are preferred due to an improvement in progression-free survival (PFS) and overall survival (OS) benefit compared to other chemoimmunotherapy. Treatment of choice is strongly based on patient preference and patient comorbidities. Initial treatment options include:

- Single-agent ibrutinib until progression (all ages)

- Ibrutinib plus rituximab until progression (younger patients)

- Fixed duration venetoclax plus obinutuzumab (all ages, use in younger patients extrapolated from trials in older adults)

- Acalabrutinib until progression (all ages)

**c. Standard-risk disease: IGHV mutated (without 17p deletion and TP53 mutation):**In these patients, PFS and OS appear to be similar regardless of targeted therapy or chemoimmunotherapy being used in the patient. These patients are further categorized into Fit and Unfit based upon their Fitness assessment.

**Fit Patients:**Clinically fit patients with IGHV-mutated CLL and without 17p deletion or TP53 mutation may either choose targeted therapy or chemoimmunotherapy depending upon patient preference and Fitness assessment. Intensive Chemoimmunotherapy (FCR or BR) may be preferred by patients desiring a long treatment-free interval. Options include:

- Fludarabine, cyclophosphamide, rituximab (FCR for six cycles (younger patients).

- Bendamustine plus rituximab (BR) for six cycles (older patients).

- Ibrutinib as a single agent (all ages) or in combination with rituximab or obinutuzumab (younger patients).

- Fixed duration venetoclax plus obinutuzumab (all ages).

- Acalabrutinib as a single agent (all ages).

**Unfit Patients:**The management of patients with limited functional status is informed by the genetic features of the tumor (17p deletion, TP53 mutation, and IGHV mutation status). Many clinically unfit patients with comorbidities may benefit from treatment with single-agent ibrutinib, fixed duration venetoclax plus obinutuzumab, single-agent acalabrutinib, and/or the combination of bendamustine plus rituximab. Chlorambucil plus obinutuzumab is a treatment option for IGHV-mutated CLL in older patients with comorbidities.

**Initial Treatment Options**

**1. Targeted Agents**

**Bruton tyrosine kinase (BTK) inhibitors**

- **Single-agent ibrutinib**is an effective treatment for older patients with CLL. It has demonstrated improvement in both overall survival (OS) and progression-free survival (PFS) when compared to chlorambucil in older patients and when compared to the combination of bendamustine plus rituximab (BR). In younger patients, ibrutinib plus rituximab or obinutuzumab has demonstrated an overall PFS and OS benefit when compared to the combination of fludarabine plus cyclophosphamide and rituximab. Acalabrutinib is another BTK inhibitor that improves PFS when compared to chlorambucil plus obinutuzumab.

- **A combination of venetoclax plus obinutuzumab**is particularly used in patients in whom ibrutinib is contraindicated, such as patients with multiple comorbidities (example, history of severe bleeding, hepatic impairment, or atrial fibrillation) or if on any anticoagulation medications.  Studies have shown that the combination of venetoclax plus obinutuzumab demonstrates higher PFS and OS when compared with chlorambucil plus obinutuzumab.

**2. Chemoimmunotherapy**

- **Fludarabine, cyclophosphamide, and rituximab (FCR)**is an initial treatment option in younger patients who can tolerate chemotherapy without 17p deletion/TP53 mutation but with IGHV mutated CLL.  In patients with IGHV unmutated CLL, targeted therapy with ibrutinib is preferred over FCR due to improved OS and PFS. FCR is contraindicated in older patients due to the high risk of infections, adverse events, and high risk of immunosuppression.

- **Bendamustine plus rituximab (BR)**as a treatment of choice for older patients (> 65 years of age) without 17p deletion/TP53 mutation but with IGHV mutated CLL.  In patients with IGHV unmutated CLL, targeted therapy with ibrutinib is preferred over BR due to improved OS and PFS.

- **Chlorambucil based therapy**is usually not used as an initial treatment for CLL as other targeted therapy (example, ibrutinib, venetoclax plus obinutuzumab) has demonstrated higher efficacy in patients with 17p deletion, TP53 mutation, or IGHV unmutated CLL.  Chlorambucil plus obinutuzumab is a combination that could be used in elderly patients with IGHV mutated CLL, and recently it was found that the combination of chlorambucil with obinutuzumab is superior to rituximab plus chlorambucil in achieving a complete response and prolonging progression-free survival. This combination has demonstrated similar efficacy to ibrutinib based therapy and venetoclax plus obinutuzumab combination therapy in patients with IGHV mutated CLL.  Adverse effects of chlorambucil include significant anemia, neutropenia, and/or thrombocytopenia.  Less common adverse effects include hepatotoxicity, drug hypersensitivity, seizures, interstitial pneumonia, pulmonary fibrosis, and infertility.

**C. Management of complications of CLL and its therapy**

CLL/SLL is characterized by hypo/agammaglobulinemia, which increases the risk of infections, especially Staphylococcus, H. influenza, Pneumococcus, and herpes. These infections can be managed with antimicrobials for bacterial, fungal, or viral infections. For refractory infections in patients with hypogammaglobinemia, or for 2 or more severe infections within a timeframe of 6-month, monthly IVIG infusions are considered.

CLL/SLL also produces autoantibodies directed against RBCs and platelets, leading to immune-mediated hemolytic anemia and thrombocytopenia.  These can be acutely managed with packed RBC transfusion for anemia and platelet transfusion for bleeding secondary to thrombocytopenia.  The cytopenias can be eventually treated with prednisone.

**D. Relapsed/Refractory CLL**

It is important to confirm relapsed/refractory CLL histologically prior to restarting treatment.  Recurrent CLL in asymptomatic patients should be monitored for symptoms requiring treatment. Richter's transformation should specifically be excluded.  The treatment of choice at relapse depends upon the initial treatment used and the initial duration of response to that treatment.

Ibrutinib is the first-line therapy to improve progression-free survival and response to treatment in relapsed/refractory CLL.  Other drugs of choice for relapsed CLL include idelalisib (a phosphoinositide 3'-kinase [PI3K] delta inhibitor), Alemtuzumab (a monoclonal antibody directed against CD52, a cellular marker found in CLL) and venetoclax (Bcl-2 inhibitor). Venetoclax is actively used in refractory CLL patients with 17p deletion. Venetoclax induces brisk apoptosis and occasionally induces tumor lysis syndrome. Anti-CD19 chimeric antigen receptor (CAR) T-cell therapy has also been active in refractory cases. Anti-CD20 monoclonal antibody (rituximab, ofatumumab, obinutuzumab) may briefly alleviate symptoms in relapsed/refractory CLL patients.

Allogeneic Hematopoietic Stem Cell Transplantation is rarely performed in CLL but has been used in refractory cases in appropriate patients. Those with a very aggressive form of the disease, such as patients with 17p deletion, especially in younger patients, HLA-matched donors, should be recommended to get bone marrow transplant. Those without a matched donor or older in age can be given a trial of ibrutinib. Palliative radiation therapy can be given to chemotherapy-resistant areas of lymphadenopathy, liver, and spleen.  Total body irradiation occasionally helps relieve symptoms temporarily.