**Radiation Therapy Biology**

Radiation therapy uses ionizing radiation to damage malignant cells by acting on the DNA, leading to cellular death or inhibiting their multiplication capacity.

Radiotherapy can be used to cure or alleviate symptoms caused by malignancy; it can be given in combination with surgery, immunotherapy, or chemotherapy.

Radiotherapy works on the principle of damaging the genetic material of cells (DNA), acting on both cancerous and normal cells. During mitosis, the DNA content of cells duplicates; therefore, cells with high mitotic activity are more susceptible to radiation than those with low mitotic activity. In other words, tissues with higher division activity are more radiosensitive, which is usually the case with malignant tumors. Different tumors have different multiplication capacities, making some more radiosensitive than others.

Normal tissues located in the radiation path also suffer the effects of ionizing radiation, which in the oral cavity leads to complications such as oral mucositis, xerostomia, and radiation-related caries. However, normal cells have a faster repair rate and a better ability to return to normal function than cancerous cells. The lower repair rate of cancerous cells is what causes differential malignant cell killing.

The newer radiotherapy modalities like 3-D confrontation therapy, intensity modulated therapy (IMRT), and proton beam therapy can deliver radiation to localized areas, thus, sparing the normal tissue more efficiently.