Particularly in the management of chronic medical conditions, like atopic dermatitis, the liberal use of moisturizers is a fundamental component of treatment.

Dry skin affects millions of people and can seriously affect the quality of life. The use of moisturizers is the simplest way to obtain symptom relief. Hence, nurses, pharmacists, and primary care providers should encourage patients to use moisturizers liberally. However, patients should be educated to select moisturizers that are free of fragrance; the more chemicals in a moisturizer, the more likely it causes an allergic reaction.

The consistent use of moisturizers in atopic dermatitis can reduce symptoms and frequency of disease flares. Numerous randomized controlled trials form the basis of this recommendation. The level and strength of evidence are IA.

Physicians (MDs, DOs, NPs, PAs) need to include moisturizers in their prescribing and care instructions. Pharmacists can make recommendations on the most appropriate types of agents to the prescriber or nursing staff. Nursing will often be in charge of application in the inpatient setting and can assess the effectiveness of moisturizing therapy, or in the outpatient setting can determine compliance with the moisturizing regimen and report back to the interprofessional healthcare team on the success or failure of treatment. Moisturizing agents can be a part of the compounding process if the pharmacist needs to make a topical preparation to deliver medication, and the pharmacist should consult with the clinician on such matters on a case-by-case basis. As with any intervention, using moisturizers is most effective with an interprofessional team approach. [Level V]