Due to the short half-life of endogenous somatostatin, synthetic analogs have been created that have a much longer half-life and are more useful in the management of the disease. These analogs include lanreotide, octreotide, seglitide, and vapreotide. While these medications can be extremely effective in reducing symptoms in patients, they are not 100% effective in all patients. Some patients only develop partial relief while others seem to be completely unaffected. In these patients who experience partial or zero relief, it appears the relative concentration and pattern of expression of the six somatostatin receptors to one another dictate the response to the synthetic analogs. This response is an area of potential research in treatment as the synthetic analogs must be developed to be more specific to the patient's unique somatostatin receptor pattern and receptor concentrations.

These somatostatin analogs are useful in the management of acromegaly and numerous NETs including, insulinoma, growth hormone releasing factor tumor (GRFoma), glucagonoma, pheochromocytoma, somatostatinoma, carcinoid tumors, many pituitary adenomas, VIPoma, and gastrinoma. Within this spectrum of disease, the synthetic somatostatin analogs are used to downregulate the overproduction of specific hormones. For example, somatostatin is used to decrease the insulin production in insulinoma or to decrease the TSH production from a pituitary adenoma. Ultimately, surgical resection of these tumors is curative, but in advanced metastasis or non-surgical candidates, medical treatment with somatostatin is the preferred treatment.

Diabetic retinopathy resulting in neovascularization of the retina, which eventually leads to vision loss if untreated, is a common cause of blindness in patients with diabetes. Due to its anti-proliferative and anti-angiogenesis properties, somatostatin is frequently employed to hinder or reverse the vessel proliferation seen in this illness.