A dental extraction can be offered to patients for a multitude of reasons. While the emphasis is always placed on retaining as much of the dentition as possible, there are cases where this is no longer feasible or in the patient's best interest.

**Dental Caries**

When dental caries have progressed significantly, there is often not enough sound tooth tissue to allow for a restoration of any kind. This would render a tooth unrestorable, leaving extraction as the only viable treatment option. Caries are widely accepted as the primary reason for tooth removal.

**Pulpal/Apical Pathology**

A common sequela of dental caries is pulpal and periapical pathology. A dental extraction would be indicated for a tooth with pulpal, or apical pathology that cannot be resolved with endodontic treatment or that would not be restorable following the endodontic treatment. In some cases, a dental extraction is indicated when the patient chooses not to have endodontic treatment but would still like the tooth to be treated.

**Severe Periodontal Disease**

Severe periodontal disease leads to the destruction of bone in the maxilla or mandible. Once a tooth has lost most of its bony support, it will become mobile and often an irritation to patients. As there are few options for bony regeneration, extraction is often indicated.

**Fractured Teeth**

Fractured teeth that cannot be appropriately restored or retained will require extraction.

**Retained Dental Roots**

Retained dental roots can be present after crown fractures due to caries or trauma or following incomplete dental extraction. Some situations will allow for the retention of a dental root, such as for prosthetic reasons or due to the risk of damaging surrounding structures in an attempt to retrieve them.

**Impacted Teeth**

Impacted teeth are those that cannot erupt due to a physical barrier.

A joint decision should be had with the patient as to whether prophylactic extraction or radiographic monitoring is preferable. Impaction of teeth is seen most commonly with teeth late in eruption chronology - namely mandibular third molars, upper canines, and lower premolars.

**Supernumerary Teeth**

A supernumerary tooth is defined as a tooth that is additional to the normal series. They present most commonly in the anterior maxilla. Supernumeraries can cause a range of clinical issues, including failure of eruption or displacement of a permanent tooth, dental crowding, and pathology.

**Orthodontic Extractions**

Teeth are often considered for extraction for orthodontic reasons, often to create space in the dental arch to allow movement of the teeth into a more favorable position.

**Pre-prosthetic Extractions**

Extraction of some teeth can be considered if it contributes to a better-fitting patient prosthesis or if teeth are considered to have a poor enough prognosis that they will later on adversely affect the suitability of a prosthesis.

**Tooth In a Fracture Line**

When a patient sustains a mandibular fracture, the pattern of this fracture will be assessed clinically and radiographically. If the fracture line is seen to pass through a tooth considered a potential source of infection, a possible inhibitor to the fracture healing, or when the tooth itself is fractured, removing the tooth may be regarded as prudent.

**Teeth with Associated Pathology**

Teeth associated with pathologies, such as cysts of the jaws or malignancies, may be recommended for extraction.

**Prior to Radiotherapy**

Patients undergoing radiotherapy, often for cancers of the head and neck, are usually required to have a dental assessment before commencing radiotherapy. This is to allow the identification of teeth with a poor prognosis or the potential to cause symptoms or infection in the near future. This is required as dental extractions in the irradiated patient carry a risk of osteoradionecrosis of the jaws, which should be avoided where possible.