Radiotherapy alone was a primary mode of treatment for patients with inoperable lungs prior to the introduction of chemotherapy in the 1980s. Since that time, the delivery and role of radiation therapy in squamous cell lung cancer and non-small cell lung cancer, in general, have evolved considerably. Early-stage lung cancers can be cured with radiotherapy alone, while more advanced disease typically requires the use of concurrent chemoradiation. Radiotherapy can be utilized in definitive, adjuvant, recurrent, and palliative settings with or without chemotherapy. Various techniques and fractionation schedules can be employed depending on the situation and treatment goals.

**Definitive Radiotherapy**

In general, patients with locally advanced inoperable squamous cell lung cancer and NSCLC are typically offered concurrent platinum-based chemoradiotherapy followed by adjuvant Durvalumab as the standard of care.

**Pre-operative radiotherapy**

Pre-operative radiotherapy is typically accompanied by platinum-based chemotherapy. Doses are usually lower than definitive therapy ranging from 45-50Gy.

**Post-operative Radiotherapy**

Post-operative radiotherapy is typically indicated in patients that have residual disease post-operatively. Doses vary from 54 to 60 Gy for an R1 resection or extracapsular extension to 60 to 70 Gy for patients with gross residual disease. The use of post-op radiotherapy for those with N2 disease has been controversial until recently. The LUNG-ART trial randomized patients with completely resected N2 NSCLC to receive 54 Gy to the primary surgical bed and mediastinal nodes or no radiation. No difference in disease-free survival was found.

**Hypofractionation**

Hypofractionated radiotherapy utilizes doses that exceed >2Gy/fraction but is lower than what can be delivered with SBRT and is typically a more protracted course. It can be employed in early-stage disease where the five fraction dose constraints for SBRT cannot be met, such as in ultra-central tumors (defined as the GTV or PTV abutting or overlapping the proximal bronchial tree, trachea, or esophagus), large tumors (>5 cm), or in palliative cases.

**Dosing and Constraints**

The ideal dosing for conventionally fractionated radiotherapy was established by the RTOG 7301 trial from the 1970s, which tested doses ranging from 30-60Gy delivered continuously or as a split course.

Dose constraints have been established for various organs at risk (OARs) that one may encounter in the thorax. The most common include the spinal cord, heart, esophagus, normal lung, and brachial plexus. The Quantitative Analyses of Normal Tissue Effects in the Clinic (QUANTEC) provides guidance on appropriate dose constraints relative to the risk of toxicity. The spinal cord should generally be <45 Gy point max dose for a near zero risk of cord myelopathy. The esophagus mean dose should be kept at <34 Gy and V50 <35%. Normal lung dose constraints have been studied with various metanalysis. Ideally, the lung V20 <20%, which had an 18% pneumonitis rate with no deaths.

**Complications**

Intensity-modulated radiotherapy has modestly reduced the rates of toxicity associated with conventional radiation compared to 3D conformal but without a change in oncologic outcomes.

**Stereotactic Body Radiotherapy (SBRT)**

SBRT is defined as the use of imaged guided high-dose radiation therapy delivered in 5 fractions or less with the intention of ablating the tumor.

While VATS lobectomy remains the standard of care for early-stage lung cancers, SBRT can be considered in patients that are medically inoperable, technically inoperable, or who refuse surgery. It is a non-invasive and well-tolerated technique with 3-year primary tumor control rates exceeding 90% for peripheral tumors and exceeding 80% for centrally located tumors.****Prospective trials comparing surgery to SBRT have been attempted but have closed due to poor accrual.

These trials had several caveats, specifically low patient enrollment (58 patients) and very few patients who underwent VATS lobectomy, which would be expected to improve outcomes compared to open resection. Current prospective trials are again investigating resection versus SBRT. The STABL-MATES trial (NCT02468024) is investigating sublobar resection versus 54 Gy in 3 fractions of SBRT, while the VALOR trial (NCT02984761) is investigating anatomic resection compared to SBRT. Larger retrospective reviews examining SBRT versus surgery for the early-stage disease have found comparable cancer-specific survival despite having inferior overall survival.

A unique approach utilizing neoadjuvant SBRT followed by resection has been investigated in the MISSILE trial, demonstrating 100% 2-year local control and 77% 2-year overall survival with excellent quality of life.

**Dosing and Constraints**

Local control is highly dependent on the biological equivalent dose (BED). Tumors receiving BED <100 Gy have a 5-year local control rate of 36.5%, while those with ≥100 Gy are 84.2%.

NCCN guidelines provide a comprehensive list of potential SBRT doses and fractionation schedules.

Target coverage evaluation is also critical, and certain metrics have been developed to evaluate and compare target coverage. Conformity <1.2 to 1.5, gradient (R – range from 2.9 to 5.9 dependent on target volume), and overall coverage V-100% are evaluated.

**Set-up and Planning**

Given the high doses and the small number of fractions in SBRT, it is critical to have highly reproducible positioning and targeting accuracy. A CT simulation is typically the first step with the patient placed in the supine position on a stereotactic body frame and a CT slice thickness of <=5 mm but recommended 1 to 3 mm.

The movement of the target caused by the respiratory cycle is an inherent problem with lung SBRT. While there is relatively little movement with tumors in the upper lobes of the lung, the closer the tumor is to the diaphragm, the more tumor motion can be expected. If tumor motion exceeds 5 mm, it is recommended that some kind of motion management technique is employed.

A 4-dimensional CT is a type of simulation scan that contains both spatial and temporal information regarding the location of the tumor in each phase of the respiratory cycle. A series of "slow" CT scans are acquired and binned according to the respiratory phase. They are typically divided into 10 phases. These sequences can then be "played," and tumor motion can be appreciated. If the tumor motion exceeds 1 cm, additional devices, such as abdominal compression, may be used to limit tumor motion. Abdominal compression devices can range from a relatively simple belt placed around the patient's abdomen to more sophisticated devices that are attached to the treatment table and apply pressure to the abdomen in predetermined increments.

Respiratory gating is another technique that isolates a particular portion of the respiratory cycle to deliver radiation. Breathing is monitored with either spirometry or surface monitoring.

Fiducial marker tracking is another option for targeting. It requires the implantation of a radiopaque marker, typically gold, either with endoscopy or CT guidance, depending on the location of the tumor. The fiducial markers can be tracked using cone beam CT, kV/kV imaging, or an automated tracking system to identify the offset and calculate the required shifts. The disadvantage is that it can add additional time, cost, and treatment complications but allows for smaller expansions, thus sparing additional uninvolved lung tissue. Each of the markers must remain in the same place relative to the other markers and the tumor. The markers also risk migration requiring a second implantation. Migration rates range from 1 to 19% depending on the type of marker implanted.

Once the patient has been simulated, target delineation can begin. The CT from the initial simulation, along with a fused PET/CT, can ensure the target is completely outlined. Contouring in lung windowing is especially helpful. Once the gross tumor volume has been outlined, expansions to the volume account for tumor motion and set-up uncertainty. If the institution has 4D-CT capabilities, the GTV is contoured on every phase of respiration and then combined to form an internal target volume (ITV). Alternatively, the maximal intensity projection (MIP) could also be used to construct an ITV, although it is vulnerable to error in cases of irregular breathing or close proximity to the diaphragm. A planning target volume expansion (PTV) is typically 5 mm.

**Delivery**

Treatment delivery of SBRT can be delivered with dedicated stereotactic systems such as Cyberknife or with various linac-based systems utilizing intensity modulation. What is critical in SBRT delivery is the need for onboard image guidance to ensure accurate targeting. This can be accomplished with kV, MV-based planar imaging, or volumetric with cone beam CT.

**SBRT complications**

SBRT is generally well tolerated, but the risk of acute or long-term toxicities should be considered when recommending treatment. The risks are determined by the location of the tumor (peripheral, central, or ultra-central), dose, and volume of tissue irradiated. Radiation pneumonitis is a major source of toxicity in lung radiotherapy and can result in lung fibrosis, the need for oxygen therapy, and even mechanical ventilation. The incidence ranges from 0 to 29%, but the severity is usually non-life threatening even in patients with known lung disease, which is likely due to the smaller volumes radiated with SBRT in general.

Centrally located tumors treated tend to have higher toxicity rates than peripheral lesions. They also have a unique set of complications according to their location. Esophageal toxicity ranging from stenosis to tracheoesophageal fistula has been reported with an overall incidence of 12%.

Chest wall pain is usually observed with peripherally located tumors is seen in approximately 30% of cases several months to years post-treatment. Rib fractures can occur up to 2 years post-treatment with an incidence of 5%, provided threshold volume and dose thresholds are met.

**Re-irradiation**

Most evidence for re-irradiation of lung tumors after primary definitive radiotherapy is confined largely to retrospective studies. Local relapse for NSCLC can occur within two years in about one-third of patients and the rate of second primary lung tumors is 14% at ten years.

There are several technical challenges associated with re-irradiation: the lack of a standard definition of what constitutes re-irradiation, disagreement regarding an acceptable time interval between treatments, the ideal method of delivering radiation, and the lack of readily accepted cumulative dose tolerances.

Several papers have attempted to address these issues with varying degrees of success. To establish a consensus, an expert survey was taken. Although a consensus failed to emerge, most experts defined re-irradiation as any overlap in the previously radiated PTV or organs at risk.

Highly conformal radiation delivery with either SBRT, IMRT/VMAT, or even proton therapy can be considered.

Devising acceptable dose constraints has been particularly challenging due to the paucity of data regarding normal tissue recovery and dose/toxicity data in humans. Several groups have attempted to assemble cumulative dose constraints. However, there is no agreed-upon set of constraints, nor is there any agreement on how to evaluate or report cumulative doses. Two methods exist for comparing and reporting cumulative dose: Equieffective dose in 2Gy fractions (EQD2) or Biologic effective dose (BED). Both of these methods attempt to ensure a uniform comparison of doses delivered. There are several published putative cumulative dose constraints listed in EQD2.

Complications resulting from retreatment include radiation pneumonitis, esophagitis, chest wall pain, cardiac toxicity, and death. Esophagitis was the most commonly reported toxicity, with a rate of 17%, followed by pneumonitis, with a rate of 12.3%. Rib fractures and spinal cord myelopathy occurred in <1% of cases. The risk of cardiac toxicity is related to the mean heart dose, and the relative risk increases by 7% for every additional 1Gy.

Pulmonary function testing should be considered, although there are no defined thresholds under which retreatment should not be offered. PFTs may be unnecessary for small peripheral recurrences treated with SBRT.

**Palliation**

There are several circumstances where radiotherapy can be used for palliative purposes: including chest wall pain, bronchial obstruction, superior vena cava syndrome, hemoptysis, bone metastasis, and brain metastasis. Chest wall pain can be treated with doses ranging from 20 to 30 Gy in 5 to 10 fractions daily or in patients with particularly poor functional status, 17Gy in 2 fractions given weekly.