**Labs**

Clinically, the complete blood count (CBC) test measures leukocytes. A CBC is frequently ordered to provide insight into disease processes and includes measurements of the leukocytes, as well as red blood cell and platelet totals. Often associated with the CBC is a differential, which refers to the relative amounts of white blood cell types (i.e., neutrophil, lymphocyte, eosinophil, etc.) as a percentage of the total number of WBCs. Of note, if a subtype of white blood cells seems to be elevated based on the differential, the actual value of the type of white blood cells should be calculated by multiplying the percentage listed on the differential by the total number of white blood cells.

The normal range of values for white blood cells is 4,000 to 11,000/mL. Anything below this range is leukopenia, and anything that exceeds this range qualifies as leukocytosis.

A peripheral blood smear is an additional optional test, which allows for the histological analysis of the peripheral blood. This test is particularly helpful in cases of leukopenia or if there is a concern for leukemia or lymphoma.

**Leukopenia**

This condition is where the leukocyte counts are lower than normal. Leukopenia can occur with viral infections and other conditions such as systemic lupus erythematosus.

**Leukocytosis**

This condition is where the leukocyte counts (primarily neutrophils) are higher than normal, accompanied by a “left shift” or an increase in immature cells in the blood. Leukocytosis is commonly a sign of inflammatory response such as infection, but can also occur during parasitic infections or cancers such as leukemia. Neutrophils can also become elevated due to other conditions such as stress.