The histopathology in pneumonia can be broadly studied under 2 main headings: bronchopneumonia/lobular pneumonia or lobar pneumonia.

**Lobar Pneumonia**

Lobar pneumonia is diffuse consolidation involving the entire lobe of the lung. Its evolvement can be broken down into 4 stages as follows:

- Congestion: This stage is characterized by grossly heavy and boggy appearing lung tissue, diffuse congestion, vascular engorgement, and the accumulation of alveolar fluid rich in infective organisms. There are few red blood cells (RBC) and neutrophils at this stage.

- Red hepatization: Marked infiltration of red blood cells, neutrophils, and fibrin into the alveolar fluid is seen. Grossly, the lungs appear red and firm akin to a liver, hence the term hepatization.

- Gray hepatization: The RBC break down and is associated with fibrinopurulent exudates causing a red to gray color transformation.

- Resolution: Characterized by clearing of the exudates by resident macrophages with or without residual scar tissue formation.

**Bronchopneumonia**

Bronchopneumonia is characterized by suppurative inflammation localized in patches around bronchi which may or may not be localized to a single lobe of the lung.

Very rarely, severe forms of pneumonia may result in the formation of lung abscess, a complete breakdown of tissue and formation of pus-filled pockets in focal areas of the lung. Also, the infection may spread to the pleural space forming a fibrinopurulent exudate filling this space- known as empyema.