There is no absolute contraindication to performing a fasciotomy. This section will explore the relative contraindications. Every decision to perform an emergency fasciotomy should be made by a senior team member and on a case-by-case basis in the context of the patient and the injury sustained.

The primary relative contraindication to performing a fasciotomy is delayed presentation; if the clinician suspects compartment syndrome of having been present for more than 12 hours, there is a potential risk of reperfusion injury.

One study has demonstrated that fasciotomies performed within 6 hours resulted in almost complete limb function recovery, between 6 and 12 hours normal functional recovery rate was 68%. However, fasciotomies performed after 12 hours resulted in only 8% regaining normal limb function.

Conversely, another more recent study has shown that there is no difference in limb salvage rate when comparing early (<12 hours) to late (>12 hours) fasciotomy. It did demonstrate the infection rate is significantly higher in patients whose fasciotomies were delayed.

In a 2008 study, a cohort of 336 combat patients received 643 fasciotomies (upper and lower limb included). Patients who underwent a delayed fasciotomy had twice the amputation rate and three times the mortality.

These considerations of irreversible nerve and muscle damage and high risk of infection change the risk-benefit analysis in missed compartment syndrome and negate the necessity for emergency surgery.