The symptoms of ASD are usually identified by two years of age, and one-third of children experience regression of skills at the same time. The symptoms of childhood disintegrative disorder usually start later, at around four years of age. In ASD, regression of skills develops around two years of age, while in childhood disintegrative disorder, regression is later, more severe, and more global in extent. Children with childhood disintegrative disorder generally have the worst outcome among individuals with ASD. Their cognitive and communication skills are affected. Most children with childhood disintegrative disorder experience a distinct prodrome characterized by bouts of anxiety and terror with no consistent medical, environmental, or psychosocial triggers.

A child affected with childhood disintegrative disorder shows normal development, and they normally develop age-appropriate verbal and nonverbal communication, as well as social relationships, motor, play, and self-care skills as compared to other same-aged children. However, by 2 to 10 years of age, they almost completely lose their acquired skills in 2 of the following 6 functional areas:

- Receptive language skills (comprehension of language: listening and understanding what is communicated)

- Expressive language skills (being able to produce speech and communicate a message)

- Social skills and self-care skills

- Bowel and bladder control

- Motor skills

- Play skills

Impairment of function also occurs in social interactions and communications.

**The 10th revision of the International Statistical Classification of Diseases and Related Health Problems (ICD-10) Criteria for Childhood Disintegrative Disorder Diagnosis (WHO)**

- Normal development up to the age of at least two years; the presence of normal age-appropriate milestones are achieved in the areas of communication, social relationships, play, and adaptive behavior at age two years or later are required for this diagnosis.

- A definite loss of previously acquired skills at the onset of the disorder. The diagnosis requires a clinically significant loss of skills (and not just a failure to use them in certain situations) in at least 2 of the following areas:

- Expressive or receptive language
- Play
- Social skills or adaptive behavior
- Bowel or bladder control
- Motor skills

- Qualitatively abnormal social functioning, manifest in at least 2 of the following areas:

- Qualitative abnormalities in reciprocal social interaction (of the type defined for autism)
- Qualitative abnormalities in communication (of the type defined for autism)
- Restricted, repetitive, and stereotyped patterns of behavior, interests, and activities, including motor stereotypies and mannerisms
- General loss of interest in objects and the environment

- The disorder is not attributable to the other varieties of pervasive developmental disorder acquired aphasia with epilepsy, elective mutism, schizophrenia, and Rett syndrome.