The two main treatments for generalized anxiety disorder are cognitive behavioral therapy and medications. Patients may benefit most from a combination of the two. It may take some trial and error to discover which treatments work best.

**Cognitive Behavioral Therapy**

This includes psychoeducation, changing maladaptive thought patterns, and gradual exposure to anxiety-provoking situations.

**Pharmacotherapy**

Patients who do not respond to cognitive behavioral therapy may be treated with medications. Some patients with severe symptoms are treated with both initially. Several types of medications are used to treat generalized anxiety disorder.

**Antidepressants**

Selective serotonin reuptake inhibitor (SSRI) and serotonin-norepinephrine reuptake inhibitor (SNRI) classes are the first-line agents with a response rate of 30% to 50%. This class of drugs includes escitalopram (Lexapro), duloxetine (Cymbalta), venlafaxine (Effexor XR), and paroxetine (Paxil, Pexeva). In a study, 81% of children with anxiety disorders who received combined sertraline hydrochloride and CBT responded to the treatment.

**Antipsychotics**may also help some patients, especially those with associated behavior problems.

**Benzodiazepines**

Examples are diazepam and clonazepam, which are long-acting agents. These agents are used when an immediate reduction of symptoms is desired, or a short-term treatment is needed. Generally, cooperative and compliant patients who are aware that their symptoms have a psychological basis are more likely to respond to benzodiazepines. Since there is a concern for misuse and dependence, patients with a history of alcoholism or drug abuse are not appropriate candidates for this treatment.

**Buspirone**

Buspirone is a non-benzodiazepine that does not cause dependency. It is also less sedating than benzodiazepines, and tolerance does not occur at therapeutic doses. This agent has a therapeutic lag in the efficacy of two to three weeks, limiting its use.

All medications should be titrated slowly and continued for at least 4 weeks to determine if they work. Once symptoms are under control, the medications need to be used for at least 12 months before gradually tapering them. Every medication has adverse effects like weight gain, hyperlipidemia, and diabetes; thus, the patients need to be monitored.

Psychotherapy is used in addition to medications; this combination has proven to be effective.

The education of the patient is vital as it can help ease anxiety. The triggers for anxiety should be managed by avoiding caffeine, alcohol, nicotine, and stress) and improving sleep.

Many complementary and alternative remedies are available, but the evidence to support their efficacy is lacking. Further, some agents like Kava may injure the liver. Others, like St John's wort and hydroxytryptophan, may interact with SSRIs and induce serotonin syndrome.