The skull is at the target of many pathological processes, including congenital, inflammatory, neoplastic, and traumatic pathologies. Most skull lesions are asymptomatic and are incidentally discovered during CT or MRI performed for other reasons. Benign tumors such as hemangioma and osteoma are the most commonly encountered lesions in this region.

**Calvarial Lesions**

Osteoma, hemangioma, fibrous dysplasia, eosinophilic granuloma, epidermoid and dermoid cysts, and Paget disease are the most commonly encountered benign lesions in the calvarium. Among these, hemangiomas, eosinophilic granulomas, and epidermoid and dermoid cysts are seen as lucent lesions while the remaining are sclerotic on radiography and CT. The most common two malign calvarial lesions are metastases and multiple myeloma. While the lung, breast, prostate, kidney, and thyroid are the most common origins of skull metastases in adults, a metastatic lesion in the skull of a child primarily suggest neuroblastoma or sarcoma as the origin. Skull metastases may be either lytic, sclerotic, or mixed; however, they mostly present as multiple lytic foci with accompanying soft-tissue components. Single and expansive lytic lesions are highly suggestive of thyroid or renal neoplasm metastasis. Metastases of prostate carcinoma are typically osteosclerotic. Multiple myelomas, the most common primary bone tumor of adulthood, characteristically show punched-out lytic lesions with sharp non-sclerotic margins that may coalesce to form larger lytic areas in the skull.

**Skull Base Lesions**

The skull base has an extremely complex anatomy and is not favorable for clinical examination. Therefore, radiologic imaging is an indispensable part of skull base evaluation. Inflammatory and neoplastic lesions of this region are the two main groups of pathology that must be primarily addressed. The main inflammatory lesions of the skull base are mucoceles and cranial complications of sinusitis and mastoiditis. Mucocele refers to the expansion of an air cell by mucus accumulation caused by the obstruction of the sinus ostium. In cases of mucocele, it is necessary to determine the cause of obstruction and to evaluate intraorbital/intracranial expansion, on CT and/or MRI. Sinusitis and mastoiditis may cause several intracranial infectious complications such as meningitis, cerebritis, ventriculitis, epidural abscess, subdural empyema, or skull base osteomyelitis. An initial non-contrast CT of the skull base and paranasal sinuses/temporal bone, followed by MRI with and without contrast administration, should be performed in case any of the mentioned complications are suspected. The neoplastic involvement profile of the skull base is no different from that of the calvarium, except for chordoma and chondrosarcoma, both of which have a well-known tendency for the skull base.