# Definition/Introduction

FODMAP is an acronym for fermentable oligo-, di- and monosaccharides, and polyols. These short-chain carbohydrates, arranged in descending order, are associated with worsening or induction of functional gastrointestinal symptoms such as cramping, bloating, and diarrhea. Such symptoms are at least partially attributable to the non-absorbable nature of osmotic carbohydrates, which undergo bacterial fermentation in the small intestine.

# Issues of Concern

It is not usually advisable to continue the diet for a period longer than four to six weeks due to potentially deleterious effects on the microbiome and vitamin, mineral, and fiber intake. However, the reintroduction of small amounts of FODMAP-containing foods may aid in the gradual restoration of intestinal microflora by supplying important prebiotics to one’s diet.

Patients on the low-FODMAP diet should refrain from eating wheat and rye products, certain stone fruit (including apricots, cherries, peaches, and prunes), persimmons, watermelons, artichokes, beets, some cruciferous vegetables, fennel, garlic, leek, onions, peas, barley, some nuts and seeds, lentils, chickpeas, mushrooms or artificial sweeteners. The list mentioned above is not comprehensive, but instead provides an idea of the scope of limitations. Patients are, however, encouraged to eat tofu, certain nuts and legumes, and quinoa in the meanwhile.

# Clinical Significance

The removal of FODMAPs from a person’s diet has demonstrably improved distressing symptoms of irritable bowel syndrome (IBS) and celiac disease.

Data from a randomized, controlled trial reveal that a low-FODMAP diet improved quality of life, psychosocial measures (including anxiety), and work performance in adults with IBS with diarrhea.

# Nursing, Allied Health, and Interprofessional Team Interventions

For this dietary intervention, it is optimal for patients to consult with a gastroenterologist and a nutritionist or registered dietician for instructions and symptom monitoring. Regular follow up with clinicians allows patients to incorporate the appropriate changes into their lifestyle successfully. Furthermore, advising the patient and paying close attention to his or her response to the diet will minimize potential harms associated with inadvertently extreme restrictions or the opposite. From the psychosocial perspective, one should note that a practitioner's attitude toward the diet plays an essential role in preventing a patient's poor response to it.

Additionally, clinic visits are an opportunity to disseminate written material to patients, which improves understanding and has been demonstrated to enhance diet adherence.