Early detection is imperative for the optimization of neonatal outcomes. Ultrasonography is particularly useful in estimating fetal weight and for diagnosing FGR by utilizing biometric measures, such as head circumference (HC), abdominal circumference (AC), femur length (FL), and biparietal diameter (BD).

**Management of Early-onset FGR (<32 weeks)**

Uterine artery Doppler velocimetry (UADV) is commonly used for surveillance as well as to determine the timing of delivery. Delivery is indicated at ≥34 weeks if absent end-diastolic blood flow velocity (AEDV) and at ≥32 weeks of gestation if reversed end-diastolic velocity (REDV) are detected.

Cardiotocography (CTG) that records fetal heartbeat and uterine contractions is another recommended technique for surveillance. The biophysical profile (BPP) also serves as a common and important method of surveillance. Twice weekly CTG and/or BPP are indicated if the UADV study is abnormal. Abnormal CTG or BPP reports are indications for interruption of pregnancy by Cesarean section (CS). FGR alone is not an indication for CS.

Antenatal corticosteroids should be administered in pregnant mothers up to 34 weeks of gestation to improve fetal lung maturation. Magnesium sulfate is recommended for neuroprotection if a very preterm delivery (<32 weeks) is anticipated.

**Management of Late-onset FGR (>32 weeks)**

A UADV study should be performed every week or every other week to evaluate for deteriorations. Similar to early-onset FGR, twice-weekly CTG and/or BPP are indicated if the UADV study is abnormal.