The majority of patients with anorectal malformations receive their diagnosis as newborns. A full newborn physical exam is vital in these patients as is a thorough work up as approximately 60% of patients will have an associated anomaly.

In addition to a perineal/anal exam, which is mandatory, a full physical newborn examination in a patient with an anorectal malformation includes listening to heart sounds to see if a murmur can be auscultated, examining the limbs for any anatomic abnormality, and a full genitourinary exam.

For an anus to be normal, it should be in the correct location and the proper size, based on age. The normal size anus of a full-term infant is a 10 to 12 Hegar dilator (an instrument used to size the anus), and the size of a 12-month-old should be about a 15 Hegar dilator. The basis of the correct location is on the anal opening being in the center of the anal muscle complex.  The position of the anal opening to the muscle complex cannot always be discerned in the clinic and often requires an exam under anesthesia.

The perineum should be thoroughly evaluated taking care to pay attention to features such as the development of the buttocks, the presence of a gluteal fold, and the examination for any type of opening or orifice on the perineum. In female patients with an anorectal malformation, a thorough vaginal exam should also take place, taking care to note the number of openings on the perineum. These physical exam features can help give clues as to the type of anorectal malformation.