Direct injury to the deep peroneal nerve (during surgery) or lateral injury to the knee can result in a foot drop in which the patient is unable to dorsiflex their foot and/or the patient may have some weakness on inversion of the foot. The deep peroneal nerve may also be affected in people with diabetes, lower motor neuron disease, infectious disorders, and ischemia. Injury to the deep peroneal nerve is a common cause of mononeuropathy of the lower leg. In people who perform repetitive motions, the deep peroneal nerve can become entrapped at the ankle beneath the extensor retinaculum which is referred to as anterior tarsal tunnel syndrome.

Women who wear high-heeled shoes or individuals who sit for a prolonged period with the feet plantar flexed can also develop neuropathy of this nerve. Other causes of deep peroneal nerve entrapment include space-occupying lesions, surgery on the lateral knee, and chronic compartment syndrome. Ganglion cysts may also cause peripheral neuropathies in the common peroneal nerve and its branches which typically occur at the level of the fibular neck.

Patients with deep peroneal nerve neuropathy may present with vague pain, a burning sensation, or a cramp over the dorsum of the foot that may or may not involve the web-space between the first and second toes. Other individuals may present with nocturnal foot pain.  Symptoms may worsen with a certain type of shoe or a particular activity. When there is more proximal involvement, it may present with tripping or foot drop due to a weakness of the extensor hallucis longus muscle.