# Continuing Education Activity

Cutis marmorata telangiectatica (CMTC) is a rare, sporadic, congenital cutaneous vascular disorder of unknown etiology. CMTC usually presents at birth with persistent cutis marmorata, vascular telangiectasia, and occasionally, ulcers. There is typically improvement of this reticular vascular skin pattern during the first year with gradual improvement in time. Some infants with CMTC have been associated with musculoskeletal anomalies, vascular abnormalities, cardiac defects, neurological defects, and ocular anomalies. This activity reviews the workup of cutis marmorata telangiectatica congenita and describes the role of health professionals working together to manage this condition.

**Objectives:**
- Describe the presentation of cutis marmorata telangiectatica congenita.
- Summarize the treatment of cutis marmorata telangiectatica congenita.
- Describe the differential diagnosis of cutis marmorata telangiectatica congenita.
- Outline the workup of cutis marmorata telangiectatica congenita and describes the role of health professionals working together to manage this condition.

# Introduction

Cutis marmorata telangiectatica congenita (CMTC) is a rare, sporadic, congenital cutaneous vascular disorder of unknown etiology.

# Etiology

Cutis marmorata telangiectatica congenita is of unknown etiology; however, several studies have attributed the cause of the disease to be multifactorial.

# Epidemiology

CMTC is usually present at birth however some cases of delayed onset have been reported with lesions developing three months to 2 years later.

# Pathophysiology

The pathogenesis of this disorder is unclear and likely multifactorial.

# Histopathology

The diagnosis of CMTC is clinical, as histology is nonspecific. Swollen endothelial cells, abnormal dilation of multiple capillaries in all layers of the dermis and subcutaneous tissue, as well as dilated veins and venous lakes, can be seen.

# History and Physical

CMTC is characterized by dark purple to red, reticulated vascular pattern intermixed with telangiectasia and occasionally prominent veins.

Areas of skin that are enclosed by the reticulated pattern may be normal, erythematous, atrophic, and or even ulcerated.

Other associated extracutaneous findings include (1) skeletal anomalies such as syndactyly, tendinitis stenosis, cleft palate; (2) Glaucoma; (3) other vascular anomalies like port-wine stains, angiokeratomas, and hemangiomas; (4) neurological anomalies such as macrocephaly presenting as Macrocephaly-cutis marmorata telangiectasia congenital, a syndrome that also includes neonatal hypotonia, developmental delay, overgrowth, and connective-tissue defects.

# Evaluation

Diagnosis of CMTC is clinical; with diagnostic criteria proposed by Kienast and Hoeger, that includes the presence of three major criteria: (1) Congenital reticular erythema, (2) absence of venectasia, and (3) Unresponsiveness to local warming; and the presence of two or more minor criteria: (1) fading of erythema within two years, (2) Telangiectasia within the affected area, (3) Port-wine stain, (4) Ulceration withing affected area, (5) Atrophy within affected area. These criteria, however, have not been validated.

Imaging studies are indicated when an associated congenital anomaly is suspected. Consider evaluation by ophthalmology, orthopedic surgery, neurosurgery, and/or vascular cosmetic surgery depending on the presenting associated abnormality. Limb girth and length measurements should be monitored on follow up.

# Treatment / Management

CMTC usually does not require the treatment of skin lesions.  Fading of erythema and marmoration during the first two years of life can be seen most probably due to the normal thickening and maturation of the skin, however, they rarely disappear completely.

Avoidance of cold, vasodilators, aspirin, pentoxifylline, PUVA are the many reported treatments that have shown varying results.

# Differential Diagnosis

The differential diagnosis of CMTC includes physiological cutis marmorata, Klippel-Trenaunay syndrome, Sturge-Weber syndrome, Adams-Oliver syndrome, Bockenheimer disease, and reticular hemangioma syndrome, among other disorders with a similar cutaneous presentation.

Bodenheimer disease (diffuse phlebectasia) presents with diffuse large and painful venous ectasias, usually affecting one limb in contrast to CMTC. This disorder usually has an onset at childhood with gradual progression.

# Prognosis

Prognosis is overall good with greater than half of the patients experiencing improvement of skin lesions.

# Complications

Although skin lesions fade over time, the associated limb asymmetry persists. Other complications are those related to treatment, specifically increased risk of scarring associated with laser therapy in patients with persistent CMTC

# Consultations

Consider evaluation by ophthalmology, orthopedic surgery, neurosurgery, and/or vascular cosmetic surgery depending on the presenting associated abnormality.

# Enhancing Healthcare Team Outcomes

CMTC usually does not require the treatment of skin lesions. Prognosis is overall good with greater than half of the patients experiencing improvement of skin lesions.