Uremic pruritus is a clinical diagnosis. Due to the high prevalence of itching among CKD patients, most people attribute itching to uremic pruritus without an alternate diagnosis. However, it is essential to rule out other causes of pruritus, including drugs, liver disease, thyroid disease, and dermatologic diseases.

Before starting treatment for pruritus, it is advisable to obtain objective information about its severity to monitor the response to treatment. A recent study recommended a set of methods that have been advised for use in clinical trials in evaluating pruritus, such as pruritus intensity scales and equipment to assess scratch lesions, quality of life, chronic pruritus course, and patient benefit from therapy.

It is also essential to assess the severity of symptoms and their impact on sleep. Different tools are used to evaluate uremic pruritus, including the visual analog scale, verbal rating scale, numeric rating scale, 5-D itch scale, and Kidney Disease Quality of Life-Short Form.

The visual analog scale, numeric rating scale, and verbal rating scale are uni-dimensional scales. They are used to measure symptom severity and can also be used to measure pruritus severity. The visual rating scale uses a visual or graphic scale, and patients are asked to select a point that describes the severity of their symptoms. For example, 0 represents no itching, and 10 illustrates the worst imaginable itching. The numeric rating scale is similar to the visual rating scale, but patients are asked to select a number representing itching severity. For example, it may be classified as none (0), mild (1-3), moderate (4-6), severe (7-8), and very severe (9 and above).

The 5-D itch scale is a multidimensional scale with five domains- duration, degree, direction, disability, and distribution. The disability domain looks at the effect on sleep, leisure, housework, and work/school.

Other psychometric tests like the kidney disease quality of life-short form assessment and uremic pruritus in dialysis patient scale have also been used.

Pruritus is a symptom, so it is subjective. Scratch marks can be quantitated, but this assessment method is often inaccurate in measuring the extent of the symptom. Therefore, typically, pruritus is assessed through patient-reported outcomes (PROs). Various PRO scales are available for estimating pruritus intensity, including unidimensional ones that address one symptom at a time and multidimensional scales that monitor more than one symptom, variations in symptoms, or more than one symptom assessment.