# Introduction

Leptin is a peptide hormone released from adipose tissue and encoded by the obese (ob) gene. While leptin's role is classically described in the regulation of appetite, neuroendocrine function, and energy homeostasis, it seems to influence several other physiological processes. These include metabolism, endocrine regulation, and immune function, with possible other functions still awaiting characterization. Leptin abnormalities have associations with a variety of metabolic syndromes, particularly obesity. The study of leptin physiology has contributed to our understanding of energy homeostasis, and it seems likely that it will play a pivotal role in developing an effective treatment and a solution to the growing obesity epidemic. The total body fat mass index (BMI), metabolic hormones, and gender are the factors that have the greatest effect on circulating plasma leptin concentrations. Women have higher levels of circulating leptin compared to men.

# Cellular Level

**Biology**

Leptin is a peptide hormone synthesized by white adipose tissue. The leptin gene (LEP or ob) is on chromosome 7q31.3.

**Mechanism**

The LR belongs to the glycoprotein 130 family of cytokine receptors and comprises 6-isoform. Of these isoforms, isoform-b is the most characterized. Its long-form is the receptor subtype that principally mediates the activation of critical second messenger pathways and normal leptin action.

# Function

Leptin's principal site of action is the brain, specifically in the brainstem and hypothalamus. The major sites of action in the brainstem are the solitary tract and the ventral tegmental area. Leptin acts here to modulate satiety and the control of reward and aversion. In the hypothalamus, the lateral hypothalamic area and the ventromedial, dorsomedial, ventral pre mammillary, and arcuate (ARC) nuclei are leptin’s major sites of action. The activation of these areas leads to various changes, including in the thyroid, gonadal, adrenocorticotropic hormone-cortisol growth hormone axes, and changes in whole-brain cognition, emotions, memory, and structure. Many of these relationships are still being worked out.

Taken as a whole, leptin’s function in the body pertains to regulating the balance between food intake and energy expenditure. The classic primary physiologic role of leptin is to serve as a marker of long-term energy stores for the central nervous system (CNS).

# Clinical Significance

Leptin deficiency or resistance is associated with dysregulation of cytokine production, increased susceptibility to infections, autoimmune disorders, malnutrition, and inflammatory responses.

**Pathophysiology and Clinical Relevance**

Hypoleptinemia

Complete leptin deficiency results in the clinical phenotypes of severe obesity, impaired satiety, intensive hyperphagia, constant food-seeking behavior, recurrent bacterial infections, hyperinsulinemia, liver steatosis, dyslipidemia, and hypogonadotropic hypogonadism. LEP or the LR gene and are known as congenital leptin deficiencies (CLD). Acquired hypoleptinemias share some of these same phenotypes and are usually due to conditions that cause a low body weight. Examples of acquired conditions are lipodystrophy syndromes and hypothalamic amenorrhea.

Hyperleptinemia

Hyperleptinemia is associated with leptin resistance - specifically resistance to the anorectic and body weight-reducing effects of leptin. Hyperleptinemia and leptin resistance are components of common obesity. Evidence for this association is a direct correlation between serum leptin concentrations and body fat percentage where obese individuals had higher leptin serum levels and adipocyte LEP mRNA content compared with normal-weight individuals. Also, leptin serum levels and adipocyte LEP mRNA content fall with weight reduction. The mechanism of resistance appears related to defects in leptin transport across the blood-brain barrier or intracellular signaling mechanisms downstream of the LR. Other diseases associated with hyperleptinemia include nonalcoholic fatty liver disease, Rabson–Mendenhall syndrome, neurodegenerative disorders, depression, and food addiction.

Therapeutics

Recombinant forms of leptin are under investigation in the treatment of both hypoleptinemia and hyperleptinemia-related syndrome. Initially studied to reverse obesity, leptin replacement has only reversed obesity in leptin-deficient conditions, with replacement in typically obese individuals with elevated leptin levels showing limited efficacy. It has FDA approval for the treatment of congenital or acquired generalized lipodystrophy (non-HIV-related). Particular studies show leptin replacement has efficacy in reversing some abnormalities present in the above-mentioned syndromes, but these conditions are not yet a recognized indication for the use of recombinant leptin as a treatment.