Echocardiography is recommended to evaluate constrictive pericarditis as it has excellent sensitivity and specificity for detecting effusions. This is observed as echolucent free space between the visceral and parietal pericardium. Echocardiography also permits the estimation of effusion size. Constrictive pericarditis on echocardiography may show increased pericardial thickness with or without calcification. A rapid deceleration during diastolic filling, as the ventricular volume approximates that of the constraining pericardium, along with deviation of the septum toward the left ventricle (septal bounce) are specific and sensitive signs of constriction and ventricular interdependence seen on echocardiography, respectively. Doppler recordings will also show abnormal filling in early diastole, increased transtricuspid diastolic flow velocity during inspiration, decrease during expiration, and a reduction in transmitral flow during inspiration. M mode is essential in ruling out constrictive pericarditis, and the absence of the following makes the diagnosis unlikely: the posterior motion of the septum during early diastole on inspiration, lack of increase in venous return during inspiration, and early pulmonic valve opening secondary to higher right-sided pressure compared to pulmonary artery pressure.

The hallmark of effusive-constrictive pericarditis is the persistence of elevated right atrial pressure after removal of the pericardial fluid. Cardiac catheterization will show elevated and equalized pressures in all four chambers prior to pericardiocentesis, along with a reduction in cardiac output and pulsus paradoxus. In constrictive pericarditis without effusion, atrial catheterization shows a prominent X descent, caused by elevated right atrial pressures during atrial repolarization, and prominent Y descent, caused by rapid atrial emptying with increased early diastolic filling. In ventricular pressure tracings, there is also what is called the “square root sign” or “dip and plateau pattern” caused by rapid early diastolic filling, followed by the abrupt halting of filling, as the stiff pericardium limit impedes ventricular expansion. This causes a dip (early diastolic filling) followed by a rapid rise and plateau (square root sign) in ventricular pressures. In tamponade, the Y descent is blunted due to decreased holodiastolic filling of the ventricle. In patients with effusive-constrictive pericarditis, right atrial pressure waves are intermediate. Before pericardiocentesis, there is a prominent X and blunted Y. Lack of hemodynamic normalization after pericardiocentesis, along with the prominent X and Y waves, along with the “dip and plateau” patterns of constrictive pericarditis, confirm the diagnosis of effusive-constrictive pericarditis.

Chest radiography is not sensitive in diagnosing effusive constrictive pericarditis, although the cardiac silhouette may appear enlarged if the effusion is large enough. The cardiac silhouette may also be flask-shaped, without evidence of pulmonary congestion, as this is not a left-sided failure in origin. However, the absence of evidence of chest radiography does not rule out effusive-constrictive pericarditis.

An electrocardiogram may show low amplitude in all leads due to an effusion-blunting electrical activity to the chest wall. There may also be nonspecific ST-T wave changes if acute pericarditis is ongoing. In the presence of a large effusion, electrical alternans occurs due to the rocking motion of the heart in the effusion during the respiratory cycle and is evident as alternating amplitudes of the QRS waves.