Although elder abuse is prevalent and has serious consequences, it is infrequently detected.

When any member suspects elder abuse of the care team, it must be acted on and reported to mobilize resources for the victim. This action is not only a moral obligation, but most states consider physicians, psychologists, law enforcement personnel, and nurses all mandatory reporters of suspected elder abuse.

There needs to be collaboration and clear communication between first responders, law enforcement, nurses, physicians, social work, case management, hospital administration, and the hospital legal team. Nurses also play a crucial role in identifying abuse as they are likely to spend the most time with the patient and family. Patients might confide in the nurse something they were unwilling to tell the doctor. The nurse might also take note of strained patient-caregiver interactions or additional exam findings while assisting with bathing, toileting, or doing procedures such as placing a urinary catheter.

Social workers and case management are integral parts of the team as well. They might identify non-medical risk factors for abuse not initially appreciated and can help organize resources and support for the patient and family.

A comprehensive, interprofessional approach is needed to effectively identify and navigate the medical, psychosocial, and societal complexities of elder abuse. By increasing awareness and working as an interdisciplinary team, we will hopefully begin to curve the prevalence of elder abuse and provide better care for older patients.