The clinical presentation of neonatal respiratory distress overlaps with a wide range of respiratory illnesses occurring in the newborn period. However, a basic history, laboratory workup, and imaging can help confirm the diagnosis. The management of RDS requires the coordination of care between numerous teams, including physicians, nurses, respiratory therapists, nutritionists, and pharmacists. Several comorbidities further complicate the clinical course of neonates with RDS requiring a high level of clinical expertise. These include respiratory complications (pneumothorax, pneumomediastinum, and pulmonary interstitial emphysema), patent ductus arteriosus, pulmonary hypertension, and sepsis.

Clear goals of care must be established from the onset of birth, from the initial stabilization of the infant in the delivery room to the long-term goals of care. A team led by the neonatologist manages the patient primarily, and at times, consulting a pulmonologist to establish long-term care after the patient's discharge from the NICU. Specialized neonatal nursing care is central to optimizing care of such critical newborns. A trained respiratory therapist is equally essential in managing a wide range of ventilatory strategies used by the medical team. These strategies may include various modes of non-invasive ventilation, conventional mechanical ventilation, as well as high-frequency ventilation. Infants that progress towards BPD continue to require a holistic approach with dedicated interprofessional healthcare teams aimed at achieving better outcomes.