# Learning Outcome

- List the causes of Cushing disease.

- Describe the presentation of Cushing disease.

- Summarize the treatment of Cushing disease.

- Recall the nursing care plans for Cushing disease.

# Introduction

Cushing disease is a rare disorder characterized by increased adrenocorticotropic hormone (ACTH) production from the anterior pituitary, leading to excess cortisol release from the adrenal glands.

Cushing disease is a relatively rare disease. The average incidence of new cases is about 2.4 cases per million people per year. This disease often is diagnosed 3 to 6 years after the onset of the illness. The peak incidence of Cushing disease is in women between the ages of 50 and 60 years. The prevalence of hypertension and abnormalities of glucose metabolism are major predictors of morbidity and mortality in untreated cases of the disease. The mortality rate of Cushing disease is estimated to be about 10% to 11%.

# Nursing Diagnosis

- Inadequate healing

- Inadequate body fluid balance

- Risk for infection

- Deficient knowledge

- Impairment in hormonal control

- Disturbed body image

- Altered thought and behavior

# Causes

Pituitary adenomas are responsible for nearly 80% of the cases of Cushing disease.

Harvey Cushing first described this disease in 1912 after he was presented with a unique case in 1910. Cushing hypothesized that excess basophil pituitary cells were responsible for his patients presenting symptoms of obesity, amenorrhea, abnormal hair growth, underdevelopment of sexual characteristics, hydrocephalus, and cerebral tension.

# Risk Factors

Cushing disease is the second most common cause of Cushing syndrome, the first cause being exogenous steroids. The average incidence of new cases is about 2.4 cases per million people per year. This disease often is diagnosed 3 to 6 years after the onset of the illness. The peak incidence of Cushing disease is in women between the ages of 50 and 60 years. The prevalence of hypertension and abnormalities of glucose metabolism are major predictors of morbidity and mortality in untreated disease cases. The mortality rate of Cushing disease is estimated to be about 10% to 11%.

# Assessment

Patients with hypercortisolism present with weight gain (50%), hypertension, easy bruising, striae, acne, flushing, poor wound healing, lower limb edema, fatigue, impaired glucose tolerance, osteoporosis, hyperpigmentation of the skin, mood and memory changes, amenorrhea, hirsutism, decreased sexual drive, or frequent infections. Clinical manifestations vary widely among patients; thus, a high index of clinical suspicion must be maintained in order to make this diagnosis correctly.

Although uncommon, large pituitary tumors (macroadenomas) also can present with mass effects on surrounding structures. These cases may present with decreased peripheral vision or headaches.

# Evaluation

On presentation, more than half of the patients with Cushing disease have a microadenoma with a diameter of less than 5 mm.

Biochemical diagnostic tests to confirm hypercortisolism include salivary and blood serum cortisol testing, 24-hour urinary-free cortisol testing, and low-dose overnight dexamethasone suppression testing.

Two or more positive initial screening tests in a patient with a high pretest probability of Cushing disease confirms the biochemical diagnosis of Cushing syndrome.

For high-dose 48-hour dexamethasone suppression testing, a plasma cortisol level above 50 nmol/L (measured 48-hours after either administration of dexamethasone 2 mg by mouth every 6 hours for 48 hours, or 48-hours after one dose of 8 mg is given) is indicative of Cushing disease.

The most accurate test used to differentiate a pituitary adenoma from ectopic or adrenal Cushing syndrome is inferior petrosal sinus sampling. This invasive method measures the difference in the level of ACTH found in the inferior petrosal sinus (where the pituitary gland drains) as compared to the periphery.

# Medical Management

If a primary ACTH secreting tumor is found, first-line treatment is surgical resection of the adenoma via trans-sphenoidal surgery (TSS).

Alternatively, pituitary radiation therapy can be used after an unsuccessful TSS.

Lastly, bilateral adrenalectomy can be used to provide an immediate reduction of cortisol levels in patients with Cushing disease.

Post-treatment testing with 24-hour urine and blood samples are used to detect the level of cortisol.

# Nursing Management

- Assess vitals

- Assess heart and lung status (hypertension and fluid overload are common)

- Perform 12 lead ECG

- Assess neurovitals (tumor is in the brain)

- Check electrolytes (low potassium and high sodium are common)

- Weight patient (Weight gain is common)

- Check-ins and outs (fluid retention is common)

- Manage blood glucose levels, which are usually high

- Encourage bed rest

- Monitor for signs of infection

- Check skin integrity

- Administer antihypertensive drugs as ordered

- Administer diuretics as prescribed (fluid retention is common)

- If the patient is to undergo surgery, keep the patient NPO

- Educate patient about the disease

- Encourage hand washing to lower the risk of infection.

- Encourage follow up with a clinician

# Outcome Identification

Without treatment, Cushing disease is ultimately fatal. The mortality is due to the excess production of glucocorticoids, which can lead to many medical problems, including impairment in immune function. For patients who undergo surgery, lifelong treatment with glucocorticoids is necessary.

# Coordination of Care

Cushing disease is a rare pituitary gland disorder best managed by a multidisciplinary team that includes a neurosurgeon, radiation consultant, endocrinologist, radiologist, primary care provider, nurse practitioner, and an internist. These patients are prone to several complications, including peptic ulcer disease, weight gain, osteoporosis, diabetes, depressed immune system, and hypertension. Hence the patient has to be closely monitored.

Large pituitary lesions usually require resection, but small lesions may be treated with medications. These patients need lifelong follow-up with regular monitoring of cortisol levels.  Recurrence of disease is not uncommon, and too much or too little cortisol can be life-threatening.

The prognosis for most patients is somewhat guarded.

# Risk Management

Recently, medical therapy has been gaining popularity in the treatment of pituitary tumors. Although surgery is still considered the first-line treatment, pharmacological therapy can control the associated hormonal imbalances.

# Pearls and Other issues

Medical therapy has been gaining popularity in the treatment of pituitary tumors quite recently. Although surgery is still considered the first-line treatment, pharmacological therapy can control the associated hormonal imbalances.