Evaluation for hyperacute rejection in a lung transplant rejection starts with immunologic testing for HLA antibodies and reviewing pretransplant virtual crossmatch results. Evaluation for other diagnoses includes complete blood count, cardiac enzymes, brain natriuretic peptide, electrocardiogram and echocardiogram, and or swan Ganz catheterization to evaluate for left ventricular dysfunction. Computed tomography (CT) imaging to evaluate for pulmonary embolism and surgical complications and pleural disease is also routinely performed. Bronchoscopy with bronchoalveolar lavage (BAL) is done to evaluate the airway anastomosis site and obtain samples for microbial studies and pathology. Asymptomatic patients can be diagnosed based on transbronchial biopsy from routine surveillance bronchoscopy itself, while CT findings in symptomatic patients lead to targeted bronchoscopic biopsy. If the lungs have diffuse changes, transbronchial biopsies are obtained from lower lobes. Otherwise, CT helps in localizing the area of maximal disease and diagnostic yield by biopsy.

The diagnosis of acute cellular rejection is based on the exclusion of infections (especially cytomegalovirus) and transbronchial lung biopsy findings of characteristic histopathologic changes in the specimen. Laboratory studies and imaging findings are neither sensitive nor specific.

A definitive diagnosis of acute antibody-mediated rejection requires demonstration of donor-specific circulating antigen, histopathological findings as above, and immunostaining positive for complement 4d. It is less common among acute allograft rejections and is more challenging to establish.

As far as CLAD is concerned, quantitative criteria involve a 20% or greater decline in FEV1 or forced vital capacity (FVC) from the best postoperative value. Detection of CLAD necessitates an urgency in establishing etiology and to attempt a reversal of function. As the response is time-sensitive, there has been an increasing consensus to label a > 10% sustained drop in FEV1 as “suspected CLAD.” Investigations to rule out alternative etiologies other than rejection can therefore start immediately. Studies include sputum culture, bronchoscopy with bronchoalveolar lavage, endobronchial and transbronchial biopsy, and CT of the chest with both inspiratory and expiratory imaging.

Laboratory, imaging, and bronchioalveolar lavage findings are not very helpful in the diagnosis of bronchiolitis obliterans but should be obtained to exclude other potential causes of the decline in pulmonary function. The hallmark for raising the alarm is an obstructive defect in pulmonary function test (PFT) with a sustained decrease in FEV1 for > 3 weeks and a >20 % decline from baseline. CT imaging in the expiratory phase demonstrates a mosaic appearance consistent with air trapping. In a study utilizing micro CT, greater than 60% of the airways beyond 6 generation bronchiole demonstrated obstruction and constrictive bronchiolitis.

The distinctive PFT feature of restrictive allograft syndrome to differentiate it from BO is a restrictive pattern of a defect with > 10 % drop in total lung capacity (TLC). Since patients self-monitored spirometers do not capture TLC, an alternative PFT based approach is to detect a sustained drop in FEV1 but progressive rise of FEV1/FVC ratio. CT shows central or peripheral ground glass changes followed by upper lobe predominant traction bronchiectasis, fibrosis, and hilar retraction. RAS seems to occur in 30% of CLAD patients over 5 years.

Before establishing a diagnosis of BOS, it is crucial to be aware of and exclude the possibility of 2 clinical entities that can have an identical clinical presentation, PFT findings, and CT features.

They are gastroesophageal reflux-related bronchiolitis obliterans and neutrophilic reversible allograft dysfunction, also known as azithromycin-responsive allograft dysfunction. Both conditions prognostically differ from classic BOS by nature of their reversibility if appropriate treatment is pursued (fundoplication in the former and azithromycin three times a week prolonged course in the latter). Response to azithromycin in a subgroup of BOS patients with near normalization of FEV1 has traditionally been correlated with BAL neutrophilia (>15%). However, the correlation with neutrophilic predominance does not always correlate with azithromycin response.