After donning sterile attire as discussed above, the umbilical stump should undergo preparation with a bactericidal solution and a loop of umbilical tape placed at the junction of the skin and umbilical stump. Drape the procedural field with sterile drapes. Grasp the umbilical stump with non-toothed forceps and apply upward traction to straighten the umbilical stump. Take a scalpel and make a transverse cut completely through the umbilical stump 1 to 2 cm from the skin to expose the non-dried umbilical cord to aid in anatomical identification and cannulation of the umbilical vein. Identify the two umbilical arteries by their thicker walls and the umbilical vein by their position at 12 o’clock and their larger thin-walled appearance. Umbilical tape may be tightened to control bleeding if present. Gently use the iris forceps to cannulate and dilate the umbilical vein and to clear any thrombus present in the umbilical vein. Grasp the umbilical vein catheter with the iris forceps and gently introduce the catheter into the umbilical vein. The base of the umbilicus should be held with the non-dominant hand. The flushed umbilical vein catheter (UVC) should be inserted into the vein. The depth of insertion should differ based on the infant's maturity. That said, it should be inserted approximately 3 to 5 cm, and 2 to 4 cm in a full-term and a premature infant, respectively, and check for blood return. The precise catheter tip location should be at the point of the inferior vena cava (IVC) and right atrium confluence.

A catheter in the inferior vena cava is considered a central venous catheter and is appropriate for central venous pressure monitoring or infusing medications with a high concentration of glucose or hyperalimentation solutions. If inferior vena cava placement is the intent, the line must be confirmed with X-ray imaging to be above the diaphragm but below the right atrium before use to avoid complications. Numerous standardized graphs and formulas exist to aid in estimating placement depth based on birth weight, shoulder to umbilicus distance. Anatomic landmark-guided methods have been shown to be able to predict insertion length accurately.