The inner ear originates from the invagination of the otic placodes during the fourth week of development. The otic placodes are sensory placodes, which are a series of transiently thickened surface ectodermal patches that form pairs rostrocaudally in the region of the developing head. Sensory placodes are involved in the development of special sensory systems like vision, olfaction, and hearing. The otic placodes are one of the first sensory placodes to form and contribute to the formation of the inner ear structures associated with hearing and balance. Otic placode induction is dependent on Wnts and FGFs provided by the hindbrain and surrounding head mesenchyme. The otic placodes are located behind the second pharyngeal arch and give rise to the otic pits by invaginating into the mesenchyme adjacent to the rhombencephalon during the fourth week of development.

Near the end of the fourth week, the otic pits break off from the surface ectoderm to form a hollow piriform shaped structure lined with columnar epithelium called the otic vesicle. At this point, the otic vesicle lies beneath the surface ectoderm enveloped in the mesenchyme, forming the otic capsule. The statoacoustic ganglion also forms during the formation of the otic vesicle and splits into cochlear and vestibular portions. The otic vesicle differentiates to form all the components of the membranous labyrinth and ultimately gives rise to the inner ear structures associated with hearing and balance. As the otic vesicle develops into the membranous labyrinth, its epithelium undergoes variations in thickness and begins to distort. The otic vesicle divides into a dorsal utricular portion and ventral saccular portion, with the dorsal utricular portion giving rise to the vestibular system and the ventral saccular portion giving rise to inner ear structures like the organ of corti that are involved in hearing. The ventral saccular portion develops into the cochlear duct (which houses the organ of corti) and saccule. The dorsal utricular portion forms into the utricle, semicircular canals, and endolymphatic tube.

In the 6th week of development, the ventral saccular component of the otic vesicle penetrates the surrounding mesenchyme in a spiraling fashion. It completes two and a half turns to form the cochlear duct by the end of the 8th week. At this point, the saccule connects to the utricle via the ductus reuniens and mesenchyme surrounds the entire cochlear duct. The mesenchyme surrounding the cochlear duct forms cartilage. During the tenth week of development, this cartilaginous shell undergoes vacuolization to create the two perilymphatic spaces of the cochlea, the scala vestibule, and the scala tympani. Two membranes separate the cochlear duct proper, which is also known as the scala media, from the scala tympani and scala vestibule. The basilar membrane demarcates the scala media from the scala tympani, while the vestibular membrane separates the scala media from the scala vestibule. Laterally, the cochlear duct is attached to the surrounding cartilage via a connective tissue structure called the spiral ligament.

The Organ of Corti is located within the scala media of the cochlear duct and resides on the basilar membrane. The capsular cartilage that surrounds the membranous labyrinth becomes ossified between 16 and 23 weeks gestation to form the true bony labyrinth. The organ of Corti is the sensory portion of the cochlear duct located between the scala media and scala tympani. There is one row of inner hair cells and three rows of outer hair cells which are surrounded by supporting cells. Inner and outer hair cells form, differentiate, and separate into their respective rows prior to the formation of the Deiters or supporting cells. Several genes share links with the embryological development of the organ of Corti. Cochlear duct growth and hair cell formation have specifically been linked to identified genes. In terms of neural development, the spiral ganglion, which innervates the organ of Corti, forms from the primitive otocyst preceding the organ’s development.