# Continuing Education Activity

Lymphocytic hypophysitis is a rare, autoimmune condition of the pituitary gland. It causes the pituitary gland to be infiltrated by lymphocytes and can cause hypopituitarism, and thus, diagnosis and management need to be performed in a timely manner. This activity reviews the evaluation and treatment of lymphocytic hypophysitis and highlights the role of the interprofessional team in evaluating and treating patients with this condition.

**Objectives:**
- Outline the etiology of lymphocytic hypophysitis.
- Explain the evaluation of patients with lymphocytic hypophysitis.
-  Describe treatment considerations for patients with lymphocytic hypophysitis.

# Introduction

Lymphocytic hypophysitis is a rare pathology of the pituitary gland which presents with features of hypopituitarism due to inflammation of the pituitary gland and/or a sellar mass lesion.

# Etiology

Hypophysitis can be categorized based on etiology as primary or secondary.

While primary hypophysitis describes pituitary gland inflammation itself, secondary hypophysitis describes pituitary gland inflammation due to diseases such as sarcoidosis, hemochromatosis, amyloidosis, granulomatosis with polyangiitis, tuberculosis, syphilis, and pituitary gland inflammation due to medications such as immunomodulatory drugs including immune checkpoint inhibitors such as cytotoxic T-lymphocyte-associated protein 4 (CTLA-4) and programmed death 1 (PD-1) medications.

Lymphocytic hypophysitis itself was first described in 1962 by Goudie and Pinkerton when they noted it to be the most common form of primary hypophysitis and associated it with autoimmune pathogenesis.

# Epidemiology

The prevalence of all the types of hypophysitis is low, with an incidence of approximately 1 in 9 million.

Lymphocytic hypophysitis itself was initially thought to be an autoimmune condition that affected women in the third trimester and the postpartum stage (first six months after delivery), however, it has now been known to occur in non-pregnant females and males as well. It is a rare condition that still affects women more frequently than men at a ratio of 8 to 1.

Although cases have been reported in children and the elderly, the mean age of diagnosis for men is 44.7 years, and the mean age of diagnosis for women is 34 years. It has also been associated with other autoimmune conditions in 20 percent to 50 percent of cases.

# Histopathology

While histology provides a definitive diagnosis of lymphocytic hypophysitis, it requires biopsy or resection of the suprasellar or sellar tissue, which poses a high risk and therefore is not a very practical approach.

The degree of lymphocytic infiltration corresponds to the degree of enlargement of the pituitary gland, which in turn places pressure on nearby structures, causing headaches, visual problems, and subclinical hypopituitarism. The subclinical hypopituitarism can resolve if the pituitary gland tissue is not completely destroyed. Fibrosis of the pituitary gland can also be seen as the disease progresses.

# History and Physical

While lymphocytic hypophysitis was initially thought to only affect the anterior pituitary, it is now known to affect the posterior pituitary and pituitary stalk as well, causing inflammation and lymphocyte, macrophage and plasma cell infiltration of the pituitary gland.

Other conditions that can occur due to pituitary inflammation include hypogonadotropic hypogonadism and growth hormone deficiency.

Often times, headache is the first symptom and occurs at the onset of the disease and is usually followed by visual field defects/ophthalmoplegia and, at times, diplopia when the cavernous sinus, cranial nerves three, four and six are affected.

# Evaluation

Lymphocytic hypophysitis continues to be a diagnosis of exclusion, and histopathology with tissue biopsy is needed for a definitive diagnosis.

The hormones that need to be measured include prolactin, adrenocorticotropic hormone, cortisol, IGF-1, growth hormone, thyroid-stimulating hormone, free thyroxine, testosterone, luteinizing hormone, and follicle-stimulating hormone. Diabetes insipidus should also be evaluated by obtaining electrolyte levels, anti-diuretic hormone, serum, and urine osmolality, and water deprivation testing if needed.

About 20% to 50% of those with lymphocytic hypophysitis have been shown to have other autoimmune conditions.

Gadolinium-enhanced MRI of the pituitary is the imagining of choice, and it is important to distinguish lymphocytic hypophysitis from a pituitary adenoma. With a pituitary adenoma, MRI shows asymmetrical pituitary enlargement, with the pituitary stalk being deviated as well. However, in lymphocytic hypophysitis, the pituitary gland and the pituitary stalk is symmetrically enlarged, but there is no stalk deviation. MRI also shows a homogeneously intense pituitary with dura enhancement, also referred to as a dural tail along with arachnoid enhancement in lymphocytic hypophysitis.

In those with a pituitary adenoma, there is no enhancement of the dura or arachnoid. Despite these findings, radiological imaging cannot always distinguish between an adenoma and lymphocytic hypophysitis so easily, and in fact, at one point, 40% of patients with lymphocytic hypophysitis were misdiagnosed as having pituitary macroadenomas.

In response to the high number of misdiagnosis, a scoring system, known as the Gutenberg scoring, was developed to correctly identify lymphocytic hypophysitis. This scoring system looks at various MRI features in an attempt to diagnose this disease prior to any surgical procedure.

The scoring system and scoring are as follows:

- Age less than or equal to 30 receives a score of -1

- Current pregnancy or being less than or equal to 6 months postpartum receives a score of -4

- An increased stalk size receives a score of -5

- Increased gadolinium enhancement receives a score of -1

- Loss of pituitary bright spot receives a score of -2

- Pituitary volume greater than 6cmreceives a score of +2

- Sphenoid mucosal thickening receives a score of +2

- Heterogeneous gadolinium enhancement receives a score of +1

- Asymmetrical sellar enlargement receives a score of +3

A total score greater than 1 is suggestive of a pituitary adenoma, while a score of zero or less is suggestive of lymphocytic hypophysitis with a specificity of 99%, a sensitivity of 92%, and a positive and negative predictive value of 97%.

# Treatment / Management

The main goal of the treatment of lymphocytic hypophysitis is to manage any pituitary hormone deficiencies and to manage any mass-like effect that may occur due to pituitary gland enlargement. This treatment can consist of conservative management and the use of anti-inflammatory agents. Surgery or radiotherapy is rarely used. However, first and foremost, the pituitary function needs to be assessed and any pituitary hormone deficiencies need to be managed.

However, if vision is affected, or if there is compressive mass like signs affecting nearby vital structures or if histology is needed to confirm the diagnosis, surgery becomes the main line of treatment. At times, patients require long term hormone replacement therapy, however, corticosteroid therapy, which has an anti-inflammatory response and can decrease the size of the mass lesion, can help patients regain pituitary function and decrease the need to be on lifelong replacement hormone therapy if recurrence after treatment does not occur. There is no consensus on the appropriate dosage and duration of glucocorticoid therapy and both these vary. One study in Germany had 32 patients treated with 20 to 500 mg daily of prednisolone equivalent glucocorticoids for a duration range of 4 days to a year.

Steroids should be tapered off accordingly based on the response as the number of adverse side effects has been increasingly reported. These adverse effects include weight gain, Cushing’s syndrome, edema, glaucoma, psychiatric symptoms, and diabetes mellitus. While there has been an initial good response to steroid therapy, there has also been a high rate of recurrence of approximately 38%. For those that show no improvement with corticosteroids or have relapsed after treatment with corticosteroids, immunosuppressive medications such as methotrexate, azathioprine, and cyclosporine can be used as well.

Once again, it is important to note that surgery is only an option for those suffering from visual problems/ophthalmoplegia, have a mass like an effect from compression of nearby structures, or for those that have equivocal imagining findings and require histology for diagnosis. It does have the advantage of providing histological confirmation to correctly diagnose and manage lymphocytic hypophysitis and to exclude the diagnosis of a pituitary tumor. Surgery, which involves transsphenoidal or transcranial partial resection of the pituitary lesion or decompression of the mass, has a rate of recurrence of the lesion and associated symptoms of 11% to 25%. It was also noted that there is no relationship between the extent of the resection and the rate of recurrence. Surgical complications that have been noted include postoperative meningitis and rhinorrhea. There have also been cases where glucocorticoid therapy and surgery were both used.

# Differential Diagnosis

A detailed history and physical examination are helpful in diagnosing lymphocytic hypophysitis. However, without a tissue biopsy and with evidence of pituitary mass along with symptoms of hypopituitarism, the differential diagnosis continues to be large.

The differential diagnosis can also include infectious and inflammatory conditions as well. These include IgG4 hypophysitis, granulomatous hypophysitis which can be idiopathic or due to tuberculosis, syphilis, or sarcoidosis, Wegner’s granulomatosis and Langerhans cell histiocytosis.

# Prognosis

Lymphocytic hypophysitis often has symptoms and features similar to that of a pituitary adenoma.

Diagnosis without definite histopathology can be difficult because some patients can present with no symptoms, however majority of them do present with headaches, visual problems, or other endocrine-related symptoms.

Diagnosis often lags behind the onset of symptoms.

# Complications

It is essential to diagnose and appropriately manage lymphocytic hypophysitis as soon as possible due to the complications that follow.

Due to rapid development of secondary adrenal insufficiency, a cosyntropin stimulation test may be normal because there is not enough time for adrenal glands to atrophy. An insulin induced hypoglycemia test may be required to assess adrenal insufficiency early on. Other hormone deficiencies can occur and prolactin, IGF-1, growth hormone, thyroid stimulating hormone, free thyroxine, testosterone, luteinizing hormone, follicle stimulating hormone, electrolyte levels, anti-diuretic hormone and serum and urine osmolality should be measures as well.

Pituitary gland enlargement can also cause neurological symptoms such as visual field defects due to mass effect and can lead to compression of the optic nerve, optic chiasm and cavernous sinus cranial nerves III, IV and VI. Visual field defects can include poor color vision perception, ophthalmoplegia and diplopia.

# Deterrence and Patient Education

Lymphocytic hypophysitis is a rare autoimmune condition where there is lymphocytic infiltration of the pituitary gland which causes inflammation of the pituitary gland.

Common symptoms include headaches, vision problems, nausea, vomiting, dizziness, fatigue, loss of libido and amenorrhea. It is important to make your physician aware of these problems so they can treat them accordingly. In most cases, blood work and MRI of the brain is obtained and treatment varies on a case by case basis.

It is also very essential that close follow up appointments are made and kept with all your physicians for long term surveillance, especially to monitor hormone deficiencies and replacement therapy if needed.

# Enhancing Healthcare Team Outcomes

Often times, it is difficult to diagnose lymphocytic hypophysitis as patients can present with no symptoms or with vague symptoms such as headaches, fatigue, nausea. It is important to know that usually, the first symptom is headache followed by other endocrine-related symptoms due to anterior and posterior pituitary hormone deficiencies and visual field defects.

Gadolinium-enhanced MRI of the pituitary is the imagining of choice and there are very fine differences in imaging that help radiologists discern between pituitary adenoma and lymphocytic hypophysitis.

An interprofessional team approach is required for the correct management of lymphocytic hypophysitis and often involves teamwork with primary care physicians, neurosurgeons, radiologists, ophthalmologists, endocrinologists, pharmacists, and nurses.