Risk Factors: Young age, prematurity, special needs, twins, colic/crying, behavior problems, and toilet training/accidents increase the risk for child physical abuse. Perpetrator risk factors include poverty, parental alcohol or drug abuse, and domestic violence in the home (30% to 60% co-occurrence); 91% of the time the perpetrator is a parent.

Sentinel Injuries: Sentinel injuries are seemingly minor injuries, such as bruises and intraoral injuries, in non-mobile infants that often precede more serious abuse. When providers appropriately diagnose and respond to sentinel injuries, escalation of the abuse can be prevented. These injuries occur in 25% of abused infants. They are known to providers 42% of the time but rarely reported.

Bruises: Suspicious bruising includes bruises that are:

- Present in non-cruising infants

- Patterned (such as a looped cord or bite)

- In protected areas (ears, genitals, buttocks).

Bruises cannot be dated accurately. The absence of bruising does not rule out abuse as children without bruising can have significant internal injuries (head trauma, fractures, abdominal trauma).

Head Trauma: Abusive head trauma (AHT) is the leading cause of death from physical abuse in children younger than age two. Crying is the usual trigger for AHT. Some children present with shock/coma, but others present with non-specific symptoms such as irritability, sleepiness, fever, vomiting, respiratory distress, or apnea. A third of AHT cases have a history of a sentinel injury, 85% have retinal hemorrhages, and 30% to 70% have other injuries like rib fractures, bruising, among others).

Fractures: In children younger than age one, 25% of fractures are abusive. Concerning fractures include those that are:

- Found in a non-mobile infant

- Multiple and unexplained

- Of varying ages

- Bucket handle/corner fractures/CMLs

- Rib fractures younger than 1.5 years (7 in 10 are abusive)

- Femur fractures younger than 1.5 years (1 in 3 are abusive)

- Skull fractures younger than 1.5 years (1 in 3 are abusive).

Burns: Scalding and immersion burns are the most common forms of inflicted burns. Burns that are symmetric, uniform in depth, spare skin creases, and lack splash burns suggest forced immersion. Patterned contact burns with distinct margins and lack of a grazing pattern should raise concern for abuse. Mimics like chemical burns (Senna), toxic epidermal necrolysis, and staphylococcus scalded skin should be considered.