Historically speaking, those with curves less than 10 degrees do not meet the specification for diagnosis of AIS. Furthermore, the US Preventative Services Task Force has recently questioned whether school screenings positively impact the patient-centered-health outcomes.

Generally speaking, those with curves of 10 to 25 degrees are monitored for surveillance with serial x-rays. This is usually at 3, 6 or 12-month intervals.

Those with curves greater than 25 degrees but less than 40 to 45 degrees are candidates for bracing. The Bracing in Adolescent Idiopathic Scoliosis Trial (BrAIST) was an NIH funded randomized control trial that illustrated the effectiveness of bracing in the adolescent population. Even though braces are widely prescribed, these uncomfortable devices have low compliance rates and their overall success remains questionable. Questions have been raised about every type of brace for managing scoliosis.

Those with curves over 40 to 45 degrees who are skeletally immature are operative candidates. The mainstay of operative treatment is surgical fusion. Historically this could be anterior or posterior fusion or a combined anterior-posterior approach.  Currently, the leading technique is posterior fusion with pedicle screws and bilateral rod placement.  Selection of operative levels is a complex decision algorithm taking into account coronal deformity location, regional kyphosis, shoulder height, L4 tilt, and lumbar alignment.  Furthermore, a ratio comparison between the main thoracic curve Cobb angle and the thoracolumbar curve Cobb angle as well as the apical vertical translation and apical vertebral rotation must be considered for advanced operative planning.

New non-fusion techniques such as tethering procedures are gaining traction as well. Surgery for scoliosis is a major procedure and the literature is replete with serious complications that are even more disabling than the disorder itself.

Other treatments like physical therapy, electrical stimulation, nutrition, and spinal manipulation have not been found to be effective in managing scoliosis.

These are gross generalizations, and actual patient care operative decisions must account for patient-specific factors, skeletal maturity, deformity progression, patient’s socioeconomic factors, and surgeon experience.