**Management Overview**

Management of osteoarthritis is based on the severity and distribution of the disease. Non-medical interventions, including physical therapy and weight loss, are strongly effective and should be initially attempted. Bracing, splinting, using a cane, and other assistive devices are additional non-medical treatments that should be considered when appropriate. Oral or topical NSAIDs are first-line therapies if pharmacological options are being considered. Oral NSAIDs should be avoided in patients who have a history of coronary artery disease or stroke. They should also be limited in patients with an increased risk of developing gastrointestinal complications, including those with a history of peptic ulcer disease, the elderly, or those using corticosteroids. Intra-articular corticosteroid injections should be used sparingly as well. Repeated injections have been shown to accelerate joint damage. SNRIs (Duloxetine), muscle relaxants, glucosamine and chondroitin sulfate, visco-supplementation injections, and opioids are other measures available as treatment options for OA. Various treatment interventions were evaluated and found to be ineffective in pain relief, including acetaminophen and topical capsaicin. There are relatively new treatments that have not yet been proven effective, including platelet-rich plasma, stem cell treatments, and cannabinoids. Tricyclic antidepressants have also been tried to help control pain. Significant advances in evaluating the biochemistry of cartilage, nerve transmission, and inflammatory cytokines are also pointing to newer treatments. Further research is needed to evaluate the efficacy and safety of these agents.

**Primary Knee and Hip Osteoarthritis**

The initial management of primary knee and hip osteoarthritis follows the general guidelines outlined above. Weight loss should be attempted in any patient with BMI is greater than 25kg/m2. At any point in the disease, a trial of exercise focusing on muscle strengthening and improving range of motion using low impact modalities should be attempted. These exercises can be either land-based or aquatic. Adjunctive measures can also include ice or heat, therapeutic ultrasound, electrical stimulation (such as transcutaneous electrical nerve stimulation [TENS], or neuromuscular electrical stimulation [NMES]).

Although not completely understood, glucosamine and chondroitin sulfate supplementation can help reduce the pain in patients with knee OA. No significant reduction in pain or function was reported with the use of vitamin D supplementation.

If a pharmacological option is being considered, the lowest effective dose of NSAIDs should be used. Topical diclofenac was found to be superior to oral NSAIDs in reducing pain in clinical trials. Acetaminophen was found to lack significant pain reduction in knee osteoarthritis, presumed to be due to the lack of anti-inflammatory effects. Tramadol is a weak opioid and is another pharmacological option. Tramadol alone or combined with acetaminophen has limited benefit in relieving chronic pain in OA compared to placebo.

Intra-articular corticosteroid injections can also be considered in moderate to severe pain despite the use of oral analgesics. It can provide immediate pain relief that can last for 12-week. Long term efficacy has not been proven, and frequent injections should be avoided due to the possible risk of promoting further cartilage damage.

Intra-articular hyaluronic acid injections have conflicting and limited evidence demonstrating small benefits in reducing pain and improving knee OA function. These injections remain a treatment option, however, with rare side effects.

Partial or total knee replacement is reserved for patients who fail both pharmacological and non-pharmacological treatment modalities. Less invasive joint-preserving surgical interventions such as joint resurfacing, unicompartmental knee arthroplasty, or hip osteotomy should be considered in younger patients with the limited disease who remain symptomatic despite conservative management. Arthroscopic debridement was found to be ineffective and can accelerate OA.

**Primary Hand Osteoarthritis**

Non-pharmacological treatment options in primary hand osteoarthritis include the local application of heat or cold, splinting, physical and occupational therapy to improve range of motion and muscle strength. Topical or oral NSAIDs are first-line pharmacological therapy in hand OA. Intraarticular corticosteroid injections are not recommended but are occasionally used for flares. Surgery is often reserved for severe erosive disease with loss of function and persistent pain.