Various diseases can mimic Riehl melanosis.

**Disorders Related to RM**

- Lichen planus pigmentosus presents as a diffuse slate-gray to black pigmentation affecting overexposed areas and flexures. It is generally associated with classical lichen planus.

- Poikiloderma of Civatte manifests clinically as a dark pigmentation with a reticulate distribution, telangiectasia, and atrophy, located on the sides of the neck. Photodynamic substances in cosmetics may play an important role.

- Erythromelanosis follicularis of the face and neck is characterized by follicular-based papules surrounded by reddish-brown pigmentation and causing hair loss. Etiology is unknown.

- Erythrose peribuccale pigmentaire of Brocq typically appears as a brown-red pigmentation around the mouth, sparing the vermillion border. It may result from photodynamic molecules present in cosmetics.

- Linea fusca is characterized by an arciform brown-yellow pigmentation near the hair implantation affecting the forehead and temporal areas. Other dark patches can be noticed all over the face. This disorder is likely caused by the use of cosmetics and hat ribbons, but it might also reveal encephalitis, central nervous tumors, and neurosyphilis.

- Erythema dyschromicum perstans manifests as multiple asymptomatic, gradually enlarging hyperpigmented macules with a raised erythematous border. Lesions sometimes become coalescing, covering extensive areas of the face, trunk, and limbs. Ashy dermatosis is characterized by similar lesions to erythema dyschromicum perstans but without erythematous borders. Etiology is controversial.

Histologically, these diseases are marked by a lichenoid reaction, added to the other characteristic findings.

**Other Differential Diagnosis**

- Drug-induced melanodermas: Several classes of drugs are incriminated: tetracyclines, salicylamides, sulfonamides, chlorpromazine, chlorothiazides, some oral antidiabetics, phenothiazines, minocycline, antimalarials, psychotropic drugs, chemotherapeutic agents, and psoralens

- Melasma

- Nevus of Ota and Hory nevus

- Addison disease

- Exogenous ochronosis

- Postinflammatory hyperpigmentation

- Idiopathic eruptive macular pigmentation

- Allergic contact dermatitis

- Irritant dermatitis