**Breakthrough Bleeding**

The most common adverse effect of menstrual suppression in all patient populations is breakthrough bleeding (BTB) at unexpected times. This bleeding is benign, though it can be distressing or inconvenient and is a common reason for treatment discontinuation.

All patients should be counseled regarding the expectation for possible benign breakthrough bleeding and that rates decrease with a longer duration of continuous hormonal contraceptive use, particularly if used longer than six months.

Several strategies per method are offered by the ACOG 2022 Clinical Consensus on menstrual suppression for the management of BTB.

When BTB occurs while using **CHCs**, including OCPs, patches, or rings, clinicians can consider the following:

- Consider cyclic cycles for 3 to 6 months, then transition to extended cycles (e.g., use CHCs for 12 weeks, followed by a 4 to 7-day hormone-free interval)

- Completing a 3-4-day hormone-free interval

- Intermittent supplementation with estrogen.

When BTB occurs while using **POPs**, clinicians can consider the following:

- Counseling that breakthrough bleeding may decrease with consistent daily dose timing (e.g., taking the dose at the same time each day)

- Increasing the dose

- Completing a brief dose taper of norethindrone (increase to 0.7 mg for 7 days, then returning to normal 0.35 mg dose).

When BTB occurs while using **DMPA**or the**etonogestrel**implant****, clinicians can consider the following:

- Use of combined OCPs or oral estrogen alone for 10 to 20 days

- A course of non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) for up to 7 days

- Increasing injection frequency of DMPA to rapidly achieve amenorrhea (up to every 4 to 6 weeks for 2 to 3 doses), then consider returning to regular dosing.

When BTB occurs while using **levonorgestrel-releasing IUD**, clinicians can consider the following:

- Preferential use of the higher dose device (52 mg levonorgestrel)

- A brief course of combined OCPs or progestin-only pills, scheduled NSAIDs, or oral sub-antimicrobial-dose doxycycline

- Watchful waiting for up to 6 months

- Counsel patients on alternative methods

**Complications Related to Estrogen**

Complications specific to estrogen-containing methods include thromboembolism (DVT, PE, stroke), new or worsening of prior hypertension, cardiac events when used in patients with cardiovascular disease, and hepatic hemangioma.

Previously, concerns were raised regarding cancer risk associated with the long-term use of OCPs. However, a 2017 study of over 46,000 women demonstrated a decreased risk of colorectal, endometrial, ovarian, and hematological cancers in those with OCP use within their lifetime.

**Complications Related to Progestins**

Injectable (and possibly oral) medroxyprogesterone acetate is associated with decreased BMD when used for two years or longer, though this loss is largely reversible.

However, BMD loss may level out beyond that, with a significant portion of the loss being reversible. One prospective cohort study of 248 new DMPA users showed a BMD loss of only 5.4% compared to their baseline after five years of use.

The main concern with this effect is the possibility of a higher risk of osteoporosis, bone stress injury, or fulminant fracture. This may be of particular concern among individuals who already carry these risks for other reasons, such as athletes or military personnel with high-volume weight-bearing physical activities, athletes with low energy availability, individuals with nutritional deficiency, those in middle age, those with chronic steroid use, or those with immobility.

Some evidence suggests that age-appropriate supplemental calcium (1200 mg daily) and vitamin D may decrease BMD loss for adolescents if taken concurrently with DMPA.

Despite the concern for BMD loss, the benefits of preventing pregnancy or suppressing menses may outweigh this risk, even in adolescents. There is no recommendation from ACOG or AAP on limiting the duration of use to 2 years.

The etonogestrel implant and LNG-IUD are not associated with BMD loss. Additionally, in general, progestins do not have any strong evidence to suggest an increased risk of breast cancer, cardiovascular disease, or thromboembolism.

**Complications Related to GnRH Agonists**

Adverse effects specific to GnRH agonists stem from the induction of a hypoestrogenic state. These include BMD loss, the risk for cardiovascular disease, headache, and menopausal symptoms such as hot flashes, mood changes, and fatigue.

**Impact on Fertility**

One of the common fears associated with menstrual suppression and hormonal contraception, in general, is the fear of alteration in baseline fertility after use. Baseline fertility rates do not appear to be affected for any of the methods beyond normal age-related fertility decline.

There may, however, be a delay in the resumption of ovulation and normal menses, depending on the method and duration of use. For this reason, within the first several months of discontinuing hormonal contraception, fertility rates in people using hormonal menstrual suppression methods may be lower than fertility rates in non-users. This initial delay is more likely seen in DMPA and CHC users than IUD users. However, there is no significant difference in pregnancy rates between methods by one year after stopping the method.