Thrombolytic therapy should be initiated as soon as the symptoms are present and no later than 6 hours. Clinicians ought to pay special attention to the dosing of streptokinase. Dosing varies based on each specific pathological setting.

- Acute ST-segment elevation myocardial infarction: The recommended dose for streptokinase in the setting of acute ST-segment elevation myocardial infarction is 1.5 million units intravenously over 30 to 60 minutes.

- Pulmonary embolism: The recommended dose in the setting of pulmonary embolism is a loading dose of 250000 units intravenously over 30 minutes. This is followed by 100000 units per hour for 24 hours.

- Deep vein thrombosis: The recommended dose in the setting of deep vein thrombosis is a loading dose of 250000 units intravenously over 30 minutes. This is followed by 100000 units per hour for 72 hours.

- Arterial thrombosis or embolism: The recommended dose in the setting of arterial thrombosis or embolism is a loading dose of 250000 units intravenously over 30 minutes. This is followed by 100000 units per hour for 24 to 72 hours.

- Arteriovenous cannula occlusion: The recommended course of treatment for arteriovenous cannula occlusion is to instill 250000 IU of streptokinase in a 2 mL solution into the occluded cannula.

Peak plasma concentration reaches 175 U/ml while the volume of distribution is 1.10 L, and the clearance of streptokinase is 0.65 L/h. The GISSI study showed that administration within 1-hour of the symptoms resulted in a 47% reduction in mortality rates. While those who were administered IV streptokinase within 3 hours had a 23% reduction in mortality. Overall, administering Streptokinase within 6 hours of the onset of symptoms has been shown to reduce mortality. Recommendations are that aspirin is administered along with streptokinase as it has been shown to decrease mortality and reduce reinfarction rates.