Biotransformation is affected by age, sex, nutritional status, disease state, medications, and genetics of a patient. There is variance in expression and activity level of the CYP450 system throughout prenatal development and from the neonatal period to adulthood. A limited amount of studies have shown that cytochrome P450, specifically the activity of CYP3A4 is higher in females than in males, in comparison to the activity of many other systems involved in drug metabolism which may be higher in males than in females. A balanced diet, as compared to a protein-deficient diet, will provide the necessary protein as well as essential metals and minerals such as copper, zinc, and calcium needed for normal cellular enzymatic activities. Also of note, patients with liver disease, such as cirrhosis, have damage to hepatocytes that can then be replaced by fibrous connective tissue that is unable to carry out metabolic processes.

Most importantly, drug interactions should undergo checking for modulators of the CYP450 systems. Drugs with CYP activity may be inhibitors, inducers, or substrates for a specific CYP enzymatic pathway which can lead to alteration of the metabolism of concurrently administered agents. Some common substrates for the cytochrome P450 system include anti-epileptics, theophylline, warfarin, oral contraceptive pills, and vitamin D. Therefore when exposed to inhibitors drug toxicity can ensue due to the decreased metabolism of the substrate, whereas inducers would speed up the process by which these substrates become metabolized.

**Common Inducers**:

- Carbamazepine

- Rifampin

- Alcohol (chronic use)

- Phenytoin

- Griseofulvin

- Phenobarbital

- Sulfonylureas

- Modafinil

- St John’s wort

- Ginseng

- Tobacco (smoking)

**Common Inhibitors**:

- Valproic Acid

- Alcohol (acute use)

- Azole antifungals

- Isoniazid

- Sulfonamides

- Chloramphenicol

- Amiodarone

- Non-dihydropyridine calcium channel blockers

- Erythromycin/clarithromycin

- Quinidine

- Cimetidine

- Ciprofloxacin

- Omeprazole

- Metronidazole

- Ritonavir

- Fluoxetine

- Grapefruit juice

- Vitamin E

- Thyroid hormone

Specific inducers and inhibitors of the CYP450 system include:

**CYP3A4**

**Inhibitors**: Aprepitant, clarithromycin, erythromycin, fluconazole, grapefruit juice, isoniazid, itraconazole, ketoconazole, metronidazole, telithromycin, valproic acid, voriconazole

**Inducers**: Carbamazepine, dexamethasone, oxcarbazepine, phenobarbital, phenytoin, rifampin

**CYP2C9/8**

**Inhibitors:**Fluconazole, ibuprofen, indomethacin, isoniazid, ketoconazole, sulfamethoxazole, trimethoprim

**Inducers****:**Carbamazepine, phenobarbital, phenytoin, rifampin

**CYP2D6**

**Inhibitors:**Isoniazid, ketoconazole, methadone, nicardipine

**CYP2C19**

**Inhibitors:**Fluconazole, ketoconazole, isoniazid, omeprazole

**Inducers****:**Carbamazepine, phenytoin, rifampin

Metabolic reactions also may vary from one individual to another. Consequently, this affects drug dosing and frequency to achieve safe and effective levels of drug within the body.

Phase II reactions can unergo alteration in patients due to acetylation polymorphisms. A person's phenotype as a slow acetylator can be homozygous for the slow acetylator gene, or in rapid acetylators, they can be either heterozygous or homozygous for the rapid acetylator gene. Slow acetylators have a genetically mediated decrease in hepatic N-acetyltransferase and can lead to higher concentrations of a drug in the blood, which can then lead to an increase in toxic reactions or fatal toxicity. The hereditary acetylator status of patients provides valuable information about their potential therapeutic, pharmacologic, and toxicologic responses. It also serves as a good prognostic indicator of susceptibility to toxicity from commonly used drugs for the treatment of a wide range of diseases.

Phase III reactions can also undergo alteration with the consumption of certain medications. P-glycoprotein (P-gp) is one of the efflux transporters located in the small intestine that will transfer drugs from the cytoplasm into the intestinal lumen for excretion during Phase III. Specific substrates, inducers, and inhibitors of P-gp include:

**Substrates:**Digoxin, loperamide, vinblastine

**Inducers:**Rifampin, phenytoin, phenobarbital

**Inhibitors:**Amiodarone, cyclosporine, clarithromycin