FFR is obtained as part of diagnostic cardiac catheterization. A guide catheter is utilized to advance the FFR-specific guide wire to the coronary artery orifice. At which point, a coronary artery pressure proximal to the stenotic lesion (or Pa) is obtained. The operator (or interventional cardiologist) then advances the FFR-specific guide wire and crosses the intermediate stenotic lesion allowing for coronary artery pressure distal to the stenosis (or Pd) to be obtained. The pressure sensor can be visualized angiographically by the operator, to help ensure proper placement.

FFR measurements must be obtained during a period of maximal blood flow or maximal hyperemia. To achieve maximal hyperemia, a hyperemic stimulus is administered either intravenously or intracoronary through the guide catheter, FFR is monitored for a period of 3 to 4 minutes. Intravenous (IV) adenosine is the most widely used method to induce maximal hyperemia.

**Equation**

FFR is defined as the ratio of maximum achievable blood flow through a blockage (area of stenosis) to the maximum achievable blood flow in the same vessel in the hypothetical absence of the blockage. It is calculated using a pressure ratio of pressure measured distal to the blockage (Pd) and pressure proximal to the blockage (Pa).

The ‘‘normal’’ ratio is expected to be 1. For example, an FFR value of 0.80 means that the maximum blood flow in the coronary artery being measured is 80% of what it would be if the artery were completely normal.

FFR = Pd / Pa

- Pd = pressure distal to the lesion (blockage)

- Pa = pressure proximal to the lesion (blockage)

**Interpretation**

In utilizing FFR, coronary stenosis can be classified into three groups based on physiologic assessment during coronary angiography:

FFR Measurement/Treatment

- Ischemia-producing stenosis (FFR less than 0.75)/Revascularization

- Non–ischemia-producing stenosis (FFR greater than 0.80)/Medical Therapy

- Gray zone (FFR 0.75 to 0.80)/Revascularization versus Medical therapy