# Continuing Education Activity

Menkes kinky hair disease is a rare X-linked recessive progressive multisystemic disease of copper metabolism. Patients usually exhibit a severe clinical course with death in early childhood. Early diagnosis of Menkes disease is clinically very challenging because of the subtle clinical features and nonspecific biochemical markers. Accurate diagnosis is important both for proper management to reduce morbidity and mortality and also for parental counseling and prenatal diagnosis. This activity reviews the pathophysiology, clinical features, evaluation, and treatment of Menkes disease; and highlights the role of the interprofessional team in the management.

**Objectives:**
- Describe the etiology of Menkes kinky hair disease.
- Outline the typical clinical features and explain the evolution of a patient with Menkes kinky hair disease.
- Review the management options available for Menkes kinky hair disease.
- Summarize the importance of collaboration and coordination among the interprofessional team to enhance patient care and improve outcomes in Menkes kinky hair disease.

# Introduction

Menkes kinky hair disease is a rare X-linked recessive progressive multisystemic disease of copper metabolism. Patients usually exhibit a severe clinical course with death in early childhood. Early diagnosis of Menkes disease is clinically very challenging because of the subtle clinical features and nonspecific biochemical markers. Accurate diagnosis is important for proper management to reduce morbidity and mortality and also for parental counseling and prenatal diagnosis.

Menkes et al first described the disease in 1962.

# Etiology

In Menkes disease, the underlying abnormality in copper metabolism is secondary to a mutation in the ATP7A gene located on Xq13.3 which has 23 exons. This gene is responsible for encoding 1500 amino acids and is abundantly expressed in various organs, such as the brain, lungs, kidneys, and muscles.

# Epidemiology

The incidence of Menkes disease is close to 1 in 35,000 live male births.

There is no racial or ethnic predilection found for Menkes kinky hair disease. The genetic theory proposes that one-third of cases with Menkes kinky hair disease exhibit new mutations. These de novo mutations can occur anywhere independent of race or ethnicity.

Menkes kinky hair disease occurs in males almost exclusively due to the X-linked recessive trait. Females are carriers and usually do not manifest symptoms unless there are unusual genetic circumstances.

Patients with Menkes kinky hair disease present between six to eight weeks after birth when parents notice delayed development or the look of an unusual eye or unusual limb movements indicative of seizure activity.

# Pathophysiology

ATP7A gene encodes ATP7A, which is an active copper (Cu) transporter. ATP7A is a transmembrane protein predominantly expressed in enterocytes, placenta, and central nervous system, where at a steady-state, it directs Cu to Cu-dependent enzymes. In low to normal copper states, the ATPase is localized in the trans Golgi network (TGN), where it is retained by Acetyl-CoA transporter 1. In the TGN, ATP7A transfers copper from the cytoplasm into the Golgi complex for the metalation of multiple cuproenzymes. Whereas if the copper levels are high, it effluxes out of the cell by relocating to the plasma membrane.

The clinical features of Menkes kinky hair disease are either a direct consequence of enzyme dysfunction or secondary to an inability to load these enzymes with Cu.

Profound neurological features are due to low Cu in the brain. Likely explanations include:

- Cu gets trapped in the blood-brain barrier and blood-cerebrospinal fluid barrier while glial cells and neurons are deprived of Cu.

- Generally, Cu is the noncompetitive antagonist of NMDA receptors. Normally ATP7A mediates the availability of NMDA receptors and a releasable pool of copper in hippocampal neurons. The absence of ATP7A markedly accentuates the NMDA receptor excitability in the neurons causing seizures.

- The deficiency of cytochrome C-oxidase causes accumulations of superoxide radicals and neuronal damage.

- Impaired blood vessel integrity with secondary ischemia leading to infarction due to deficiency of lysyl oxidase.

# Histopathology

Histopathological findings in both hair and brain have been described in Menkes disease. Findings of hair on light microscopy include pili torti (180 degrees twisted on-axis), monilethrix, and trichorrhexis nodosa. The internal elastic lamina is fragmented with the proliferation of the intimal layer.

Neuropathological changes in the brain include striking cortical neuronal loss, mineralized neurons, gliosis, subcortical myelin loss associated with severe axonal degeneration, and widespread atrophy of grey and white matter present. Light microscopy findings include focal degeneration that extends to all layers of the cerebral cortex with more prominent neuronal loss in the hippocampus, striatum, hypothalamus, and thalamus. Granular neurons are severely depleted in the cerebellum with relative preservations of Purkinje cells, which differentiate this from other neurodegenerative conditions. Purkinje cells branch in the molecular pattern forming cactus-shaped extensions. The neuropathological changes are largely due to the deficiency of cytochrome C oxidase.

Light microscopy findings in patients with hepatomegaly show nonspecific cholestasis and focal necrosis. Light and electron microscopy findings of ocular tissue show progressive degeneration of retinal ganglion cells, loss of nerve fibers, and optic atrophy.

# History and Physical

Classical Menkes kinky hair disease patients usually exhibit severe clinical course with death in early childhood typically by three years. Progressive neurodegeneration and connective tissue dysfunction characterize the clinical picture of classical MD.

Pregnancy and labor are usually uncomplicated with normal anthropometry at birth. Clinical features in the newborn period include prolonged jaundice, hypothermia, hypotonia, and feeding difficulties at birth. Spontaneous fractures and cephalohematoma may present at birth.

Neonatal Menkes disease is often missed because of the more nonspecific clinical and biochemical findings. The patient may present with hypoglycemia, hypothermia, prolonged jaundice, cephalohematoma, and pectus excavatum at birth. Characteristic hair findings are often absent, and microscopic findings of hair are not evident in the early phase of life. A definite diagnostic test, copper egress in cultured fibroblast, takes several weeks to result, so a more rapid and reliable test that diagnoses the patient before the onset of symptoms is critical. Such newly recognized tests include plasma catecholamine analysis and placental copper concentrations.

Neurological manifestations are the most common and characteristic of Menkes disease. Developmental regression and seizures are usually the first to start around 2 to 3 months.

Connective tissue dysfunction and skeletal abnormalities are very common in Menkes disease. Tortuous blood vessels and fluctuating blood supply are some of the well-established causes of seizures. Internal jugular vein dilatation or phlebectasia and aneurysm of brachial arteries have been reported.

Ocular findings include aberrant eyelashes, very poor visual acuity, strabismus, blue irides, iris stromal hypoplasia, and peripheral retinal hypopigmentation.

Menkes disease patients present with dysautonomia symptoms (chronic diarrhea, fainting, orthostatic hypotension) attributed to abnormal catecholamine synthesis due to defective dopamine beta-hydroxylase. Gastrointestinal manifestations are wide and may cause gastric polyps, reflux disease, colonic diverticula, and progressive hiatal hernia. Reports of hepatomegaly in Menkes disease have been made. Patients with significant growth failure and GI complications often need a gastrostomy tube.

Urological complications are very frequent in Menkes disease, and the most common manifestation is bladder diverticula. Bladder diverticula often lead to frequent urinary tract infections, ascending infections, hydronephrosis, and renal parenchymal damage. Cases of renal rupture, vesicoureteric reflux, and cryptorchidism have been reported.

# Evaluation

The diagnosis of Menkes disease is made by the characteristic clinical, biochemical, and radiological features. The characteristic clinical features often suggest the diagnosis.

Biochemical evaluation plays a significant role in the diagnosis of Menkes disease. Serum copper and ceruloplasmin levels are typically low in Menkes disease in the range of 0-55 microgram/dl and 10-160 mg/dl, respectively, with the normal levels being 70 to 150 micrograms/dl and 200-450 mg/dl. These levels are typically low in babies less than six months. So, biochemical labs should never be interpreted alone without another testing. In this scenario, plasma catecholamine analysis indicative of dopamine beta-hydroxylase deficiency can be used as a rapid diagnostic test.

Features of hair on light microscopy are often very characteristic in the case of Menkes disease. It is important to examine as many strands as possible because every hair may not demonstrate typical morphological features.

Neuroimaging has a major role in establishing the diagnosis of Menkes disease. Cerebral atrophy and delayed myelination are the most commonly observed features on the MRI brain. (Fig.1A) Other features include subdural effusion, hematoma and hygroma, leukoencephalopathy, basal ganglia signal changes, and intracranial vessel tortuosity.

EEG in Menkes follows three characteristic stages with the progression of the disease. Ictal findings in the early stage include slow spike waves and slowing in the posterior region, whereas interictal EEG shows multifocal polymorphic waves. The intermediate stage shows multifocal hypsarrhythmia with diffuse irregular slow and spike waves. The late-stage is characterized by multifocal high amplitude activity and mixed irregular slow waves.

X-ray findings include generalized osteoporosis, metaphyseal flaring, and spurs in long bones. Periosteal diaphyseal reactions and thickenings are present. Rib fractures are often misdiagnosed as child abuse. Menkes disease should be considered as a differential diagnosis in infants with unexplained subdural hematoma in the absence of retinal hemorrhage.

Molecular genetic testing includes single gene testing and multigene panels. The sequential analysis includes analyzing ATP7A followed by gene-targeted deletion/duplication analysis if no pathogenic variant is found. Multigene panels can be customized by the clinician, including ATP7A and other genes of interest such as FBLN5 related cutis laxa and ELN related cutis laxa while limiting identification of variants of uncertain significance and variants that do not explain the underlying phenotype.

Prenatal diagnosis is available for women with carrier states, including chorionic villi sampling and analyzing copper intake in the cultured fibroblast, especially if the genetic mutation is unknown. If there is an affected patient in the family with a known mutation, then specific genes can be tested.

# Treatment / Management

Menkes disease is a fatal disease with death usually occurring between 6 months to 3 years. Treatment outcome depends on the severity of ATP7A gene deletion and residual functioning ATP7A protein. When designing a treatment plan for patients with Menkes kinky hair disease, providers should take into account three basic principles:

- Bypass the block in enteral absorption of copper

- Copper should be made available to the cellular enzymes that need it as a cofactor

- To avoid irreparable neurodegeneration in Menkes kinky hair disease, infants should be identified and treatment must be commenced earlier in life

The goal of the treatment is to provide copper to the copper-dependent enzymes. Early treatment of Menkes disease is essential (ideally within four weeks of life). The copper histidine component has been reported to be the most effective. Oral copper treatment is not effective because it gets trapped in the enterocytes. The subcutaneous or intravenous route is preferred. Neurodegeneration can be effectively reduced in some patients if the treatment is started at less than three weeks of age. Copper-histidine treatment can effectively reverse skin and hair changes, improving appendicular tone, weight gain, and achievement of socio-cognitive milestones. Outcomes also depend on the initiation of treatment and residual functioning ATP7A.

Menkes disease needs multiple specialists in the management of complications. For example, a feeding tube may be given to ensure proper nutrition, a G tube for a patient with significant dysphagia, surgical correction for urological complications, seizure management with multiple antiepileptics. In addition to medical and surgical management, the patient needs extensive physical, occupational, and speech therapies. Orthopedic aids may improve symptoms due to connective tissue problems.

Although replacing copper does not ensure substantial neurologic improvement in all cases of Menkes kinky hair disease, its use leads to modest clinical benefits, such as reduced seizure frequency and decreased irritability.

Damage to the proximal renal tubule is a known complication of copper overload.

Other treatment options that have been studied but still need more evidence to become established management options include the following:

- Vitamin C may help limit copper and metallothionein interaction

- Vitamin E

- Carbamic acid derivative - diethyldithiocarbamate

- Brain-directed viral gene therapy

In Menkes kinky hair disease, there is no heightened anesthetic risk.

- Myringotomy tubes - for chronic otitis media

- Gastrostomy tube - for feeding problems

- Bladder diverticula repair

# Differential Diagnosis

Occipital horn syndrome (OHS): OHS is the milder form of Menkes disease that usually manifests at 5 to 10 years of age with overlapping features of classical Menkes. At birth, infants present with hypothermia and prolonged jaundice. Connective tissue abnormalities are prominent in OHS, including umbilical and inguinal hernias. A characteristic feature of OHS is bony abnormalities of bones, typically symmetric exostoses from occiput. Neurological symptoms are less profound than Menkes, intellectual capabilities are usually low to borderline, and motor delays are secondary to hypotonia.

ATP7A related distal motor neuropathy: Adult-onset distal motor neuropathy similar to Charcot Marie tooth disease. It is characterized by progressive distal motor neuropathy with minimal to no sensory loss. Distal muscle weakness and atrophy get more prominent and may occasionally cause pes cavus. Biochemically the levels are normal.

Biotinidase deficiency: Typically occurs in the first few months of age. Presents with seizures, hypotonia, global developmental delay, ataxia, vision, and hearing problems. Skin rashes, hypopigmentation, and hair loss are common.

Hupke-Brendel syndrome: Rare autosomal recessive conditions characterized by bilateral congenital cataract, sensorineural hearing loss, and severe developmental delay. Patients usually die between 9 months and 6 years of age. Diagnosis is usually established in a proband with characteristic features and very low serum copper, and ceruloplasmin levels and biallelic pathogenic variants in SCL33A1 are identified by molecular genetic testing.

# Prognosis

The life span of patients with Menkes kinky hair disease is difficult to predict, although the majority of these children do not live past the age of three years. A common cause of death has been found to be pneumonia which leads to respiratory failure. However, some patients die suddenly without any apparent acute medical cause. Major underlying causes of morbidity and mortality in Menkes kinky hair disease are associated with the following systems:

- Neurologic

- Gastrointestinal

- Connective tissue

- Vascular system

# Complications

Late complications of the disease include intractable seizures, subdural hematoma, blindness, and recurrent infections. In classical Menkes disease, death occurs by three years of age, usually secondary to vascular complications or respiratory infections. Renal complications may also occur secondary to copper sequestration in the proximal renal tubule. Growth failure becomes apparent shortly after the beginning of neurodegeneration.

Ocular pathologies have been observed, such as retinal hypopigmentation, partial optic nerve atrophy, macular dystrophy, congenital cataracts, and microcysts in the iris.

# Consultations

To provide the best management plan to the patients with Menkes kinky hair disease, an interprofessional approach is critical preferably at a common location, such as a pediatric center. The following specialties should particularly be consulted:

- Medical geneticist

- Neurologist

- Gastroenterologist and nutritionist

- Urologist

- Otolaryngologist

- Dentist

- Psychologist/social worker

- Physical and occupational therapist

# Deterrence and Patient Education

Genetic counseling and prenatal diagnosis can be very helpful in the prevention of Menkes kinky hair disease. However, in one-third of all cases of Menkes kinky hair disease new mutations are the underlying pathology. There are established guidelines for prenatal screening and diagnosis.

Physical and occupational therapy techniques may be taught to parents. Menkes kinky hair disease impacts are severe on the families and psychosocial support is often valuable and crucial. Families of patients with Menkes kinky disease have to endure the pain of transitioning from apparent good health to irrevocable debilitating illness within the first few months of life. Therefore psychological support is an essential part of a holistic management plan.

# Enhancing Healthcare Team Outcomes

Menkes disease has no specific curative treatment, and it is a progressive multisystem disease. Also, currently, there are no newborn screening programs available. Early diagnosis of Menkes disease is clinically very challenging because of the subtle clinical features and nonspecific biochemical markers. So high index of suspicion is required when evaluating a newborn with hypotonia, hypothermia, and jaundice, especially in the setting of significant family risk factors or connective tissue abnormalities because early replacement of copper reverses and prevents complications.

Menkes disease is better managed by an interprofessional team approach, including a neonatologist, pediatric neurologist, geneticist, nutritionist, physiotherapist, and occupational therapist. Genetic counselors play a significant role in providing parental reproductive risk counseling and prenatal diagnosis. Menkes disease families need medical, educational, psychosocial, and financial support services in their local communities.