A good history and physical is the mainstay of evaluating acute pyelonephritis, but laboratory and imaging studies can be helpful. A urinary specimen should be obtained for a urinalysis. On urinalysis, one should look for pyuria as it is the most common finding in patients with acute pyelonephritis. Nitrite production will indicate that the causative bacteria is E.coli. Proteinuria and microscopic hematuria may be present as well on urinalysis. If hematuria is present, then other causes may be considered, such as kidney stones. All patients with suspected acute pyelonephritis should also have urine cultures sent for proper antibiotic management. Blood work such as a complete blood cell count (CBC) is sent to look for an elevation in white blood cells. The complete metabolic panel can be used to search for aberrations in creatinine and BUN to assess kidney function. The imagining study of choice for acute pyelonephritis is abdominal/pelvic CT with contrast. Imaging studies will usually not be required for the diagnosis of acute pyelonephritis but are indicated for patients with a renal transplant, patients in septic shock, those patients with poorly controlled diabetes, complicated UTIs, immunocompromised patients, or those with toxicity persisting for longer than 72 hours. Ultrasonography can be used to detect pyelonephritis, but a negative study does not exclude acute pyelonephritis. Regardless, ultrasound can still be a useful study when evaluating for acute pyelonephritis because it can be done bedside, has no radiation exposure, and may reveal renal abnormalities, which can prompt further testing or definitive treatment.