Men and women accumulate fat in distinct and predictable patterns. These patterns are genetically and hormonally determined. The fat distribution in men is primarily around the abdomen and torso, which is an android pattern. Women accumulate fat primarily around the hips and thighs in a gynoid pattern.

The fat present in cellulite is no different from ordinary subcutaneous fat. The subcutaneous fat in the trunk area is composed of a superficial and deep layer. The superficial layer is dense and compact and contains multiple fibrous septa. The deep layer is loose, areolar, and contains few septa. The deep layers are located around the umbilical, gluteal, paralumbar, and medial thigh regions. One patient concern is the appearance of cellulite, which is the lay description for the external appearance of the superficial abdominal subcutaneous fat. This dimpling and ridging appearance is due to the presence of dense vertical septa of the subcutaneous ligamental attachments to the deep dermis, separating the fat into discreet pockets. As the fat hypertrophies or the skin relaxes with age, the septae cause an accordion-like irregular appearance known as cellulite.

Fat cells are produced in utero, early childhood, and early adolescence. Once maturity is reached, the number of fat cells remains the same. When fat cells are removed through liposuction or other techniques, new fat cells do not form to replace them; however, the remaining fat cells may hypertrophy, causing the total fat mass in the area to increase or remain the same. One exception is in certain patients who are morbidly obese, wherein fat cells become hyperplastic and multiply in number.

The primary blood supply to the abdominal skin is from the superior and inferior epigastric vessels. These vessels run within the rectus muscle and contain branching perforators that traverse the rectus fascia and abdominal fat, finally reaching the skin and subdermal plexus. When performing an abdominal flap, the blood supply is interrupted.

A second blood supply to the abdominal skin is located in the fat superficial to the fascia of Scarpa. The lateral intercostal, subcostal, and lumbar vessels are the only blood supply of the central abdominal skin after flap elevation. Previous surgeries in this superior and central abdominal area put the blood supply to the skin at risk because of interruptions of these vessels by prior surgical scars.

The lower trunk has three horizontal zones of adherence: 1) the inguinal region, 2) the suprapubic region, and 3) the hip/lateral thighs. The tissue adherence becomes relaxed secondary to aging, pregnancy, and massive weight loss. Due to the laxity of these ligamentous attachments and senile changes of the overlying skin, the tissues descend vertically and concentrically around the pelvis and migrate centrally.

Panniculectomy differs from an abdominoplasty in several ways. The amount of skin and adipose tissue undermining superior to the tissue being excised (panniculus) is extremely limited in panniculectomy. This is because the large abdominal flaps formed after massive weight loss often demonstrate a relatively compromised vascular status, owing to the increased distance of the skin from the vascular supply origin, essentially a watershed effect. Significant undermining in this situation is associated with a high rate of skin loss and seroma formation, both due to relative hypo-perfusion at the distal edges of the flap. The excision can almost be thought of as a wedge excision of the tissue to be removed. Previous scars must be carefully noted because these also predispose to tissue loss. If the tissue needed to be removed extends above the umbilicus, a umbilectomy is also discussed with the patient.