Mipomersen is a 20-base pair, 2’-O-methoxyethyl modified antisense oligonucleotide complementary to human apolipoprotein B-100 messenger RNA.

By directly reducing and eliminating the cytoplasmic apolipoprotein B-100 messenger RNA concentration, mipomersen plays a crucial role in lowering the ribosomal production of the final, folded apolipoprotein B-100 polypeptide. This therapy ultimately leads to decreased production of protein human apolipoprotein B-100 and, therefore, reduces the production of low-density lipoprotein and lower-low-density lipoprotein cholesterol. Mipomersen functioned consistently across all species in tested human volunteers and patients.

**Pharmacokinetics**

**Absorption**

Following administration, mipomersen is well absorbed in the site of injection. This absorption has been observed to be rapid and extensive, independent of the dosage injected. It has been noted that mipomersen achieves a peak plasma concentration at 3 to 4 hours following introduction subcutaneously. The measured half maximal effective concentration (EC50) for mipomersen in plasma was 18 ± 4 ng/ml. It has been estimated that the absolute bioavailability of mipomersen is within the range of 54 to 78%.

**Distribution**

As mipomersen is injected, it has been noted that this synthetic oligonucleotide is extensively bound to plasma proteins (>85%) in systemic or vascular circulation. It can rapidly enter tissues through cell-surface protein interactions. While bound to plasma proteins in circulation, the half-life of mipomersen in plasma is 2 to 5 hours. This time range represents the transfer of mipomersen from the blood into the tissue. Mipomersen interacts mainly with serum albumin, along with various other serum proteins. The Kd associated with mipomersen’s binding to serum albumin is approximately 150 μM. Dose-saturation studies on mice have demonstrated that the binding of mipomersen to plasma protein is saturated at doses exceeding 20 to 30 mg/kg.

Mipomersen is predominantly distributed to the liver, where cells specialize in apolipoprotein B-100 synthesis. Studies have also demonstrated that mipomersen demonstrates no adverse effect on the concentrations of PCSK9 in human plasma.

Studies in mice and monkey experiments have shown that mipomersen dose-dependently reduces apolipoprotein B-100 concentrations and has no effect on high-density lipoprotein cholesterol levels (HDL-C). Further experimentations have demonstrated that mipomersen achieves steady-state tissue concentrations following the 6-months mark post-administration.

**Metabolism**

Unlike non-nucleic acid therapeutics, mipomersen is not metabolized by cytochrome P450 or other traditional drug-metabolizing enzymes in the liver. Mipomersen is instead a target of endonucleases in tissues. These endonucleases digest the oligonucleotide to form shorter strands of deoxynucleotides. These deoxynucleotides are further digested and metabolized by tissue exonucleases.

**Excretion**

In the tissues, like other small oligonucleotides, mipomersen is slowly degraded via exonuclease metabolism and excreted with other nuclease-digested metabolites in urine. The elimination half-life of mipomersen following cessation of administration is 1 to 2 months. The half-life of elimination is independent of the dosages administered to the human patient.