Syncope is a symptom of an underlying disease process rather than a disease itself. Although syncope mimics a death-like experience eliciting extreme consternation among both patients and their families, most syncopal events have a benign cause.  Benign causes of syncope reflect vasovagal (also known as neurocardiogenic), volume depletion, or medication-related etiologies. More ominous causes are related to dysrhythmia and valvular abnormalities such as ventricular tachycardia, atrioventricular (AV) block, or critical aortic stenosis. A history of left ventricular dysfunction (with concomitant degeneration of the conduction system leading toward a propensity for dysrhythmias) has been found to be the most ominous predictor of an adverse etiology of a syncopal event.

**Causes of Syncope**

1. Cardiovascular disorders

- Cardiac arrhythmias (both tachy and bradyarrhythmias)

- Structural and obstructive disorders (valvular abnormalities, HOCM, MI, PE)

2. Cerebrovascular causes (vertebrobasilar insufficiency)

3. Disorders of blood flow and vascular tone

- Vasovagal (neurocardiogenic)

- Orthostatic hypotension (medications, autonomic failure, peripheral neuropathy, decreased blood flow)

- Situational (cough, micturition, defecation, postprandial, deglutition)

- Carotid sinus syncope

4. Others that mimic syncope

- Seizures

- Metabolic (hypoglycemia, hypoxia, symptomatic anemia)

- Psychogenic (panic attacks)

**Vasovagal Syncope (Neurocardiogenic syncope,****Common faint)**

This accounts for almost 50% of all cases of syncope. When faced with certain situations like prolonged standing, crowded places, hot environment, severe pain, extreme fatigue and stress leads to vasodilatation (sympathetic withdrawal) and bradycardia (parasympathetic activity). This condition is also called common faint as it is the common cause of syncope and can occur even in normal people. Syncope events are preceded by prodromal symptoms like blurred vision, diaphoresis, nausea, dizziness, weakness, and then leads to bradycardia, decreased blood pressure, and then lose consciousness. Patients appear pale to the onlookers. Patients normally regain consciousness in few minutes and may experience generalized weakness. They do not lose sphincter control, rarely have any tonic-clonic activity or confusion after regaining consciousness as in patients with seizures.