There are many causes of edema and presentation will differ according to the etiology. Generally, edema presents as ankle swelling and may extend higher. Common causes include congestive cardiac failure, constrictive pericarditis, nephrotic syndromes, liver disease (cirrhosis), allergic reactions (urticaria or angioedema), malabsorption, protein calorie malnutrition, obstructive sleep apnea, pregnancy, or medication side effects. When there is unilateral or asymmetric edema, venous thrombosis is suspected. In the case of heart failure, the specific etiology is important when distinguishing the exact location of edema

Localized edema is generally due to cellulitis, chronic venous insufficiency, deep vein thrombosis, lymphedema, or May-Thurner syndrome. When the edematous area is warm and patient’s vitals are unstable (febrile, tachycardic, or tachypneic), then infectious and/or thrombotic causes should be suspected.

Medications causing edema are generally anti-hypertensives (calcium channel blockers, minoxidil, or hydralazine), antidepressants (trazodone and MAO inhibitors), antivirals (acyclovir), chemotherapeutics (docetaxel, cyclophosphamide, and cyclosporine), fludrocortisone, pramipexole, hormones (estrogens, progesterones, and anabolic steroids), thiazolidinediones, and non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (celecoxib and ibuprofen)

Edema can also occur in the brain leading to increased intracranial pressure. This is often fatal if left untreated. Intracranial edema can occur due to several causes including generalized hypoxia, injury, abscesses, or tumors.

Fluid in the body cavities is another clinical cause of edema. Etiologies include pleural effusion (such as heart failure, inflammation, or tumors), pericardial effusion (such as in inflammation or tumors), or ascites (due to cirrhosis, heart failure, or tumors). Ascites will typically present with abdominal distention, shifting dullness, and a fluid wave on percussion of the abdomen.

The treatment for generalized edema largely depends on the etiology. The first step in treatment is to treat the underlying cause. Certain instances, such as pulmonary edema, can be a life-threatening condition requiring immediate therapy.

Dietary modifications can also help reduce fluid overload and consider decreasing dietary sodium intake to 2 g/dL and increase protein intake to 1g/kg/dL if hypoalbuminemia exists. Diuretics, specifically loop diuretics such as furosemide, bumetanide, and torsemide, can reduce edema fluid. Caution needs to be taken when using diuretics in patients with cirrhosis and ascites of the liver with no peripheral edema or with localized edema due to venous of lymphatic obstruction, or malignancy