Given the current mental health crisis, the Lifestyle Medicine approach offers a safe and low-cost option for enhancing its management that may incorporate some clinical psychological techniques of motivational interviewing to motivate people to embrace lifestyle changes.

**Nutrition**– The most common dietary patterns in the United States typically include high-calorie saturated fats and refined sugar. Such nutrient-poor and energy-dense foods now constitute about 30% of the daily intake of American adults.

In the primary care visit, the first line of advice to patients at risk for hypertension or hyperlipidemia, both risk factors for cardiovascular disease, is to make lifestyle changes such as diet and exercise. However, many primary care physicians lack adequate training or time to delve into specific plans of transformation in detail. A pilot randomized controlled study by McMillan et al. demonstrated the significant effects of short-term dietary change on mood and cognition in healthy individuals, including improvements in self-rated vigor, alertness, and contentment in the group that ate the more nutritious diet for just ten days compared to the control group.

Additionally, in 2017, a randomized trial showed that 32% of patients with moderate-to-severe depression disorder remit with nutritional interventions alone. Furthermore, in 2019, this trial was followed by a large meta-analysis of more than 45,000 participants showing that dietary interventions significantly reduce symptoms of both depression and anxiety, particularly in women.

Given increasing literature supporting connections to improved mood following improved dietary changes warrant consideration of incorporating specific dietary counseling into primary care encounters where behavioral health concerns are addressed.

There are four primary mechanisms by which diet notably affects psychological health: its impact on the gastrointestinal microbiome, inflammation, epigenetics, and macronutrients and micronutrients. The gastrointestinal microbiome contributes to the production of substances (e.g., GABA, dopamine, serotonin, and norepinephrine) that enter the brain through the bloodstream. Tryptophan, a precursor to serotonin, appears to have the most significant impact on mental health.

Consuming healthy foods also positively impacts the diversity and composition of the microbiome via the production of the desirable effects of neuroendocrine pathways, with proven clinical improvement in patients with generalized anxiety disorder, schizophrenia, and bipolar disorder. In addition to eating adequate whole foods, diets should be low in processed foods, refined carbohydrates, sugars, and trans-saturated fats. It is hypothesized that highly processed foods are recognized as foreign invaders in the human body, consequently leading to inflammatory cascades (measured by Dietary Inflammatory Index) that ultimately are detrimental to physical and mental health.

Unhealthy dietary behaviors may influence the onset and progression of many diseases through epigenetic mechanisms, while healthy dietary behaviors also result in health-promoting gene expression through epigenetic regulation.

A dose-response relationship exists between the consumption of fruits and vegetables and happiness, even after controlling for numerous personal, social, and economic factors that influence emotional well-being.

The Mediterranean diet consistently demonstrates an association with a range of mental health benefits.

**Exercise**– The sedentary lifestyle is becoming increasingly commonplace, contributing to the worldwide obesity pandemic.

Regular physical activity is beneficial for attaining both healthy body habitus and increased mental well-being. While patients with sub-clinical depression rate lifestyle or psychosocial approaches as most helpful for improving mood, those diagnosed with clinical depression tend to rate exercise as the most effective intervention.

WHO and the Department of Health and Human Services (HHS) define adequate physical activity as at least 150 minutes of moderate-intensity aerobic activity per week, along with resistance, balance, and flexibility training.

In 2018, the European Psychiatric Association issued new guidelines using physical activity as a fundamental method of managing depressive disorders and schizophrenia. Literature supports that physical activity can be equally effective in improving depressive symptoms and quality of life as antidepressants or psychotherapy, especially if under the guidance of an exercise specialist. Physical activity also reduces psychiatric symptoms and improves cognition in patients with schizophrenia spectrum disorders.

Furthermore, exercise is associated with neuroprotective effects, thought to promote hippocampus neurogenesis, angiogenesis, and synaptogenesis. Functional magnetic resonance imaging studies show increased white matter volume throughout the brain following exercise, which may help reduce the risk for mental health symptoms. These findings correlate with evidence that a single ten-minute bout of exercise results in clinically significant improvement in mood, offering a stark contrast to the 6-week trial of antidepressant medication to detect effectiveness reliably.

**Relationships**– A 75-year longitudinal study created to examine the predictors of healthy aging found that interpersonal relationships significantly impacted satisfaction with life. Positive and supportive relationships benefit general health, especially for maintaining psychological health. Lack of social engagement correlates to increased inflammation and impaired immune function, which are detrimental to brain health.

Volunteer activities can help attain the aforementioned mental benefits even without supportive friends and family. Volunteering weekly increases life satisfaction by the same amount as an income bracket increases from <$20,000 to >$75,000 annually.

**Stress**– Chronic stress changes the regulation of the hypothalamic-pituitary axis, leading to immunosuppression and impairing serotonin transmission, thereby facilitating the development of depressive symptoms.

As quoted by Jon Kabat-Zinn, mindfulness is paying attention "on purpose, in the present moment, and non-judgmentally." Regular mindfulness practice may lead to increased cortical thickness in the prefrontal cortex, an area of the brain that demonstrates low activity in depression.

Practicing gratitude is another means of decreasing stress and improving mental health. Recording three positive takeaways at the end of each day for six months demonstrated improved emotional well-being for participants across the lifespan. Furthermore, a single gratitude visit that included composing and delivering a letter of gratitude to someone of significance to the participant also improved subjective personal well-being even one month later.

**Sleep –**While the reasons behind the need for sleep are not fully elucidated, it is undisputed that sleep is essential to psychological and physical wellness. Numerous sleep problems, such as insomnia, obstructive sleep apnea, and restless leg syndrome, are all causes of inadequate sleep linked with impaired cognition, decreased immune function, and dysregulated mood.

As demonstrated using functional magnetic resonance imaging, sleep-deprived individuals have more significant limbic region activity, translating to greater emotional reactivity when shown aversive images. Sleep-deprived individuals are also more than twice as likely to remember negative connotations for an arbitrary list of viewed words than those who are not. Indeed, sleep disorders are a risk factor for both new-onset and recurrent depression in all age groups, leading to increased severity and duration of depressive symptoms. Patients with schizophrenia with poor sleep quality are associated with increased symptom severity.

The treatment strategy is based on educating patients on sleep hygiene, using cognitive behavioral techniques, and administering hypnotic and antidepressant medications. Lifestyle Medicine would additionally emphasize lifestyle modification, including addressing a sedentary lifestyle, poor diet, and caffeine and alcohol use.

**Substance use**– Individuals with mental health conditions are also more likely to use substances. Many turn to substances to cope with mental illness symptoms such as depression, anxiety, and feelings of shame.

In 2016, nearly 34% of adults diagnosed with a mental health condition reported using tobacco, which is 10% higher than the general population. Smoking tobacco is also associated with heavy alcohol use, prescription medication misuse, and the use of marijuana and other illicit substances.

A meta-analysis of more than 50,000 adults found that smoking significantly increased the prospective risk of depression over one to six years.

Since smoking is frequently a coping mechanism, barriers to smoking cessation include expectations that it would induce worsened anxiety and mental health. Therefore, discussing and addressing all aspects of patients' internal risk-benefit analysis concerning tobacco cessation is essential in identifying and driving self-motivation and intervention efficacy.

While drinking alcohol is generally more socially acceptable than smoking tobacco, it is a powerful substance that affects dopaminergic, serotoninergic, γ-amino butyric acid (GABA), and glutamate pathways, leading to a 2 to 3-fold increased lifetime risk for depression and anxiety in those with substance use disorder. While acute alcohol use diminishes neuronal glutamate release, during alcohol withdrawal, a higher amount of rebound glutamate releases from the synapses. Combined with dysregulated neuroendocrine and monoamine pathways, it may provoke anxiety and dysphoria.