Issues of concern in geriatric assessment can be broadly divided into the following 4 classes:

- Functional Status

- Physical Health

- Vision impairment
- Hearing loss
- Nutrition status
- Fall prevention
- Urinary Incontinence
- Osteoporosis and arthritis

- Polypharmacy and Medication Reconciliation

- Cognitive Assessment

- Dementia
- Sleep and insomnia
- Mood disorder

**1. Functional Status**

Evaluation of one's ability to perform activities required to live independently comprises functional status assessment. It can be broadly divided into 2 levels - basic activities of daily living (BADL), which includes activities of self-care such as feeding, dressing, bathing, toileting, grooming, controlling bladder and bowel movements, etc. and instrumental activities of daily living (IADL) which includes activities to live independently such as taking medications, shopping, preparing meals, driving/using public transport, handling finances, doing household works, using telephone, etc. Commonly used indices to assess such activities are the Katz index for BADL and the Lawton scale for IADL. Information about functional status can also be achieved by asking open-ended questions about their daily activities. Functional status is directly affected by physical health, so any change in functional status should prompt further evaluation. There are various validated tools to measure functional ability, such as the Vulnerable Elders Scale-13 or Clinical Frailty Scale.

**2. Physical Health**

Geriatric assessment should include detailed medical history and physical examination, with particular focus on problems specific to the elderly such as vision, hearing, nutrition, fall prevention, urinary incontinence, osteoporosis, and preventative health.

**Preventative Health**

Preventative health includes screening for diseases such as diabetes mellitus, hypertension, cancer, etc. Early identification and treatment may be beneficial in diabetes, hypertension as well as in certain malignancies. However, the American Geriatric Society recommended that such screenings be based on patient's preferences, life expectancy, and co-morbid conditions rather than solely on age-based criteria. Older patients may have many co-morbid conditions that can shorten their life, hence the potential benefits of such screening tests and patient's preference for further evaluation and invasive procedure if screened positive should be taken into account before the screening. For the same reason, screening should be focused on treatable conditions which can provide immediate benefit to their quality of life rather than on asymptomatic diseases.

**Vision**

Visual impairment affects older patients' functional status, especially functions such as driving, preparing meals, managing money, etc. are significantly affected. It is also associated with falls, cognitive decline, and depression in the elderly.

**Hearing**

Hearing loss is, in fact, the third most common condition in older patients. Like visual impairment, hearing loss is associated with functional decline, poor cognition, and dementia, social isolation, and depression.

**Nutrition**

Up to 15% of the community-dwelling elderly population is affected by malnutrition, which is associated with a decline in physical health, such as poor wound healing, anemia, immune dysfunction, etc. Poor cognition, functional decline, and an overall increase in mortality.

**Falls**

About 28% of older adults report falling at least once in the last year, as per a recent cross-sectional study in the United States.

A systematic review of 18 studies reported fall to be multifactorial with the following risk factors - history of falls, gait or balance impairment, orthostatic hypotension, visual impairment, cognitive impairment, impairment in activities of daily living, and medications such as benzodiazepines, antidepressants, diuretics, etc. Of these, the two most predictive risk factors were history of falls and gait or balance impairment. When adjusted for other variables, age was not as important as the aforementioned two risk factors in predicting falls. Hence, a simple approach could be to ask for a history of falls and any abnormality in gait and balance. The patient will be at high risk if he/she answers "yes" to any one of these questions.

**Urinary Incontinence**

Most studies show the prevalence of urinary incontinence (UI) in the range of 25-45% and rise further with aging.

Initial evaluation of incontinence should comprise a non-invasive approach, including detailed medical history, fluid intake assessment, self-voiding diary, etc.; however, complicated cases may necessitate urodynamic studies. A simple and reproducible validated tool to differentiate stress and urge incontinence is 3 Incontinence Questions which comprises questions about urinary leaks.

**Osteoporosis and Arthritis**

Osteoporosis and osteopenia are common in the elderly and can lead to fractures even with mild trauma. Increased bone loss due to aging and menopause in women puts older patients and post-menopausal women at high risk of osteoporosis.

Osteoarthritis (OA) is a major cause of disability and pain in older patients. About 50% of people will have OA changes in knees by age 65, and almost everyone will have at least 1 joint affected with OA by age 75. Evaluation should include ruling out infectious process, rheumatoid arthritis, polymyalgia rheumatic, gout, and pseudogout. A careful history, physical examination, arthrocentesis, laboratory tests, and radiographic imaging may be necessary to come to a diagnosis. Medication such as NSAIDs and acetaminophen are used primarily to manage symptoms as no pharmacological cure is available for OA. Despite early enthusiasm, glucosamine and chondroitin sulfate have not shown to decrease pain in a recent clinical trial. Joint replacement surgery for carefully selected older patients may provide maximum benefit in improving the quality of life.

**3. Polypharmacy**

Patients older than 65 use more than 30% of all prescribed medication in the U.S.

Taking multiple medications can cause serious adverse effects due to the drug itself, drug-drug interaction, and drug-disease interaction.

**4. Cognitive Assessment**

Prevalence of mild cognitive impairment (MCI) and dementia increases with age. The prevalence of dementia is around 5% to 7%, and that of MCI is about 4 times that of dementia.

**Sleep**

Insomnia is one of the common presenting problems of older patients. Poor sleep is associated with increased fatigue, falls, nursing home placement, poor quality of life, and overall mortality. Quality of sleep decreases with aging. Sleep disorders could be primary such as insomnia, restless leg syndrome, obstructive sleep apnea, or secondary to comorbid medical, psychiatric, behavioral, environmental, or medication side effects. Assessment of sleep disorder should include evaluation for secondary causes if any. Due to increased side-effects of hypnotics used in the treatment of insomnia, non-pharmacological interventions such as cognitive behavioral therapy, education about sleep hygiene and expected changes with aging, stimulus control, decreased daytime sleep and dietary modifications are the first line of treatment for insomnia.

**Depression**

Almost half of the cases of depression have their onset at 60 or older. Depression is associated with decreased cognition, physical and social functioning, self-care, and independence. Older patients with depression die at a higher rate; a portion of that death rate results from the highest suicide rate among older adults.