Rather than providing a comprehensive review of the physics that dictates vaporizer functioning, this section will address key concepts that all anesthesiologists should understand when using these devices.

By definition, vapor is the gaseous phase of a substance. To reach this phase, a substance must reach a temperature below its critical temperature, which is different for every drug. The behavior of a gas in a sealed container is explained by the ideal gas law, which states that the pressure exerted by the gas on the walls of the container is directly proportional to the number of gas molecules (n) and the temperature inside the container expressed in degrees Kelvin (K). However, it is inversely proportional to the volume (v) of the container. In other words, gas molecules inside the container behave like points in space colliding with each other and the container walls, generating pressure. Under normal operating conditions, anesthetic gases will behave as ideal gases.

**Expressing Gas Concentrations and Minimum Alveolar Concentration**

Quantifying the proportion of an individual gas within a mixture of gases can be achieved by calculating either its partial pressure (Dalton law) or the percentage of volume (V/V%) occupied by this particular gas in comparison to the mixture.

Percentage of volume (V/V%) of oxygen = Partial pressure of oxygen / Total pressure of air * 100

- V/V% of isoflurane = (239 mmHg / 760 mmHg) * 100 = 31%

The minimum alveolar concentration (MAC) is defined as the concentration of anesthetic gas that prevents movement from the surgical stimulus in 50% of patients at 1 atmosphere of pressure (760 mmHg).

Duration (or consumption rate) of the anesthetic liquid inside of vaporizers can be calculated, giving more of a clinical application to this concept. One milliliter of anesthetic liquid is able to produce up to 210 ml of anesthetic gas, though this varies between drugs. Based on this calculation, the following formula can be applied:

- Ml of liquid anesthetic/hour = 3 (or 3.3 if is sevoflurane or 2.85 if is desflurane) * Dial concentration (V/V%)* fresh gas flow (Liters/minutes)

Example:

How many milliliters of sevoflurane would be consumed if providing 2.5% V/V% and a fresh gas flow of 3 liters?

Ml of sevoflurane= 3.3 * 2.5% * 3 liters/minute= 24.7 ml/hour of sevoflurane consumption

**Saturated Vapor Pressure (SVP)**

Evaporation is the phenomenon by which molecules in the liquid phase (with high kinetic energy) escape from the surface of a liquid to enter the gas phase. Inside the vaporizer, molecules will enter the gas phase until the rate of vaporized molecules equals the rate of molecules returning to the liquid phase. This dynamic equilibrium is known as saturation. The pressure exerted by this gas is known as “saturated vapor pressure.” SVP increases in a non-linear fashion as the temperature of an anesthetic in the liquid phase increases and is independent of the barometric pressure. The SVP for all anesthetic gases is measured at 20ºC and is a unique characteristic for each drug. For example, isoflurane has an SVP of 239 mmHg.

Evaporation is an energy-consuming process that can be expressed in terms of heat. The amount of energy required to convert 1 gram of liquid into vapor at a constant temperature is called the “latent heat of vaporization.” Thus, a liquid at normal temperature evaporates and loses temperature (cooling), which leads to a reduction of vapor pressure. Modern anesthetic vaporizers mitigate and compensate for evaporative cooling, preventing a decrease in the output of anesthetic gas.

**Boiling Point**

The boiling point is defined as the temperature at which vapor pressure equals atmospheric pressure, and a substance changes from the liquid to the gas phase, commonly expressed in degrees centigrade. The boiling point is 1 atmosphere for anesthetic gases. It is especially important to note that desflurane has a boiling point of 22.8ºC. As the boiling temperature can be affected by the barometric pressure, changes in altitude can affect the performance of desflurane vaporizers. However, this is no longer a problem since the introduction of the Tec-6 vaporizer.

**Specific Heat and Thermal Conductivity**

Specific heat is the number of calories required to increase the temperature of 1 gram of a substance by 1ºC. Thermal conductivity describes how well any material allows heat to flow through it. Vaporizers are designed with materials of high specific heat and thermal conductivity, allowing them to resist the changes of external and internal (cooling) temperature. Thus, a constant temperature is maintained inside the vaporization chamber during the evaporation process.

Two mechanisms for preventing heat loss have been widely used in vaporizer fabrication. Old vaporizers use a “heat sink” like glycol or water, while modern vaporizers are covered with a dense metal that prevents heat loss, such as copper. However, maintaining a gas concentration at a lower temperature requires more gas to pass through the vaporization chamber. Temperature-compensated devices have been manufactured for this purpose. These devices use a bimetallic strip composed of two metal bands with different coefficients of expansion that bend according to the temperature inside the vaporization chamber. If the temperature decreases, the strip allows the fresh gas flow to enter the vaporization chamber. In modern models, this strip can be found in the bypass chamber to prevent corrosion of the piece. Older vaporizers are not temperature-compensated. Another common piece used for temperature compensation is the aneroid bellows. These are attached by a rod to a cone that is located in the orifice of the bypass chamber. When the temperature decreases, the bellows contract and make the cone partially obstruct the bypass channel, increasing fresh gas flow to the vaporization chamber.

**Classification of Modern Vaporizers**

Modern vaporizers are designed to provide an accurate and adjustable concentration of anesthetic gas to the patient. The concentration of anesthetic gas inside the vaporizer is extremely high and must be diluted. Dorsch and Dorsch (1979) proposed a vaporizer classification, though current advances in technology have made this classification less reliable. Additionally, a vaporizer can share only one to several of the characteristics in their classification. A better explanation of modern vaporizers can be obtained by separating them into two groups, according to the input of fresh gas flow (Figure 1).

**Mixing the Gases**

As mentioned previously, V/V% is the percentage of the volume occupied by a particular gas within a mixture of gases. When the V/V% in the vaporization chamber is too high, it can be diluted in two ways. The first is by splitting the fresh gas flow such that a small portion of gas can enter the vaporization chamber, and the rest bypass it.