**Evaluation**

The evaluation stage allows for a trial of therapy before committing to the full implant. The evaluation procedure is done under local anesthesia because sensory innervation is an important indicator of lead placement. The patient is placed prone, and C-arm fluoroscopy is positioned. General landmarks of the sacrum are then identified, including:

- The base of the sacrum, which is found by following the iliac crest medially

- The apex of the sacrum is found at the sacrococcygeal articulation

- The median sacral crest is found on the sacrum midline in between the sacral foramina

A foramen needle is inserted into the S3 foramen at an angle of 60 degrees. The motor response should include great toe dorsiflexion and visualization of contraction in the perineum and anus called the bellows reflex. The sensory response should include fluttering/vibration or pulling the scrotum, vagina, perineum, or inner gluteal fold. It is important to be aware of responses to stimulation from the S2 and the S4 nerve roots, as these will not provide optimal therapy. Stimulation of the S2 root will result in pinching of the anal sphincter with plantar flexion and lateral rotation of the foot with sensation in the leg and buttock area. Stimulation of the S4 root will result in a bellows reflex with no lower extremity movement and a pulling sensation around the perineum.

The stylet of the foramen needle is removed and is replaced with a directional guide. Keeping the directional guide in place, the foramen needle is then removed. A small transverse skin incision is then made at the skin entry point to facilitate passage of the introducer, which is advanced into the S3 foramen. The directional guide is removed, leaving the introducer sheath. The tined lead is advanced, so electrodes 2 and 3 (3 being the most proximal) straddle the sacral foramen, and electrodes 0 and 1 (0 being the most distal) are placed anterior to the bony sacrum.

Recent literature suggests inserting the tined lead such that the lead occupies the most superior and medial space in the foramen.

Good prognostic indicators that suggest maximal success with sacral neuromodulation include optimal lead placement, ideal motor threshold levels, and the use of curved stylets.

The most critical part of the procedure is the tined lead placement. It is essential that the lead tracks along the S3 root, as this position is proven to provide optimal results. Care must be taken to correctly identify the sacral landmarks during lead placement. Video instructional guides are available to assist with learning lead placement and troubleshooting.

The trial period lasts 7 to 14 days for the tined lead evaluation. Stage 2, involving full implantation or removal of the leads, must be scheduled separately and will be dependent on the trial results.

CT guidance can also be used for electrode placement in selected cases as an alternative to C-arm fluoroscopy.

Computer-assisted lead placement for sacral neuromodulation has recently been reported. This was done using a surgical navigation system with electromagnetic tracking to guide the lead placement to the S3 nerve roots. Such advances can make it easier to optimize lead placement in otherwise technically difficult clinical situations.

Monopolar configurations are generally more effective and stimulate more motor nerve fibers at lower sensory thresholds resulting in greater therapeutic efficacy. In addition to reprogramming, changing the polarity or the position of the cathode lead can significantly change the sensory and motor responses.

**Implant**

Implantation of the internal pulse generator (IPG) follows a successful trial, meaning at least a 50% clinical improvement of symptoms.

Adverse events associated with sacral neuromodulation that lead to revision commonly include pain at the neurostimulator site (11.8% of patients with implants) and lead migration (7.9% of patients with implants).

Neurostimulators come with preprogrammed factory settings for lower urinary tract disorders and fecal incontinence. Each program has a specified pulse width, frequency, active electrodes, and cycling pattern. Patients can only switch between preset programs and modify amplitude settings on the device. In the office, the provider can adjust all settings using a physician programmer to tailor programs to individual patient needs. After implantation, patients should have yearly follow-up visits to confirm continued symptom management.

The duration of treatment is directly related to the longevity of the implantable battery. Non-rechargeable implants last an average of about five years.