First-line management of cardiac sarcoidosis is immunosuppression with corticosteroids with the goal of reducing inflammation and fibrosis, thereby preventing disease progression.

A Finnish nationwide study on 110 patients, of whom 93% received immunosuppressive therapy, showed that cardiac transplant-free survival at 1, 5, and 10 years was 97%, 90%, and 83%, respectively.

FDG-PET is used to follow response to immunosuppression after three months of starting therapy. If patients show reduced uptake on FDG-PET after three months, they can be put on a steroid taper to complete a total of 12 months. If there is evidence of active disease after the initial three months of steroids, second-line agents can be tried, including methotrexate, mycophenolate mofetil, cyclophosphamide, azathioprine, infliximab, and adalimumab. FDG-PET should be repeated three months after stopping therapy to determine if steroids need to be resumed for relapse. In the absence of evidence of relapse on FDG-PET after three months of steroids, patients should undergo surveillance echocardiogram and electrocardiogram every six months to follow left ventricular ejection fraction and conduction system disease, respectively.

The HRS consensus statement recommends using antiarrhythmic medications and catheter ablation for VT that does not respond to immunosuppression. First-line management for VT storm in CS is a combination of steroids and amiodarone, with catheter ablation reserved for patients refractory to medical therapy.

Implantable cardioverter-defibrillator is recommended for CS patients with a history of sustained VT or inducible sustained VT on electrophysiology study, cardiac arrest, left ventricular ejection fraction less than 35% despite immunosuppression, history of syncope thought to be from CS, and/or right ventricular ejection fraction less than 40% with evidence of active inflammation. In addition, if patients meet indications for permanent pacemaker implantation, the HRS recommends implantation of an implantable cardioverter-defibrillator instead.