Acarbose is available as a 25 mg, 50 mg, or 100 mg oral tablet. It should be administered orally three times daily with the first bite of each meal. Initial dosing is 25 mg orally three times daily; however, starting with once-daily dosing may limit GI adverse effects. From 25 mg by mouth three times daily, the dose can be titrated every 4 to 8 weeks to reach desired glycemic control while limiting GI adverse effects. The maximum daily dose is 100 mg three times daily.

- If the patient weighs less than 60 kg, the dose should not exceed 50 mg three times daily.

- Patients with renal dysfunction (serum creatinine greater than 2.0 mg/dL) have not been studied.

- Safety and efficacy have not undergone evaluation in pediatric patients.

- Studies have not established the safety of acarbose in pregnant patients.

- Nursing mothers should not use acarbose.

Gruden S. et al. conducted a study on 67 obese middle-aged Caucasian men with orlistat and acarbose modified-release oral capsules to determine the safety of this experimental dosage form.

Mabate B. et al. conducted in vitro research on the combination of fucoidan and acarbose to treat diabetes mellitus.

**Drug-Drug Interactions**

- Acarbose may decrease the bioavailability of digoxin and valproic acid.

- Acarbose may increase hypoglycemic risk when combined with other anti-diabetic agents that cause hypoglycemia.

- Digestive enzymes, including amylase, lipase, and protease, may decrease the effectiveness of acarbose.

- Therapy requires monitoring with other agents that affect blood glucose concentrations.