During heme catabolism, one of the by-products produced is biliverdin. The enzyme biliverdin reductase then converts biliverdin into bilirubin. This bilirubin is unconjugated and is fat-soluble, hence requires its conjugation for its excretion. So, unconjugated bilirubin is carried to the liver by albumin. UDP-glucuronosyltransferase (UGT) enzyme converts unconjugated bilirubin into conjugated bilirubin via the process of glucuronidation in the liver. Genetic mutation is the root mechanism of this disease involving the impairment of conjugation. In the absence of this enzyme, as in Crigler-Najjar syndrome type I, the levels of unconjugated bilirubin will rise, leading to jaundice. Unconjugated bilirubin is water-insoluble, and high levels can deposit in the brain leading to a condition called kernicterus. Severe hyperbilirubinemia usually develops in the first few days of life. Type II Crigler-Najjar syndrome is characterized by decreased activity of UGT, making it less severe. Although some affected infants develop severe hyperbilirubinemia, their jaundice responds well to treatment with phenobarbital.

Unconjugated bilirubin gets accumulated in the plasma. It is eliminated very slowly in small amounts by alternative pathways that consist of direct passage into the bile and small intestine. It cannot be excreted through the urine as it is water-insoluble. These factors contribute to the excessive accumulation of indirect bilirubin in the body resulting in deposition in body tissues such as skin, sclera, brain, etc. At normal physiologic body pH, unconjugated bilirubin binds sufficiently to albumin. But in the absence of conjugation and excretion, the amount of unconjugated bilirubin overwhelms the amount of albumin present in the body. Hence the amount of free (unbound) unconjugated bilirubin rises in the blood. Typically, about 99% of bilirubin is bound to albumin, which doesn't interact with cerebral endothelial. In contrast, free (unbound) unconjugated bilirubin easily crosses the blood-brain barrier and interacts with neural tissue.