The muscles around the pelvis are essential in maintaining the stability of the pelvic girdle, maintaining an erect posture, and assisting the movement of the trunk and lower extremities.

The internal iliac crest serves as the origin of the Iliacus muscle, which travels inferiorly and meets with the psoas, which originates above the pelvis but travels down through it, to make the iliopsoas. This muscle eventually exits the pelvis and inserts itself upon the femur. The piriformis is another muscle that originates inside of the pelvis and inserts externally on the femur.

The pubic symphysis serves as an attachment point for both abdominal muscles, including the rectus abdominis, internal and external obliques, and transversus abdominis, as well as muscles of the adductor compartment of the leg, including the adductor brevis/longus/magnus, gracilis, and pectineus. Attached along the inferior edges of the pubis running posteriorly to the sacrum are the pelvic floor muscles, which include the puborectalis, iliococcygeal, ischiococcygeus, pubococcygeus, external anal sphincter muscles, and levator ani. The obturator internus muscles also have insertions on the internal side of the pubis and travel on the pelvic floor muscles, eventually leaving the greater sciatic notch and inserting on the posterior surface of the femur. The obturator externus travels from the anterior face of the pubis posteriorly to insert on the backside of the femur as well. The gluteal muscles, quadratus femoris, and semitendinosus muscles all also have attachments on the pelvic bones. The inguinal ligament, a common anatomical landmark involved with a hernia, runs from the anterior portion of the iliac spine to the front of the pubic symphysis.