The primary goal of treatment is to alleviate the symptoms of acute attacks, prevention and management of immediate complications, and prevention of late complications and future attacks.

**Acute Treatment**

The goal is to normalize the serum potassium level by administering oral potassium chloride, which is believed to be more readily absorbed compared to other oral potassium solutions, alleviates the symptoms of muscle weakness. Oral potassium chloride is administered in incremental dose, starting initially with 0.5 to 1 mEq/kg (i.e., 60 to 120 mEq of potassium for a 60 kg individual) is reasonable. If they do not respond to the initial dose, then 30% of the initial dose (i.e., 0.3 mEq/kg) is repeated every 30 min.

IV potassium is not preferred initially and is reserved for arrhythmias due to hypokalemia or if the patient has swallowing difficulties or respiratory muscle paralysis. IV potassium is preferentially administered with the mannitol, not with dextrose or saline as both carbohydrate and salt can itself trigger the muscle paralysis and thus may worsen the weakness.

Individuals having a milder form of attacks can also benefit from low-level exercises.

**Preventive Treatment**

Both pharmacological and nonpharmacological interventions can be used to prevent recurrent future attacks. Nonpharmacological interventions include educating patients about triggering factors and lifestyle modifications to avoid these factors (discussed later). Pharmacologic interventions include medications like chronic potassium supplementation, carbonic anhydrase inhibitors (CAIs), potassium-sparing diuretics that are used when lifestyle modifications become insufficient in reducing attack rates. The favored approach is to add one of the diuretics with the chronic potassium supplementation. The initial choice of diuretics is carbonic anhydrase inhibitor acetazolamide.

Carbonic anhydrase inhibitors seem to be potent in decreasing future attacks of muscle weakness, though the mechanism of CAIs in HypoKPP is still unclear. Carbonic anhydrase inhibitors promote urine potassium loss and non-anion gap metabolic acidosis, which reduce the patient's susceptibility to muscle paralysis. It is also suggested that CAIs increase the opening of the calcium-activated potassium channels. Further, CAIs also reduce intracellular sodium accumulation, thus reducing the cellular toxicity and prevent muscle degeneration, which may be effective in the treatment of permanent weakness.

The genetic variation in response to acetazolamide treatment had been reported. Patients with SCN4A mutations show less response compared to patients with CACNA1S mutations. In a study of 74 identified cases of HypoKPP, 56% (31/55) of patients with CACNA1S mutations, and only 16% (3/19) of patients with SCN4A mutations showed a response to acetazolamide therapy.

FDA recently approved dichlorphenamide for the treatment of HypoKPP. 50 mg twice daily dose of dichlorphenamide has been more effective than a placebo in reducing the occurrence, severity, and duration of future attacks.

While no definitive therapy for the late-onset myopathy has been proven to date, but it is believed that reducing the attacks of muscle weakness helps to mitigate the resulting myopathy.

A study also reported the improvement in severity and frequency of attacks with topiramate therapy in 11 years old twins with HypoKPP, thus necessitates further study regarding the efficacy of topiramate in HypoKPP.

**Special Consideration**

Surgery and HypoKPP

HypoKPP patients with CACNA1S mutation are susceptible to malignant hyperthermia, as the CACNA1S gene is allelic to the gene that increases susceptibility to malignant hyperthermia.

Pregnancy

During pregnancy, potassium management during the attacks should not differ from the pre-pregnancy state. However, drugs like acetazolamide and dichlorphenamide are FDA pregnancy category C so, their use during pregnancy is quite challenging, and risks and benefits of drug use should be weighed in them. Some pregnant women prefer not to take these medicines during pregnancy.