**Myocarditis, Myocardial Injury, and Elevated Cardiac Enzymes**

The myocardial injury appears to be a common feature in COVID-19 and portends a poor prognosis when present. A meta-analysis of six published studies from China found that 8% of patients with COVID-19 had associated cardiac injury.

Early reports from China noted that 7%–20% of patients had increased levels of cardiac biomarkers or electrocardiographic (ECG) abnormalities indicating underlying myocardial injury. These patients with myocardial involvement had worse outcomes.

The association between myocardial injury and fatal outcomes was examined in a retrospective single-center case series of 187 COVID-19 patients from Wuhan, 28% of whom had elevated troponin T levels indicating myocardial injury. In-hospital mortality was 60% in these patients versus 9% in patients with normal troponin T levels. Further, mortality was 8% in patients without underlying cardiovascular disease and normal troponin T levels, 13% in patients with underlying cardiovascular disease but normal troponin T levels, 38% in patients without underlying cardiovascular disease but elevated troponin T levels, and much higher at 69% for those with underlying cardiovascular disease and elevated troponin T. The authors concluded that the presence of myocardial damage was associated with increased mortality in COVID-19 patients and that the absence of myocardial injury led to a better prognosis.

Myocardial injury was predictive of the risk for in-hospital mortality in patients with severe COVID-19.

Most of the early studies did not report echocardiographic or cardiac magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) results. Later studies have identified patients with myocardial injury elicited abnormal cardiac imaging and cardiac contractile dysfunction.

A 53-year-old woman without any history of cardiovascular disease presented with severe fatigue in a case report from Italy. She was found to have evidence of acute myopericarditis with elevated levels of cardiac biomarkers. Her ECG showed diffuse ST elevation. Imaging with cardiac MRI revealed a slew of gross abnormalities, including biventricular hypokinesis, ventricular interstitial edema, circumferential pericardial effusion, and a left ventricular ejection fraction of 35%. The patient was treated with lopinavir/ritonavir, steroids, and chloroquine, along with dobutamine for heart failure, and showed clinical improvement.

Another case report from China described a 37-year-old man with COVID-19 complicated by fulminant myocarditis and cardiogenic shock. Troponin T was elevated, and ECG showed ST elevation. Emergency computed tomography (CT) coronary angiography revealed no coronary stenosis. Echocardiography showed an enlarged heart with a left ventricular ejection fraction of 27%. The patient was treated with glucocorticoids and immunoglobulins, resulting in clinical recovery with the restoration of normal cardiac size and function.

Histopathological evidence of COVID-19 affecting the myocardium is limited. In one case report, a patient with COVID-19 developed ARDS, hypotension, and cardiogenic shock. Endomyocardial biopsy showed low-grade myocardial inflammation with coronavirus particles observed in the myocardial interstitium.

Currently, the exact mechanism of action of myocardial injury by SARS CoV-2 is not precisely understood. Some evidence suggests an indirect effect of the virus, with myocardial injury appearing to be mostly related to systemic inflammation and hypoxia. In a few cases, the myocytes' direct viral involvement may lead to viral myocarditis.

**Heart Failure**

Heart failure has been well described in patients with pneumonia, and now multiple studies have shown an association between heart failure and COVID-19. In a case series of 21 severely ill patients with COVID-19 in an ICU, one-third developed new-onset cardiomyopathy with globally decreased left ventricular ejection fraction on transthoracic echocardiogram with clinical signs of cardiogenic shock and elevated creatine kinase or troponin I.

Patients with COVID-19 may develop right-sided heart failure secondary to pulmonary hypertension due to hypoxia and ARDS. In a cohort of 105 COVID-19 patients hospitalized at one center, right ventricular dilation was present in 31% of intubated patients. Right ventricular hypokinesia was observed in 66% of COVID-19 patients with right ventricular enlargement versus 5% of COVID-19 patients without right ventricular enlargement.

A few studies have reported takotsubo (stress-induced) cardiomyopathy as a complication of COVID-19. Most cases occurred in women older than 65 years of age. The association with COVID-19 infection is not clear, but it has been suggested that the emotional distress and anxiety associated with the pandemic may have a role in the onset of this disease.

The etiology of heart failure in COVID-19 disease is unclear whether it is a direct effect of SARS-CoV-2 on the myocardium or indirectly caused by hypoxia, cytokine release, volume overload, renal failure, stress, or overwhelming critical illness. Further, some patients with risk factors for heart disease (diabetes, hypertension, hyperlipidemia, coronary artery disease) may have had underlying subclinical heart failure uncovered or exacerbated by COVID-19 infection and associated illness. Acute coronary syndromes triggered by COVID-19 can also result in heart failure or worsen the preexisting disease.

Diagnostic workup for suspected heart failure includes brain natriuretic peptide, troponin markers, transthoracic echocardiography, and cardiac MRI. Cardiac MRI may help look for changes induced by COVID-19 in patients with diastolic heart failure.

Knowledge of the presence or absence and degree of cardiomyopathy is crucial for managing patients in shock status and determining the need for circulatory support and type of extracorporeal membranous oxygenation. The management of heart failure in patients with COVID-19 should be initiated and continued as per current guidelines.

**Arrhythmias and Sudden Cardiac Arrest**

Arrhythmias and sudden cardiac arrest have been reported with COVID-19. In a report of 138 hospitalized patients with COVID-19 in Wuhan, 17% had arrhythmias [1], although the specific types of arrhythmias were not described. In another study of hospitalized COVID-19 patients in Wuhan, 6% had developed ventricular tachycardia or ventricular fibrillation. More patients with elevated troponin T levels (17%) than normal troponin T levels (2%) had ventricular tachycardia or ventricular fibrillation.

In patients with COVID-19, a cardiac injury that induces arrhythmia can be due to various causes, such as hypoxia, a worsening of coronary perfusion, direct tissue damage, hyperacute systemic inflammatory response syndrome, or the effects of medications used to manage the COVID-19. Hypokalemia can occur in patients with COVID-19 due to the interaction of SARS-CoV-2 with the renin-angiotensin-aldosterone system and increases vulnerability to various kinds of arrhythmia.

Cardiac arrest was reported in 11% of COVID-19 patients with ECG evidence of ST elevation in a case series from New York.

**Thromboembolism and Coagulation Abnormalities**

COVID-19 infection has been associated with venous and arterial thromboembolism. Studies have shown abnormalities of the coagulation cascade, with elevated D-dimer, thrombocytopenia, slightly elevated prothrombin time, and higher levels of fibrinogen and von Willebrand factor. The hypercoagulable state in COVID-19 infection is thought to be related to severe inflammatory response, cytokine storm, and endothelial damage, along with underlying patient comorbidities.

In a retrospective cohort study from China, a D-dimer >1 mcg/mL was reported in 42% of patients and in 81% of those who died from COVID-19; as such, it was identified as one of the risk factors for death and was associated with 18-times increased risk for mortality.

COVID-19 infection has been associated with cerebrovascular accidents. The incidence of acute ischemic stroke in patients with COVID-19 is approximately 1%–3%. A review of 37 studies with 370 patients with COVID-19 who had developed acute ischemic stroke or transient ischemic attack found that most patients had underlying comorbidities predisposing them to ischemic stroke.

Peripheral arterial thromboembolism causing acute limb ischemia also has been described in COVID-19. Two young patients without any known risk factors have been diagnosed with acute thrombosis involving the aorta presenting as acute limb ischemia.

There is increasing evidence that anticoagulation is of benefit in COVID-19 illness. A study from New York demonstrated that treatment-dose anticoagulation was associated with reduced mortality. In the study, 786 out of 2773 patients (28%) were administered systemic anticoagulation. In-hospital mortality for patients who received anticoagulation was 23%, and median survival was 21 days, compared with 23% and median survival of 14 days in patients who did not receive treatment-dose anticoagulation. In patients who needed mechanical ventilation, in-hospital mortality was 29% for those who received treatment-dose anticoagulation, and median survival was 21 days, versus 63% and median survival of 9 days in patients who did not receive treatment-dose anticoagulation.

At this time, most centers have incorporated anticoagulation into the treatment protocol for COVID-19 patients, especially if they have elevated D-dimer levels. However, it is unknown which anticoagulation agent (unfractionated heparin, low-molecular-weight heparin, warfarin, or direct oral anticoagulants) is most efficacious in preventing thromboembolic events in COVID-19 patients. As always, the risks and benefits of anticoagulation treatment must be weighed for each patient. Future clinical trials may shed more light on the benefits of anticoagulation in COVID-19 infection.

**Acute Coronary Syndrome**

Several studies and case reports have established an association between COVID-19 and acute coronary syndrome. In a letter to the editor, investigators from New York reported their experience with COVID-19 patients who showed ST-segment elevation on ECG.

In Italy, researchers published a study of 28 patients with confirmed COVID-19 who had undergone with coronary angiogram for ST-elevation myocardial infarction. Of these, 79% had typical chest pain, while 21% presented with dyspnea without any chest pain; 86% had ST-elevation myocardial infarction as the initial presentation of COVID-19. This suggests that COVID-19 caused acute coronary syndrome (ACS) without substantial systemic inflammation.

Despite the association between COVID-19 and ACS, the reported incidence of ACS has been lower during the pandemic than in the pre-COVID-19 period. Reports indicate a 42%–48 % reduction in ACS hospitalizations and 38%–40% fewer percutaneous coronary interventions performed for ST-elevation myocardial infarction. This could be due to patients being reluctant to present to hospitals and clinics out of fear of contracting COVID-19. Unavailability of beds has also been a reason, as hospitals have been flooded with sick COVID-19 patients precluding many other admissions, particularly non-urgent cases.