It is imperative to identify risk factors and perform a thorough assessment of the patient before performing a limp implant. A team approach is an ideal way to limit the complications of this procedure. Before surgery, the patient should have the following done:

- Evaluation by a surgeon experienced in selecting the appropriate patient for the surgery

- Evaluation by the primary care physician and anesthesiologist to ensure that the patient is fit for anesthesia

Following surgery, the patient should be evaluated and monitored by a perioperative nursing specialist providing support and patient education as well as coordination of follow-up care.

An interdisciplinary team comprised of an experienced surgeon, anesthesiologist, and surgical assistants, and operative nurses should perform the lip implant for the best outcomes. Close follow-up during the initial post-operative period, either by a wound care nurse and/or clinician experienced in the post-operative care of lip implants should monitor the patient for possible complications, including bleeding or infection. It is also crucial the team works together to counsel the patient on avoiding strenuous activity, heavy lifting, or bending over during the first several days post-operatively to prevent such complications. Patients should also avoid aggressive manipulation of the perioral region until 7 to 14 days postoperatively. [Level V]

Coordinated interprofessional team care involving physicians, specialists, and specialty-trained nurses is essential to achieving positive results in lip implant procedures. [Level V]