The indications for bladder catheterization are:

**Therapeutic**

- Urinary retention

Urinary retention can be acute or chronic. The causes of urinary retention can be:

- Obstructive: Urinary obstruction can be intrinsic (within the urinary system) or extrinsic. Benign prostatic hyperplasia (BPH), stones, strictures, stenosis, or a tumor can cause intrinsic obstruction. BPH is the most common cause of urinary retention. If the blockage is from a pathology outside the bladder, it is classified as extrinsic. An enlarged abdominal or pelvic organ can compress on the bladder neck resulting in extrinsic obstruction.

- Infectious & Inflammatory: Cystitis, urethritis, prostatitis (common infectious etiology in men), and vulvovaginitis in the woman can cause urinary retention.

- Pharmacologic: Drugs with anticholinergic or alpha-adrenergic agonist properties.

- Neurologic: Brain or spinal cord injury, cerebrovascular accident, multiple sclerosis, Parkinson disease, and dementia can lead to urinary retention.

- Others: Trauma, psychogenic, Fowler syndrome in women.

- Perioperative

Bladder catheterization is performed perioperatively in most abdominopelvic surgeries, such as urological and gynecological procedures. In cases of surgery on structures adjacent to the genitourinary tract, sheath catheters are recommended.

- Neurogenic bladder dysfunction

- Urinary incontinence

- Social and hygiene reasons

- Acutely ill patients requiring close urinary output measurement

- Chemotherapy drug delivery

- Bladder irrigation

**Diagnostic**

- Measurement of urodynamics

- Sample collection for urinalysis

- Radiographic studies (cystogram)

**Indications for Removal**

The need for a bladder catheter should be assessed daily and must be removed when the purpose of the catheter insertion is served.

Early removal of urinary catheters helps with ambulation and better post-op recovery.