Spermatic cord torsion may be intravaginal or extravaginal. Extravaginal torsion is seen almost exclusively in neonates. It occurs due to the increased mobility of the testicle before the descent into the scrotum when attached to the scrotal wall via the tunica vaginalis. During intravaginal torsion, frequently associated with the bell clapper deformity, the spermatic cord twists on itself, ultimately pinching off arterial blood supply to the testicle leading to ischemia and infarction. The degree of torsion may be variable, usually causing venous occlusion and congestion first. Most cases of spermatic cord torsion leading to infarction are twisted to at least 720 degrees.

Epididymitis is a genitourinary tract infection that is usually due to continuous spread from pathogens affecting the bladder of the urethra. In men less than 35 years old, this is most commonly associated with sexually transmitted organisms such as Chlamydia trachomatis and, less commonly, Neisseria gonorrhea. Men older than 35 years or those without sexual partners usually present with gram-negative urinary pathogens, which are also responsible for cystitis and prostatitis, predominantly Escherichia coli. Other urinary pathogens such as Klebsiella pneumoniae, Proteus mirabilis, and Ureaplasma urealyticum, may be seen. Rare organisms can occur, such as cytomegalovirus, Mycobacterium, and other fungal causes that may be seen in immunocompromised hosts such as those with HIV.

When inguinal or inguinoscrotal hernias can not be reduced, venous and arterial flow is impeded. This results in ischemia.