# Continuing Education Activity

Benign rolandic epilepsy (BRE), also called benign epilepsy with centrotemporal spikes (BECTS) or benign epilepsy of childhood with centrotemporal spikes (BECCT) is the most common epilepsy syndrome in children. As the name states, these seizures originate in the rolandic area of the brain. This activity illustrates the evaluation and treatment of rolandic epilepsy seizure and highlights the role of the interprofessional team in managing patients with this condition.

**Objectives:**
- Outline the epidemiology of benign rolandic epilepsy.
- Explain the role of the electroencephalogram (EEG) in confirming the diagnosis of benign rolandic epilepsy.
- Describe the use of a single anti-epileptic drug in the short-term treatment of benign rolandic epilepsy.
- Summarize the importance of collaboration and communication among the interprofessional team members to counsel the patient on the correct use of the anti-epileptic drugs along with the monitoring for side effects to improve outcomes for those affected by benign rolandic epilepsy.

# Introduction

Benign Rolandic epilepsy (BRE), also called benign epilepsy with centrotemporal spikes (BECTS) or benign epilepsy of childhood with centrotemporal spikes (BECCT) is the most common epilepsy syndrome in children.

# Etiology

Benign Rolandic epilepsy (BRE) is classified as a genetic disorder as approximately 25% of patients have a family history of either febrile seizures or epilepsy.KCNQ2,ELP4,GRIN2A

# Epidemiology

Benign Rolandic epilepsy (BRE) can start anywhere between the ages of 1 to 14 years. It peaks around 7 to 10 years when the majority of the cases occur. BRE occurs more often in boys than in girls with a 1.5 to 1 predominance. The incidence of BRE is 10 to 20 per 100,000 children up to age 15 years. BRE makes up about 15% of all epilepsy cases in children

# History and Physical

Benign Rolandic epilepsy (BRE) affects children until adolescence and usually occur at night or on awakening (greater than 70%).

# Evaluation

As with other epilepsy syndromes, a diagnosis of benign Rolandic epilepsy (BRE) is based on history and confirmed with characteristic electroencephalogram (EEG) findings.

# Treatment / Management

As the name suggests, benign Rolandic epilepsy (BRE) is generally a benign condition, seizures almost always resolve by adolescence, and are often not treated. This is especially true if the seizures are partial, infrequent, occur only at night, and the patient and family/parents are agreeable.

# Differential Diagnosis

Differential diagnoses include centrotemporal spikes without seizures, centrotemporal spikes with a cerebral lesion, temporal lobe epilepsy, Panayiotopoulos syndrome, and Landau-Kleffner syndrome.

# Prognosis

The prognosis of benign Rolandic epilepsy (BRE) is excellent irrespective of treatment. Seizures occur for only 2 to 4 years and spontaneously resolve by the age of 15 to 16 years (in more than 95% of children).

# Deterrence and Patient Education

As with any epilepsy syndrome, patient/family education is of paramount importance for a good outcome. Education plays a vital role when decisions are made about starting or stopping treatment. The patient and family should be educated about the possibility of status epilepticus as well as sudden unexplained death in epilepsy (SUDEP).

# Enhancing Healthcare Team Outcomes

An interprofessional approach to Rolandic seizures is recommended.

Rolandic epilepsy is a relatively common diagnosis but the condition is benign. Because of its diverse presentation, healthcare workers including nurses need to be aware of the possible signs and symptoms. By far, the majority of children require no treatment, and the disorder gradually disappears in 2 to 4 years. The few patients with recurrent seizures may require treatment with a single anti-epileptic drug. The pharmacist should educate the patient and family about the benign nature of the disorder. In addition, if drug treatment is undertaken, the family/patient must be educated about the need for compliance and watching for side effects. Patients should be informed that the drug should not be abruptly discontinued nor the dose changed without first speaking to the neurologist. The outcomes for most patients with rolandic epilepsy is excellent.