# Continuing Education Activity

Prune belly syndrome is a rare congenitally acquired disorder primarily characterized by the clinical triad of deficient abdominal musculature, cryptorchidism, and urinary tract abnormalities. Children born with this syndrome present on a broad spectrum, ranging from incompatibility with life to aging normally and having children of their own. This activity reviews the evaluation and management of prune belly syndrome and highlights the role of the interprofessional team in managing patients with this complex condition.

**Objectives:**
- Identify the possible etiologies of prune belly syndrome.
- Describe the clinical and radiological findings associated with prune belly syndrome. 
- Outline the management options available for prune belly syndrome.
- Summarize interprofessional team strategies for improving care coordination and communication among health care professionals managing prune belly syndrome and improving outcomes.

# Introduction

Prune belly syndrome, also referred to as Eagle-Barrett syndrome or the triad syndrome, is a rare congenital disorder characterized by the triad of deficient abdominal musculature, cryptorchidism, and urinary tract abnormalities.

# Etiology

The exact etiology of prune belly syndrome remains unknown, although there are several theories.

# Epidemiology

Prune belly syndrome has a contemporary incidence of 3.6 to 3.8 per 100000 live male births.

# Pathophysiology

Male infants with prune belly syndrome display bilateral cryptorchidism where the testes lie intra-abdominally, adjacent to the dilated ureters at the level of the iliac arteries. The reason for the undescended testes is not known.

The massive dilation of the ureters occur at the distal level; however, this finding is variable. Hydroureteronephrosis is seldom due to obstruction within the ureter; instead, the usual culprits include lower urinary tract obstruction (e.g., posterior urethral valves), vesicoureteral reflux (VUR) and a histologic deficiency of smooth muscle and preponderance of fibrous tissue in ureters leading to ineffective peristalsis.

The severity of abdominal wall musculature is variable. There are rare cases with completely absent abdominal wall musculature; the abdominal wall deficiency is often present in the lower part of the abdominal wall. The rectus muscles and internal and external obliques are often less well developed, and in severe cases, skin, subcutaneous fat and a single fibrous layer may be all that is overlying the peritoneum.

Besides the characteristic triad, about 75% of children with prune belly syndrome have abnormalities involving other systems.

# History and Physical

The characteristic dried prune-like wrinkled appearance of the abdominal wall is the most notable physical finding and is the reason for the name, prune belly syndrome. This abdominal finding appears to be attributable to either deficient or absent abdominal musculature.

# Evaluation

During the second trimester, suspected prune belly syndrome may be detectable during the prenatal ultrasound screening.

In patients with severe renal dysplasia, pulmonary hypoplasia is a common finding. These patients are either stillborn or die in the early neonatal period. If alive at birth, these babies with pulmonary hypoplasia usually require aggressive neonatal resuscitation with various mechanical ventilation strategies. A chest radiograph is helpful to evaluate the pulmonary status, which generally shows small underdeveloped low volume lungs. A renal function panel should be ordered to assess renal status.

Once the neonate is stable, a renal and bladder ultrasound can take place, which helps evaluate the nature and severity of the urinary tract dysmorphism. Enlarged bladder with significant residual urine may be present due to weak bladder contraction.

# Treatment / Management

Medical: Nearly 80% of patients born with prune belly syndrome will have at least one documented urinary tract infection (UTI), and one-third of these patients will develop pyelonephritis.

Surgical: Broadly, patients with PBS may undergo three types of surgeries: orchiopexy, procedures involving the urinary tract, and the abdominal wall reconstruction. The timing and sequence of these procedures vary among individuals based on the severity of the urinary tract abnormalities and also the presence of other comorbidities (e.g., pulmonary hypoplasia).

Orchiopexy is almost always an indicated procedure in prune belly syndrome, and the current recommendation for bilateral orchiopexy is at about six months of age. The orchiopexy at an earlier age is recommended but should be weighed against the higher anesthetic risks. A delayed orchiopexy worsens the testicular prognosis as in any other case of undescended testes.

The timing and need for urinary tract reconstructive surgeries vary among clinicians who manage prune belly syndrome, and the decision should be individually based on the clinical severity of each patient.

# Differential Diagnosis

Given the characteristic triad and the pathognomonic finding of the abdominal wall in prune belly syndrome, a differential diagnosis is often not required. It is crucial, however, to identify the severity and potential causes of the urinary tract dysmorphisms and also to consider all other comorbid conditions associated with prune belly syndrome outside of the usual characteristic triad. Some patients have the typical urinary tract abnormalities described in prune belly syndrome but may have either normally placed testes (or unilateral cryptorchidism) or a normal abdominal wall (or partial/unilateral laxity), referred to as pseudo-prune belly syndrome.

# Prognosis

As stated before, children born with this condition present on a spectrum ranging from incompatibility with life to leading a normal healthy life. Perinatal mortality ranges between 10 to 25% in contemporary studies and directly correlates to the level of prematurity and severity of pulmonary hypoplasia as a direct result of urinary tract abnormality leading to Potter sequence.

Woodard broadly classified prune belly syndrome patients into three clinical groups.

Before 1992, men with prune belly syndrome were considered infertile as there had been no reported cases of paternity.

With only 5% of prune-belly syndrome diagnoses being female, females exhibit only deficiency of abdominal wall musculature and the anomalous urinary tract without any gonadal abnormality.

# Complications

Given the multi-organ system manifestations, many potential complications abound. The most important to keep in mind, however, are the ones which clinicians can significantly impact the course and improve the outcome.

- In severe cases, the complications of pulmonary hypoplasia and renal dysplasia predominate. These require management by the multidisciplinary team, including the maternal-fetal medicine specialists, neonatologists, urologists, nephrologists, geneticists, pulmonologists, anesthesiologists, respiratory therapists, and others. Families should be thoroughly informed about the condition of the fetus (or infant), and receive counseling about the possible outcome. They should be helped to make informed decisions, and all the ethical considerations should be addressed by the team of experienced specialists.

- Beyond the neonatal period, urinary tract complications predominate, and about one-third of patients may eventually progress to need a renal transplant.

# Deterrence and Patient Education

- As there is no known cause for prune belly syndrome, there are no steps for the prevention of this syndrome.

# Pearls and Other Issues

- Babies born with prune belly syndrome present on a spectrum ranging from incompatibility with life to leading a normal healthy life. The care plan requires individualization based on the type and severity of the presentation.

# Enhancing Healthcare Team Outcomes

As prune belly syndrome has manifestations in nearly every major organ system, it truly is a diagnosis that requires a large team of specialists. The role of the neonatologist or pediatrician is vital to appropriately navigate the early management and workup of a child born with prune belly syndrome. Pediatric surgery and urology consults are important initially to manage the classic triad of symptoms. Other specialists should be consulted (cardiology, orthopedic surgery, pulmonology, gastroenterology, pediatric surgery, cardiac surgery) depending upon where the work-up leads.

As prune belly syndrome is a condition with variable severity and with multisystemic manifestations, patients are best managed by the interprofessional team. In severe cases with poor outcome, families should be thoroughly informed about the condition of the infant (or fetus), and appropriate, timely counseling should be provided. They should be helped to make informed decisions, and all the ethical considerations should be addressed by the team of experienced specialists.

In patients with less severe manifestations, it is of utmost importance to educate and support the parents of infants born with prune belly syndrome through the early perinatal period and ensure that they understand the importance of continued follow-up and surgical planning. Many parents will be relieved to know that the prune belly syndrome will improve over time, not every patient needs complex reconstructive surgeries and that their child will potentially live a normal life with the ability to have kids of their own in the future should they so desire.

For parents, it is essential to educate them that orchiopexy should be done near the six months age mark, and this time frame is also an appropriate period to plan an abdominal wall reconstructive surgery, if necessary. Urinary tract reconstruction is usually avoided unless they develop recurrent febrile urinary tract infections or demonstrate progressive renal deterioration. Occasionally children will need temporizing urologic interventions such as a cutaneous vesicostomy in order to safely drain the bladder while infants grow in preparation for more definitive surgeries such as ureteral reconstruction and reimplantation at a later age. Clinicians can refer families with PBS to peer support groups for further resources such as Prune Belly Syndrome Network.

Prune belly syndrome patients often require surgical procedures and are at a higher risk of anesthetic complications because the deficiency in abdominal wall musculature, which compromises their cough effectiveness, potentially leading to retention of pulmonary secretions and subsequent pneumonia. During hospitalizations, they should also be closely watched for the development of atelectasis for the same reason.

Whenever catheterization is indicated, whether for voiding cystourethrogram or obstruction of the bladder outlet necessitating foley drainage, nursing plays a key role in assuring that proper sterile technique is utilized during catheter placement and that proper catheter hygiene is continued with the foley remains in place.

Patients with prune belly syndrome do appear to be at a higher risk for testicular malignancy, but it is no higher than that of non-prune belly syndrome patients with cryptorchidism. This is one more reason that placement of the testes into the scrotum in a timely manner is necessary to both reduce the risk of developing malignancy as well as enhancing the detection of potential tumors.

The only way to improve outcomes is by managing these patients with an interprofessional team with close communication. Because of the multisystem organ involvement, most patients need lifelong follow up by the pediatrician, nurse practitioner, social worker, urologist, and the primary care provider.

Each of these clinicians has a particular role and contribution to make the overall team. Physicians will manage the case overall, and decide which specialists, as outlined above, will be necessary. Nursing will coordinate ongoing care and can offer counsel and direction to parents, and in surgical cases, they are on the front lines for post-surgical care. If antibiotics are necessary, the pharmacist should verify all dosing and assess coverage. Social workers or counselors should provide reassurance and ongoing emotional support. In each of these roles, the individual contributor must report back to the team and document progress within their specialty. Only through this type of collaboration can the interprofessional team drive outcomes in prune belly syndrome to successful outcomes, regardless of the severity of the particular case. [Level V]