Balloon valvuloplasty is a less invasive than open-heart valve replacement, but it is not an alternative to valve replacements.

Studies comparing ballon tricuspid valvuloplasty to surgical tricuspid valve replacement are not available, so in most of the cases, tricuspid valve surgery is preferred. However, in high-risk surgical cases or with moderate to severe valvular regurgitation associated with tricuspid stenosis, balloon tricuspid valvuloplasty can be performed.

Pulmonary stenosis is a common congenital heart disease characterized by the right ventricular outflow obstruction. The clinical significance in treating pulmonary stenosis in children mainly depends on the severity of obstruction. Mild pulmonary stenosis (gradient <greater than 0 mmHg) does not require intervention. In moderate pulmonary stenosis (gradient 40 to 60 mmHg) and severe pulmonary stenosis (gradient greater than 60 mmHg), balloon pulmonary valvuloplasty is preferred.

The outcome of clinical trials on the clinical significance of percutaneous balloon mitral valvuloplasty compared to open and closed surgical commissurotomy was that percutaneous mitral balloon valvuloplasty was good or better than surgery in patients who were candidates for valvotomy.

Percutaneous balloon aortic valvuloplasty has a limited role in the treatment of calcific aortic stenosis. BAV is first-line therapy in children and younger adults with aortic stenosis due to congenital disease (generally due to bicuspid commissural fusion) without significant valve calcification.