The airway is one of the most critical components in the body to be protected regardless of whether a patient is in a hospital, undergoing outpatient surgery, or has admission to the intensive care unit (ICU) for observation and therapy. While most intubations are straightforward, there are some difficult airways, which, if not handled appropriately, can lead to the death of the patient.

For this reason, when a clinician considers intubation, they must evaluate the risk of failure to intubate and optimize variables for success. Besides anesthesiologists, physicians in many specialties and nurse anesthetists, as well as the clinical pharmacist, are often called upon to assist in the preparation and intubation of a patient, but they should be fully aware of the 3-3-2 rule. A difficult airway cart should be kept at the bedside when intubating a difficult airway. All physicians with intubation skills in the hospital should be informed as a backup before difficult intubation. The reversal agent of sedation and paralytics should be kept at the bedside in case if the physician is not able to intubate the patient.

ED nurses are often called upon to secure the tubes or assist in their placement, as well as monitoring patient vitals following intubation, and communicate any concerns to the physician on duty. Failure to intubate on a timely basis is a very common cause of cardiac arrest. Given this, an anesthesiologist consult is always in order if anticipating a difficult airway. Sometimes, oral intubation may not be possible, and an emergent tracheostomy may be required. The nursing staff should be prepared to assist the clinician in this procedure, often assisting with patient alignment and control of the head position. The nursing staff should monitor the patient and immediately report any changes in oxygen saturation or evidence of breathing difficulty to the clinician after intubation. Nurses should place signs outside of the room "difficult intubation" This keeps the medical team aware of it in case of self-extubation.

Employing the 3-3-2 rule is not the purview of any single healthcare discipline; all members of the interprofessional team with exposure to intubation should know the rule, how to employ it, and communicate openly with other interprofessional team members if issues arise. This collaborative approach is essential for advancing patient outcomes in cases of intubation. [Level 5]