Treatment of retinitis is primarily directed at the source of infection or against the abnormal immune response in autoimmune diseases. In some cases, local therapy via injections or implants might suffice, but oral or intravenous medications are sometimes necessary as some of these are potentially blinding conditions with the possibility of contralateral spread. Laser procedures or surgery have been described for some infections to prevent complications like macula-off retinal detachment (RD).

In immunocompetent patients, Toxoplasma-related chorioretinitis is usually a self-limited infection and generally resolves spontaneously in 4 to 8 weeks. However, it is recommended to treat lesions within the vascular arcades or adjacent to the optic disk/fovea, those larger than 2 optic disk diameters to reduce the chance of vision loss, or when the induced vitreal inflammatory response has dropped vision below 20/40 in a previously 20/20 eye or at least has sustained a two-line drop in vision. Multiple drug combinations have been studied for treating toxoplasma chorioretinitis, including the classic triple-drug therapy (pyrimethamine, sulfadiazine, and corticosteroids); clindamycin, and steroid; and trimethoprim and sulfamethoxazole.

In 1992, trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole (160 to 800 mg bid for 4 to 6 weeks) was studied as a new treatment option for ocular toxoplasmosis and was found to be a safe and effective substitute for sulfadiazine and pyrimethamine in treating ocular toxoplasmosis.

Recently Soheilian et al. compared the efficacy of local treatment with intravitreal injection of clindamycin and dexamethasone with the classic triple-drug treatment and found no significant difference between the two groups.

For CMV retinitis, currently available therapies include intravenous and intravitreal ganciclovir and foscarnet, intravenous cidofovir, and oral valganciclovir. The cause of immunocompromise should be treated adequately. First-line treatment of CMV retinitis is usually oral valganciclovir, which is a prodrug of ganciclovir with higher bioavailability. With intravenous ganciclovir, induction therapy is given at a dose of 5 mg/kg every 12 hours for 14 to 21 days followed by a maintenance dose of 5 mg/kg/day while for valganciclovir, it is 900 mg twice daily during induction therapy, followed by 900 mg daily for maintenance.

The principal side effect of ganciclovir and valganciclovir is myelosuppression; hence blood counts monitoring needs to be done. In patients with immediately sight-threatening lesions (lesions close to the macula or optic nerve head), local therapy with intravitreal injection of ganciclovir (2 mg/0.1 ml) or foscarnet (2.4 mg or 1.2 mg /0.1 ml) with concurrent systemic therapy can be given.

Central Disease Control (CDC) guidelines recommend that for AIDS-related CMV retinitis, chronic maintenance therapy be continued until immune reconstitution occurs, defined as a sustained (>6 months) increase in the CD4+ lymphocyte count to greater than 100 to 150 cells/mL as ganciclovir is not virucidal.

Treatment of ARN should be initiated early with the objective of hastening the resolution of disease in the infected eye and preventing contralateral disease. Initially, patients should be hospitalized and treated with a 10 to 14-day course of intravenously administered acyclovir 10 to 15 mg/kg every 8 hours, followed by oral acyclovir 800 mg five times a day for  6 to 12 weeks.

Local treatment with intravitreal injections of ganciclovir (2 mg/0.1 mL) is effective in treating sight-threatening herpetic infections with fovea or optic disc involvement. Oral steroids should be administered under antiviral cover, starting 24 to 48 hours after antiviral therapy, particularly in cases with optic nerve involvement. The role of prophylactic laser posterior to the area of active retinitis (wherever possible through the hazy media) to prevent RD in the setting of recent ARN still stands doubtful.

Early surgery for retinal detachments in ARN is crucial even though vitrectomies are difficult with high chances of redetachment due to increased risk of proliferative vitreoretinopathy (PVR) in these patients.

The aim of treatment in Behcet disease is to control the inflammation, reduce the frequency of recurrences, and avoid complications. Corticosteroids and immunomodulatory therapy are the mainstays of treatment as it is a chronic relapsing autoimmune disease.

First attacks of anterior uveitis are treated with topical corticosteroid drops and cycloplegic agents to prevent synechiae formation and relieve photophobia and pain. For more severe and repeated attacks, subtenon injection of depot steroids or systemic steroids may be used for long term suppression of inflammation. Despite the absence of RCTs(randomized controlled trials), European League Against Rheumatism (EULAR) recommends that systemic steroids may be given in the form of high-dose systemic corticosteroids (prednisolone 1 to 2 mg/kg/day) or intravenous pulse methylprednisolone (1 g/day) administered for 3 consecutive days for rapid anti-inflammatory effect.

As long term steroid therapy is associated with systemic and ocular side effects, patients need to be started on an immunosuppressive agent. Conventional immunosuppressive agents that have been used for the treatment of Behcet uveitis with posterior segment involvement include antimetabolites (methotrexate, azathioprine, mycophenolate), calcineurin inhibitors (cyclosporine A, tacrolimus, sirolimus), and alkylating agents (chlorambucil, cyclophosphamide). Studies have also evaluated the use of biological agents like anti-TNF-alpha or IFN-alpha for treating severe retinal vasculitis secondary to Behcet disease.

Although the majority of post fever retinitis recover with a good visual outcome over a 10- to 12-week period, systemic steroids may be used to control inflammation in posterior uveitis, panuveitis, and optic neuritis if an immune origin of the manifestation is considered. For focal retinitis clinically suggestive (aided with imaging modalities) of rickettsial disease (non-toxoplasma and non-viral/herpetic) empirically starting oral doxycycline before oral steroid may be prudent.

Metastatic/endogenous endophthalmitis needs urgent control of the systemic infection or focus of infection. Ocular management includes intravitreal antimicrobial therapy and vitrectomy. The visual prognosis is usually poor in such cases.

SSPE is a fatal disease, and many drugs, including ribavirin, have been tried.

The cause of immunocompromise (if present) should be treated optimally.

The patients should be monitored closely for the progression of the disease, systemic/contralateral involvement, and complications of disease/therapy.

In all cases of infective retinitis, the antimicrobial should be started first, and then steroids can be started. Starting steroids in a case of infective retinitis/panuveitis without antimicrobial cover may cause severe ocular damage and even maybe life-threatening in cases with systemic disease.