**Disimpaction**

The first phase of treatment is to empty the hard stool from the colon, also known as disimpaction. Removal of the impacted, hard stool allows the colon to begin returning to normal size and function. In the past, manual removal, suppositories, and enemas were common methods during this phase of treatment. Polyethylene glycol (PEG 3350) has become the first treatment of functional constipation due to its efficacy, safety profile, and because it is well tolerated. There are variations in the amount of PEG 3350 recommended for the cleanout phase of the treatment regime, but a reasonable dose would be 1 to 1.5 grams per kilogram PEG 3350 mixed with 6 to 8 oz. water or juice. Significantly higher doses have been used, especially in the hospital setting. Patients should be encouraged to drink this over 3 hours, if possible. If there has not been a significant response to this treatment, the patient can repeat the dose the next day. If there is no response after two days of treatment or significant abdominal discomfort, persistent vomiting, or any other concerns, the family should present for follow-up and reevaluation.

**Maintenance Therapy**

In the second phase of treatment, the goal is to keep the stool very soft, preventing reaccumulation of hard stool while the colon returns to normal size and function. Drugs in this phase are oral medications.

- Osmotic laxatives

- Polyethylene glycol (PEG) 3350 at 0.2-0.8 g/Kg/day
- Lactulose at 1- 3 mL /kg/day
- Magnesium hydroxide at 0.5-3 mL/kg/day

- Stool Softeners

- Docusate sodium at 5 mg/kg/day
- Mineral oil (lubricant) at 1-3 mL/Kg/day

- Stimulant laxative for rescue therapy in addition or alone (duration less than 30 days)

- Senna at 2.5-7.5 mL/day
- Bisacodyl at 5-10 mg/day

**Non-Pharmacological**

Normal fiber and fluid intake are recommended for children with constipation, along with an average amount of physical activity. There is no evidence to support the routine use of intensive behavioral protocolized therapy programs or biofeedback in addition to conventional treatment. There is no evidence to suggest the use of prebiotics or probiotics in the treatment of constipation.

Adequate fluid intake is essential, as is age-appropriate activity. Children who are toilet trained should be encouraged to sit on the toilet and try to have a bowel movement for 5 to 10 minutes at the same time of day, every day, after the same meal; this will take advantage of the gastrocolic reflex and reduce the risk of constipation by “training” the child to have a bowel movement every day. A follow-up appointment should occur in 1 to 3 weeks to assess the efficacy of the treatment, as well as to consider necessary changes in the plan of care.