Meckel’s diverticulum is a congenital anomaly resulting from the abnormal embryonic separation of the omphalomesenteric duct. Meckel’s diverticulum is a true diverticulum comprised of all 3 layers of the gastrointestinal (GI) tract, including mucosa, submucosa, and adventitia.

- Occurs in 2% of the population

- Located within 2 feet of the ileocecal valve

- Two centimeters in length

- Two times as likely to be symptomatic in young boys as compared to young girls

- Symptoms often present before the age of 2

Although Meckel's diverticulum is usually asymptomatic and may never be identified until autopsy reports, it can lead to serious complications, most notably hemorrhage, obstruction, perforation, or infection. Hemorrhage occurs secondary to acid secretion from the gastric mucosa that forms ulcerations along the intestinal mucosa and can lead to painless rectal bleeding, typically in children. Bleeding can be substantial and may require transfusions.

The diverticulum can also serve as a lead point for an ileocolic or ileoileal intussusception, as well as a turning point for a volvulus. If symptomatic, patients typically complain of crampy, right lower quadrant abdominal pain. Finally, erosion of nearby intestinal mucosa or inflammation of the diverticulum itself can lead to perforation, or the diverticulum itself can become inflamed, leading to diverticulitis.

Evaluation of a patient with suspected complications from Meckel's diverticulum includes multiple options. Lab testing is largely unremarkable, but hemoglobin and hematocrit should be checked as mild to moderate anemia may develop if there is bleeding. If there is significant bleeding, transfusions may be necessary. Electrolyte levels and kidney function testing are not helpful for diagnosis but can help guide treatment options.

Multiple imaging modalities exist to evaluate suspected Meckel's diverticulum. If a patient, especially a young child, presents with GI bleeding, the test of choice is a technetium-99 pertechnetate scintiscan. The pertechnetate will be absorbed by the gastric mucosa and will be detected when scanned by a gamma camera. This is the preferred scan due to ease and accuracy; however, false negative tests do occur if the diverticulum is comprised of other tissue other than gastric mucosa.

If intestinal obstruction or perforation of Meckel's diverticulum is suspected, then a CT scan may be helpful, whereas ultrasonography has been useful if the clinical picture suggests intussusception. Overall, Meckel's diverticulum may be found incidentally on routine imaging or during a surgical procedure or may only be recognized when complications arise.