Euphorbiaceae is a large family of flowering plants found worldwide and encompasses over 8,000 species. Also known as the spurge family, it is divided into multiple genera. Plants belonging to the genus Euphorbia have been used in folk medicine to treat various conditions throughout ancient history.  Species such as Euphorbia tirucalli (pencil cactus), Euphorbia milii (crown of thorns), and Euphorbia pulcherrima (Poinsettia) are commonly used as decorative houseplants and in landscaping. Many Euphorbia species secrete a white, milky sap, called latex, that can cause harmful effects through dermal or mucous membrane contact, particularly ocular exposure.

Euphorbia tirucalli, also commonly referred to as the pencil cactus, milk bush, and firestick plant grows as a shrub or small tree without leaves, has succulent-like branches, and may grow up to 12 meters high. Euphorbia tirucalli produces an abundant amount of latex when pieces of the plant are broken or damaged. Although native to Africa, it is used extensively in the southern United States for ornamental purposes. Because of its proximity to humans, medical providers in regions where the plant is widespread must be aware of its toxicity. The Texas Poison Center Network reported 678 Euphorbia tirucalli exposures from 2000 to 2018, but it is likely that many exposures likely go unreported.Euphorbia myrsinites, Euphorbia marginata, Euphorbia peplus, and Euphorbia trigona also cause irritant effects after contact with their latex.

Dermal contact generally causes mild, irritant contact dermatitis, whereas ocular exposure to Euphorbia latex is a medical emergency that may lead to blindness without proper treatment. Ingestion of the latex is rare and usually only causes mild symptoms related to irritation of the oral cavity, esophagus, and stomach.