# Introduction

The suboccipital nerve arises from the posterior ramus of the C1 nerve and is also known as the dorsal ramus of the first cervical nerve.****and, having an important role in cervicogenic neck pain and headaches, is a novel target for interventions to treat these pathologies when severe or refractory to simple analgesia.

# Structure and Function

The suboccipital nerve is formed from ventral and dorsal rootlets that emerge from the spinal cord and unite within the subarachnoid space.

The dorsal ramus of the C1 spinal nerve is the suboccipital nerve, so-called because it innervates the suboccipital muscles exclusively; the nerve has no cutaneous, meningeal, or articular branches.

The anatomical course of the suboccipital nerve is intimately related to the C1 (atlas) vertebra and the vertebral artery. The vertebral artery is divided anatomically into four parts, 3 of which are extradural and the final segment, which is intradural, before it becomes the basilar artery. The third segment of the vertebral artery (V3) is often termed the ‘atlantic’ segment because it travels within a groove over the posterior arch of the atlas (C1 vertebra).****

Both the suboccipital nerve and the V3 segment of the vertebral artery lie within the area known as the suboccipital triangle, which is bounded by some of the muscles innervated by the suboccipital nerve. The borders of the suboccipital triangle are the rectus capitis posterior major medially, the obliquus capitis superior superolaterally, and the obliquus capitis inferior inferolaterally. Thus, the suboccipital triangle has its apex facing inferomedially at the bifid spinous process of the C2 vertebra.

The muscles innervated by the suboccipital nerve are the three that make up the borders of the suboccipital triangle, plus the rectus capitis posterior minor. Collectively, the suboccipital muscles function as postural muscles of the head, assisting with head extension and rotation. The suboccipital muscles act by rotating the head by rotating the C1 vertebrae, the atlas, on the C2 vertebrae, the axis.

The suboccipital nerve also may anastomose with the dorsal rami of the C2 and C3 spinal nerves as part of the Cruveilhier plexus.

# Embryology

The suboccipital nerve forms from the interactions between the paraxial mesoderm and the visceral mesoderm at a zone called the head-neck interface (HNI), which is responsible for the development of cranial nerves X, XI, XII, and the cervical nerves C1 to C6. According to embryological studies, C1 develops primarily from somitomeres that undergo segmentation and resegmentation during embryologic development. Derangements during embryologic development likely contribute to the anatomical variations seen in the suboccipital nerve.

# Muscles

The suboccipital nerve innervates the group of four suboccipital muscles, namely the rectus capitis posterior major, rectus capitis posterior minor, obliquus capitis superior, and obliquus capitis inferior.

The rectus capitis posterior major forms the medial border of the suboccipital triangle. It originates from the bifid spinous process of the C2 vertebra before extending superolaterally to insert just below the nuchal line of the occipital bone. It is a head extensor and ipsilateral rotator of the head and the atlas.

The rectus capitis posterior minor muscle lies outside the suboccipital triangle, situated between the rectus capitis posterior major and the midline. It originates on the posterior arch of the atlas (C1 vertebra) and extends superiorly to insert below the nuchal line of the occipital bone, just medial to the insertion of the rectus capitis posterior major. It is a weak extensor of the head.

The obliquus capitis superior forms the superolateral border of the suboccipital triangle. It originates from the transverse process of C1 (atlas) and fans out superiorly to insert on the occipital bone between the superior and inferior nuchal lines. It is a lateral head flexor.

The obliquus capitis inferior forms the inferolateral border of the suboccipital triangle. It originates just below the origin of the rectus capitis posterior major on the bifid spine of the C2 (axis) vertebra and traverses superomedially to inserts on the transverse process of the atlas, just medial to the origin of the obliquus capitis superior. It rotates the atlas ipsilaterally.

# Physiologic Variants

There are variations between individuals when evaluated in cadaveric studies with regard to the origins of the C1 spinal nerve and, thus, the suboccipital nerve. In 80 cadaveric specimens, it was found that the dorsal rootlets were present alongside ventral rootlets in 60% of cases, and these dorsal rootlets formed a dorsal root ganglion in 30% of cases. Surprisingly, therefore, in around 40% of specimens, there were no dorsal rootlets that contributed to the formation of the C1 spinal nerve.

However, these inter-individual differences in the origins of the nerve do not affect its function or subsequent branching patterns as the nervous supply of the suboccipital group of muscles. Furthermore, after splitting to form the suboccipital nerve from the ventral ramus of the C1 spinal nerve, there was a connection with the dorsal ramus of the C2 spinal nerve found in 15 cadaveric specimens.

# Surgical Considerations

The suboccipital nerve may suffer injury in surgeries involving the posterior neck at the levels of C1 and C2. Surgeries involving the midline suboccipital approach, such as distal vertebral artery bypass or access to the fourth ventricle of the brain, and posterior approaches for cervical neck fusions may damage the suboccipital nerve.

# Clinical Significance

The suboccipital nerve may play a role in the pathogenesis of cervicogenic headaches and occipital neuralgia. The nerve may also be vulnerable to trauma from whiplash injuries. For this reason, it is a novel target for the intervention and treatment of these regional pain syndromes.

**Occipital Neuralgia**

Occipital neuralgia, also called C2 neuralgia, is a condition of recurrent headaches localized to the occipital area of the head and neck. Occipital neuralgia is described as a sudden onset neuropathic pain, generally unilateral but occasionally bilateral, across the dermatomes of the greater occipital nerve and the lesser occipital nerve.

Cervicogenic headaches present as unilateral headaches or migraine brought on by movement or palpation of the cervical vertebrae. The pain can present anywhere on the scalp due to the referred pain of nerves, but it primarily presents in the posterior area of the neck. The pathogenesis of cervicogenic headaches appears to be due to cervical vertebrae pathology affecting the C1-C3 nerves. The suboccipital nerve may contribute to cervicogenic headaches, especially in certain anatomic variants where it connects with the greater and lesser occipital nerves.

**Cluster Headaches**

Cluster headaches are characterized by attacks of severe unilateral pain focussed around the orbit, supraorbital, or temporal area.

**Post-dural Puncture Headache**

Pregnant women who undergo spinal anesthesia for cesarean section delivery can present with post-dural puncture headache, typically with symptoms of postural headaches, which can be associated with neck stiffness, and, more rarely, with photophobia, tinnitus, or vomiting.

**Suboccipital Muscle Spasm**

Like other muscles, the suboccipital muscles can become strained, resulting in neck pain, spasms, or headaches. Additionally, the suboccipital muscles and the suboccipital nerve can incur damage from whiplash injuries from car accidents or other rapid deceleration injuries. The theory is that damage to the suboccipital nerve that occurs due to whiplash injuries may be due to injury of the rectus capitis posterior minor muscle.