A thorough clinical evaluation not only helps to diagnose hyperopia but also points out significant related events.

**Visual Acuity:**It depends on the age at presentation, degree of accommodation, and status of the crystalline lens and posterior segment. In children, thevision may not be affected due to a full accommodative effort to focus the image on the retina. As the status of the eye is usually not complicated by cataract and retinal diseases in children, distant vision may be affected with high hyperopia, which can not be corrected by the full range of accommodation. There may be a gross reduction of vision if amblyopia develops in unilateral or bilateral high hyperopia cases. Near vision may also be diminished in children with high hyperopia or in aged where accommodation is partially or fully lost. An age-related hyperopic shift can make near vision more difficult.

**Diffuse light examination:**Eyeball and cornea may appear smaller, especially in high hyperopia and in unilateral cases. Sometimes it may simulate enophthalmos. Anterior chamber (both central and peripheral) appears shallow, and the angle of the anterior chamber may appear narrow with a small pupil. Gonioscopy is indicated in all cases to rule out possible angle closure. Cortical cataracts may also be present in aged persons or young individuals with diabetes.

**Fundoscopy:**Fundoscopy reveals a small optic disc with a very small cup. Disc margins become blurred with overcrowding of blood vessels, sometimes termed as "pseudopapillitis" or "pseudo-papilledema" if bilateral. Choroidal folds may be present.

**Examination of Latent / Manifest strabismus:**In children having uncorrected hyperopia for a long duration, strabismus may be present: latent (-phoria) or manifest (-tropia).Extraocular movement is usually full in all directions of gazes.

Breaking the fusion by****Alternate Cover-Uncover test with occluder and asking the patient to focus at a point light source may reveal latent strabismus, mainly in children and young. Alternate and sequential shifting of the occluder to cover either eye is done. The presence of latent strabismus is confirmed if the covered eye deviates, which is noted during refixation when uncovered.

In manifest strabismus, the deviated eye takes fixation after occlusion of the fellow orthophoric eye. Manifest strabismus must be examined by Hirschberg corneal reflex test (HCRT) and with a prism bar to note the degree of deviation. HCRT reveals the approximate degree of deviation i.e., corneal light reflex on the pupillary border and the corneal border corresponds to approximately 15 degrees and 45 degrees of deviation, respectively. Prisms can also serve to keep the apex towards the deviation to bring the corneal light reflex at the center and note that deviation in prism-diopter.

**Retinoscopy/Refraction:**In the modern era of automated refraction, retinoscopy has its importance while examining young children and bed-ridden patients. It's a good practice to evaluate a child with suspected any refractive error with cycloplegic retinoscopy

**Existing refractive error (in horizontal/vertical axis) = Retinoscopic findings (in both axis) - the value of distance in meter (1 for 1 meter, 1.5 for 2/3rd meter) - tonus allowance for the particular cycloplegic drug (For atropine ointment 1% it is 1, cyclopentolate drops 1% it is 0.75, and for homatropine drops 2% it is 0.5)**

If both the axis and the power (after deduction) are equal, then that is considered as the spherical refractive power of the eye. If it is unequal, then the extra power (in one axis) is denoted as the astigmatic power in the other axis.