As with any medication, the prescription of chloramphenicol will require an interprofessional healthcare team to ensure safe prescribing of this antibiotic and maximum benefits attained by patients from its administration. This international healthcare team will consist of nurses, pharmacists, and physicians involved in the care of the patient. Prior to the initiation of the antibiotic, the physician should always get a thorough drug history from the patient to identify any potential allergy with chloramphenicol. Moreover, for female patients of child-bearing age, nurses can help with ensuring that they receive pregnancy testing, and a negative pregnancy status confirmed before patients start on the drug. The pharmacist can also work with the doctor to check that the patient receives the right dose, route, and frequency of the medication. Also, due to the risk of bone marrow suppression associated with chloramphenicol use, both the doctor and the pharmacist need to check for concomitant usage of other medications that also carries the risk of decreasing blood cell counts. Examples of drugs that can also cause bone marrow suppression include rifampicin, carbimazole, and trimethoprim. These medications should not be administered together with chloramphenicol.

Nurses involved in the care of the patient can collaborate with physicians to ensure laboratory tests are performed regularly during the treatment for early detection of decreases in blood cell counts. Lastly, physicians, nurses, and pharmacists all share the responsibility of providing adequate patient education regarding the drug. Patients should understand the signs and symptoms suggestive of an adverse reaction to chloramphenicol that they can look out for and report. Proper patient education on the use of chloramphenicol can also help improve patients’ compliance and adherence to the medication.