**Using the Ventilator**

The initial ventilator setting can vary greatly depending on the cause for intubation and the scope of this review. Nonetheless, there are some basic settings for the majority of cases.

The most common ventilator mode to use in a newly intubated patient is AC. The AC mode provides good comfort and easy control of some of the most important physiologic parameters.

It is started with a FiO2 of 100% and titrated down guided by pulse oximetry or ABG, depending on the case.

Low tidal volume ventilation has been shown to be lung protective not only in ARDS but in other types of diseases. Starting the patient on a low tidal volume (6 to 8 mL/Kg of ideal body weight) will reduce the incidence of ventilator-induced lung injury (VILI). Always use a lung-protective strategy as there are not many advantages for higher tidal volumes and they will increase shear stress in the alveoli and may induce lung injury.

Initial RR should be comfortable for the patient 10-12 bpm should suffice. A very important caveat on this is for patients with severe metabolic acidosis. For these patients, the minute ventilation should at least be matched to their pre-intubation ventilation as failure to do so will worsen acidosis and can precipitate complications such as cardiac arrest.

Flow should be initiated at or above 60 L/min to prevent auto-PEEP.

Start with a low PEEP of 5 cm H2O and titrate up as tolerated by the patient to the goal for oxygenation. Pay close attention to blood pressure and patient comfort while doing this.

An ABG should be obtained 30 minutes after intubation and changes to the ventilator settings should be made in accordance with ABG findings.

Peak and plateau pressures should be checked on the vent to assure there are no problems with airway resistance or alveolar pressure in order to prevent ventilator-induced lung injury.

Attention should be given to the volume curves in the ventilator display as a reading showing that the curve is not coming back to zero at the time of exhalation is indicative of incomplete exhalation and development of auto-PEEP and corrections to the vent should be made immediately.

**Troubleshooting the Ventilator**

With a good understanding of the concepts discussed, managing ventilator complications and solving problems should come as second nature.

The most common corrections that have to be done with the ventilator are to solve hypoxemia and hypercapnia or hyperventilation:

- **Hypoxia:**Oxygenation depends on the FiO2 and the PEEP (T high and P high for APRV). To correct for hypoxia increasing any of these parameters should raise the oxygenation. Special attention should be paid to the possible adverse effects of raising PEEP which can cause barotrauma and hypotension. Raising FiO2 does not come without its concerns as high FiO2 can cause oxidative damage in the alveoli. Another important aspect of managing oxygen content is to define a goal for oxygenation. In general, there is little benefit from keeping oxygen saturation above 92-94% except for cases of carbon monoxide poisoning for example. A sudden drop in oxygen saturation should raise suspicion for tube misplacement, pulmonary embolism, pneumothorax, pulmonary edema, atelectasis, or the development of mucus plugs.

- **Hypercapnia:**To modify CO2 content in blood one needs to modify alveolar ventilation. To do this, the tidal volume or the respiratory rate may be tampered with (T low and P Low in APRV). Raising the rate or the tidal volume, as well as increasing T low, will increase ventilation and decrease CO2. Consideration has to be made while increasing the rate, as this will also increase the amount of dead space and might not be as effective as tidal volume. While increasing volume or rate special attention should be paid to the flow-volume loop to prevent the development of auto-PEEP.

- **Elevated pressures:**Two pressures are important in the system: peak and plateau. The peak pressure is a measure of airway resistance as well as compliance and includes the tubing and bronchial tree. Plateau pressures are a reflection of alveolar pressure and thus of lung compliance.

If there is an increase in peak pressure, the first step to take is to do an inspiratory hold and check the plateau.

Elevated peak pressure and normal plateau pressure: high airway resistance and normal compliance.

Possible causes: (1) Kinked ET tube - The solution is to unkink the tube; use a bite lock if the patient is biting on the tube, (2) Mucus plug - The solution is to suction the patient, (3) Bronchospasm -  The solution is to give bronchodilators.

**Elevated Peak and Elevated Plateau: Compliance Problems**

Possible causes include:

- Mainstem intubation: The solution is to retract the ET tube. For diagnosis, you will find a patient with unilateral breath sounds and a dull contralateral lung (atelectatic lung).

- Pneumothorax: Diagnosis will be made by hearing breath sounds unilaterally and finding a hyper-resonant contralateral lung. In intubated patients, placement of a chest tube is imperative as the positive pressure will only worsen the pneumothorax.

- Atelectasis: Initial management consists of chest percussions and recruitment maneuvers. Bronchoscopy may be used in resistant cases

- Pulmonary edema: Diuresis, inotropes, high PEEP

- ARDS: Use low tidal volume, high PEEP ventilation

**Dynamic hyperinflation or auto-PEEP:**This is a process in which some of the inhaled air is not fully exhaled at the end of the respiratory cycle. The accumulation of trapped air will increase pulmonary pressures and cause barotrauma and hypotension. The patient will be difficult to ventilate. To prevent and resolve auto-PEEP, enough time should be given for the air to leave the lungs during exhalation. The goal in management is to decrease the inspiratory to expiratory ratio, this can be achieved by decreasing respiratory rate, decreasing tidal volume (higher volume will require a longer time to leave the lungs), and increasing inspiratory flow (if the air is delivered quickly the inspiratory time is less and the expiratory time will be longer at any given respiratory rate). The same effect can be achieved by using a square waveform for inspiratory flow, what this means is that we can set the ventilator to deliver the full flow from beginning to end of inhalation. Other techniques that can be implemented are to assure adequate sedation to prevent patient hyperventilating and the use of bronchodilators and steroids to decrease airway obstruction. If auto-PEEP is severe causing hypotension, disconnecting the patient from the vent and letting time for all the air to be exhaled may be a life-saving measure. For a full description of the management of auto-PEEP please review the article titled “Positive End-Expiratory Pressure (PEEP)”

Another common problem found in mechanically ventilated patients is patient-ventilator dyssynchrony, usually termed as the patient “fighting the vent”. Important causes include hypoxia, auto-PEEP, not satisfying the patient's oxygenation or ventilation demands, pain, and discomfort. After ruling out important causes such as pneumothorax or atelectasis, patient comfort should be considered and proper sedation and analgesia should be assured. Consider changing the ventilator mode as some patients may respond better to different modes of ventilation.

**Special Circumstances**

Special attention to vent settings should be taken in the following circumstances:

**COPD**is a special case, as lungs in pure COPD have high compliance which causes a high tendency for dynamic airflow obstruction due to airway collapse and air trapping, making COPD patients very prone to developing auto-PEEP. Using a preventive ventilation strategy with high flow and low respiratory rate may help prevent auto-PEEP. Another important aspect to consider in chronic hypercapnic respiratory failure (due to COPD or another reason) is that there is no need to correct the CO2 back to normal, as these patients usually have a metabolic compensation for their respiratory problems. If a patient is ventilated to normal CO2 levels, his bicarbonate will decrease, and when a patient is extubated he will quickly go to respiratory acidosis as his kidneys cannot respond as fast as his lungs and his CO2 will go back to his baseline, causing respiratory failure and reintubation. To prevent this, CO2 goals should be determined based on pH and previously known or calculated baseline.

**Asthma:**As with COPD patients with asthma are very prone to air trapping, although the reason is pathophysiologically different. In asthma, air trapping is caused by inflammation, bronchospasm, and mucus plugs, not airway collapse. The strategy to prevent auto-PEEP is similar to the strategy used in COPD.

**Cardiogenic pulmonary edema:**High PEEP may decrease venous return and help resolve pulmonary edema as well as aid in cardiac output. The concern should be to make sure the patient is adequately diuresed before extubating, as the removal of the positive pressure may precipitate new pulmonary edema.

**ARDS**is a type of non-cardiogenic pulmonary edema. An open lung strategy with high PEEP and low tidal volume has been shown to improve mortality.

**Pulmonary embolism**is a difficult situation. These patients are very preload-dependent secondary to the acute increase in right atrial pressure. Intubating these patients will increase RA pressure and further decrease venous return, which may precipitate shock. If there is no way to prevent intubation, careful attention to blood pressure and initiation of vasopressors should be done promptly.

**Severe pure metabolic acidosis**is a concern. When intubating these patients, careful attention should be paid to their pre-intubation minute ventilation. If this ventilation is not provided when starting mechanical support, pH will drop further possibly precipitating cardiac arrest.