Once a urethral injury is identified, an emergent consultation with urology should take place, or patients should be transferred to a center with experienced urological specialists. Treatment of urethral injuries is often multifactorial and somewhat controversial.

Surgical intervention is categorized as immediate (0 to 10 days), delayed (10 to 14 days), and late (more than three months) repairs.

There are several main therapeutic principles upon which experts generally agree. The first is that if the patient cannot urinate or if they have blunt trauma to the anterior urethra, the urinary bladder should undergo decompression to prevent further extravasation of urine into the pelvic soft tissue and/or abdomen.

There are several options for the immediate management of acute urethral injuries after pelvic trauma. An endoscopic realignment is an elegant option for early urethral realignment, particularly in experienced centers. Only normal saline irrigation should be used. A flexible cystoscope or ureteroscope is introduced suprapubically through the bladder and into the prostatic urethra. Simultaneously, a standard cystoscope is placed transurethrally and an attempt is made to pass a guidewire between the two. Once a guidewire has been successfully passed, a Foley catheter can be placed over the wire through the penis and the urethra is realigned. This catheter will remain (with monthly exchanges) until urethral healing is complete and patency has been established; on average, between four weeks and three months.

Currently, when a urethral disruption is present, the standard recommendation is to surgically place a suprapubic cystotomy tube. Attempts can initially be made at early endoscopic or non-endoscopic urethral realignment and Foley catheter placement but such attempts should not be overly prolonged to avoid contamination and extravasation.  If unsuccessful, a suprapubic tube should be placed with an expectation that a delayed urethroplasty will likely be needed.