While techniques for performing LRYGB and LSG have a fair amount of variation depending on surgeon preference and training, the objectives of these surgeries are relatively uniform.

Both surgeries begin by insufflating the abdomen to 12 to 15 mm Hg of CO2 to blow up the intra-abdominal space like a balloon. This can be done by either inserting a Veress needle or by direct trocar entry. This allows better visualization of the stomach and organs that need to be dissected. Next, the trocars are introduced through the patient’s abdominal wall by making 5 to 12 mm incisions with a scalpel and inserting ports, which serve as doorways to pass instruments into the abdomen through. A liver retraction device is placed through one of these holes usually sub-sternal, to expose the stomach and surrounding area. The arteries supplying the stomach are then divided using an instrument that seals and cuts tissues.

The remainder of the surgery differs between LRYGB and LSG with the former being more complex and technically difficult to perform. The next step in LRYGB is to measure a distance (generally 120 to 150 cm) from the beginning of the duodenum where the distal jejunum is divided with a stapler. The distal portion of the divided bowel is brought up to what will be a new stomach pouch (or mini stomach), and the 2 are eventually sewn together creating a new pathway for food transit such that food passes from the pouch directly into the downstream intestine. In effect, this so-called “Roux limb” bypasses all of the duodenum and intestines proximal to where the jejunum was divided and creates a shortcut for food to reach the downstream intestines.

In the next part of LRYGB, the proximal end of the divided intestine is connected further downstream (around 150 cm) to the distal jejunum so that biliary secretions and digestive enzymes can join the food and aid in digestion. This also ensures that digestive contents (which would otherwise have nowhere to go in the newly designed GI tract) travel in the right direction.

After confirming the integrity of the staple lines and ensuring that there is no leak, the CO2 is removed from the abdomen, and the ports are removed. The incisions are closed, and the patient awakes from anesthesia shortly after that.

LSG, by comparison, is a much simpler procedure. The lower portion of the stomach is divided with a stapler and is removed from the abdomen. No new routes, bypasses, or connections are created. The integrity of the staple line is inspected as with LRYGB, a leak test is performed, and the surgery is completed using all the same basic steps as previously described. The types of stapling devices used, over-sewing techniques, and methods of conducting these surgeries vary according to surgeon preference and training. The results and physiologic changes, however, are relatively uniform no matter where these surgeries are performed.