This activity focuses on some of the well-known dietary elements that can significantly affect health in the general population.

Sodium-restricted diet is associated with a significant reduction in blood pressure, more prominently in the hypertensive group than in the normotensive group. The benefit is shown to be greater in the Black and Asian populations compared to the White population. Adopting a low-sodium diet in normotensive individuals is debatable. While it is not as effective in reducing blood pressure as the hypertensive group, some studies argue that it increases serum lipid and triglyceride levels. Higher sodium intake was shown to be associated with increased odds of having chronic kidney disease, while lower sodium intake was associated with lower proteinuria and albuminuria, which are strong predictors of having chronic kidney disease.

Potassium is also associated with effects on blood pressure. Studies have shown that when it is taken at about 90 mmol/day, it has shown the greatest effect on blood pressure and stroke risk reduction. Higher potassium intake does not necessarily bring the lowest risk reduction in stroke. Increased potassium intake is also associated with a lower risk of chronic kidney diseases and a reduced glomerular filtration rate.

While there is no universal definition of a low-fat diet, it generally refers to daily calorie intake from fat less than 30% of total calories or a very low-fat diet with calories from fat less than 10% of total calories. The low-fat diet has shown greater weight loss in individuals with higher BMI and lower fat intake at baseline. It is also associated with increased insulin sensitivity. When adopting a low-fat diet, it is important to have dietary fat from healthy sources, such as fatty fish, whole grains, non-starchy vegetables, whole fruits, and nuts.

Carbohydrates usually take up 45-60% of the total calorie intake in the general population. Reducing dietary carbohydrates is associated with increased energy expenditure during weight loss maintenance. Low-carbohydrate diets and low-fat diets generally have a similar rate of weight reduction in adults with obesity. Anti-epileptic effects were shown in the ketogenic diet, which can be used as an effective non-pharmacological treatment option for patients with drug-resistant epilepsy, especially in the pediatric population. Carbohydrates with lower GI index should be consumed more often as it has a slower increase in serum glucose.

Plant-based diets have multiple subgroups, such as lacto-ovo vegetarian, flexitarian, pescatarian, proletarian, vegan, etc. Compared to a non-vegetarian diet, vegetarian diets are shown to have possibly lower all-cause mortality and lower risks for cardiometabolic outcomes and some cancers. They are associated with lower BWI, total cholesterol, LDL, HDL, triglycerides, and blood glucose. Males appeared to have more beneficial results from adopting vegetarian diets.

Increased dietary fiber intake is associated with lower HbA1c, total cholesterol, LDL cholesterol, BMI, and C-reactive protein. It also has a beneficial effect in lowering all-cause and cardiovascular mortality, especially in patients with previous first-time myocardial infarction. Increasing daily fiber intake to 35 g can be beneficial.