**Pharmacodynamics/Pharmacokinetics**

In the fasted state, and after a single oral dose of 40 mg of aprepitant, the mean area under the plasma concentration-time curve (AUC0-∞) is found to be 7.8 mcg x hr/mL, and the mean peak plasma concentration (Cmax) is 0.7 mcg/mL, observed at approximately 3 hours after dose administration (Tmax).

After a single 125 mg oral dose of aprepitant on day 1 and 80 mg once daily on days 2 and 3, the area under the curve (AUC) for 0 to 24 hours is found to be 19.6 mcg x hr/mL and 21.2 mcg x hour/mL on day 1 and day 3, respectively. The Cmax of 1.6 mcg/mL and 1.4 mcg/mL were observed in approximately 4 hours (Tmax) on day 1 and day 3, respectively. Aprepitant pharmacokinetics is found to be non-linear across the clinical dose range.

**Route of Administration**

Oral and IV for aprepitant, and IV for fosaprepitant.

The NK-1 receptor antagonist aprepitant is sometimes given with a 5-HT3 antagonist and a glucocorticoid, e.g., ondansetron and dexamethasone. Ralopitant and netupitant are oral formulations.

**Onset of Action**

For oral aprepitant, the onset of action is 1 hour, the peak blood concentration is 4 hours as published in the manufacturer’s package insert.

**Duration of Action**

The duration of action of aprepitant is 24 hours as published in the manufacturer’s package insert and other publications. According to the pharmacokinetic principle, it should take approximately 4 to 5 half-lives (T1/2) to eliminate most of the absorbed drug from the body. Therefore, one should expect the duration of action of aprepitant to be at least 40 hours.

**Distribution**

The volume of distribution of aprepitant is 70 liters.

The mean absolute oral bioavailability of aprepitant is approximately 60% to 65%.

**Protein Binding**

Protein binding for neurokinin-1 (NK-1) receptor antagonists, e.g., aprepitant, is greater than 95%.

**Metabolism**

NK-1 receptor antagonists, such as aprepitant, are metabolized primarily by cytochrome P450 enzymes, e.g., CYP3A4 with minor metabolism by CYP1A2 and CYP2C19. Researchers have identified seven less active metabolites of aprepitant in human plasma.

**Clearance**

Apparent plasma clearance of aprepitant is 62 to 90 mL/min.

**Elimination Half-life**

The biological half-life of aprepitant (neurokinin-1 (NK-1) receptor antagonist) is 9 to 13 hours. Aprepitant is eliminated primarily by metabolism through the liver; the kidneys do not excrete it.

**Excretion**

After a single administration of an intravenous 100 mg dose of radiolabeled [14C]-aprepitant in healthy subjects, 45% of the radioactivity was recoverable in feces and 57% in the urine. There was no study conducted with a radiolabeled capsule formulation. The results of excretion after oral and intravenous administration may differ.