**Parkinson Disease**

Pramipexole administration is via the oral route. There are two tablet forms: immediate or extended-release tablets. The initial dose for the immediate-release tablet is 0.125 mg/three times/day. The subsequent doses should increase gradually by 0.125 mg per dose to the usual maintenance dose of 0.5 to 1.5 mg/three times/day every 5 to 7 days. For discontinuation, the reduction dose should be 0.75 mg per day until the total daily dose is 0.75 mg. After then, reduce the dose by 0.375 mg/day. Extended-release tablets should not be chewed, crushed, or divided but should be swallowed whole. The initial dose for the extended-release tablets is 0.375 mg/once/day. The dose can be increased every 5 to 7 days to 0.75 mg/once/day and then increased by 0.75 mg per dose up to 4.5 mg/once/day. Discontinuation of therapy should be gradual: reduce dose by 0.75 mg/day until reaching 0.75 mg/once/day, and then reduce by 0.375 mg/day.

Ropinirole is also an orally administered drug. For the immediate-release tablet, the starting dose is 0.25 mg/three times/day. The dose may be increased by 0.75 mg/day every week for four weeks. After four weeks, the dose may be increased weekly by 1.5 mg/day until 9 mg/day. After then, the dose may be increased weekly by up to 3 mg/day until a total of 24 mg/day. For extended-release tablets, the initial dose of 2 mg/once/day for weeks 1 and 2. The dose may increase by 2 mg/day weekly or longer intervals up to a maximum dose of 24 mg/day.

Rotigotine administration is via a transdermal patch. For early-stage Parkinson’s disease, the initial application of 2 mg/24 hours patch/once/day is the recommended dose. The lowest effective dosage is 4 mg/24 hours, and the maximum recommended dose is 6 mg/24 hours. For advanced-stage Parkinson’s disease, the initial application of 4 mg/24 hours patch/once/day is recommended. The recommended dose is 8 mg/24 hours, and the maximum dose used in the clinical trials is 16 mg/24 hours. Discontinuation should be gradual and preferable decreased by equal to or less than 2 mg/24 hours every other day.

Apomorphine is administered by subcutaneous injection. Avoid intravenous administration as it may cause thrombus or embolism due to crystallization. Apomorphine is useful as adjunctive therapy for “off” episodes with levodopa. Antiemetic therapy is recommended three days before initiation but for less than two months to prevent adverse events. The initial test dose is 0.2 mL (2 mg). If a patient tolerates and responds to the test dose, a starting dose of 0.2 mL (2 mg) is the recommendation if needed. The dose may be increased by 0.1 mL (1 mg) every few days up to the maximum dose of 0.6 mL (6 mg).

**Restless Legs Syndrome**

Patients may start the immediate-release form of pramipexole at an initial dose of 0.125 mg/once/day. The dose can be doubled every 4 to 7 days up to 0.5 to 0.75 mg/day. The therapy should be discontinued by gradually reducing the dose every 4 to 7 days.

Ropinirole immediate-release tablets may start with the initial dose of 0.25 mg/once/day. After 2 and 7 days, the dose may be increased to 0.5 mg/day and 1 mg/day, respectively. In the following weeks, the dose may be increased by 0.5 mg/week until 3 mg/day and then to a maximum dose of 4 mg/day in the following week.

Pramipexole and ropinirole should be administered 2 to 3 hours before bedtime. If augmentation occurs, the patient may divide the dose into multiple daily doses, including a dose earlier in the day.

Rotigotine transdermal patch may be applied initially at 1 mg/24 hours patch/once/day. The dose may be increased weekly by 1 mg/24 hours. The lowest effective dosage is 1 mg/24 hours, and the maximum dose is 3 mg/24 hours. For discontinuation of treatment, decrease by 1 mg/24 hours every other day.

**Neuroleptic Malignant Syndrome**

Bromocriptine can be administered orally or via a gastric tube. The dose of 2.5 mg can be given every 8 to 12 hours to the maximum dose of 45 mg/day if needed. Bromocriptine should not be discontinued abruptly and should be tapered slowly, as the sudden withdrawal of levodopa and dopamine agonists may precipitate the neuroleptic malignant syndrome.

**Hyperprolactinemia**

To treat hyperprolactinemia, the starting oral dose of bromocriptine 1.25 to 2.5 mg/day is recommended. The dose can be gradually titrated upward by 2.5 mg/day/every 2 to 7 days up to the usual maintenance dose range of 2.5 to 15 mg/day.

Cabergoline is administered orally and initiated at 0.25 mg/twice/weekly. The dose can be increased very slowly by 0.25 mg/twice/weekly and adjusted at a minimum of every four weeks. The half-life of cabergoline in the elderly is 63 to 69 hours. The maximum dose is 1 mg/twice/weekly. When taken with or after meals, there may be a decreased gastrointestinal distress and increased tolerability.

**Type 2 Diabetes Mellitus**

Bromocriptine is administered orally. To treat type 2 diabetes mellitus, starting a dose of 0.8 mg/once/day, preferably in the morning within 3 hours of awakening, is recommended. If tolerable, the dose can be titrated up to 1.6 to 4.8 mg/once/day at 0.8 mg increments weekly.

**Hypertensive Emergency**

Fenoldopam is administered by continuous intravenous infusion using a calibrated infusion pump. The starting dose in adults is 0.1 to 0.3 microgram/kg/min. This low initial dose is recommended to prevent reflex tachycardia. Dose is increased by 0.05 to 0.1 microgram/kg/min every 15 to 20 minutes. The maximum dose is 1.6 microgram/kg/min. Its use should be limited to not more than 48 hours.