Criteria for diagnosis of DM have been defined and updated from time to time by American Diabetes Association (ADA). Diagnosis of DM is based on the cut-off values for plasma glucose levels in fasting, 2 hours post 75g glucose load (oral glucose tolerance test - OGTT), and values of HbA1c fraction of glycated hemoglobin. The below-mentioned table shows the cut-off values prescribed by ADA for the diagnosis of DM.

less than 100 mg/dl

(<5.6 mmol/L)

100 to 125 mg/dl

(5.6 to 6.9 mmol/L)

126 mg/dl or higher

(≥7 mmol/L)

less than 140 mg/dl

(<7.8 mmol/L)

140 to 199 mg/dl

(7.8 to 11.0 mmol/L)

200 mg/dl or higher

(≥11.1 mmol/L)

An FPG value between 100 to 125 mg/dl (5.6 to 6.9 mmol/L) is impaired fasting glucose. While OGTT value between 140 to 199 mg/dl (7.8 to 11.0 mmol/L) is known as impaired glucose tolerance. The presence of any of these conditions classifies the patient under a pre-diabetic state. Such patients should be advised to adopt a healthy balanced diet and active lifestyle. These patients should be regularly monitored for their disease progress and the effect of dietary and lifestyle modifications.

The Clinical & Laboratory Standards Institute (CLSI) has advised reporting the critical values of different laboratory parameters. The plasma glucose level of less than 40 mg/dL or more than 399 mg/dL is defined as a critical value according to CLSI guidelines. The laboratory and the hospital must have a robust communication system for notifying these critical values to the treating clinician or the ward’s nursing station so that life-saving measures can commence as early as possible for the patient’s well-being. It is also advised that the critical values should be read back by the notification-receiving individual to ensure accuracy.

Documentation of the communication also needs to be maintained with regards to the date and time of call attempts, names and designation of the person making and receiving calls, details communicated, the hospital’s superior officer notified in case of failed communication attempt, etc.