Both national comprehensive cancer network and international inflammatory breast cancer expert guidelines recommend intensive therapy for patients with primary inflammatory breast cancer to achieve the best local control and survival outcome via a tri-modality approach: Systemic therapy, surgery, and radiation therapy. An interprofessional team approach is critical in the care of patients with inflammatory breast cancer.

**Nonmetastatic IBC-stage III**

The treatment of nonmetastatic inflammatory breast cancer is similar to nonmetastatic noninflammatory locally advanced breast cancer (LABC). The major difference is that sentinel lymph node biopsy and breast conservative therapy are not preferred in IBC even with a very good response to neoadjuvant therapy. All eligible patients should be enrolled in clinical trials, given the rarity of the disease.

The standard therapy includes neoadjuvant chemotherapy, followed by locoregional treatment (grade 1B). All patients who have achieved a partial response to neoadjuvant chemotherapy should undergo modified radical mastectomy with axillary dissection and post-mastectomy radiation. For nonsurgical candidates, radiotherapy is given. The success of systemic therapy in stage III inflammatory breast cancer is measured by the pathologic response to the therapy. Patients that have achieved pathologic complete response have significantly improved outcomes compared with those who did not.

Anthracycline and taxane-based chemotherapy regimens are commonly used in neoadjuvant therapy. For inflammatory breast cancer with HER-2 overexpression, trastuzumab with or without pertuzumab is used in addition to neoadjuvant chemotherapy. Trastuzumab should be continued for a total period of 1 year. To minimize the cardiotoxicity, anthracyclines are given first, followed by taxanes and trastuzumab. For hormone receptor-positive, postmenopausal women, aromatase inhibitors like anastrozole is used for 5 years. (Grade 2 A). For premenopausal women that are hormone receptor-positive, ovarian function suppression plus tamoxifen for a period of 10 years (grade 2B) is used.

Inflammatory breast cancer is associated with poor prognosis and a high risk of early recurrence, so immediate reconstruction following surgery should be avoided. New evidence suggests that outcomes have improved with neoadjuvant chemotherapy, followed by local, regional treatment.

**Metastatic IBC-stage IV**

About one-third of patients with inflammatory breast cancer at the time of diagnosis have stage IV disease. The treatment for metastatic disease is primary systemic therapy to achieve optimal response. For patients who have a significant clinical response after systemic therapy, every effort should be given for intense locoregional therapy. Controversy exists about the impact of surgery and radiation therapy in terms of overall survival in this population. The goal of systemic treatment for metastatic inflammatory breast cancer is a prolongation of survival, symptom elevation, maintenance, and improvement in the quality of life despite the toxicities associated with treatment as local progression is an issue.