Central lines are of two types: (1) Tunneled catheters are implanted surgically (by creating a subcutaneous track before entering the vein) into the internal jugular, subclavian, or femoral vein for long-term (weeks to months) use such as chemotherapy or hemodialysis and (2) Non-tunneled catheters, more commonly used. They are temporary central venous catheters inserted percutaneously and account for most CLABSIs. Within 7 to 10 days of central venous catheter placement, bacteria on the skin surface migrate along the external surface of the catheter from the skin exit site towards the intravascular space. Typically, tunneled catheters have a cuff that causes a fibrotic reaction around the catheter, creating a barrier to bacterial migration). The absence of a tunnel (a subcutaneous tract) places non-tunneled catheters at higher risk for CLABSIs. CLABSIs that occur beyond ten days are usually caused by contamination of the hub (intraluminal), typically from a health care provider's contaminated hands but rarely from a host and often due to a breach of standard aseptic precautions to access the hub. Less common mechanisms include hematogenous seeding of bacteria from a contaminated infusate or another source.

Host factors that increase the risk of CLABSI are chronic illnesses (hemodialysis, malignancy, gastrointestinal tract disorders, pulmonary hypertension), immune-suppressed states (organ transplant, diabetes mellitus), malnutrition, total parenteral nutrition, extremes of age, loss of skin integrity (burns) and prolonged hospitalization before line insertion.

Femoral central venous catheters are associated with the highest risk of CLABSI, followed by internal jugular and subclavian catheters. Further, the catheter type, insertion conditions (emergent versus elective, use of full barrier precautions versus limited), catheter care, and operator skill also influence the risk of CLABSI.

Pseudomonas is commonly associated with neutropenia, severe illness, or known prior colonization. Candida is associated with risk factors: femoral catheterization, TPN, prolonged administration of broad-spectrum antibiotics, hematologic malignancy, or solid organ or hematopoietic stem cell transplantation. Certain bacteria such as staphylococci, Pseudomonas, and Candida produce extracellular polysaccharide [slime (biofilm)], which favors increased virulence, adherence to catheter surface, and resistance to antimicrobial therapy.