# Continuing Education Activity

Adult T- cell leukemia (ATL) is a rare and aggressive peripheral T-cell neoplasm associated with human T-cell leukemia virus type -1 (HTLV-1) infection. It is classified into four different clinical variants that are acute, lymphomatous, chronic, and smoldering. ATL is associated with poor prognosis with short overall survival despite treatment. This activity reviews the evaluation and treatment of ATL and highlights the role of the interprofessional team in evaluating and treating patients with this condition.

**Objectives:**
- Review the etiology of adult T cell leukemia.
- Describe the evaluation of adult T cell leukemia.
- Outline the management of adult T cell leukemia.

# Introduction

Adult T-cell leukemia (ATL) is a highly aggressive mature T-cell neoplasm associated with human T-cell lymphotropic virus type 1 (HTLV-1) infection, which affects around 10 million people in the world. Of them, approximately 1-5% eventually develop symptomatic ATL.

ATL is classified into four clinical subtypes: acute, lymphoma, chronic, and smoldering type. Aggressive ATL (acute, lymphoma, and chronic type with unfavorable prognostic factors) have a poor prognosis with an overall survival rate of less than a year. The favorable chronic and smoldering subtypes carry a relatively good prognosis, and watchful waiting is generally preferred until disease progression occurs. Patients who have rapidly progressive disease carry a poor prognosis due to the chemo-resistance of malignant cells and severe immunosuppression.

# Etiology

Adult T cell leukemia is primarily caused by HTLV-1 infection that usually remains asymptomatic. Transactivator protein (tax) and HTLV-1 basic leucine zipper factor (HBZ), the two viral oncoproteins, play an essential role in the development of disease and progression. Tax protein expression takes part in the onset of neoplastic transformation. HBZ protein is expressed on all infected malignant cell lines, which is responsible for the proliferation of leukemic cells.

# Epidemiology

Prevalence is high in southwestern Japan, the Caribbean region, West Africa, and northeast Iran, south and Central America, and there is a slight male predominance across the studies. HTLV-1 and ATL are rarely reported in North America. A recent report of ATL cases from 2001 to 2015 in North America showed an incidence rate of 0.06 per 100.000 population.

# Pathophysiology

ATL is uniformly associated with HTLV-I infection of CD4-positive T cells that play a significant role in the pathogenesis of ATL.

Tax and HTLV-1 B-zip protein (HBZ) are the viral regulatory proteins associated with neoplastic transformation and proliferation. HTLV-1 can escape from the host immune response by reducing Tax and activating HBZ expression. HBZ inhibits Tax-dependent viral transcription and induces its own expression. Therefore, it maintains chronic infection. HBZ viral protein is the only one continuously expressed in ATL. It has been reported that clones of ATL cells with the same proviral integration site can have different T cell receptor rearrangements, raising the possibility that ATL may arise from immature HTLV-1 infected hematopoietic progenitors.

ATL is frequently associated with hypercalcemia, which can be severe. The hypercalcemia seen in ATL is thought to arise from cytokines released from the malignant cells. There are several proposed mechanisms, including the production of parathyroid hormone-related protein (PTH-RP), tumor necrosis factor-beta, or interleukin-1, increased RANKL expression (receptor activator of nuclear factor-kB ligand). These factors may also contribute to the genesis of the lytic bone lesions, increased bone turnover, increased serum alkaline phosphatase.

# History and Physical

Adult T cell leukemia is clinically classified into four subgroups defined by the Shimoyama criteria: acute, chronic, lymphoma, and smoldering

- **Acute**subtype accounts for >50% of cases and presents with leukemic pictures, systemic symptoms, lymphadenopathy, organ infiltration, hypercalcemia, and high serum lactate dehydrogenase (LDH) level.

- **Chronic**ATL is characterized by the presence of skin, lung and liver involvement, lymphocytosis (≥4 × 103 cells/μL) with normal LDH, and calcium. The chronic ATL has two subgroups: favorable and unfavorable. The unfavorable subgroup presents with at least one poor prognostic factor such as elevated LDH, elevated BUN, and decreased albumin

- The **lymphomatous**form is characterized by extensive lymphadenopathy, organomegaly, markedly increased LDH, hypercalcemia, and less than 1% presence of circulating leukemic cells in the peripheral blood.

- The **smoldering**form presents with lung or skin involvement, normal lymphocyte count, normal or mildly increased LDH.

All forms of ATL may demonstrate variable skin findings. Tumor lysis syndrome, as well as central nervous system involvement, may be seen in aggressive ATL. Due to severe immunosuppression, all ATL patients are at increased risk for infections, including fungal, viral, and parasitic infections, specifically strongyloidiasis.

# Evaluation

Diagnosis of adult T cell leukemia requires a comprehensive history review in conjunction with laboratory and pathologic survey. ATL is diagnosed mainly in patients from HTLV-1-endemic areas, e.g., Southwestern Japan, the Caribbean area, and South America, sub-Saharan Africa, and some regions of the Middle East and Australo-Melanesia.

In the acute and chronic leukemic phase, the white blood cell count may increase with circulating atypical cells. The peripheral blood smear may show condensed chromatin with a convoluted or polylobated nucleus, often called a “flower cell” or “cloverleaf” that is pathognomonic for ATL.

Many other cytologic variants can be observed, such as large cells, anaplastic cells, and Sézary-like cells. Overall, the recommended panel should include CD3, CD4, CD5, CD7, CD8, CD25, and CD30 for the diagnosis.

An excisional lymph node biopsy, skin biopsy, and GI tract biopsy in conjunction with flow cytometry and immunohistochemistry (IHC) are helpful for the diagnosis. Bone marrow aspiration and biopsy may also be needed for diagnosis and staging. Anaplastic lymphoma kinase (ALK), paired box 5 (PAX5), and terminal deoxynucleotidyl transferase (TdT) are negative in the lymphoma subtype of ATL. A high level of Ki-67 proliferation index is associated with aggressive ATL.

In a clinical setting, evaluation should always include a complete cell blood count with differential, peripheral blood smear, LDH, a TLS panel, including uric acid, phosphate, calcium, potassium, and creatinine levels, and a serum concentration of soluble interleukin 2 (IL-2) receptor. The screening for Glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase (G6PD) deficiency should also be considered before proceeding to TLS treatment with rasburicase. HIV and hepatitis panel should also be sent. All patients with newly diagnosed aggressive ATL should have a human leukocyte antigen (HLA) typing as a part of the initial workup.

All patients with aggressive ATL should receive imaging tests to evaluate the extent of lymphadenopathy, splenomegaly, organ infiltration, and skeletal involvement. Either computed tomography (CT) with contrast or positron-emission tomography-computed tomography (PET-CT) should be included as part of the workup; however, treatment should not be delayed solely to obtain PET-CT. CT scan or MRI of the brain and lumbar puncture should also be considered to evaluate the central nervous system involvement by ATL cells or opportunistic infection, especially for aggressive ATL.

# Treatment / Management

Patients with acute, lymphomatous, or unfavorable chronic type adult T cell leukemia carry a poor prognosis and have a median overall survival (OS) measured in months. Treatment is tailored according to clinical subtype and patients characteristics. Chemotherapy or antiviral regimen is generally the first-line treatment for aggressive type (acute, lymphoma, and chronic with unfavorable features). Antiviral regimen or watchful waiting is a reasonable first-line for smoldering and favorable chronic subtypes. For skin lesions, ultraviolet B (NB-UVB) and psoralen and ultraviolet A (PUVA) can be used.

**1. Antiviral therapy**

Patients with leukemic forms of ATL showed improved results with first-line antiviral therapy (zidovudine and interferon), whereas patients with lymphoma type showed a better outcome with chemotherapy. The clinical use of AZT-IFN was first reported by Gill et al. in 1995 for 19 patients with acute-lymphomatous forms of ATL.

**2. Chemotherapy**

Different chemotherapy regimens have been studied for ATL patients. Most frequently used chemotherapies are VCAP-AMP-VECP (vincristine, cyclophosphamide, doxorubicin, prednisone-doxorubicin, ranimustine, and prednisone-vindesine, etoposide, carboplatin, prednisone), modified EPOCH (etoposide, prednisolone, vincristine, carboplatin, and doxorubicin; carboplatin is substituted for cyclophosphamide), hyper-CVAD (hyperfractionated cyclophosphamide, vincristine, doxorubicin, and dexamethasone), CHOP (cyclophosphamide, doxorubicin, vincristine, and prednisone), CHOEP (cyclophosphamide, doxorubicin, etoposide, vincristine, and prednisone).

The Japanese Clinical Oncology Group (JCOG) has initiated a number of clinical trials to evaluate different chemotherapies in Japan. A phase III study from JCOG compared the VCAP-AMP-VECP regimen (known as LSG-15) to biweekly CHOP in untreated acute, lymphoma, or unfavorable chronic ATL patients. The 3-year OS was 24% versus 13% in the VCAP-AMP-VECP arm and CHOP arm, respectively. CR rate (40% versus 25%) and the median OS (13 months versus 11 months) were also superior in VCAP-AMP-VECP arm as compared to CHOP arm. In this study, patients were also administered G-CSF and CNS prophylaxis with cytarabine and intrathecal methotrexate and prednisone.

**3. Allogeneic Stem Cell Transplantation**

The role of stem cell transplantation (SCT) has been investigated in aggressive ATL, given the poor outcomes with standard treatment modalities. Few studies have been reported autologous SCT, and it has been shown to be associated with poor clinical outcomes, including high transplantation-related mortality.

Retrospective studies showed no significant difference in overall survival between myeloablative conditioning (MAC) and reduced-intensity conditioning (RIC), although a mild trend for overall survival was observed in favor of RIC-received older patients.

**4. Monoclonal Antibody Therapy**

- 
**Brentuximab Vedotin**

Brentuximab vedotin (BV) is a CD30-directed monoclonal antibody. The efficacy and safety were studied in clinical trials for ATL patients. A phase I study evaluated the combination of frontline BV and cyclophosphamide, doxorubicin, and prednisone (CHP) in CD30 positive peripheral T-cell lymphoma with all patients, including ATL, achieving CR.

****2.**Mogamulizumab**

Mogamulizumab is a humanized anti-CCR4 monoclonal antibody that is approved for relapsed or resistant ATL in Japan. The single-agent activity was demonstrated in a phase II study with the ORR of 50%, OS of 14 months, and progression-free survival of 5.3 months, months in relapsed ATL patients.

A phase II trial that was done outside Japan comparing Mogamulizumab with chemotherapy in 71 relapsed/refractory ATL patients showed the single-agent activity with ORR of 11% versus 0%. Several retrospective studies also reported severe acute graft-versus-host disease (GvHD) with the use of Mogamulizumab, especially prior to allo-HSCT.

3. **Alemtuzumab**

Alemtuzumab is a humanized monoclonal antibody against CD52 that has demonstrated clinical activity against chronic lymphocytic leukemia (CLL), cutaneous T-cell lymphoma (CTCL), and peripheral T-cell lymphoma (PTCL).  ATL cells express CD52 more frequently than other peripheral T cell lymphoma. Alemtuzumab, in combination with cyclophosphamide/doxorubicin/vincristine/prednisone (CHOP) regimen, was evaluated in 24 patients with peripheral T-cell lymphoma (PTCL) between 2003 and 2005. A total of 17 patients (71%) achieved complete remission, and the overall median duration of response was 11 months.

4. **Daclizumab**

Daclizumab is a humanized monoclonal antibody that binds to CD25 (interleukin-2 receptor alpha chain) that is over-expressed on ATL cells. Its manufacturing was stopped in 2009 due to its side effects, including hepatic toxicity. In 2016, a new form (daclizumab high-yield process) was approved by the FDA for relapsing multiple sclerosis. In phase I/II trial of daclizumab monotherapy (8 mg/kg) for 34 patients with ATL, no response was found in 18 patients with aggressive ATL.

**5. Other novel approaches******

Several new treatment strategies are being studied to increase survival. A phase II study assessing the efficacy of immunomodulatory agent Lenalidomide for aggressive ATL reported encouraging results. The ORR, OS, and median PFS were 42%, 20.3 months, 3.8 months, respectively.

# Differential Diagnosis

The differential diagnoses are other mature T-cell malignancies, including peripheral T-cell lymphoma not otherwise specified (PTCL-NOS), anaplastic large cell lymphoma (ALCL), angioimmunoblastic T-cell lymphoma (AITL), mycosis fungoides and Sézary syndrome. In some cases, the presence of Reed Sternberg-like cells (RS) in peripheral T-cell lymphomas (PTCLs) may lead to a misdiagnosis of lymphocyte-rich classical Hodgkin lymphoma.

# Prognosis

Adult T cell leukemia is chemoresistant and carries a poor prognosis despite the recent progress in treatment modalities. In general, the prognosis of acute and lymphoma subtypes is poor compared with that of chronic and smoldering types. Lymphoma Study Group from 1984 to 1987 reported that median survival time was 6 months for acute type, 10 months for the lymphoma type, and 24 months for the chronic type.

The OS at 4 years for acute, lymphomatous, chronic, and smoldering subtypes were 11%, 16%, 36%, and 52%, respectively. Although outcomes appear to be slightly better when comparing two studies, the long-term prognosis of ATL is still unsatisfactory. Based on 854 patients with newly diagnosed ATL between 1983 and 1987, the Japan Clinical Oncology Group-Lymphoma Study Group (JCOG-LSG) identified five prognostic factors, including advanced performance status (PS), high lactic dehydrogenase (LDH), age ≥40 years, ≥3 involved lesions, and hypercalcemia.

Other poor prognostic factors were identified in several studies for acute and lymphoma subtypes, including bone marrow involvement, skin involvement, and monocytosis.

# Complications

Opportunistic infections due to severe immunosuppression are frequently reported in patients with ATL. Prophylactic trimethoprim/sulfamethoxazole should be given for pneumocystis jirovecii pneumonia. If needed, screening can be considered. Prophylaxis against herpes-zoster virus, gram-negative bacterial and fungal infection; strongyloidiasis stercoralis infection screening should also be considered in ATL patients. Tumor lysis syndrome is an oncologic emergency with high mortality risk. Vigorous intravenous hydration, rasburicase should be initiated immediately. Allopurinol administration is generally recommended 24 hours prior to starting the anti-cancer therapy.

# Deterrence and Patient Education

Adult T cell leukemia is primarily caused by HTLV-1 infection that is transmitted through breastfeeding, sexual contact, and blood transfusion. Although most of the individuals who carry HTLV-1 infection remain asymptomatic, they are at an increased lifetime risk for developing ATL. There is no uniform screening. However, patients should avoid prolonged breastfeeding (more than six months); condom use should be encouraged by physicians. Patients should be educated for the risks of intravenous drug-related infections, including HTLV-1.

# Enhancing Healthcare Team Outcomes

Adult T cell leukemia is uncommon and aggressive neoplasm caused by HTLV-1 infection that infects 10 million people in the world. Of them, 5% of infected people eventually develop symptomatic ATL. HTLV-1 is the first human retrovirus discovered and is endemic in Japan, the Caribbean region, Africa, and some parts in the Middle East, South, and Central America. HTLV-1 transmission is through breastfeeding, sexual interaction, and blood transfusion. The overall prognosis is poor. Hence, preventive measures are of utmost importance. ATL is clinically classified into four subgroups defined by the Shimoyama criteria: acute, chronic, lymphoma, and smoldering. The treatment is chosen based on clinical and patient characteristics. Currently, chemotherapy or the antiviral regimen is the first-line treatment for aggressive type (acute, lymphoma, and chronic with unfavorable features).

An antiviral regimen or watchful waiting is a reasonable first-line for smoldering and favorable chronic subtypes. Different chemotherapy regimens are used in clinical practice including VCAP-AMP-VECP (vincristine, cyclophosphamide, doxorubicin, prednisone-doxorubicin, ranimustine, and prednisone-vindesine, etoposide, carboplatin, prednisone), modified EPOCH (etoposide, prednisolone, vincristine, carboplatin, and doxorubicin; carboplatin is substituted for cyclophosphamide), CHOP (cyclophosphamide, doxorubicin, vincristine, and prednisone), CHOEP (cyclophosphamide, doxorubicin, etoposide, vincristine, and prednisone), hyper-CVAD (hyperfractionated cyclophosphamide, vincristine, doxorubicin, and dexamethasone). ATL patients are increased risk of opportunistic infections due to severe immunosuppression, therefore, appropriate screening, prevention, and prompt recognition are essential. These patients are likely encountered by primary care physicians. Early recognition and referral to a specialist are important to avoid delay in treatment. Researchers are working on novel approaches and focusing on clinical trial participation. Collaborative work is important to find effective therapeutic strategies to improve survival in ATL.