The Pathophysiology behind Overlap syndrome encompasses a combination of the individual effects seen in patients with either COPD or OSA. There is a severity scale for both COPD and OSA, and it is unknown at what point the combined disorders start to have clinical significance, either additively or synergistically.

**Obstructive sleep apnea:**The pathophysiology of obstructive sleep apnea involves multiple mechanistic pathways, including anatomical factors (e.g., collapsibility of the upper airway) and non-anatomical variables (upper airway muscle responses, respiratory-related arousability from sleep, and control of breathing).

(1) Anatomical factors:

- Typically, hypopneas and apneas occur during the transition from wakefulness to sleep and can also occur through all stages of sleep.

- Interaction between pharyngeal architecture and the inability of upper airway dilator muscles, notably the genioglossus, to maintain a patent airway during sleep.

- Decreased excitatory genioglossus negative-pressure reflex during sleep contributes to the development of OSA in patients with anatomically restricted upper airways.

- Repetitive respiratory events are associated with increased airway resistance and can lead to increased patient end-tidal CO2 (PETCO2) and alternating periods of hypoventilation and hyperventilation (as depicted in the figure below).

- In obesity, fat deposition surrounding the pharyngeal airway is likely to increase the airway's susceptibility to collapsing.

(2) Non-anatomical factors:

- Ventilatory control plays a significant role in the pathogenesis of obstructive sleep apnea.

- Altered ventilatory motor output affects upper airway patency via muscular dilator activity or caudal traction changes.

- Oxidative stress caused by breathing interruptions during sleep results in sporadic reductions in airflow to the lungs and significant variations in the partial pressure of oxygen between the proximal and distal airways.

**COPD:**is characterized by airflow obstruction that is minimally reversible and aberrant inflammatory responses in the lungs. The inflammatory condition involves the airways, lung parenchyma, and pulmonary vasculature. The COPD spectrum ranges from chronic bronchitis to emphysema.

(1) Mechanical factors: Due to peripheral airway obstruction, destruction of pulmonary connective tissue, or a combination of both that leads to changes in the mechanical properties of the respiratory system. These structural changes lead to a cascade of changes that can contribute to the morbidity and chronicity of the disease.

- The natural defensive reaction to inhaled toxins is exaggerated, resulting in tissue death, impairment of defense mechanisms that prevent such destruction, and disruption of healing mechanisms. Also seen are protease-antiprotease imbalances, which can lead to structural damage to the alveolar air sacs resulting in emphysematous changes.

- The inflammatory reaction and blockage of the airways induce a reduction in forced expiratory volume (FEV1), while tissue damage results in airflow obstruction and reduced gas exchange.

- Lung hyperinflation is commonly seen on radiographic imaging due to air trapping resulting from airway collapse while exhaling.

- Hyperinflation increases the anterior-posterior diameter of the lower rib cage while depressing and shortening the diaphragm, which makes contraction less mechanically advantageous.

- Chronic bronchitis subtype presents with increased airway resistance, particularly within the small airways, which results from mucous gland enlargement and mucociliary dysfunction resulting in excessive mucus production and reduced airways caliber. Fibrosis and smooth muscle hypertrophy may result from increased mucus production.

- Emphysema subtype exhibits loss of elastic recoil resulting in diminished expiratory flow rates, air trapping, and airway collapsing mediated by complex inflammatory response including neutrophils, macrophages, CD8 T-cells, and other inflammatory mediators resulting in enzymatic damage of the lung parenchyma.

- Skeletal muscle myopathy from long-term corticosteroid usage, systemic inflammatory response with oxidative damage, and persistent hypoxemia.

- Increased airway resistance during both inspiration and expiration.

(2) Ventilatory factors: Ventilatory control is not significantly affected in individuals with mild COPD. However, altered ventilatory motor output is usually seen in progressive COPD, where several changes occur to gas exchange and respiratory function during wake and sleep.

- A reduced ventilatory drive leads to a significant decrease in tidal volume producing a compensatory response of prolonging inspiratory time, which leads to a reduction in expiratory time, and worsening hyperinflation.

- In the chronic bronchitis subtype of COPD, profound transitory nocturnal hypoxemia is typical during REM sleep; these patients often have hypoxemia and CO2 retention when awake and breathing.

- The increased airway resistance during inspiration and expiration leads to additional effort to maintain normal ventilation, seen physically as an increased respiratory frequency or work of breathing.

- The increased work of breathing in individuals with advanced COPD leads to more oxygen extraction from the blood and more carbon dioxide production.

- The hypercapnic ventilatory response (change in minute ventilation for a given change in arterial carbon dioxide slope of VE/PCO2) is reduced in most patients with COPD due to the increased mechanical load.

- The effect of oxygen on hypercapnia in individuals with COPD has been debated for many years. Several mechanisms, such as reduced ventilatory responses, VQ mismatch, and the Haldane effect, play a role.

**Overlap Syndrome:**When discussing overlap syndrome, the link between OSA and COPD is reciprocal, with a worsening of one disease process causing a worsening of the other. However, it is uncertain at what severity these combined disorders begin to have additive or synergistic clinical significance.

Overlap syndrome results in nocturnal oxygen desaturations (NOD) which is more profound than in COPD or OSA alone. Previous studies have defined NOD as ≥30% of the recording time (time in bed) with a transcutaneous SaO2 < 88% or 90%.

Three mechanisms are the main contributors to NOD, which lead to disrupted sleep and worsening clinical outcomes in these patients. These mechanisms include: alveolar hypoventilation, decreased ventilation-perfusion matching, and decreased end-expiratory volume (ERV).

The main culprit as a result of the mechanisms listed above is hypoxia, which causes the release of systemic inflammatory mediators such as C-reactive protein (CRP), interleukin-6 (IL-6), interleukin-8 (IL-8), nuclear factor-kappa beta (NF-κB), tumor necrosis factor-alpha (TNF-α), and hypoxia-inducible factor (HIF) in these patients.

As a result of these processes, which promote hypoxia and NOD, reactive oxygen species (ROS) are released. These free radical oxidants contribute to endothelial dysfunction and accelerated atherosclerosis, which contributes to the clinical presentations, particularly the increased risk for cardiovascular events associated with increased mortality and pulmonary hypertension risk.

The exact mechanism for developing OSA in patients with COPD is still contested. Studies have proposed protective mechanisms for developing OSA in chronic obstructive pulmonary disease patients. These include larger end-expiratory lung volumes (EELV), which favor tracheal traction reducing airway resistance and stabilizing the upper airway, also contributing to reducing the loop gain.

Conversely, an increased loop gain promotes recurrent apneas, and the higher the loop gain, the more unstable the respiratory control system is.

Other plausible mechanisms related to inflammatory airway swelling with increased sputum production increase upper airway resistance and predispose to snoring and obstructive sleep apnea. In addition, the expiratory snoring and flow limitation has been shown to predict the presence of airflow obstruction on spirometry.

Patients with overlap syndrome have higher sympathetic activity and reduced parasympathetic activity measured by sympathetic and parasympathetic modulation of heart rate, compared to patients with OSA or COPD alone. In addition, research suggests that individuals with overlap syndrome have increased arterial stiffness, more so than patients with OSA alone, suggesting another underlying mechanism for cardiac disease.