# Continuing Education Activity

Salmon calcitonin (after this referred to as "calcitonin") is an analog of human calcitonin used to treat postmenopausal osteoporosis, Paget disease of bone, and hypercalcemia. Its clinical importance derives from its ability to inhibit osteoclasts and increase renal excretion of calcium. Through these processes, bone matrix resorption and serum calcium are both decreased. For these reasons, it is of benefit in the treatment of postmenopausal osteoporosis, Paget disease of bone, and emergent hypercalcemia. This activity reviews the mechanism of action, adverse event profile, toxicity, dosing, pharmacodynamics, and monitoring of calcitonin, pertinent for clinicians and other interprofessional team members where calcitonin therapy can provide patient benefit.

**Objectives:**
- Identify the mechanism of action of calcitonin.
- Review the FDA-approved on-label indications of calcitonin.
- Summarize the contraindications and risks associated with calcitonin therapy.
- Outline the importance of collaboration and communication among interprofessional team members to improve outcomes and treatment efficacy for patients receiving treatment with calcitonin.

# Indications

Salmon calcitonin (after this referred to as “calcitonin”) is an analog of human calcitonin used in the treatment of postmenopausal osteoporosis, Paget disease of bone, and hypercalcemia. Its clinical importance derives from its ability to inhibit osteoclasts and increase renal excretion of calcium. Through these processes, bone matrix resorption and serum calcium are both decreased. For these reasons, it is of benefit in the treatment of postmenopausal osteoporosis, Paget disease of bone, and emergent hypercalcemia.

**Postmenopausal Osteoporosis**

Calcitonin is currently FDA approved for use in postmenopausal osteoporosis once the patient is at least five years postmenopausal.

However, short-term use of calcitonin has also been demonstrated to significantly reduce osteoporotic bone pain compared to placebo, especially in the acute setting.

Recommended dosages are 200 units via intranasal spray once daily or 100 units once daily via intramuscular (IM)/subcutaneous (subQ) injection. The patient should supplement calcitonin with calcium, and vitamin D. BMD measurements should occur every 1 to 2 years after beginning therapy. Height, weight, serum calcium, and serum calcifediol should be measured yearly. Biochemical markers of bone turnover can also be useful to assess therapeutic response.

**Paget Disease of Bone**

Calcitonin is an FDA-approved second-line treatment for Paget disease, indicated when bisphosphonate tolerance is a problem. Clinically, it can relieve bone pain, reverse neurologic deficits, reduce blood flow to diseased bone, and may even improve Pagetic hearing loss.

In a study of 24 patients with untreated Paget’s disease, treatment with calcitonin showed reduced skeletal blood flow to Pagetic bone, which may lower disease activity and reduce bleeding during surgery. Serum alkaline phosphatase (ALP) and urine hydroxyproline, markers of bone remodeling and turnover, were also reduced.

Paget disease of bone is a chronic illness; therefore, calcitonin therapy can be of indefinite duration. Patients are initially given 50 to 100 units of calcitonin daily via IM or subQ administration and then given either 50 units daily or 50 to 100 units every 1 to 3 days. Serum alkaline phosphatase should be measured at 3 to 6 months to assess for a response to therapy. After serum ALP has normalized, it can be measured every six months to one year. If ALP once again begins to rise, the formation of calcitonin antibodies should be suspected, and ordering an antibody titer may be warranted. Calcium and vitamin D supplementation are also recommendations, and their serum levels should be intermittently measured. If the patient has bone pain refractory to calcitonin therapy, a CT scan or MRI can help to define the lesion better and determine whether surgical management should be a consideration.

**Hypercalcemia**

Calcitonin is FDA approved for the treatment of hypercalcemic emergencies. Complications of hypercalcemia include confusion, coma, dehydration, polyuria, kidney stones, nausea, constipation, pancreatitis, hypertension, and cardiac arrhythmias. Calcitonin addresses this problem by decreasing bone resorption of hydroxyapatite and increasing renal excretion of calcium. Since calcitonin is fast-acting, it is a viable therapeutic choice when a rapid decrease in calcium is needed.

Calcium initially lowers via rehydration with a saline solution, followed by co-administration of a bisphosphonate and calcitonin. Calcitonin administration is via IM or SubQ injection at a rate of 4 units/kg every 12 hours.

# Mechanism of Action

Endogenous calcitonin is produced in the parafollicular C cells of the thyroid gland, while exogenously administered calcitonin extract derives from the ultimobranchial gland of salmon. Salmon calcitonin is a 32 amino acid, alpha-helical polypeptide that differs significantly from human calcitonin along amino acids 10 to 27. These differences in amino acid sequence explain the increased potency of salmon-derived calcitonin.

# Administration

Calcitonin administration can be via injection (subQ/IM) or nasal spray. All forms are rapidly absorbed and have an onset of action of fewer than 30 minutes. The injectable solution contains 200 units/mL, while the nasal solution contains 200 units/actuation. Nasal administration has only 25% of the bioavailability of the injectable form and is absorbed more slowly. In its injectable form, the subQ route is the choice when the volume is less than 2mL. IM injections are a viable choice when the volume exceeds 2mL. SubQ self-administration or intranasal spray is preferable in an outpatient setting. Either the intranasal spray or injectable form may be used for postmenopausal osteoporosis. However, the injectable form is preferred for the treatment of Paget disease and hypercalcemia.

# Adverse Effects

Patients with allergies to fish products may be prone to hypersensitivity reactions when taking salmon calcitonin. The hypersensitivity response includes bronchospasm, tongue swelling, and anaphylactic shock. Reports of isolated incidences of maculopapular rashes and urticaria also exist. In atopy-prone individuals, a skin allergy test is necessary before drug administration; rescue therapy for such a reaction is via epinephrine injection. Clinicians must also exercise special care for patients being treated for bipolar disorder as calcitonin can decrease serum lithium. Animal research shows decreased fetal weight with the administration of calcitonin during pregnancy. While this has not been the case in humans based on data, it may nonetheless be prudent to exercise additional caution with calcitonin therapy during pregnancy.

The most common side effects of parenterally administered calcitonin involve the GI tract; 10% of such patients experience mild nausea that subsides as therapy continues. Other GI side effects include reduced appetite, diarrhea, abdominal pain, and discomfort. Injectable calcitonin can cause flushing of the face, hands, and feet several minutes after administration. A local inflammatory reaction may also occur at the site of injection. Other side effects of injectable calcitonin include pruritus, tingling of the palms and soles, and increased diuresis.

The nasal spray can cause epistaxis, rhinitis, and ulceration of the nasal mucosa. Therefore, the nasal mucosa, turbinates, and septum should be closely inspected before beginning therapy, whenever the patient presents with nasal symptoms, and periodically throughout treatment. Adverse nasal events increase with the age of the patient. When nasal ulceration exceeds a 1.5 mm diameter, the recommendation is to discontinue the nasal formulation. Nausea may also occur with intranasal calcitonin but with decreased incidence compared to parenteral administration.

# Toxicity

There is a weak association between long-term use of intranasal calcitonin and increased incidence of cancer, particularly basal cell carcinoma. A meta-analysis of 21 randomized, controlled clinical trials showed an increased incidence of malignancy in patients treated with calcitonin (4.1%) compared to patients using a placebo (2.9%).Salmonella and E. coli cells. Furthermore, there is no plausible mechanism of causality based on the current understanding of calcitonin’s mechanisms of action.

Given its mechanisms of action, the use of calcitonin may also contribute to hypocalcemia. Hypocalcemia can trigger tetany, seizures, changes in mental status, and cardiac arrest. When using calcitonin for Paget disease or osteoporosis, recommendations that patients take supplemental vitamin D and calcium to prevent hypocalcemia. Men 50 to 70 years old should take 1,000 mg of calcium per day, while women older than 50 and men older than 70 should take 1200 mg per day. Patients over 50 should ingest 800 to 1000 units of vitamin D per day, and patients older than 70 should reduce intake to 800 units per day.

# Enhancing Healthcare Team Outcomes

In patients with acute hypercalcemia, Paget disease of bone, and osteoporosis, introducing calcitonin therapy should involve the efforts of an interprofessional healthcare team that includes the patient's primary care clinician (MD, DO, PA, NP), endocrinologist, oncologist, nursing staff, and a board-certified pharmacotherapy pharmacist to provide a comprehensive approach towards patient care. Each interprofessional team member will contribute with the expertise from their discipline and must communicate with other team members to keep everyone apprised of the patient's progress or lack thereof. This will optimize the potential therapeutic effectiveness of the medication while minimizing adverse events. [Level 5]