Treatment of underlying cause is the focus of treatment in syncope. During acute an acute episode, patients should be made to sit or lay down quickly and raising the legs help recovery in patients with reflex postural hypotension event. Placing patients in a horizontal position after the acute event and preventing rising too soon. Treatment of any injuries sustained during a sudden fall from syncope warrants immediate attention.

1. Vasovagal syncope:

- Conservative measure includes avoiding situations or stimuli that have caused them, Tilt training and increasing use of salt and fluid.

- Drug therapy with beta-blockers, SSRIs, hydrofludrocortisone, proamatine, and few other medications might be useful if conservative measures fail.

2. Orthostatic hypotension:

- Rising slowly from supine and sitting position, a gradual change in posture.

- Avoiding medications that can cause orthostatic hypotension (diuretics, vasodilators).

- Use of compression stocking to improve venous return.

- Intravenous fluids in patients who are intravascularly volume depleted.

- Use proamatine in refractory cases.

3. Cardiovascular disorders: Treating underlying condition by Cardiology.

Disposition is often the most difficult task in caring for emergency department patients with syncope. Admission rates vary in patients presenting with syncope. In the United States, about 80% of patients presenting to the emergency department following a syncopal event will be admitted. In Canada and elsewhere, admission rates may be as low as 10%. Rather than reflecting differences in acuity, this discrepancy more likely reflects thresholds for missing rare, potentially clinically relevant causes. Practitioners have published multiple pathways with which to risk-stratify syncope patients to help improve this discrepancy; however, all of them appear comparable to a thorough history and examination. The Boston Syncope Criteria center on risk stratifying patients for admission based on prior history of cardiac disease (left ventricular dysfunction, dysrhythmia or valvular disease); concomitant complaints in emergency department presentations of potential cardiac disease such as associated chest pain, dyspnea, or palpations; ECG abnormalities such as signs of ischemia, dysrhythmia, or conduction disease. These criteria suggest that any patient without associated comorbidities and unrevealing emergency department workup should be safe for discharge.

Costs of evaluating syncope have grown exponentially in recent years. Approximately $ 2 billion is spent in the US on patients hospitalized for syncope.

Follow-up: Patients with unknown etiology and without underlying heart disease have a good outcome. Patients with syncope and underlying heart disease needs regular follow-up with a primary care physician and cardiologist.