**Pearls**

- Healthcare professionals should document all findings and recommendations in the medical record, including statements made denying abuse.

- If domestic violence is admitted, documentation should include the history, physical examination findings, laboratory and radiographic finds, interventions, and referrals.

- If there are significant findings that can be recorded, pictures should be included.

- The medical record may become a court document; be objective and accurate.

- Healthcare professionals should provide a follow-up appointment.

- Reassurance that additional assistance is available at any time is critical to protect the patient from harm and break the cycle of abuse.

**Screening**

**Screening: Reporting Family and Domestic Violence**

Over 80% of domestic and family violence victims seek care in a hospital; others may seek care in health professional offices, including dentists, therapists, and other medical offices. Routine screening should be conducted by all healthcare practitioners, including nurses, physicians, physician assistants, dentists, nurse practitioners, and pharmacists. Screening is a critical component in protecting victims and minimizing negative health outcomes.

Health professional interventions reduce the incidence of morbidity and mortality associated with domestic violence.

- As family and domestic violence is a significant public and social problem, all health professionals should be aware of and use screening tools to assess family and domestic violence.

- The United States Preventive Service Task Force has recommended routine screening of women for intimate partner violence in all primary care settings.

- Insurance plans are required to cover the costs for intimate partner violence screening for adolescent and adult women.

- Screening for family and domestic violence raises concerns regarding compromising patient privacy as well as the ethical, legal, and professional and legal responsibilities of clinicians.

**Screening: Tools**

- The American Academy of Pediatricians has free guides for the history, physical, diagnostic testing, documentation, treatment, and legal issues in cases of suspected child abuse.

- The Kempe Family Stress Inventory questionnaire assesses maltreatment in young single women of low socioeconomic status.

- The Maternal History Interview uses open-ended questions and subscales to assess personality, parenting skills, life stress, and child abuse risk.

- The Center for Disease Control provides several scales assessing family relationships, including child abuse risks.

- The physical examination is still the most significant diagnostic tool to detect abuse. A child or adult with suspected abuse should be undressed, and a comprehensive physical exam should be performed. The skin should be examined for bruises, bites, burns, and injuries in different stages of healing. Examine for retinal hemorrhages, subdural hemorrhages, tympanic membrane rupture, soft tissue swelling, oral bruising, fractured teeth, and organ injury.

**Screening: Child Abuse**

Child abuse and neglect may result in acute trauma, anxiety, depression, unwanted pregnancy, substance abuse, suicide, and risky behaviors. Children are more likely to be involved in family and intimate partner abuse.

The most common risk factors for child abuse and neglect are poverty, low education, large family size, single-parent, young parents, step-parents in the home, and psychiatric disease.

Clinicians must take responsibility to identify child abuse to prevent recurrent injuries. While it has not been established that routine child abuse screening is necessary, clinicians should screen for abuse if it is suspected. Multiple missed appointments and delays in seeking medical treatment are indicators of neglect.

Many organizations offer free screening tools. However, most lack sufficient sensitivity and specificity. False-positive and false-negative results can entail serious consequences, including both under- and overreporting of abuse.

**Screening: Intimate Partner Violence**

Some experts believe screening should only occur when signs and symptoms are present. Routine screening may, in fact, be problematic because it can stigmatize patients and result in anxiety. Further, in domestic violence cases, victims are often unwilling to use available resources to end abuse.

Several national organizations, such as the American Medical Association and Family Violence Prevention Fund, recommend screening all women for intimate partner violence. Screening tools for abuse are available for assessment, intervention, documentation, and referral.

Studies have shown that abused women who receive counseling have fewer instances of intimate partner violence during and after pregnancy.

Screening has the potential to decrease abuse and improve health outcomes. While victims may not be willing to use the information provided, serious consequences follow if abuse is ignored. A clinician can provide the resources to ensure that the patient is educated and informed.

The Center for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) provides numerous tools to assist practitioners in the free publication, Intimate Partner Violence and Sexual Violence Victimization Assessment Instruments for Use in Healthcare Settings.

**Screening: Elder Abuse**

Elderly patients are at risk of abuse in the home environment as well as in institutional settings. Risk factors for elder abuse both at home and in institutions include increased age, dementia, abnormal behaviors, cognitive decline, physical dependency, and daily living activities impairment. In an institutional setting, there may be shortages of qualified assistants, nurses' aides, and other support staff become tired, stressed, and overwhelmed, resulting in anger and aggression that may be taken out on patients.

Screening for elder abuse should include a review of social and financial information.

The Abuse Suspicion Index is a screening tool for cognitively intact patients. In patients with dementia, often, the practitioner must rely on the physical exam. Bruising can be an indicator of physical; however, elders commonly take blood-thinning agents that result in easy bruising. Victims of physical abuse tend to have bruises that are larger than five centimeters, and they tend to be located on the face, lateral right arm, or posterior torso. In many instances, the victim may recall how the bruise occurred.

If abuse is suspected, radiographs of ribs, small bones, and face should be considered. A CT of the head should also be considered to rule out subdural hemorrhage. While difficult, a pelvic examination should be considered if there are any signs of sexual abuse. Weight loss may be a sign of physical or medical neglect due to malnutrition. Other common causes of weight loss should be ruled out. Pressure ulcers should raise suspicion for neglect.

All clinicians should be aware of the potential signs and symptoms of elder abuse and be familiar with screening tools. When abuse is suspected, the history and physical exam should be carefully conducted and documented with additional laboratory and imaging tests considered.

**Screening: Challenges**

While screening is crucial to identify domestic and family, several barriers exist. Despite the prevalence of domestic violence, many clinicians do take the time to screen patients. Unfortunately, no universal approach has been established to assess for domestic violence. Additionally, many clinicians do not have the time, resources, or desire to get involved with abuse or neglect investigation. Many health professionals remain ignorant of the warning signs and risk factors. In most states, reporting of suspected elder abuse or neglect is required by statute. However, few health professionals are prosecuted for failure to comply, further hindering reporting. Routine screening increases the odds of identifying domestic abuse cases.

Ongoing challenges include:

- Lack of recognition

- Lack of standard screening tools

- Limited time

- Limited resources

- Lack of motivation to screen

**Screening: Recommendations**

- Evaluate for organic conditions and medications that mimic abuse.

- Evaluate patients and caregivers separately.

- Clinicians should regularly screen for family and domestic violence and elder abuse.

- The Elder Abuse Suspicion Index can be used to assess for elder abuse.

- Screen for cognitive impairment before screening for abuse in the elderly

- Pattern injury is more suspicious.

**Reporting**

In cases of acute injury or emergency, contact local law enforcement.

A 24-hour toll-free domestic violence hotline is available for counseling and information at 1-800-656-HOPE. The counselors will refer the victim to a local domestic violence center. The Adult Abuse Hot Line is (Toll-Free) 1-800-752-6200 or 1-877-597-2331

Kentucky has several domestic violence centers that will provide referral services, counseling, a 24-hour hotline, emergency shelter, educational services, assessment and referral of parents with children, and local training of law enforcement personnel.

If child abuse is suspected, contact the KY Cabinet for Health and Family Services or National Child Abuse Hotline: 1-800-4-A-Child.

Healthcare professionals play a crucial role in screening, identifying, and reporting child abuse. Using screening tools in clinical practice can increase the odds that child abuse will be identified.

**Obstacles**

- Attitudes of clinicians

- The belief of unreasonable intrusion

- Concern over being sued for reporting

- Concern over violating privacy

**Risks**

- Failure to report child abuse is illegal in most states.

- Failure to report intimate partner and elder abuse is illegal in many states.

**Legal**

It is important to be aware of federal and state statutes governing domestic and family abuse. Remember that reporting domestic and family violence to law enforcement does not obviate detailed documentation in the medical record.

- Battering is a crime, and the patient should be made aware that help is available. If the patient wants legal help, the local police should be called.

- In some jurisdictions, domestic violence reporting is mandated. The legal obligation to report abuse should be explained to the patient.

- The patient should be informed of how local authorities typically respond to such reports and provide follow-up procedures. Address the risk of reprisal, need for shelter, and possibly an emergency protective order (available in every state and the District of Columbia).

- If there is a possibility the patient’s safety will be jeopardized, the clinician should work with the patient and authorities to best protect the patient while meeting legal reporting obligations.

- The clinical role in managing an abused patient goes beyond obeying the laws that mandate reporting; there is a primary obligation to protect the patient's life.

- The clinician must help mitigate the potential harm that results from reporting, provide appropriate ongoing care, and preserve the patient's safety.

- If the patient desires, and it is acceptable to the police, a health professional should remain during the interview.

- The medical record should reflect the incident as described by the patient and any physical exam findings. Include the date and time the report was taken and the officer's name and badge number.

**National Statutes**

Federal Child Abuse Prevention and Treatment Act (CAPTA)

Each state has specific child abuse statues. Federal legislation provides guidelines for defining acts that constitute child abuse. The guidelines suggest that child abuse includes an act or failure recent act that presents an imminent risk of serious harm. This includes any recent act or failure to act on the part of a parent or caretaker that results in death, physical or emotional harm, sexual abuse, or exploitation.

Elder Justice Act

The Elder Justice Act provides strategies to decrease the likelihood of elder abuse, neglect, and exploitation. The Act utilizes three significant approaches:

- Creation of a Coordinating Council and an Advisory Board which are charged with recommending multidisciplinary tactics for reducing elder abuse at the local, state, and federal levels

- Allotment of grant money and monetary incentives to improve staffing, quality of care, and technology in long-term care facilities and increase states, adult, protective services departments

- A provision of the EJA that requires facilities receiving federal funding to adhere to a strict reporting requirement

Patient Safety and Abuse Act

The Violence Against Woman Act makes it a federal crime to cross state lines to stalk, harass, or physically injure a partner; or enter or leave the country violating a protective order. It is a violation to possess a firearm or ammunition while subject to a protective order or if convicted of a qualifying crime of domestic violence. The victim also has a right to:

- Restitution

- Information about the offender

- Notification and presence at court proceedings

- Dignity and privacy

- Protect from the accused offender

- Conference with an attorney

**State Statutes**

According to Kentucky law, Primary care physicians, who are granted licensure after July 1, 1996, are required to successfully complete a 3-hour domestic violence training course within 3 years of the date of initial licensure.

Kentucky Statute 600.020: Abused or neglected child "means a child whose health or welfare is harmed or threatened with harm when his parent, guardian, or other person exercising custodial control or supervision of the child."

Kentucky Statute 620.030: "Any person who knows or has reasonable cause to believe that a child is dependent, neglected or abused shall immediately cause an oral or written report to be made to a local law enforcement agency or the Kentucky State Police; the Cabinet or its designated representative; the commonwealth’s attorney or the county attorney; by telephone or otherwise…" Thus, health professionals report when there is suspicion. Health professionals do not need confirmatory proof. Health professionals must report all cases of reasonable cause to believe that a child or adolescent has been abused or neglected or is in danger of being abused. A health professional cannot assume that the report has been made. Health professionals must always make a report if he suspects a child is or has been abused.

Kentucky Statute KRS 620.030(1): "…Any supervisor who receives from an employee a report... shall promptly make a report to the proper authorities for investigation."

Kentucky Statute KRS 620.050(1): "Anyone acting upon reasonable cause in the making of a report or acting under KRS 620.030 to KRS 620.050 in good faith shall have immunity from any liability, civil or criminal, that might otherwise be incurred or imposed. Any such participant shall have the same immunity with respect to participation in any judicial proceeding or resulting from such report or action."

Kentucky Statute on failure to report: KRS 620.990(1): "Any person intentionally violating the provisions of this chapter shall be guilty of a Class B misdemeanor. A class B misdemeanor carries a penalty of up to 90 days in jail and/or a fine of up to $250."

Kentucky Statute 620.050(14): "As a result of any report of suspected child abuse or neglect, photographs and X-rays or other appropriate medical diagnostic procedures may be taken or cause to be taken, without the consent of the parent or other person exercising custodial control or supervision of the child, as a part of the medical evaluation or investigation of these reports. These photographs and X-rays or results of other medical diagnostic procedures may be introduced into evidence in any subsequent judicial proceedings. The person performing the diagnostic procedures or taking photographs or X-rays shall be immune from criminal or civil liability for having performed the act. Nothing herein shall limit liability for negligence."

The name of the person making a report is confidential, with the exceptions outlined in KRS 620.050(11).

**Resources**

**National**

The following agencies provide national assistance for victims of domestic and family violence:

- Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (800-CDC-INFO (232-4636)/TTY: 888-232-6348

- Childhelp: National Child Abuse Hotline: (800-4-A-CHILD (2-24453)

- The coalition of Labor Union Women (cluw.org): 202-466-4615

- Corporate Alliance to End Partner Violence: 309-664-0667

- Employers Against Domestic Violence: 508-894-6322

- Futures without Violence: 415-678-5500/TTY 800-595-4889

- Love Is Respect: National Teen Dating Abuse Helpline: 866-331-9474 /TTY: 866-331-8453

- National Center on Domestic and Sexual Violence

- National Center on Elder Abuse

- National Coalition Against Domestic Violence (www.ncadv.org)

- National Network to End Domestic Violence: 202-543-5566

- National Organization for Victim Assistance

- National Resource Center on Domestic Violence: 800-537-2238

- National Sexual Violence Resource Center: 717-909-0710

- National Teen Dating Abuse Helpline: 866-331-9474 or TTY 1-866-331-8453

- Rape Abuse and Incest National Network (RAINN): 800-656-HOPE

- Sexual Assault Training and Investigations (SATI) (mysati.com): 619-561-3845

- Speaking Out About Rape (SOAR): 407-898-0693

- Stalking Resource Center, National Center for Victims of Crime ( 1-800-FYI-CALL (394-2255)/TTY: 800-211-7996

- The Battered Women's Justice Project: 800-903-0111

- The National Center for Victims of Crime (www.victimsofcrime.org)

- The National Domestic Violence Hotline (www.thehotline.org): 800-799-7233 or TTY 1-800-787-3224

- U.S. Department of Justice, Office on Violence Against Women: 202-307-6026

- Workplaces Respond to Domestic and Sexual Violence: A National Resource Center (www.workplacesrespond.org.)

**State**

To report abuse of children, the disabled, and the elderly:

- KY Cabinet for Health and Family Services

- Child/Adult Protective Services Reporting System: 1-877-KYSAFE1 (597-2331)

- Adult Abuse Hot Line (Toll-Free) 1-800-752-6200 or 1-877-597-2331

For information and referral relating to domestic violence:

- Kentucky Coalition Against Domestic Violence (KCADV): 502-209-5382

For information on sexual assault:

- Call the 24/7 crisis line: 1-800-656-HOPE

For further local assistance, the police and sheriff’s departments and local shelters should be contacted.