Given that this is an intracellular organism, antibiotics should be chosen that would be able to enter the cell effectively. The recommended classes of antibiotics include fluoroquinolones, macrolides, and rifampin. Either Levofloxacin 750 mg, one tablet for seven to ten days, or Azithromycin, 1 gm on day one followed by 500 mg one tablet once a day for seven to 10 days, are advised. Parenteral therapy is advised initially as the patient may not tolerate antibiotics given by mouth because of potential gastrointestinal symptoms. Immunocompromised patients, especially transplant patients, should preferably be treated for 21 days with fluoroquinolones. Macrolides would not be recommended here as they can interfere with immunosuppressant agents.

To prevent the infection, most hospitals across the country perform frequent testing of their water supply for Legionella. Proper decontamination of the water supply is recommended.

**Disinfection**

- Heat water to 70 C to 80 C, with flushing of distal sites.

- Copper-silver ionization units are effective at eradicating legionellae, and they provide sustained protection.

- Ultraviolet light kills legionellae.

- Hyperchlorination of water is not effective because legionellae are fairly chlorine resistant, and chlorine decomposes at the higher temperatures.

**Prevention**

- Legionellae transmission can be minimized through the use of only sterile water for filling and rinsing nebulization devices and regular maintenance of cooling towers.