Here we present a review of the core features and various clinical presentations in ASD, with a particular focus on individuals with autism spectrum disorder of an Asperger syndrome type (ASD-AS).

ASD is a heterogeneous disorder with a wide variety of clinical manifestations, ranging from slight to significant impairment, and is characterized by abnormal social communication and social interaction; and restricted and repetitive patterns of behavior. Symptoms present in the early developmental period, although they may not become fully evident until social demands exceed limited capacities. Specifiers include associating intellectual disability, language impairment, medical or genetic condition, catatonia, and other neurodevelopmental, mental, or behavioral disorders. There are three levels of severity for each core symptom domain, which is classified based on the severity of symptoms and the required levels of support to assist with impairments, and separate ratings are required for each domain (table 1).

**Illustrative Examples of Impaired Social Communication and Interaction**

1- Deficits in social-emotional reciprocity:

- Absent or limited interest in social interactions

- Abnormal social approach

- Failure of normal back and forth conversation

- Reduced sharing of interests, emotions, or affects

- Failure to start or appropriately respond to social interactions

2- Deficits in nonverbal communicative behaviors used for social interaction

- Poorly integrated verbal and nonverbal communication

- Abnormal eye contact

- Abnormal body language, facial expressions, and nonverbal communication

- Abnormalities in understanding and use of gestures

3- Deficits in developing, sustaining, and understanding relationships

- Failure to adjust behavior to suit different social contexts

- Absence of interest in peers

- Difficulties in making friends

**Illustrative Examples of Restricted and Repetitive Behavior, Interests, and Activities**

1- Stereotyped and repetitive behaviors

- Patterns of restricted and repetitive motor movements such as hand or finger flapping, toe walking

- Patterns of restricted and repetitive use of objects

- Patterns of restricted and repetitive speech

2- Insistence on sameness and inflexible adherence to routines

- Resistance to change routines such as eating particular foods, repetitive questioning about a particular topic

- Ritualized patterns of verbal or nonverbal behavior

3- Highly restricted interests that are unusual and abnormal in intensity or focus

4- Atypical sensory behaviors, hyperreactivity or hyporeactivity to sensory input, unusual interest in sensory aspects of the environment

There are specific symptoms that are mainly relevant to specific age groups or certain subpopulations of individuals with ASD. For instance, lack of orientation to name or lack of following a pointing gesture are reliable indicators of autism in toddlers and preschool children but not in older children and adults. Also, not having close friends is not a developmentally appropriate factor for a toddler, and it is a more problematic factor for adults.

Identifying the various clinical situations associated with ASD at different ages of life allows clinicians to provide appropriate screening, referral, diagnosis, and treatment. Here, we discuss several situations at different ages of life in patients with ASD-AS, which are commonly encountered by practitioners in the clinical setting.

**Children and Adolescents**

Social isolation and bullying at school:

Friendship is an essential social experience for children. It provides them with a context in which they can practice and develop the social skills required for friendship, including good social adaptability, understanding of emotions, empathy, and concern for others. Children with ASD-AS have difficulties with these social skills and therefore struggle to build friendships. However, research has shown that they are interested in having a relationship, ask themselves the reason for their loneliness, and identify the feeling of loneliness at an early stage. Children with ASD-AS have difficulty in interpreting details of nonverbal language, gestures, and facial expressions, do not fully understand humor and metaphors, have limited and sometimes unusual interests, and may speak with an unnatural intonation. All these challenges and the lack of social skills cause them to be at higher risk of interpersonal difficulties and lead them to be a target of mockery by their peers. More than 40% of children with ASD have been victims of bullying and intimidation at school. It is not uncommon to see individuals with AS who dropped out of school due to developing significant anxiety and depressive symptoms as a result of their interpersonal difficulties.

Limited fields of interest, awkwardness, and clumsiness:

Some children with ASD-AS play repetitive and stereotypical games with no creativity. They can play the game of “pretending” for days. They are preoccupied with limited interests that are unusual or abnormal by their intensity or focus. Children with ASD-AS are often interested in certain objects such as technical train data, mechanics, space, history, music, or meteorology, and they are good at memorization. Motor coordination disorders and unusual gait and posture are common; thus, they have little interest in sports, and they experience difficulties when performing activities such as drawing, writing, or fastening shirt buttons.

ADHD and Autism:

Attention deficit disorder with or without hyperactivity disorder (ADHD) is the most frequent mental disorder in children and adolescents. Studies have shown several symptoms overlap in ADHD and AS; therefore, ASD-AS should be sought when diagnosing ADHD with serious interpersonal difficulties. High distractibility in ADHD and lack of mental flexibility in ASD-AS may present as a decrease in attention level. Besides, both conditions may lead to interpersonal difficulties, and both may show an extraordinary ability to engage their interests profoundly.

Heterogeneous neurocognitive profile:

The neurocognitive profile of children with AS has been very heterogeneous, although the verbal intelligence quotient (IQ) is generally higher than the performance IQ. Despite popular belief, not all patients with Asperger's are geniuses, and there is significant inter-individual variability in most cognitive tasks. It appears that ASD-AS subjects have deficits in their executive functions and in tasks that require comprehensive treatment, while their strength is in the areas of fluid intelligence and problem-solving.

Sensory and perceptual characteristics:

More than 90% of autistic subjects experience atypical sensory perceptions that could involve all senses and may lead to serious anxiety. Hypersensitivity is a common observation that may present with food selectivity, or overreaction to a noisy environment, certain types of contacts, or body odor. Hyposensitivity symptoms such as lower pain thresholds, indifference to temperature, or circular movements could also be present.

**Adults**

Delayed diagnosis:

It is not uncommon for ASD-AS to be diagnosed in adulthood. This delay in diagnosis is more likely due to the fact that this subpopulation of ASD can fairly compensate for their social difficulties. Individuals with ASD-AS have average or superior intelligence, which can lead them to be able to mask their deficits in social interaction and communication skills to a certain extent. However, it is difficult to maintain these compensatory strategies as the social environment becomes increasingly complicated. Also, this mood of function eventually fails due to their inflexibility of behavior and difficulties in coping with changes such as living in a couple or starting a professional activity, causing them to be at risk of anxiety and depression. Warning signs in these individuals lack specificity and are mostly related to social interactions.

Potential for misdiagnosis as schizophrenia:

The accurate distinction between schizophrenia and AS is not always easy. Misdiagnosing Asperger syndrome as schizophrenia may prevent effective therapy and cause serious problems. Impaired social communication and interaction, limited interests, and delusions of persecution apparently are clinical features that can be presented in both conditions. The apparent lack of affect, visual contact, and facial expressiveness in individuals with AS can be mistaken for the discordance of schizophrenia. Also, the alteration of social interactions may be difficult to differentiate with the withdrawal period in schizophrenia subjects. Besides, impaired communication skills in AS may appear similar to the thought disorder, which is a feature of schizophrenia. However, there are clinical features that are more characteristic of AS, such as younger age at onset, repetitive behaviors, impaired pragmatic language, lack of imagination, oddities of intonation, and willingness for a conversation about their favorite subject. It is also important to note that patients with ASD-AS may display transient psychotic episodes, consisting of depersonalization, derealization, and hallucinatory experiences.

Decrease in symptoms into adulthood:

Studies have found that ASD symptoms will decrease into adulthood for most individuals with ASD. This decrease in symptoms tends to be more significant in those with average or superior intelligence, compare with individuals who have ASD and intellectual disability. Social difficulties, perceptual deficits, struggles with nonverbal communication, and in particular, restricted and repetitive behaviors have been reported to be stable over time.

Sexuality:

Regarding sexuality, individuals with ASD-AS do not appear to be significantly different from the general population. Autistic people have sexual and romantic desires, and they pursue romantic relationships. However, they lack the required social skills, and their attitude may be interpreted as being bizarre or disturbing. Failure to understand the appropriateness of behaviors in different social situations may lead to inappropriate public behaviors such as unclothing, masturbating, awkward sexual conversation, or improper attempts at seduction, which can be interpreted as harassment by others. Their repetitive and restricted behaviors, as well as sensory fascinations, may also disturb their sexual development; thereby, they may develop obsessions with sexual references, abnormal sexual fears, or compulsive masturbation with an object in a manner similar to fetishism.

Professional scope:

Lack of skills that are required to use language in context successfully (i.e., impaired pragmatic language) may cause ASD-AS subjects to communicate very formalized, direct, and without attempting to avoid offending others. This weakness can cause problems in the workplace, particularly in certain occupations such as work positions that need teamwork. Also, their limited cognitive flexibility may cause them to follow certain rituals in a very strict manner, and any interruption of these rituals may generate anxiety. For instance, they may place their items in a certain place on their desk or choose to start and finish their working day at a precise time. Even with a university degree, it can be difficult to find the first job due to the difficulties that they may experience in job interviews. They may have difficulty in stating their skills and behaving in a disconcerting manner. However, they may also have many valuable potentials, such as punctuality, honesty, creativity, and logical reasoning abilities.