Most of the post-surgery extubations happen on the table and if stridor occurs, it needs to be differentiated from laryngospasm, angioedema, and rare possibility of anaphylaxis. Certain surgical interventions and surgery positions also increase the risk of post-intubation laryngeal edema, which might contribute significantly to the development of post-extubation stridor.

After aggressive anti-edema measures, as mentioned above, the patient may have to be reintubated after closely observing up to an hour. The same scenario could happen in ICU where the high-risk patients undergo a bedside CLT and receive prophylactic steroids in case of a negative leak test. The risk of post-extubation stridor is high especially if the patient has been intubated for more than 36 hours, with other risk factors being intubated state for more than 6 days, female gender, large for size endotracheal tubes, traumatic intubation, lack of muscle relaxant used during intubation and reintubation after unplanned extubation.

A fibreoptic evaluation may be required to assess the degree of laryngeal and tracheal abnormalities in patients who do not improve the cuff leak volume after treatment for 24 to 48 hours with steroids. The endoscopic evaluation would provide a direct view of laryngotracheal areas. Elective tracheostomy may have to be considered if the fibreoptic evaluation reveals grossly and persistently oedematous laryngeal area or shows irreversible or slowly reversible injuries significantly obstructing the upper airway.