Infected hosts may go on for months or years without showing any signs or symptoms of infection; some patients have persistent cysts for years without noticing, others cysts may rupture spontaneously or due to trauma and disappear entirely.

If a cyst continues growing, patients may exhibit symptoms gradually due to the cyst exerting pressure on surrounding tissue. Sudden signs and symptoms are more likely due to rupture rather than the growth of the cyst.

Rupture of the cyst can induce an IgE mediated hypersensitivity reaction in patients, presenting as hives, mucous membrane swelling, and flushing. The reaction can be life-threatening.

Ruptured or leaking cysts can release protoscolices into the peritoneum causing secondary hydatidosis.

The nature of signs and symptoms varies depending on the site of the cyst, which is most common in the liver (greater than 65% in pastoral strains) and lungs (25%) but can affect other sites including bones, spleen, central nervous system, and the heart. Most primary infections consist of one cyst, but 20 to 40% of patients display multiple organ involvement.

While infections can be acquired in childhood, most causes of hydatidosis present later in life due to the slow growing nature of cysts. However, cysts in the brain or eye can cause symptoms early on and thus mostly present in childhood.

Common findings in liver hydatidosis include abdominal pain, decreased appetite, hepatomegaly, a palpable mass, abdominal distention.

Common findings in lung hydatidosis include chronic cough, chest pain, and shortness of breath.

During the history, it's important to look for risk factors of echinococcosis, especially contact with canines and cattle.