**Imaging**

Cross-sectional imaging with contrast-enhanced CT or MRI should be done for diagnostic and treatment planning purposes. Such imaging can determine whether there is anatomy or pathology that may prevent TACE from being safe or effective, such as whether the main portal vein is thrombosed.

**Biopsy**

No biopsy is necessary if:

- A tumor meets the criteria for HCC based on its enhancement pattern on multi-phase CT or MRI in a patient with risk factors for developing HCC or

- There is clear evidence of an extra-hepatic primary tumor on imaging along with tumors in the liver that have behaved on contrast-enhanced imaging as expected for metastases.

The NCCN suggests biopsy consideration before treatment in the following presentations:

- A liver lesion is suspicious for malignancy but does not meet imaging criteria for HCC (such as defined by the American College of Radiology Liver Reporting and Data System).

- A liver lesion meets imaging criteria for HCC but the patient:

- Is not considered to have any risk factors for HCC, such as cirrhosis or chronic hepatitis,

- Has risk factors for cholangiocarcinoma instead of HCC, such as elevated serum CA 19-9 or CEA level, or

- Is part of a research trial in which histologic grading or molecular characterization is needed

**Prevention of Nontarget Embolization**

To avoid inadvertently performing non-target chemoembolization, radiologists often will use platinum coils to embolize arteries near the artery planned for delivering chemotherapy (as discussed in the anatomy section above). Although it is not mandatory, some radiologists have patients undergo a "planning" arteriogram before the arteriogram for delivery of chemotherapy, at which time such coils would be placed.

**Anesthesia**

TACE typically is performed using conscious sedation. Determination of periprocedural anesthesia risk is site dependent. Many hospitals require physicians to assess the patient using the American Society of Anesthesiology (ASA) physical classification system and a Mallampati score. If the patient is ASA class 4 or higher and/or has any other anesthetic risk factors, such as a high-risk airway, then some institutions and authors recommend that the patient should undergo consultation with an anesthesiologist and/or medical specialist, such as a cardiologist, to address the pertinent risk factors.

**Hydration**

Many radiologists administer normal intravenous saline intravenously for hydration.

**Infection Prevention**

Because chemoembolization creates a bed of necrotic tissue, and such tissue may form an abscess, nearly all radiologists prescribe prophylactic antibiotics at the time of the procedure. Regimens should cover gram-positive cocci, gram-negative rods, and in the case of patients without an intact sphincter of Oddi from previous surgery, sphincterotomy or biliary drainage, anaerobes. This is discussed in more detail by the Society of Interventional Radiology (SIR) guidelines

**Bleeding Prevention**

Parameters for prevention of bleeding complications (lab tests and medication withdrawal) are specified by the Society of Interventional Radiology 2013 guidelines.

**Other Symptom Control**

In patients being treated for carcinoid tumors, pre-procedure or intra-procedure administration of octreotide may prevent or diminish the side effects of serotonin release ("carcinoid crisis").

Other pre-procedure medications may include antiemetics and steroids. However, some radiologists only administer this post-procedure as routine or on an as-needed basis.