**Compressive Disorders**

Entrapment syndromes of the fibular nerve at various locations along its anatomical pathway can lead to compressive neuropathy. Of these, common fibular neuropathy at the fibular head is the most common mononeuropathy affecting the leg.

Sciatic nerve compression between the two heads of the piriformis muscle leading to foot drop has been reported.

Compression palsies in the ICUs due to protracted bed rest have been known to occur. Approximately 10% of patients that stay in the ICU for a period longer than four weeks are expected to develop paresis of the fibular nerve. Critical illness polyneuropathy involving multiple motor and sensory nerves can also present with foot drop.

Lumbar radiculopathy is also a common cause of foot drop. L5 radiculopathy is the most common lumbar radiculopathy and typically results from lumbar disc herniation or spondylitis in the spine.

Extraforaminal compression of the L5 nerve from disc herniations and bony (osteophytes or sacral ala) or ligamentous (sacroiliac ligament and lumbosacral band) compression is known to occur.

**Traumatic Injuries**

Traumatic injuries often occur associated with orthopedic injuries as knee dislocations, fractures, blunt trauma, and musculoskeletal injuries. Sciatic neuropathy most commonly results from a traumatic injury of the hip or secondary to surgery. Sciatic neuropathy is the second most common mononeuropathy of the lower extremity and typically presents with foot drop.

A less common cause is lumbosacral plexopathies, resulting from traumatic injury, a complication of abdominal or pelvic surgery, or a complication of neoplasm or radiation therapy.

**Neurologic Disorders**

ALS (Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis), also known as****motor neuron disease (MND) or Lou Gehrig disease is a neurodegenerative disease manifested by the death of motor neurons in the anterior horn cells leading to muscle weakness, difficulty speaking and swallowing. Initial presentation can be a painless foot drop.

Cerebrovascular disease (CVA) can present as hemiplegia. Foot drop is a part of this presentation. Other signs of upper motor neuron involvement, as increased muscle tone, hyperreflexia, and circumduction of the lower extremity during ambulation, are also seen. Depending on the location of ischemia, aphasia can be present.

Mononeuritis multiplex is defined as the involvement of one or more sensory and peripheral motor nerves. It is usually painful and asymmetrical. It can be associated with AIDS, leprosy, hepatitis, granulomatis with polyangiitis (Wegener granulomatosis), and rheumatoid arthritis. Loss of sensation and movement may be associated with dysfunction of specific nerves. The sciatic nerve is one of the commonly affected nerves in this condition. Vasculitis of small epineuria arteries leads to damage to the axons disrupting nerve conduction and eventually leading to muscle weakness.

Acute inflammatory demyelinating polyneuropathy (AIDP), also called Guillain-Barré syndrome, is an autoimmune process in which progressive motor weakness, sensory loss, and areflexia are characteristic presentations. Sensory symptoms often precede motor weakness. Autonomic dysfunction is a common accompaniment to this condition. Damage to the myelin sheath leads to segmental demyelination.  A hallmark of AIDP is the slowing of nerve conduction velocities and conduction block. Foot drop can be part of the clinical presentation.

Charcot–Marie Tooth (CMT) is a primary congenital demyelinating peripheral neuropathy and is one of the most common inherited neuropathy. It affects both motor and sensory nerves. The incidence is 1 in 25000. One of the main symptoms is foot drop and wasting of the lower leg muscles, giving a typical “stork leg” appearance.

Somatization disorder and conversion reaction are not uncommon etiologies to foot drop. In the event of an otherwise unremarkable workup, psychiatric evaluation should be considered. It should be noted that both the needle EMG and nerve conduction portions of the electrodiagnostic medicine study will appear normal in cases of poor or no effort for ankle dorsiflexion or other motor groups.