**Compartments of the Foot**

The foot muscles are divided into nine compartments encompassed by fascia, although past studies on the exact divisions of the foot have varied considerably.

The medial compartment contains the abductor hallucis, flexor hallicus brevis, and flexor hallucis longus tendon. The lateral compartment contains the abductor digiti minimi and the flexor digiti minimi. The superficial central compartment contains the flexor digitorum brevis, the four lumbricals, and the flexor digitorum longus tendons. The deep central (calcaneal) compartment, which communicates with the deep posterior compartment of the lower leg, contains the quadratus plantae and the posterior tibial neurovascular bundle. The adductor compartment contains the adductor hallucis muscle.

There are four interosseous compartments; the first is between the first and second metatarsals and includes the first dorsal interosseous muscle. The second is between the second and third metatarsal and includes both the dorsal and plantar interosseous muscles. The two compartments between the third and fourth, as well as the fourth and fifth metatarsals, also include the dorsal and plantar interosseous muscles.

The muscles are perhaps more easily described as either extrinsic (originating outside the foot) or intrinsic (originating within the foot).

**Extrinsic Muscles of the Foot**

Peroneus Longus

- The peroneus longus is one of the three muscles that span the lateral leg - peroneus may also be interchanged with fibular, referring to the lateral bone of the lower leg running deep to the peroneal muscles.

- Origin: The peroneus longus muscle originates on the head of the fibula and the upper half of the fibular shaft. This muscle crosses the ankle joint, courses deep into the foot, and passes into a groove of the cuboid bone.

- Insertion: The peroneus longus muscle inserts on the posterolateral aspect of the medial cuneiform bone and the lateral portion of the base of the first metatarsal.

- Action: The peroneus longus acts to evert the foot, plantarflex the ankle, and add support to the transverse arch of the foot.

- Blood Supply: Anterior tibial artery

- Innervation: Superficial peroneal nerve

Peroneus Brevis

- The peroneus brevis is another of the three muscles spanning the lateral leg and may also be called fibularis brevis, referring to the fibula.

- Origin: The peroneus brevis originates on the inferior two-thirds of the lateral fibula and ultimately courses posteriorly to the lateral malleolus of the fibula.

- Insertion: The peroneus brevis inserts on the styloid process of the fifth metatarsal.

- Action: The primary action of the peroneus brevis is eversion of the foot and plantarflexion of the ankle.

- Blood Supply: Peroneal artery

- Innervation: Superficial peroneal nerve

Peroneus Tertius

- The peroneus tertius is the third and final muscle of the lateral peroneus or fibular muscles.

- Origin: The peroneus tertius originates from the middle fibular shaft.

- Insertion: The peroneus tertius inserts on the dorsal surface of the fifth metatarsal.

- Action: The primary action of the peroneus tertius is dorsiflexion, eversion, and abduction of the foot.

- Blood Supply: Anterior tibial artery

- Innervation: Deep peroneal nerve

Anterior Tibialis

- The anterior tibialis is the most prominent muscle in the anterior leg and is often visible during dorsiflexion of the foot.

- Origin: The anterior tibialis originates from the lateral condyle of the tibia and the proximal half to two-thirds of the tibial shaft.

- Insertion: Insertion of the anterior tibialis occurs after passing under the extensor retinaculum and is on the medial and plantar surfaces of the medial cuneiform and base of the first metatarsal.

- Action: The primary action of the anterior tibialis is dorsiflexion of the ankle and inversion of the hindfoot.

- Blood Supply: Anterior tibial artery

- Innervation: Deep peroneal nerve

Posterior Tibialis

- Origin: The posterior tibialis originates from the superior two-thirds of the medial posterior surface of the tibia.

- Insertion: The tendon of the posterior tibialis courses distally, bifurcating at the calcaneonavicular ligament, to insert on the tuberosity of the navicular bone (superficial slip) and the plantar surfaces of the second, third, and fourth metatarsals (deep slip).

- Action: The posterior tibialis is the primary inverter of the foot but also adducts, plantar flexes, and aids in supination of the foot.

- Blood Supply: Sural, peroneal, and posterior tibial arteries

- Innervation: Tibial nerve

Extensor Digitorum Longus

- Origin: The extensor digitorum longus originates from the lateral tibial condyle and continues distally to split into four tendons after the level of the extensor retinaculum.

- Insertion: The tendons insert on the dorsum of the middle and distal phalanges.

- Action: The primary action of the extensor digitorum longus is extension of the second through fifth digits; the muscle assists with dorsiflexion of the ankle.

- Blood Supply: Anterior tibial artery

- Innervation: Deep peroneal nerve

Flexor Digitorum Longus

- Origin: The flexor digitorum longus originates from the posterior surface of the tibia distal to the soleal line.

- Insertion: The muscle continues distally to split into four individual tendons, which insert on the plantar surfaces of the bases of the second through fifth distal phalanges.

- Action: The primary action is flexion of digits two through five; the muscle may aid in plantar flexion of the ankle.

- Blood Supply: Posterior tibial artery

- Innervation: Tibial nerve

Flexor Hallucis Longus

- Origin: The flexor hallucis longus originates from the inferior two-thirds of the posterior fibula.

- Insertion: The muscles insert on the plantar surface of the base of the distal phalanx of the great toe.

- Action: The primary action of the muscle is flexion of the great toe, but it may minimally supinate and plantarflex the ankle.

- Blood Supply: Peroneal and posterior tibial artery

- Innervation: Tibial nerve

Gastrocnemius

- The gastrocnemius is the most superficial calf muscle.

- Origin: The gastrocnemius muscle has two heads, one of which originates from each femoral condyle.

- Insertion: The gastrocnemius merges with the soleus to form the thick Achilles tendon, which inserts on the calcaneus.

- Action: The action of the gastrocnemius is plantarflexion of the ankle.

- Blood Supply: Sural branch of the popliteal artery

- Innervation: Tibial nerve

Soleus

- The soleus is the deep muscle of the posterior leg and makes up the bulk of the calf.

- Origin: The soleus originates from the upper quarter of the posterior fibula and the middle third of the posterior tibial shaft.

- Insertion: The soleus eventually joins the gastrocnemius to become the Achilles tendon and inserts into the calcaneus.

- Action: The action of the soleus is plantarflexion of the ankle.

- Blood Supply: Posterior tibial, peroneal, and sural arteries

- Innervation: Tibial nerve

**Dorsal intrinsic Muscles of the Foot**

Extensor Digitorum Brevis

- Origin: The extensor digitorum brevis originates from the dorsal surface of the calcaneus.

- Insertion: The muscles insert on the base of the proximal phalanx of digits two through four.

- Action: The extensor digitorum brevis acts to extend the second, third, and fourth digits.

- Blood Supply: Dorsalis pedis

- Innervation: Deep peroneal nerve

Dorsal Interosseous

- The three dorsal interossei muscles exist between digits two through five - the two adjacent muscles form a central tendon and act to abduct the metatarsal-phalangeal joints. Innervation comes from the lateral plantar nerve.

Extensor Hallucis Brevis

- Origin: The extensor hallucis brevis originates from the dorsal surface of the calcaneus.

- Insertion: The muscle inserts at the base of the proximal phalanx of the great toe.

- Action: The extensor hallicus brevis extends the great toe.

- Blood Supply: Dorsalis pedis

- Innervation: Deep peroneal nerve

**Plantar intrinsic Muscles of the Foot**

**1st Layer**

Abductor Hallucis

- Origin: Calcaneal tuberosity

- Insertion: Base of the great toe and the proximal phalanx

- Action: Abduction of the great toe

- Blood Supply: Medial plantar artery

- Innervation: Medial plantar nerve

Flexor Digitorum Brevis

- Origin: Calcaneal tuberosity

- Insertion: The middle phalanx of digits two through five

- Action: Flexion of the second through fifth digits

- Blood Supply: Medial plantar artery

- Innervation: Medial plantar nerve

Abductor Digiti Minimi

- Origin: Calcaneal tuberosity

- Insertion: Base of the fifth metatarsal

- Action: Abduction of the fifth digit

- Blood Supply: Lateral plantar artery

- Innervation: Lateral plantar nerve

**2nd Layer**

Quadratus Plantae

- Origin: Plantar surface of the calcaneus

- Insertion: Flexor digitorum longus tendon

- Action: Aids in flexion of the distal phalanges

- Blood Supply: Lateral plantar artery

- Innervation: Lateral plantar nerve

Lumbricals

- There are four muscles referred to as lumbricals in the foot.

- Origin: Flexor digitorum longus tendon

- Insertion: Extensor digitorum longus tendon

- Action: Flexion of the metatarsophalangeal joints and extension of the interphalangeal joints

- Blood Supply: Medial and lateral plantar arteries

- Innervation: Medial and lateral plantar nerve

**3rd Layer**

Flexor Hallucis Brevis

- Origin: The cuboid and the lateral cuneiform

- Insertion: Proximal phalanx of the great toe, by two tendons at the medial and lateral surfaces

- Action: Flexion of the great toe

- Blood Supply: Medial plantar artery

- Innervation: Medial plantar nerve

Oblique and Transverse Head of Adductor Hallucis

- The adductor hallucis has two heads, an oblique hea, and a transverse head.

- Origin: The oblique head originates at the proximal ends of the metatarsals two through four, and the transverse head originates via MTP ligaments of digits three through five

- Insertion: inserts at the proximal phalanx of the great toe

- Action: The primary action is to adduction of the great toe

- Blood Supply: First plantar metatarsal artery

- Innervation: Deep branch of lateral plantar

Flexor Digiti Minimi Brevis

- Origin: Base of the fifth metatarsal

- Insertion: Proximal phalanx of the fifth metatarsal

- Action: The primary action is flexion of the fifth digit

- Blood Supply: Lateral Plantar artery

- Innervation: Lateral plantar nerve

**4th Layer**

Plantar Interosseous

- The are three plantar interossei

- Origin: Medial aspect of the individual metatarsals of digits three through five

- Insertion: The proximal phalanges of digits three through five

- Action: The primary action of the plantar interossei is adduction and abduction of the digits. They also assist the lumbricals in the extension of the interphalangeal joints.

- Blood Supply: Plantar metatarsal artery

- Innervation: Lateral plantar nerve