Rome IV criteria establish functional constipation when 2 or more of the following are present for at least one month for infants and children up to 4 years. For children older than 4 years of age, symptoms should last for at least 2 months:

- Two or fewer bowel movements per week

- At least one episode of fecal incontinence per week after the child has acquired complete bowel control

- History of extensive fecal retention or withholding behavior by the child

- Having hard and painful stools

- Large fecal mass on digital rectal examination

- Large in diameter of stools that cause rectal outlet obstruction

Careful history and examination are usually sufficient to make a diagnosis. A thorough history is recommended as part of a complete evaluation of a child with constipation. However, the answer to which aspects of the clinical history are most pertinent are not defined. Paramount information includes the time after the birth of the first bowel movement, the period the condition has been present, the incidence of bowel movements, consistency and the size of the stools, whether defecation is painful, whether blood is present on stool or toilet paper, and if defecation is associated with abdominal pain. Also, is important to inquire about soiling, which can be mistaken for diarrhea in some parents. Medications can be associated with constipation, such as opiates, sucralfate, antacids, among others. A psychosocial history is important to evaluate the family structure, the number of members living at home and child relationship to them, interaction with his peers and the possibility of abuse.

The physical exam should include an assessment of “alarm” signs and symptoms (in other words, fever, abdominal distention, anorexia, nausea, vomiting, weight loss, or poor weight gain). Bloody diarrhea in an infant with constipation could be an indication of a diagnosis such as Hirschsprung disease. On abdominal examination, distention or a palpable “mass” may be appreciated in the lower abdomen. A rectal exam should be performed to identify the presence of impacted stool or intrarectal mass. Visual and digital anal inspection to ensure normal size and positioning of the anal opening and to assess for rectal prolapse.