Most of the care of abusive head trauma is supportive. Vital signs should be monitored. Intubation and mechanical ventilation may be required. Intracranial pressure, if present, should be monitored and treated. If there is a subdural hematoma, surgical evacuation should be considered. The goal of therapy is to maintain low intracranial pressure while maintaining acceptable blood pressure, ensuring adequate cerebral perfusion pressure (CPP).

**First-Tier Therapy**

The initial management of a child with a traumatic brain injury is maintaining the patient’s airway, breathing, and circulation. Children with no alterations of consciousness and normal blood pressure may be managed with supportive care. Hypotension is treated with fluid boluses. Those with a Glasgow coma score of less than 9, marked respiratory distress, or hemodynamic instability may require advanced airway management to enhance oxygenation and ventilation and prevent aspiration.

Cervical spine immobilization must be maintained during advanced airway procedures. Consider the immediate brain injury resulting from the initial traumatic forces equally important to the two forms of secondary brain injury that may occur. The first form of secondary brain injury includes coagulopathy, hypoxemia, hypotension, intracranial hypertension, hypercarbia, hyperglycemia or hypoglycemia, electrolyte abnormalities, enlarging hematomas, seizures, and hyperthermia. The acute management of severe head injury is to ameliorate those circumstances that lead to secondary brain injury. Secondary brain injury is a consequence of an endogenous cascade of cellular and biochemical events that occur within minutes in the brain and continues for months after the primary brain injury that lead to ongoing traumatic axonal injury (TAI) and neuronal cell damage and, ultimately, neuronal cell death. The following conditions can exacerbate secondary brain injury:

- Coagulopathy

- Elevated intracranial pressure resulting in intracranial hypertension

- Electrolyte abnormalities

- Enlarging hematomas

- Hypoxemia

- Hypotension

- Elevated intracranial pressure leading to intracranial hypertension

- Hypercarbia or hypocarbia

- Hyperglycemia or hypoglycemia

- Hyperthermia

- Seizures

Oxygenation is monitored using pulse oximetry, with supplemental oxygen administered to ensure adequate oxygenation. For initial monitoring of traumatic brain injury ventilation, capnography is recommended to monitor end-tidal carbon dioxide to avoid excessive hyperventilation and hypocapnia, leading to vasoconstriction and decreased cerebral perfusion. Intracranial pressure management is crucial to prevent secondary brain injury. Raising the patient's head to 30 degrees optimizes cerebral perfusion pressure and decreases intracranial pressure by improving venous drainage without affecting cerebral blood flow.

**Second-Tier Therapy**

Traumatic brain injury can cause intracranial hypertension. These patients require sedation with barbiturates, which lowers intracranial pressure by decreasing cerebral metabolism, decreasing cerebral blood flow.

**Third-Tier Therapy**

- Decompressive craniectomy for signs of herniation, neurologic deterioration, or those not responding to prior therapy.

- This surgical procedure involves removing part of the skull allowing for swelling to occur while limiting secondary injury.