Several techniques are well described for the placement of a suprapubic catheter. Two categories exist; these are open technique and percutaneous technique. Variations of each of these exist, and many are hybrid techniques.

Open cystotomy involves a small, typically transverse incision roughly 2 fingerbreadths above the pubic symphysis. The bladder ideally is filled prior, this aids in the identification of the bladder. The rectus fascia is opened allowing access into the preperitoneal space. The bladder is identified, and dissolvable stay stitches are placed on either side of the intended cystotomy. A small cystotomy is then made, and the drainage tube is placed. The tube is secured to the bladder with a dissolvable purse-string stitch. The facial layers and skin are then closed around the tube which is finally secured to the skin with a temporary stitch.

The Percutaneous Seldinger technique is also fairly common. Distention of the urinary bladder is imperative for this approach. This can be done physiologically (urinary retention) or with the aid of a cystoscope. Cystoscopic examination allows direct visualization of the puncture needle but is not required. In an area, roughly 2 fingerbreadths above the pubis, a large bore needle is inserted until urine returns. Sterile saline can be added to the bladder at this point if necessary. X-ray guidance is also optional as contrast can be added to better visualize the urinary bladder. A guide wire is then advanced through the needle into the urinary bladder. (Note: An 0.035" guidewire will comfortably fit in an 18 gauge or larger bore needle.) This tract is then dilated either mechanically with dilators or with balloon dilators to accommodate a pull away sheath. The suprapubic catheter is then passed into the bladder via the access sheath which is removed after the catheter balloon is inflated. The catheter is then secured. Cystoscopic confirmation of placement is recommended when feasible.

The curved Lowsley prostatic retractor can be utilized for a modified open approach. This specialized instrument is passed per the urethra into the urinary bladder. Urethral access to the bladder is necessary for this technique to be used. Upward pressure is then applied bringing the curved instrument tip and bladder dome close to the abdominal wall. Except in very obese individuals, the tip of the Lowsley retractor is palpable through the skin of the lower abdomen. A suprapubic cut down is then performed exposing the retractor tip. The urinary catheter is then attached to the Lowsley prostatic retractor which is pulled back into the bladder taking the catheter tip with it. The balloon on the suprapubic tube is inflated and the catheter is released from the Lowsley by twisting open its jaws.  The jaws are then closed and the Lowsley is removed. Occasionally, the tip of the catheter will be in the bladder but the balloon will be inflated just outside. For this reason, a cystoscopy is recommended after placement to be absolutely certain of proper positioning.

Trocar kits are also available for direct puncture into the urinary bladder. These are used less frequently as they can have an increased risk of injury to adjacent organs. Several commercially available kits are available for the percutaneous technique which tends to be the most common approach.