In the clinical trials, teprotumumab was given as an intravenous infusion with an initial dose of 10 mg/kg (over 90 minutes) followed by 20 mg/kg (over 90 minutes for infusion 2 and over 60 minutes for infusions 3 to 8), at a 3-week interval.

No dose-finding studies have been performed for teprotumumab in the setting of thyroid eye disease. Teprotumumab pharmacokinetics is linear in patients with thyroid orbitopathy with low systemic clearance and distribution volume, as well as a long elimination half-life.

**Reconstitution and Dosage Preparation**

Each vial contains 500 mg of teprotumumab. Using an aseptic technique, reconstitute the dose with 10mL of sterile water for injection. Ensure the stream of diluent is not directed onto the lyophilized powder, and gently swirl the solution until the powder is dissolved. The reconstituted solution has a volume of 10.5 mL, and the final concentration is 47.6 mg/mL. The reconstituted teprotumumab solution must be further diluted in 0.9% sodium chloride prior to infusion. Withdraw the required volume from the reconstituted vial based on the patient’s weight and transfer it into an intravenous bag to a total volume of 100 mL (for less than 1800 mg dose) or 250 mL (for 1800 mg or greater).

The reconstituted teprotumumab or the diluted solution in the intravenous bag does not contain preservatives and, therefore, must be used within 4 hours at room temperature 20 to 25 degrees or up to 48 hours under refrigerated conditions 2 to 8 degrees, protected from light. If refrigerated, allow the diluted solution to reach room temperature before infusion.

Reconstituted teprotumumab is either a colorless or slightly brown, clear solution. Discard the drug solution if there is any particulate matter or if the discoloration is observed.