The gracilis obtains its vascular supply from the medial circumflex femoral artery, superficial femoral artery, deep femoral artery, descending genicular artery, and the anterior branch of the obturator artery. The anterior division of the internal iliac artery, the inferior epigastric artery, or the external iliac artery can give off the obturator artery, which traverses the ilioischial line, enters the obturator foramen, and splits into the anterior and posterior branch of the obturator nerve as it exits the obturator foramen.

The terms major and minor pedicles are utilized when describing the neurovascular supply of the gracilis muscle. Major pedicles are areas where one artery (the major artery), two veins (venae comitantes), and the anterior branch of the obturator nerve enter the muscle, while minor pedicles are where one artery and two vena comitantes enter the muscle. The medial circumflex femoral artery, deep femoral artery, and the anterior branch of the obturator artery are the arteries that may be present in major pedicles.

- **Type I (Dichotomous):**The major artery splits into a proximal and distal branch. The proximal branch runs proximally from the pedicle insertion and branches to supply the proximal gracilis. The distal branch progresses distally in the muscle and branches into two branches, each of which branches again into two additional branches.

- **Type II (Array):**The major artery enters the gracilis and runs diagonally (slightly towards the distal end) in an anterior-to-posterior direction, from which arrays of ascending and descending branches arise to supply the gracilis.

- **Type III (Dual Pedicle):**In patients with two major pedicles, both pedicles are present on the proximal anterior aspect of the gracilis. However, they do not have any connections between the major arteries or their branches. The major artery of one pedicle and its branches supply the proximal gracilis, and the major artery of the other pedicle and its branches supply the distal gracilis.

The major artery typically supplies the posterior (deep) portion of the muscle, while the other branches supply the anterior (superficial) portions of the gracilis.

The minor pedicle artery can be the superior femoral artery, the deep femoral artery, or the descending genicular artery. Most of the minor pedicles are distal to the major pedicle. The artery of minor pedicles enters the gracilis anteriorly and divides into ascending and descending branches within the muscle. The ascending and descending branches form anastomoses with adjacent vessels, especially along the anterior aspect of the gracilis.

In the major and minor pedicles, each artery has two venae comitantes running alongside them, with one vein distal and anterior to the artery and one vein proximal and posterior to the artery. Each vein has a distinct draining region. Veins only anastomose with minor pedicle arteries outside the muscle, not within the muscle. When patients have two major pedicles, each major artery only has one vena comitans.