Since its inception, balloon sinuplasty has a reputation as a safe, yet effective minimally invasive procedure. The first large scale study by Bolger et al., deemed the CLEAR study, looked at adverse events within a 24 week follow up period after balloon sinuplasty. Out of the 115 patients included in the study, there were no serious adverse effects, defined as cerebrospinal fluid leaks (CSF), diplopia, significant intraoperative bleeding, or vision loss. There were a reported nine patients diagnosed with acute bacterial sinusitis during the immediate follow-up period, which researchers attributed to the procedure.

This same study population was then followed by Weiss et al. for two more years after the initial time frame. Sixty-five of the original 115 patients were enrolled due to two of the original surgical hospitals not participating. They noted no adverse events in the remaining participants in this study two years after the initial surgery.

A recent retrospective cohort study from 2018 explored the complication rates of 2851 patients who underwent BSP from 2011 to 2014. They noted an overall complication rate of 5.26%, which subdivided into the three following categories: orbital (2.95%), bleeding (2.03%), and skull base injury (0.35%). The orbital complications category included the following: fractures, hemorrhage, orbital cellulitis, epiphora, pain, and erythema around the eye, ophthalmoplegia, diplopia, and orbital disorder. Skull base complications consisted of CSF leak, pneumocephalus, skull base injury, and central nervous system complications. They also noted that the complications rates dropped from 2012 to 2014.

Other reported complications noted in the literature include acute bacterial sinusitis and tooth/facial numbness.