**Pre-radiotherapy Dental Management**

Pre-radiation dental treatment is done to prevent further infection and avoid the need for invasive procedures during and after radiotherapy. All efforts are directed at minimizing the risk and severity of head and neck radiotherapy complications: oral mucositis, oropharyngeal candidiasis, xerostomia, radiation-related caries, and osteoradionecrosis.

During this stage, patients must be informed of the importance of maintaining excellent oral hygiene and given careful oral care instructions and dietary advice. All carious lesions must be restored. Scaling, oral prophylaxis, and periodontal therapy should be performed. All sharp cusps and restorations should be smoothened.

If a definitive restoration cannot be placed due to time limitations, carious tissue must be removed and teeth restored with glass ionomer cement. Amalgam restorations should be avoided as they often backscatter and cause local mucosal irritation.

Performing pre-radiation dental extractions is a controversial topic since the evidence available is contradictory. Some studies have shown that pre-radiation extractions may increase the risk of osteoradionecrosis, and others show that the lack of pre-radiation extractions increases this risk too. If extractions are performed before the first cycle of radiation therapy, the ideal interval between extraction and the beginning of RT should be between ten days and three weeks so that complete soft tissue healing occurs.

The urgency to start RT is a critical dictating factor in whether to extract teeth or not.

Finally, obtaining dental impressions pre-radiation therapy for study models that will be useful for fabricating soft mouth guards or medicament-carrying trays is recommended.

**Management of Oral Complications During Radiotherapy**

**Oral Mucositis**

Uncomplicated oral mucositis is usually self-limiting, and palliative care tends to be sufficient.

Basic oral care includes enhancing the patient's oral hygiene (increasing frequency of tooth brushing, clean interproximally, using soft brushes, and replacing the toothbrush more often); rinsing the oral cavity with bland rinses like saline water or sodium bicarbonate every four hours; lubricating the oral mucosa using mousses or topical barrier gels, and avoiding irritants like tobacco or alcohol.

Foods that may unintendedly injure or irritate the oral mucosa must be avoided, such as hard, sharp, and spicy food.

MASCC/ISOO guidelines recommend topical morphine 0.2% for pain management.

**Xerostomia**

The aim of treatment is symptomatic relief, and management mainly includes patient education measures. Patients must be advised to frequently sip water, chew sugar-free gum, suck sugar-free candy, avoid caffeine, tobacco, alcohol, and hard or dry food, and increase fluid intake to prevent dehydration.

Pharmacological treatment is reserved for when local measures are ineffective. The systemic drugs pilocarpine and cevimeline are approved by the FDA for managing xerostomia.

**Oropharyngeal Candidiasis**

Oropharyngeal candidiasis is managed with topical treatment in milder cases, and systemic antifungals are indicated when disseminated candidiasis is suspected, the patient is at higher risk (myelosuppression, immunodeficiency) and upon failure of topical measures.

The first-line treatment includes topical fluconazole, miconazole, or nystatin. When systemic antifungals are indicated, fluconazole is the drug of choice. Generally, systemic therapy with fluconazole is more efficient than topical antifungals in patients with cancer.

**Management of Oral Complications After Radiotherapy**

**Radiation-related Caries**

Prevention, early detection, and treatment are vital. The risk of radiation caries should be explained to patients before, during, and after radiation therapy. Prevention regimens must be implemented immediately after the cancer diagnosis.

The importance of maintaining excellent oral hygiene must be emphasized, including gentle tooth brushing with a soft-bristled toothbrush twice or four times per day, interproximal cleaning, and fluoride supplementation.

The restoration of radiation caries poses a tremendous challenge to the dentist, mainly due to limited mouth opening, poor access and visibility, and changes in the tooth structure that alter the adhesive properties of dental materials.

When the pulp is involved, endodontic treatment is preferred over extraction.

Some authors suggest opening the tooth through the vestibular or incisal surfaces or decoronating teeth with gross caries to improve access.

**Osteoradionecrosis**

The mainstay of osteoradionecrosis treatment is prevention. Oral health should be stabilized before radiotherapy. All necessary dental and periodontal interventions must be performed, oral hygiene instructions carefully instructed, and oral health closely monitored before, during, and after radiation treatment. This is to avoid infection and the need for invasive procedures during and after radiation treatment.

If a tooth is deemed unrestorable, it is recommended that endodontic treatment is tried first. If extraction becomes unavoidable, general practitioners can extract teeth located outside the radiation field, or if in the radiation field, the dose must be less than 50 Gy.

The patient must be referred to a tertiary maxillofacial department for treatment if osteoradionecrosis is diagnosed.

The need for more radical surgical management depends on the severity of the condition.