A colonoscopy does require the use of particular instruments and a team of individuals knowledgable about the procedure. A colonoscopy suite will be equipped with high definition monitors, an insufflation device that produces positive pressure within the intestinal lumen, a suction device, several different grasping instruments, and equipment needed for providing irrigation to the intestine.

A colonoscope is a long cylindrical tube that is flexible, durable, able to be cleaned, and can be manipulated by a single individual. There are pediatric and adult-sized endoscopes. The length of the scope is roughly 160 cm - 180 cm with, a diameter of about 1.0 cm to 1.2 cm, depending on the manufacturer and scope size. At the end of the colonoscope, there are several vital working parts. These include anywhere from two to three lenses to help provide depth and clarity to images, two light-emitting diodes (LED) that allow for appropriate illumination of the colonic mucosa, and two small holes that function as working ports to pass irrigant and instruments through (Image 4).

The colonoscope has a handle that is intended to be held with the left hand, while the right hand manipulates and advances/withdraws the scope near the anus. At the base of the handle, depending on the brand of scope, there is a dial to increase or decrease the rigidity of the scope. This allows for maneuvering through difficult corners and applying various degrees of tension during push and pull of the colonoscope. Too much rigidity can increase patient discomfort and increase the risk of perforation, so caution should be used when increasing this too much during the colonoscopy. Also attached to the handle are several working instruments that allow for manipulation of the tip of the scope, adjusting image quality and controlling various videography options during the colonoscopy (record, freeze frame, picture, zoom, etc.). Two notable controls on the scope are the wheels attached to the right of the handle. These are intended to be manipulated with the thumb and index finger of the left hand, although the right hand can assist if needed. The larger wheel, located proximal to the handle allows for the upward and downward motion of the scope, while a smaller wheel located distal to the handle allows for left and right movements of the scope. These, together with the rotational aspect of the colonoscope, allows for a wide degree of motion and movement that allows for better visualization of the colon. The head of the scope without movement has a viewing angle of anywhere from 140 degrees to 170 degrees, depending on the scope model and manufacturer. This, in conjunction with the movement of the end of the scope, allows for a nearly 360-degree view in all directions. It is also important to note that proximal and distal to the two wheels are two switches that are used to lock the up/down, left/right features of the scope. It is important that before starting the procedure that these switches are released, and the tip of the scope moves freely before inserting it into the anus. Failing to do so can cause discomfort to the patient and damage the sensitive tissue to the anus. In addition, this will complicate the procedure and make maneuvering the scope through tight junctions and turns more difficult; this increases the risk of accidental perforation. Please see images 3-7 for visualization of a colonoscopy.

The two small holes, as previously mentioned, allow for the passing of equipment and irrigation. These working ports are crucial for the successful visualization and therapeutic effects of a colonoscopy. Long wires and instruments can be inserted into the working port. This includes graspers, needles, snares, and clip appliers. The purpose of such allows for a wide variety of therapies, including stopping a bleeding vessel, removing a suspicious polyp, tattooing a mass for future surgical planning, or cauterizing concerning and bleeding tissue.