Mirtazapine is an atypical antidepressant and is used primarily for the treatment of a major depressive disorder. Experts synthesized mirtazapine in 1989. Mirtazapine first received approval for treating a major depressive disorder in the Netherlands in 1994. It was finally FDA-approved in the United States in 1996 for treating moderate and severe depression. Mirtazapine is not approved by FDA for use in pediatric patients.

The drug has sedative, antiemetic, anxiolytic, and appetite stimulant effects, which explains its off-label use for the following conditions: insomnia, panic disorder, post-traumatic stress disorder, obsessive-compulsive disorder, generalized anxiety disorder, social anxiety disorder, headaches, and migraines. Clinicians usually prescribe mirtazapine for major depressive disorder after using Selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors (SSRI). Mirtazapine is used predominantly in depressed patients with insomnia and/or underweight individuals.

In 2010, the National Institute for Health and Care Excellence(NICE) in the United Kingdom published a guideline for treating depression, and this study also included a review of various antidepressants. NICE guidelines stated that mirtazapine is as efficacious as other antidepressants. Moreover, mirtazapine had a higher chance of remission in a statistical, though not clinical, setting. It also showed a statistical advantage over current SSRIs in decreasing the symptoms of depression, but the finding was not clinically meaningful. Therefore, the guideline recommended SSRIs as the first-line treatment for depression as they were equally as effective as other antidepressants but had a favorable risk-benefit ratio.

A systemic review and network meta-analysis conducted in 2018 comparing the efficacy and acceptability of 21 antidepressant drugs demonstrated mirtazapine as one of the most effective compared to other antidepressants in head-to-head studies. The available evidence shows that mirtazapine is effective in all stages of severity of depressive illness and a broad range of symptoms associated with depression.

A recent RCT evaluated mirtazapine for methamphetamine use disorder. In this study, mirtazapine reduced methamphetamine use and high-risk HIV behaviors, and the with benefits of the treatment extended after the treatment period.

**FDA-approved Indication**

- Treatment of unipolar major depressive disorder (MDD)

**Off-label Clinical Uses**

- Insomnia

- Panic disorder

- Prophylaxis of chronic tension-type headache

- Social anxiety disorder

- Post-traumatic Stress Disorder(in combination with SSRI)

- fibromyalgia