Treatments for significant hearing loss include hearing aids, cochlear implants, and implantable bone-conduction devices.

Conventional hearing aids are electronic devices that amplify sound to the ears. Generally, they are beneficial for patients with mild to severe sensorineural hearing loss with good to excellent speech recognition ability and hearing clarity. Hearing aids come in three different styles: behind the ear (BTE), in the ear (ITE), and canal types (either in the canal (ITC) or completely in the canal (CIC). Most children are fit with BTE hearing aids which facilitates long-term use as the hearing aid molds can be readily fashioned for the growing child while keeping the same hearing aid housing. The non-BTE hearing aids provide the advantage of being less visible.

Patients with severe to profound hearing loss with minimal to no benefit from hearing aids are candidates for cochlear implantation. A cochlear implant is an internally implantable electronic device that works in conjunction with an externally worn sound processor that stimulates the afferent fibers of the auditory nerve with electrical current. Although they do not replace acoustic hearing, they can provide access to a wider frequency range and improve speech understanding with habilitation and practice.

Cochlear implants in children born with deafness have been shown to significantly benefit speech and language development, with earlier younger implantation leading to greater vocabulary. The best cochlear implant results are obtained in post-lingual deafness and those with early-identified deafness (younger than the age of 2 years ) with early cochlear implant intervention. The FDA has now approved cochlear implantation for infants as young as 9-months old who meet the criteria. Cochlear implantation has been found to be effective in CHARGE syndrome, Jervell, and Lange-Neilsen syndrome, Waardenburg syndrome, Usher syndrome, and Pendred syndrome.

Implantable bone-conduction hearing devices are utilized for patients with conductive hearing loss, mixed hearing loss, or single-sided hearing loss. The external and middle ear are bypassed, with sound being transmitted to the cochlea via bone conduction. Bone conduction devices are either percutaneous (skin-penetrating) or transcutaneous (implanted under the scalp). Bone-conduction devices can be particularly beneficial in patients with anatomic abnormalities of the external or middle ears not amenable to reconstructive ear surgery. Bone conduction devices have demonstrated effectiveness for patients with Treacher Collins, BOR, Nager, and Goldenhar syndromes.