**US-Guided Technique**

When performing an ultrasound-guided biopsy, the transducer should be broad bandwidth, high frequency, and linear array. The transducer’s focal zones and the machine’s power, gain, and time-gain constant should be optimized.

Depending on the size and type of biopsy performed (spring-loaded or VAD), a dermatome might be required. While maintaining appropriate transducer pressure and visualization of the target lesion, the needle is advanced into the breast. It is imperative the operator maintain constant visualization of the needle tip to ensure adjacent structures are not damaged, and the trajectory of the needle is parallel to the underlying chest wall. This will help limit the complications discussed later in this paper. This technique is real-time; the biopsy apertures should be visualized within the target lesion and image saved for post-biopsy review. Generally, 4 to 10 samples are taken to assist in tissue diagnosis. After completion of the biopsy, removal of the device, and placement of a biopsy marker, manual pressure should be applied to mitigate the possibility of developing a hematoma. A post-biopsy mammogram is subsequently obtained and compared to pre-biopsy imaging to confirm the on-target biopsy and appropriate biopsy marker placement.

**Mammographic-Guided Technique**

During a mammographic stereotactic guided biopsy, the breast is placed between a compression plate and imaging receptor. Then an X-ray type image is obtained at 0 degrees (scout image). If the lesion is seen within this image, subsequent off-angle images are obtained at roughly 15-degrees and -15-degrees relative to the 0-degree position (the scout image plane). Using proprietary software, the machine provides a coordinate set relative to a known reference point (this is different on different machines).

Once adequate imaging is obtained, the breast is prepped and draped in a sterile fashion. The skin overlying the entrance point is locally anesthetized, followed by the placement of anesthetic into the subdermal tissue and breast parenchyma within the expected biopsy needle track. At this time, some institutions repeat the scout images to ensure that the lesion has not moved. After confirmation of the lesion’s location, a dermotomy is performed at the expected skin entrance point prior to the advancement of the biopsy needle. The needle is then advanced through the dermotomy to the desired depth via the coordinate system. The second set of 15-degree and 15-degree images is then obtained to confirm accurate needle positioning. Tissue sampling is performed with a VAD along multiple axes. Usually, 6 to 12 samples are obtained. After sampling but prior to the removal of the biopsy device, the tissue samples are evaluated under x-ray to ensure the target lesion was sampled. Target lesions are typically indicated by the presence of the same suspicious calcifications seen on diagnostic mammograms.

Once adequate sampling has been confirmed, the biopsy device is removed, and a subsequent biopsy marker is placed. The patient is then brought out of compression, and manual pressure is provided to the biopsy site. A post-biopsy mammogram is obtained and compared to pre-biopsy imaging to ensure appropriate sampling and biopsy marker placement.

**Magnetic Resonance-Guided Technique**

These breast biopsies are generally performed on a 1.5 T or 3 T machine with the patient in the prone position. The breast is placed in compression and prepped in a similar process as a mammographic stereotactic biopsy. The biopsy is generally attempted from the lateral to the medial aspect of the breast. Imaging guidance is provided using a basic grid type system, post, and pillar, as well as freehand. Commonly a sagittal T1 fat saturation pre and post-contrast sequences are obtained. The needle is then advanced (sagittal plane) under intermittent imaging guidance. This process is repeated until adequate positioning is achieved. Then, as in mammographic stereotactic biopsies, a VAD or spring-loaded device is used with 6 to 12 samples obtained. The needle is removed, and a biopsy marker is placed, followed by manual pressure. Most institutions obtain a post-biopsy mammogram to confirm biopsy marker placement.