**Patient Selection**

A thorough history, clinical examination, and pre-assessment are imperative to ensure appropriate patient selection. This combination evaluates whether patients are medically or psychologically suitable for a specific technique and determines the appropriate procedure. This is fundamental for patient safety but can also benefit the clinician, as procedures will be more challenging without adequate patient cooperation.

A pre-assessment should record the patient's baseline vital signs, such as oxygen saturation, blood pressure, heart rate, height, and weight. The latter allows a body mass index score to be calculated.

The American Society of Anesthesiologists (ASA) classification of the physical status of a patient is a widely used method to establish if a patient is fit for conscious sedation and general anesthetic:

- ASA 1: A normal healthy patient

- ASA 2: A patient with mild systemic disease

- ASA 3: A patient with a severe systemic disease that is not life-threatening

- ASA 4: A patient with a severe systemic disease that is a constant threat to life

Airway assessment is essential in case of a serious complication during the procedure requiring airway support. The modified Mallampati score is a common example:

- Class 0: Any part of the epiglottis is visible

- Class I: Soft palate, uvula, and pillars are visible

- Class II: Soft palate and uvula are visible

- Class III: Only the soft palate and base of the uvula are visible

- Class IV: Only the hard palate is visible

All options must be considered for each patient to avoid a blanket approach. Every effort should be made to adopt the least invasive technique, and desensitization methods should be at the forefront of the mind. This enables practitioners to formulate a specific indication (or contraindication), ensuring actions are justified and in the patient's best interests.