Compartment syndrome results from increased compartment pressure. When the systemic blood pressure is inadequate to overcome the pressure within a compartment, ischemia of its contents occurs.

When there is increased fluid in a fixed volume compartment, such as with bleeding or soft tissue swelling, tissue and venous pressure rise. When the interstitial pressure exceeds the capillary perfusion pressure (CPP), capillary collapse can occur.

Tissue perfusion is proportional to the difference between systolic blood pressure and compartment pressure. Stated differently, it is the difference between the interstitial fluid pressure and capillary perfusion pressure. One equation to measure this is local blood flow (LBF) = [local arterial (LA) pressure - venous pressure (PV)] / local vascular resistance. Under normal conditions, the difference between diastolic blood pressure and compartmental pressure should be more than 30 mmHg although controversy exists over the precise cutoff. As the compartmental pressure increases, this difference will decrease. Compartment pressures greater than 30 mmHg should raise suspicion for compartment syndrome.

Chronic exertional compartment syndrome (CECS) is reversible ischemia caused by repetitive physical activity and resolves with cessation of the offending activity. In rare cases where the athlete continues to exercise, irreversible acute compartment syndrome can develop. Normal physiologic response to activity can lead to a 20% increase in muscle volume. Intramuscular pressure can remain elevated even after fasciotomy suggesting other pathophysiology contributing to CECS. The pathogenesis is not well understood but may include a lower capillary density, lower number of capillaries, and abnormal arteriolar regulation.