Microspherophakia is a rare congenital entity that is characterized by a bi-convex spherical lens with reduced equatorial diameter. This is primarily because of the developmental anomaly of zonules. The clinical manifestations can range from asymptomatic to high lenticular myopia, acute angle-closure, or chronic glaucoma. The diagnosis is based on meticulous and detailed clinical evaluation and dilated pupillary examination through which equatorial lens margins are easily visible. Anterior segment optical coherence tomography (ASOCT) or ultrasound biomicroscopy (UBM) also helps understand the lens curvature, thickness, or angle structures crowding owing to spherical lenticular shape. A high index of clinical suspicion, careful examination, regular follow-ups for correction of refractive error or planning surgical intervention, regular postoperative follow-ups, with monitoring of intraocular pressures and fundus for glaucomatous damage form the basis of successful management. This review describes the etiology, predisposing risk factors, variable clinical manifestations, investigations, imaging modalities, treatment protocols, and postoperative care of patients with microspherophakia by an interprofessional team.

**Objectives:**
- Describe the pathophysiology of microspherophakia.
- Outline the clinical investigations and role of imaging in microspherophakia.

- Summarize the management of patients with microspherophakia.
- Explain the possible ocular complications in patients with microspherophakia.