# Introduction

Factor XIII, also known by the name fibrin stabilizing factor, is a key clotting factor in the coagulation cascade known for stabilizing the formation of a blood clot. The plasma form of Factor XIII is a protein heterodimer of A and B subunits expressed by bone marrow and mesenchymal lineage cells remarkable for its function as a transglutaminase of catalyzing cross-linkage peptide reactions.

# Issues of Concern

Though extremely rare in occurrence, congenital disorders of Factor XIII are associated with high rates of morbidity and mortality, particularly in the Khash region of Southeastern Iran, passed on autosomal recessively

# Cellular Level

Factor XIII (FXIII), is a heterotetrameric proenzyme converted by thrombin with calcium to a transglutaminase that catalyzes intertwining between fibrin monomers, and between a2-antiplasmin and fibrin during the coagulation cascade.

# Function

FXIII is a transglutaminase that forms gamma-glutamyl-lysyl amide crosslinking of fibrin, stabilizing the insoluble clot against shear stress. As a result, it achieves further protection from clot degradation in the coagulation cascade.

# Mechanism

Homeostasis is the body’s way of preventing blood loss, broken down into three main stages: vasoconstriction, platelet plug formation, and blood clotting. Within a clot, fibrin mesh strengthening occurs with the aid of Factor XIII, mainly by keeping the platelet plug together. Both the intrinsic pathway and extrinsic pathways of the coagulation cascade feed into the common pathway. The common pathway involves thrombin-catalyzed cleavage of fibrinogen into fibrin, forming a mesh that strengthens the platelet plug. Subsequently, Factor XIII covalently bonds to fibrin to further support fibrin's interaction with the platelets to prevent dissolution of the clot. Clot retraction, which usually occurs a day after the initial clot formation, involves disruption of Factor XIII crosslinks and fibrinolysis.

# Related Testing

Testing for low FXIII levels can be warranted when general hematology labs show no abnormality of PT, PTT, INR and bleeding time in the presence of hemorrhage, hematomas and/or delayed bleeding. These findings would indicate more of a workup for a defect in clot stabilization or fibrinolysis, particularly after trauma or surgical procedures.

First line detection of Factor XIII activity is obtainable by ammonia release assay, or a quantitative functional factor XIII assay.

# Pathophysiology

There are two common forms of FXIII deficiency: congenital and acquired.

**Congenital FXIII deficiency**

Rare bleeding disorders are mostly inherited autosomal recessively. Iran, a middle eastern nation with remote areas of high incidences of consanguinity, has a phenomenally high rate of rare bleeding disorders (RBD), especially Factor XIII. While factor activity measurements are useful for other RBD, clot solubility is necessary for FXIII deficiency diagnostics. As aforementioned, severe, life-threatening bleeding is often the characteristic clinical presentation.

**Acquired FXIII deficiency**

Causes of acquired FXIII deficiency include immune-mediated inhibition, non-immune FXIII heightened consumption, or lack of synthesis. Acquired deficiency is attributed to idiopathic causes, autoimmune diseases, and malignant conditions.

# Clinical Significance

The transglutaminase activity of FXIII has been attributed to wound healing, embryo and uterus interactions, angiogenesis, and bone extracellular matrix stabilization.

Umbilical cord bleeding in neonates may be te earliest presenting symptom of Factor XIII deficiency, while brain hemorrhages are the most common overall cause of death in this blood disorder. Other common manifestations of deficiency include bruising, hematomas, muscle bleeds, and delayed post-surgical bleeds.

Common clinical signs for coagulation factor deficiencies clinically include mucosal bleeding, bleeding pre and post medical procedures, and hemorrhagic diathesis. More severe signs include intracranial bleeding and hemarthroses, fairly specific to low levels of Factor XIII and Factor X, and afibrinogenemia.

Other biological functions of factor XIII are under consideration beyond a "fibrin stabilizing factor."