To improve outcomes, an interprofessional approach to truncus arteriosus is recommended.

Team-based healthcare delivery starts very early after conception for these patients with high-risk obstetricians and fetal cardiac imaging specialists. After delivery, the timing of surgical re-intervention and/or trans-catheter intervention is also important to enhance outcomes. Especially given the common association with 22q11 microdeletion syndromes, and the need for open-heart surgery in the newborn period, team-based case in childhood should include the pediatric cardiologist, a pediatric cardiac surgeon, an intensivist, residents or fellows, geneticist, and a radiologist. As patient care most often occurs in a neonatal or cardiac intensive care unit, specific team members are vital. In addition to the physicians mentioned above, teams should also have a charge nurse and bedside nurse, respiratory therapist, nutrition specialist, social worker, pharmacist, and radiographers.

With increasing success in surgical and post-operative management and the advent of new technological advances, children with congenital heart disease are surviving well into adulthood. This, however, comes with an array of questions revolving around transitions of clinical care, recommendations for daily and competitive activity, medications and adherence, routine medical and dental care, acquisition of proper insurance and healthcare providers, reproductive issues including pregnancy and contraception, and education and career planning. Physicians should be aware that impairments in cognition, social interactions, communication skills, and executive functioning are well documented in children with complex heart disease, so as these patients reach adolescence and adulthood, an important consideration should be given to addressing these issues at the appropriate times and with the appropriate members of the care team. For the adult, a specialist in adult congenital heart disease (ACHD) is ideal, but an electrophysiologist and interventional cardiologist may also be required. Additionally, an internal medicine provider may prove beneficial in coordinating required care with a high-risk obstetrician, neurologist, psychologist/psychiatrist, endocrinologist, and geneticist. Other critical members of the ACHD team include nurses and nurse practitioners, physician assistants, cardiac anesthesiologists with training in CHD, a hepatologist, and a cardiac pathologist. Services that may be required include rehabilitation services, psychological services, social services, and financial counselors. The smooth transition of care to adult medicine is critical.