# Continuing Education Activity

Bullous myringitis (BM) is a relatively common infectious condition characterized by bullae or vesicles on the tympanic membrane without affecting the contents of the external or middle ear. This activity reviews the evaluation and management of bullous myringitis, highlights the need for early recognition and prompt treatment by the interprofessional team to prevent complications and facilitate early resolution.

**Objectives:**
- Identify the etiology and epidemiology of bullous myringitis.
- Review the appropriate history, physical, and evaluation of bullous myringitis.
- Outline the treatment and management options available for bullous myringitis.
- Describe some interprofessional team strategies for improving care coordination and communication for bullous myringitis and improve outcomes.

# Introduction

Bullous myringitis (BM) is a relatively common infectious condition characterized by bullae or vesicles on the tympanic membrane (TM), without affecting the contents of the external or middle ear.

The current thinking is that bullous myringitis is caused predominantly by viruses, although one study insinuated mycoplasma pneumoniae, which was not substantiated by subsequent studies.

# Etiology

Bullous myringitis is thought to be caused predominantly by viruses, although Streptococcus pneumoniae is the most commonly identified bacteria.Haemophilus influenzae, Moraxella catarrhalis, Group A Streptococcus, Staphylococcus aureus.

# Epidemiology

The peak incidence of bullous myringitis is found to be in the winter months and is thought to be the result of poor Eustachian tube function in cold climate.

# Pathophysiology

Bullous myringitis shares similar pathophysiology with AOM and although some aspects remain unclear. Inflammation of the tympanic membrane can occur as a direct result of trauma such as a foreign body, accidental trauma while cleaning the ear canal, sudden loud noises, changes in airline cabin pressure, and even an inflicted blow to the ear. Bullous myringitis can also occur as a result of viral or bacterial infections affecting the tympanic membrane as part of a respiratory infection or through the spread of fungal infection from the adjacent epidermis. Once inflamed, the enlarging bullae and inflamed tympanic membrane can cause severe pain until the blister ruptures, which can result in bloody ear discharge.

# History and Physical

The most common symptom of bullous myringitis is acute ear pain.

The classic sign of bullous myringitis is the presence of blisters (bullae) on the tympanic membrane, often accompanied by fever, thickening, and erythematous appearance of the tympanic membrane, decreased or absent light reflex, and decreased mobility. In true bullous myringitis, the bullae are confined to the tympanic membrane. If bullae or vesicles are seen in the ear canal or external ear, other diagnoses should be considered such as Ramsay-Hunt syndromw or any of the bullous dermatidities. Conductive hearing loss may occur in the presence of effusion. Over half of the patients with bullous myringitis demonstrate sensorineural hearing changes. However, the mechanism of this is poorly understood.

Diagnosis is clinical, with its basis on the presence of one or more blisters on the tympanic membrane, irrespective of other findings such as AOM.

# Evaluation

The basis for the diagnosis of bullous myringitis is on physical examination via an otoscope

**Laboratory Studies**

Laboratory evaluation is rarely necessary for the diagnosis of bullous myringitis. The occasions that would lead to further laboratory evaluations would consist of infants less than 28 days of age with a fever and acute bullous myringitis. This scenario will involve full sepsis work up per the American Academy of Pediatrics guidelines to confirm or exclude other systemic or congenital diseases.

**Imaging Studies**

Imaging studies are not a routine recommendation unless there are concerns for intertemporal or intracranial complications such as mastoiditis, epidural or brain abscess, meningitis, or cholesteatoma. CT or MRI may be of assistance.

**Tympanocentesis**

Tympanocentesis is rarely indicated but can be of assistance in neonates or toxic appearing children who require culturing due to a higher risk of adverse outcomes, and to provide pain relief.

# Treatment / Management

The treatment and prognosis of bullous myringitis are similar to AOM without bullae, with the exception being that pain management may require more aggressive treatment. Also, the more common “watch and wait” method of AOM may not be appropriate in BM cases, as these have a higher reoccurrence rate, and the majority of patients have a positive bacterial culture of their middle ear effusion.

A recent review evaluating therapeutic options for myringitis found no well-designed randomized studies, although surgery showed better treatment results than topical agents and laser-assisted treatments.

Due to the high occurrence of hearing loss in a patient diagnosed with bullous myringitis, recommendations include a pure tone audiogram in all patients diagnosed with bullous myringitis.  This evaluation is key in identifying the specific type and quantity of hearing loss.

Myringotomy may be necessary in refractory cases or cases with impending complications.

# Differential Diagnosis

The differential diagnosis of bullous myringitis relies heavily on the clinician’s physical exam.  Bullous myringitis, like AOM, needs to be distinguished from otitis media with effusion (OME) as well as from other bullous dermatologic conditions such as bullous pemphigoid and pemphigus vulgaris. Bullae must also be distinguished from vesicles, which would suggest a viral origin sich as Ramsay-Hunt syndrome. Other differential diagnoses include acute suppurative otitis media, otitis externa, granuloma, and acute mastoiditis.

# Prognosis

Bullous myringitis, like AOM without bullae, has a relatively good prognosis. Hearing loss and vestibular dysfunction are usually transient, and most recover after the infection has resolved.

# Complications

Complications arising from bullous myringitis are similar to AOM without bullae.  The most common sequelae being hearing loss. More rare, but life-threatening, complications include subperiosteal abscess, labyrinthitis, facial paresis, mastoiditis, post-auricular cellulitis, epidural abscess, meningitis, and sigmoid sinus thrombosis. Among patient populations with adverse sequelae, multidrug-resistant Streptococcus pneumoniae has been isolated.

# Deterrence and Patient Education

Patients require education regarding the completion of their full course of antibiotics and the need to follow up with their primary care provider.  Return precautions for worsening of their symptoms, despite appropriate pain management and antibiotic administration, are recommended.

# Pearls and Other Issues

The biggest challenge is the timely recognition of this condition. Failure to do so results in great patient dissatisfaction as it is very painful.

# Enhancing Healthcare Team Outcomes

Diagnosis and management of patients diagnosed with bullous myringitis require an interprofessional team of healthcare professionals that include a nurse, a pharmacist, and several physicians in different specialties. This approach is necessary to reduce both morbidity and mortality of bullous myringitis sequela. The moment there is a diagnosis of bullous myringitis, the provider needs to provide proper analgesia orders for the nurse to administer, as well as systemic antibiotics. There also may be a need for referral to otolaryngology for further evaluation and management, which includes auditory testing for the assessment of hearing loss.