Anti-epileptic drugs (AEDs) are numerous. There are a variety of mechanisms of action, and some AEDs possess multiple mechanisms of action. Although precise mechanisms of some drugs remain elusive, anti-seizure medications tend to be grouped by their principal mode of action. A brief review of some of the major drugs on the market is provided below.

Some AEDs act on the sodium channels by either blocking their repetitive activation (phenytoin, carbamazepine) or by enhancing their slow inactivation (lacosamide). Others work on calcium channels by blocking either T-type calcium channels (ethosuximide, valproic acid) or the N- and L-type calcium channels (zonisamide). Lamotrigine works by blocking sodium channels, blocking N- and L-type calcium channel, and modulating H-current. Topiramate works by blocking sodium channels, alpha-amino-3-hydroxy-5-methyl-4-isoxazole propionic acid (AMPA) receptors, and by inhibiting carbonic anhydrase. Other mechanisms through which AEDs act are by enhancing gamma-aminobutyric acid (GABA)-A receptors (phenobarbital, benzodiazepines), blocking N-methyl-D-aspartic acid (NMDA) receptors (felbamate), and opening neuronal potassium channels (ezogabine).

Carbamazepine (CBZ) is used for focal and generalized seizures. It is also used for patients with bipolar disorder and trigeminal neuralgia. By inhibiting voltage-gated sodium channels, CBZ reduces neuronal firing. It is metabolized by the cytochrome P450 system and is a strong inducer of these hepatic enzymes. Common side effects include gastrointestinal upset, hyponatremia, rash, itch, drowsiness, dizziness, blurred vision, and headache. Rare but dangerous side effects include Stevens-Johnson syndrome, toxic epidermal necrolysis, leukopenia, and aplastic anemia (pancytopenia).

Oxcarbazepine is structurally similar to CBZ and thus wields a similar mechanism of action. It is also comparable to CBZ in terms of efficacy for focal and secondarily generalized tonic-clonic seizures. Patients may experience dizziness, headache, ataxia, nausea, rash, double vision, and/or hyponatremia. The latter effect is thought to be secondary to the syndrome of inappropriate secretion of antidiuretic hormore (SIADH) and may occur in 25-75% of patients.

Phenytoin is one of the oldest anti-seizure medications and is still widely used for focal and generalized seizures. It is also administered for status epilepticus. In addition, practitioners may invoke phenytoin as a second-line agent for patients with mixed seizure types (e.g., tonic-clonic and myoclonic). As mentioned, phenytoin blocks voltage-gated sodium channels, but other possible mechanisms revolve around decreased synaptic transmission, smaller changes in ionic gradients involving the sodium-potassium ATPase pump, and inhibition of calcium-calmodulin phosphorylation. Of note, phenytoin is a broad spectrum inducer of the CYP system and, therefore, may reduce the effectiveness of many forms of hormonal oral contraception (OCP) medications. Major adverse effects include gingival hyperplasia, body hair increase, folic acid depletion, rash, and worsening bone density. Patients should also be counseled regarding the possible development of confusion, ataxia, double vision, and neuropathy with long-term usage.

Lacosamide stabilizes hyperexcitable membranes and inhibits repetitive neural firing via the slow inactivation of voltage-gated sodium channels. Another possible mechanism may involve binding to collapsin response mediator protein 2 (CRMP2), which has been implicated in epileptogenesis. Lacosamide is used as monotherapy or adjunct therapy for focal-onset seizures in patients aged 4 years and up. It tends to be tolerated decently well, with dizziness, ataxia, and nausea being the most typically encountered adverse effects. Importantly, dose-dependent PR interval prolongation on electrocardiogram (EKG) is a well known effect, and so EKG monitoring is recommended alongside initiation of therapy.

Phenobarbital is another very old drug. It is used for generalized and focal seizures, but its sedating properties make it difficult to use in the modern clinical realm. Regarding mechanism, phenobarbital is a barbituate and binds to the GABA-A receptor, prolonging its open state to allow for more chloride influx and consequent cellular hyperpolarization. It is a potent inducer of the CYP system and thus can decrease serum levels of other drugs metablized by this pathway.

Vigabatrin is an inhibitor of an enzyme that metabolizes GABA (GABA transaminase), thereby elevating GABA concentrations within the central nervous system. Vigabatrin is used adjunctively for refractory focal seizures, but it can also be used as monotherapy in this setting. It is also useful in the pediatric world for infantile spasms, particularly in children with tuberous sclerosis complex. Patients should be precautioned regarding possible vision loss. The drug can also lead to MRI abnormalities (but without clear neurologic deficits), fatigue, dizziness, and headache.

Topiramate has several modes of action, including blockage of voltage-gated sodium channels, GABA transmission enhancement, and NMDA receptor antagonization. It also blocks carbonic anhydrase to a modest extent. Topiramate is used as monotherapy in both pediatric and adult medicine for focal-onset and primary generalized tonic-clonic seizures (ages 10 and up). The drug can also be used as adjunctive therapy for focal seizures or in patients with Lennox-Gastaut syndrome (ages 2 and up). Patients may commonly experience weight loss, impaired cognition, and difficulties with expressive language. Some patients may experience fatigue, depression, headache, and/or paresthesias. Metabolic acidosis with tachypnea and/or calcium phosphate nephrolithiasis (kidney stones) may also occur.

Valproate (valproic acid, VPA) is another broad spectrum medication used to treat both focal and generalized seizures. Similar to topiramate, it possesses multiple mechanisms of action, including voltage-gated sodium channel inhibition, augmentation of GABA concentrations, and mild inhibition of T-type calcium currents (but not to the extent of ethosuximide). Valproate is metabolized by the liver and is an inhibitor of CYP enzymes. It should be used with caution in patients with hepatic insufficiency and should be avoided altogether in patients with urea cycle disorders due to high risk of hyperammonemia. Parenthetically, combining topiramate and valproate can lead to increased levels of ammonia. This combination should be closely monitored if encountered in clinical practice. With that said, topiramate is not alone in this regard; other carbonic anhydrase inhibitors, enzyme-inducing anti-seizure drugs, and antipsychotic medications can increase the risk of hyperammonemic encephalopathy in the setting of VPA use. Other general side effects of VPA include nausea/vomiting, tremor, easy bruising, weight gain/insulin resistance, metabolic syndrome, and subclinical hypothyroidism. Rarely, VPA can cause acute hepatocellular injury with jaundice or acute pancreatitis. VPA should be avoided during pregnancy, as teratogenic neurotoxicity has been observed.

Levetiracetam's precise mechanism is not clear, but studies have linked its effectiveness to the binding of synaptic vesicle protein 2A (SV2A). It encompasses a very broad spectrum in terms of its efficacy and is used as adjunctive therapy for focal-onset seizures in children and adults, myoclonic seizures in patients with juvenile myoclonic epilepsy (ages 12 and up), and primary generalized tonic-clonic seizures (ages 6 and up) in patients with idiopathic generalized epilepsy. The drug is uniquely metabolized independent of the hepatic CYP system, and it does not induce CYP enzymes like phenytoin, phenobarbital, and carbamazepine. Importantly, levetiracetam does not necessitate a prolonged titration period like other drugs (e.g., lamotrigine with its risk of Stevens-Johnson syndrome). Levetiracetam is extremely well-tolerated, with common adverse effects revolving around behavioral disturbances, drowsiness, dizziness, and upper respiratory infections.

In summary, it is now abundantly clear that anti-seizure medications wield disparate mechanistic profiles, but they all effectively suppress epileptic seizures in one way or another. Accordingly, grouping the drugs together by mechanism is a very helpful organizing principle. From this viewpoint, it may become easier to appreciate that some drugs have different efficacy profiles for different seizures types and epilepsy syndromes. Ethosuximide is an exception with its specific limited use with respect to absence seizures, but almost all of the other available medications listed above have potential use against generalized and focal seizures.