The fate of the intracellular amino acid pool strongly depends on the metabolic state of the individual tissue and body in general. In a fed physiologic state, the amino acids can be degraded further to their carbon and nitrogen skeletons. While the carbon backbone can undergo oxidation for energy, the nitrogen component is eliminated from the body through nitrogenous waste products. Initially, the nitrogen is present in the form of ammonia, a toxic substance to the human body. The liver converts toxic ammonia into urea, through the urea cycle, into a non-toxic, water-soluble form of nitrogen that can be eliminated easily through the kidneys.

As the nitrogen backbone becomes discarded, the carbon skeleton of amino acids can be used for energy production by oxidation into pyruvate (tryptophan, glycine, alanine, serine, cysteine) and acetyl-CoA. Pyruvate and acetyl Coenzyme A are substrates for the citric acid cycle to ultimately produce ATP and carbon dioxide. Acetyl CoA can also form ketone bodies released into the bloodstream for use as an energy source by specific tissues. Amino acids that become acetyl CoA or acetoacetate are named ketogenic because of their propensity to become ketone bodies.

Another possible fate is for the carbon skeleton to convert into citric acid cycle intermediates alpha-ketoglutarate (arginine, histidine, glutamine, proline, glutamate), succinyl CoA (valine, threonine, isoleucine, methionine), fumarate (aspartate, tyrosine, phenylalanine), and oxaloacetate (aspartate, asparagine).