Several hypotheses have been proposed to explain the etiology of Schwartz-Matsuo syndrome. In 1973, Schwartz postulated iridocyclitis as the cause of increased IOP due to reduced outflow of aqueous humor.

However, Davidorf suggested that elevations in IOP occur due to blockage of the trabecular meshwork from pigmented granules released from retinal pigment epithelium during rhegmatogenous retinal detachment.

Finally, Matsuo et al. were able to isolate photoreceptor outer segments and inflammatory cells within the aqueous humor. This led him to hypothesize that photoreceptor outer segments and inflammatory cells were able to escape the subretinal space and communicate with the aqueous humor potentially through the retinal tear. This eventually leads to the accumulation of photoreceptor outer segments in the trabecular meshwork and aqueous outflow obstruction, causing elevated intraocular pressures.

Aqueous humor is a clear intraocular fluid secreted by the ciliary epithelium lining the ciliary processes and is mainly responsible for the structural integrity and maintenance of normal intraocular pressure of the eye.

Normally, aqueous humor flows from the posterior chamber (PC) of the eye to the anterior chamber (AC) through the pupil and gets reabsorbed via two pathways – the conventional pathway involving the trabecular meshwork and the non-conventional route involving the uveoscleral pathway. Usually, the rate of aqueous humor production and reabsorption is at equilibrium regulating intraocular pressure.

In Schwartz-Matsuo syndrome, the conventional pathway consisting of the trabecular meshwork is blocked by photoreceptor outer segments disrupting normal aqueous outflow and resulting in an elevation in IOP.

Typically, retinal detachment results in hypotony (low intraocular pressure). Several factors, including the type of detachment, duration, and extent, influence the degree of hypotony.

Several hypotheses have been postulated in the past regarding the pathophysiology behind the low intraocular pressure seen in retinal detachment. However, it is now believed that drainage of subretinal fluid via the peri-optic connective tissue is responsible for the low intraocular pressure seen in retinal detachment, a mechanism different from the one seen in Schwartz-Matsuo syndrome.

Therefore, an exam finding of elevated intraocular pressure in patients with retinal detachment is unusual and should raise suspicion and warrant further workup for Schwartz-Matsuo syndrome.