# Continuing Education Activity

Clavulanic acid is a medication that can be used in conjunction with amoxicillin to manage and treat bacterial infections, specifically bacteria that are beta-lactamase producers. It is in the beta-lactamase inhibitor class of medications. This activity describes the indications, action, and contraindications for clavulanic acid as a valuable agent in the treatment of beta-lactamase-producing bacterial infections when used with amoxicillin and how the interprofessional team can use this agent to drive positive outcomes in fighting infections.

**Objectives:**
- Identify the mechanism of action of clavulanic acid.
- Describe the potential adverse effects of clavulanic acid.
- Outline the appropriate monitoring for patients receiving clavulanic acid.
- Review interprofessional team strategies for improving care coordination and communication to advance clavulanic acid and improve outcomes.

# Indications

Clavulanic acid, also known by its potassium salt form clavulanate, is FDA approved for clinical use in conjunction with amoxicillin to treat certain bacterial infections. This can be based on the source of the infection, Gram stain, or culture and sensitivity results. The antibacterial activity of amoxicillin is not improved by clavulanic acid when used against bacteria that do not produce beta-lactamase. Therefore, indications for this drug combination only include patients suspected of infection with beta-lactamase-producing bacteria.H. influenzae, M. catarrhalis, and S. aureus. The amoxicillin/clavulanate combination should be considered before ceftriaxone for urinary tract infections to decrease the risk of re-infection and complications.

# Mechanism of Action

Clavulanic acid use is always in conjunction with amoxicillin in its salt form clavulanate potassium. Amoxicillin is a beta-lactam antibiotic that disrupts bacterial cell wall synthesis. It binds to penicillin-binding proteins that are present on the inside of the bacterial cell wall, and this inhibits the synthesis of the peptidoglycan layer in the cell wall.

# Administration

Clavulanic acid alone has been shown to have no antibacterial effects, and administration must accompany amoxicillin. It is available in both solid and liquid forms. For the solid form, the patient must chew the chewable tablets before swallowing, and there are also immediate and extended-release tablets that must be swallowed whole. The oral liquid suspension should be shaken before administration and is the recommended formulation for children who are unable to chew tablets or swallow whole pills. Administration of all forms of the drug should be done at the start of a light meal to enhance oral absorption and avoid gastrointestinal irritation. Clavulanic acid may increase the absorption of amoxicillin. This drug regimen is to be administered twice to three times daily, depending on dosage, at regular time intervals to maintain constant serum concentrations.

# Adverse Effects

Clavulanic acid, when administered with amoxicillin, can cause some mild gastrointestinal adverse effects. These include vomiting, nausea, loose stools, and discomfort. Antibiotic-associated diarrhea due to amoxicillin-clavulanic acid treatment is the most common adverse effect. There is a higher incidence of diarrhea when clavulanic acid is added to amoxicillin compared to amoxicillin alone. Diarrhea is more common in those taking a high dose of the extended-release form of clavulanic acid and amoxicillin.

When used for the treatment of urinary tract infections, this drug combination can cause candida vaginitis.

# Contraindications

All contraindications for clavulanic acid are considered in conjunction with amoxicillin since clavulanic acid is not administered by itself.  The drug combination is primarily excreted renally, so caution is necessary when a patient has renal impairment or is on hemodialysis.

# Monitoring

The monitoring and administration of clavulanic acid are only considered in conjunction with amoxicillin. There are reports of hypersensitivity reactions to this drug combination, so monitoring for this at the beginning of an administration is recommended. Monitoring for secondary infection while on this drug regimen is also advisable. Hepatic, hematological, and renal functions also require monitoring if the administration lasts for longer than one week. Patients with hepatic and renal impairment require close surveillance while on the drug and after discontinuation of the drug.

# Toxicity

The toxicity of clavulanic acid alone is unknown. However, the toxic effects of amoxicillin/clavulanate have been reported. The most common toxic effect is an idiosyncratic drug-induced hepatic injury which leads to a mixed hepatocellular-cholestatic injury, and it is more common in older men.

# Enhancing Healthcare Team Outcomes

Beta-lactamase inhibitors, such as clavulanic acid, are an essential tool for treating bacterial infections capable of producing beta-lactamase. To prevent an increase in antibiotic resistance, it is critical to administer this drug only to patients infected with beta-lactamase-producing bacteria.

It is also crucial that pharmacists, nurses, and physicians work together as an interprofessional team to make sure the drug is administered safely and in the appropriate setting to avoid adverse effects or reactions to clavulanic acid and amoxicillin. Clinicians are responsible for initial agent selection, but the pharmacist can weigh in after performing medication reconciliation and verifying dosing. Nursing will often be responsible for administration instructions, confirmed by the pharmacist, and can follow up to assess compliance as well as the effectiveness of the regimen. Any deviations from expected in the above should be reported to the prescribing/ordering clinician. In this manner, the entire interprofessional team can guide and participate in the antimicrobial regimen to optimize patient results. [Level 5]