Clomiphene citrate is commonly indicated to treat patients diagnosed with anovulatory or oligo-ovulatory infertility to induce ovulation for patients wishing to conceive. It is also indicated for the treatment of male infertility to induce spermatogenesis. Treating patients with infertility requires an interprofessional team of healthcare professionals across various disciplines.

Before initiating clomiphene citrate therapy, the clinician must properly evaluate the patient to ensure that the patient meets the indications for clomiphene therapy and the contraindications are not present. To achieve the goal of treatment, the physician must ensure that there are no inhibitors to the goal. If inhibitors exist, they require attention before initiating clomiphene citrate therapy. The clinician should outline the treatment plan with the patient in advance, and the patient should receive education on the objectives of therapy, balanced with potential risk. The importance of timed coitus to coincide with the expected ovulation period must be stressed to the patient since ovulation often occurs from 5 to 10 days after a cycle of clomiphene therapy. Advising the patient to use the ovulation test kit from 5 to 10 days after the treatment cycle to determine the ovulation day is a team effort.

If the patient ovulates during the first cycle but did not get pregnant, there is no advantage to increasing the dose in subsequent cycles. If ovulation does not occur during the first treatment cycle, then the dosage can be increased to 100 mg per day for five days. The second treatment cycle may commence as early as 30 days after the prior cycle, provided that the patient is negative for pregnancy. It is not recommended to increase the dosage or duration of therapy beyond 100 mg per day for five days.

Most patients who will ovulate normally do so after the initial cycle of clomiphene therapy. If the patient does not ovulate after three cycles of clomiphene citrate therapy, further treatment with clomiphene citrate is not recommended. The patient will need further reevaluation. If the patient ovulates three times but does not get pregnant, treatment should discontinue. If the patient fails to menstruate after an ovulatory response, then reevaluate the patient. It is not recommended for the patient to have more than six cycles of clomiphene therapy, thus avoiding severe side effects or toxicity due to the overuse of clomiphene citrate.

The biochemical response of clomiphene citrate may vary. Therefore, when treating men with hypogonadism or infertility, it is suggested to do lab evaluations for testosterone levels and semen analysis at regular intervals. It is unnecessary to assess PSA or HCT levels since they are not affected by using clomiphene citrate.

**Recommendations for Increasing Successful Outcomes in Infertility Therapy**

- Before initiating infertility treatment with clomiphene, first assess the underlying cause of the patient's anovulation and recommend lifestyle modifications or appropriately treat the causal medical condition.

- Patients and their physicians must monitor ovulatory response since it allows for suitably timed intercourse or intrauterine insemination respectively; this will guide any alternative therapies if ovulation doesn't occur.

- Patients with hypothalamic hypogonadism may require exogenous gonadotropins as an alternative to oral agents.

- A patient that fails to conceive after being prescribed clomiphene therapy can be prescribed menotropin and a dose of human chorionic gonadotropin. The menotropin will stimulate the ovarian follicles, while the human chorionic gonadotropin will cause luteinizing hormone to surge.

- In women with infertility due only to polycystic ovarian syndrome (PCOS) and are resistant to clomiphene (especially obese women), add metformin (an insulin sensitization agent) to the clomiphene regiment or prescribe gonadotropin as second-line pharmacologic therapy for ovulation induction.

- Combining metformin with clomiphene in obese women may increase pregnancy rates compared to clomiphene alone.

- Letrozole was found to induce ovulation at a similar rate as gonadotropin in clomiphene-resistant PCOS patients but with reduced risk compared with gonadotropin.

- Recent studies have shown letrozole, an aromatase inhibitor, to be the most effective oral agent than clomiphene or the combination of clomiphene and metformin to induce ovulation in patients with polycystic ovarian syndrome.

- Combining letrozole and clomiphene is associated with higher ovulation rates than letrozole alone in patients with infertility and PCOS.

- Another second-line therapy is to perform laparoscopic ovarian surgery to induce ovulation in anovulatory women with PCOS and no other fertility factors and be resistant to clomiphene.