Clinicians should administer activated charcoal when they believe an ingested toxin is still in the gastrointestinal tract and when the benefits of preventing the absorption of the toxin are assumed to outweigh the risks posed by administering activated charcoal. The optimal dosing of activated charcoal is unknown. Activated charcoal administration can be oral or via nasogastric and orogastric tubes. When the dose of the ingested toxin is known, experts recommend activated charcoal at a 10 to 1 ratio of activated charcoal to the ingested toxin. This ratio may be impractical when the patient has ingested large doses of a toxin.

- SDAC dosing adult: 50 to 100 g

- SDAC dosing infants younger than one year: 10 to 25 g

- SDAC children 2 to 12 years: 25 to 50 g

- SDAC children older than 12 years: follow adult dosing

Multiple-dose activated charcoal (MDAC) refers to the administration of two or more sequential doses of activated charcoal for enhanced elimination of the ingested toxin. MDAC appears to prevent ongoing absorption of drug remaining within the GI tract and enhance elimination via enterohepatic or entero-enteric recirculation. While the quality of clinical data is not robust, researchers believe MDAC is beneficial for “potentially life-threatening” ingestions of carbamazepine, dapsone, phenobarbital, quinine, and theophylline.

Dosing strategies of MDAC vary. The initial dosing is either a 10 to 1 ratio of activated charcoal to the toxin or 1 g/kg of bodyweight. Interval MDAC doses range from 0.25 to 0.5 g/kg of body weight every 1 to 6 hours in adults. Some cases have employed the continuous administration of activated charcoal through an NG tube. A simplified MDAC approach for adult patients would be:

- A loading dose of 25 to 100 g

- Repeat doses of 10 to 25 g of activated charcoal every 2 to 4 hours

Due to the variability in proper dosing strategies and indications for MDAC administration, it would be reasonable to consult a regional toxicologist or Poison Control Center before initiating MDAC therapy.

Formulations have been attempted to increase the palatability of activated charcoal, which is black and has a gritty texture. Ready-to-use aqueous suspensions of activated charcoal are available in 15 g, 25 g, and 50 g doses and formulations premixed with sorbitol. If activated charcoal is not premixed, a slurry can be made with activated charcoal in a 1 to 8 ratio of activated charcoal to a suitable liquid such as water, cola, or flavored syrups. Offering activated charcoal in an opaque cup with a lid and straw is an easy way to increase the palatability of activated charcoal.