Acarbose is a complex oligosaccharide that acts as a competitive, reversible inhibitor of pancreatic alpha-amylase and membrane-bound intestinal alpha-glucoside hydrolase. Pancreatic alpha-amylase hydrolyzes complex carbohydrates to oligosaccharides in the small intestine. Intestinal alpha-glucosidase hydrolase breaks down oligosaccharides, trisaccharides, and disaccharides (sucrose, maltose) to monosaccharides (glucose, fructose) in the brush border of the small intestine. By delaying the digestion of carbohydrates, acarbose slows glucose absorption, resulting in a reduction of postprandial glucose blood concentrations.

Acarbose may produce weight loss by increasing glucagon-like peptide-1.

**Pharmacokinetics**

**Absorption**

Acarbose acts locally in the gastrointestinal (GI) tract with low systemic bioavailability (less than 2% gets absorbed as the active drug, and 35% as metabolites).

**Metabolized**

Acarbose is metabolized in the GI tract by intestinal bacteria and digestive enzymes.

**Excretion**

The kidneys excrete the absorbed drug, and 51% of an oral dose gets excreted in feces.

Gupta S. et al. conducted a three-month study in mice to evaluate the anti-aging effects of acarbose.

An in vitro study suggests that acarbose could help in treating ischemic stroke by decreasing mitochondrial and lysosomal dysfunction and changing gene expression related to improving cellular survival.

Yang Q. et al. conducted research on the treatment of polycystic ovarian syndrome with impaired glucose tolerance using acarbose and diet. This treatment helped improve the ovulation and pregnancy rate of the patients.