Multidirectional instability is a complex process that is difficult to diagnose as it lacks hallmark or pathognomonic findings. It is instead a process that presents with an insidious onset of vague, activity-related shoulder pain. It usually lacks a defining traumatic event. Overhead activities are typically the most offending as well as carrying heavy objects.

Diagnosis of MDI is typically made on a physical exam.

Patients will also complain of feelings of uneasiness with the shoulder placed in abduction to 90 degrees and external rotation known as the apprehension test. Gentle anterior to posterior pressure over the proximal humerus during the apprehension test should relieve the uneasy feeling with external rotation and further indicates true anterior instability. Posterior and anterior load and shift test with the shoulder adducted and the patient relaxed can also be positive.

In cases of MDI, it is also important to assess the patient for other joint laxities. Beighton’s criteria can be used to assess for hyperlaxity syndromes as a potential cause of the patient’s laxity. Beighton’s criteria consist of 5 components that are tied to a point value.

While the diagnosis of a collagen disorder alone is not sufficient for the diagnosis of MDI, it can alert the clinician to a possible contributory factor.  Several asymptomatic laxity conditions never lead to shoulder instability. However, the treating provider needs to be aware of the disorder as it does affect the outcomes of stabilization procedures.