Treatment for cervical disc disease is centered around decreasing pain, improving function, and minimizing recurrence and duration of symptoms. Treatment typically beings with nonoperative care and can lead to operative intervention.

**Nonoperative**

Conservative modalities include rest, modification of activity, pharmacological agents, physical therapy, manipulation, different types of injections, and acupuncture. Initial short term immobilization may be beneficial. Medications may provide symptomatic relief. These may include nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs), steroids, and/or muscle relaxants. NSAIDs are commonly used and provide relief via interfering with prostaglandin synthesis leading to the inhibition of the inflammatory cascade.

Steroids may be beneficial in initial management for short-term usage as they are associated with deleterious side-effects. Muscle relaxants are an option when patients are experiencing muscle spasms. Gross et al. demonstrated cervical mobilization and manipulation might provide immediate or short-term relief for neck pain.

A cervical collar may be recommended in patients who present with intractable neck pain. Controversy exists over the efficacy of cervical traction for treatment of HNP as there is no evidence to suggest a reduction in the degree of disc herniation.

Physical therapy should start early in the treatment algorithm. Passive modalities should be used and include but are not limited to heat, mechanical traction, massage, and a soft cervical collar.

Active modalities should also be part of rehabilitation. These include aerobic conditioning, dynamic muscle training, isometric, and range of motion exercises. Postural training may help. Isometric exercises allow for the strengthening of paravertebral muscles with avoidance of certain motions that can cause pain. Recent reports suggest there was no strong evidence for patients with chronic neck pain to undergo neck strengthening and stretching exercises.

As stated previously, the diagnosis and treatment of cervical myelopathy may be difficult and unpredictable. Some patients may develop a rapid onset and decline of symptoms while some may experience a plateau in symptoms, but in general, it is usually progressive as a timeline may be variable.

**Operative Treatment**

Patients who fail to respond to nonoperative treatment, especially those experiencing intractable pain, progressive or significant neurological compromise, myelopathy may require surgical intervention. One surgical option is decompression. Decompression procedures may include fusion with or without instrumentation. However, typically most decompressions will consist of a fusion to minimize the potential for post-surgical deformity.

Pain management procedures may also be beneficial. Nerve root injections or epidural steroid injections can not only be used as a diagnostic tool but can also be therapeutic. However, they are not without undesirable complications.

There are a variety of surgical approaches to the cervical spine. Commonly, the neural structures become compressed anteriorly; therefore, an anterior approach is necessary to directly remove a disk, causing decompression and will most likely include a fusion (ACDF). The approach of choice in patients with normal to kyphotic alignment is the anterior approach as a laminectomy in these patients may further cause kyphosis secondary to the destabilization that occurs.

Some studies demonstrate a fusion rate of up to 94% after an ACDF.

When an indirect decompression is warranted, the posterior approach to the spinal cord can be utilized. This approach is mainly for patients with neutral or lordotic cervical spine alignment. Furthermore, the posterior approach is quite helpful with patients who have multi-level compression and congenital stenosis, usually involving C3-C6 or C7. The muscles attaching to the second cervical segment are protected to avoid progressive kyphosis and postoperative neck pain. Posterior decompression provides the spinal cord with additional space, moving away from the disk/bony ridges compressing anteriorly. Options include laminectomy (either with or without fusion) or open-door laminoplasty. Both of which can achieve the same goal, to increase the diameter of the canal.

Highsmith et al. showed similar neurological outcomes between the two, but patients who underwent a laminectomy with fusion had less neck pain compared to laminoplasty.

Recently, cervical disk arthroplasty has gained popularity. Some studies show no significant difference between fusion and arthroplasty regarding revision rates two years postoperatively.

A combined approach (anterior and posterior) may be needed when a multi-level corpectomy is indicated or when there is diminished bone quality secondary to the patients’ metabolic state.