Over the past three decades, the rates of overdose from cocaine have gradually increased. In the United States, deaths involving cocaine range from 0.9-1.6 per 100,000 population. Only in the last five years have the rates started to decrease to 0.78 per 100,000 population. People who inject cocaine into the neck veins have been known to develop pneumothorax, thrombophlebitis, hemothorax, and myositis. In addition, there are reports that intravenous injections can be associated with aneurysms of vessels, resulting in rupture, obstruction, and fistula formation. When cocaine is combined with other illicit and prescription drugs, the mortality rates are also high. More important, cocaine and alcohol have been associated with a 16 fold increase in the risk of suicide than either agent alone. Individuals who use cocaine often select a violent method for self-harm. Finally, cocaine use during pregnancy is also associated with adverse perinatal outcomes.

An interprofessional team can improve patient outcomes. Emergency department nurses are often responsible for triage. I high index of suspicion is needed. Emergency department and urgent care doctors and nurse practitioners are involved with initial treatment, while intensivists, cardiologists, and hospitalists continue care. Pharmacists monitor medication usage and dose, as well as check for drug-drug interactions and contraindications. Specialty-trained nurses, such as emergency and critical care nurses, administer treatments, monitor patients, and notify the team of changes in the patient's condition. They also provide education to the patient and the family.

To date, there is no drug to prevent or cure cocaine addiction. The key is to educate the patient when he or she presents to the emergency department. Patients should be urged to seek drug counseling. Those who intended to commit suicide should be referred to a mental health counselor prior to discharge.