MEPs provide real-time feedback to alert the operative and anesthesia team to potentially reversible neurologic injury. During surgical manipulation involving vulnerable structures, the surgical team may request serial MEPs to assess for signal changes. Significant changes in MEPs may indicate an impending injury and must trigger a discussion between the members of the healthcare team to determine the potential cause of the change and proceed safely with the procedure.

The anesthesia provider must communicate with the surgeon and neurophysiologist to determine potential anesthetic or physiologic causes of MEP changes unrelated to surgical manipulation. Examples of anesthetic changes that could reduce MEP signals include changes in the depth of anesthesia, recent medication boluses, or changes in maintenance medications, such as transitions from intravenous to inhaled anesthetics.

Physiologic changes can also impact MEPs. Changes in the patient’s temperature can decrease the amplitude and increase the latency of MEP signals, especially when body temperatures are lower than 32 degrees Celsius. Hyperthermia can also degrade MEP signals. Regional changes in temperature, such as a cold extremity or cold saline irrigation of the spinal cord, have also been shown to interfere with evoked potential monitoring.

Disturbances in blood flow can also cause MEP signal deterioration. Systemic hypotension or regional hypotension due to surgical compression, steal phenomenon, or localized ischemia can alter MEPs due to neuronal ischemia. Chronically hypertensive patients with abnormal autoregulation of central nervous system blood flow are at increased risk of neuronal ischemia from episodes of relative hypotension. Care is needed to keep the patient’s blood pressure at the appropriate level and promptly treat hypotension.

Changes in MEP signal due to anesthetics or systemic changes (i.e., hypotension, hypoxemia, hypothermia) will generally be global, impacting MEPs in all extremities. In contrast, MEP deterioration caused by surgical insult is typically focal and often abrupt. Changes due to local perfusion or temperature would also be expected to produce focal MEP changes, but these would generally be more gradual in onset than changes brought on by surgery.