Cranial nerves innervate different structures in the head, neck, and trunk. The olfactory and optic nerves exit from the cerebrum, while the remaining cranial nerves exit from the brainstem.

Cranial nerves have motor, sensory, and autonomic functions. Generally, a singular cranial nerve deficit indicates a peripheral nerve lesion. A lesion in the brainstem may produce multiple cranial nerve deficits and motor and sensory abnormalities of the extremities.

**Cranial Nerve I**

The olfactory bulb lies within the cranial vault on the inferior portion of the frontal lobes. The olfactory nerve (CN I) is composed of special visceral afferents, which provide the sense of smell and contribute to the flavor-discriminatory aspect of taste.

The central processes of these olfactory bulb neurons project through the olfactory trigone medially to the septal area and the contralateral bulb via the anterior commissure. At the same time, other fibers travel laterally to the amygdala and piriform cortex, also known as the primary olfactory cortex, where conscious odorant sense is processed. These fibers travel to the secondary olfactory cortex. The secondary olfactory cortex comprises the insula and entorhinal cortex (hippocampus input area connected to the parahippocampal cortex).

**Cranial Nerve II**

Optic nerve (CN II) fibers are formed from the projections of ganglion cells, whose cell bodies are located deep in the retina. Next, the optic nerve fibers traverse the optic canal and enter the cranium.

**Cranial Nerves III, IV, and VI**

The oculomotor (CN III), trochlear (CN IV), and abducens (CN VI) nerves are grouped and tested together as they all function in the motion of the eye.

**Cranial Nerve V**

The trigeminal nerve (CN V) provides the general sensory function to the face through 3 divisions: the ophthalmic (V1), maxillary (V2), and mandibular (V3).

**Cranial Nerve VII**

The facial nerve (CN VII) has motor and autonomic fibers with minor somatosensory components. Special visceral efferent (SVE) motor innervation is to the muscles of facial expression and exits the skull through the stylomastoid foramen deep to the parotid gland. Damage to these fibers results in ipsilateral facial paralysis.

General visceral efferents (GVE) and special visceral afferents (SVA) fibers initially exit the brainstem as the nervus intermedius. This separate nerve bundle joins with the other components of the facial nerve within the facial canal. The GVE components from the superior salivary nucleus are responsible for parasympathetic innervation of the glands and mucosae of the face, except for the parotid gland and the smaller buccal and labial glands.

Taste fibers from the anterior two-thirds of the tongue travel centrally as the chorda tympani nerve to their cell body of origin in the geniculate ganglion before synapsing centrally in the solitary nucleus. Depending on the location of the lesion, these visceral components may also be impacted in lesions of the facial nerve. General somatic afferents (GSA) provide sensory innervation from the auricle and a small external portion of the auditory canal.

**Cranial Nerve VIII**

The vestibulocochlear nerve (CN VIII) is responsible for auditory sensation and the vestibular sense of orientation of the head. This nerve conveys special sensory afferents (SSA) from the inner ear to the cochlear nuclei and the vestibular nuclei in the caudal medulla oblongata. Hair cells within the cochlear duct, semicircular canals, utricle, and saccule are polarized sensory receptor cells with apical ciliary extensions that transduce an electrochemical signal upon mechanical deformation.

Ganglionic neurons within the cochlea and the vestibular nerve receive this signal peripherally and transmit it centrally through the internal auditory meatus before entering the medulla. These nerves run through the internal acoustic meatus, a narrow canal of the temporal bone.

**Cranial Nerve IX**

The glossopharyngeal nerve (CN IX) is responsible for motor (SVE) innervation of the stylopharyngeus and the pharyngeal constrictor muscles by the nucleus ambiguus. Inferior salivary nucleus fibers travel with cranial nerve IX to provide general visceral efferent (GVE) innervation to parotid, buccal and labial glands. In contrast, visceral afferents (GVA and SVA) receive sensory information from the carotid body and carotid sinus and taste from the posterior third of the tongue to synapse on the solitary nucleus.

**Cranial Nerve X**

The vagus nerve (CN X) conveys parasympathetic efferents (GVE) fibers from the dorsal vagal nucleus to the thoracic and abdominal viscera to the splenic flexure of the colon representing its major neural component. These fibers form a comprehensive plexus that travels along the esophageal serosa to the viscera. It also has a considerable motor output (SVE) from the nucleus ambiguous to the pharyngeal and soft palate muscles, as well as the intrinsic laryngeal muscles via the superior and recurrent laryngeal nerves.

Somatic afferents (GSA) supply the posterior cranial dura and a portion of the ear and external auditory canal epithelium. Visceral afferents (GVA) from the pharynx, larynx, aorta, thoracic and abdominal viscera, and taste buds from the root of the tongue and epiglottis (SVA) synapse on the solitary nucleus as well.

**Cranial Nerve XI**

The spinal accessory nerve (CN XI) is responsible for the general somatic efferent (GSE) motor innervation of the trapezius and sternocleidomastoid muscles through the spinal nucleus of the accessory nerve.

Central root or nuclear damage to the spinal accessory nerve results in ipsilateral flaccid paralysis of the sternocleidomastoid (with difficulty turning the head against force) and partial ipsilateral trapezius paralysis leading to shoulder drop. The trapezius is innervated by anterior horn grey matter from cervical spinal regions C3 through C4/5 in addition to the spinal accessory nerve. Thus, complete paralysis of the trapezius muscle will not occur following a simple focal lesion.

**Cranial Nerve XII**

The hypoglossal nerve (CN XII) is responsible for the general somatic efferent (GSE) innervation of the intrinsic and extrinsic muscles of the tongue, except the palatoglossus muscle, from the nerve’s synonymous nucleus.