Fluoroscopic PICC line placement is becoming more commonly used in clinical practice. The use of fluoroscopic guidance eliminates the need for a post-procedure check X-ray. Real-time fluoroscopic guidance allows the practitioner to confidently place the PICC and ensure that they have inserted the catheter into the correct vessel, ensure the line does not have any kinks or coils and that the tip terminates in the correct anatomical location.

PICC usage has increased significantly since the advent of central venous access. However, they do have advantages over other types of catheters for central venous access, some of which include:

- Ability to use in an outpatient setting

- Lower risk of infection in inpatient settings

- Ability to remain in for months at a time for long term treatments and diagnostics

Fluoroscopically guided PICC placement is not without caveats. Not every facility has the ability to perform fluoroscopically guided procedures. Patients may be unable to travel to the radiology department to have the procedure done, such as in the ICU. Ultrasound guidance without fluoroscopy would have to be performed at the bedside in these patients. In addition, pregnant patients would be better suited to performing the procedure without fluoroscopic guidance to avoid unnecessary excess radiation to the fetus. Fluoroscopic guidance can aid in cases of PICC placement in difficult patients with tortuous anatomy. Improving healthcare professional's knowledge and exposure to this technique will ultimately improve patient outcomes and reduce the risk of infection, hemorrhage, and vascular injury.