The challenge with invasive lobular carcinomas is that they can be difficult to detect clinically and radiographically, and consequently tend to be larger at the time of diagnosis. They are often poorly circumscribed and can be missed on fine-needle aspiration and needle core biopsies due to low cellularity and the bland nature of the tumor cells.

**Mammography**

It is often difficult to diagnose invasive lobular carcinoma by mammography with higher false-negative rates than for other invasive cancers.

The mammographic presentations of invasive lobular carcinoma include:

- A mass (up to 65% of cases) with irregular margins mostly speculated but sometimes circumscribed

- Architectural distortion and asymmetric, focal density

- Microcalcifications are uncommon (0 to 24%)

- Normal or benign mammographic findings in invasive lobular carcinoma are reported in 8 to 16% of cases.

**Ultrasonography**

The different presentations of invasive lobular carcinoma on ultrasonography are

- A hypoechoic mass with irregular or indistinct margins and posterior acoustic shadowing (60%)

- Shadowing with no appearance of a mass (15 to 18%)

- Well-circumscribed mass lesions (9 to 13%)

- Ultrasonographically invisible (approximately 10%)

In one study, when investigating the role of ultrasound screening as an adjunct to annual mammography in detecting breast cancer in women with a history of lobular neoplasia diagnosed after BACAF or an excisional biopsy, it was found to improve sensitivity and the negative predictive value when used together. (Sensitivity: 83%, Specificity: 72%, Negative Predictive Value: 97%).

**Magnetic Resonance Imaging**

MRI is useful in estimating the extent of invasive lobular carcinoma since it determines tumor margins, size, and multifocality more accurately than ultrasound and mammography.

The preoperative magnetic resonance is more effective in the detection of contralateral breast cancer in an early stage with positive hormone receptors in older women at high risk of breast cancer.

The most frequent manifestation of invasive lobular carcinoma is an enhancing solitary nodule with spiculated or ill-defined margins.

Significant correlations between histology and MRI enhancement patterns have been demonstrated. Classic invasive lobular carcinomas with tumor cells streaming along septa are visualized at MRI as enhancing septa without a dominant tumor focus.