SVR becomes clinically significant when the patient's blood pressure is too high or low. Often this situation is an emergency and warrants immediate action with appropriate medication management. The classic example of an emergency like this is when a patient has lost a significant amount of blood and needs pharmacological intervention to maintain perfusion of vital organs.

Vasopressors: Agents such as exogenous epinephrine, or epinephrine analogs can be utilized to agonize alpha receptors on smooth muscle cells, increasing their tone and reducing the diameter of the associated arterioles, thus increasing SVR. Vasopressors can also be administered locally with sodium channel blockers to constrict the local vasculature and increase the duration of local analgesia.

Calcium channel blockers: Clinicians can use medications that block the calcium channels on the surface of smooth muscle cells such as verapamil to treat patients with high SVR to relax the smooth muscle cells surrounding arterioles by preventing the formation of Ca2+/calmodulin complexes needed for the contraction to occur.

The processes underlying the maintenance of SVR can also become significant when specific organs are not being appropriately perfused, as in the case of erectile dysfunction. In erectile dysfunction, there is an insufficient vasodilatory drive from the endothelium of the arterioles of the erectile tissue to allow for tumescence. This condition is treatable by blocking the action of phosphodiesterase E4 (PDE4) with drugs such as sildenafil. PDE4, metabolizes cGMP, a second messenger that mediates the relaxation of smooth muscle cells lining the arterioles. With PDE4 inhibition, cGMP levels rise due to the activity of NO from the endothelium on guanylate cyclase. This increase in cGMP mediates the relaxation of the arterioles of the erectile tissue, allowing for blood to enter the tissue and compress the veins of the erectile tissue, leading to a sustained erection.