The three primary complications associated with infertility treatments are multiples, ectopic pregnancy, and ovarian hyperstimulation syndrome.

**Multiple Gestations**

The risk of multiples has been a problem for artificial reproductive technologies since the inception of the practice. In the U.S., 32% of ART pregnancies were multiples compared to 3.4% of naturally conceived births.

Currently, the ASRM and CDC have strongly promoted the use of elective single embryo transfer eSET for good prognosis patients. With the use of eSET, the rates of twins and triplets dropped to less than 1%. Additionally, there is active debate if gonadotropins should be used for ovulation induction outside of an IVF protocol due to the high risk of multiples.

**Ectopic Pregnancy**

Ectopic pregnancy following treatment of infertile patients is another risk, which requires extensive counseling. There is a two-to threefold increase of ectopic pregnancies among infertility patients. This is thought to be associated with a high percentage of tubal factor infertility.

**Ovarian Hyperstimulation Syndrome (OHSS)**

This is an iatrogenic complication of controlled ovarian hyperstimulation that results in a broad range of signs and symptoms, ranging from abdominal distention, nausea, vomiting, enlarged ovaries, third-spacing of fluids, renal failure, and venous thrombosis, acute respiratory distress syndrome, electrolyte derangements, cardiac arrhythmias, and sepsis. If severe OHSS is not treated and monitored, mortality can result from the listed complications. The different stages of OHSS are classified by Golan et al. in 1989.