Advanced cataracts and surgical or non-surgical trauma to the lens capsule can lead to lens-induced uveitis. Typically, the time lapse from trauma or surgery is within two weeks of the event.

Many factors may influence the presentation, including the composition of the lens, amount of antigen liberation, immunological pre-sensitization, and genetic and individual factors. Symptoms include pain, redness, photophobia, watering, and decreased vision. Retained lens matter in the vitreous cavity may also cause floaters. Cystoid macular edema may also cause a reduction in vision. Visual acuity may be the perception of light (PL) in advanced cataracts or cases of severe inflammation. It may also range from PL to 20/20 in cases of post-operative uveitis. Inflammation may be seen within a few hours after trauma or surgery or might be delayed.

Typically, granulomatous anterior uveitis is noted though vitritis may also be present. Lid edema, circumciliary congestion or even diffuse congestion, corneal epithelial and stromal edema, presence of keratic precipitates (KPs, mutton fat or fine KPs), anterior chamber cells, marked flare, lens matter in the anterior chamber, hypopyon, peripheral anterior synechiae, posterior synechiae, rubeosis iridis, pupillary membrane, and iris nodules may be seen. Intraocular pressure (IOP) is often high.

Causes of high IOP include trabeculitis, phacolytic glaucoma (altered lens protein and macrophages blocking the angle of the anterior chamber), and peripheral anterior synechia. The underlying cataract is usually advanced, and there may be wrinkling or calcification of the anterior capsule. The posterior segment may not be visible due to dense cataracts. Lens fragments, vitreous cells, intense vitritis, traction bands, vasculitis, cystoid macular edema, and epiretinal membrane formation may occur. Advanced cases may present with a picture very similar to endophthalmitis. Untreated cases may result in phthisis or a painful blind eye due to absolute glaucoma. Hypotony may result from choroidal effusion, ciliary shutdown, or cyclitic membranes.