Management of neoplastic LSP usually needs radiotherapy, with slightly higher subjective than objective response rates. Treatment sometimes needs an average of 4 months before a response is seen. Response rates are better when the radiation dose is above 300cGy. Side effects of radiation include dysesthesias, causalgia, and chronic pain syndromes which in turn need a multi-modality approach including medications, lidocaine patches, transcutaneous electrical nerve stimulation (TENS) units, sympathetic ganglion blocks, and rarely plexus dissection and neurolysis.

Management of neoplastic LSP usually needs radiotherapy, with slightly higher subjective than objective response rates. Treatment sometimes needs an average of 4 months before a response is seen. Response rates are better when the radiation dose is above 300 cGy. Side effects of radiation include dysesthesias, causalgia, and chronic pain syndromes which in turn need a multi-modality approach including medications, lidocaine patches, transcutaneous electrical nerve stimulation (TENS) units, sympathetic ganglion blocks, and rarely plexus dissection and neurolysis.

Pain management and physical therapy are critical components of managing lumbosacral plexopathy related to neoplastic causes. There is not a lot of data supported by randomized controlled trials. Pain management includes - physical ( heat, cold, TENS), oral pharmacologic (various classes of medications (antidepressants including tricyclics, selective serotonin receptor inhibitors, selective norepinephrine serotonin receptor inhibitors, antiepileptic medications such as gabapentin and pregabalin as well as opiates if the pain is refractory) and topical pharmacologic (lidocaine patch, capsaicin cream). In some cases, intervention with spinal cord stimulators and/or intrathecal baclofen may be required. As for physical therapy, strengthening exercises to improve motor imbalance, improve flexibility and gait would be useful. Orthotic devices are provided where it may aid with ambulation.