**Pectus Excavatum**

This anomaly represents 90% of chest wall deformities; it is more common in the White race with an incidence of 1 per 400 live births and 5 to 1 male predominance. Pectus excavatum could present as isolated non-familiar deformity; however, familiar non-syndromic positive history is present in up to 40%, highlighting an autosomal dominant inheritance patron. Pectus excavatum deformity can be part of genetic syndromes. Noonan and Marfan are the most important associated syndromes identified by POSSUM (Pictures Of Standard Syndromes and Undiagnosed Malformations version 5.7) and WBDD (Winter-Baraitser Dysmorphology Database version 1.0.14). It is of paramount importance that Poland syndrome rib hypoplasia causes secondary pectus excavatum, which could need modified Ravitch procedure repair. Less than 1% of pectus excavatum cases have an underlying connective tissue disorder. Data shows that 80% of cases get diagnosed at two years of life. Mitral valve prolapse (17%), arrhythmias (15%), and congenital heart disease (2%) are the most important cardiac anomalies related.

**Pectus Carinatum**

Is the second most common chest-wall deformity (5 to 6 times less common than pectus excavatum), has an incidence of 0.06% of live births with a 4 to 1 male predominance. Pectus carinatum could present as an isolated disease with a 25% to 30% positive family history, or can be part of genetic syndromes. As pectus excavatum, Marfan and Noonan are the most prevalent associated syndromes. Cardiac anomalies association could exist. Thoracolumbar scoliosis is linked to an underlying connective disorder in 12% to 14% of cases. Chondrogladiolar type is more common (95%). Pectus carinatum may present at any age; however, patients generally request medical attention at puberty.

**Poland Syndrome**

The average incidence is 1 in 20000 to 1 in 30000 live births with male predominance between 2 to 1 and 3 to 1.

**Sternal Clefts**

Sternal clefts are the most common type of sternal defects and represent 0.15% of chest wall deformities.

**Ectopia Cordis**

It is an extremely rare chest-wall deformity with an estimated prevalence of 1 of 5.5 to 7.9 per million live births. Ectopia cordis types are thoracic (65% to 90%), thoracoabdominal (7% to 20%), and cervical (2.8 %). Ectopia cordis may occur as an isolated condition; however, it has a strong association with congenital heart diseases or other midline defects. Fallot tetralogy is the most common congenital cardiac defect. Thoracoabdominal ectopia cordis highlights include high indices of left ventricle diverticulum and Cantrell pentalogy association. Omphalocele is the most common abdominal defect associated with ectopia cordis.

**Jeunes Syndrome**

The incidence is 1 per 120000 live births. Most deaths occur in half to three-fourths of cases in the first two years of life. Skeletal chest wall growth arrest is the most serious complication core. Clavicle, limbs, pelvis, renal, hepatic, pancreatic are the main malformations that correlate with Jeune syndrome.

**Jarcho-Levin syndrome**

Epidemiological data are scarce. Spondylothoracic dysostosis incidence is unknown. It has an autosomal recessive inheritance patron linked to chromosome 2q32.1, without DLL3 gene mutation, it does not demonstrate gender predilection. Puerto Rican ancestry history is commonly positive. Most deaths (80 to 100%) occur in infancy; however, reports exist of mild phenotypes cases with a good prognosis.