When performing surgeries, it is important to be aware of anatomical variations of sesamoid bones. While surgeries involving the patella, such as total knee arthroplasty, are commonplace, medical imaging plays a critical role in the pre-operative evaluation, surgical technique, and postoperative follow-up.

Special consideration should be taken to cut medial to the patella, reflecting the patella laterally to reach the patellofemoral joint. Similarly, surgeries involving the various ligaments of the knee also utilize imaging to visualize multiple structures within the knee. The patella remains the exception in the study of sesamoid bones due to its consistent presence and significance.

Sesamoid excision has been studied in athletes with a sesamoid bone injury and whether an athlete's ability was affected because of this. The study showed that about 80% of athletes who underwent a sesamoidectomy could return to sports in five months.

Another commonly studied sesamoid surgery involves the hallux sesamoid. A successful union of a hallux sesamoid fracture is challenging, and a sesamoidectomy was explored for the potential to provide better outcomes. The study showed that sesamoidectomy provided better pain relief and allowed a return to normal activities within 12 weeks.

Whereas a sesamoid bone often posed no significant discomfort or pain, any fracture or injury to a sesamoid bone greatly benefited from excision instead of a union repair.

An unexpected sesamoid bone poses a unique challenge in surgeries involving that particular area if adequate imaging is not readily available in an emergent situation. Surgeons must be aware of potential anatomical variants and their interactions with the local anatomy if operating in an area with high suspicion of a sesamoid bone. Special consideration must be taken into account for an unexpected sesamoid bone if conventional surgical techniques and approaches do not allow it.