**Mechanical Removal**

Cutting the eyelashes is a radical technique. Using forceps, physical removal of lice and nits from the eyelashes may be difficult in non-cooperative patients such as children. The use of botulinum toxin A, at the concentration of 2.5 units per 0.1 ml applied with a swab stick on the eyelashes, may be a cost-effective adjunctive treatment, which facilitates physical removal since it induces paralysis of the lice preventing them from adhering to the eyelashes.

**Topical Drugs**

Several topical treatments may be used in phthiriasis palpebrarum. Yellow 1% mercuric oxide ophthalmic ointment (older publications), 0.3% tobramycin eye ointment,  0.5% moxifloxacin eye ointment, parasympathomimetic agents (physostigmine ointment, 4% pilocarpine gel), liquid vaseline, topical botulinum toxin, 20% fluorescein, and liquid petrolatum ointment have been reported to be efficient on lice and nits. Topical antiparasitic agents such as natural pyrethrin's, pyrethroids, 1% permethrin, 0.2% phenothrin, topical 0.5%-1% malathion or shampoo, 50% tea tree oil, and lindane (sometimes erroneously reported as gamma-benzene hexachloride) may also be prescribed.

**Cryotherapy and Argon Laser Therapy**

Parasite destruction may be an alternative to physical removal or topical treatment. Cryotherapy with liquid nitrogen performed under the slit lamp was reported to be efficient by some authors.

**Role of Ivermectin**

Oral ivermectin may be used as a single dose treatment; however, since the drug's half-life is 16 hours, a second dose may be necessary after seven to 10 days to control newly hatched nits. Oral ivermectin is contraindicated in children younger than five years old and/or weighing less than 15 kilograms. Ivermectin can cross the blood-brain barrier and result in untoward side effects for pregnant and lactating women. Ivermectin blocks the chemical signals through the synaptic channels of the nerve.  The act on neurotransmitters glutamate or gamma-aminobutyric acid (GABA) paralyzes the parasite resulting in death.

**General Hygienic Measures**

Treatment of associated body hair infestation using antiparasitic topical and/or shaving is mandatory. Clothing, bedding, pillowcases, and towels should be washed at 50 C for half an hour and then heat dried for up to 10 minutes to eliminate both lice and nits. All sexual contacts and family members of a person having should be evaluated for the presence of phthiriasis pubis and phthiriasis palpebrarum, and if necessary, they have to be treated. The effect of such measures in preventing recontamination is a proven strategy.