**Anatomy**

The glenohumeral joint is a complex, mobile, multiaxial, ball-and-socket articulation that allows coordinated motion in the frontal, transverse, and sagittal planes. The latter allows for 360 degrees of circumduction. The relatively shallow glenoid fossa articulates with the much larger humeral head to allow for a wide range of physiologic motion. Also, the joint capsule is relatively lax. Shoulder movements occur secondary to the dynamic and coordinated articulations at four distinct joints:

- Sternoclavicular

- Acromioclavicular

- Glenohumeral

- Scapulothoracic

Static and Dynamic Stabilizers

The static stabilizers include the glenohumeral articulation, the labrum, the glenohumeral ligaments, rotator cuff interval structures, and the negative intra-articular pressure. The dynamic stabilizers consist of the rotator cuff muscles, the deltoid, and the scapular and periscapular stabilizers.

**Shoulder Instability Cascade**

Pathophysiology and pathologic cascade exist for shoulder instability, acute episodes, recurrence, and long-term implications. There is significant variability in the amount of shoulder translation in asymptomatic, normal subjects. However, shoulder instability is a pathologic process that results in an excessive translation of the humeral head on the glenoid, ultimately resulting in pain, weakness, and shoulder dysfunction.

Several anatomic risk factors have been identified as potential contributors to developing shoulder instability. For example, increasing degrees of glenoid eversion away from neutral and an inferior inclination of the glenoid vault are associated with anterior shoulder instability.

To accurately diagnose and classify shoulder instability, it is critical to distinguish joint laxity from actual instability. The latter characteristically demonstrates the presence of symptoms in association with abnormal laxity. The pathologic soft tissue laxity can be present either from repetitive microtrauma, high-energy acute trauma (e.g., traumatic dislocations), or it can be present congenitally. Shoulder instability implies some degree of disruption to the static and/or dynamic stabilizers of the glenohumeral joint, including the osseous structures, capsule, labrum, and glenohumeral ligaments. Regarding the latter, the anterior and posterior bands of the inferior glenohumeral ligament (IGHL) are the most critical ligamentous structures in maintaining shoulder stability.

**Unidirectional Instability**

Unidirectional instability can present following acute trauma or one or multiple low-energy instability events. The latter may be present in the setting of unidirectional instability with or without hyperlaxity. When there is associated soft tissue hyperlaxity, an accompanying capsulolabral lesion is less likely. In effect, the unidirectional instability is often attributable to the patulous capsular tissue that predisposes the shoulder to recurrent instability events. However, the same unidirectional instability scenario in a patient without soft tissue hyperlaxity most commonly will present with an associated capsulolabral injury.

Following a traumatic primary shoulder dislocation, a significant number of patients will demonstrate at least a mild degree of either chondral or osteochondral lesions.

**Humeral Sided Defects**

The Hill-Sachs lesion is an impaction injury to the posterosuperolateral humeral head associated with anterior instability events. Described in 1940 by Hill and Sachs, the authors highlighted the so-called line of condensation that was apparent on the posterosuperolateral humeral head and best viewed on the internal rotation shoulder radiograph.

The impact of recurrent instability on the Hill-Sachs lesion becomes problematic as the abnormal anterior soft tissue laxity predisposes the Hill-Sachs lesion to repeatedly abut against the harder cortical bone at the anterior glenoid.

**Glenoid Sided Defects**

The prevalence of glenoid bone loss is also not consistently reported in the literature, although most authors agree that in the setting of recurrent instability, there will inevitably be some degree of glenoid bone loss.

The nature of glenoid defects is best appreciated on three-dimensional CT scans, having the ability to differentiate between a true bony Bankart lesion from the more erosive changes that can be seen representing an attritional bone loss state. The former is considered a true fracture fragment containing a portion of the anterior glenoid rim. The latter often appears rounded off with blunted edges on imaging, indicative of a more chronic, erosive process secondary to recurrent instability or, in the acute setting, a low-energy compression fracture. The description of the location of these defects often references relative to a clock face created by drawing a circle around the glenoid. Saito et al. reported that the most common location of glenoid defects in the setting of anterior instability is between 2:30 and 4:20.

The pathologic mechanism of glenoid bone defects is likely multifactorial. In general, blunted osseous glenoid defects can present in the setting of either:

- Acute, low-energy, compression fracture

- Chronic/recurrent, low-energy, attritional deficiency and erosive changes over time

Chronic attritional glenoid erosive changes can develop over time following a high-energy index dislocation event that initially suffers an accompanying glenoid injury. The injury is either managed nonoperatively or ultimately fails surgical fixation to result in subsequent instability events with progressive attritional glenoid erosion over time.

Glenoid rim fractures and acute avulsion injuries often result secondary to high-energy impact collisions. Moreover, traumatic dislocations yielding associated glenoid injuries can produce large, anterior glenoid rim fracture fragment(s) or smaller glenoid rim avulsion injuries. Burkhart and De Beer advocated that an acute glenoid rim fracture suggests a significant axial load impacted the glenoid rim at the time of dislocation. The authors compared shoulder dislocation events seen in South African rugby players to American football players. The former had about a 10% incidence rate of associated glenoid rim fractures, while American football players in this particular study had a 0% association rate of glenoid rim fractures.

**Multidirectional Instability**

Since the initial description of multidirectional shoulder instability (MDI), our knowledge regarding the pathologic findings and objective criteria for diagnosing MDI remains debated. Part of the clinical ambiguity is attributable to the lack of a precise definition for MDI. Neer and Foster initially described MDI as anterior and posterior instability associated with involuntary inferior subluxation or dislocation.

The same principles applied earlier for unidirectional shoulder instability classifications also apply to the MDI setting. Anterior and posterior capsulolabral injuries will often accompany MDI without soft tissue hyperlaxity. MDI patients with soft tissue hyperlaxity will often present with instability in two or more directions and display signs of generalized hyperlaxity on physical exam. Patients more commonly report relatively frequent, recurrent low-energy subluxation events.

**Long-term Implications**

Altered Shoulder Girdle Biomechanics

Glenoid bone loss decreases the available articular arc and generates glenoid-humeral mismatch. The former generates a smaller articular arc length and decreased surface area by which the glenoid cavity can resist transmitted axial forces from the proximal humerus. Thus, failing to address glenoid bone loss during surgical fixation will result in significant shear forces imparted to a repaired capsulolabral interface.

Alterations in the static and dynamic scapular movements present in the setting of glenohumeral instability. Scapular dyskinesia is reportedly present in up to 80% of instability patients.

- Anterior tilting

- Internal rotation

- Protraction

Additionally, scapular dyskinesia predisposing to anterior shoulder instability also includes decreased upward rotation of the scapula during scapulothoracic movements. The result of altered scapular posturing yields excessive tensile loads and shear forces experienced by the anterior band of the inferior glenohumeral ligament (aIGHL).

Recurrent Instability

Recurrent instability can develop from any of the above-mentioned underlying pathophysiologic mechanisms. Furthermore, recurrent instability can present following nonoperative and operative management. Several studies have indicated that almost 90% of contact athletes and up to two-thirds of non-contact athletes with significant glenoid bone loss ultimately fail surgical stabilization secondary to associated Bankart lesions or abnormal glenoid morphology affecting overall glenohumeral joint biomechanics.

Dislocation Arthropathy

In 1982, Neer first described a subset of patients with a history of shoulder instability events (or required surgical stabilization procedures) that developed glenohumeral arthritis at long-term follow-up.

By definition, dislocation arthropathy describes degenerative changes of the shoulder joint. Hovelius and Rahme conducted a prospective study of 257 primary anterior shoulder dislocations in 255 patients. At a 25-year follow-up, 27% had mild glenohumeral arthritis, and 34% had moderate to severe arthrosis.