The initial management of a patient diagnosed with urinary retention is usually a urethral Foley catheter. The amount drained immediately should be recorded. Patients with more than 1,500 mL drained immediately from the bladder after catheter insertion are at risk for postobstructive diuresis.

**Postobstructive diuresis**is a pathological condition of uncontrolled salt and water excretion. It is defined as more than 200 mL of urinary output per hour for at least 2 hours or more than 3,000 mL of urine over 24 hours.

In patients who are totally unable to void or have very large residuals (1,500 mL or more), a Foley catheter is preferred initially for monitoring due to possible postobstructive diuresis as well as therapeutic bladder decompression and recovery. If, for any reason, a urethral catheter cannot be inserted, a suprapubic tube can be placed instead.

Bladder overdistension injury will occur if an overdistended bladder (defined as 120% or more of normal capacity or generally more than 600 mL) is maintained for 24 hours or longer.

**Acute urinary retention**is best managed with a short-term Foley catheter or clean intermittent patient self-catheterization until the resolution of the disorder. An initial Foley catheter is usually preferred if residual volumes of >1,000 mL are encountered. This can be converted to a self-catheterization program if the patient is willing and able to do so. A benefit of self-catheterization is that when normal bladder function returns, the post-void residual volumes will decrease, and it will become obvious that the catheterizations are no longer needed. For this reason, it is suggested that the patient measure and record the post-void residual amount occasionally, such as once a day. Another advantage is that if the patient ever feels a return of symptoms, she can perform a self-catheterization and avoid a visit to the emergency department.

The risk of a significant decrease in renal function or permanent bladder damage is minimal in acute urinary retention if identified and treated promptly. A Foley catheter, suprapubic tube, or clean intermittent self-catheterization will be necessary for female patients with acute urinary retention not due to a mechanical obstruction who remain unable to void adequately on their own. A full recovery is unlikely if it has not occurred by six to eight months after the original acute event, which now becomes chronic urinary retention.

Intermittent self-catheterization is preferred over indwelling catheters or suprapubic tubes whenever possible, except in cases of very large initial bladder volumes of 1,500 mL or more where an initial period of continuous Foley catheterization is suggested.

Patients suspected of a possible unrecognized surgical cystotomy (essentially all female patients with urinary retention immediately after any major pelvic surgery) can be checked by simple irrigation of the bladder through a Foley catheter with 100 mL of sterile saline. In patients with an unrecognized cystotomy, the fluid can be instilled but cannot be withdrawn. In such cases, an immediate x-ray cystogram should be done. Small extraperitoneal bladder perforations can often be managed conservatively with just a Foley catheter, but if the leak is particularly large or intraperitoneal, an immediate surgical repair is required.

**Clean Intermittent Self-Catheterization**

Patients who are candidates for clean intermittent self-catheterization need to have the manual dexterity and strength to perform the procedure, as well as the mental ability to understand the procedure and the willingness to do so on an ongoing, regular basis. For many patients, an initial schedule might be four times a day: morning, after lunch, after dinner, and at bedtime. Additional catheterizations are permitted depending on the volumes obtained and patient sensation. Some patients may need to perform self-catheterization six times a day and possibly once at night as well.

The patient should always void first, if able. The timing of the catheterizations should be adjusted to maintain a catheterized urinary volume of no more than 500 mL. When the catheterizations are consistently less than 200 mL, consideration can be given to performing them less often or stopping the procedure altogether.

Learning how to perform self-catheterization can be challenging for many women. They may not be familiar with the anatomy, or their body habitus may make it difficult. The use of a mirror is suggested and can be helpful for many women who otherwise would have difficulty doing the procedure. A flashlight is also helpful. Patients should wash their hands or use gloves (non-sterile) before performing self-catheterization. Pre-lubricated, non-touch catheters are commercially available. Washing the genital area and using an antiseptic wipe just before catheterizing is recommended to minimize urinary tract infections. Prophylactic antibiotics are not generally used except in exceptional cases.

An experienced female nurse is suggested for this training to minimize patient anxiety and discomfort. This should not be rushed, and patients should be given ample opportunity to learn and practice the technique if they are capable and interested. The importance of maintaining a regular schedule of bladder emptying should be emphasized to avoid urological complications. Many educational aids and videos are available online and from various healthcare organizations and societies, including the Society of Urologic Nurses and Associates (SUNA) and the American Urological Association (AUA).

**Voiding Trial**

At some point, patients with acute retention requiring a Foley will be ready for a voiding trial. (This is not necessary for patients doing self-catheterization as their residual urine volumes will indicate when it's safe to discontinue the practice.) For most neurologically intact patients, this can be done within a few days to a few weeks after the initial episode of urinary retention. If the original bladder volume drained was over 1,500 to 2,000 mL, a longer period is recommended to allow the bladder muscle more time to recover, such as two to four weeks.

For an active voiding trial, such as can be done in an office or clinic, the bladder is filled with 300 mL of sterile saline or to maximum tolerable capacity. The catheter is then removed, and the patient is allowed to void. Success is generally defined as a post-void residual volume of 100 mL or less, although less than 200 mL may be acceptable in some cases. Success may also be defined as a post-void residual volume of no more than one-third of the amount instilled.

A spontaneous voiding trial may be easier for hospitalized patients who can just have their catheters removed early in the morning (such as at 5 or 6 AM before the usual change of nursing shifts) and then be taken to the bathroom to try voiding after 4 hours. A bladder scan should be done for a post-void residual when the patient voids, but the scan should be done even if the patient is unable to urinate in order to avoid bladder overdistension. The patient is then given another opportunity to void every 2 hours until they are successful or their residual volumes approach 500 mL. Success is again defined as post-void residual urine of 100 mL or less. It may also be defined as a post-void residual of only one-third or less of the total bladder volume.

A post-void residual of over 200 mL is regarded as abnormal, while a reading of 100 to 200 mL is considered equivocal.

**Chronic urinary retention**is treated initially the same as acute urinary retention: either with a urethral Foley catheter, suprapubic tube or by clean intermittent self-catheterization. AUA Guidelines also recommend a renal function test (serum creatinine) and renal ultrasound as initial baseline tests in newly diagnosed patients with chronic urinary retention.

Long-term intermittent self-catheterization is a reasonable treatment option for many women with chronic urinary retention, as most will demonstrate detrusor underactivity and low bladder storage pressures, which minimizes the risk of renal failure.

Patients with acute or chronic retention associated with a urinary tract infection, sepsis, hemodynamic instability, a high likelihood of severe postobstructive diuresis, acute myelopathy, or acute renal failure should generally be admitted.

Conservative treatment measures have had some limited success in treating female urinary retention. Physical therapy with biofeedback has shown benefits in some patients with prolapse, rectoceles, cystoceles, and dysfunctional voiding.

Those patients with specific obstructive disorders usually benefit from customized therapy.

- Patients with pelvic organ prolapse clearly benefit from treatment of the prolapse.

- Using a pessary to correct stage 3 or 4 pelvic organ prolapse resulted in improved post-void residual volumes in 75% of such patients with urinary retention.

- Surgical prolapse repair resulted in normal post-void residual volumes of 89%.

- Urethral dilations are not generally recommended in female patients with urinary retention, especially not after synthetic sling surgery, due to the risk of mesh erosions, but may be of use in selected cases with known urethral strictures.

- Most urinary retention patients with urethral erosions from prior pelvic incontinence surgery will see a relief of their voiding problem by the removal of the transvaginal sling and urethral reconstruction.

- In carefully selected female patients with primary bladder neck obstruction, about 85% saw relief of their urinary retention from surgical transurethral bladder neck incision.

- Botulinum toxin injections have been used successfully in men with primary bladder neck obstruction, but there is inadequate data available about its use in female patients with chronic urinary retention.

- Bethanechol is a cholinergic agonist that can increase detrusor muscle tone. However, it has not demonstrated any significant benefit, either alone or with prostaglandin E2, in treating non-obstructive female urinary retention even with detrusor underactivity and is therefore not recommended.

Alpha-adrenergic blocker medications such as tamsulosin generally appear to help, but many studies regarding its use are small, lack a control group, are short-term, and results are somewhat inconsistent. Overall, alpha-adrenergic blocker medications are generally recommended as most available studies show the benefit of this therapy in female patients with urinary retention. The medication is well tolerated, and no other simple, more effective alternative treatment exists.

**Sacral neuromodulation**is a minimally invasive treatment that utilizes an implantable device to provide gentle electrical stimulation of the S3 nerve root to modulate bladder function. While particularly effective for many patients with intractable overactive bladder disorders, sacral neuromodulation also offers an overall 70% success rate in treating non-obstructive female urinary retention.

The mechanism of action is not well understood but is thought to be through inhibition of the guarding reflex, which normally prevents accidental urinary leakage by activating somatic efferent fibers to contract the external urinary sphincter. This is initiated by afferent signals to Onuf's nucleus during periods of increased pressure, such as during a cough.

Many ladies are unhappy about the generally accepted treatments of alpha-blockers, urethral dilation, intermittent catheterization, permanent catheterization, pessary placement, surgery, Botulinum toxin urethral injections, pelvic floor exercises, and physical therapy due to inconvenience, discomfort, or lack of efficacy which makes sacral neuromodulation a viable alternative for many.

Sacral neuromodulation is relatively costly, and long-term efficacy is uncertain. A surgical procedure is needed for placement. Battery life is limited, and older models will require periodic implant replacement or at least periodic recharging for newer, rechargeable units.

**Fowler syndrome**may be best treated by sacral neuromodulation as it has been shown to increase detrusor contractility without increasing urethral activity.

Sacral neuromodulation is the recommended treatment for Fowler's syndrome, as surgeries and medications are not usually effective, and there is evidence of restoration of normal voiding in many patients.

**Percutaneous tibial nerve stimulation**is similar to sacral neuromodulation because the intention is to activate the S3 nerve route. This is achieved indirectly by stimulating the tibial nerve at the ankle. This avoids surgical implantation of tined leads or stimulator battery packs but is generally less effective. Patients receive tibial nerve stimulation treatments weekly in the office or clinic for 12 weeks.

There is limited data on the use of percutaneous tibial nerve stimulation for female urinary retention, although a recent systematic analysis showed a moderate success rate of 25% to 41%, with more than half the patients indicating subjective improvement.

**Treatment Summary:**

- Initial treatment for acute or chronic urinary retention is the same; Foley catheter, suprapubic tube, or self-catheterization depending on patient capability and willingness.

- Short-term continuous catheterization is recommended for high-risk patients and those with larger bladder residual volumes (>1,500 mL).

- Intermittent self-catheterization is recommended whenever possible.

- Persistent post-void residuals of <200 mL generally indicate resolution of urinary retention.

- Acute retention for six months or more is treated as chronic urinary retention.

- Retention caused by specific obstructive disorders should have those problems corrected.

- Pelvic organ prolapse can be treated with a pessary or surgery.

- Urethral strictures can be treated with dilation, which is otherwise not recommended, particularly not after sling surgery due to the high risk of urethral erosions.

- Botulinum toxin and transurethral incision or resection may be helpful in selected patients, but there is a worrisome risk of permanent incontinence.

- Bethanechol is not recommended due to its low efficacy and high side effect profile.

- Alpha-adrenergic blockers such as tamsulosin are generally recommended as the preponderance of the available evidence suggests a benefit.

- Sacral neuromodulation and percutaneous tibial nerve stimulation are recommended options in non-obstructive chronic female urinary retention.