Aldosterone is clinically significant for two reasons. An increase or decrease in aldosterone can cause disease and medications affecting its function alter blood pressure. Changes in the concentration of aldosterone, either too much (Conn syndrome and renovascular hypertension) or too little (certain types of Addison's disease and congenital adrenal hyperplasia), can result in disastrous effects on the body.

Hyperaldosteronism is caused by either a primary tumor within the adrenal gland (Conn syndrome) or via renovascular hypertension. A primary tumor within the adrenal gland causes an uncontrolled production and release of aldosterone. Renovascular hypertension increases aldosterone through two primary mechanisms: fibromuscular dysplasia (usually in young females) and atherosclerosis (usually in older individuals). Both decreased perfusion to the afferent arterioles of the kidney causes the renin-angiotensin system to be activated. This causes uncontrolled hypertension and hypokalemia.

Addison’s disease is characterized by a hypo-functioning adrenal gland. However, depending on the cause of Addison’s disease, the regulation of aldosterone may be unaffected. Aldosterone is only affected by Addison’s disease when the adrenal gland undergoes destruction, for example, in autoimmune-mediated destruction. Aldosterone is controlled by the renin-angiotensin system, while the rest of the adrenal glands' hormone production is controlled by adrenocorticotropic hormone (ACTH). Therefore, in cases of Addison’s disease caused by pituitary dysfunction, adrenal insufficiency will exist, but with appropriate aldosterone levels. This is due to the fact the renin-angiotensin system remains intact.

Contraction alkalosis is a side effect of increased absorption of water via aldosterone and ADH pathways during a volume-depleted state. The body senses a low mean arterial blood pressure when the ECF is low. Therefore the renin-angiotensin system is activated. This causes an increase in water absorption as well as activation of aldosterone. Aldosterone causes sodium to be absorbed and potassium to be excreted into the lumen by principal cells. In alpha intercalated cells, located in the late distal tubule and collecting duct, hydrogen ions and potassium ions are exchanged. Hydrogen is excreted into the lumen, and the potassium is absorbed. This mechanism prevents the body from losing too much potassium, which causes a relative depletion of hydrogen ions in the blood causing an alkalotic state.

**Medications**

Beta-agonists/antagonists can cause the increase or decrease of renin by the JG cells, which translates to an increase or decrease in aldosterone.

Angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitors, a common class of hypertensive medications, blocks ACE from producing angiotensin II which results in a decreased aldosterone.

Angiotensin II receptor blockers (ARBs) block angiotensin II receptors which result in a decrease in aldosterone. This class of medications is used to control blood pressure when a patient has an intolerance to ACE-I.

Spironolactone is an aldosterone receptor blocker, which prevents aldosterone from acting on the receptors within the principal cells of the kidney.

Amiloride and triamterene are medications that block the sodium channels on the luminal side of the principal cells within the kidney. This prevents aldosterone from exerting its full effect on the kidney.

Generally speaking, all of these medications block the function of aldosterone, which prevents sodium absorption and potassium excretion. Therefore, possible side effects to all of these medications are hyponatremia, hyperkalemia, and hypovolemia.