The spleen is an important site of autoantibody production. Sequestration of anti-platelet IgG antibodies occurs in the spleen's red pulp, where sensitized platelet removal occurs by phagocytosis. Research showed that radiolabeled-IgG sensitized platelet removal occurs in a few hours compared with a normal platelet half-life of 8 to 9 days.

In contrast to maternal ITP, gestational thrombocytopenia rarely brings the count below 70,000 /dL, typically does not cause bleeding, and has its origins in a dilutional, not consumptive, mechanism.

Neonatal alloimmune thrombocytopenia may occur in pregnant women who are negative for the platelet antigen PL a1 but were sensitized in prior pregnancies by infants who were PL a1 positive or by blood transfusion. The condition has also involved other platelet antigens.

In drug-induced ITP, the drug absorbs the platelet cell membrane. The immune system makes antibodies to the target drug-platelet complex, which results in the removal of the sensitized platelet by phagocytes residing in the spleen and liver. The activation of the complement system by the classical pathway is another effector mechanism of platelet cell damage (thrombocytopenia).

Childhood immune thrombocytopenic purpura often occurs within a few weeks following a viral infection, suggesting a possible cross-immunization between viral and platelet antigens, the absorption of immune complexes, or a hapten mechanism.

Many other platelet antigens are a target of autoantibodies, including GPIIb/IIIA and GP V (after chickenpox). However, their exact role in diagnostic testing is dubious at best.