There is good evidence that post-mastectomy radiation lowers the risk of locoregional recurrence of breast cancer. But this therapy is not devoid of side effects. Patients undergoing radiation therapy need to be managed by an interprofessional team that includes an oncologist, oncology nurse, physical therapist, and an internist. These patients need follow up to ensure that they are not developing a recurrence of cancer or side effects from the therapy. Besides history and physical exam, a mammogram and routine blood tests are required every 6 to 12 months. In addition, women over the age of 60 also need assessment of their bone density. To reduce the risk of fractures, the patient should be encouraged to discontinue smoking and enroll in a physical therapy program. A cardiology referral is necessary to screen for heart disease. The pharmacist should emphasize the importance of integrative therapies like yoga, meditation, massage, and music to lower stress. A dietary consult should be obtained to ensure that the patient is eating a healthy diet rich in calcium.

**Outcomes**

There have been many studies conducted on the benefits of post-mastectomy radiation and the overall impression is that there is a reduction in relapse rates and overall mortality in patients who receive extensive irradiation. So far the studies have not shown a significant difference in recurrence following radiation in patients with one or 2-3 positive lymph nodes. Unfortunately, most studies have not been long-term with only a few following patients at 10 years.