Methadone is available as a lipophilic hydrochloride salt in oral, IM, IV, subcutaneous, epidural, and intrathecal formulations.

- Pain management:

- 
              
- Opioid-naive: Oral, 2.5 mg every eight hours with incremental dose increase if needed about once every week.
              
              
- Opioid-Tolerant: Oral, 10 mg of methadone is approximately equivalent to a 15 mg dose of oral morphine. Follow dosing charts for equivalent dosing and conversion factors tailored to the individual patient.

- Opioid use disorder:

- 
              
- General: Oral dosing starts at 30 to 40 mg/day and is titrated upwards by 10 to 20 mg/week to an optimal of 80 to 150 mg/day.
              
              
- Pregnancy: Continue maintenance treatment in women who are pregnant and have opioid use disorder. Consider treating with buprenorphine instead due to less sedation on the neonate.

- Opioid withdrawal:

- 
              
- Adults: Oral dosing starts at 10 to 20 mg and is increased by 10 mg increments until the withdrawal symptoms are controlled, usually about 40 mg. Stabilize dosing for 2 to 3 days and then reduce dose by 10 to 20% daily and monitor for withdrawal symptoms. 
              
              
- Neonates**:**Oral, 0.05 to 0.1 mg/kg every 6 hours until withdrawal symptoms stabilize. Then reduce the dose by 10 to 20% daily and continue serial monitoring of withdrawal symptoms

**Other Considerations**

- Methadone has high oral bioavailability, with plasma levels measurable after 30 minutes and a decline in plasma levels occurring after 24 hours, all of which should be considered in frail patients or patients with altered hepatic clearance to prevent overdose.

- CYP 3A4 and CYP 2B6 hepatically metabolize methadone to non-active metabolites, and interactions with other hepatically metabolized drugs merit consideration and monitoring.

- As methadone is hepatically metabolized, dosing adjustments are typically not needed in patients with renal issues, but care should still be advisable in end-stage renal disease.

- The recommended dose for parenteral administration is between 50 to 80% of the oral dose, and caution is necessary when switching to methadone from another opioid. Dosing ratios can be useful to calculate the appropriate dose.