Carbon dioxide lasers are employed for a variety of cutaneous conditions and indications. These include treatment and prevention of photoaging and reduction in the appearance of scarring, among others. Carbon dioxide lasers may also be used for prophylaxis and treatment of premalignant lesions and keratinocyte skin cancers (squamous cell carcinoma and basal cell carcinoma), as well as cutaneous vascular lesions such as hamartomas. Carbon dioxide laser resurfacing produces its optimal results in patients with Fitzpatrick type I-II skin - fair-skinned Caucasians - because they have fewer melanocytes, which are prone to causing dyspigmentation as a result of post-procedure inflammation.

Cosmetic indications for CO2 laser resurfacing include the treatment of photoaging and rhytids. Photoaged skin is characterized by increased laxity, irregular color and texture, and the presence of static rhytids. In comparison to other methods of addressing photoaging, such as dermabrasion and chemical peels, the use of CO2 lasers allows for more precise control over the area, depth, and extent of thermal damage. A number of blinded studies have demonstrated significant improvement in photoaging of the forehead and glabella and the periorbital and perioral regions, resulting from the collagen remodeling after CO2 laser treatment.

Treatment of scarring from acne, trauma, or surgical procedures can be achieved effectively with CO2 laser resurfacing as well.

For the treatment of premalignant lesions and actinic damage, CO2 lasers may not be as effective as other methods, such as chemical peels or dermabrasion. When compared with topical 5-fluorouracil and trichloroacetic acid chemical peels, CO2 laser treatments have been shown to be equally effective in reducing the number of premalignant actinic keratoses and keratinocyte skin cancers that ultimately develop.

Carbon dioxide lasers can also be employed for the treatment of keratinocytic skin cancers.