# Continuing Education Activity

Pulmonary contusions are lung injuries commonly sustained during cases of blunt chest trauma. These traumatic lung injuries result in impaired gas exchange, AV shunting, and decreased lung compliance. This article reviews the evaluation and treatment of pulmonary contusions and highlights the role an interprofessional team plays in ensuring a high level of care to improve patient outcomes.

**Objectives:**
- Identify the etiology of pulmonary contusion and emergencies.
- Review the evaluation of pulmonary contusions.
- Outline the management options available for pulmonary contusions.

# Introduction

A pulmonary contusion is an injury to the lung parenchyma in the absence of laceration to lung tissue or any vascular structures. It usually results from blunt chest trauma, shock waves associated with penetrating chest injury, or explosion injuries. These injuries can lead to pulmonary failure and death. The pathophysiology of pulmonary contusions remains poorly understood. They were first described by Morgagni, an Italian anatomist, in 1761, and the term pulmonary contusion was coined in the 19th century by French military surgeon Dupuytren.

Widespread use of explosives in World War 1 and 2 led to increased recognization of pulmonary contusion due to blast injuries. Many soldiers with blast injuries developed pulmonary bleeding without apparent external injuries.

# Etiology

Any chest trauma, blunt, penetrating, or a combination of both, can lead to a pulmonary contusion. Explosions, falls from great heights, and sports injuries are other identified causes.

# Epidemiology

A pulmonary contusion is the most commonly identified lung injury  (30% to 75%) in blunt chest traumas, with a mortality rate of 10-25%.

# Pathophysiology

A pulmonary contusion causes injury to the lung parenchymal, leading to disruption of alveoli and capillaries, resulting in leakage of blood and other interstitial fluids (water and serum) across the alveolar-capillary membrane into lung tissue and alveolar space. Fluid in the alveolar space leads to alveolar edema and a decrease in the amount of surfactant, leading to alveolar collapse and atelectasis. Decreased lung compliance, ventilation-perfusion mismatch, and intra-pulmonary shunting result from the discoloration.

Lung injury due to pulmonary contusion leads to activation of the immune system, resulting in tissue macrophage activation, accumulation of blood leucocytes, and increased production of cytokines, chemokines, arachidonic acid metabolites, oxygen radicals, complement, and coagulation cascades.

Concurrent aspiration of gastric acid can complicate a pulmonary contusion by worsening the permeability of lung injury and increasing inflammatory response and progress to ARDS and pneumonia.

Three possible mechanisms are suggested for resulting in pulmonary contusion.

- **The spalling effect**leads to increased cell membrane permeability due to the interruption of the lipid layer when a pressure wave encounters a liquid-gas interface, such as the alveolar wall.

- **The inertial effect**, when a pressure wave encounters tissues with different densities, leads to a different rate of acceleration and deceleration, resulting in lighter alveoli stripping away from denser bronchial tissue.

- **The implosion effect**, when a pressure wave encounters tissues with air bubbles, compresses the gas within tissues, and a rebound leads to stretching and tearing of tissues due to over-expansion.

# Histopathology

Pulmonary hemorrhage may be associated with pulmonary contusion. Alveolar or interstitial fluid accumulation was found on biopsy in soldiers during world war 2, initially attributed to fluid resuscitation. In recent years, animal disease models have identified interstitial hemorrhage followed by edema and inflammatory cell infiltration.

# History and Physical

The clinical presentation may vary based on the severity of pulmonary contusion and other concurrent injuries. It may present with difficulty breathing and coughing, whereas mild cases may be asymptomatic. The affected area of the chest may be tender. Breath sounds may be decreased on auscultation. In severe cases, hemoptysis may be the presenting symptom. In extreme cases, alveolar gas exchange is disrupted, resulting in hypoxemia and hypercarbia, which leads to tachypnea and dyspnea.

In severe contusion, symptoms appear within hours, whereas in mild injury, symptoms may develop gradually over 24 to 48 hrs.

# Evaluation

A detailed history of the injury, thorough physical examination, and imaging can aid in diagnosing pulmonary contusion.

The imaging techniques include radiography of the chest, computer tomography (CT) scans, and ultrasound.

A chest X-ray is the most commonly used imaging technique for diagnosis. Its interpretation may be difficult as lung anatomical boundaries do not limit pulmonary contusions.

An ultrasound is a vital bedside imaging tool readily available for evaluating trauma patients in the supine position in the emergency department for diagnosis of pulmonary contusion and pneumothorax.

A chest CT scan is a more sensitive imaging technique in diagnosing pulmonary contusion. A higher resolution of CT scans can detect contusion immediately after trauma.

# Treatment / Management

Most pulmonary contusions require supportive therapy until the contusion heals. Because contusions can gradually evolve over the first 24 to 48 hours after trauma, close monitoring is needed. Treatment aims to prevent respiratory insufficiency, failure, and complications.

**Supportive care**like postural drainage, suctioning, chest physiotherapy, incentive spirometry, encouraging coughing, and deep breathing can be tried to prevent atelectasis. Positive pressure ventilation using CPAP and BiPAP may be used.

**Surgical stabilization**may be required for multiple rib fractures/ flail chest to correct pulmonary mechanics. Cases refractory to all conventional therapies have been successfully managed by extracorporeal gas exchange (ECMO).

# Differential Diagnosis

Many conditions, like pneumonia, hemothorax, and pulmonary edema, may have a similar presentation clinically and on imaging as a pulmonary condition. Trauma patients receiving blood products can develop hypoxia and pulmonary edema due to transfusion-associated lung injury (TRALI) and mimic contusions.

# Prognosis

Most pulmonary contusions heal with supportive care within 5 to 7 days. The Murray score for Acute lung injury can be used to assess the severity of lung injury. It includes four parameters: hypoxemia score (PaO2/FiO2), atelectasis, lung compliance, and PEEP score. Each parameter is scored from 0 to 4. The score is calculated by adding the examined parameters and dividing by the number of examined parameters: Score of 0: no lung injury, score of 0.1 to 2.5, mild or average lung injury, score above 2.5,  lung injury with ARDS.

# Complications

Pulmonary contusions may result in respiratory failure, progress to ARDS, and pneumonia.

# Deterrence and Patient Education

Using seat belts, vehicle airbags, and age-appropriate car seats offers protection in motor vehicle accidents (MVA) and minimizes the risk of pulmonary contusions.

# Pearls and Other Issues

Patients at high risk of a pulmonary contusion are in motor vehicle accidents with sudden deceleration or a fast-moving vehicle hitting a stationary object. Soldiers exposed to blasts are also at increased risk of developing pulmonary contusions that can cause significant respiratory compromise. These patients should be identified quickly, and appropriate imaging should be done to quantify the severity of injury to the pulmonary parenchyma. This would help in the prognosis and identification of those patients at risk of significant clinical decompensation.

# Enhancing Healthcare Team Outcomes

The pathophysiology of pulmonary contusions remains poorly understood. The condition can lead to severe life-threatening complications if a high index of suspicion for this diagnosis and its treatment is not provided. A better understanding of this clinical entity by the physicians who treat trauma victims is critical to delivering optimal care for these patients. Identifying patients at risk of this injury is crucial to managing them promptly and appropriately.