**Anatomy of Corneal Endothelial Cells**

Before embarking on specular microscopy, it is imperative to be thorough with the anatomy and physiology of corneal endothelial cells.

These cells lie dormant in the G1 phase of the cell cycle, and there is no evidence of mitotic activity under normal conditions. When there is endothelial injury, the healing is by the process of cellular elongation and spread to create a uniform cellular layer over the inner surface of the cornea.

The endothelial cell's morphological analysis is characterized by polymegathism (coefficient of variation, CV), pleomorphism (% of hexagonal cells), cellular density (cells/ mm), and cell area +/-S.D. (μm). The cell density is calculated by the formula 10/ average cell area. Polymegathism is denoted by the coefficient of variation and is calculated by the formula CV= SD / mean cell area, where CV is the coefficient of variation and SD denotes the standard deviation of the cell area.

The endothelial cell density reduces with aging at an average of 0.6% per year. This has two phases, a rapid phase and a slow phase.

This is a normal aging process in the cornea with a change in cellular dimensions and senescence of endothelial cells. The endothelial cell density is also affected and declines with racial, environmental, and geographical variations.

**Physiology of Corneal Endothelial Cells**

The monolayer of endothelial cells contains approximately 350,000 to 500,000 cells on the posterior surface of the cornea.

The cornea is avascular and provides a physiological barrier to external stimuli.

The endothelium plays a significant role in maintaining hydration of the cornea to prevent edema. The endothelium acts as a physiological and anatomical barrier to maintain corneal hydration, which makes it semipermeable.

Moreover, on the lateral aspect of the cell membrane, tight junctions between the endothelial cells help control the endothelial permeability and the amount of fluid influx in the corneal stroma.

The endothelium also has an active NaKATPase pump and carbonic anhydrase pump that maintain stromal deturgescence by fluid efflux from the stroma by a dynamic transport mechanism. The carbonic anhydrase pump also helps transport bicarbonate ions across the cell membrane, allowing the aqueous flow in the anterior chamber.