The pathophysiology of hypercalcemia of malignancy is explained mainly through three mechanisms: excessive secretion of parathyroid hormone-related protein (PTHrP), bony metastases with the release of osteoclast activating factors, or the production of 1,25-dihydroxy vitamin D (calcitriol).

Excessive secretion of PTHrP is the most common cause of hypercalcemia of malignancy.

Structurally, PTHrP is similar to parathyroid hormone (PTH) in the first 13 amino acid sequences. Due to the similarity in structure, it acts at the same receptor as PTH and causes bone resorption, increased phosphate excretion from the proximal tubules, and calcium reabsorption from the distal tubules in the kidney. It does not have any effect on 1,25-dihydroxy vitamin D production. Lab findings are consistent with elevated PTHrP, low to normal PTH, and normal 1,25-dihydroxy vitamin D levels. Response to treatment can be evaluated by monitoring the levels of PTHrP. Usually, patients with HHM tend to have advanced disease, and it portends a poor prognosis.

Bony metastases causing the release of osteoclast activating factors contribute to 20% of the cases and are commonly seen in patients with multiple myeloma and solid organ tumors, which metastasize to bones, such as breast cancer. Typical findings include skeletal metastasis with low to low-normal PTH, PTHrP, and 1,25-dihydroxy vitamin D levels. Though the levels of PTHrP are low to normal, breast cancer cells in the bone produce PTHrP locally and increase the activity of receptor activator of nuclear factor kappa B ligand (RANKL), which, in turn, promotes osteoclastic activity and hypercalcemia.

Almost all cases of Hodgkin lymphoma and about one-third of non-Hodgkin lymphoma cases, as well as granulomatous diseases like sarcoidosis and tuberculosis, cause hypercalcemia by increasing 1,25-dihydroxy vitamin D production. This subset of the patient population responds well to steroids.