The timeline for the onset of sympathetic ophthalmia can range from days to years after the initial injury to the inciting eye; however, 90% of cases occur within one year.

Upon seeing patients with bilateral uveitis, it is imperative to elicit an accurate history focusing on whether the patient has had a history of traumatic ocular injury or prior eye surgeries. Early-stage sympathetic ophthalmia may present with isolated mild anterior segment inflammation or isolated posterior segment inflammation. Detection during this early stage may lead to a better visual prognosis with prompt treatment.

Patient symptoms may range from mild visual disturbances to significant vision loss. Other symptoms include pain, photophobia, epiphora, floaters, and redness.

Anterior segment findings may range from mild bilateral anterior segment inflammation to bilateral granulomatous inflammation with mutton-fat corneal precipitates. Posterior iris synechiae and peripheral anterior synechiae may be present. Iris thickening with or without iris nodules may also be seen. Intraocular pressure may be low in the setting of ciliary body shutdown or high secondary to trabeculitis or obstruction of the trabecular meshwork.

Posterior segment exam findings may include mild to severe vitritis, Dalen-Fuch nodules (yellow-white lesions of the RPE), choroiditis, papillitis, and retinal vasculitis. Exudative retinal detachment may also be present, varying from small pockets of peripapillary exudative detachments to more extensive serous retinal detachments.

Chronic sympathetic ophthalmia may also cause subretinal fibrosis and choroidal neovascularization.