Blood tests are extremely useful in identifying and evaluating biliary tract disorders. For example, a comprehensive metabolic panel (CMP) evaluates serum alanine (AST) and aspartate (ALT) aminotransferases, alkaline phosphatase (ALP), bilirubin, albumin, and total protein. These values also play an important role in determining a hepatocellular vs. cholestatic pattern of liver disease. For example, a hepatocellular liver injury will show extreme elevations in ALT and AST, while a cholestatic pattern of liver disease will show elevations in serum ALP levels.

**Specific Tests Used to Evaluate for Biliary Tract/Gallstone Disease**

- Ultrasound:

- A non-invasive test that uses sound waves to examine the bile ducts, liver, and pancreas.
- Imaging can be impaired in obese patients or those who have recently eaten.
- A sonographic Murphy sign is positive when the sonographer pushes directly on the gallbladder with the probe and elicits pain greater than when pushing on other areas of the abdomen.

- Endoscopic ultrasound:

- A scope with an ultrasound probe is passed through the mouth and down into the small intestine, where images of the bile ducts, gallbladder, and pancreas are obtained. 
- This test is particularly useful in locating bile duct stones that may easily be missed on regular ultrasound, as well as in diagnosing pancreatic and bile duct cancers.

- Endoscopic Retrograde Cholangiopancreatography (ERCP):

- An endoscope that can access and assess the bile and pancreatic ducts. In addition, this endoscope has the capability to remove stones from these ducts and can also utilize a sphincter of Oddi manometry to measure the pressure within the sphincter of Oddi muscle.

- Magnetic Resonance Cholangiopancreatography (MRCP):

- A non-invasive test utilizing an MRI machine that creates images of the bile and pancreatic duct, similar to those images obtained by ERCP. The difference between an ERCP and an MRCP is that an MRCP does not require an endoscopy and, therefore, does not have the capability of removing stones or fixing an abnormality seen on the imaging.

- Hepatobiliary Iminodiacetic Acid (HIDA) scan:

- Also known as cholescintigraphy, a HIDA scan is used as a confirmatory test for suspected uncomplicated cholecystitis if previous ultrasound findings are inconclusive. The HIDA scan uses an IV to inject a radioactive tracer into the patient. This tracer undergoes selective uptake by hepatocytes and subsequent excretion into the bile. If the cystic duct is patent, the radiotracer can enter the gallbladder.