MRI, is a process of generating detailed images of tissues and organs of the human body without the application of "ionizing" radiation and/or x-rays. In contrast, MRI employs powerful central or main magnetic field, gradient magnetic fields, radio frequency waves, and a computer to create images that show normal and abnormal processes, infections or inflammatory conditions.

For the Magnetic Resonance Imaging procedure, the patient is positioned in the wide, tube-like device, called the MR scanner, which is open at both ends. The high strength, central or main magnetic field, aligns mainly mobile hydrogen protons, which exist in most tissues of human body. Radio frequency waves are then applied by the transmit coil to cause these mobile protons to produce response signals which are picked up by a receiver or a transmit-receiver coil that is a component of the MR scanner. These response signals are specifically characterized using the gradient magnetic field, in conjunction with computer software processing, tissues and organs images are generated as a field of view "slices" that could be visualized and evaluated by the radiologists in the sagittal, coronal, transverse and oblique orientation.

MRI procedures cause no pain, and no known tissue damage is produced by the central or main and gradient magnetic fields. During the MR scanning procedure, knocking and/or tapping, and other noises are produced; these noises are musical in rhythm. Earplugs could prevent most of this noise problem occurring during the scanning procedure. Patients are monitored continuously, and patients are able to communicate with the MR scanner operator or technologist using an intercommunication system during the procedure.