Treatment plans for these patients can vary immensely bared on their related injuries. Nondisplaced anterior table fractures can be monitored with observation and close follow-up. In the case of frontal sinus fracture with an overlying laceration (deemed an open fracture), it is imperative to administer appropriate antibiotics and tetanus prophylaxis/immunoglobulin as indicated. If there is involvement of the anterior table without intracranial communication, IV amoxicillin-sulbactam is sufficient. The addition of a third-generation cephalosporin is appropriate if there is a displaced posterior table fracture. Surgical options, which will be described below, can include frontal sinus ablation/obliteration, closed fracture reductions, cranialization, open reduction with internal fixation (ORIF), and conservative management with observation. As previously mentioned, classification and treatment guidelines are not universal, which could account for variations in patient management; many surgeons have gravitated toward more conservative management in recent years, even electing to observe displaced anterior table fractures, provided no involvement of the frontal outflow tract or posterior table has occurred. In the event that the bone does not remodel on its own, fillers or fat grafts may be placed at a later date in order to improve the cosmesis of the result. Despite this lack of consensus, a posterior table fracture with greater than 5mm of displacement is generally accepted as an absolute surgical indication. Most procedures should take place within 12 to 48 hours from initial presentation, barring any more life-threatening injuries.

**Observation with Close Follow-Up**

- Minimally displaced anterior table fractures (<1-2 mm), without nasofrontal recess injury

**Closed Fracture Reductions/Minimally Invasive**

- Various minimally invasive techniques exist for the closed repair of anterior table fractures. This type of repair often results in aesthetically favorable outcomes.

- Both percutaneous screws and inflating a Foley catheter within the sinus have been reported as means of fracture reduction.

**Open Reduction with Internal Fixation (ORIF)**

- This is generally indicated for displaced fractures of the anterior table (>2 mm) without the involvement of the nasofrontal recess or in patients with an obvious cosmetic forehead deformity.

- Surgeons attempting this approach must be able to obtain adequate visualization and access to the sinus to perform the proper repair while considering aesthetic outcomes for the patient. These can be approached either endoscopically or in an open fashion depending on the extent of the fracture and surgeon preference.

- This approach uses small metal plates (microplates) or a titanium mesh and screws to secure the bony fragments. In some cases, reduction screws can be used to support the bone without fixation.

**Frontal Sinus Obliteration/Ablation**

- This procedure can be indicated in patients who have comminuted anterior table fractures with a linear nondisplaced posterior table fracture or involvement of the frontonasal duct. Another indication is a significant mucosal disruption of the sinus or severely comminuted fractures of the anterior table.

- This entails the removal of all sinus mucosa, occlusion of the nasofrontal duct, and filling the sinus cavity with bone grafts or other materials.

- 
              
- Hydroxyapatite, pericranial flap obliteration, adipose tissue, calcium phosphate, and glass ionomer can also be used as grafting material.

- A potential complication of this procedure is a mucocele secondary to incomplete removal of the mucosa during obliteration. If left untreated, mucocele growth can cause further bony destruction.

**Cranialization**

- This is generally indicated for posterior table fractures with significant displacement or comminution, intracranial injury, or CSF leak.

- It involves removing the entire frontal sinus contents, including the mucosa, external debris, bone fragmentation, and the posterior table of the frontal sinus. Any anterior table defects must be reconstructed to further protect the brain and dura that have herniated into the frontal sinus.