Tularemia is caused by the highly infectious gram-negative coccobacillus Francisella tularensis. Infection can occur with a small number of organisms and through a variety of entry sites, including inhalation, direct contact with non-intact skin or mucous membranes, ingestion or via the bite of a tick or fly vector. There are four recognized subspecies of F. tularensis,  with F. tularensis type A causing the most severe disease and the most frequent disease in North America. A less severe disease is associated with F. tularensis subspecies holarctica (type B) in other parts of the northern hemisphere, including widespread disease in Europe. In addition to variations in disease severity associated with each subtype, there may also be differences in antibiotic susceptibility with a greater degree of fluoroquinolone susceptibility reported in F. tularensis subspecies holarctica (type B).

Tularemia has the following presentations:

- Ulceroglandular disease that presents with cutaneous ulcerations and marked lymphadenopathy

- Glandular disease that presents with no ulcers but marked lymphadenopathy

- Oculoglandular disease that presents with preauricular lymphadenopathy and conjunctivitis

- Oropharyngeal disease that presents with pharyngitis, stomatitis and cervical lymphadenopathy

- GI treat disease that presents with vomiting, abdominal discomfort, and diarrhea

- Respiratory disease that presents as pneumonia or pleuritis

- Typhoid tularemia is a febrile illness without any early signs or symptoms

The type of tularemia one develops depends on the mode of transmission. In most cases, the organism is transmitted by inoculation into the skin or via inhalation/ingestion. Human to human spread is not likely. However, the transmission of infection can occur from an insect bite or contact with contaminated animal products. Thorough cooking can lessen the risk of transmission. The organism can survive extremes of cold, heat and even in animal carcasses. The organism has been found in many insects and animals. In Northern Europe, mosquitoes may serve as an insect vector. In North America, many ticks have been found to have tularensis.

F tularensis biovar tularensis is found in North American ticks and rabbits and known to cause severe infection in humans. F tularensis biovar holarctica is found in European and Asian rodents and causes a milder form of infection.

The risk of infection is increased in the following populations:

- Veterinarians

- Laboratory workers

- Farmers, landscappers

- People who work with animals, sheep

- People who handle meat