**The Medicare Hospice Benefit**

Medicare was designed to provide comprehensive medical care for older Americans. Among its sections, Medicare Part A covers hospice services almost entirely—all services being provided without cost to the beneficiary, as long as the services are related to the terminal condition and have been approved by the hospice for payment. Given that this is a “carve-out” benefit, patients enrolled in hospice waive their traditional Medicare Parts A and D and elect the Medicare hospice benefit for care related to their terminal illness, including prescription medications. Historically, the Medicare hospice benefits only applied to medications related to the terminal diagnosis; for example, a hospice patient with congestive heart failure as their terminal diagnosis but with coexistent Diabetes and Hypertension would remain covered by traditional Medicare Parts A and D for the latter two comorbidities. Since 2015, under new guidance from Medicare, the hospice benefit now centers around a terminal prognosis rather than a diagnosis, given that prognosis is often worse in the setting of multiple comorbidities. For example, patients on hospice benefit from congestive heart failure who also suffer from chronic stage 4 kidney disease have a worse prognosis than patients with congestive heart failure but preserved kidney function.

**Hospice Benefit Periods**

All hospice services are rendered during benefit periods. Hospice care begins with two 90-day periods, followed by an unlimited number of 60-day periods. At the end of each benefit period and before the next one begins, the hospice team reevaluates the patient and recertifies that the patient has a terminal illness and that prognosis is less than 6 months. Each 60-day benefit period also requires a face-to-face visit from a hospice physician or nurse practitioner, who must provide clinical information to the certifying hospice physician in a timely manner. At any time during this process, a patient can change their mind about continuing hospice care.

Patients also may be discharged from hospice care for specific reasons, such as if they no longer have an expected prognosis of 6 months or if the patient moves away from the hospice’s service area. Patients are also free to re-enroll in the hospice benefit and need to be recertified for eligibility to resume hospice services. Whether patients revoke the hospice benefit or are discharged, traditional Medicare coverage becomes immediately available.

Since its inception, the Medicare hospice benefit has been a per diem capitated payment arrangement; hospices are paid a fixed dollar amount per day of patient care, based on the level of care. The rates of reimbursement are fixed annually and vary by geographic location.

**Hospice Levels of Care**

Four levels of care exist under the Medicare hospice benefit—two levels of care in the home and two inpatient levels. These are reimbursed differently by Medicare, with higher or more intense levels of care receiving higher reimbursement.

**Routine Home Care**

This level of care is administered in the patient’s place of residence, which could be a private home, a personal care home, a nursing facility, or a prison. In most states, the benefit does not cover the cost of a patient’s room and board in a nursing home. For a hospice program to obtain certification by Medicare, it is required to have 80% of its patients in their own homes. During home visits, the hospice team makes physical and environmental assessments and assesses the patient’s and family’s needs for additional services and assistance. Physical assessment involves reviewing the patient’s symptoms, the need for adjustment of medications, level of dependence, and psychological and spiritual distress. Environmental assessments focus on patient safety (e.g., gait and balance, loose carpets, or inadequate lighting) as well as adaptations required to adjust to the patient’s changing condition, such as having a hospital bed available for a patient who has become bedbound. Family assessment is crucial to detect caregiver burden and needs for additional support. When hospice care is rendered in the patient’s home, a family member serves as the primary caregiver and, when appropriate, helps make decisions for the terminally ill individual. Hospice staff, usually nurses, are on-call 24 hours a day, seven days a week.

**Continuous Home Care**

This level of hospice care, which is more intense than routine home care, is given during brief periods of crisis management of acute symptoms with the intention of maintaining the patient in their home setting. To justify continuous home care, the patient needs direct skilled care for 8 hours a day, over 50% of which has to be delivered by the nurse. An example of skilled care would be intractable pain management with frequent assessment and administration of intravenous medications. A nursing home cannot provide this level of care.

**General Inpatient Care (GIP)**

Provision of this level of care is outside of the patient’s usual home environment, in a Medicare-approved facility such as a free-standing inpatient hospice facility, a contracted nursing home, or hospital. This setting does not include custodial or residential. Indications that might determine a need for General Inpatient Care include managing uncontrolled pain, delirium, or other symptoms, especially ones that fall outside the purview of home care. Like continuous home care, a skilled need is necessary with GIP. Though GIP does not have a specified limit, patients are assessed daily by the hospice team regarding the necessity and eligibility of continuing that level of care. The expectation is for the patient to be stabilized and returned to their previous level of care/residence if possible.

**Respite Care**

This level is designed to provide relief to caregivers; it is allowable for no more than 5 consecutive days for every occurrence and is provided in a Medicare-approved facility such as an inpatient hospice facility or a nursing home. These patients don’t require skilled care.