Prescribing this medication is contraindicated if a patient has a hypersensitivity to the drug or any components in its formulation.

Although rare, serotonin syndrome is a very serious condition that carries a high mortality rate. Taking a thorough history and doing a proper medication reconciliation can help prevent this dangerous condition. Signs of serotonin syndrome include tachycardia, sialorrhea, hyperactive bowel sounds, mydriasis, hyperthermia, and diaphoresis. If unsure whether a patient is suffering from serotonin syndrome, the Sternbach and Hunter criteria can be useful to help arrive at a definitive diagnosis. It can be caused by combining monoamine oxidase inhibitors, tricyclic antidepressants, triptans, additional serotonin receptor modulators, and over-the-counter drugs such as St. Johns Wart. Desvenlafaxine therapy should not start until after discontinuing the previous class of medications listed for at least two weeks. If serotonin syndrome is suspected, prompt discontinuation of the offending agent is necessary, along with supportive measures. If necessary, cyproheptadine can be a therapeutic measure.

There is conflicting data on gastrointestinal bleeding resulting from SNRI use. There is no specific documentation for this with desvenlafaxine; however, its combined use with non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs may add to the risk.

If a bipolar disorder is a consideration in the differential diagnosis, it is crucial to add a mood stabilizer along with a serotonin receptor modulator not to trigger a manic episode.

There have been documented instances where neonates exposed to SNRIs late in the third trimester have gone on to develop difficulties with feeding and breathing, which have required prolonged hospitalization. Desvenlafaxine is a category C drug, which means that tests done on animals have shown an adverse effect on the fetus, and there are no well-controlled studies in humans. Still, possible benefits may justify the use of the drug in pregnant women despite the risks. Desvenlafaxine is excreted into breast milk, with one study reporting that peak levels are 3.3 hours after a dose. When mothers took the sister drug venlafaxine, neonates exposed to the drug via breast milk sometimes experienced poor neonatal adaptation. This reaction could occur in individuals taking desvenlafaxine as well.