Just as patients undergo triage when entering a medical treatment area, triage of patients is necessary before transferring them to other treatment areas or different facilities.  The same principles necessitating triage upon arrival drive essential components of evacuation triage.  When the needs outstrip resources, triage must be utilized to maximize the results for the number of patients.  There are unique characteristics for evacuation triage that separate it from its counterpart though that must be discussed and well understood prior to implementation.

The first key difference is to understand that providers are not triaging patients to prioritize treatments. Instead, they are triaging to prioritize evacuation.  It is essential to recognize that the patients are already in a treatment area and receiving medical care at this point.  The reasons that would necessitate evacuation include being transferred to receive definitive care, go to a higher level of care with further resources or sub-specialization, or to clear space at the forward treatment area to make room for new patients coming in.

The other significant difference is in recognizing into what categories to triage patients. Evacuation triage does not follow the medical triage designations such as 1-5 of the Emergency Severity Index or the color-coded Red Yellow Green Black methodology of (Jump) START.

The 9 Line Medevac of the military is the report and request for resources used once it is determined there is a need to evacuate patients. It has several essential pieces of information that we will discuss further but which merit consideration in all evacuation cases.  Other pieces of information are not applicable to most civilian situations but raise the point that there are often other factors in even the most routine evacuation that should be accounted for prior to execution.

The first portion of evacuation triage is to recognize how many patients there will be to move and by what means they will need transport. Can the patients walk and move on their own? Are they on a backboard? Are they bed bound? These questions help determine what type of vehicle they will fit into and if personnel is needed to help move them.

The next step in evacuation triage is recognizing how quickly each patient needs removal from the current treatment area.  Patients may be sick, but as long as they are receiving care at the current level, they may be stable enough to hold off evacuation while other patients who are not able to be maintained in the current treatment area obtain transport.

Next, there needs to be synchronization regarding which patient will require removal. What resources will are necessary in route? Will patients require ventilators? Will they require medicine pumps? Will there be special equipment required to move or extricate the patient?

Understanding of all resources available is essential to this portion of evacuation triage.  There may be medical evacuation assets including ambulances and helicopters that are available for normal use in evacuation plans.  These assets should be well known and hopefully rehearsed in their employment by those who will be utilizing them to manage evacuations.  In a triage scenario, these resources are likely overwhelmed or insufficient to handle the volume of patients that need evacuation during a specific period.

Use of casualty evacuation, discussed in different articles, may not only be necessary but the most appropriate use of resources.  The use of nonstandard evacuation methods can help facilitate the quick movement of a large number of patients; all patients should get matched to a specific resource.  Those requiring medical treatment in route should be prioritized for the medical evacuation vehicles while those who are stable enough to be transported by casualty evacuation can utilize nonstandard forms as discussed.

Each evacuation resource will have an intrinsic number of patients that they can move depending on severity and resources required.  For instance, patients who can sit upright will take up less space in a ground vehicle, and more may be transportable in one trip.  Patients are generally not able to sit up in air ambulances, and air ambulances have inherent limitations on the number of patients that they can carry.  Their use in evacuation triage must give priority for those requiring the most care in route for the most expedient evacuation.

A detailed understanding of the current situation and the environment, along with broad situational awareness is essential to maintain the flow of patients through the evacuation process.  Below is a basic flow that one can use to help visualize the process of evacuation and be aware of where triage is often necessary to help those managing the scene ensure that they are aware of potential bottlenecks and can come up with workarounds to improve flow.

- Phase 1 – Patients undergo identification in the field. They receive point of care treatment. They can then evacuate to a casualty collection point

- Phase 2 – CCPs are the first receiving points for groups of patients. They get triaged on arrival and receive further care. CCPs are often temporary and hastily put together in a disaster. Patients will need a transfer for more definitive care

- Phase 3 – Patients undergo triage for evacuation to a higher level of care. Further planning and resources should begin in this phase. While casualty evacuation was likely all that was available at the point of injury, medical evacuation assets can begin to be utilized and appropriated into the plan.

- Phase 4 – During an evacuation, multiple inflection points should be utilized to maximize turnaround times. Exchange points and asset release triggers are some of the most common.

- Phase 5 – After arrival to a higher level of care, patients undergo another triage process for evaluation and treatment. After stabilization, some patients may require additional evacuation, cycling back to Phase 3.