**Transanal Endoscopic Microsurgery (TEMS)**

TEM was the first rigid platform created in 1983. The proctoscope has a flat or beveled end with a diameter of 40mm and a length of 12 or 20 cm. Once introduced into the rectum, the proctoscope is sealed with a faceplate that contains multiple ports for inserting the stereoscopic optics system and surgical instruments. The stereoscopic optics system provides depth perception by allowing the surgeon to see in three dimensions. Penumorectum is maintained by an insufflation system, while a roller pump drives suction irrigation. The entire platform is secured to the operating table using a support arm.

**Transanal Minimally Invasive Surgery (TAMIS)**

TAMIS was introduced in 2010 after single incision laparoscopic ports became widely available. The TAMIS platform was adapted from the SILS Port and GelPOINT PATH and incorporated a flexible port with multiple channels for the insertion of conventional laparoscopic camera scopes and instruments.

**Insufflation**

Maintaining a stable pneumorectum is essential in both TEMS and TAMIS to maintain a clear operative field and space in which to work. Generally speaking, pressures of 12 to 15 mmHg is used in rectal microsurgery. In TEMS, a multifunctional endosurgical unit regulates CO2 insufflation and suction while monitoring intrarectal pressure. Meanwhile, TAMIS uses a gel seal cap with a port that allows the insufflation of CO2. More recently, Airseal has been introduced in TAMIS, which is a tri-lumen filtered tube set that optimizes gas flow by insufflating CO2 and extracting smoke simultaneously.