The recommendations of the British Thoracic Society (BTS) suggest checking for underlying factors involving immunoglobulin tests (IgA, IgM, IgG, and IgE), and testing to exclude ABPA (specific IgE to Aspergillus, IgG to Aspergillus, and eosinophil count).Pseudomonas aeruginosa and Staphylococcus aureus isolation, or upper lobe predominant disease irrespective of age.

Alpha-1 Antitrypsin level, Ciliary function analysis, and Serology for HIV  if indicated.

**Imaging:**

**Chest radiography**is usually the initial study performed in suspected bronchiectasis.

Signs on chest x-ray include the identification of parallel linear densities, tram-track opacities, or ring shadows reflecting thickened and abnormally dilated bronchial walls.

Signs of complications/exacerbations, such as patchy densities due to mucoid impaction (mucus may become of high density due to chronic inspissation) and consolidation, volume loss secondary to mucoid bronchial obstruction or chronic cicatrization are also seen.

In comparison to chest x-ray, CT is both more sensitive and provides more specific information. In addition to making the diagnosis, the pattern of disease on HRCT may enable one to limit the differential to a single/few specific causative entities.

The **CT chest**signs of bronchiectasis were first described by NAIDICH et al. in 1982. Multidetector computed tomography (MDCT) is preferred over high-resolution computed tomography (HRCT) as it can obtain thin sections of 1 mm (high resolution). HRCT is performed when MDCT is not available.

Bronchial dilation, the cardinal sign of bronchiectasis, is characterized:

- A broncho arterial ratio (BAR) of more than 1

- Lack of bronchial tapering (normal airways diminish in caliber as they extend toward the lung periphery)

- Visibility of airways within 1 cm of the pleural surface (normal airways should not be visualized this far out in the lung periphery) or abutting the mediastinal pleural surface.

**Usual Pattern on CT scan of the Chest**

Cylindrical (tram track sign):****Dilated airways seen in a horizontal orientation.

Signet-ring: The dilated airway lies adjacent to a pulmonary artery branch giving the appearance of a ring (internal bronchial diameter greater than that of the adjacent pulmonary artery).

Varicose:****Implies non-uniform bronchial dilatation. The bronchi resemble varicose veins. The luminal dilatation is characterized by alternating areas of luminal dilatation and constriction, creating a beaded appearance, and the wall thickening is irregular. This varicose bronchiectasis serves as an intermediate step before the development of grossly dilated cystic airways.

Cystic or saccular: A cluster of thin-walled cystic spaces.

Mosaic lung attenuation: The terminology is used to characterize heterogeneous lung density in the damaged lung segments owing to air trapping and hence has a geographic distribution. On expiration, this result can be produced or exaggerated.

Dilated bronchial arteries: These are best-demonstrated post administration of intravenous contrast. These tortuous vessels extend along the central airways toward the hila. It is these vessels that are often responsible for hemoptysis.

**Other Findings:**

Lobar collapse

Mycetoma formation (Fungus ball): Aspergillus fumigatus (a fungus) may colonize dilated airways or bullae/cavities. It is a major source of hemoptysis.

Decreased Lung function:

Airflow obstruction: FEV1 decreased

Air trapping: Residual volume increased