These reflexes are graded on a scale from 0 to 4+, where 0 is absent, 2+ is normal, and 4+ indicates hyperactivity wherein a tap elicits a repeating reflex (clonus). Grading these reflexes is important because abnormalities can often indicate that a reflex arc has been affected, which could mean a problem could involve the sensory fiber, the spinal cord, or the motor fiber. If a lesion involves the anterior horn of the spinal cord at that level or the motor fiber itself, then it would be defined as a lower motor neuron lesion (LMN). These lesions result in decreased reflexes (grade 0 to 1) due to damage to the alpha motor neurons. If the lesions involve the cerebral cortex, brain stem, or descending motor tracts, then they are upper motor neuron lesions (UMN). These lesions result in increased reflexes (grades 3 to 4) due to the loss of inhibition from the descending motor pathways.

The Hoffman, or 'H reflex,' is similar to the muscle stretch reflex and is obtained after the selective electrical stimulation of the sensory 1a afferents, bypassing the muscle spindles.

Higher stimulation should be avoided as it may cause 'F wave' owing to the stimulation of the alpha fibers.

Golgi tendon organs outplay inverse myotatic reflex mediating through the 1b afferents and gamma efferents. This checks sustained tonic contraction following stretch reflex by inhibiting the agonist (inhibitory postsynaptic potentials) and stimulating the corresponding group of antagonists'  muscles (summations of excitatory postsynaptic potentials). Any abnormality in this mechanism leads to hyperexcitable stretch reflexes, thereby causing spasticity.