Pseudocholinesterase deficiency is an infrequently encountered genetic or acquired condition; discovery is typically only after exposure to succinylcholine or mivacurium.  Anesthesiologist, anesthesia nurses, intensivists and emergency department physicians involved in the care of patients with pseudocholinesterase deficiency should be aware of the following key points:

- The prolonged neuromuscular blockade should receive treatment with mechanical respiratory support until the spontaneous return of muscle function.

- Patients may be unaware they have pseudocholinesterase deficiency if there is no prior exposure to succinylcholine or mivacurium.

- Future anesthetics should avoid administration of succinylcholine or mivacurium to avoid prolonged neuromuscular blockade.

- Family members of individuals diagnosed with pseudocholinesterase deficiency are encouraged to undergo testing for pseudocholinesterase deficiency.

- Patients with pseudocholinesterase deficiency may experience sudden cardiac arrest after cocaine use.

- Patients with a history of malignancy, extensive burn injuries, pregnancy, liver disease, and chronic infections are at increased risk for pseudocholinesterase deficiency.

While a rare condition, pseudocholinesterase deficiency is best addressed via an interprofessional healthcare team approach, with physicians, specialists, specialty trained nursing staff, and pharmacists, working and communicating to achieve the best possible patient outcomes. [Level V]