Prior to infliximab infusion, pretreatment with loratadine or cetirizine (0.5 mg/kg; max 25 mg), hydrocortisone (4 mg/kg; max 200 mg) and paracetamol (15 mg/kg; max 1 gm) 30 – 60 minutes before infusion is necessary for combating infusion reactions that may occur.

Infliximab is prepared as an intravenous infusion the dosage of which can vary from 3 to 10 mg/kg, most commonly being 5 mg/kg. Infliximab has a half-life of 7-12 days as it has a low rate of elimination. Therefore, dosing schedule repeats at weeks 2, 6 and every eight weeks thereafter.

The pharmaceutical product contains 100 mg lyophilized drug powder in 20 ml vial. Each vial is reconstituted with 10 ml sterile distilled water using a 21-gauge needle following which gentle stirring is performed to dissolve the powder. The vial is kept aside for 5 mins, and the solution dissolved in 250 ml of 0.9% sodium chloride intravenous solution.

Infusion of this agent should begin within 3 hours of dilution and over a period or 2-3 hours during which period the recording of vitals including temperature, pulse, blood pressure, and respiratory rate is required until 1-hour post infusion.

FDA-approved indications with dosages

- Psoriasis and Psoriatic arthritis – 5 mg/kg at weeks 0, 2 and 6 followed by every 8 weeks.

- Rheumatoid arthritis – 3 mg/kg at 0, 2 and 6 weeks followed by every 8 wks. According to response, the dose may be incremented up to 10 mg/kg and spaced at every four weeks.

- Ankylosing Spondylitis – 5 mg/kg at weeks 0,2 and 6 followed by every 6 - 8 weeks.

- Crohn’s disease and Ulcerative colitis – 5 mg/kg at 0, 2 and six weeks and subsequently every eight weeks. Doses may be escalated up to 10 mg/kg depending upon response.