There is a need to reconstruct damaged hard tissue for several reasons that include traumatic or non-traumatic events, congenital abnormalities, or disease. Damaged tissues stemming from these events can become a major issue in orthopedic, dental, and maxillofacial surgery. A study on numerous biomaterials revealed that calcium phosphates had been used in hard tissue reconstruction for more than 6 decades. Hydroxyapatite (HA) was the primary material used in orthopedics and dentistry.

Hydroxyapatite (HA) is an inorganic mineral that has a typical apatite lattice structure as (A10(BO4)6C2) where A, B, and C are defined by Ca, PO4, and OH. Pure HA contains 39.68% by weight calcium and 18% by weight phosphorus resulting in a Ca/P mole ratio of 1.67. In fact, there are commercial HA products with the Ca/P ratio bigger or smaller than 1.67. The variety in the Ca/P ratio indicates the phase shift between tricalcium phosphate (TCP) and calcium oxide (CaO). HA with Ca/P ratio bigger than 1.67 comprises more CaO than TCP and vice versa

HA crystals present in the human body both inside bone and teeth. In terms of human bone, the HA crystals as a bioactive ceramic cover 65 to 70% by weight of the bone. Furthermore, the architecture of the bone comprises of type-I collagen as an organic component and the HA as an inorganic component. These 2 components form a composite structure at the nanoscale, in which nano-HA is interspersed in the collagen network. This composite forms mineralized collagen and is the precursor of biological mineralized tissue from tendons and skin to hard mineralized tissues such as bone and teeth. Moreover, in the bone, the HA crystals present in the shape of plates or needles, are about 40 to 60 nm long, 20 nm wide, and 1.5 to 5 nm thick

About concerning the dental role of HA crystal, it covers 70 to 80% by weight of dentin and enamel. Within the human body, the enamel is the hardest substance consisting of relatively large HA crystals (25 nm thick, 40 to 120 nm wide, 160 to 1000 nm long)

Overall, the pressure-point in hard tissue reparation is on HA due to its chemical proportion that occupies the majority of hard tissue composition, and also its mechanical properties that support tissue integrity