All healthcare providers, at some point in their career, will be called upon to go beyond medical decision-making and traverse into the realm of medical ethics. The intersection of medicine and law has provided physicians with tools to guide this process, especially when attempting to make decisions for patients who cannot make decisions for themselves. This field of advance care planning (ACP) has been defined as “…a process that supports adults at any age or stage of health in understanding and sharing their personal values, life goals, and preferences regarding future medical care.”

Perhaps the most important tool to be aware of when navigating these kinds of situations is the healthcare power of attorney.

**What is Power of Attorney?**

A general power of attorney may be a person or an organization, known as the agent or attorney-in-fact, that has been given powers to act on another person’s behalf. While this can extend beyond the scope of making healthcare decisions for a specific individual, health care power of attorney will be the focus of the article here.****

**What constitutes a Health Care Power of Attorney?**

Health care power of attorney grants in writing a particular agent the power to make healthcare decisions on another's behalf. This decision is usually in tandem with a durable power of attorney, which is essentially a proviso of the health care power of attorney that safeguards the power of attorney if a person loses the functional capacity to make their own decisions. Given that this is the normal circumstance under which a health care power of attorney becomes activated, the form one fills out to designate decision-making powers is usually headlined “Durable Power of Attorney for Healthcare Decisions” (commonly referred to in the literature in acronym form, DPOAHC). A synonym for a durable power of attorney for healthcare decisions is a health care proxy.

**What’s the difference between Health Care Power of Attorney and a Living Will?**

A health care power of attorney is as described above. A living will is a written statement by the person in question, whereby specific wishes are stated and made known. It does not designate a particular agent to have decision-making power in certain circumstances; only one’s preferred choices regarding individual decisions should they arise (e.g., if the patient would like resuscitation or intubation as potential life-saving maneuvers). A living will may be used by a designated health care power of attorney to help guide their decision-making.

**Can more than one person be designated Health Care Power of Attorney?**

Yes, if it is the wish of the patient, multiple people can be selected to have decision-making powers. Additionally, a backup agent should always be designated in the case that the primary agent is unable to serve in their assigned role when needed. It should be clear in these cases if each of the agents can act independent of the others or if they must make joint decisions. While multiple agents allow for checks and balances, and arguably a more reasoned approach to decision-making, it comes at the cost of time and potential disagreements, which can delay the delivery of the necessary care (or lack thereof).