Therapeutic keratoplasty (TPK) is a surgical technique where a disease-host corneal tissue is replaced with a healthy donor cornea. A corneal graft is placed after terminating the infectious foci and improving the anatomical integrity of the cornea.

Tectonic keratoplasty is performed in corneal perforation or corneal melt cases where the anterior chamber has collapsed, and aqueous humor has leaked.

In developing countries, there is a high load of non-healing microbial keratitis and perforated corneal ulcers, and TPK is commonly performed. TPK helps in cases of glue with bandage contact lens, tenoplasty, conjunctival Gundersen flap fails, or when the perforation is large.

In the Singapore Corneal Transplant study, 13% of corneal transplants were therapeutic or tectonic, and in another study from Brazil, approximately 18% of corneal transplants were for corneal ulceration and perforation.

In TPK, anterior chamber exudates are removed after trephining the host disease cornea, angles are washed with normal saline, a peripheral surgical iridectomy is made, retro-iris exudates are washed, and retro-iris exudates are washed. Lens removal can also be performed based on the indication.

Additional sutures can be secured if there is an anterior chamber leak. The patient is started on antimicrobial therapy based on the pre-operative diagnosis, and topical steroids are initiated after a brief quiescence if there are no infectious foci or graft infections. The aim is to prevent complications of TPK and salvage the globe anatomically and functionally.

**Types of Therapeutic Keratoplasty**

- Full-thickness therapeutic keratoplasty

Here the full-thickness corneal graft is placed over the host cornea after removing the diseased portion of the cornea with the primary aim of eliminating the infection.

- Tectonic keratoplasty

Here the full-thickness corneal graft is placed over the host cornea to restore the tectonic integrity of the cornea.

- Patch graft

Patch graft can be full thickness as well as lamellar patch graft depending on the extent of involvement of the corneal tissue.

- Therapeutic deep anterior lamellar keratoplasty

In therapeutic DALK, the diseased corneal portion is usually the anterior stromal tissue; hence the deep anterior lamella is removed and replaced with a partial thickness graft.