The goals of subacute thyroiditis treatment are pain relief and symptom control. Treatment recommendations are based on observational data and expert opinion. Unfortunately, no clinical trials assessed optimal treatment for subacute thyroiditis.

Treatment for de Quervain thyroiditis is pretty straightforward, with anti-inflammatory treatment being the key. Patients with mild to moderate pain are generally treated with rest and salicylic acid 600 mg orally every 6 hours, naproxen 500 to 1000 mg twice a day, or ibuprofen 400 to 800 mg orally every 8 hours. For more severe neck pain, oral corticosteroids (Prednisone) can be started with 40 mg daily. Usually, symptoms improve in 2 to 3 days with NSAIDS; prednisone should be initiated if no improvement is noted. Steroids should provide pain relief in 1 to 2 days. The typical steroid course can be two months, occasionally longer. The persistence of pain beyond two days should need a further workup for other causes of neck pain. Once pain is improved, an attempt should be made to use the lowest possible dose, and dosing can be titrated by decreasing 5 to 10 mg every week. Recurrent pain should require up-titration of prednisone dose. Unfortunately, prednisone has no role in preventing thyroid dysfunction.

Mild and transient symptoms of hyperthyroidism do not require any treatment. Palpitations, anxiety, and tremors need to be treated with propranolol or atenolol with close follow-up. Thionamides should not be used to treat hyperthyroidism of subacute thyroiditis, such as radioiodine therapy, because the disorder is caused by the release of preformed thyroid hormone from destroyed follicles instead of the synthesis of new T3 and T4.

Subacute thyroiditis usually resolves, and patients return to a normal euthyroid state in 3 or 4 months. Rarely do patients have hypothyroidism which can be transient or permanent. Patients with hypothyroidism with TSH greater than 10 microU/L or having symptoms of hypothyroidism need levothyroxine treatment for 1 to 2 months. Levothyroxine should be discontinued, and thyroid function tests should be done in 1 month to ensure hypothyroidism is transient. Some patients may need treatment with levothyroxine for a long time.

After sub-acute thyroiditis is diagnosed, serial thyroid function tests should be done every 2 to 8 weeks to confirm the improvement of hyperthyroidism and follow the natural course of disease till they are normalized.