Disability and return to work. The main goal of disability management is to assist the patient in maintaining functional status or return to functional work status as soon as possible.  Long periods of being out of work can, and have been shown to, contribute to poor physical and mental health. Common medical problems can be easily accommodated at the place of employment.

The American College of Occupational and Environmental Medicine (ACOEM) provides good resources for managing disability patients preparing to return to work. An abbreviated list would include socioeconomic and psychological factors, attitudes and beliefs, health behaviors, clinical measures taken, perception of injury and pain, previous health interventions and diagnostic workups, employer/employee relationship, legal factors, and social environment.  These aforementioned factors are often modifiable and identified early on. For example, there are screening tools that can be used to identify the patients perceived level of injury or pain: The Orebro musculoskeletal pain questionnaire is a self-survey that indicates perceived pain; The Back Disability Risk Questionnaire is a self-reported survey administered during the first two weeks of injury to identify the patients perceived level of injury; The Center of Epidemiologic Studies for Depression scale is a short self-reported questionnaire that identifies depression symptoms and has a good predictive ability for chronic pain patients. Additionally, the employer/employee relationship can be easily improved from the time of employment through the time of injury.

The ACOEM promotes the adoption of an injury-prevention cooperate infrastructure as a majority of work-related injuries are preventable. This infrastructure would include incentivizing healthy lifestyles and return to work programs. Promoting a safer environment and maintaining an interest in the employees’ health and safety enhances the inherent relationship. If an employee is to be injured at work, the ACOEM has shown that early positive contact by the employer has shown to be a strong predictor of earlier return to work.  The Canadian Institute for Work and Health has identified seven principles associated with return to work as seen in.

If the patient has the opportunity to return to work with modified duties, the patient should do so under the advisement and recommendation of the treating physician. Doing so can be productive and therapeutic. Modified work programs include either decreased or flexible work hours, decreased required shift tasks, and/or workplace modifications to accommodate needs. If the patient has no opportunity to have a temporary or modified job, then the patient may require a temporary total disability claim until MMI is achieved.  The Functional Capacity Evaluation (FCE) is a standardized assessment of an injured individual’s ability to return to a transitional, modified work environment. The FCE may require performance-based tests using job-specific equipment in a simulated or real environment. An additional Job Site Evaluation (JSE) can be obtained by using a specially trained therapist to assess the functions of the job and the physical demands required.