Isolated systolic hypertension, like any other hypertensive disorder, often results in end-organ damage when untreated. Hence, early diagnosis, addressing modifiable risk factors, and initiating appropriate treatment are prudent to decrease morbidity and mortality. The important aspects of the history in the hypertensive patient include the following:

- Intake of precipitating agents such as nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs, steroids, sympathomimetics, cocaine, steroids, estrogen

- Risk factors such as smoking, diabetes, dyslipidemia, obesity, sedentary lifestyle, unhealthy diet

- Diet, including high salt, processed food, high fat, and alcohol intake

- Family history of hypertension, renal disease, diabetes, or cardiovascular disease

- Symptoms of secondary causes such as spells of tremor, sweating or tachycardia, muscle weakness, thinning of the skin, depression, hematuria, loud snoring, and daytime somnolence

- Symptoms of end-organ damage such as headaches, loss of visual acuity, dyspnea, chest pain, and claudication

**Physical Examination**

**Accurate Blood Pressure Measurement**

- Reassess normal blood pressure yearly.

- Take blood pressure after the patient rests for five minutes.

- The patient should sit in a chair with both feet flat on the ground and the back straight.

- The patient's arm should be placed on a flat surface at the level of the chest or heart.

- Choosing the right cuff size is important.

- Systolic blood pressure (SBP) is the first Korotkoff sound.

- Diastolic blood pressure (DBP) is the fifth Korotkoff sound.

- Obtain an average of 2 to 3 blood pressure measurements on two or three separate occasions to confirm a hypertension diagnosis.

**General Appearance**

- Body mass index calculation

- Signs of Cushing syndrome such as buffalo hump, moon face, thinning of the skin, and red or purple striae.

- Restlessness

- Sweating

- Flushing

- Neurofibromatosis

**Neck**

- Thyroid enlargement

- Carotid bruits

**Fundoscopy**

- Papilledema

- Cotton wool spots

- Arteriolar narrowing

- Arteriovenous nicking

- Hemorrhage

**Heart**

- Gallop rhythm, S4

- Heave

- Jugular venous distension

**Lungs**

- Rales

- Rhonchi

**Abdomen**

- Enlarged kidneys

- Aorta or renal bruits

**Neurologic**

- Visual changes

- Confusion

- focal weakness

**Extremities**

- Peripheral pulses

- Pedal edema

- Cold peripheral limbs