**Preoperative Considerations**

Glucose control is important throughout the perioperative period. Early preoperative intervention can improve outcomes. Unfortunately, hyperglycemia is common in cardiac surgical patients, with almost 1 in 4 patients have elevated hemoglobin A1c (Hb A1c) and 1 in 10 with undiagnosed diabetes. Elevated Hb A1c is associated with deep sternal wound infection, ischemic events, and mortality. Whenever possible, Hb A1c level should be below 6.5%.

Lower preoperative albumin is associated with prolonged mechanical ventilation, acute kidney injury (AKI), infection, prolonged hospital length of stay, and death. Whenever possible, maximizing nutritional status with preoperative nutritional supplementation before surgery (ideally for 7 to 10 days) is paramount, especially in malnourished patients.

When possible, increasing preoperative patient engagement and functional capacity should be emphasized. Improving patient engagement through education and counseling has been shown to improve outcomes.

The preoperative clinic should emphasize the cessation of both alcohol and tobacco.  These should be stopped at least one month before surgery. Alcohol and smoking tobacco are associated with various complications such as infection, respiratory issues, slower wound healing, bleeding, and metabolic dysfunction.

**Intraoperative Considerations**

The most important surgical site infection in cardiac surgery is the deep sternal wound infection (DSWI). DSWI occurs in about 1 to 4% of cardiac surgery, leading to increased morbidity, mortality, and cost. Staphylococcus aureus (S. aureus) is the most common bacteria involved, with the majority likely originating from preoperative colonization as up to 30% of cardiac surgery patients are carriers. The ERACS guidelines recommend preoperative intranasal S. aureus therapy, skin preparation (including chest clipping), intraoperative antibiotics that cover S. aureus, and regular postoperative wound and dressing care.

Many studies have shown that adequate glycemic control improves outcomes. In cardiac surgery, maintaining a glucose level below 180 mg/dL leads to significantly fewer sternal wound infections. This can be most efficiently accomplished with an insulin infusion. Of note, tight glucose control (i.e., 80-110 mg/dL) is not recommended as this may lead to hypoglycemia.

Pain is a significant issue in cardiac surgery and is typically treated with high-dose opioids, which have many side effects. The ERACS guidelines recommend a multimodal opioid-sparing approach to achieve adequate pain control. Medications used for this multimodal approach include acetaminophen, gabapentin (or pregabalin), tramadol, and dexmedetomidine. All of these medications are associated with lower opioid requirements in patients.

In addition to medications, various neuraxial and peripheral nerve blocks can be utilized in cardiac surgery. With the use of intraoperative high-dose heparin, neuraxial anesthesia (thoracic epidural and intrathecal opioids) and paravertebral blocks remain controversial. However, studies have shown benefits from using these measures in reducing cardiopulmonary complications.

Normothermia should be maintained after cardiopulmonary bypass and during the initial intensive care period. Hyperthermia (core temperature above 37.9 degrees Celsius) has been associated with cognitive dysfunction, infection, and renal injury.

Bleeding is common in cardiac surgery, and various blood product conservation guidelines exist to minimize unnecessary transfusions. The ERACS guidelines recommend developing a blood product transfusion protocol based on the existing guidelines.

Sternotomy closure is typically done with wire cerclage, which has been the standard of care for decades. However, several newer rigid plate fixation devices are currently available and have been suggested to reduce side-by-side sternal movement during healing and are associated with improved bone healing, decreased pain, improved upper body function, and less mediastinitis. Though data and adoption are still limited, a rigid fixation plate device should be considered in high-risk patients. Some high-risk factors include a history of obesity, diabetes, chronic obstructive pulmonary disease, and radiated chest wall.

**Postoperative Considerations**

Minimizing mechanical ventilation and intubation reduces morbidity, mortality, and cost. Several studies in cardiac surgery have shown that early extubation (within 6 hours of ICU admission) is safe and decreases cost and the length of stays in the ICU and hospital.

Goal-directed fluid therapy has been shown to reduce complications and length of stay in cardiac surgery. Quantitative measures (such as cardiac index, mixed venous oxygen saturation, urine output, lactate, etc.) should be used whenever available to guide fluid management to achieve euvolemia.

Acute kidney injury (AKI) is fairly common and very costly in cardiac surgery. Identifying patients at high risk for AKI can be difficult. Still, recently some urinary biomarkers (tissue inhibitor of metalloproteinases-2 and insulin-like growth factor-binding protein 7) can predict AKI early after cardiopulmonary bypass. Using these biomarkers may lead to early AKI risk stratification, early renoprotective intervention, and AKI reduction in cardiac surgery.

Delirium occurs fairly often in cardiac surgery patients (up to 50% in some studies) and can lead to decreased long-term cognitive recovery and increased mortality and readmission. Regular delirium monitoring and early treatment should be routinely done, with nonpharmacologic treatment as the first-line intervention.

Both deep venous thrombosis (DVT) and pulmonary embolism (PE) are likely preventable complications after cardiac surgery. Patients should have mechanical thromboprophylaxis until they are mobile. As soon as there is surgical hemostasis, chemical thromboprophylaxis should be initiated, ideally from postoperative day one until discharge.

Chest tube clogging is fairly common after cardiac surgery and may lead to pericardial effusion, hemothorax, and atrial fibrillation. One method of unclogging a chest tube is by stripping (or milking), which unfortunately does not work effectively and may be harmful. Another unclogging method includes using a smaller tube to suction the chest tube, which typically involves breaking the chest tube sterility and can lead to infection or iatrogenically cause internal damage. The ERACS guidelines do not recommend either stripping or suctioning that involves breaking the sterile field.