**Prehospital**

The first step in trauma assessment begins prior to the patient's arrival. This includes gathering the care team, equipment, and initial information. Emergency medical services (EMS) should provide information including mechanism of injury, patient vital signs, obvious injury, current interventions, and patient's age and sex if available. After receiving this information, the healthcare team members should begin thinking of possible injuries that may be a threat to the patient's life. The trauma team may vary based on the hospital location and staffing but should, at a minimum, include a physician and nurse. Once the team is present, and ideally before the patient arrives, roles should be assigned. There must be one individual assigned as a team leader, usually the physician. Other roles may include documentation, airway management, IV access, attaching monitoring devices, and medication administration. The team leader should assign the roles and be in charge of the direction and decision making upon patient arrival and throughout the assessment.

**Primary Survey**

Upon patient arrival, the room should be quiet, and EMS should briefly present the patient and their findings. Depending on the patient's condition, the primary survey may have to start during the EMS presentation. If this occurs, every effort should be made to obtain the pertinent information from EMS before their departure. Advanced Trauma Life Support (ATLS), developed by the American College of Surgeons, promotes the primary survey sequence as airway, breathing, circulation, disability, exposure (ABCDE).

**Airway**

Airway obstruction is a major, preventable cause of death in trauma victims, and therefore it is the initial step of the primary survey.

**Breathing**

Once the airway is secured or maintained by the patient, breathing and ventilation should be assessed. This involves visual inspection of the patient's chest, looking for injury. Look for paradoxical chest movement, which indicates flail chest, penetrating injury, or tracheal deviation. Auscultate the lungs listening for decreased breath sounds. Palpate the chest for signs of crepitus. If the patient has signs of tension pneumothorax, immediate needle decompression or chest thoracostomy should be performed. Evaluate the patient's oxygen saturation. Ultrasound or x-ray imaging of the chest should be considered as an adjunct to the physical exam.

**Circulation**

The assessment of circulation focuses on hemorrhage control and maintaining adequate perfusion. Hemorrhage has been identified as the most common cause of preventable death in trauma victims.

**Disability**

Once airway, breathing, and circulation have been evaluated and stabilized, the patient's neurologic function should be assessed. Measure the patient's consciousness using the Glasgow coma score (GCS) (Table 1, GCS chart). For patients with a GCS of 8 or less, consideration should be given to definitive airway control (if not already achieved). Check pupils for size and reactivity. Assess the patient's motor ability and sensation in all four extremities to look for signs of spinal cord injury. Cervical spine immobilization should be maintained.

**Exposure**

The fifth and final step of the primary survey includes removing all clothing to assess for signs of injury such as gunshot wounds, stab wounds, abrasions, lacerations, ecchymosis, or any other traumatic findings. During this stage, it is important to remember to keep the patient warm as hypothermia can lead to multiorgan failure.

**Secondary Survey**

Once the patient is stabilized, and if they do not need immediate surgical intervention, a secondary assessment is performed. The secondary assessment involves further history from the patient, a thorough head-to-toe exam, and diagnostic testing. The four most commonly missed diagnoses during the survey are blunt abdominal trauma with internal organ injury, penetrating abdominal trauma, penetrating thoracic trauma, and extremity trauma such as fractures and compartment syndrome.