Monoclonal antibodies are intended to treat outpatient mild-moderate COVID-19 infections in patients with risk factors for progression to severe disease. Effectively managing COVID-19 with monoclonal antibodies and ensuring patient safety requires the coordinated efforts of an interprofessional healthcare team, including clinicians, pharmacists, nurses, and medical assistants.

Healthcare providers must be able to recognize patients at risk for progression to severe disease who would benefit from monoclonal antibody infusion and recognize which patients must be hospitalized for severe infection. Healthcare providers should also educate the patients on the potential benefits of monoclonal antibody therapy for the treatment of COVID-19. Healthcare providers must also educate the patient on symptoms that mark progression to severe disease and prompt the patient to return for reevaluation.

The interprofessional healthcare team must be familiar with the dosages and methods of administering monoclonal antibodies. Monoclonal antibodies are administered either subcutaneously or as an intravenous infusion. The FDA strongly recommends IV infusion except when IV infusion is not available or would lead to a delay in treatment. The pharmacy staff should be aware of the proper storage and handling of the medications. Nursing staff should be aware of the proper preparation of the drugs and the recommended infusion rates.

When administering monoclonal antibodies, the interprofessional team must be prepared for adverse events such as transfusion reactions and anaphylaxis. This requires equipment and medications used for the immediate treatment of allergic reactions. Patients must be observed for at least one hour after receiving a monoclonal antibody to ensure patient safety. All adverse events related to monoclonal antibody treatment must be reported according to the instructions in the fact sheets released by the FDA.

The interprofessional healthcare team is also responsible for educating patients on infection control measures. After receiving monoclonal antibody therapy, the patient must continue self-isolating and use infection control measures such as social distancing, frequent handwashing, and wearing personal protective equipment.

Healthcare providers should also be aware of the resistance patterns of SARS-CoV-2 variants. They should review the information found in section 15 on the fact sheets issued for each monoclonal antibody. Providers should also review the CDC website, which provides information from state and local health authorities that report viral variants in the region, which will help guide treatment decisions. Up-to-date information regarding authorized medications is essential to optimize clinical outcomes. A well-coordinated interprofessional team can minimize the use of ineffective therapies and optimize clinical outcomes for patients affected by this disease. [Level 5]