# Continuing Education Activity

Cupping therapy can generally be described as a technique that uses cups placed over the skin to create negative pressure through suction.
Cupping therapy dates back to ancient times and was used around the world. In 400 BC, Herodotus listed wet and dry cupping as a treatment for many ailments, including maldigestion, lack of appetite, and headaches. This activity describes the technique, indications, and contraindications of cupping therapy.

**Objectives:**
- Identify the technique of cupping therapy.
- Describe the indications for cupping therapy.
- Review the clinical relevance of cupping therapy
- Outline the importance of improving care coordination among interprofessional team members to improve outcomes for patients undergoing cupping therapy.

# Introduction

Cupping therapy can generally be described as a technique that uses cups placed over the skin to create negative pressure through suction.

Cupping therapy dates back to ancient times and was used around the world. In 400 BC, Herodotus listed wet and dry cupping as a treatment for many ailments, including maldigestion, lack of appetite, and headaches.Papyrus Ebers in Ancient Egypt (1550 BC).

There are two types of cupping methods, dry and wet. Dry cupping is noninvasive with no bloodletting. Wet cupping is invasive and includes bloodletting. It is further subdivided into traditional wet cupping and Al-hijamah. Al-hijamah comes from the Arabic word hajm, which means sucking, expansion, and bloodletting.

The specific mechanism in which cupping exerts its therapeutic effect has not been identified. However, a number of theories have been proposed. One method, called Taibah, suggests wet cupping mimics an artificial kidney.

Cupping therapy has been used for centuries to treat a wide variety of health disorders. However, to improve patient outcomes, clinicians should understand that cupping therapy is not a substitute treatment for conventional therapies but a complementary therapy. Health professionals should also be aware evidence to support its use for treating most medical disorders is lacking and that some health professionals may mistake cupping bruises as evidence of abuse.

# Anatomy and Physiology

There are numerous anatomical sites that can be used in cupping therapy and are chosen based on the ailment being treated. Areas where muscle tissue is abundant are the most common location for cup placement, including the back, chest, abdomen, and buttocks.

Anatomical sites avoided are those with abundant hair, those that have little muscle tissue, and those that do not have enough surface area to place the cups.

# Indications

Cupping therapy is indicated for both healthy patients and those suffering from ailments.

# Contraindications

Absolute contraindications to cupping therapy include cancer, organ failure, hemophilia or a similar blood disorder, and having a pacemaker.

Contraindications include sites with deep vein thrombosis, an open wound, or a bone fracture.

Those suffering from certain chronic diseases, like cardiovascular disease, those being treated with anticoagulants, or those experiencing an acute infection should generally avoid cupping therapy.

# Equipment

Cups can be fabricated from a variety of different materials, including bamboo, glass, and clay.

A sharp surgical blade is commonly used to create superficial lacerations in Al-hijamah wet cupping.

# Technique or Treatment

Dry cupping is a one-step technique. Traditional wet cupping is a two-step technique: superficial skin scarification followed by cupping. Al-hijamah is a three-step wet cupping technique: cupping, superficial scarification, cupping.

In Islamic medicine, it is recommended to perform Al-hijamah in the third quarter of the lunar month, particularly the 17th, 19th, and 21st days.

Researchers recommend that cups should be on the skin for no more than 5-10 minutes.

**Suctioning**

To create the necessary negative pressure in the cups, there is manual pumping, automatic pumping, and the fire method. For dry cupping, using fire to create a suction is the most popular choice and the primary method used in China.

In Al-hijamah wet cupping, honey is used to fix the cups and for the scarification, which aids in healing.

# Complications

Cupping therapy is generally safe, with adverse events being infrequent.

Nonpreventable adverse events include Koebner phenomenon, headache, dizziness, tiredness, vasovagal syncope, nausea, and insomnia.

# Clinical Significance

The strongest evidence for cupping therapy’s benefit is for the treatment of pain, particularly musculoskeletal pain, migraine, or tension headache.

Dry cupping is commonly used for musculoskeletal pain and muscular tension.

Overall, dry cupping showed the most benefit in generalized pain conditions, while wet cupping showed the most benefit in inflammatory-related pain conditions, such as herpes zoster infection (shingles).

There have been studies done that have shown the benefits of cupping therapy beyond pain management. In a German study, traditional wet cupping was shown to be effective in treating carpal tunnel syndrome.

As mentioned in the Introduction, to improve patient outcomes, clinicians should understand that cupping therapy is not a substitute treatment for conventional therapies but a complementary therapy. Health professionals should also be aware evidence to support its use for treating most medical disorders is lacking and that some health professionals may mistake cupping bruises as evidence of abuse.

# Enhancing Healthcare Team Outcomes

Detailed measures for infection control are vital for preventing infections from cupping therapy. Hand washing and wearing the appropriate protective equipment (gloves, mask, protective eyewear, gown) are essential in preventing the spread of infection. Disinfecting beds or chairs used during treatment ensure a sterile environment. Using disposable equipment for cups, surgical blades, and vacuum pumps is preferable to disinfecting.

To minimize complications and adverse effects of cupping, a detailed medical history is recommended. Compiling a checklist that includes known contraindications to cupping therapy is a simple and effective method of automating the initial encounter. A physical exam should also be performed to evaluate whether or not the patient has any other abnormalities that would hinder or contraindicate treatment.