In patients with corneal epithelial microsporidiosis, the patient gives a typical history of exposure to contaminated water, mainly in the rainy season. The history of exposure to pool water or natural spring or indulgence in water sports can also be elicited. The patients usually come with complaints of redness, decreased visual acuity, watering, lid swelling, and foreign body sensation following exposure to contaminated water. Initially, the disease is usually unilateral but can also be bilateral.

On clinical examination, multiple fine to coarse punctate, raised epithelial corneal lesions (stuck on appearance) are seen. The lesion stains variably with fluorescein stain and can be distributed peripherally, paracentrally, or diffusely. Corneal lesions are invariably associated with significant conjunctival congestion and are so appropriately termed as keratoconjunctivitis. In some cases, anterior chamber inflammation can also be noted with/without keratic precipitates. Some cases may present with multiple subepithelial punctate infiltrates and are indistinguishable from adenoviral keratoconjunctivitis.

Depending on the presenting features, the disease can be graded from grade 1 to 4.

In stromal microsporidial keratitis, there may be a history of multiple episodes of remission and recurrence. The corneal infiltrates are multifocal, mid to deep stromal, and often with intact overlying epithelium. The stromal infiltrates are non-specific and associated with stromal edema with or without deep stromal vascularization. The infiltrate can be ulcerative at times.

The disease is often treated as viral keratitis, though it can mimic fungal and bacterial keratitis also.