Effective management of BPSD requires a coordinated interprofessional health care team that partners with the patient's home caregiver.

- Nurses and nursing assistants are on the front lines of identifying, quantifying, and monitoring BPSD in hospitals and long-term care facilities, where they are usually the first to notice precipitants such as changes in the environment, medications, and physical symptoms. In addition to delivering direct nursing care, home health nurses provide education and guidance to family caregivers.

- Physical, occupational, and recreational therapists can aid in identifying and removing sources of danger, assisting with family caregiver education, and providing non-pharmacological interventions such as busy quilts (or other forms of distracting activities) and weighted blankets.

- Social workers can support family caregivers and connect them with resources such as caregiver education, respite, and permanent placement.

- Clinical psychologists can create behavioral plans that integrate non-pharmacological interventions with measures to avoid inadvertently reinforcing undesirable behaviors.

- Pharmacists can assist in identifying medications or drug interactions that may contribute to BPSD, as well as checking for drug interactions and verifying dosing regimens.

- Physicians, nurse practitioners, and physician assistants perform medical evaluations, initiate and monitor pharmacotherapy, and oversee the interprofessional treatment plan.

All team members are responsible for maintaining clear communication with other team members, informing everyone regarding any concerns or new developments, and addressing safety risks. For in-home settings, a notebook that contains caregiver ratings of symptoms, medications, including date/time of any as-needed medications, and instructions given by each discipline can be immensely beneficial.

With open collaboration and communication among all members of the interprofessional healthcare team, the management of BPSD will be more effective and result in better patient outcomes. [Level 5]