The single most useful laboratory measurement to narrow the differential diagnosis towards retroperitoneal bleeding is falling hemoglobin; however, it must be emphasized that patients bleed whole blood, so it may take some time with or without crystalloid volume resuscitation to recognize this acute hemorrhagic anemia. Other useful studies include prothrombin time, partial thromboplastin time, international normalized ratio, and thromboelastography to identify a patient’s anticoagulation status. Urine analysis can evaluate for urinary tract involvement. If bleeding is suspected or ongoing, a blood type and crossmatch is essential.

The focused assessment with sonography for trauma (FAST) has profoundly altered the approach to diagnosis and management of abdominal trauma. Unfortunately, one well documented profound shortcoming of abdominal ultrasonography is the inability to effectively evaluate the retroperitoneal space. Because of this, ultrasound remains an incredibly useful tool in evaluating for concomitant free fluid in the peritoneal space, but cannot be reliably used to rule in or out retroperitoneal bleeding. The FAST exam is also limited in several other ways.

Also common in the trauma bay are the routine cervical, chest, and pelvic roentgenograms. A pelvic fracture may be the clinician’s first indication that the inferior retroperitoneum is involved; however, outside of the trauma setting, roentgenograms lack usefulness. The computed tomographic (CT) cross-sectional imaging of the abdomen with intravenous contrast has been identified as the superior study for narrowing the broad differential associated with retroperitoneal bleeding. CT can easily, rapidly, and repeatedly identify the specific hematomal location, concomitant injuries, and determine if bleeding is ongoing.

CT examination is not without its negatives. The scan utilizes ionizing radiation, which can predispose a patient to develop cancer at a later date. The use of intravenous contrast can cause an acute kidney injury. Evaluation of pregnant women and children should emphasize studies that forgo the use of ionizing radiation such as abdominal ultrasonography and magnetic resonance imaging.