Interprofessional interaction during and after an episiotomy plays a crucial role in achieving the best standard of care for women and their unborn babies. Before performing an episiotomy, it is imperative to obtain consent from the patient and provide education, if time permits, as it can be considered as an unnecessary procedure for assisting delivery. Clear communication about the risks, benefits, and alternatives for episiotomy is necessary. The nurse's role is critical before, during, and after performing the episiotomy procedure. During the pre-procedure period, the nurse should make sure that the patient is well informed. The nurse should address any concerns or uncertainties the patient might have about the episiotomy procedure. The nurse should record the patient's vital signs in the medical chart and ascertain they are appropriate. If there is any untoward change in vital signs, she should immediately get back to the clinician and document the findings. The nurse ensures that the necessary tools needed to perform the episiotomy are available and ready for use.

During the procedure, the nurse assists the obstetrician or midwife by handing over equipment and ensuring that adequate exposure of the perineum is maintained. Afterward, the nurse should cover the episiotomy incision with the proper dressing and educate the patient on appropriate wound care management. The nurse should also monitor the patient's vital signs and report any potential complications to the provider. The patient should receive further written information about the procedure and instructions on how to care for their wounds after the procedure. The clinical pharmacist plays a role by counseling the patient on the proper use of analgesics and anti-inflammatory drugs within the first 24 to 72 hours after episiotomy. The pharmacist also ensures that the patients are not receiving any other medications that might interfere with their prescribed medications, to prevent drug-drug interactions. The interprofessional team should ensure that pelvic floor exercises and proper wound care are incorporated post-partum to minimize the inappropriate scarring of the perineum. This management will help decrease the complications in a relatively sensitive area. The utilization of interprofessional collaboration will ensure the best patient outcome. [Level 5]