Different states of vigilance like waking and sleep states with or without dreams have been identified since ancient times. The Upanishads (approximately 1000 BCE) have described the different states of consciousness. The Hippocratic school (400 BCE) had understood the role of sleep in promoting good health.

There are many theories on the functions of sleep, even though specific research has not validated these. This includes the early theory of restorative function, which involves the growth and changes in metabolism. There are contradictory findings on the restorative effects of post-exercise sleep–molecular studies on the cell division and DNA transcription function relative to circadian rhythms on various tissues. However, researchers generally agree that there are beneficial effects on neuronal function and behavior.

There are theories on energy conservation to reduce energy expenditure by lowering metabolism and thermoregulation through hypothalamic nuclei. There are cross pathways of circadian rhythms and energy metabolism

Researchers also think that sleep brings about memory consolidation and the plasticity of the cognitive neural networks. Learning, behavior, and cognitive performance are improved after sleep, as evidenced by functional magnetic resonance imaging on the visuomotor task performance after normal sleep.

This short article mainly covers the EEG aspects of sleep to familiarize the reader with terminology and specific characteristics of various sleep stages.