Preventing surgical errors is a task that requires a robust interprofessional approach. Current recommendations for addressing this global issue rely on effective communication, teamwork, and adopting a culture of safety. Lingard et al identified communication failures as a significant contributor to surgical errors; interprofessional team interventions such as checklists, briefing, and debriefing effectively reduced communication failures and, consequently, surgical errors.

Several collaborative organizations and ongoing quality improvement initiatives such as The Joint Commission, World Health Organization, Surgical Care Improvement Project, Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality, Comprehensive United-based Safety Program, and the Safety Attitudes Questionnaire have played a role in improving patient safety.

The Safety Attitudes Questionnaire (SAQ) is used in more than 500 hospitals in the United States. The SAQ is a validated tool that measures culture by establishing benchmark safety culture scores. The SAQ comprises questions measuring working conditions, job satisfaction, perception of management, safety climate, teamwork, and stress recognition. Participating institutions compare scores and work together to implement programs to improve their safety culture.

Error reporting is intended to prevent future error occurrences. The Joint Commission requires healthcare agencies immediately report all sentinel events to allow for timely investigational analysis and response. Root cause analysis and failure mode effect analysis (FMEA) are two major analytical frameworks following error reporting.

Simulation training allows healthcare professionals to practice key aspects of patient care without the risk of causing harm. Evidence shows that simulation training in laparoscopic inguinal hernia repair and central line placement improves patient care outcomes.

The Comprehensive Unit-based Safety Program (CUSP) promotes routine interprofessional meetings to discuss and improve safety hazards.

The Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality (AHRQ) was created in 1989 to improve healthcare efficiency, safety, and effectiveness in the United States. The AHRQ created Patient Safety Indicators in 2003, which aid healthcare system leaders in identifying potential adverse events.

The World Health Organization (WHO) Safe Surgery Saves Lives campaign was created to implement safe surgical and patient safety practices. The campaign recommends a surgical safety checklist divided into three phases: sign-in, time-out, and sign-out. These steps help to control possible errors associated with equipment, correct site, correct patient, correct procedure, antibiotic administration, sponge count, and postoperative assignment.

The Situational Debriefing Model is a communication technique used by the US Navy that focuses on structured verbal communication. This model can be applied to standard patient sign-out in which written or oral communication of patient information is provided to the oncoming healthcare professional assuming their care. This technique can enhance the transmission of critical information such as pertinent medical history or physical examination findings, changes in underlying condition, significant concerns, and adequate time for questions from the receiving provider.

The Surgical Care Improvement Project (SCIP) was created as a steering committee composed of several national organizations, including the CDC and The Joint Commission, committed to reducing surgical complications. SCIP measures the incidence of preventable perioperative adverse events by advocating using effective, up-to-date practices and removing out-of-date ineffective methods.