HDL gets tested through blood sampling and is commonly determined within a complete lipid profile. Testing in adults requires fasting for 12 hours before sampling, whereas testing is possible without fasting in the youth without risk factors for heart disease. Without fasting, only total cholesterol and HDL are usable. In this scenario, if the total cholesterol is ≥200 mg/dL or HDL is below 40 mg/dL, the NCEP III guidelines indicate a follow-up lipoprotein profile is necessary for management based on LDL.

A lipid profile, and thus HDL-C, may be ordered for those with risk factors for heart disease, which includes:

- Smoking (cigarettes)

- Sedentary lifestyle

- Being overweight or obesity

- Poor diet

- Men over 45 years or women older than 55 years

- Hypertension (higher than 140/90)

- Positive immediate family history of premature heart disease (under 55 for men and under 65 for women)

- Pre-existing heart condition

- Diabetes or prediabetes

For the youth, the American Academy of Pediatrics recommends that children be tested once between ages 9 and 11 and repeated between the ages of 17 and 21. This screening is recommended for children under the age of 9 if the children's parents test positive for high cholesterol. The NCEP ATP III guidelines also suggest using agents that will correct the HDL abnormality while also lowering LDL cholesterol, lowering LDL cholesterol being paramount.

Monitoring the lipid profile involves testing to be completed 4 to 12 weeks after starting a statin and every 3 to 12 months after that to ensure a response. These levels can also get checked after successful lifestyle changes, such as smoking cessation, diet, and exercise. Research has shown that a higher intake of total fat in the form of unsaturated fat can reduce triglycerides and raise HDL cholesterol in the setting of metabolic syndrome.

The ideal lipid profile is controversial. The NCEP ATP III guidelines indicate that the ideal HDL levels should be between 40 and 60 mg/dL.

Some laboratory reports give a ratio of total cholesterol to HDL cholesterol, with a desirable ratio being 5 to 1 and the optimum ratio being 3.5 to 1.

It bears mentioning that lipid profiles should not be measured when a person is acutely ill or is less than six weeks recovering from an illness, as cholesterol t is lowered during acute illness, stress (surgery or trauma), or pregnancy.