**Normal Hearing**

A normal audiogram displays air and bone conduction lines with thresholds of ≤25 dB HL at each of the tested frequencies in both ears.

**Presbycusis**

Presbycusis represents the most common type of hearing loss that develops with advancing age. This type of hearing loss occurs due to age-related structural changes in the inner ear, producing a bilateral, symmetric, sensorineural hearing loss that is typically worse at higher frequencies. This pattern is represented by a gradual "downsloping" configuration in both ears on an audiogram.

**Ototoxicity**

Ototoxicity may cause sensorineural hearing loss by damaging various structures of the inner ear, such as the cochlea's inner hair cells. Common causes include platinum-based chemotherapeutic agents, aminoglycosides, anti-malarial agents, antineoplastic drugs, loop diuretics, and high dosages of non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs. The audiogram pattern for ototoxicity is often similar to presbycusis, with a bilateral sensorineural hearing loss more prominent in the high frequencies.

**Ménière Disease**

Ménière disease is characterized by episodes of a triad of vertigo, tinnitus, and fluctuating hearing loss in one ear.

**Vestibular Schwannoma**

Vestibular schwannoma, also known as acoustic neuroma, is a benign tumor of the internal auditory canal or the cerebellopontine angle that arises from the Schwann cells of the vestibular nerve. As the tumor grows, it compromises the function of the cochlear and/or vestibular nerves, which can, in turn, affect hearing and/or balance. The hearing loss associated with these tumors is a unilateral or asymmetric high-frequency sensorineural hearing loss on the affected side. These tumors are typically unilateral, except in neurofibromatosis type 2, in which bilateral tumors are diagnostic.

**Noise-Induced Hearing Loss**

Noise-induced hearing loss is the permanent loss of hearing due to the destruction of stereocilia (hair cells) in the inner ear from repetitive exposure to loud sounds.

**Otitis Media with Effusion**

Otitis media with effusion is an inflammation of the mucosa of the middle ear that causes fluid accumulation in a typically air-filled space. It may cause conductive hearing loss by affecting the transmission of sound from the air through the structures of the middle ear. This pathology may result in an air-bone gap of >15 dB HL.

**Otosclerosis**

Otosclerosis occurs due to abnormal growth of the bone surrounding the cochlea, which can lead to fixation of the stapes to the oval window. Due to changes in the middle ear structure, otosclerosis commonly causes conductive hearing loss but may progress to mixed hearing loss in some cases. A classic feature, known as "Carhart's notch," may also be present, which is represented by a worsening in bone conduction hearing of 10 to 15 dB HL at 2000 Hz, sometimes accompanied by an apparent improvement of the air conduction threshold at that same frequency.

**Congenital Hearing Loss**

Congenital, inherited hearing loss, as may result from Stickler syndrome, Waardenburg syndrome, connexin 26 gene mutations, and others, may present with a "cookie bite" pattern on pure tone audiometry. The "cookie bite" is a "U" shape to the air and bone lines that denotes mid-frequency SNHL centers around 1000 Hz but usually extends from 500 Hz to 2000 Hz before sloping back towards normal. While this pattern is often associated with genetic hearing loss, neither its specificity (18%) nor its positive predictive value (15%) for this diagnosis is high, and a U-shaped audiogram can also result from vestibular schwannoma, autoimmune inner ear disease, carbon monoxide poisoning, and other insults to the cochlea and eighth nerve.