# Introduction

Wernicke area was first discovered in 1874 by a German neurologist, Carl Wernicke. It has been identified as 1 of 2 areas found in the cerebral cortex that manages speech. Wernicke area is located in Brodmann area 22, the posterior segment of the superior temporal gyrus in the dominant hemisphere.

Receptive aphasia may be best described as one who is unable to comprehend/express written or spoken language. The patient will most commonly have fluent speech, but their words will lack meaning. The other aspect of Wernicke aphasia is that the patient has auditory incomprehension. This means an individual is unable to understand what is being spoken to them. Lastly, patients with Wernicke aphasia are unaware of their lack of comprehension. Due to the prominent involvement of the Wernicke area in basal life, various disease etiologies may result in damage to this area.

# Blood Supply and Lymphatics

Wernicke area receives its vascular supply from the inferior temporal branch of the middle cerebral artery. The temporal lobe drains blood via 2 primary routes.

The first involves the anterior drainage of the temporal lobe via the superficial middle cerebral vein. As it is drained, it progresses toward the vein of Labbe which eventually empties into the transverse sinus.

The second route involves drainage of the inferior temporal love into the posterior choroidal vein. From there, it moves posteriorly behind the interventricular foramen to join with the thalamostriate vein and form the internal cerebral vein. The internal cerebral vein then joins the basal veins to form the great cerebral vein.

# Muscles

Although the result of all speech production is a series of muscle movements, new research demonstrates that the neurologic mechanisms involved in speech production are not simply limited to motor commands that move muscles. Before motor commands can be sent, the speaker must create a mental image of the sounds comprising the words. This stage can be exemplified by the fact that one knows that the word “snow” rhymes with “blow” but not with “flow” without needing to say these words aloud.

# Surgical Considerations

The temporal lobe is a crucial component in regulating essential processes such as language, memory, and emotion. Thus, surgery must be performed with extreme care to avoid detrimental results. Because temporal lobe surgery commonly has more risks than benefits, it is mainly reserved to treat temporal lobe epilepsy.

# Clinical Significance

Wernicke area is most commonly damaged due to vitamin B1 (thiamine deficiency) resulting in Wernicke-Korsakoff syndrome. While most often associated with chronic alcoholism, Wernicke encephalopathy may also occur due to poor nutrition, increased metabolic requirement, or in the setting of renal dialysis (water-soluble vitamin depletion).

**Wernicke Syndrome**

The cardinal symptoms of Wernicke syndrome include gait ataxia, horizontal nystagmus, and encephalopathy. The encephalopathy may be characterized by inattentiveness, delirium, and profound disorientation to person/place/time. Although horizontal nystagmus is the most common ocular finding, vertical nystagmus may also occur. The ataxia experienced in these patients is a combination of vestibular dysfunction, cerebellar involvement, and polyneuropathy. Other uncommon findings may include severe hypotension, hypothermia, or coma.

**Korsakoff Syndrome**

Korsakoff syndrome has a more chronic onset and is characterized by confabulation, memory loss, hallucinations, and personality changes. Diagnostic imaging techniques such as magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) may be used to illustrate contrast enhancement in the mamillary bodies and thalamus.

**Hyperemesis Gravidarum**

During pregnancy, expecting mothers may experience a phenomenon labeled as hyperemesis gravidarum. Over 75% of pregnant women experience severe nausea and vomiting during the first and second trimester of pregnancy. When vomiting becomes severe enough to result in weight loss, it is termed hyperemesis gravidarum. In addition to the variety of electrolyte abnormalities experienced, Wernicke encephalopathy may emerge due to water-soluble vitamin deficiency (Thiamine).****

**Brodmann Area 22 Damage**

Wernicke area may be directly damaged via direct insult to the superior temporal gyrus. These etiologies may include transient ischemic attack (TIA), stroke, cerebral abscess, neoplasm, encephalitis, or seizures. Common presentations of patients with damage to this area include a variety of paraphrastic errors in which either whole-word is improperly substituted (chair for table) or phonemic substitutions such as "cable" for "table." Comprehension may be assessed by giving a series of commands with increasing difficulty. The token test is frequently used in which a series of commands involving 20 tokens of different shapes, sizes, and colors presented in increasing complexity. An impairment in comprehension may be due to failure of word recognition, auditory memory, syntactic structure formation, or speech sound discrimination.