The prostate is a genitourinary organ in men located between the bladder and urogenital diaphragm. It is shaped like a walnut and measures on average 3.75 to 4.0 x 2.5-3.0 x 3.1 to 3.8 cm (width x length x height) with a volume of 20-25 cm3. The prostatic base is located adjacent to the bladder with its apex at the urogenital diaphragm. The seminal vesicles join with the vas deferens at the prostate's posterior aspect to form the paired ejaculatory ducts, which traverse the gland and empty into the prostatic urethra.

The prostate is most commonly classified into anatomic zones: the peripheral, central, transitional, periurethral zones, and the anterior fibromuscular stroma, containing non-glandular tissue. The peripheral zone accounts for 75% of the prostate's mass and is where most prostate cancers arise. Prostate cancer is unique in that it is typically multifocal, whereas other malignancies tend to be unifocal unless they have metastasized. The central zone contains glandular tissue and is where the ejaculatory ducts travel to empty into the urethra. The transitional zone surrounds the urethra and is the smallest component. However, it is the primary site of benign prostatic hyperplasia. These different zones are not readily differentiated on imaging. Therefore on the transrectal ultrasound, the gland is divided into an inner (periurethral and transitional zones) and outer (central, peripheral, anterior stromal zones) gland, separated by the surgical capsule.

The prostate is supplied by three branches of the internal iliac arteries: internal pudendal, inferior vesicle, and middle rectal arteries. It receives venous blood from the dorsal vein of the penis and drains into the iliac veins. There is also a communication to the internal vertebral venous plexus (Batson plexus), which accounts for the metastatic spread of prostate cancer to the vertebral bodies. The lymphatic drainage is primarily to the internal iliac and sacral lymph nodes. It receives parasympathetic supply from pelvic splanchnic nerves (S2-4) and sympathetic supply from the inferior hypogastric plexuses. The neurovascular bundle travels posterolateral to the prostate.

The prostate has multiple physiologic functions. The glandular tissue produces the glycoprotein prostate-specific antigen (PSA), which liquefies semen, multiple prostaglandins (A, E, and F), spermidine, and spermine. The gland also is the site of the conversion of testosterone into dihydrotestosterone with the enzyme 5α reductase.