Within rhodopsin, light absorption leads to a chemical reaction that forces part of the rhodopsin molecule to translocate, by changing protein conformation and exposing active sites. This activated form of rhodopsin is known as metarhodopsin. MetarhodopsinII activates many copies of the G protein transducin (by replacing transducin's GDP with GTP). Activated transducin complexes and activates cyclic nucleotide phosphodiesterase (PDE), which can itself hydrolyze 1000 molecules of cGMP to 5'-GMP per second. cGMP-gated channels in the plasma membrane of these rods (or cones) allow sodium ion influx at high cGMP concentrations; this is balanced by cation exchanger-mediated glutamate efflux, maintaining cell depolarization (dark conditions). At low cGMP concentrations, these channels close, stopping sodium ion influx and reducing glutamate efflux, all leading to cell hyperpolarization (light conditions). Thus light-induced rod/cone state changes lead to hyperpolarization of the photoreceptor cells; which cease to transmit the neurotransmitter glutamate. Conversely, photoreceptor cells without the presence of light exist in the depolarized state and continuously release glutamate.

Light response is a one-to-one effect. The enzyme rhodopsin kinase quickly binds metarhodopsin II, phosphorylating and halting its activity. The protein arrestin binds phosphorylated metarhodopsin II. Innate GTPase activity in transducin eventually degrades bound GTP to GDP, leading to PDE dissociation and inactivation. MetarhodopsinII is unstable and will split within minutes, leading to opsin and free trans-retinal. Trans-retinal is transported to pigment epithelial cells that convert trans-retinal back to 11-cis-retinal, which eventually is recombined with opsin within cones/rods to reform rhodopsin. Guanylate cyclase restores cGMP concentration, and the cone/receptor is ready to respond to another light exposure event.

Additionally, phototransduction is subject to regulation by a calcium-mediated pathway to quickly diffuse a large gradient response, in such circumstances as sudden flashes of light in the dark. In dark conditions, intracellular calcium level is high due to calcium diffusion through cGMP-gated channels. Lack of frequent light response allows more calcium to enter the cell per second, due to high intracellular cGMP concentrations. Calcium ion binding to rhodopsin kinase increases the rate of rhodopsin phosphorylation, reducing transducin activation. Calcium ion binding to guanylate cyclase accelerates the restoration of cGMP concentration. And calcium ion binding to calmodulin increases cGMP affinity to its gated channel.

Color vision results from the combination of signals from three visual pigment types within cones: that of red, green, and blue, which correspond to cone types L, M, and S (RGB-LMS). Those colors correspond to the wavelengths of peak light absorption intensities of the modified chromophores. L cones have peak absorptions at 555 nm to 565 nm, M cones at 530 nm to 537 nm, and S cones at 415 nm to 430 nm. Thus color vision arises from the shifted cones' peak absorption levels and ultimately the brain's interpretation of the composition of these points of wavelength absorption. The entire pathway is sometimes referred to as the retinoid cycle.