Odontogenic cutaneous fistulas are responsible for most cases of oral cutaneous fistulas reported in the literature.

Cutaneous fistulas and sinuses in the maxillofacial region secondary to osteomyelitis rarely appear in clinical practice.

An additional cause of oral cutaneous fistula is medication-related osteonecrosis of the jaw.

Traumatic fistulas may be the result of injury or surgical repair. In a study by Dawson et al., which explored factors associated with the formation of orocutaneous fistulas following head and neck reconstructive surgery, they found that patients who had undergone chemoradiotherapy had a significantly higher probability of developing a fistula than those who had not (p = 0.008).

Complications of dental implants usually result from a combination of infection and host inflammatory responses or a lack thereof. The literature reports a case report of an oral cutaneous fistula associated with an osseointegrated dentoalveolar implant which occurred after three months.

There are also reports of fistulas mimicking a brachial cyst caused by an ectopic salivary gland. In one case, a 24-year-old man presented with intermittent clear drainage on both sides of the middle neck. The lesion underwent surgical excision, and the pathological examination revealed heterotopic salivary gland tissue.

Periapical actinomycosis is among the rarest forms of actinomycosis in the maxillofacial region. Although rare, it can result in an orocutaneous fistula.

More rarely, OCF is secondary to a neoplasm. Squamous cell carcinoma is the most common oral cavity neoplasm. If the fistula occurs, it has a poor prognosis because lymphatic drainage has most likely taken place by the time of diagnosis.