Achieving fracture stability is the mainstay of management.****

**A conservative approach**may be justified for patients with the following:

- Good alignment with

- No dynamic instabitiy

- No deficits.

Type I and Type III fractures Halo fixation or cervical traction and rigid cervical collar result in fusion in:

- 100% of type 1 in the majority of cases

- Approximately 90% of type III fractures, and

- 60% of type II fractures.

A cervical collar is biomechanically superior to halo orthoses with minimal risk of concurrent device-related complications.

**Indications for Surgery in Type II Fractures**

- Unstable fracture

- Irreducible fracture

- Nonunion, and

- Patients with deficits.

**Criteria of instability**

- Fracture age equal to or more than six months

- Comminuted fracture

- Rupture of the transverse ligament

- Non-reducible or mal-aligned fracture pattern,

- Dens displacement more or equal to 6 mm,

- Angulation greater more or equal to 10 degrees or

- Fracture gap more than or equal to 2 mm

- Lateral mass gap  >2 mm.

Both anterior and posterior fixation techniques have equivalent clinical results.

The posterior inferior fracture type and concurrent tear of the transverse ligament are selected for the posterior fixation.

Nakanishi described the technique of anterior odontoid screw fixation.

**Anterior fixation**is advocated for:

- Fractures < 6 months old and

- Anterior-inferior sloping fracture line,

- Transverse without any comminuting segments at the base.

There is no need for bone grafting and minimal risk of injury to the vertebral artery. There are also mild limitations in functional abilities following the procedure.

**Prerequisites for the anterior odontoid screw fixation include:**

- Intact transverse ligament, and

- Reduction and proper alignment following traction.

The bicortical purchase and superior and posterior breach of the odontoid tip significantly govern postoperative alignment.

**Subsets not appropriate for anterior odontoid screw fixation include:**

- Type II-a fractures

- Rupture of the transverse ligament

- Associated atlantoaxial dislocation

- Osteopenia

- >6 months of injury

- Anterior oblique fracture slope

- Short neck

- Barrel-shaped chest, and

- Severe kyphosis.

**Recent advances in assisting instrumentation include:**

- 0-arm navigation.

- A 3D print model.

- Endoscopic approach.

- Robotics.

- CT-guided navigation.

The odontoid screw fixation technique is not recommended for children under six years old.

There is a level II recommendation for surgical stabilization in geriatric patients due to the high risk of high nonunion.

There is marked variation in the treatment strategies as well as follow-up and imaging algorithms.