Mediastinitis can be caused by various pathologies that breach the integrity of the mediastinal structures, including iatrogenic, traumatic, or infectious causes. In regards to fibrosing mediastinitis, this is an inflammatory process that starts within the mediastinum.

There are many causes of mediastinitis, too numerous to cover in this review. Although this review will not go into great detail, it is important to note that a common cause of mediastinitis is tracheal or esophageal rupture, such as after an endoscopic procedure, Boerhaave syndrome, and foreign body aspiration. Other causes associated with mediastinitis include direct traumatic injury, the spread of pulmonary infection, and pancreatitis, though rare.

Postoperative mediastinitis refers to mediastinitis in the setting of postsurgical procedures. It is most commonly related to sternotomies and thoracic surgeries. It is thought to be caused by the intraoperative introduction of infection or from infection of the surgical wound that seeds into the mediastinum. It has also been referred to as post-sternotomy mediastinitis or deep sternal wound infections.

Descending necrotizing mediastinitis involves the spread of infection from a head or neck pathological processes such as neck abscess, Ludwig angina, and other dental infections. Commonly, odontogenic or pharyngeal sources cause inflammation via the fascial planes affecting the posterior mediastinum.

The exact etiology that causes fibrosing mediastinitis is still not adequately researched. Although believed to be idiopathic, there has been speculation that it is associated with both infectious and noninfectious processes. Of the potential infectious causes, histoplasmosis and tuberculosis have been frequently described in the literature as linked to an immune-mediated hypersensitivity reaction. The non-infectious causes described often include sarcoidosis, retroperitoneal fibrosis, and Riedel thyroiditis.