# Continuing Education Activity

Non-odontogenic cysts arise from tissue not involved in tooth formation. While uncommon, these lesions can be encountered by many health professionals. This activity outlines and reviews the evaluation and management of non-odontogenic cysts and highlights the role of the interdisciplinary team in evaluating and treating patients with these conditions.

**Objectives:**
- Describe the most common non-odontogenic cysts.
- Identify the etiology of non-odontogenic cysts.
- Review possible treatment modalities for non-odontogenic cysts.
- Outline an interprofessional approach to the evaluation, management, and follow-up of non-odontogenic cysts.

# Introduction

Non-odontogenic cysts are usually discovered during a routine examination. These lesions arise from the non-odontogenic (non-tooth forming) tissue. By definition, the cysts are lined by epithelium. Cysts within the oral cavity vary in their clinical appearance, incidence, histology, behavior, and management. The clinical features, etiology, and treatment modalities for the following lesions will be discussed in this activity: nasopalatine duct cyst, nasolabial cyst, palatal cyst of the neonate, oral lymphoepithelial cyst, and epidermoid cyst.

# Etiology

Nasopalatine duct cysts are developmental in origin, arising from epithelial remnants of the nasopalatine duct.

Nasolabial cysts are developmental in origin. There are currently two hypotheses that exist for the pathogenesis of these cysts. The first states that the cyst is formed from retained epithelial cells within the mesenchyme after the fusion of the nasal processes. The second proposes that the cyst arises from epithelial remnants of the nasolacrimal duct in the area of the nasal process and maxillary prominence. Both theories remain to be determined.

Palatal cysts of the neonate, also known as Epstein pearls or Bohn’s nodules, result from keratin entrapment within the palate, resulting in cystic lesion formation.

Oral lymphoepithelial cysts have several theories regarding pathogenesis; however, the most accepted theory involves the association with oral lymphoid tissue (Waldyer ring) and the entrapment and/or accumulation of desquamated epithelial cells within a dilated crypt.

Epidermoid cysts are developmental in origin and are considered inclusion cysts that are derived from the ectoderm. These cysts can also be acquired by trauma resulting from the forced displacement of epithelial tissue into deeper tissue layers forming a cystic cavity.

# Epidemiology

Nasopalatine duct cysts are the most common non-odontogenic cyst found within the anterior maxilla.

Nasolabial cysts are relatively rare, accounting for only 0.7% of all maxillofacial cysts.

Palatal cysts of the neonate are very common, occurring in 60% to 85% of newborn infants.

Oral lymphoepithelial cysts are relatively rare and have no gender predilection.

Epidermoid cysts are rare and have a predilection for males.

# Pathophysiology

Nasopalatine duct cysts arise from epithelial remnants of the nasopalatine duct, which can undergo activation by trauma, infection, or spontaneously.

Nasolabial cyst's pathogenesis is unclear; however, it is suggested that the epithelium in the nasolacrimal duct undergoes spontaneous activation and subsequent cyst formation.

Palatal cysts of the newborn arise from entrapped epithelium during the fusion of the palatal processes or trapped minor salivary glands.

Oral lymphoepithelial cysts arise from either entrapped epithelium in the area of Waldyer’s ring or from obstructions in minor salivary gland ducts.

Epidermoid cysts arise from epidermal inclusions. In comparison to the dermoid cyst, the epidermoid cyst does not demonstrate any skin adnexa, like sebaceous glands or hair follicles.

# Histopathology

Nasopalatine duct cysts present histologically as a cystic lining of flattened stratified squamous epithelium approximately 2 or 3 cell layers thick.

Nasolabial cysts present histologically as a cystic lining of epithelium, ranging from stratified squamous epithelium to ciliated pseudostratified columnar epithelium.

Palatal cysts of the newborn present histologically as a keratin-filled cystic lumen lined by stratified squamous epithelium.

Oral lymphoepithelial cysts present as a cyst lined by stratified squamous epithelium surrounded by lymphoid tissue. The cyst appears encapsulated by the surrounding lymphoid tissue.

Epidermoid cysts present histologically with a cystic wall of stratified squamous epithelium without skin adnexa present. The cystic lumen typically presents with abundant keratin flakes.

# History and Physical

Nasopalatine duct cysts present as well-circumscribed radiolucencies noted in the anterior maxilla. Oftentimes, the nasal spine is superimposed on the image, giving the lesion a “heart-shaped” appearance. Clinically, these lesions can present as painless, firm swellings on the anterior hard palate crossing the midline with or without drainage.

Nasolabial cysts present as an asymptomatic swelling approximating the nasolabial region of the midface. They range from 1 to 5 centimeters in diameter.

Palatal cysts of the neonate are small, white to yellow nodules adjacent to the palatal midline.

Oral lymphoepithelial cysts present as yellowish-white nodules with relatively smooth surfaces. Most lesions present on the ventral surface or lateral borders of the tongue or the floor of the mouth but can be discovered on any oral mucosal surface associated with the Waldyer ring.

Epidermoid cysts present most commonly on the floor of the mouth as an asymptomatic slow-growing mass. They are typically not discovered until becoming large in size.

# Evaluation

Nasopalatine duct cysts present histologically with an epithelial-lined cyst wall surrounded by fibrovascular connective tissue, oftentimes with minor salivary glands as incidental findings.

Nasolabial cysts present histologically with pseudostratified columnar epithelium with occasional stratified squamous epithelium.

Palatal cysts of the neonate are diagnosed clinically and therefore require no additional tests.

Oral lymphoepithelial cysts present histologically as a cyst lined by stratified squamous epithelium surrounded by lymphoid tissue.

Epidermoid cysts present histologically as keratinized stratified squamous epithelium-lined cysts without dermal appendages in the underlying fibrous connective tissue. With more diagnostic imaging modalities, such as a CT scan, lesions may appear as well-circumscribed, unilocular, low-density masses.

# Treatment / Management

Nasopalatine duct cysts are best treated by surgical resection. After removal, it is important to monitor patients both clinically and radiographically to determine if the lesion has completely resolved. Recurrence is rare.

Nasolabial cysts are typically removed via conservative surgical excision.

Palatal cysts of the neonate are self-limiting and will rupture with time.

Oral lymphoepithelial cysts can be removed via conservative surgical excision.

Epidermoid cysts are typically removed via conservative surgical enucleation.

# Differential Diagnosis

**Nasopalatine Duct Cysts**

- Any odontogenic cyst (lateral periodontal cyst and periapical cyst/granuloma)

- Enlarged incisive fossa

- Central giant cell granuloma

**Nasolabial Cyst**

- Radicular cyst

- Periapical abscess

- Nasopalatine duct cyst

- Benign mesenchymal tumors

- Minor salivary gland tumors

**Palatal Cysts of the Newborn**

- Congenital epulis

- Dental lamina cysts

- Natal tooth

**Oral Lymphoepithelial Cyst**

- Branchial cleft cyst

- Lipoma

- Mucocele

- Sialolithiasis

**Epidermoid Cyst**

- Lipoma

- Dermoid cyst

- Oral lymphoepithelial cyst

- Benign mesenchymal tumors

# Prognosis

Nasopalatine duct cysts have an excellent prognosis with rare recurrence.

Nasolabial cysts have an excellent prognosis as complete surgical excision is curative.

Palatal cysts of the newborn have an excellent prognosis as they self-resolve in weeks to months.

Oral lymphoepithelial cysts have an excellent prognosis. They are benign, and to date, there have been no recurrences reported in the literature.

Epidermoid cysts have a good prognosis with low to rare incidences of recurrence.

# Complications

Nasopalatine duct cysts can be expansile in nature and may result in drainage intraorally. These lesions can be caused by mucous retention and inadequate drainage, leading to pain or pressure symptoms as the lesion expands.

Nasolabial cysts may present clinically as both non-odontogenic and odontogenic lesions. Thus the histological analysis is key to the diagnosis.

Palatal cysts of the newborn spontaneously rupture and present with no complications.

Oral lymphoepithelial cysts typically do not present with complications once removed. There is no recurrence after excision.

Epidermoid cysts that become larger in size have the potential to result in complications, such as difficulty with breathing and/or speech.

# Deterrence and Patient Education

Nasopalatine duct cysts are developmental in origin, and consequently, there are no preventative measures. Patients should be informed of any radiographic findings and counseled on having the lesion biopsied to rule out other lesions.

Nasolabial cysts are developmental in origin. Patients should be made aware that recurrence of these lesions is rare.

Palatal cysts of the newborn are developmental in origin. Parents of infants presenting with these lesions should be reassured that the lesions will self-resolve with time.

Oral lymphoepithelial cysts are developmental in origin. Patients should be informed of these lesions and the plan to have them excised.

Epidermoid cysts are mostly developmental in origin. Conservative management and subsequent removal of these lesions typically result in their resolution.

# Enhancing Healthcare Team Outcomes

All members of the interprofessional healthcare team may encounter non-odontogenic cysts in the oral cavity. It is important to note that most of these lesions are developmental in origin and have a low, if any, malignant potential. Treatment of these lesions is typically conservative surgical excision or self-monitoring. Lesions that have rapid growth, are fixed, and/or appear atypical should be referred immediately to the appropriate healthcare specialist for evaluation, biopsy, diagnosis, and management.