The pathophysiology still needs to be fully elucidated. There are likely different mechanisms underlying different patterns of hypoglycemia.

Postprandial hypoglycemia is thought to occur in two phases:

- Induction of post-meal hyper-insulinemia

- Maintenance of inappropriately high levels of insulin

**Post-Meal Hyperinsulinemia**

In individuals with post-RYGB hypoglycemia, ingested food induces faster, higher glycemic peaks and lower nadirs.

Glucagon-like peptide -1 (GLP -1) is secreted by the intestinal L cells in response to ingested food, and it contributes to insulin secretion in a dose-dependent (glucose-dependent) manner. In individuals with post-bariatric surgery hypoglycemia, it was noted that meal-induced GLP-1 levels are elevated and likely result in an exaggerated insulin response compared to those without symptoms of hypoglycemia.

Ghrelin suppresses insulin secretion and opposes its action. Its secretion is decreased after gastric bypass surgery, which can contribute to hypoglycemia.

**Maintenance of Inappropriately High Levels of Insulin**

Specific mechanisms perpetuate high insulin levels in individuals with post-RYGB hypoglycemia, even after developing hypoglycemia. They have lower beta cell suppression in response to low blood sugar levels. They also may have diminished insulin clearance. Increased insulin sensitivity after weight loss and disturbed counter-regulatory hormonal responses to hypoglycemia also have a role.

The effects of other insulinotropic factors and changes in insulin sensitivity may be contributory, although they still need to be fully understood. Increased beta cell mass was previously implicated; however, it is currently not considered a significant cause of hypoglycemia.