Guidelines on red blood cell transfusion from the American Association of Blood Banks advise a restrictive approach for stable patients with non-hemorrhaging anemia.

Currently, guidelines for the transfusion of red blood cells (RBC) generally follow a restrictive threshold. While there is some variation in the number for the threshold, 7 g/dL is an agreed-upon value for asymptomatic healthy patients. Multiple studies have shown this is an acceptable threshold in other patient populations, including those with gastrointestinal (GI) bleeding and critically ill patients. The guidelines recommend a value of 8 g/dL as the threshold in patients with coronary artery disease or those undergoing orthopedic surgeries. However, this may be secondary to the lack of literature on using a threshold of 7 g/dL in the evaluation studies of these patient populations. The guidelines and clinical trials on transfusion requirements in critical care (TRICC) also recommend a value of 7 g/dl as the threshold for critically ill patients.

Transfusion may also be indicated in patients with active or acute bleeding and patients with symptoms related to anemia (for example, tachycardia, weakness, dyspnea on exertion) and hemoglobin less than 8 g/dL.

Unless the patient is actively bleeding, it is recommended to transfuse 1 unit of packed red cells at a time, which will typically increase the hemoglobin value by 1 g/dL and hematocrit by 3%. Follow up by checking post-transfusion hemoglobin.

The American Society of Anesthesiologists advises transfusion at hemoglobin levels of 6 g/dL or less. However, more recent data show decreased mortality with preanesthetic hemoglobin greater than 8 g/dL, especially in renal transplant patients.

The transfusion of fresh frozen plasma (FFP) is common, but there are limited specific indications for its use. There is insufficient evidence for its use in many clinical scenarios, such as prophylaxis in nonbleeding patients.

In the past, FFP, combined with vitamin K, was indicated for warfarin excess in cases of life-threatening hemorrhage. FFP is rarely needed in vitamin K deficiency or warfarin reversal because prothrombin complex concentrate is widely available.

Platelet transfusion is beneficial in cases of platelet deficiency or dysfunction. In patients with bone marrow failure, prophylactic platelet transfusion is indicated when there are no other risk factors for bleeding and platelet counts are below 10 X 10/L. If other associated risk factors exist, the threshold to transfuse may be raised to 20 X 10/L. A prerequisite to invasive procedures is platelet counts greater than 50 X 10/L. In the case of active hemorrhage, platelet transfusion should be done when thrombocytopenia contributes to the hemorrhage, and the platelets are less than 50 X 10/L. When there is diffuse microvascular bleeding, the platelets should be maintained above 100 X 10/L.

Cryoprecipitate transfusion is indicated in dysfibrinogenemia or fibrinogen deficiency in the setting of bleeding, injury, invasive procedures, or acute disseminated intravascular coagulation.