The gracilis muscle is the most superficial of the adductor muscles; it originates on the symphysis pubis and pubic arch. It inserts distally onto the medial surface of the tibia within the pes anserinus. The muscle belly is broad and flat at its origin but tapers to its insertion. It functions to adduct, flex the knee and hip, and medially rotate the hip.

The dominant pedicle for this flap is from the descending branch of the medial femoral circumflex artery, although a direct branch from the profunda femoral artery has been described. In most adults, the perforating vessel may be found approximately 10 cm inferior to the pubic tubercle. Arising from the common femoral artery, the medial circumflex artery branches run deep to the adductor longus and superficial to adductor magnus. Usually, two vena comitantes accompany the dominant pedicle.

The gracilis can also be harvested with a skin paddle at the base of the muscle thanks to fasciocutaneous and musculocutaneous perforators. The anterior branch of the obturator nerve provides innervation to the muscle and the surrounding skin. Arising from the obturator foramen, the nerve then divides into anterior and posterior branches beneath the pectineus muscle. The anterior branch then passes in between the adductor longus and brevis to eventually innervate the deep aspect of the gracilis muscle. Both the vascular and nerve pedicles can be harvested with about 7 cm of length, making the gracilis muscle ideal for free tissue transfer.