Multiple systemic reviews and meta-analyses have shown that intra-articular knee HA injections are safe, decrease pain and improve function in patients.

Prolotherapy offers a cost-effective and conservative approach to the treatment of chronic pain. Several studies have shown the efficacy of prolotherapy for treating pain and dysfunction associated with various chronic musculoskeletal conditions, especially tendinopathies and OA. Further studies are needed to determine a standard protocol for prolotherapy injections.

PRP is currently used as a treatment modality for OA, ligament injury, meniscus injury, muscle injury, tendinopathy, and spine disorders. Multiple randomized control trials, systemic reviews, and meta-analyses have supported the use of PRP in the management of chronic tendinopathy. However, variation in PRP preparation methods, post-intervention rehabilitation protocol, and different anatomic sites translate into variation in outcomes of the studies.

LP-PRP has improved pain and functional status for knee OA patients. Some studies have shown symptom relief of up to 1 year after PRP injection for knee OA. Patients in earlier stages of knee OA may benefit more from PRP than HA injections. Studies have not shown any significant benefits of PRP in treating hip OA.

Many studies have examined the efficacy of PRP for the treatment of ligament injuries. There is promising evidence that PRP can improve anterior cruciate ligament (ACL) reconstruction outcomes.

Low back pain is very prevalent among US adults and is one of the most common debilitating outpatient complaints.

Despite promising in-vitro results, very few high-quality clinical studies have been done to evaluate the role of PRP in the treatment of low back pain.

A review of various studies involving the use of BMC in treating musculoskeletal disorders of the knee has shown level II evidence in the treatment of knee OA.