Many of the presenting symptoms of vaginal atrophy may easily be attributed to other genitourinary conditions such as vaginal infections or urinary tract infections. It may be difficult for a clinician to diagnose vaginal atrophy if a complete history is not obtained, including a sexual history. Ask about sexual habits and activities. This will rule out many other causes, especially genitourinary infections. As these symptoms onset, many patients find sexual activity difficult due to the changes in the vaginal mucosa and may avoid it altogether, further contributing to the atrophy.

Patients suffer from vaginal atrophy experience symptoms, including vaginal dryness, burning, irritation, dyspareunia, post-coital bleeding, vaginal bleeding, and dysuria. A decrease in vaginal lubrication during sexual activities is often first to follow by just daily activities. In addition, as vaginal pH alters, so does the vaginal flora. With these new conditions, women are at increase risk for recurrent vaginal infections and urinary tract infections. Recurrent symptoms of genitourinary infections should raise concern to the clinician for possible vaginal atrophy as a predisposing factor.

Note the anatomical changes of the vaginal area: scarce pubic resorption or fusion of labia major or minor, introital retraction, urethral, and surrounding area eversion or prolapse. Note and evaluate the changes during the speculum exam: tissue fragility, rugae, elasticity, amount of lubrication or secretions, and/or shortened, narrowed, and poorly distensible vaginal vault. Look for pallor, erythema, fissure, petechiae. Be cautious during pelvic and speculum exams, as it may cause pain and bleeding.

A pale, dry, smooth, shiny, and inflammation changes such as patchy erythema or petechiae or increased visibility of blood vessels are all classical findings of atrophy. There may also be friability, bleeding, and discharge.