Treatment with efavirenz can significantly improve the quality of life of patients infected with HIV, but its efficacy heavily relies on patient adherence. The neurologic side effects associated with efavirenz cause some patients to discontinue therapy. An interprofessional team of healthcare providers must become actively involved with the care of their HIV-positive patients. Key members of the team include pharmacists, physicians, nurses, and social workers. Obstacles to successful ART may consist of a lack of social support and the financial burden of therapy. Healthcare providers play a critical role in providing counseling regarding methods of coping with these side effects and promoting medication adherence. Identifying appropriate opportunities for members of each discipline to provide care and encouragement is crucial to successful ART.

The following are recommendations for healthcare providers to assist in increasing successful outcomes in patients diagnosed with HIV on ART

- Monitoring of successful entry into HIV care is recommended for individuals diagnosed with HIV. [Level 2A] Nursing staff can play a significant role in this function and report their findings to the clinical team.

- Entry into care, defined as a visit with an HIV care provider, has demonstrated correlations with improved survival.

- Providers should obtain self-reported adherence routinely. [Level 2A]

- Healthcare providers should ask patients about their adherence to appointments; here again, nursing can play a significant role in assessing pharmacotherapy adherence.

- Pharmacy refill data is recommended for adherence monitoring if medication refills are not automatically sent to patients. [Level 2B]

- Pharmacy refill data can help to confirm self-reported adherence. If the pharmacist notices irregular refill activity, they should respond immediately, contacting both the patient and the prescriber.

- If regimens have equivalent efficacy, switching treatment-experienced patients receiving complex or poorly tolerated regimens to simpler once-daily regimens is the recommended approach. [Level 3B]

- A higher tablet/capsule burden is associated with lower adherence. Discussing with the patient about their tablet/capsule burden can identify an opportunity for improving adherence. The pharmacist can advise on newer combination formulations that decrease tablet/capsule burden.

- Individual one-on-one ART education is recommended. [Level 2A]

- Counseling, skills-building, and education have demonstrably shown to increase adherence rates.

- An interprofessional education and counseling intervention approaches are recommendations. [Level 3B]

- Interprofessional teams can provide education regarding multiple factors that affect adherence.

- Case management is necessary to minimize the number of adherence barriers in the homeless [Level 3B]

- Assistance in acquiring mental health and substance abuse treatment and housing accommodations can significantly improve outcomes.

In summary, efavirenz therapy, as with all ART, requires an interprofessional team approach, including clinicians (MDs, DOs, NPs, PAs), specialists, specialty-trained nurses, and pharmacists, all collaborating across disciplines to achieve optimal patient outcomes. [Level 5]