Glasses with prism power are often used to treat misalignment, convergence insufficiency, nystagmus, and (with the use of a prism in only the periphery) hemianopia

Prismatic power can be ground into a new pair of glasses for superior image quality. Prism should be written in prism diopters along an axis with the direction of the base specified. For example, to correct a five prism diopter hypertropia, one would write for five prism diopters of the base down prism over the hyperopic eye. Since alignment is a binocular issue, the prism can also be split and placed in front of each eye. Once the required prism is over ten diopters, referral to a strabismus surgeon should be a consideration.

Prisms can make convergence more or less difficult. Given that a myope with spectacle correction has inherent base-in prism when converging, myopic spectacles lessen the demands of convergence. In contrast, a hyperope would experience more difficulty with convergence due to spectacle use. In the case of convergence insufficiency, base in prisms can make convergence easier or base out prisms can be used to strengthen the muscles of convergence. Although theoretically sound, the practical use of the base in prisms for convergence insufficiency is no more effective than placebo.

Finally, in nystagmus, there often exists a point of minimization of the nystagmus called the null point, which often results in patients adopting a head turn. If the null point is in eccentric gaze, prisms can be used to shift the null point to a primary gaze to allow for a lessened head turn. However, the amount of prism necessary is often too high for this to be practically useful. This same limitation is also a problem is using prisms to shift the visual field in homonymous hemianopia or hemispatial neglect.

While there exist many other uses of the prism in non-ophthalmic applications, the relevance to ophthalmology is our focus here. In summary, the proper use of prisms in ophthalmology can facilitate diagnosis and treatment.