A number of contraindications to dupilumab have been noted in the literature, some of which are listed below. However, insufficient scientific data or research-based evidence exists to back up most of these contraindications. For the most part, the contraindications to dupilumab are few, and it is considered relatively safe for use in pregnancy when compared to most other medications for AD. The most serious contraindication to using dupilumab is hypersensitivity to any of its excipients.

**Hamster Protein Hypersensitivity**

Dupilumab is contraindicated in patients with hamster protein hypersensitivity, as this drug is produced in Chinese hamster ovary cells. Hypersensitivity reactions, including rash and allergic conjunctivitis, have occurred after dupilumab administration.

**Vaccination**

Current FDA recommendations caution only against the use of live virus vaccines in dupilumab recipients, although no concrete date is available on the ability of live vaccines to trigger an immune response.

**Acute Bronchospasm, Asthma, Corticosteroid Withdrawal, and Status Asthmaticus**

While dupilumab is approved as an adjuvant or maintenance therapy to treat eosinophilic and glucocorticoid-dependent moderate-to-severe asthma, it should not be used by itself to treat episodes of asthma exacerbations or acute bronchospasm.

Patients with comorbid asthma who start dupilumab therapy for atopic dermatitis or chronic rhinosinusitis with nasal polyposis should be advised to stay on their asthma medications to prevent the onset of any adverse event.

**Eosinophilic Pneumonia and Vasculitis**

Rare cases of eosinophilic pneumonia and vasculitis consistent with eosinophilic granulomatosis with polyangiitis have been reported in asthmatic patients on dupilumab.

**Helminth Infection**

It is advised to treat patients with a preexisting helminthic infection with anti-helminthic therapy prior to initiating dupilumab.

**Pregnancy**

It is unknown whether dupilumab use during pregnancy may cause harm to the fetus, including congenital defects or other adverse outcomes.

Animal research studies have shown no adverse effects on the growth or development of offspring at birth or later after IL-4R alpha antibody injection.

**Breast-feeding**

It is unknown whether dupilumab is excreted in breast milk or whether systemic absorption occurs after ingestion.