The clavicle is an S-shaped bone and is the only osseous link between the upper extremity and the trunk. The clavicle articulates distally with the acromion at the acromioclavicular joint and articulates proximally with the sternum at the sternoclavicular joint. Due to its superficial subcutaneous location and the numerous ligamentous and muscular forces applied to it, the clavicle is easily fractured. Because the midshaft of the clavicle is the thinnest segment and does not contain ligamentous attachments, it is the most easily fractured location.

Fractures of the clavicle are typically described using the Allman classification system, dividing the clavicle into 3 groups based on location. Fractures of the middle third or midshaft fractures are in Group I (the most common), fractures of the distal or lateral third are in Group II, and fractures of the proximal or medial third are in Group III.

The Allman classification has been further revised by Neer and includes the following:

- Type 1 fracture where there is minimal displacement. These fractures occur just lateral to the intact coracoclavicular ligament and are managed non-surgically.

- Type 2 fracture occurs when the medial fragment is separated from the coracoclavicular complex. The fragment is displaced inferiorly due to the pull of the sternocleidomastoid muscle. The distal fragment is displaced cranially. This fracture results in an obvious deformity and has a high rate of nonunion.

- Type 3 fracture is where there is non-displacement of the fracture but it extends into the acromioclavicular joint. Again, these fractures are treated non-surgically. However, late AC degenerative changes can occur and may require excision of the distal clavicular segment.

Many important structures are adjacent to the clavicle and thus subject to injury when a fracture occurs. The subclavian artery passes anterior to the first rib and is in close proximity with the middle segment of the clavicle. In addition, the brachial plexus also course behind the clavicle and are at risk when there is a fracture of the middle clavicle.

More than 85 percent of clavicular fractures occur by a fall onto the shoulder