The mainstay of treatment is lifestyle modification with the goal to achieve at least 5% to 10% of weight loss. Both biochemical and histological improvement was seen in patients who had weight loss, which is accomplished via calorie reduction combined with exercise. One to two cups of caffeinated drip coffee may be considered as part of the lifestyle modification measure, given the reported association of caffeinated drip coffee with decreased liver fibrosis and decreased incidence of hepatocellular carcinoma. Studies have shown that eliminating high fructose corn syrup and increasing omega three fats in the diet is beneficial. Thiazolidinediones appear to be beneficial in improving adipocyte insulin sensitivity and preventing inappropriate lipolysis. Their side effect profile (weight gain, congestive heart failure exacerbation, and osteoporosis), however, limits their use. Antioxidants such as vitamin E are of modest benefit and likely safe in non-diabetic patients; a dose of 800 units per day may be offered in such patients after explaining the risks of increased all-cause mortality with high dose vitamin E therapy. In patients with diabetes, we do not recommend giving a dose higher than 400 units per day. Bariatric surgery is an effective treatment and may be considered in patients with morbid obesity who would otherwise meet the criteria for bariatric surgery. Statins should not be withheld in patients with NAFLD due to pre-existing abnormal liver biochemical tests. Liver transplantation is the last resort in patients with decompensated cirrhosis, with the caveat that NAFLD can recur after transplant.