Currently, there are no specific clinically proven treatments for mpox infection. As with most viral illnesses, the treatment is supportive symptom management. There are, however, prevention measures that can help prevent an outbreak. The infected individual should remain in isolation, wear a surgical mask, and keep lesions covered as much as reasonably possible until all lesion crusts have naturally fallen off and a new skin layer has formed. For severe cases, investigational use can be considered for compounds with demonstrated benefit against orthopoxviruses in animal studies and severe vaccinia vaccine complications.

The oral DNA polymerase inhibitor brincidofovir, oral intracellular viral release inhibitor tecovirimat, and intravenous vaccinia immune globulin have unknown efficacy against the mpox virus.

For individuals exposed to the virus, temperature and symptoms should be monitored twice daily for 21 days because that is the accepted upper limit of the mpox incubation period. Infectiousness aligns with symptom onset; therefore, close contacts need not isolate while asymptomatic. In some cases, post-exposure vaccination with modified vaccinia, Ankara vaccine (smallpox and mpox vaccine, live, non-replicating) is recommended. Contact between broken skin or mucous membranes and an infected patient’s body fluids, respiratory droplets, or scabs is considered a “high risk” exposure and warrants post-exposure vaccination as soon as possible. According to the CDC, vaccination within four days of exposure may prevent disease onset, and vaccination within 14 days may reduce disease severity.

The replication-defective modified vaccinia Ankara vaccine is a two-shot series, four weeks apart, with a superior safety profile compared to first and second-generation smallpox vaccines. Unlike live vaccinia virus preparations, administering modified vaccinia, Ankara does not create a skin lesion or pose a risk of local or disseminated spread.

Identifying the potential benefits and drawbacks of preventative mpox vaccination in endemic communities requires more thorough data collection and feasibility analysis. Access to medical care, testing capabilities, and infrastructure limits the ability to make informed decisions about best addressing this neglected tropical disease.