Dornase alfa is utilized to treat and manage cystic fibrosis (CF) in conjunction with standard therapies to improve pulmonary function. Cystic fibrosis is an autosomal recessive multisystem progressive disorder. It is caused by pathologic variants in the CFTR (cystic fibrosis transmembrane conductance regulator) gene resulting in dysfunctional CFTR protein. This results in altered chloride and bicarbonate transport across many epithelial tissues resulting in mucus in various organs becoming thick and sticky. The disease primarily affects patients' upper and lower airways, causes long-lasting lung infections, and limits the ability to breathe over time.

Dornase alfa is an inhaled medication that thins mucus. It has been shown to decrease respiratory tract infections in selected patients with forced vital capacity (FVC) greater than 40% of predicted. Dornase alfa was discovered in 1992 as a mucolytic agent for treating hyper viscous mucous produced in cystic fibrosis patients after noticing in the 1950s that the use of bovine deoxyribonuclease decreased the thickness of the sputum in CF patients.

Several studies have evaluated and demonstrated the off-label use of dornase alfa in non-CF patients. It is used off-label for the treatment of parapneumonic pleural effusions and empyemas. In 2015, Bobeck and colleagues showed that Dornase alfa could be used in patients with pleural empyema to improve drainage of hyper viscous pus when used in combination with a tissue plasminogen activator (tPA). However, first, it should be confirmed that the drainage is hyper-viscous by using a drop rate count from the syringe.

The drug was also examined for its potential to resolve mucous secretion in COVID-19 patients, but due to its nebulized administration, it carries the risk of aerosolizing the virus, creating a risk of secondary infection.