Vaccination is the primary strategy for the prevention and control of influenza. The success of the vaccination depends upon the promotion by the health workers, including clinicians (MDs, DOs, NPs, PAs), nurses, pharmacists, and other health care professionals operating as an interprofessional team. A proper understanding of the vaccine's benefits is mandatory. Discouraging vaccination for trivial reasons should be avoided. Encourage health professionals at risk to vaccinate themselves.

Pregnant women should be protected by individual vaccination by cocoon protection by vaccinating the surrounding people. Vaccinating pregnant women is preferable. Influenza infection after vaccination tends to be less severe, and complications are also reduced. And it helps to protect the baby against flu during the crucial first six months of life as the mother passes the immune protection to her newborn.

With all 50 states in the USA permitting pharmacists to administer influenza vaccines, patient access to the vaccine has never been more prevalent or easy to obtain. Pharmacists must coordinate their efforts with other interprofessional healthcare team members to ensure patients are appropriate candidates for receiving the vaccine and that the patient's vaccine record is updated so that all team members operate from the same patient data. This information sharing is one example of how interprofessional teamwork can enhance patient outcomes and minimize adverse events. [Level 5]

The real challenge in the primary strategy for preventing and controlling the influenza virus is antigenic drifts and shifts. Annual vaccination is the current recommendation due to waning immunity. A universal influenza vaccine is undergoing trials and serves the purpose of building a single vaccine that targets all strains of the virus; this will, in turn, minimize the need for frequent vaccination and be the bright future of this vaccination.