There are a wide variety of pathologies associated with pyramidal tract lesions. They can be the result of many diseases including stroke, amyotrophic lateral sclerosis, multiple sclerosis, and central pontine myelinolysis.

**Stroke**

Cerebrovascular accidents, or strokes, are caused by occlusion of blood flow to a particular area of the brain. They divide into either an ischemic stroke or hemorrhagic stroke. Ischemic strokes are the sudden interruption of blood supply to a structure due to occlusion or obstruction by a thrombus or embolus. Hemorrhagic strokes result from the rupture of a blood vessel leading to bleeding into the brain. Because the pyramidal tract is such a large structure and receives blood supply from so many different arteries, any occlusion to these supporting arteries can lead to a wide variety of symptoms.

**Amyotrophic Lateral Sclerosis**

Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) is a progressive neurodegenerative disease that leads to progressive damage of nerve cells within the spinal cord and brain. It causes symptoms of both upper and lower motor neuron syndrome. Upper motor neuron symptoms include spastic gait, dysphagia, dysarthria, and clonus. Lower motor neuron symptoms include muscle atrophy, weakness, and flaccidity. As it progresses upwards, it causes such severe dysphagia and dyspnea that the patient is unable to breathe and generally dies from respiratory failure. It most commonly afflicts adults between the ages of 40 and 70 and at this time is incurable. The only pharmaceutical treatment available that has been shown to extend the lifespan of patients is riluzole, a glutamate blocker.

**Multiple Sclerosis**

Multiple sclerosis is a demyelinating autoimmune disease of the nervous system. Its manifestations show a wide range of symptoms such as double vision, muscle weakness, coordination trouble, or cognitive disturbance. It is the most common CNS autoimmune disorder, and there currently is no cure. Management centers on improving function after an attack, and preventing recurrent attacks.

**Central Pontine Myelinolysis**

Central pontine myelinolysis (CPM) is a condition that involves damage to nerve cells in the pons. It can be devastating leading to paralysis, dysphagia, dysarthria, pseudobulbar palsy, and locked-in syndrome (loss of all muscle movement except for eye movements). Its most common cause is the rapid correction of low blood sodium levels (hyponatremia). If the sodium levels are corrected too quickly, water gets driven out of the brain cells which causes widespread damage throughout the entire brain. Once CPM has begun, it cannot be corrected. Therefore, the best treatment of CPM is prevention by correcting hyponatremia at a consistent rate.