The biggest question for physicians dealing with patients with ankyloglossia remains whether to treat or not to treat. There is evidence that supports treatment in symptomatic patients.

When physicians choose treatment over observation, frenotomy is the most commonly used procedure. This procedure is quick and can be done in an outpatient setting.

The procedure involves holding the tongue up to make the frenulum tight, then cutting through the fascia-like tissue along a line parallel with, and close to the tongue. The cut is made in a single motion as is done very quickly, less than a second. The infant is restrained by swaddling or in a Papoose board, with an assistant holding the child's head for better support. The timing of frenotomy varies from 6 days to 18 days of age. In a study of 200 infants undergoing frenotomy without analgesia, researchers found that 18% cried during the procedure and 60% after the procedure. According to an article titled Do tongue ties affect breastfeeding? by Griffiths, the mean crying time for frenotomy was 15 seconds. Some physicians choose to give sucrose before the procedure, to minimize and help with pain. Rarely the frenulum grows back.

Before deciding to treat patients with tongue tie, physicians should keep in mind other differential diagnoses that could present with feeding difficulties and failure to gain weight. A lactation nurse should always be involved in the care and assessment of these patients and to help mothers with feeding techniques.

Risk and complications of frenotomy are uncommon but have been described. Bleeding is the most common and usually resolved with local pressure. A family history of bleeding disorders should be assessed before the procedure, and in older patients, a history of bleeding should be elicited.

Another procedure used to treat ankyloglossia is frenuloplasty. However, it is rarely performed, and it does require general anesthesia.

A systematic review published in Pediatrics Journal 2015 titled Treatment of Ankyloglossia for Reasons Other Than Breastfeeding: A Systematic Review by Sivakumar Chinnadurai, MD mentioned some data points to the fact that there is no need for treatment. However, since the short frenulum will likely elongate spontaneously with use and stretching, there is no sufficient data to support this statement. In this particular review, authors concluded that among children with ankyloglossia, there is limited evidence to suggest intervention for this condition, and there is not enough data to support that frenotomy is associated with positive outcomes in other issues besides breastfeeding.