Lung isolation is achieved using either a single-lumen endotracheal tube (SLT), DLT, or BB, depending on the clinical scenario. Fiberoptic bronchoscopy (FOB) is typically used to guide and confirm the placement and positioning of these tubes. It is vital for clinicians performing lung isolation to be familiar with the correct use of FOB in placing, positioning, and troubleshooting these devices. Choosing the appropriate bronchoscope diameter is also critical to prevent an inappropriately sized bronchoscope from becoming stuck, requiring removal of the entire DLT and reintubation or inability to advance the BB.

**Single-lumen Endotracheal Tube**

An SLT may be advanced into either the left or right mainstem bronchus to achieve lung isolation. This maneuver is typically easier on the right side, given that the trajectory of the right main bronchus closely parallels that of the trachea. The use of an SLT to achieve lung isolation is usually reserved for pediatric populations, as there are no DLTs manufactured for very small children. In emergency situations, such as the sudden development of left-sided pneumothorax or pulmonary hemorrhage in a previously intubated patient, an SLT can be advanced into the right main bronchus and used to achieve lung isolation.

**Double-lumen Endotracheal Tube**

A correctly positioned DLT will have its bronchial lumen in the mainstem bronchus with the bronchial cuff inflated such that it does not herniate over the carina. The tracheal lumen should be open to the opposite side, enabling selective ventilation of each lung, depending on which lumen is clamped. There are both right and left-sided DLTs, but because of the early branch point of the right upper lobe bronchus, a right-sided DLT has a second opening on the bronchial lumen to allow ventilation of the right upper lobe. Correctly positioning the bronchial cuff such that it does not occlude this bronchus is more challenging than on the left-side, so left-sided DLTs are generally preferred. However, a right-sided DLT is indicated for a left pneumonectomy or any other procedure that involves the proximal left main bronchus that would preclude the placement of a left-sided DLT.

**Bronchial Blockers**

There are several different models of BB available from different manufacturers. Each of these includes an inflatable balloon at the end of an introducer that can be advanced either through a standard endotracheal tube or an endotracheal tube with a small separate lumen containing the BB. The BB can be advanced under fiberoptic guidance into either mainstem bronchus to provide lung isolation. The BB can also be advanced into a more distal bronchus to provide selective isolation of a particular lung segment.

**Device Selection**

Several factors will influence the choice of the airway device. If definitive anatomic lung isolation is required to prevent the spread of purulence from an infected to a non-infected lung, a DLT is typically utilized as it is less likely to be dislodged once correctly positioned compared to a BB. A DLT also allows for suctioning or lavage of the diseased lung through the appropriate lumen, which is impossible with a BB.

Purported advantages of DLTs over BBs include increased ease and rapidity of placement, more complete deflation of the non-ventilated lung, and less frequent need for re-positioning. However, some recent studies have cast doubt on these assumptions. In a study of patients undergoing video-assisted thoracoscopic surgery (VATS) for esophagectomy, the patients were randomized to either BB or DLT. While the time to complete lung-collapse was longer in the BB group, there was no significant difference in the time required to position the devices. Additionally, postoperative hoarseness and sore throat were more frequent in the DLT group.

A new generation of a DLT with an integrated high-resolution camera allows real-time video guidance during placement. This device has been shown to reduce the time to intubate and confirm tube placement after patient surgical positioning.

The patient with preexisting tracheostomy presents a challenge for lung isolation. If the tracheostomy is less than seven days old, it should not be removed because the stoma may close during the procedure. In this case, a cuffed tracheostomy tube should be utilized as a conduit for a BB. The majority of practitioners also prefer this technique even for mature stomas because of its simplicity and reduction in the opportunity for iatrogenic airway trauma. Other alternatives include introducing an SLT through the tracheostomy stoma and directing it into the desired bronchus or removing the tracheostomy tube and placing the DLT orally.