There are no routine laboratory findings that are specific for toxoplasmosis. Lactate dehydrogenase (LDH) can be increased markedly in patients with disseminated toxoplasmosis and pulmonary disease.

A **presumptive diagnosis**of cerebral toxoplasmosis in the HIV patient can be made as follows:

- CD4 count less than 100 cells/microliter without any effective prophylaxis

- A compatible clinical syndrome

- A positive T. gondii IgG antibody (Anti-toxoplasma IgM antibodies are usually absent except rarely in cases of primary infection. Quantitative IgG antibody titers are not helpful in diagnosis.)

- Brain imaging (preferably MRI) that demonstrates a typical radiographic appearance.

If the above criteria are present, there is at least a 90% probability the diagnosis will be cerebral toxoplasmosis.

It is important to note however that a positive serology does not confirm the diagnosis and a negative serology implies the diagnosis is not likely (though not impossible) to be cerebral toxoplasmosis.

The brain imaging often shows multiple (67%) or single (33%) ring-enhancing brain lesions often associated with edema (See figure). There is a predilection for involvement of the basal ganglia, corticomedullary junction or brain white matter.

A more **definitive diagnosis**can be made by obtaining lumbar puncture. Cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) analysis will often show mononuclear pleocytosis, elevated protein and sometimes, reduced CSF glucose.  Polymerase chain reaction (PCR) testing forT. gondii in CSF is 100% specific but only 44% to 65% sensitive. This suggests a positive CSF PCR result establishes the diagnosis of cerebral toxoplasmosis but a negative one does not rule it out.

When the diagnosis is in doubt and alternative diagnoses considered, brain biopsy can be obtained. Findings in cerebral toxoplasmosis may show necrotic abscesses with blood vessel thrombosis and necrosis. Cysts containing bradyzoites may often be found coexisting with numerous active tachyzoites. In most cases, brain biopsy is not required for diagnosis.