Most side effects of OCP's are mild and disappear with continued use or switching to another pill formulation. The most common adverse effect of combined oral contraceptive pills is breakthrough bleeding. Women will also complain of nausea, headaches, abdominal cramping, breast tenderness, and increased vaginal discharge or decreased libido. Nausea can be avoided by taking the medication at night before sleep. The majority of the other consequences will resolve with time or switching OCP to a different preparation.

Women who have a pre-existing cardiovascular condition or smoke should not use OCs. For the first six months, OC progestogens can impair glucose metabolism in healthy adult women. Women with diabetes mellitus might need to increase insulin intake to regulate blood glucose levels within the desired range.

Oral contraceptive pills can cause hypertension in 4-5% of healthy women and exacerbate hypertension in about 9-16% of women with pre-existing hypertension.

Four studies on teenage women found a small negative effect of combined oral contraceptive pills on the acquisition of bone mineral density. In addition, COC use increases the risk of venous thrombotic events (VTE), especially during the first year of initiation. VTE risk increases with high Ethinyl Estradiol dose and 3rd and 4th generation progestin.

Stroke and/or Myocardial infarction: In a meta-analysis, which included 28 publications reported COC users were at higher risk of ischemic stroke (relative risk 1.7, 95% CI 1.5 to 1.9) and myocardial infarction (relative risk 1.6, 95% CI 1.2 to 2.1) when compared with non-users. The risks did not depend on type pr generation of progestagen. Data analysis showed the risk of ischemic stroke or myocardial infarction increases with higher doses of estrogen. This risk was highest when pills had more than 50 micrograms of estrogen. Most preparation now contains less than 50 micrograms of estrogen, making COC substantially safer to use. COC pill containing 30μg of estrogen and levonorgestrel is the safest oral form of combined oral contraceptive pills.

These pills do not protect against any sexually transmitted diseases (STDs). Thus, using a condom is highly recommended, especially if the partner is a stranger. Regular monitoring of the patient is necessary to ensure that she is not developing any serious side effects.

In one study, women who used COC for one year of "continuous use" were monitored for return of fertility, and 97 percent of women had spontaneous menses within 90 days after discontinuation of COCs.

In women with a history of hereditary angioedema, exogenous estrogen components may induce or exacerbate symptoms of angioedema. Chloasma may occasionally occur, especially in subjects with a known history of chloasma gravidarum. If Women have a tendency to develop chloasma, avoid exposure to ultraviolet radiation and the sun while taking COCs.

POP users have reported acne flare and follicular ovarian cysts. Changes in menses and unscheduled, irregular bleeding are the most commonly reported adverse effects of POPs.

Progestogen-only OCs have lesser systemic side effects than combined OCs but often cause menstrual changes. Their long-term effects are not yet known.

Both COC and POP have significant drug interactions, and hence patient medication history should be taken thoroughly before prescribing OC, including supplements. For example, co-administering OC with antiseizure medicines (phenytoin, carbamazepine, oxcarbazepine, lamotrigine, barbiturates) can result in a lower level of OC in blood and reduce the effectiveness of OC.