Before specific staining can occur, tissue samples must undergo preparation through the following stages: Fixation, processing, embedding, sectioning, and sometimes antigen retrieval. In modern histology laboratories, most of these steps are automated.

**Fixation:**Fixation uses chemicals to preserve the structure of the tissue in its natural form and protects it from degradation by irreversibly cross-linking proteins. Although several specialized fixatives are available, Neutral Buffered Formalin is a common choice for this step. The fixation step is vital to the rest of the histologic staining procedure because by retaining the chemical composition of the tissue, the sample is hardened and makes the sectioning phase easier. Paraffin-formalin is another effective fixative. Its benefit is that it is the fixative of choice for immunostaining; however, it requires preparation at the time of the fixation. Bouin is a fixative used for examining embryo and brain tissue because of its superior preservation of delicate nuclei and glycogen. Its downside is that it does not preserve kidney tissues well and also distorts mitochondrial structure.

**Dehydration:**The addition of ethanol accomplishes the dehydration of a sample. It removed water from the sample and further hardens the tissue for eventual light microscopy. After ethanol is applied, and following the completion of tissue dehydration, xylene is used to remove the ethanol.

**Embedding:**Embedding is the process of putting the sample into a paraffin wax or a plastic resin to enhance the process of extracting cellular structures. This step is to be performed with caution if the goal is to perform immunostaining because the paraffin wax will inhibit the penetration of antibodies, and lead to a false result.

**Sectioning:**Sectioning involves mounting the specimen on a microtome and cutting it into sections. The preferred thickness is 4-5 micrometers so that it can be stained and put on a microscope slide for examination.

**Antigen Retrieval:**This step is to retrieve antigens that could have been covered in the fixation and embedding stages. If the cross-linking of proteins conceals the antigen sites, there may not be as robust of an immunohistochemical response. Antigen retrieval is achieved through heating and proteolytic methods to break down the cross-links and reveal the epitopes and antigens that were previously covered.