Treatment methods for ingrown toenails range from medical measures to surgical interventions. Indications for the treatment depend mainly on the stage of the condition, prior modalities of treatment in case of recurrence, and other factors including allergies to local anesthetics, pregnancy, and bleeding disorders. Conservative measures are generally recommended in cases of mild to moderate lesions (stages 1 and 2), whereas severe lesions causing disability require surgical methods (stage 3).

**General Measures**

General measures for ingrown toenails include proper footwear as well as correct nail trimming; this includes avoiding curved cutting off the lateral margins of the nail plate. General measures should also include management of the underlying factors (hyperhidrosis, onychomycosis). Soaking the affected toe in warm soapy water or Epsom salt water for several minutes, followed by the application of a topical antibiotic ointment may give relief. The application of topical steroids to hypertrophic granulation tissue may decrease inflammation.

**Conservative Techniques**

- Cotton-wick insertion under the corner of the nail:  Cotton wisp or pledget are placed under the ingrown lateral groove corner using a nail elevator.

- Dental floss technique: This is an alternative to the cotton wisps. A string of dental floss is inserted under the ingrown nail to separate it from the lateral fold.

- The gutter splint or sleeve technique: Gutter strips are prepared by cutting to size vinyl intravenous infusion tube from top to bottom. The lateral edge of the nail plate gets splinted with this sterilized splint plastic tube and then attached with adhesive tape or strips, giving instant relief of pain.

- Taping procedure: One end of the tape gets placed against the side of the ingrown toenail, with the rest twisted around the toe. The aim is to pull the side of the nail fold away from the nail to decrease pressure. Taping is the safest and least painful procedure among conservative options.

- Nail wiring: Two holes are made at the distal edge of the nail, and an elastic wire is inserted and bent forward. The elasticity of the wire may correct the deformity of the ingrown toenail.

- Others: slit tape-strap procedure, acrylic nails, nail braces.

**Surgical Techniques**

Surgical procedures for ingrown toenails are performed under local anesthesia (LA). There are various techniques for LA, including digital block, metatarsal block, or transthecal anesthesia. Any local anesthetic can be used (lidocaine, ropivacaine, mepivacaine, or prilocaine) in 0.25% to 2% concentrations. Indications for LA depend mainly on the type of surgery and the physician’s preference.

Surgical options for ingrown toenails are:

- Spicule excision and partial matricectomy: It consists of excising the affected portion of the nail with a partial mechanical matricectomy.

- Chemical partial matricectomy: Chemical matricectomy is commonly performed using phenol. It demonstrates a higher success rate and is less painful than mechanical matricectomy. Its success depends on good hemostasis. Other chemical agents can be employed, such as sodium hydroxide and trichloroacetic acid.

- Wedge resection of the toenail and nail fold: This approach consists of the excision of the affected portion of the nail plate, partial matricectomy, and wedge dissection of the nail bed and the hypertrophic nail fold. Clinicians should generally avoid this technique.

- Excision of the affected nail and total matricectomy: It is a more radical solution to ingrown toenails, consisting of excision of the affected nail, nail bed, and a total matricectomy (chemical or mechanical). It is indicated for stage IV ingrown toenails, for onychogryphosis and onychodystrophy.

- Soft-tissue nail fold excision technique: This procedure does not touch the nail as its basis is the theory that the nail is not the causative factor in the development of ingrown toenails. It consists of wide excision of the soft tissue enveloping in an elliptical manner.

- Other techniques: Newer techniques, including electrocautery, radiofrequency ablation, and carbon dioxide laser ablation, have become the newest form of ingrown toenail management.

Thus, surgical treatment options for ingrown toenails are numerous, and there is no consensus on the technique of choice. The ideal procedure should lead to the best functional and aesthetic outcome, as well as a low rate of recurrence. Many studies have proven that simple nail avulsions lead to high recurrence rates, while phenol matricectomy has shown greater success.