When the heart is exposed to long periods of increased workload, it undergoes hypertrophic enlargement secondary to the increased demand. Various cardiovascular pathologies such as myocardial infarction, stimulant drug abuse, or obesity have been shown to induce cardiac cell hypertrophy, which may lead to heart failure. Various signaling modulators in the cardiovascular system have been demonstrated to regulate cardiac mass, including an influence on gene expression, apoptosis, cytokines, as well as stimulation of growth factor. Recent studies suggest that pathological hypertrophy can be reversed or prevented altogether. Other molecular mechanisms potentially causing cardiac hypertrophy include the aberrant re-expression of a fetal gene program. A variety of molecular pathways that potentially induce a coordinated control of the program that induces hypertrophy include the following: natriuretic peptides, adrenergic nervous system, adhesion, and cytoskeletal proteins, IL-6 cytokines, MEK-ERK1/2 signaling, histone acetylation, calcium-mediated modulation and the role of microRNAs in controlling the cardiac hypertrophic response. At a cellular level, cardiomyocyte hypertrophy is characterized by an increase of cell size, up-regulation of protein synthesis, and intensified organization of the sarcomere. Mechanical stress induces a hypertrophic response downstream of mechanosensitive molecular structures. The sarcomeric Z-disc and its proteins seem to drive mechanical stress-induced signal transduction or mechanotransduction. An example of mechanosensitive molecules includes a family of Z-disc-specific proteins, calsarcins, or myozenins. Calsarcins have been demonstrated to attach the cardiac skeletal apparatus to signaling molecules that directly impact gene expression by binding to the Z-disc myofilament anchor proteins, a-actinin, and telethonin, and then attaching them to calcineurin, a calcium-dependent phosphatase demonstrated to induce cardiomyocyte hypertrophy by transcriptional pathways downstream.