# Introduction

Biliverdin is a tetrapyrrolic, water-soluble compound formed by the breakdown of heme.

# Fundamentals

Elevated levels of biliverdin and bilirubin have been shown to decrease the risk of vascular injury due to cytoprotective activity, which lowers the incidence of atherosclerosis in these patients. Biliverdin and bilirubin downregulate the proliferation of vascular smooth muscle cells and demonstrate an antioxidant effect in the damaged blood vessels. This decreases the formation of the tunica intima of blood vessels and blocks neovascularization and angiogenesis. Due to this effect of biliverdin and bilirubin, the hypothesis is that biliverdin may be useful in the prevention of atherosclerosis.

In addition to the cytoprotective activity, biliverdin and bilirubin have demonstrated an anti-inflammatory effect. Biliverdin decreases inflammation by downregulating pro-inflammatory cytokines such as TLR-4 and by stimulating the production of anti-inflammatory cytokines such as IL-10.

In addition to the anti-inflammatory effect of biliverdin, it has also been shown to be protective against insulin resistance — elevated levels of biliverdin cause dysregulation of adipogenesis. Biliverdin downregulates the expression of Cd11c and Tnfa, two genes that are responsible for the production of an M1 macrophage and tissue necrosis factor-alpha, a proinflammatory cytokine, respectively. This downregulation due to elevated biliverdin results in decreased fat production and reduced inflammation, thus protecting against insulin resistance in patients indulging in high-fat diets.

Bilirubin and biliverdin have also been shown to be scavengers of hydroxyl peroxide groups showing the antioxidant effects of biliverdin.

# Issues of Concern

Biliverdin and bilirubin may elevate for several reasons. Liver failure results in elevated bilirubin and biliverdin due to impaired metabolism and excretion of bilirubin. Hemolytic diseases cause increased production of biliverdin and bilirubin due to hemoglobin breakdown.

# Cellular Level

Biliverdin is considered a waste product of heme degradation. When red blood cells lyse, either due to hemolytic diseases or by natural apoptosis, heme get released. The heme is metabolized by heme oxygenase using three molecules of oxygen and seven electrons and producing biliverdin IX-alpha, carbon monoxide, and ferrous iron. The biliverdin IX-alpha undergoes metabolism to bilirubin IX-alpha via NADPH-dependent biliverdin reductase. The bilirubin IX-alpha is initially in the unconjugated, fat-soluble, indirect form. It gets conjugated in the liver via UDP-glucuronosyl transferase.

# Clinical Significance

When red blood cells are injured, they burst open and release their contents into the skin and surrounding tissue. Injury to tissue may result in a bruise due to these contents from the blood. Blood breakdown first releases heme, which is responsible for the purple discoloration of a bruise.