The diagnosis of factitious disorder is most often based on DSM-5 criteria:

- Identified deception; involving falsification of psychological or physical symptoms, or induction of injury or disease.

- The individual presents themselves to others as ill, injured, or impaired.

- The deception is evident in the absence of external rewards.

- Another mental disorder does not better explain the behavior.

- Single or recurrent episodes should specify the behavior.

If factitious disorder is suspected, evaluation should be geared toward providing objective evidence of deception and falsification of a medical or psychiatric condition. There are many findings on evaluation that could help lead to a diagnosis. These include:

- Absence of supporting lab work, imaging, or other diagnostic findings for the presumed disease

- Specific labwork proving the falsification of symptoms. For example, in patients with factitious diarrhea, a stool sample may be positive for laxatives or stool osmolality may be consistent with water. In non-diabetic hypoglycemia, testing may be done to rule out exogenous insulin use.

- The patient is witnessed inducing symptoms or interfering with treatment.

- A search of the patient’s room reveals means of inducing symptoms. (e.g., syringes, laxatives, blood pressure medications, sedatives, illicit drugs) This is often part of the consent form signed by a patient upon admission.

- The patient seems overly eager to undergo extensive workup and/or treatment.

- The patient predicts or demonstrates a decline when faced with discharge from the hospital.

- The patient admits to behavior when confronted.

In certain cases, evidence such as direct observation of the behavior or lab values such as laxatives found in the stool may simplify diagnosis. However, many cases lack definitive evidence and determining what level of evidence is sufficient for diagnosis may be challenging.

Some argue that the DSM does not recognize that deception is normal human behavior and should not be considered pathologic in all cases. It is very common for patients to exaggerate symptoms to receive the attention they desire. This further complicates diagnosis because the threshold at which the behavior is considered pathological is not always clear.