**PLAATO**

In 2001, Sievert achieved the first-in-human percutaneous LAAC using the PLAATO device (Appriva Medical, Sunnyvale, CA).

**Watchman and Watchman FLX**

Watchman device (Boston Scientific, Natick, MA) is the only device that has been evaluated in randomized clinical trials.

The WATCHMAN FLX (Boston Scientific) is a second-generation device fully covered by the polyethylene terephthalate membrane cap to minimize peri-device leaks.

**AMPLATZER Cardiac Plug and Amulet**

The AMPLATZER Cardiac Plug (ACP; Abbot Vascular, Santa Clara, CA) is a self-expanding nitinol mesh with a proximal polyester fabric disk and distal lobe connected by an articulated waist.

The Amulet device (Abbot Vascular) is based on ACP device design but with improvements facilitating implantation and reducing procedural complications.

**WaveCrest**

The WaveCrest device (Biosense Webster, Diamond Bar, CA) is a single-lobe nitinol device with polyurethane foam facing the LAA and an expanded polytetrafluoroethylene cover on the left atrial side and has 20 anchoring points.

**Occlutech LAA Occluder**

The Occlutech LAA Occluder (Occlutech International AB, Helsingborg, Sweden) is a self-expanding conical-shaped nitinol wire mesh and is anchored at the distal margin through the closed loops.

**LAmbre LAA Closure System**

The LAmbre LAA Closure System (Lifetech Scientific Co, Ltd, Shenzhen, China) is another nitinol device with a left atrial cover and a distal self-expanding umbrella, protected by a double polyethylene terephthalate membrane and attached with a central articulating waist.

**Ultraseal LAA Closure Device**

Another self-expanding device is an Ultraseal LAA closure device (Cardia Inc, Eagan, MN), which is comprised of two sections: a soft distal bulb for anchoring the device and a 3-leaflet proximal sail for occlusion of LAA. Both are connected with a dual articulating joint, enabling multidirectional mobility and optimum adjustment of various ostium angles and shapes.

**Pfm Device**

The Pfm device (Pfm Medical, Köln, Germany) is a nitinol frame device consisting of three parts: a primary distal anchor, a middle connector, and a proximal disk with a secondary anchor.

**Epicardial Devices**

**Lariat**

The Lariat (SentreHeart, Redwood City, CA) device enables the percutaneous delivery of pretied surgical sutures to litigate the LAA. It is cleared by the FDA for the approximation of soft tissue.

**Sierra Litigation System**

The Sierra Ligation System (Aegis Medical Innovations, Vancouver, Canada) is an epicardial device having single access through subxiphoid through electrographic navigation.