Risks, benefits, and potential alternatives, including the elective and diagnostic nature of the procedure, need to be reviewed with the patient.  Ideally, this should have been discussed prior to the day of the procedure in an office setting without the stress of the impending procedure. The patient should have adequate opportunity and time to ask questions, and the proceduralist should explain the procedure with images and/or spine models.

If the patient is a female of child-bearing age, a negative pregnancy test or waiver should be obtained.

The clinician should review anti-coagulation and/or antiplatelet therapy and review PT or INR, if applicable.  The clinician should review cardiac and/or other medical clearance if indicated.

IV access is obtained for light sedation and/or IV antibiotic administration. Non-invasive monitoring is obtained: EKG, NIBP, SpO2, and baseline vitals are obtained and found to be acceptable for the procedure. The patient is placed in a prone position on the fluoroscopy table.  The lumbar region is marked with a skin marker.

A standard "time-out" is called.  The correct patient, location, and procedure are verified.  If a post-discogram CT is being performed, the location and time en route of transport to CT are confirmed before skin prep.

The L5/S1 is the most difficult location, especially in males, due to the higher iliac crest and narrower sacrum. It is not uncommon to take initial images before skin prep and potentially side-bend the patient away from the entry side and even cross the leg over the other.  It may be necessary to bend the knee 90 degrees and cross it over the back of the contralateral knee. If such maneuvers are to be employed, it is best to know this before sterile prepping and draping.

Before sterile prepping, the patient position is verified so that the C-arm has adequate space to angle lateral and oblique without hitting or having radiopaque parts of the table get in the way of the beam.

The antibiotic, if used, is usually reconstituted into 10 ml of 0.9% normal saline (e.g., cefazolin 1 g in 10 ml gives a solution of 100 mg/ml). Commonly, 9 ml are given to the patient IV, and the other 1ml (100 mg) is placed into 10 ml of contrast agent with all springes are labeled.  It should be noted that there is currently no consensus regarding the use of prophylactic antibiotics for the prevention of discitis.

Procedure room personnel should don lead aprons.  The proceduralist should don sterile gloves.

If manometry is being used, the transducer, contrast syringe, and extension tubing are all one piece in a kit, depending on the manufacturer.

A short IV-extension tubing is attached to the syringe labeled contrast, and it is primed with contrast removing all air in the tubing.

Optional: 22-gauge, 7-inch needle used for disc entry can be given a distal curved bend in the plane of the bevel.  It is then inserted through the 3.5 or 5 inches larger bore needle just up to the tip so that the 7-inch needle can be pushed through the distal end of the shorter larger needle to deploy medially towards the disk once the shorter needle is in place. (see image)