There are two uterine arteries, one on each side (left and right). The uterine artery is a branch of the internal iliac artery also called hypogastric artery. The right uterine artery is a branch of the right anterior division of the internal iliac artery. The uterine artery courses from lateral to the medial direction through the bottom part of the broad ligament also called the cardinal ligament. At the uterine isthmus level, the uterine artery is divided into ascending and descending branches.

After the bifurcation, the ascending artery further rises superiorly next to the uterus and runs a tortuous course with the lateral side of the uterus. The ascending artery, in multiparous women, become much more convoluted and tortuous in size and shape. The ascending branch of the uterine artery anastomoses to the ovarian artery. The ovarian artery is a direct branch of the abdominal aorta. The ovarian artery supplies oxygenated blood to the ovary, fallopian tube, and uterus. In the myometrium, the uterine artery further branches out to the arcuate artery, radial artery, spiral artery, and basal artery.

The descending branch supplies blood to uterine cervix and vagina. The arcuate artery around the cervix is also called the circular artery of the cervix. The uterine artery also circulates branches towards the fallopian tube and ureter as it goes across it. Cervicovaginal branches anastomose with vaginal arteries to create the azygos arteries of the vagina.

The arcuate arteries of uterus supply blood to the smooth musculature of the uterus called myometrium. The arcuate arteries penetrate throughout the circumference of the myometrium and supply blood to anterior and posterior walls of the uterus. The arcuate artery terminates in the spiral artery, which supplies the endometrium, decidua, and placenta during pregnancy. The rhythmic contraction and relaxation of these vessels help to maintain the endometrial stability and necessary control of blood supply. These vessels are usually demonstrated in the late luteal phase. Before the beginning of menses and during menses, these vessels are less apparent. Estrogen causes an increase in the size and the number of these vessels and increases blood flow. Estrogen is responsible for the proliferation of the uterine endometrium during the proliferative phase of the menstrual cycle.

The spiral arteries supply blood to the endometrium of the uterus, more specifically, the functional zone which sheds off during menstruation. In histology, identification of spiral arteries helps to make the diagnosis of the luteal phase of the menstrual cycle.

The basal arteries supply the blood to the endometrium, more specifically, the basal zone. The basal zone starts the regeneration of the denuded endometrium after menstruation. This regeneration happens under the influence of estrogen during the proliferative phase of the menstrual cycle. Maintenance of the stroma occurs with progesterone.