The presence of a secretory pituitary tumor may result in features of hormone excess for the particular hormone produced by the tumor, while other pituitary hormones may be deficient.

**Investigations**

**Laboratory Investigations:**Initial testing involves baseline levels of pituitary hormones and hormones produced by target glands. Due to the variation of hormone levels related to the time of day, season, and pulsatile secretion of certain pituitary hormones, baseline levels may not be helpful. In this instance, dynamic function testing can confirm biochemical deficiency or excess of a particular pituitary hormone. In dynamic function testing, for the investigation of a hormone deficiency, a stimulatory agent that would normally increase secretion of the hormone is given to the patient, and blood levels are measured before and after the administration of the agent. After administering this stimulant, measurements are taken at defined intervals to determine if there has been an adequate response to stimulation.

**Insulin Tolerance Test:**This is the best provocative test that is used to assess the presence of the deficiency of both GH and ACTH. Following an overnight fast, baseline samples are obtained for cortisol, GH, and glucose. An insulin dose of 0.1 U/kg or 0.05 U/kg is administered intravenously (IV). Further samples for analysis of the hormones measured in the baseline samples are then taken at several other points in time following administration. It should not be performed in those with cardiac disease or epilepsy. The plasma glucose should fall to 40 mg/dl within 30 to 45 minutes or by 50% of baseline. The test is terminated by giving IV dextrose and assessing the patient's status for at least another 90 minutes. A normal/adequate response is indicated by cortisol of more than 20 ug/dL and GH of more than 5 ng/mL to 10 ng/mL.

**ACTH Stimulation Test:**This is used to assess the pituitary-adrenal axis when the insulin tolerance test is dangerous for a patient's health due to the high risk of hypoglycemia. It can be done with ACTH administration, either 250 mcg (that is the most commonly used) or 1 mcg, given IV or IM. Cortisol levels are measured before the medication administration and then 30, 60, and 90 minutes after. Cortisol levels over 18 mcg/dL indicate normal response.

**Modern Combined Test:**The patient is given growth hormone-releasing hormone (GHRH), cortisol releasing hormone (CRH), gonadotropin-releasing hormone (GnRH), and thyroid releasing hormone (TRH) as the provocative stimuli and GH, TSH, ACTH, cortisol, LH, and FSH are measured at baseline and at specified time intervals after that. Doses of each stimulating hormone are as follows:

- GHRH (1.0 ug/kg)

- CRH (1.0 ug/Kg)

- GnRH (100 ug)

- TRH (200 ug).

However, this testing is rarely required.

Radiological Investigations: Imaging studies of the pituitary using magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) with gadolinium enhancement are used to visualize the pituitary, particularly to detect the presence of a mass lesion. Visual field defects need to be assessed if a pituitary mass is the cause of hypopituitarism.