Approximately 25% to 35% of infertile women are found to have tuboperitoneal disease, with pelvic inflammatory disease (PID) being the most common cause of tubal damage.

Endometriosis, a chronic inflammatory disease defined by the presence of endometrial tissue outside of the uterine cavity, is significantly more prevalent in women with infertility compared to those without.

Poor semen quality is the sole cause of infertility in 20% of couples and contributes to fertility issues in another 20%. Decreased sperm count, motility, or morphology (shape of the sperm) can be successfully treated medically or surgically in approximately 50% of men. Intrauterine insemination can also increase pregnancy rates in couples where the male partner has a low number of motile sperm. If such treatments fail, IVF with or without intracytoplasmic sperm injection (ICSI) can be utilized. Sperm extracted from the testicle or epididymis in cases of obstructive azoospermia or testicular hypofunction can only be used in an IVF cycle with ICSI as the sperm have not undergone the final in vivo maturation process, allowing it to fertilize an oocyte.

Women who are unable to produce their own oocytes due to POI or diminished ovarian reserve are able to become pregnant with donor oocytes or donor embryos. IVF cannot overcome the impact of age on oocyte function and fertilizability, and so many women in their late 30’s and older will use donor oocytes. These oocytes have been removed from a younger woman (usually less than 30 years of age) and are either frozen for future use or used in a fresh IVF cycle.

IVF is also utilized in women who desire to preserve their fertility. Women with cancer or other illnesses may need to undergo gonadotoxic treatments that pose a threat to ovarian function. These women can cryopreserve either oocytes or embryos prior to chemotherapy or radiation that then can be transferred at a future time.

Oocyte cryopreservation is also a viable option for women who wish to delay childbearing. It is well established that women’s fertility dramatically decreases in the fourth decade of life. This drop-in fecundability is a result of a decrease in both oocyte quantity and quality. Women who are not interested in pregnancy in the near future can cryopreserve oocytes for future use.