The aortic root consists of the outflow tract from the left ventricle, the aortic valve, and the junction with the ascending aorta. The aortic valve is a semilunar valve with three leaflets (cusps). The leaflets consist of a right, left, and non-coronary leaflets. Two coronary arteries arise from above their respected leaflets. The aortic valve does not have a discrete annulus like other valves. The non-coronary cusp and left cusp are positioned near the aortomitral valve continuity. Below the commissure of the non-coronary cusp and left cusp lies the subaortic curtain, which is quite fibrous. On the right side of this commissure, the non-coronary cusp is attached superiorly on the left ventricular outflow tract. This area is related to the right atrial wall.

Along the non-coronary cusp and right coronary cusp before reaching the commissure, this area is above the wall containing the atrioventricular node. Nicks procedure is classified as one of the posterior aortic root enlargement procedures along with the Nunez and Manougian techniques. In Nicks procedure, a longitudinal incision is made through the non-coronary leaflet but not through the fibrous body between the aortic valve and the anterior leaflet of the mitral valve. This technique helps to increase the size of the aortic valve by 1 or 2 sizes upwards.

Patient prosthesis mismatch (PPM) was first discussed in the late 1970s. PPM occurs when the aortic annulus is too small, and this causes the prosthetic valve effective orifice area (EOA) when compared to the body surface area to be less than 0.85 cm/m. PPM is associated with poor outcomes such as poor hemodynamic performance, reduced left ventricular mass regression, and decreased survival rates among those with PPM.

When PPM is thought to be a possible occurrence, the surgeon can enlarge the aortic root or place a stentless bioprosthetic aortic valve or a newer aortic mechanical valve. Even though a prosthetic valve may appear to fit snug in the annulus, this may cause an unacceptable hemodynamic response. A high transvalvular gradient will impair left ventricular remodeling, which overall leads to higher morbidity and mortality, especially in patients with decreased left ventricular function.