Treatment for Gaucher disease falls into two categories, enzyme replacement therapy, and substrate reduction therapy.GBA1 enzyme (also called beta-glucosylceramidase or beta-glucocerebrosidase). The FDA has approved both Cerezyme (imiglucerase) and VPRIV (velaglucerase alfa) for Gaucher disease type 1 and 3 enzyme replacement therapy. Enzyme replacement therapy typically cannot replace an enzyme deficient in the brain due to the blood-brain barrier and therefore is not effective for treating the central nervous system problems associated with type 2 and 3 Gaucher disease. Enzyme replacement therapy will help with the “non-brain” signs and symptoms associated with type 3 Gaucher disease, e.g., enlarged organs and skeletal issues.

Enzyme replacement therapy does not correct the underlying genetic defect and acts only to relieve signs, symptoms, and ongoing damage caused by the accumulation of toxins. Moreover, it is possible to develop antibodies to the replacement enzyme.

Substrate reduction therapy is an orally administered small-molecule drug (not protein) that relies on a strategy distinct from that of enzyme replacement therapy. In substrate reduction therapy the goal is to reduce the levels of a substrate such that toxic accumulation of the substrate’s subsequent degradative product is diminished to a level that is clinically less toxic. In the case of Gaucher disease, the goal is to use substrate reduction therapies that can inhibit the first committed step in glycosphingolipid biosynthesis. There are two FDA-approved substrate reduction therapy drugs to treat patients with Gaucher disease, i.e., eliglustat and miglustat. Eliglustat, a glucosylceramide synthase inhibitor, does not effectively cross the blood-brain barrier is indicated only for type 1 Gaucher disease.