Psychogenic nonepileptic seizures may be difficult to distinguish from epileptic seizures. Observation of waxing and waning consciousness, out-of-phase shaking movements, pelvic thrusting, side-to-side head shaking, and eye closure during the event suggest PNES. However, at times brief episodes of sudden unresponsiveness may represent the PNES event. Sometimes, friends or family may volunteer a history of nonepileptic seizures or spells, but frequently this is lacking, and the patient has been labeled as having a seizure disorder and is being prescribed antiepileptic drugs.

Even in a busy emergency department, there is always a brief moment of observation before starting treatment. Therapy should not be blindly protocol-driven without some inspection and examination.

Wild thrashing, side-to-side head movements, and yelling verbal phrases likewise are not consistent with epileptic seizures. Four extremity motor movements with seizures would represent diffuse cortical involvement with an epileptic seizure, and the patient should not be able to communicate during such a convulsion. The mouth is usually open during the tonic phase of a generalized convulsion; the presence of a clenched mouth during a tonic spell should raise consideration of PNES.

There are exceptions to these observations. Pelvic thrusting, bicycling movements, abnormal posturing may occur in frontal lobe epilepsy.

An increase in heart rate of 30% was observed in patients with epileptic seizures, both convulsive and nonconvulsive, compared to nonepileptic events.

With the advent of cameras on cell phones, witnesses to an event may offer a video record. Analysis of these recordings by expert review has been found to have additive value for diagnosing nonepileptic seizures.