The SIR has published complication rates for PCN. The rate of major complications is around 2% to 10%. Major complications include:

- Sepsis

- Hemorrhage, including subcapsular hematoma and pseudoaneurysm

- Pneumothorax

- Puncture of adjacent organs

- Urine leak/urinoma

- Death

Transgression of blood vessels during PCN is to be expected.  Coagulation usually occurs successfully, and hemorrhage ceases entirely within 2 to 3 days. Bleeding through the catheter can occur if a catheter side hole is left in communication with a renal vessel or if a pseudoaneurysm develops.  Minor, temporary bleeding after PCN placement is expected and occurs in about 95% of cases.  Significant bleeding requiring transfusion has been reported in 1 to 4% of patients while small retroperitoneal hematomas have been found in 13%.

In hemodynamically stable patients:

If arterial hemorrhage is obvious (such as bright red pulsatile blood is coming out of the tube), then the patient should be taken for emergent angiographic embolization.

If hemorrhage is suspected (such as from observing persistent hematuria, a falling hemoglobin level, or unstable vital signs), then CT angiography (CTA) can be considered as a first-line diagnostic tool.  Digital subtraction angiography (DSA) via arterial puncture can be performed after that for embolization treatment if evidence of bleeding is seen on the CTA. However, whenever there is strong clinical suspicion of bleeding in the absence of hemorrhage seen on CTA, then a fluoroscopic tractogram should be performed next.

If no vessels are opacified or if the drainage catheter side holes are found to lie outside the kidney, then the catheter should be repositioned and the tractogram repeated. If a vein is opacified, then the catheter should be upsized to tamponade the vein. Time should be given to see if the intervention worked. If an artery is opacified, then the catheter should be upsized to tamponade the artery. If blood can still be aspirated through the larger catheter, then angiographic embolization of the renal artery branch involved should be performed urgently.

In hemodynamically unstable patients:

A decision must be reached between the radiologist and surgeon whether the patient should go to surgery, to angiography, or both (if angiography can be performed in the operating room).

PCN provides a conduit for bacteria to enter the urinary tract from an external source. Although PCN may be performed to treat the obstruction that is the cause of sepsis, PCN itself may also cause sepsis.  Preventive measures include routine catheter exchange every 2 to 3 months and using a catheter that has a good chance at remaining patent. Pyelonephritis is treated with antibiotics (such as Unasyn). Intravenous (IV) fluids, oxygen, and vasopressors in the setting of an intensive care unit should also be considered.

Infections associated with PCN should be treated with culture specific antibiotics.  Once appropriate antibiotics have been administered, it is recommended that the nephrostomy tube be changed within four days.

Percutaneous nephrostomy catheters can become clogged with encrustations (usually calcium phosphate).  Catheter flushing can help with an acute obstruction temporarily, but even routine flushing does not appear to affect the rate of encrustation.  Only increased hydration has been shown to reduce the encrustation rate.  In pregnancy, PCN catheters should be changed every 4-6 weeks.  For most other patients, routine changes every 3 months is typically suggested.