**History and examination of all patients with ptosis should determine:**

- age of onset and duration (congenital or acquired)

- any abnormal head position (e.g., chin lift)

- associated symptoms indicating the underlying cause

- the progression of ptosis as may be seen in conditions such as chronic progressive external ophthalmoplegia (CPEO)

- variability of ptosis, which may be seen in conditions such as myasthenia gravis

**Presenting Complaints**

Patients usually present with a complaint of visible drooping of one or both eyelids, cosmetic concerns, diminution of vision, head posture abnormality, movement of the eyelid with the movement of the mouth, heaviness in the eyes, double vision in upgaze (if congenital ptosis is associated with superior rectus abnormality).

**History**

- Trauma (traumatic ptosis)

- Medical conditions (e.g., myasthenia gravis, myotonic dystrophy, CPEO, muscular dystrophies, hypertension, thyroid, and diabetes)

- Recurrent episodes (e.g., in recurrent 3rd nerve palsy secondary to ischemia caused by diabetes and hypertension)

- Contact lens wear (poorly fitting contact lenses can lead to secondary blepharospasm giving rise to falsely small palpebral fissures)

- Previous history of amblyopia therapy or the use of spectacles

- Drug intake (e.g., neostigmine)

- A recurrent stye, chalazion, vernal keratoconjunctivitis, giant papillary conjunctivitis, trachoma, eyelid tumor

**Past Medical History**

- Diabetes mellitus

- Hypertension

- Any neurological disorders

- Other associated congenital disabilities

- Thyroid disease

- Bleeding disorders (relevant if surgery is contemplated)

**Past Surgical History**

- Any strabismus surgery or ptosis correction surgery

- History of peribulbar block administration before any intraocular surgeries

**Birth History**

Delivery with the aid of forceps can be associated with an injury resulting in ptosis or facial palsy.

**Family History**

The****presence of ptosis in family members should be ascertained, especially in blepharophimosis syndrome cases.

**Examination of a Case of Ptosis**

- A study of previous photographs helps determine the duration, severity, or variation of the ptosis.

- Handshake to rule out myotonic dystrophy.

- Visual acuity should be tested in all ptosis patients to rule out any associated refractive error and amblyopia, which should be addressed.

- Facial symmetry is determined.

- Chin elevation should be examined for in cases of bilateral ptosis.

- Periocular fullness should be assessed to determine the presence of any underlying conditions like hemangioma.

- Frontalis overaction will indicate compensation for the ptosis.

- Any periocular scars should be noted.

- Causes of pseudoptosis should be ruled out in ipsilateral and contralateral eyes before labeling it as a case of true congenital ptosis.

- Refraction is performed to rule out high myopia.

- Extraocular movement in primary and secondary gaze should be examined to rule out any extraocular muscle palsy or paresis.

- A cover-uncover test should be performed to rule out any strabismus associated with the ptosis.

- Direct and consensual light reflex should be checked to look for Horner's syndrome and third cranial nerve palsy.

- Dilated fundus examination should be done to rule out any associated vitreoretinal abnormalities.

- Movement of the upper eyelid while using mastication muscles should be noted to rule out the presence of Marcus Gunn Jaw winking phenomena.

In unilateral ptosis, elevate the ptotic eyelid to see if there is any droop of the opposite eyelid to confirm the diagnosis of true ptosis (based on Hering's law of equal innervation).

Bell's phenomenon should be checked in all patients before planning surgical intervention to assess the possible risk of exposure of the cornea after surgery. Bell's phenomena is a normal defense reflex of the eye wherein on closing the eyelids. The eye moves upwards and outwards. Bell's phenomena are graded into 3 categories :

- Good- on lifting the forcibly closed eye, less than one-third of the cornea is visible.

- Fair -on lifting the forcibly closed eye, one-third to one-half of the cornea is visible.

- Poor- one-half or more than half of the cornea is visible.

The corneal sensation and lagophthalmos should be checked in all ptosis patients before planning for surgery. Normal blink reflex and eyelid closure are essential to prevent dry eye and exposure keratitis after ptosis correction surgery.

Schirmer's test, tear film breakup time, and the tear meniscus should be documented before surgery as the presence of a dry eye may be a contraindication for ptosis correction.

The ice pack test should be tested to rule out myasthenia gravis.

Phenyeprine test: phenylephrine drops are used to assess Muller's muscle function in patients with mild to moderate ptosis. Phenylephrine stimulates the alpha-adrenergic receptors on Muller's muscle. Mullers muscle contraction is responsible for 2-3 mm of elevation of the upper eyelid. If the ptotic eyelid is not elevating after phenylephrine drops, surgeries other than Müller muscle-conjunctival resection should be considered levator resection or frontalis sling surgery).

**Margin reflex distance 1 (MRD1):**is the distance between the upper eyelid margin and the pupillary reflex in primary gaze. This test is used to grade the degree of ptosis. Normal MRD1 is around 4 to 4.5 mm.

**Margin reflex distance 2 (MRD2):**is the distance between the pupillary reflex in the center to the lower eyelid margin. It is a measure of lower lid retraction. A measurement of 5 to 5.5 mm is considered normal.

**Margin reflex distance 3 (MRD3):**the distance between the corneal light reflex and the center of the upper eyelid in extreme upgaze.

**Margin crease distance (MCD):**is the distance from the upper eyelid crease to the upper eyelid margin in downward gaze. The eyelid crease is formed by the insertion of the levator aponeurotic fibers into the upper eyelid skin. Normal MCD is 8 to 9 mm in males and  9 to 11 in females. The lid crease is absent or shallow in patients with congenital ptosis.

**Palpebral aperture:**is the distance between the upper eyelid and lower eyelid at the center (widest point) in primary gaze. Normal distance ranges from 7 to 10 mm in males and 8 to 12 mm in females.

**Berke's method to measure levator function:**Place the thumb against the brow to stop the action of the frontalis and then ask the patient to move the eyes from extreme downgaze to upgaze. Levator function is graded as

- Normal: >15mm

- Good: 12 to 14 mm

- Fair: 5 to 11 mm

- Poor: 4mm or less

**Margin limbal distance MLD (also known as Putterman's method):**is the distance between the center of the upper lid margin to the 6'o clock limbus in extreme upgaze. Normal MLD is around 9.0 mm.

**Iliff test:**is a useful test in children in the first year of life to evaluate the levator function. On everting the upper eyelid when the child looks down, if the eyelid reverts on its own, it indicates a good levator function.