Ion channels are pore-forming integral membrane proteins that are composed of various combinations of subunits.

The concentration of calcium inside the cell can vary widely depending on location.

A plasma membrane is an important place for calcium channels to carry out their function by regulating the entry and exit of calcium from the cell. One of the most important types of calcium channels found on plasma membranes is voltage-gated calcium channels, which rapidly transport calcium into the cytoplasm. These channels respond to a change in voltage across the cell membrane, which is driven by an electrochemical gradient. They are especially critical for the initiation of cellular processes, including muscle contraction and gene transcription.

Other calcium channels exist on the plasma membrane to transport calcium out of the cell to provide a very low cytosolic concentration. These channels include various calcium channel pumps and exchangers. Among these are the plasma membrane calcium ATPase (PMCA) pump and the sodium/calcium ion exchanger (NCX), which expend large amounts of energy to function.

Calcium is so essential for intracellular processes that the cell stores it in high concentrations, particularly in the endoplasmic reticulum (ER) (sarcoplasmic reticulum (SR) in muscle cells). The ER/SR serves as the main storage site for calcium inside the cell.

Other channels exist to transport calcium in the opposite direction from the endoplasmic/sarcoplasmic plasmic reticulum to the cytoplasm, such as the inositol triphosphate (IP3) receptor and ryanodine receptor (RyR).

Once calcium has been released into the cytoplasm, the calcium stored inside the storage organelles of the ER/SR eventually becomes depleted. For the cell to continue performing calcium-dependent responses, these stores need to be rapidly replenished. Special calcium channels exist for this purpose called store-operated calcium channels, which mediate a process called store-operated calcium entry (SOCE). The way these channels function involve a complex series of events that have only recently come to light. They form when concentrations of calcium in the lumen of the ER are low, sensed by a calcium-sensing protein called the stomal interacting molecule (STIM). When calcium becomes low, the STIM protein oligomerizes and moves to the ER membrane, where it interacts with another protein called Orai1, referred to as a calcium-release activated channel (CRAC). The interaction between these two proteins creates a passageway for calcium between the membranes of the endoplasmic reticulum and the plasma membrane. Through the bypassing of these two different membrane systems, a direct passageway for calcium from the cell exterior to the primary storage organelles is made possible. Because the concentration of calcium is generally one thousand or more times greater outside of the cell than inside, it provides a powerful mechanism by which intracellular calcium levels are rapidly replenished.

All calcium channels play an essential role in calcium homeostasis and signaling in the cell. It is not possible to describe every type of calcium channel in this article. However, the essential calcium channels that contribute to the regulation of calcium concentration in the cell will be discussed. Ultimately, calcium channels are involved in a large number of different processes. They exhibit significant diversity in both structure, function, and pharmacology. The abnormal functioning of calcium channels is associated with a large number of pathological conditions. As a result, a greater understanding of calcium channels is necessary.