Bevacizumab is usually only prescribed by specific clinicians, including oncologists, rheumatologists, ophthalmologists, immunologists, and ophthalmologists. However, the routine monitoring of patients treated with bevacizumab is done by nurses. Monitoring for signs of an infusion reaction is necessary during infusions with bevacizumab; this will largely be the responsibility of the nursing staff. Additional monitoring includes CBC with differential, blood pressure monitoring every 2 to 3 weeks, and monitoring for proteinuria. Additionally, patient education by healthcare providers should include risk-benefit evaluation and consideration of severe hypertension, gastrointestinal complications, bleeding tendencies, and arterial and venous thromboembolism.

Warnings and precautions include GI perforation, bleeding, surgery, and wound healing complications. The pharmacist must educate the patient on the drug's potential benefits and toxicity. Pharmacists must also examine bevacizumab in the context of the patient's overall drug regimen and report any interactions or concerns to the treating physician. Challenging cases may require an oncology-certified pharmacy practitioner. Communication between the clinicians, pharmacists, and nurses who prescribe, dispense and administer this agent is vital to prevent serious adverse effects. Bevacizumab requires all interprofessional healthcare team members to collaborate and communicate to optimize therapy and minimize adverse reactions. [Level 5]

In addition, a study examined the outcomes of ovarian cancer by patient-centered care through a multidisciplinary, interprofessional approach involving gynecological surgeons, pathologists, oncologists and collaboration with other healthcare professionals, including nurses, radiologists, nuclear medicine physicians, nutritionists, vascular surgeons, urologists, gynecologists, and psychologists can provide valuable input in all the decision-making steps of ovarian cancer management which translates to better patient outcomes.