CTA is the most reliable non-invasive neurovascular imaging modality and is the initial test of choice for patients with suspected cerebral artery injury. CTA should be performed in patients meeting the modified Denver Screening Criteria and in this population has a sensitivity of nearly 100%. Digital subtraction arteriography (DSA) has long been described as the gold standard but is more invasive, less readily available, and requires more contrast than CTA. DSA itself also carries an increased risk of stroke (0.5%). DSA is still a choice when concurrent endovascular therapy is under consideration or when other imaging modalities are inconclusive or unavailable. CTA has largely replaced DSA.

MRI is recommended to screen for vertebral artery injury in patients with blunt spinal cord or vertebral subluxation injuries. Magnetic resonance angiography (MRA) has shown inferior or equivalent specificity for detecting vertebral artery injury as compared to CTA and MR and is often unavailable or impractical in the emergency setting. MR angiography is not used independently to screen for blunt cerebrovascular injury. While duplex ultrasonography is the least invasive and perhaps the most widely available imaging modality, there is no data to support its use in assessing for vertebral artery injury. Ultrasound’s poor sensitivity for detecting vertebral artery injury is due to anatomic constraints that limit visibility in areas obscured by bone.

Young patients presenting with acute ischemic stroke should have spontaneous cerebral artery dissection considered as an inciting cause. CTA is commonly performed after non-contrast head CT to evaluate for this diagnosis.