Once the diagnosis of intrahepatic cholestasis of pregnancy (ICP) is confirmed, immediate treatment is necessary, and the primary goal of therapy is to decrease the risk of perinatal morbidity and mortality and to alleviate maternal symptoms.

Ursodeoxycholic acid (UDCA) is the drug of choice for the treatment of ICP.

For patients with no improvement of ICP, refractory to UDCA, other medications such as rifampin, cholestyramine, and S-adenosyl-L-methionine are options.

**Antepartum Management of ICP**

In patients with intrahepatic cholestasis of pregnancy, the importance of regular antepartum fetal testing is not proven to be useful to identify fetuses at risk of demise. None of the existing antenatal tests has been shown to either predict or reduce the risk of adverse perinatal outcomes. Nevertheless, most providers find it reassuring to have regular antenatal testing for patients with ICP. Although there is a dearth of high-quality evidence to support antenatal screening in pregnant women with ICP, the consensus is to use weekly biophysical profiles (BPP) to detect fetal compromise.

**Timing of Delivery**

Many authors have advocated elective early delivery of women with intrahepatic cholestasis of pregnancy to reduce the risk of sudden fetal demise. The timing of delivery should depend on balancing the risk of fetal death as opposed to the potential risks of prematurity. In a meta-analysis of 23 studies done by Ovadia et al., it was noted that the prevalence of stillbirth after 24 weeks of gestation was 3.44% (95% CI 2.05–5.37) for females with intrahepatic cholestasis of pregnancy compared with 0.3 to 0.4% from pooled national average data among included countries. The elevated total bile acid concentrations (greater than 100 micromol/L) were highly predictive of stillbirth in single pregnancies (area under the receiver operating characteristic curve 0.83 [95% CI 0.74 to 0.92], and the conclusion was that in women with total bile acid concentrations of 100 micromol/L or more, delivery should probably occur by 35 to 36 weeks of gestation.

Consider delivery before 37 weeks of gestation in women with ICP if they have one of the following:

- Maternal symptoms along with jaundice not improving with medications, and needing escalating doses of UDCA

- Previous history of intrauterine fetal demise before 37 weeks secondary to ICP

- Total serum bile acid concentration of more than 100 micromol/L

Intrahepatic cholestasis of pregnancy is not an indication for cesarean delivery. Postpartum - pruritus typically disappears in the first two to three days following delivery, and serum bile acid concentrations will normalize eventually. ICP is not a contraindication to breastfeeding, and mothers with a history of ICP in pregnancy can breastfeed their infants. Postpartum monitoring and follow-up of bile acids and liver function tests should be done in 4-6 weeks to ensure resolution. Women with the persistent abnormality of liver function tests after 6 to 8 weeks require investigation for other etiologies.