Pulmonary hypertension can be suspected on clinical presentation. However, it is important to rule out other causes as the signs and symptoms of pulmonary hypertension are non-specific. The baseline functional class of the patient can be determined by the 6-minute walk test.

If pulmonary hypertension is suspected, a presumptive diagnosis of pulmonary hypertension can be made with echocardiography, which estimates the systolic pressure of the pulmonary artery and right heart function. Further tests are done to exclude heart and lung diseases that are the common causes of pulmonary hypertension. These tests include ECG,  pulmonary function test (PFT) with the diffusing capacity of the lungs for carbon monoxide (DLCO), arterial blood gas (ABG), chest x-ray, and high-resolution computed tomography (HRCT).

ECG shows right ventricular hypertrophy, right atrial enlargement, right axis deviation, increased amplitude of P wave in lead II in all groups. It may show left ventricular hypertrophy in left heart disease.

The chest radiograph may show signs of left heart disease such as pulmonary vascular congestion and pleural effusion. Increased right ventricular size and cardiomegaly in all patients can be seen in PAH.

V/Q Scans are done to rule out chronic thromboembolic pulmonary hypertension (CTEPH) once the common causes are excluded. Patients with perfusion defects are further evaluated by CT pulmonary angiography and right heart catheterization.

Pulmonary hypertension diagnosis can be confirmed with right heart catheterization that measures the hemodynamic parameters accurately. Pulmonary artery catheter can directly measure central venous pressure, right heart intracardiac pressure, pulmonary artery pressure, pulmonary capillary wedge pressure/PA occlusion pressure, cardiac output, mixed venous oxyhemoglobin saturation. These direct measures such as mean PAP, pulmonary capillary wedge pressure (PCWP) and, cardiac output (CO) can be used to calculate pulmonary vascular resistance indirectly. Pulmonary vascular resistance (PVR) helps in determining the prognosis of pulmonary hypertension. Mean PAP is high in both PAH and Group 2 PH, but PCWP greater than 15 mm Hg is typically seen in PH due to left heart disease.