Many conditions may mimic the presentation of rapid eye movement behavior disorder symptoms.

- Substance use and/or withdrawal

- Benign childhood epilepsy

- Complex partial seizures

- Confusional arousals

- Delirium

- Epilepsia partialis continua

- Epileptic encephalopathy

- Juvenile myoclonic epilepsy

- Malingering

- Obstructive sleep apnea (OSA)

- Parasomnia overlap syndrome

- Periodic limb movement disorder

- Posttraumatic stress disorder

- Psychogenic nonepileptic seizure

- Sleep terror

- Sleepwalking

- Trauma-associated sleep disorder

Non-REM sleep parasomnias are common and could mimic RBD, including confusional arousals, sleepwalking, and sleep terrors. These disorders typically occur during childhood in the first half of the night during non-REM sleep without dream recall. However, these clinical findings may be observed concomitantly with objective results of REM without atonia and have been characterized as parasomnia overlap syndrome. In contrast to RBD, sleep terrors occur predominantly in children and present with sudden screening during sleep that can last for several minutes. Sleep talking can be confused with RBD. However, the tone of voice mimics usual conversation and occurs during NREM and REM sleep. Nightmares are vivid dreams that do not have a motor activity. Other associated parasomnias may include sleep-related eating disorders, sexsomnia, or rhythmic movement disorder.

Trauma-associated sleep disorder has recently been characterized as a novel parasomnia. The patient demographics tend to be younger males with traumatic experiences as the temporal onset of disturbing nocturnal behaviors and nightmares. They may or may not have posttraumatic disorders. Objective findings include REM without atonia. Disruptive nocturnal behaviors captured in the lab are rare.

It is important to differentiate RBD behaviors from nocturnal seizures, including juvenile myoclonic epilepsy, grand mal seizure, benign rolandic, Landau-Kleffner syndrome, and sleep-related hyper motor epilepsy (formerly known as nocturnal frontal lobe epilepsy). Patients with epilepsy may exhibit prodromal symptoms such as mood changes and auras, such as irregular blinking or bladder/bowel control loss. Another differentiating behavior between RBD and seizures is the presentation of postictal states that may appear as confusion, headaches, nausea, temporary neurological deficits, sensory deficits, and/or suppressed alertness following the seizure.