Classically, osteoarthritis presents with joint pain that is worse with use and improves with rest. The pain usually peaks in the late afternoon or early evening and can also be evident in the early morning upon awakening from sleep. The pain can be divided into two types.

- Dull, aching, throbbing pain that becomes more constant over time and is predictable. It can also be accompanied by stiffness after prolonged immobilization (also known as "gelling phenomenon").

- Intense, unpredictable pain for short periods can be emotionally traumatizing and limit the patient's readiness to participate in daily activities.

Based on the aforementioned types of pain, OA can be clinically classified into three stages:

- Early OA: Predictable sharp pain that is often triggered by a mechanical stimulus that limits the patient's ability to participate in high impact activities.

- Mid OA: In addition to the pain described above, there is unpredictable joint pain or locking – particularly for the knee. The pain becomes increasingly more constant and can affect daily activities.

- Advanced OA: Constant dull-aching pain with intermittent short episodes of unpredictable intense pain that results in avoidance of engaging in recreational or social activities.

Additional joint symptoms include tenderness, stiffness, crepitus, limited range of movement, joint swelling, deformity, or instability.

Findings on physical examination in OA include bony enlargement (most commonly affecting the DIP and PIP joints of the fingers and toes), crepitus, effusions (non-inflammatory), joint line tenderness, and limited range of motion due to pain, swelling, or joint deformity. Heberden's nodes describe the posterolateral bony swelling of the DIP joints, and Bouchard nodes describe the posterolateral bony swelling of the PIP joints. OA involving the base of the thumb (first CMC joint) is often described as a "shoulder appearance" or "squaring".