The primary route of infection and cause depend on the clinical syndrome.

**Pulmonary**

Pulmonary aspergillosis is contracted via inhalation of Aspergillus conidia.Aspergillus is ubiquitous in the environment, present in concentrations between 1 and 100 m, depending on whether the location is indoors or outdoors. It can be higher in certain areas, such as where the soil is disturbed.A. fumigatus.

**Rhinosinusitis**

Rhinosinusitis is contracted via the inhalation of conidia via the nasal route and predominantly occurs in severely immunocompromised hosts.A. flavus.

**Cerebral**

Aspergillus species reach the brain either hematogenously in the case of disseminated infection or via direct extension from contiguous areas, such as the mastoid, middle ear, or paranasal sinuses.

**Endophthalmitis**

Cataract surgery can serve as the entry point for Aspergillus species, causing fungal endophthalmitis.

**Osteomyelitis**

Aspergillus enters the bone via disseminated infection in severe immunocompromise or direct inoculation, such as intravenous drug use

**Cutaneous**

An entry into the skin via venous catheters, predisposing chronic inflammatory skin condition, or trauma is necessary.Aspergillus species.Aspergillus species have been increasingly recognized as a cause of onychomycosis, with nail trauma, immunodeficiency, and exposure of the nails to the soil as gateways to procuring this infection.

**Disseminated and Other Sites**

Disseminated infections often originate from one of the sites above in the immunocompromised host, but dissemination from the pulmonary route is common.

In the past, it has been challenging to identify the exact species causing disease in many cases, leading to reporting the isolates as part of a complex. However, molecular diagnostics have helped aid in identification.Aspergillus fumigatus has previously been thought to be the cause of around 90% of invasive aspergillosis.