Postural instability has a limited diagnostic specificity, given that it can result from a variety of issues in afferent pathways, efferent pathways, musculoskeletal function, and central processing.

Distinguishing postural instability from orthostatic hypotension takes into account symptomatology and changes in blood pressure with the latter. Dizziness from orthostatic hypotension is usually related directly to changes in position and is associated with fainting or lightheadedness. In contrast, dizziness from postural instability usually occurs when a patient reaches, bends, or turns. Many patients with frequent falls due to postural instability may have no subjective complaints of dizziness.

Progressive supranuclear palsy (PSP) is the most common atypical parkinsonian disorder. Characteristic features of PSP include vertical supranuclear gaze palsy (patient unable to look down), postural instability with unexplained falls, dysarthria, dysphagia, and frontal cognitive dysfunction. Postural instability is the most frequent symptom presentation in PSP.

Patients with multiple system atrophy can often have asymmetrical parkinsonian bradykinesia, autonomic features, and gait disturbances that also occur in Parkinson disease. The disease onset, however, is important. Postural hypotension is usually present at diagnosis or in the early years after the presentation of multiple system atrophy, whereas in Parkinson disease, these happen later in the course of the disease.

Corticobasal degeneration presents with an asymmetrical akinetic–rigid syndrome that is similar to Parkinson disease. The positional or postural limb instability, however, is usually present upon initial evaluation.

Dementia with Lewy bodies may present with postural instability similar to Parkinson disease. However, visual hallucinations and fluctuations in a patient's attention and awareness are significant features in the diagnosis of this disease.

Vertigo can also present with postural instability. However, these patients are more likely to complain of dizziness. Severe postural instability with frequent falling and other neurological signs such as ataxia, dysarthria, dysphagia, or diplopia suggests central vertigo (central nervous system etiology). Unidirectional instability preserved walking, and possible tinnitus or deafness would suggest peripheral vertigo (inner ear etiology).