The process of wound healing is vastly different when comparing fetuses and adults. Fetal wound healing typically has minimal to no scarring, little to no inflammation (thought to be due to a lack of myofibroblasts), rapid epithelialization, high proportions of type III collagen, fast fibroblast migration, and less degranulation by fibroblasts.

Under normal adult conditions, wound healing and tissue repair occur in four stages:

- **Hemostasis**(Scab formation)

- **Inflammatory Stage**(Inflammation and edema formation)

- **Proliferative Stage**(Granulation tissue formation)

- **Remodeling Stage**(Scar formation)

**Hemostasis**

During this stage of wound healing, the blood vessels at the site of injury contract, and the blood that leaked out through the wounds begin to coagulate and scab over. The coagulation process results from the aggregation of thrombocytes, forming a fibrin network. The fibrin network is the basis for a clot and serves as a temporary matrix for migrating cells. The thrombocytes release cytokines and growth factors that serve as pro-inflammatory signals to attract the immune response to the site of the wound.

**Inflammatory Stage**

This stage begins when neutrophils begin to arrive at the wound site. Neutrophils arrive at the wound within a few minutes and continue to accumulate for several days. The neutrophils' role is to entrap the microorganisms present at the wound site from the beginning of the injury. The neutrophils also amplify the pro-inflammatory response and release their own markers.

Monocytes arrive at the site of injury within two days, where they differentiate into macrophages. The role of macrophages is to phagocytose debris, pathogens, and neutrophils while also producing chemical mediators (TGF-beta and VEGF) that serve to recruit fibroblasts and endothelial cells that mark the next stage of healing. During this stage, the site of injury becomes erythematous and edematous. This stage takes about 72 hours to complete.

**Proliferative Stage**

During this stage of healing, re-epithelialization and the replacement of the clot by granulation tissue occurs simultaneously. This stage is highly cellular with the primary cell types, including fibroblasts, keratinocytes, and endothelial cells. Fibroblasts function to synthesize collagen and the extracellular matrix. The granulation tissue itself is made up of extracellular matrix, proteoglycans, hyaluronic acid, collagen, and elastin. Cytokines and growth factors, interleukins, and angiogenesis factors are active during this time, which can continue anywhere from days to weeks under normal circumstances. Granulation tissue grows from the base of the wound and can typically fill any size wound. Any errors in the formation of granulation tissue can result in chronic wound formation. Foreign bodies at the site of a wound can also result in persistent granulation tissue and poor wound healing with excess macrophages, fibroblasts, and capillaries reacting around the foreign material.

**Remodeling Stage**

The last stage of wound healing involves apoptosis and the production of new cells. The apoptosis and degradation of the extracellular matrix and immature type III collagen and the ultimate formation of mature type I collagen are critical to scar formation, integrity, and strength. This stage can continue from months to years. If there are errors during this phase, there may be excessive wound healing leading to hypertrophic or keloidal scarring or a chronic wound resulting in persistent granulation tissue.

Healthy granulation tissue appears pink to red due to new capillary formation, is soft to the touch, moist appears “bumpy,” and typically painless. Unhealthy granulation tissue is darker red, bleeds easily with minimal contact, painful, and maybe covered by shiny white or yellow fibrous tissue that is avascular, impeding healing. When granulation tissue appears “unhealthy,” an infectious process or poor healing should be suspected. Wound culture and appropriate treatment according to the culture results should be completed as soon as possible. Once the infection is ruled out or cleared, some chronic wounds may respond to simple cautery with silver nitrate or with topical steroid preparations, while those with the overlying fibrous tissue will require debridement with a curette or scalpel to allow for healing.