**Poor Ambient Light**

Lighting is often suboptimal in the prehospital environment. Inadequate ambient light interferes with proper preparation of airway equipment and impairs good communication and situational awareness among team members during the procedure itself, and has obvious implications for airway procedures themselves (particularly for intubation which relies on direct visualization of tube position). An excess of ambient light may cause problems due to glare blinding the airway operator, particularly where light sources are in the operator’s line of sight (such as the low-lying sun at dusk or dawn).

In low light settings, bystanders or team members can be tasked with positioning artificial light sources to illuminate the immediate surroundings, and responders should consider using head-mounted lamps.

If excessive light is interfering with airway management, bystanders and team members may similarly facilitate the procedure by using a sheet or tarpaulin to reduce glare. Video laryngoscopy, as opposed to direct laryngoscopy, may be of benefit, but video laryngoscope screens may be difficult to view in broad daylight compared to artificial indoor lighting conditions.

The illumination of the airway during intubation generally relies on light emitted from the laryngoscope itself. Batteries and light bulbs should be charged and checked ahead of time, and it is good practice to have a second laryngoscope immediately available in case of last-minute equipment problems.

In the absence of a functioning light source, blind digital intubation guided only by the rescuer’s fingers has been described.

**Atypical Patient Position**

Patients in the prehospital setting are often found on the ground rather than on a waist-high surface which is more ergonomic for responders. They are often not lying in the optimal supine ramped position. Space creation around the patient, or (in extremis) a snatch-and-grab strategy moving the patient to adjacent flat terrain for emergent airway management, is often desirable but may not always be possible due to entrapment or restricted patient access.

Various techniques can be employed, which may need to be tailored to specific circumstances. Basic techniques such as the head-tilt-chin-lift maneuver, jaw thrust maneuver, or insertion of an oropharyngeal or nasopharyngeal airway may be sufficient to improve the patient’s condition until good access is possible. Second-generation supraglottic airway devices have become more widely available over the last decade and may provide a more secure airway and improved oxygenation in the obtunded patient, with the advantage that they can be inserted without requiring line-of-site of the patient’s vocal cords. Insertion can be aided by using small judicious doses of sedative medication – this technique is referred to as pharmacologically assisted laryngeal mask insertion (PALM).

If tracheal intubation is judged essential while the patient is on the ground, the responder can adopt various postures. If the patient is supine, the simplest approach is often for the rescuer to lie prone, kneel or sit on the ground at the patient’s head; the responder can alternatively take a lateral decubitus position; this may be easier when lying on the left, as the responder’s right arm movements will be less restricted for tube insertion, and the left arm is stabilized on the ground during laryngoscopy.

For patients who may require intubation while in an upright position (such as those entrapped while sitting in a car), or where there is an absolute restriction of access at the patient’s head, it may be possible for the rescuer to adopt a face-to-face approach using inverse direct laryngoscopy, with the laryngoscope held upside down in the right hand and the tracheal tube in the left. This may require the rescuer to straddle the patient. Video laryngoscopy may facilitate this; one study found significant differences in success when using different designs of video laryngoscope.****Given that most responders will have limited experience with the unnatural ergonomics of face-to-face intubation, it may be preferable to rely instead on other techniques to improve oxygenation and ventilation until extrication or better patient access is possible for conventional laryngoscopy.

**Obesity**

Obesity is associated with a significantly increased risk of airway complications.

**Minimal Backup and Limited Equipment**

The number of trained clinicians present at a prehospital incident is invariably lower than the in-hospital setting, and skilled backup is generally not immediately available. Advanced airway interventions are complex, and their success relies on having a well-trained team of skilled providers. If inadequate providers are present, the priority must be to maintain oxygenation and ventilation, even if this means using only basic adjuncts and techniques.

The use of standardized equipment sets and protocolized checklists may reduce the rate of errors by reducing superfluous decision-making during the incident, freeing up cognitive “bandwidth.”