The intercostal nerves are commonly grouped into two categories: typical intercostal nerves and atypical intercostal nerves. The typical intercostal nerves (IC) include IC3 through IC6, and the atypical intercostal nerves include IC1 through IC2 and IC8 through IC11. The main reason for the two separate groupings is that the typical intercostal nerves stay confined to their own intercostal spaces. In contrast, the atypical spinal nerves go past the thoracic wall and partially or wholly supply other regions.

As described above, the typical intercostal nerve runs laterally behind the sympathetic trunk and enters the intercostal space between the parietal pleura and the intercostal membrane. While in the costal groove, it runs along with the intercostal vessels and crosses anterior to the internal thoracic artery. The major branches of the typical intercostal nerves include the rami communicantes, the muscular branches, the collateral branch, the lateral cutaneous branch, and the anterior cutaneous branch. The ramus communicans branches carry visceral signals to and from the corresponding thoracic ganglion by gray and white rami. The muscular branches supply the intercostal muscles, as well as the serratus posterior superior, subcostal, transversus thoracis, and levatores costarum. The collateral branch innervates the intercostal muscles, parietal pleura, and periosteum of the rib. The lateral cutaneous branch goes through the muscles of the lateral thoracic wall and then divides into anterior and posterior branches to return sensory information from the skin of the lateral thoracic wall. The anterior cutaneous branch is the terminal branch of the typical intercostal nerves and divides into medial and lateral branches to supply sensory innervation to the skin of the anterior thoracic wall.

The atypical intercostal nerves, IC1 through IC2 and IC7 through IC11, run a more complicated course and have their own routes to innervation in the human body. The first intercostal nerve does give some contribution to the lower trunk of the brachial plexus along with the anterior ramus of C8. The first intercostal nerve lacks both lateral and anterior cutaneous branches seen in typical intercostal nerves. The second intercostal nerve has a branch named the intercostobrachial nerve, and this branch returns cutaneous information from the floor of the axilla and the superior region of the upper extremity. In cases of coronary artery disease, the cardiac pain that some patients describe on the medial side of the arm is due to the intercostobrachial nerve. The seventh to eleventh intercostal nerves travel in the intercostal spaces but then travel into the abdominal wall, supplying muscles such as the external oblique, internal oblique, transversus abdominis, and rectus abdominis. They also innervate the skin and parietal peritoneum.