Hypertensive heart disease results from chronic high blood pressure. Current 2017 American Cardiology Association/American Heart Association guidelines define hypertension as blood pressure as systolic blood pressure higher than 120 mm Hg or a diastolic pressure more than 80mm Hg. The risk of cardiovascular mortality doubles for every 20mmHg systolic and 10mmHg diastolic pressure increase over a baseline blood pressure of 115/75.

The vast majority (90 to 95%) of hypertensive patients will classify as having primary or essential hypertension. The etiology behind primary hypertension is poorly understood. However, it likely is a complex interplay between genetic and environmental factors. Several risk factors such as increasing age, family history, obesity, high sodium diets (greater than 3g/day), physical inactivity, excessive alcohol consumption have strong and independent correlations with the development of hypertension. Hypertension has been found to precede the development of heart failure by an average of 14.1 years.

Hypertensive heart disease is responsible for roughly one-fourth of all causes of heart failure. According to the Framingham Heart Study, hypertension has a 2-fold increase in the development of heart failure in men and a 3-fold increase for women when adjusted for specific risk factors and age. The 2015 SPRINT trial demonstrated a reduced risk of progression to heart failure in patients with more intensive blood pressure control with a target systolic blood pressure of 120mmHg (1.3%) compared with 140mmHg (2.1%). Proper management of hypertension correlates with a 64% reduction in the development of heart failure.