Visual discrimination is the ability to detect differences in and ability to classify objects, symbols, or shapes. These can be categorized by color, position, form, pattern, texture, as well as size. In the simplest terms, the eyes normally receive input from the environment, then various cells detect and transmit signals to the brain. For visual discrimination, specifically, the visual cortex, contained within the occipital lobe, is the area responsible for detecting the shape and orientation of objects. Three cell types in the primary visual cortex (simple, complex, and hypercomplex) display correspondingly increased ability to respond to motion and degree of linearity. A more in-depth explanation of the visual cortex is a separate neuroanatomy topic.

The classification and categorization of vision form a basis for studying how humans receive and process visual stimuli. For example, a study of visual texture helps explain more complex connections between task modulation and perception.

Visual discrimination should not be confused with visual acuity, which denotes the sharpness of visualization. Eye examinations can assess both using the traditional eye chart. (The patient identifies a letter or symbol, and determines how clear a letter or symbol at a distance.) Questionnaires can also help to assess a patient’s visual function.

Applications of technology should be studied to improve and assess relevant components of human visual function. Facial recognition, objectively measured using EEG, is more potent in the upright than in inverted orientations. This finding supports the human use of visual categorization and orientation.