The three main blood supplies of the foot, which arise from the popliteal artery, are the anterior tibial artery, the peroneal artery, and the posterior tibial artery. The posterior tibial artery lies between the flexor digitorum longus and flexor hallucis longus as it runs down toward the medial ankle region and plantar aspect of the hindfoot. This artery then divides into the medial and lateral plantar arteries that distally anastomose. This anastomosis forms a ring with the deep plantar arch that runs transversely.  The peroneal artery supplies the posterior compartment of the foot. The anterior tibial artery supplies the anterior and dorsal regions of the foot and eventually becomes the dorsalis pedis artery when passing the extensor retinaculum. The specific arteries that supply the medial longitudinal arch of the foot are discussed in the muscles section.

The venous system of the lower extremity is made up of a combination of superficial and deep veins. The deep veins run between muscles, and the superficial veins run under the skin. During every step of ambulation, these veins are emptied as the blood is pushed up the ankle and to the calf. On the anterior of the medial malleolus, the medial marginal vein ascends above the medial longitudinal arch, eventually becoming the great saphenous vein (the internal saphenous vein).

Lymph from the lower extremity is drained into the common and external iliac lymph node chains. The sole has an abundance of superficial lymphatic vessels. These vessels accumulate at the medial and lateral collectors. The lymph in the medial superficial lymphatic vessels first moves to the superficial inguinal nodes and then drains into the deep inguinal nodes. While the deep lymphatic vessels and lateral superficial lymphatics vessels drain into the popliteal lymph nodes.