Prothrombin complex concentrate (PCC) comes from the process of ion-exchange chromatography from the cryoprecipitate supernatant of large plasma pools and after removal of antithrombin and factor XI. This agent's initial development was for hemophilia; however, with the availability of recombinant replacement factors, it no longer has a use in this setting. It is now used to replace congenital or acquired vitamin-K deficiency warfarin-induced anticoagulant effect, particularly in the emergent setting. The FDA-approved indication is for urgent reversal of acquired coagulation factor deficiency induced by warfarin-induced anticoagulation in patients presenting with major acute bleeding (intracerebral hemorrhage-ICH) or needing urgent invasive surgery or procedure. This activity outlines the indications, mechanism of action, methods of administration, significant adverse effects, contraindications, monitoring, and toxicity of prothrombin complex concentrate, so providers can direct patient therapy in treating conditions for which it is indicated, as part of the interprofessional team.

**Objectives:**
- Describe the mechanism of action of prothrombin complex concentrate.
- Review both the approved and off-label indications for using prothrombin complex concentrate.
- Summarize the adverse effects of prothrombin complex concentrate.
- Explain the importance of improving care coordination among the interprofessional team to enhance care delivery for patients who can benefit from therapy with prothrombin complex concentrate.