Forced expiratory volume in the first second (FEV1) can be useful to categorize the severity of obstructive lung diseases, such as asthma and chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD). Expressing FEV1 as a percentage of the predicted value in a patient is means by which to express this severity.

FEV1 can also be helpful in the interpretation of the reversibility test, also known as the bronchodilator test. This test assesses the bronchodilator response in a patient with obstructive lung disease. It involves the administration of a bronchodilator, such as an anticholinergic agent or a short-acting beta-2 agonist. An increase in the FEV1 of greater than or equal to 12%, or greater than or equal to 200 mL, after bronchodilator use is considered a positive bronchodilator response. A positive response typically presents in reversible airway obstruction, such as in asthma. In contrast, nonreversible obstruction, as seen in COPD, may not show a positive response to the administration of a bronchodilator.

The ratio of FEV1 to FVC (FEV1/FVC, also known as FEV1%) can help distinguish obstructive and restrictive lung diseases. In obstructive diseases, FEV1 reduction is due to the increased airway resistance to expiratory flow. A reduction in the FVC may also present because of premature airway closure in expiration; however, it is not affected as much as FEV1 and, thus, is not decreased in the same proportion as FEV1, which can lead to a reduced value of FEV1/FVC, of less than 70%.

Forced expiratory volume in 6 seconds (FEV6) has been proposed as a valid alternative for forced vital capacity (FVC) in the diagnosis of airflow obstruction in elderly individuals.