The history and physical exam will vary widely depending on where they fall on the continuum from SIRS to septic shock. Important considerations when taking a history in a patient with suspected sepsis are geared toward assessing those risk factors associated with increased mortality or higher incidence of sepsis as well as inquiring about possible sources of infection. Comorbidities associated with morbidity and mortality in sepsis include active cancer, diabetes, chronic lung disease, congestive heart failure, renal insufficiency, and liver disease(cirrhosis). Age, specifically older than 65 years old, has been shown to be an independent predictor of mortality in sepsis. This is because of the association of increasing age with a decrease in the adaptive immune system, with B and T cells showing impaired functionality. Alternatively, gender does not seem to play a role in sepsis mortality, as studies focusing on this subject are conflicting.

Gathering information geared toward finding an infectious source will help tailor further intervention and management. Notably, a patient’s recent history, hospitalization, and exposure to drug-resistant organisms may help direct what treatment to initiate. Retrospectively, sources of infection have been shown to be in the order of prevalence: pneumonia, intra-abdominal infections, and urinary tract infections.

The physical portion of the exam will provide critically important vital signs, allowing for the utilization of clinical screening tools.  There has been criticism of utilizing the SIRS criteria for this purpose because its specificity in sepsis remains low. However, the basic tenets of observing vital sign abnormalities and systemic response to infection remain valid. The differences and reliability of these clinical scores are discussed in further detail below. Clinical conditions that are associated with inflammatory injury are best grouped as organ systems related to their condition in order of prevalence:

- Lungs manifesting as acute respiratory distress syndrome (ARDS),

- Cardiovascular as septic shock (hypotension)

- Kidneys as acute kidney injury (AKI)

- Brain as septic encephalopathy

- Bone marrow as anemia of critical illness

- Skeletal muscle as critical illness myopathy

- Peripheral nerves as critical illness polyneuropathy

The physical exam should be focused on quickly assessing the patient with initial vitals and, if there is suspicion for sepsis, a thorough physical exam looking for a potential infectious source, including a pelvic exam if indicated.