Schwartz-Matsuo syndrome is primarily a clinical diagnosis; however, definitive diagnosis requires cytological evaluation with a demonstration of photoreceptor outer segments in the anterior chamber using transmission electron microscopy (TEM).

Further analysis of a rod outer segment under TEM shows lobules containing rod sacs. Each rod sac has two thick membranes with a less dense inner space.

Despite that, many practices and hospitals lack access to a transmission electron microscope. Therefore, modern slit lamps with monochromatic filters can aid in characterizing the various types of cells (such as white blood cells, red blood cells, pigment cells, or photoreceptors) that may be present in the anterior chamber to further support the diagnosis of Schwartz-Matsuo syndrome.

The widely used red-free filter or “green” filter is especially useful when examining patients with Schwartz-Matsuo syndrome. This filter usually has an optical wavelength between 540 nm to 570 nm making blood and blood vessels appear dark and well-defined with enhanced contrast.

The green filter also allows for the visualization of white blood cells in the anterior chamber. In situations where red blood cells and/or pigmented cells are the predominant cells in the anterior compartment, using the red-free filter accentuates the visibility of white blood cells while minimizing the visibility of RBCs and pigmented cells. Photoreceptors also contain visual pigment embedded in their cell membrane folds, thus allowing for less visualization under the green filter.