Most treatment strategies of ischemic stroke aim to reopen the thrombosed vessels. However, time is of the essence here. Beyond a critical time, instead of preserving brain tissues, restoration of oxygen amplifies the destruction of an already deranged neurovascular and brain parenchymal environment. This topic has been a scientific intrigue ever since, even before thrombolytic therapies evolved.

Prolonged ischemia and hypoxia, secondary to a cerebral vessel's thrombosis, result in a change to anaerobic metabolism, leading to insufficient energy balances and ion dysregulation due to pump failures like Na+/K+ ATPase, amongst many others. This cascades to a Na+ and Ca+2 overload swelling the neuron, causing morphological and functional disruption of cellular organelles, most notably the mitochondria. Damage and swelling of the mitochondria further exacerbate the brain cells' energy dysfunction.

A. The most critical consequence of introducing oxygen by restoring blood flow to such an oxygen-deprived tissue is the aggravated generation of reactive oxygen species (ROS). The unchecked generation of ROS directly damages the neurons and indirectly sets the immune system into overdrive.

- Formation of ROS: Ischemic tissue is a region where there is the formation of ROS. Hypoxanthine, which is built up during ischemia, is suddenly metabolized (due to oxygen in the reperfusion) by hypoxanthine oxidase, aiding in the formation of the reperfusion mediators (like O-, HOCl-, HO). Mitochondria also contribute to the formation of reactive oxygen species (ROS), paving the way for the 'oxidative stress.'

- ROS in I/R injury: Reactive oxygen species causes peroxidation of the cell membranes and directly damages the cells. Unchecked ROS intensifies and abets the ongoing pro-inflammatory molecular cascades, along with the recruitment and activation of more leukocytes.

B. Inflammatory responses:

- Many animal studies established a temporal relationship between the activation of inflammatory cascades and ischemia. At the ischemic penumbra, there is upregulation of adhesion molecules like p-selectins, ICAM-1, which result in leucocyte-endothelial interaction. Unchecked ROS production helps in the enhanced P-selectin mediated rolling and ICAM-1 mediated adhesion of the leukocyte, eventually leading to PECAM-1 (platelet-endothelial cell adhesion molecule1) aided transmigration or diapedesis of the leukocyte into the affected tissues.

- Oxidative stress also leads to complement activation, involving both C3a and the more powerful anaphylatoxin C5a. C5a induces the formation of proinflammatory-cytokines like tumor necrosis factor-α(TNF-α), IL-1(interleukin-1), IL-6 (interleukin-6). The cytokine production helps the leukocytes' aggregation because of the increased upregulation of leukocyte adhesion molecules. C5b-9, along with other activated complement components, lead to the formation of a membrane attack complex (MAC), causing further activation of the leukocytes, lysing the cell membranes. IgM antibodies have been shown to deposit in ischemic tissues. When the flow is resumed, the complement proteins adhere to them and activate the complement pathway, thus exacerbating the injury.

- Ischemia-reperfusion plays a vital role in the activation of platelets. P-selectins which are upregulated during this cascade, play an essential role in the adhesion of activated platelet and leukocytes. Activated platelets and neutrophils aggregate and may clog the brain's microvasculature, a phenomenon called 'no-reflow' that may occur after reperfusion. Activated platelets lead to the formation of a plethora of biochemical molecules, further enhancing the leukotaxis, extravasation of the leukocytes, and exacerbating tissue injury.

C. Blood-Brain Barrier (BBB), composed of the vascular endothelium, basement membrane, pericytes, and astrocyte foot process, bestows a unique and environment to the brain, protecting it from the fluctuations in plasma. The barrier is unique because of the non-fenestrated basement membrane, minimal pinocytic transport, and tight junctions(TJ). Nevertheless, sometimes there is a minimal opening of BBB in certain physiologic states.

A heady mix of ROS mediated lipid peroxidation, leukocyte-endothelial adhesion, activated complement, aggregation of activated platelets, and leukocytes (mostly neutrophils) leads to the interruption of the TJ and a breach of the BBB. This breach leads to access to the leukocytes, particularly the activated neutrophils and their toxins, which deranges the brain tissue physiologic milieu's fidelity. Reperfusion also leads to the activation of proteases like Matrix metalloproteinases(MMP), affecting the capillary basal lamina's integrity, leading to increased capillary permeability and ending in the opening of BBB.