Treatment of HHS requires a multidisciplinary approach. Consultations with an endocrinologist and an intensive care specialist are recommended. Appropriate resuscitation with attention to the principle of Airway, Breathing, Circulation (ABC) should be initiated. Patients with HHS can present with altered mental status as a result of significant fluid depletion and decreased cerebral perfusion. A good rule of thumb is to secure the airway if the Glasgow coma score is less than 8.

Aggressive hydration with isotonic fluid with electrolyte replacement is the standard practice in the management of HHS. An initial fluid bolus of 15 to 20 ml/kg followed by an infusion rate of 200 to 250 ml/hour are the recommended rates for adults. In pediatric patients, the infusion should run at about twice the maintenance rate. Hydration with isotonic fluid has been shown to help in reducing the amount of counterregulatory hormones produced during HHS. The use of this alone can reduce serum glucose by about 75 to 100 mg/hour. The serum potassium in HHS is usually high, but the total body potassium is low as a result of the extracellular shift from lack of insulin. Potassium replacement should be started when the serum potassium is between 4 to 4.5 mmol/L.

Care should be taken to avoid starting insulin drip in the initial stage of treatment as this might cause a rapid drop in serum glucose levels leading to cerebral edema. It is recommended to try to keep the glucose level around 300 mg/dL to prevent the development of cerebral edema.

In pediatrics, rehydration and electrolyte correction over a longer period of 48 hours may help in the prevention of cerebral edema.