# Introduction

Today, more than ever, effective inter-professional team communication, collaboration, and coordination in the care of patients with increasingly more complex disorders in the fast-paced, dynamic, evolving healthcare environment is paramount.  Inter-professional teamwork is now a worldwide-recognized core inter-professional competency that all healthcare providers should acquire.  Simulation-based training (SBT) is an excellent format for fostering the knowledge, skills, and abilities (KSAs) needed for highly reliable team interaction by bringing together inter-professional learners in a nonthreatening environment in which they can practice addressing high risk, low-frequency situations without any risk to a patient.

Although the high technology simulators and complex scenarios of SBT tend to focus more attention on its technology, methodology, and curricular components, the ultimate utility of SBT as an educational format relies on the effectiveness of the debriefing rendered during a session.the most crucial element of SBT.

Debriefing has played an integral role in the medical simulation since its implementation, and its advantages are well-founded in educational theory. Debriefing strategies are based upon learner types, scenario objectives, and preference of the educator leading the debrief. Irrespective of technique, debriefing leads to meaningful learning opportunities via experiential reflection. Reflective practice outlines how it is not the experience alone but the deliberate reflection on experience that leads to active learning. When appropriately applied to clinical practice and educationally productive debriefing following medical simulation can inevitably improve patient safety.

Medical debriefing is based upon the military and aviation fields, which have team building, crisis management, and high-risk situations in common. Anesthesiology debriefing specifically has its origins within aviation crew resource management (CRM). Military debriefing was developed by Colonel S.L.A Marshall, the chief United States Army historian in World War II, Korea, and Vietnam.

Debriefing can occur either after or during a simulation exercise. It can also be either facilitator-guided or self-guided by simulation learners. Two of the most important aspects of healthcare simulation include debriefing and feedback.

# Function

Structurally, a debriefing has seven elements. The facilitator guides and fosters learning. The participants, in an inter-professional setting, learn with, from, and about each other.  The experience element in SBT includes the scenario and the after-action review. The impact of the experience focuses on participants’ experiences, comparing their experiences to a standard. The recollection element has the participants recalling and self-assessing their actions. Mechanisms for reporting events include video playback, verbal discussion, or simulator feedback.  Finally, the last element, timing, relates to the length of the debrief and the interval between it and the actual SBT. Although several theoretical frameworks exist related to the interaction between SBT and debriefing, Kolb’s experiential learning model is a useful schema.

Debriefing refers to facilitator-guided reflection in experiential learning to help identify and bridge gaps in participants’ knowledge and skill acquisition. Successful debriefing involves the active participation of learners as opposed to passive receipt of feedback. Performance reviews should be predicated on learning and improvement compared to a specific standard and open discussion of events during the simulation.

Scripted or structured debriefing during clinical care and simulation-based education may aid facilitators. The EXPRESS (Examining Pediatric Resuscitation Education using Simulation and Scripting) trial aimed to standardize Pediatric Advanced Life support (PALS) course debriefings for novice instructors. Learning and performance outcomes were measured based on a scripted debriefing tool.

The advocacy inquiry technique is commonly utilized by educators to unearth a shared mental model during simulation scenarios. Educators aim to elucidate a learner’s rationale for action by stating a concrete observation before inquiring about the participant’s perspective. A robust and interactive discussion results when facilitators elicit alternatives to clinical decisions, risks, and benefits of interventions, varying management options, or other pertinent performance implications.

# Issues of Concern

Organizational-, participant-, and debriefer-specific barriers can adversely influence inter-professional team SBT debriefings.  At the organizational level, both a lack of institutional support for SBT and the absence of an appropriate learning structure for it can undermine SBT activities. Manifestations may include off-limit topics of discussion or the absence of a safe learning environment. Identifying and recruiting a champion within the leadership group can address these difficult issues. Participant-specific barriers can arise due to learner-specific characteristics or situation-specific issues that lead to difficulties with participants during the debriefing process. Learner-specific examples include the shy participant, the indifferent participant, the dominating participant with poor insight, and the dominating participant showing off.  Situation-specific examples include participants who react emotionally or defensively because of the scenario.

Debriefer-specific barriers to effective debriefing in inter-professional team SBT can arise due to a lack of knowledge of the facilitator related to debriefing technique, human factors, or teamwork dynamics. Additionally, they can result from the inherent cognitive biases, heuristics, and errors of attribution of the facilitators themselves.  Furthermore, the debriefer may fail to create a learning environment with the necessary psychological safety needed to allow participants to contribute.  Finally, the facilitator may end up focusing on “who is right” instead of “what is right.”

Employing the Debriefing Duties can help a facilitator in avoiding debriefer-specific barriers. These duties are threefold: Make it Safe, Make it Stick, Make it Last.  In making it safe, the facilitator engages the learner, creates an inviting learning environment, and establishes psychological safety.  In making it stick, the debriefer guides the participants to identify their performance gaps and develop solutions to them.  Finally, in making it last, the facilitator challenges each participant to identify at least one take-home learning point on which to work in the clinical environment.

Despite the widespread acceptance of simulation as an integral teaching modality, many educators have little or no formal training in debriefing and may struggle to facilitate effectively. There are several practical guides to model a successful debriefing process. Self-guided debriefing refers to the use of cognitive aids as a basis for reflection and formative self-assessment.

# Curriculum Development

The two main types of facilitator-guided post-event debriefing models include a 3-phase structure and a multi-phase structure. Each debriefing method consists of an analysis of events and a summary or application phase, in which learning is reinforced and teaching objectives are reviewed. The glaring difference between these two conversational structures is when dealing with learners’ emotional responses or reactions. Reaction time allows participants to engage in exploration in a less emotionally charged environment.

The obstacles that may hinder a successful debriefing session include the prohibitively high cost of simulation educator training, limited educator exposure in debriefing experience or education, and the lack of experienced simulation facilitators to provide mentoring to junior faculty. Inadequate or incomplete debriefing can take away from medical knowledge and procedural skill acquisition, and learner attitudes. Novice simulation educators are challenged in creating a structured debriefing session that encourages meaningful discussions, promotes critical reflection, codifies simulation events, and provides open and honest performance feedback to learners.

# Clinical Clerkships

There are various ways to structure an effective debriefing session that allows learners to uncover their frame of reference and reorganize their educational agenda. The Center for Medical Simulation in Cambridge, Massachusetts, has lead simulation educator courses called “Debriefing with Good Judgement.”

**Three-Phase Debriefing Structures**

Rudolph et al. first described the 3-phase conversational structure for debriefing, including the reaction, analysis, and summary phases.

The GAS model was developed in 2009 by the Winter Institute for Simulation, Education, and Research in Pittsburgh in conjunction with the AHA.

******Multi-Phase Debriefing Structures**

A blended approach to debriefing known as ‘‘PEARLS’’ (Promoting Excellence and Reflective Learning in Simulation) utilizes a 4-phase debriefing framework.

Another 7-phase model known as healthcare simulation after-action review (AAR) is based upon the US Army’s AAR construct.

**Table 1. Debriefing Structures: 3 Phase Models**

**Table 2. Multiphase Debriefing Structures**

# Procedural Skills Assessment

According to Sawyer et al., seven elements are considered essential to a successful debrief, including psychological safety, establishing clear cut boundaries or debriefing rules, commencing the simulation session with a “basic assumption,” creating a shared mental model, addressing teaching objectives, using open-ended questions, and utilizing silence appropriately.

Clear learning objectives should be highlighted and incorporated into every simulation scenario and debriefing. On behalf of the facilitator, open-ended questions can expedite discussion and foster reflection and self-assessment both individually and within the team dynamic.

# Medical Decision Making and Leadership Development

First described in business and organizational behavior literature, the advocacy inquiry technique allows the facilitator to explain their observation of intervention and then enquire about the learners’ frame of mind concerning this action. The guided team self-correction method enables simulation participants to correct their own actions.

Circular questions allow an outsider’s perspective on the dyadic relationship between two learners. These questions ask participants to “circle back” and comment on an interaction in which they took part. In the debriefing process, circular questions are useful because they allow tracking of behavioral patterns, incite the generation of new information, and encourage perspective.

# Continuing Education

As stated previously, the debriefing process must create a psychologically safe environment that allows active engagement from learners despite potential threats to their professional and social identity. Rudolph et al. describe four activities that foster such an environment.

There are several well-established methods for assessing the debriefer, including the Objective Structured Assessment of Debriefing (OSAD) and the Debriefing Assessment for Simulation in Healthcare (DASH). Personal and institutional preferences are largely responsible for the chosen method. Developed by the Imperial College London, OSAD consists of a 1-page rubric for simulation and clinical debriefings for both novice and advanced educators.

# Clinical Significance

Debriefing is among the most important aspects of simulation-based learning. David Kolb has described the importance of reflection and analysis of the development of experiential learning theory.

- Reducing the time between performance and debriefing as much as possible

- Identifying and addressing performance and perception gaps

- Creating a safe environment to enhance learner comfort and participation

- Learner engagement in self-reflection

- Instructors should espouse strong facilitation and debriefing skills

- Debriefing should not be comprehensive and should focus on only a few learning objectives or educational goals that are manageable

- Structured debriefing should preclude broad, open-ended questions, such as “what happened” and utilize questions such as “what was your thought process when you first encountered the patient?”

- Faculty should engage in active listening and pay particular attention to nonverbal cues from learners

The “conscious competence” learning model can aid in guiding the debriefing process.

When they are working effectively, inter-professional healthcare teams' productivity is more than the sum of its individual members whose autonomous actions can have profound impacts on team function.  Such behavior is characteristic of a complex adaptive system.

# Enhancing Healthcare Team Outcomes

To optimize team outcomes related to debriefing inter-professional teams in SBT, the learning objectives, curriculum, and scenarios should focus on team-based competencies in lieu of task-based ones.  In this manner, the participants will avoid the burden of learning both technical and non-technical skills. Other essential strategies include involving the entire team in the debriefing and meeting their multiple needs, focusing on team-based concepts rather than individual-based topics, and employing reliable, valid assessment tools to measure the teamwork during the SBT to allow for objective use to guide the debriefing.  By focusing on team communication, cooperation, and coordination during the debriefing of inter-professional team SBT, the likelihood of their transfer to the actual clinical environment with concomitant improvement of patient care increases.

The most commonly used and studied method for simulation debriefing, facilitator-guided post-event debriefing, has been shown to improve individual and team performance in many contexts.

There is a form of debriefing with several clinical experiences, including intraoperative arrest or patient death. These can range from discussing a medical error to a complex interdisciplinary trauma response in a formal or informal setting. Structured debriefings are most commonly found in the resuscitation literature.

Because there is no formalized or structured curriculum for the development of debriefing techniques, simulation educators should rely on the principles of learning theory to guide their approach. Rudolph et al. stress the need to alter pre-existing cognitive frames to construct new understanding and practice regimens for learners.