Exogenous seeding is the most common cause of bacterial endophthalmitis and depends on host factors, pathogen factors, as well as inoculum size. Bacteria such as coagulase-negative staphylococci typically colonize the conjunctiva and can be introduced to the inner ocular cavity during surgery, injections, or trauma. After cataract surgeries, research reveals that one-third of patients' aqueous humor cultured coagulase-negative staphylococci. However, only 1-in-500 to 1-in-1000 of cataract surgeries result in bacterial endophthalmitis. These numbers highlight how host factors, such as the immune response, can clear the small inoculum of bacteria. Another host factor that is preventative of infection is the constant turnover of aqueous fluid. The vitreous humor has no such turnover rate. This is shown by the fact that bacterial seeding of the vitreous during cataract surgery increases the likelihood of postoperative endophthalmitis 6-fold. Inoculum size has also been shown to overload the immune system and leads to infection.

Pathogen factors can also play a role in the pathogenesis of bacterial endophthalmitis. Bacteremia is a rare cause of bacterial endophthalmitis, but when it does occur, the culprit is usually Klebsiella pneumoniae. The magA gene endows the serotype K1 or K2 of Klebsiella pneumoniae with a mucopolysaccharide-web capsule that allows hypermucoviscous virulence and is a common cause of pyogenic liver abscess in southeastern Asia. As many as 7% of patients with K1 or K2 Klebsiella pneumonia liver abscess will experience hematogenous spread to their retina. Experimental models with mice confirm that eyes injected with Klebsiella with the hypermucoviscosity (HMV) phenotype have increased retinal function loss and inflammation than eyes injected with HMV-negative strains.

Bacillus cereus can cause posttraumatic endophthalmitis and can also present in intravenous drug users. Bacillus cereus is a major pathogen that can cause fulminant endophthalmitis. Quorum-sensing by Bacillus initiates toxin release and migration that contributes to the rapid deterioration of the retina and is unique for the destructive course of Bacillus endophthalmitis. The virulence factors of Bacillus species that accommodate this destruction include membrane-damaging toxins such as hemolysins, sphingomyelinases, and phospholipases. The quorum sensing-dependent transcriptional regulator PlcR regulates virulence factor production. Neutrophils themselves lead to damage to the retina, and chemokine CXCL1 and other factors contribute to neutrophil recruitment and the damaging inflammation seen during Bacillus endophthalmitis.

In bleb-related endophthalmitis, Streptococcus pneumoniae is the most common pathogen and can cause severe endophthalmitis. Virulence factors such as the pneumococcal capsule, pneumolysin, and autolysin all appear to contribute to the pathogenesis. Studies have shown that intraocular infection with pneumolysin-deficient S. pneumoniae results in less severe tissue damage in the first 24 hours of disease compared with infection with pneumolysin-producing strains of S. pneumoniae.

Streptococcus pneumoniae central virulence includes its use of exotoxins and enzymes as well as a polysaccharide capsule that prevents phagocytosis. Streptococcus pneumoniae virulence also uses pneumolysin, which has been shown to inhibit host responses involved with antibody synthesis and lymphocyte proliferation. Inflammation results from the cell wall components Streptococcus pneumoniae, which causes the symptoms that patients usually end up noticing and for which they seek care.

Pseudomonas aeruginosa endophthalmitis causes rapid tissue necrosis caused by Pseudomonas toxins such as pyocyanin, pyoverdin, exotoxin A, and elastase. These toxins are used to disrupt membrane and epithelial barriers, leading to cytotoxicity.