Patients being evaluated for folic acid deficiency should also be evaluated for vitamin B12 deficiency as both cause macrocytic anemia. Initial laboratory tests should include a complete blood count (CBC) and a peripheral smear (PS). Laboratory tests in folic acid deficiency would reveal anemia, manifesting as a decrease in hemoglobin and hematocrit levels. The mean corpuscular volume (MCV) would be increased to a level greater than 100 consistent with a diagnosis of macrocytic anemia. In addition, a PS would show macrocytic red blood cells (RBCs)and/or megaloblasts and hypersegmented neutrophils. Ordering serum vitamin b12 and folate levels can help differentiate between the two.

Generally, serum folate levels <2 ng/mL are considered deficient, while levels > 4 ng/ml are considered as normal. Borderline levels between 2 to 4 ng/mL warrant further confirmation by measurement of methylmalonic acid (MMA) and homocysteine levels. Folate deficiency can be confirmed with a normal B12 and  MMA level and elevated homocysteine levels, while vitamin B12 deficiency can be confirmed with elevated MMA and homocysteine levels and low B12 levels [1]. RBC folate levels are a very useful index of body stores and can help access the duration of deficiency.[5][6]. Bone marrow evaluation is not required for evaluation of Vitamin B12 or folate deficiency, but if done for other reasons in patients with folate deficiency may show hypercellularity with megaloblastic erythroid hyperplasia of cells. Future deficiencies can be prevented by identifying an underlying and addressing an underlying cause of the folic acid deficiency.