The development of the human pelvis is a complex process involving the formation of multiple separate bony elements that fuse relatively late in development. Any errors in the lengthy process or intricate developmental events and their sequence may result in bony malformation. Much like the rest of the skeletal system, the bony pelvis follows a basic developmental plan proceeding through the formation of an initial structure of primordial mesenchyme that converts into cartilage via chondrification and gradually forms bone via primary and secondary ossification.

Primary ossification centers, the sites where bone formation first occurs, typically appear in utero but may continue their development postnatally. Secondary ossification centers form after the development of primary centers and tend to appear postnatally and into adolescence. The pelvic joints form from mesenchyme and are associated with developing their surrounding bony elements.

The sacrum develops as part of the axial skeleton, while the hip bones or os coxae develop as proximal portions of the lower limb. The sacroiliac joint forms at the junction of the axial and appendicular skeleton, while the lumbosacral and sacrococcygeal joints participate in the axial skeleton. The axial skeleton develops from somites first emerging near the skull around 20 days post-fertilization, with three to four subdivisions growing each day to ultimately form the entire vertebral column. By approximately day 29, the five sacral somites typically appear, followed by the coccygeal somites. Chondrification of these structures begins in the sixth or seventh week of development, with the formation of hyaline cartilage bone models visible in radiologic studies.

Meanwhile, the appendicular skeletal elements first appear around 28 days post-fertilization. Chondrification centers of the ilium, ischium, and pubis appear within nine weeks but develop rapidly. They first appear in the pubis and ischium during week 6. By the eighth week, a shallow cartilaginous acetabulum and primordial pubic symphysis are visible. By ten weeks, primary ossification centers can be seen at the iliac crest, and the sacrum and ilium begin to fuse, thus forming the sacroiliac joint.