NOACs like rivaroxaban have several benefits over warfarin, including faster time to achieve the effect, rapid onset of action, predictable pharmacokinetics and pharmacodynamics, fewer documented food and drug interactions, lack of need for routine INR monitoring, and improved patient satisfaction.

The major adverse effect of this drug is bleeding; hence, a thorough assessment of the patient is necessary before initiating this drug. The medical history of patients must rule out bleeding disorders, unstable blood pressure, chronic liver disease, chronic kidney disease, or anti-phospholipid antibody syndrome. Surgical history is necessary to rule out any heart valve replacements because such patients will benefit from taking warfarin. A drug history can rule out concomitant use of NSAIDs (nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs), clopidogrel, and other blood thinners because such patients have increased bleeding risk. Before starting this drug, the patient must receive screening for bleeding and coagulation profile and hepatic or renal impairment. A patient must receive counsel not to stop taking this drug without talking to the doctor as it may raise the chance of blood clots. Caution is necessary when performing any spinal or epidural procedure because such patients are more likely to have a bleed around the spine, and the patient must have monitoring for signs of nerve problems like pain, weakness, numbness or tingling, paralysis, or loss of bladder or bowel control after the procedure. The patient must understand that they may bleed easily while on this drug and need to avoid cuts and injury and to watch out for signs of bleeding like vomiting or coughing blood, bleeding from gums, dark stools or vaginal bleeding, headache or dizziness, and bleeding that takes a long time to stop.

If a patient misses a 15 mg dose, tell the patient to immediately take the missed dose and return to the normal daily dosing. If a patient misses a 2.5 mg dose, then the patient is asked to skip the missed dose and start with normal dosing from the next day. When the procedure/surgery is elective, stop rivaroxaban therapy at least 24 hours prior to the procedure or at least 48 hours in advance of procedures carrying an increased bleeding risk. In patients requiring emergency surgery who have had no bleeding events, studies do not recommend the prophylactic use of hemostatic blood products. After the procedure, rivaroxaban therapy should restart at the same dose, following adequate hemostasis (e.g., 24 hours after surgery).

The provision of prophylaxis to patients admitted for elective total knee replacement surgery has been proposed as an effective strategy to reduce the incidence of venous thromboembolism. Single prophylaxis strategies with oral factor Xa inhibitor are more effective in preventing deep vein thrombosis in the elective total knee replacement population than combination strategies (with anticoagulants and anti-platelets), with rivaroxaban being the most effective.

The efficacy and safety of rivaroxaban for patients with nonvalvular AF were assessed in a randomized, double-blind phase III trial (ROCKET AF).

The cardiovascular outcomes for people using anticoagulation strategies in patients with stable coronary artery disease or peripheral artery disease (PAD) resulted in a 24% reduction in the primary endpoint of cardiovascular death, stroke, or myocardial infarction and an 18% reduction in mortality. Rivaroxaban alone did not produce any additional benefit compared with aspirin. The combination therapy with rivaroxaban and aspirin reduced significant adverse limb events, including amputation, in patients with PAD. Based on these results, the addition of rivaroxaban to aspirin is expected to substantially reduce morbidity and mortality in patients with stable coronary or PAD (Level 1).

Rivaroxaban is on the FDA Pregnancy Category C list. There is limited data available on pregnant women and lactating mothers, so the risk-benefit ratio requires assessment while initiating this drug. Rivaroxaban falls under the list of drugs in the 2015 American Geriatrics Society Beers Criteria for non–anti-infective medications to be avoided or have dose reductions with varying levels of kidney function in older adults.

Given the bleeding risk of rivaroxaban, an interprofessional team approach is necessary to ensure optimal therapeutic results while limiting and eliminating adverse effects and interactions. This team includes all clinicians, specialists, mid-level practitioners, nurses, and pharmacists, who must coordinate their activities and engage in open communication to ensure proper patient care with rivaroxaban, as with any anticoagulant therapy. [Level 5]