Mechanisms of injury involved in vascular reperfusion are three-fold:

- Increased formation of reactive oxygen species

- Microvascular vasoconstriction

- Adhesion of neutrophils to endothelial lining, their activation, and release of cytokines.

Whenever there is impairment of blood flow to the tissues, there is tissue hypoxia, which triggers anaerobic respiration resulting in depletion of cellular ATP reserves. Ionic pumps like Na/K ATPase pumps start malfunctioning due to low ATP stores leading to ionic imbalance. The Na/Ca exchange pumps are activated, resulting in increased intracellular calcium levels. These increased calcium levels also explain the hyper-contractile myocardial tissues seen in post –MI cardiac tissues.

Once blood flow to a hypoxic tissue is restored, an increased supply of molecular oxygen leads to activation of pathways resulting in increased production of ROS. The enzymes involved in these pathways are NADPH oxidase, xanthine oxidase, and nitric oxide synthase. Primary ROS, such as superoxide and secondary such as hydroxyl, peroxynitrite, and hypochlorous, are formed. This damages the micro-vasculature as well as membranes, including those of the mitochondria. Damaged mitochondrial membranes lead to the release of caspases and cytochromes and activation of the process of apoptosis.

Further, increased activity of nitric oxide synthase forms a nitric oxide which reacts with superoxide to give peroxynitrite that potentiates the damage to nucleic acids/proteins and lipids. Hypoxia causes the conversion of NAD-reducing xanthine dehydrogenase into oxygen radicle, producing xanthine oxidase. During decreased oxygen supply, ATP is broken down into hypoxanthine. Reperfusion introduces oxygen, which reacts with hypoxanthine in the presence of xanthine oxidase forming hydrogen peroxide and superoxide anions. These further react with iron to give hydroxyl radicles.

Propylhydroxylase is a set of enzymes that are oxygen dependent because they need oxygen as a co-factor. In the hypoxic state, there is inhibition of these enzymes, causing post-translational changes in nucleic acids, protein oxidation as well as lipid peroxidation. Studies have been done to show that structural and functional damage can occur to glycocalyx, which is the endothelial lining on the luminal side.

There is evidence to state that ROS formed by one enzymatic pathway goes onto activate and speed up the production of more ROS by other pathways. The rate at which ROS are formed exceeds the rate at which they can be detoxified. These ROS then go onto activate neutrophils.