The management of EM is best done with an interprofessional team. While the dermatologist often makes the diagnosis, the follow-up of these patients is with the primary care provider and nurse practitioner. The following specialties should be involved in the care of the patient:

The pharmacist should ensure that the patient is on no medication that can worsen EM and that all offending medications have been discontinued.

The dermatologist should be consulted if the diagnosis is in doubt.

An ophthalmologist should be consulted if the eyes are involved.

A burn surgeon should help manage critically ill patients.

The infectious disease specialist should provide a guide to the treatment of any viral, fungal, or bacterial infection.

If the lungs are involved, a respiratory therapist should be involved.

The physical therapist should be involved in exercising the patient and restoring joint function.

Since the patient can develop severe scars and poor aesthetics, a mental health nurse should provide counseling.

In general, supportive care will suffice for most patients. Patients need to be educated about general skin care. Once the primary condition is managed, EM resolves. However, time healing may take weeks or even months. Particular vigilance during the acute episode must be implemented to prevent these sequels. The vital prognosis is only exceptionally brought into play when the care is adapted. Two situations that deserve particular vigilance are (1) severe mucosal involvement and (2) bacterial superinfections.