The surface of the cerebrum is known as the cortex. It is about two-millimeter-thick and has many folds forming ridges (gyri) and grooves (sulci). A fissure is a deeper grove and is often used interchangeably with sulcus. The cerebrum is divided into a left and right hemisphere by a longitudinal fissure that goes by many different names: longitudinal fissure, cerebral fissure, median longitudinal fissure, interhemispheric fissure. Each cerebral hemisphere divides into four separate lobes by a central sulcus, parieto-occipital sulcus, and lateral fissure. The central sulcus runs posterior-medial to anterior-lateral and separates the frontal lobe from the parietal lobe. The parieto-occipital sulcus separates the parietal lobe from the occipital lobe. The lateral fissure (Sylvian fissure) is a laterally located horizontal fissure and separates the temporal lobe from the frontal and parietal lobe.

**Frontal Lobe**

The frontal lobe is anterior to the central sulcus and superior to the lateral fissure. The frontal lobe further divides into a superior, middle, and inferior frontal gyrus, primary motor cortex, and orbital area. These areas combine to controls our executive and motor functions. It controls judgment, problem-solving, planning, behavior, personality, speech, writing, speaking, concentration, self-awareness, and intelligence. The primary motor cortex is present in the precentral gyrus of the frontal lobe and is positioned immediately anterior to the central sulcus. The premotor cortex is anterior to the primary motor cortex. This area controls the contralateral body and extremity movement. The medial region controls the lower extremity. The superior-lateral region controls the upper extremity and hand. The lateral region controls the face. Certain body parts are more richly innervated thus does not proportionally represent the human body. In fact, the majority of the primary motor cortex is used to finely control the muscle of the hands, face, and lips, which is well represented by the homunculus model. Within the middle frontal gyrus is the frontal eye field area and is mostly responsible for the contralateral eye abduction and ipsilateral eye adduction. Broca's area is responsible for speech and is not present in both hemispheres. Instead, it is within the inferior frontal gyrus of the dominant hemisphere. The dominant hemisphere, in most individuals, is the left hemisphere. Therefore, Broca's area is most common in the left inferior frontal gyrus.

**Parietal Lobe**

The parietal lobe is posterior to the central sulcus and anterior to the parieto-occipital sulcus. This lobe controls perception and sensation. The primary somatosensory cortex is in the postcentral gyrus and is positioned immediately posterior to the central sulcus. The primary somatosensory cortex controls the sense of touch, temperature, and pain of the contralateral body. Mirroring the primary motor cortex, the medial region senses the lower extremity, superior-lateral region sense the upper extremity and hand, and the lateral region senses the face. Similar to the primary motor area, the hands, face, and lips take up the majority of the somatosensory area and are also well presented by the homunculus model. Damage to the parietal lobe can present with a lack of these sensations as well as other symptoms depending on whether the dominant or nondominant hemisphere is farther damage. Damage to the dominant parietal lobe, usually the left hemisphere, present with agraphia, acalculia, finger agnosia, and left-right disorientation. The presentation of these symptoms is characteristic of Gerstmann Syndrome.

**Occipital Lobe**

The occipital lobe is posterior to the parieto-occipital sulcus and superior to the tentorium cerebelli. This lobe interprets vision, distance, depth, color, and facial recognition. The occipital lobe receives its information from the contralateral vision field of both eyes (i.e., the left occipital lobe receives and interprets information from the right visual field from both the left and right eye).

**Temporal Lobe**

The temporal lobe is inferior to the lateral fissure and further divides into a superior, middle, and inferior temporal gyrus. This lobe controls language comprehension, hearing, and memory. Wernicke's area is responsible for language comprehension, and it not found in both hemispheres. Similar to Broca's area, Wernicke's area is in the superior temporal gyrus of the dominant hemisphere, which is usually the left hemisphere. Therefore, the location of Wernicke's area is most commonly in the superior temporal gyrus. The primary auditory cortex is in the superior temporal gyrus and processes most auditory information from the contralateral ear and some from the ipsilateral ear. The temporal lobe communicates with the hippocampus and amygdala to form memories.

Nerves that travel to and from the brain consist of dendrites, a cell body, axon, and axon terminal. Grey matter is commonly used interchangeably with the cortex. However, the grey matter implies that axons that are not myelinated appear grey. Grey matter can be found in deep structures, as well. Below the cortex sits white matter, which implies that axons are myelinated and appear white. White matter receives and send signals to and from the brain and allows for communication between different part of the brain quickly due to their myelinated axons. The grey matter of the cortex interprets signals received from different parts of the body and then sends out a response signal.