Treatment principles for acute lacunar stroke are similar to any acute ischemic stroke. The initial goal of acute-stage treatment is ensuring medical stability and determining candidacy for thrombolysis. Tissue plasminogen activator (TPA) improves outcomes for patients with ischemic stroke if administered within 4.5 hours of symptom onset. Once intracerebral bleed is ruled out, intravenous thrombolysis is an important step in the treatment. An acute lacunar infarct is efficiently treated with TPA.

If symptom onset duration is more than 4.5 hours and there is suspicion of intracranial arterial occlusion in the anterior circulation, CTA/MRA is useful for selecting candidates for mechanical thrombectomy between 6 to 24 hours from the last known well.

Management of a patient who presents with acute lacunar infarct out of TPA window consistent with a non-cardioembolic stroke includes dual antiplatelet therapy (DAPT) with aspirin and clopidogrel within 24 hours of symptom onset and continued for 21 days. DAPT in the acute phase effectively lowers recurrent ischemic stroke for 90 days from symptom onset. Antiplatelet therapy should be delayed for 24 hours in patients who received TPA.

Management of hypertension includes allowing for permissive hypertension unless the blood pressure is markedly elevated (i.e., more than 220/120 mmHg); in this case, lower blood pressure by 15% during the first 24 hours, hold any outpatient antihypertensive medications at admission for the early 24 hours, unless other comorbid conditions require the immediate lowering of blood pressure. In patients where TPA is given or who undergo thrombectomy, lowering the blood pressure below 185/110 mmHg is ideal.

Blood sugar management is done to maintain euglycemia with recommended blood glucose levels at 60–180 mg/dL. Both hypoglycemia and hyperglycemia should be monitored and corrected. The recommended HbA1c goal is 6.5 to 7.

Correct volume status by giving isotonic saline as stroke patients tend to be volume depleted. Keep oxygen saturation above 90%. Continue statin therapy with a goal LDL of less than 70 mg/dl. Assess swallowing function before advancing diet. VTE prophylaxis and early mobilization efforts are essential parts of the treatment plan.

**Stroke Prevention**

Primary and secondary stroke prevention remains an essential part of the treatment plan. Primary prevention includes the prevention of the first episode of stroke, and secondary prevention includes the prevention of recurrence.

Primary stroke prevention measures include risk factor management that uses antihypertensive medications, diabetes control, cholesterol-lowering agents, smoking cessation, dietary intervention, weight loss, and exercise.

Secondary prevention includes antithrombotic agents like aspirin, clopidogrel, extended-release dipyridamole, and ticlopidine and managing underlying risk factors. Antiplatelet agents reduce the risk of recurrence in patients with lacunar strokes.

Dual antiplatelet therapy (clopidogrel and aspirin) for secondary prevention has not shown a further reduction in the risk of recurrence in lacunar stroke.

Oral anticoagulants are not considered for small cerebral vessel disease-related stroke prevention, including recurrent lacunar infarcts, as they disproportionately increase intracranial cerebral hemorrhage risk.

Physical therapy and rehabilitation are essential steps for managing patients who suffer lacunar strokes that cause physical disability. These patients require rehabilitation. The goal of rehabilitation is to optimize functional recovery after a stroke and level of independence and maintain quality of life.