Monitoring parameters vary depending on the condition receiving therapy with leuprolide. For all uses, bone mineral density and psychiatric symptoms require monitoring. Risk factors for bone loss include osteoporosis or a strong family history of it, chronic medication use that can decrease bone density such as anticonvulsants or corticosteroids, and chronic tobacco and alcohol use. Caution is necessary when treating these patients with leuprolide. Mood changes such as emotional lability, aggression, irritability, anger, and impatience are all possible in patients on leuprolide therapy; thus, the development or worsening of these symptoms is essential to monitor. Use leuprolide with caution in patients diagnosed with depression.

When using this drug to manage women with endometriosis, pregnancy must initially be ruled out with a negative pregnancy test. Endometrial pain can become exacerbated at first with therapy, but the clinician should monitor the pain throughout the use of leuprolide.

For the treatment of precocious puberty in children, LH and FSH blood serum levels must be monitored, and height and bone age should be measured every 6 to 12 months. Testosterone levels in males and estradiol levels in females should get checked as well, and tanner staging is essential to monitor before, during, and after treatment.

Pediatric females using leuprolide may experience menses or spotting during the first two months of treatment, but medical staff should follow patients to check for continued bleeding after two months.

For the treatment of prostate cancer, providers should monitor FSH and LH levels, serum testosterone levels, and prostate-specific antigen levels. Fatigue, weakness, and urinary tract obstruction all merit vigilance during the initial treatment. Screening for diabetes should take place before starting therapy, as leuprolide can worsen glycemic control. Blood glucose and HbA1c should get periodically measured throughout therapeutic use. Electrocardiograms and electrolyte levels should be monitored occasionally, as well.