Before performing any procedure, it is important to perform a time-out. During the time out, the healthcare team performing the procedure should 1) verify the patient details, 2) confirm the procedure and site, 3) ensure patient consent, 4) ensure normal labs, 5) review patient medications, and 6) ensure appropriate personnel and equipment are at the bedside. The most common vein accessed for the RHC is the internal jugular vein. Usually, an ultrasound is used for locating the vein and guiding the needle. The ultrasound also helps to assess the location of the nearby artery to confirm the patency of the vessel and to ensure that there is no thrombus inside the vessel lumen. Though it can be performed without an ultrasound as well, imaging guidance has shown to decrease complications.

The first step of the procedure is to clean the area with an antiseptic solution, and the patient is draped to make a sterile working field. Using a vascular probe, the position of the vessel is confirmed again. Following this, local anesthesia is provided at the site of insertion. The central vein is then punctured with the needle provided, and a guidewire is introduced into the vein by the Seldinger technique. The ultrasound can be used to confirm the location of the guidewire inside the vein. After the guidewire is confirmed to be in place, the needle is removed. A scalpel blade is then used to make a 3 to 4 mm incision adjacent to the guidewire to ensure easy passage of the dilator. Care should be taken not to cut the guidewire. An 8.5 Fr dilator with an introducer sheath is inserted over the wire into the vein. The wire and dilator assembly should then be removed together as a unit leaving the introducer sheath in place. Once the introducer sheath is in position, the pulmonary artery (PA) catheter is inserted through it and advanced up to 20 cm. This should place its distal tip within the right atrium, which can be confirmed on the monitor with a right atrial pressure waveform. Once the position inside the right atrium is confirmed, the balloon is then inflated with air using the 1.5 mm syringe. The catheter is then advanced into the right ventricle and then into the pulmonary artery. The advancements are confirmed by checking the appropriate waveforms and pressures on the monitor. Once the catheter is advanced into the pulmonary artery to the point where the waveform changes into a wedge form, the balloon should be deflated. The catheter will then show the PA pressures. After obtaining the appropriate PA pressures, a PCWP/pulmonary artery occlusion pressure can now be measured. This is done by inflating the balloon slowly while observing the monitor. The balloon is inflated only until the PA pressure waveform changes into a wedged waveform. When the balloon is inflated, it creates a static column of blood between the artery distal to the catheter and the pulmonary vein. This post-capillary pressure, known as the PCWP, is an indirect estimate of the pressure in the left atrium. Once the procedure is done, a chest X-ray should be ordered to confirm the position of the catheter and to check for any complications. The tip of the PA catheter should not extend beyond 2 cm of the hilum and is usually within the mediastinal shadow.

The utility of RHC is dependant on the accuracy and completeness of the data obtained. Essential measurements during the procedure include:

- Oxygen saturation (superior vena cava, inferior vena cava, pulmonary artery, sinoatrial)

- Right atrial pressure

- Right ventricular pressure

- Pulmonary artery pressure

- Left heart filling pressure (wedge pressure, left atrial pressure, or LVEDP)

- Cardiac output/cardiac index

- Pulmonary vascular resistance

- Systemic blood pressure

- Heart rate

- Response to acute vasodilators

Misinterpretation of the wedge pressure is a common pitfall in the invasive diagnosis of pulmonary hypertension. The wedge pressure should be measured at end-expiration and in several different segments of the pulmonary vasculature. LVEDP should be obtained if there is any doubt about the accuracy of the wedge pressure tracing or if the results are unexpected in a given patient. A fluid challenge may be necessary to elicit the presence of diastolic dysfunction.

Of note, operators should proceed early with trans-septal LA catheterization for patients with mitral valve disease or prior mitral valve replacement.