Obstructive Sleep Apnea (OSA) symptoms begin insidiously and are often present for years before the patient is referred for evaluation.

Nocturnal symptoms may include:

- Frequent loud snoring, witnessed apneas, restless sleep, nocturia and mouth breathing associated with the presence of obstructive SDB.

- The hallmark of OSA are the witnessed apneas during sleep.

Daytime symptoms may include:

- Nonrestorative sleep (e.g., “waking up as tired as when they went to bed”)

- Morning headache, dry or a sore throat

- Excessive daytime sleepiness (EDS) that usually begins during quiet activities

- Daytime fatigue/tiredness

- Cognitive deficits; memory and intellectual impairment

- Sexual dysfunction, including impotence and decreased libido.

- Disruptive snoring: A history of disruptive snoring has 71% sensitivity in predicting sleep-disordered breathing (SDB).

- Disruptive snoring and witnessed apneas: These factors taken together have 94% specificity for SDB.

Physical exam findings may include:

- Obesity – Body mass index (BMI) greater than 30 kg/m

- Large neck circumference – Greater than 43 cm (17 in) in men and 37 cm (15 in) in women

- Abnormal (increased) Mallampati score (Mallampati score assessment (originally designed for quantifying different intubation) is a simple and fast method for assessing upper airway dimensions)

- Enlarged, or "kissing," tonsils (3+ to 4+)

- Retrognathia or micrognathia, macroglossia

- Large degree of overjet

- High-arched hard palate

- Systemic arterial hypertension, present in approximately 50% of patients with OSA

Clinical assessment of tonsillar size (Brodsky score) is a weak predictor of presence or severity of obstructive SDB. During an evaluation, other differential diagnoses must be considered before labeling as sleep apnea.

Causes of nocturnal dyspnea include bronchial asthma, gastroesophageal reflux disease, and panic disorder. EDS might be a result of poor sleep hygiene, alcohol or drug abuse, atypical depression, and narcolepsy. Nocturia is prevalent and increases sharply with age. It might be caused by urological and other medical conditions such as hypertrophic benign prostate, diabetes mellitus, congestive heart failure, renal disease, diabetes insipidus and intake of diuretic medication.