The neural tube gives rise to three primary vesicles: Forebrain(Prosencephalon), Midbrain(Mesencephalon), and Hindbrain(Rhombencephalon). The prosencephalon divides into the Telencephalon and Diencephalon. The mesencephalon does not divide further. The rhombencephalon divides into the metencephalon and myelencephalon,

**The function of the Prosencephalon**

- **Basal ganglia:**control of voluntary movements, cognition, emotion, eye movements, habitual, and perceptual learning

- **Cerebral hemisphere:**control of muscle movements, speech, thoughts, emotions, reading, writing, and learning.

- **Hippocampus:**regulates emotions associated with long-term memory and spatial navigation.

- **Hypothalamus:**synthesizes and releases neurohormones that control and regulate the pituitary gland.

- **Infundibulum:**connects the posterior pituitary gland to the hypothalamus.

- **Lateral ventricles:**contains cerebrospinal fluid and acts as a cushion for the brain while also aiding in the movement of nutrients and removal of waste.

- **Pineal gland:**produces and regulates melatonin, which regulates circadian rhythms.

- **Thalamus:**relays motor signals to the cerebral cortex, regulates consciousness, sleep, and alertness.

- **Third ventricle:**one of the four ventricles that aids in the protection of the brain from injury, and transports nutrients and waste.

**The Function of the Mesencephalon**

- **Cerebral aqueduct:**connects the third and fourth ventricle to allow cerebrospinal fluid to pass between them.

- **Crus cerebri:**transports nerve impulses from the cortex of the brain, brainstem, or lower part of the brain to the rest of the central nervous system.

- **Tectum:**responsible for the auditory and visual reflexes

- **Tegmentum:**responsible for controlling the basic body and limb movements

**The Function of the Rhombencephalon**

- **Cerebellum:**coordinates voluntary movements like posture, balance, coordination, and speech. It receives information from the sensory system, spinal cord, and other parts of the brain.

- **The fourth ventricle:**is filled with cerebrospinal fluid and aids in forming the central canal and protects the brain from trauma.

- **Medulla oblongata:**regulates breathing, digestion, swallowing, and blood vessel function.

- **Pons:**The pons is responsible for communication between different parts of the brain, sensations such as hearing, taste, and balance. It is also involved in the control of breathing.

- **Spinal cord:**connects the peripheral nervous system to the brain and sends nerve impulses through neurons into the brain.