**Therapeutic Effects**

Administration as an inhalant provides a rapid and smooth onset with a predictable duration of effect in hypoxic respiratory failure. In addition, with most of its immediate effects confined to the lungs, there is relatively low organ toxicity.

**Respiratory Effects**

Low-dose iNO therapy for PPHN could decrease the need for ECMO therapy, as evidenced by the study performed in 2000 by the Clinical Inhaled Nitric Oxide Research Group (CINRGI). Neonates who received low dose iNO therapy had less need (38%) for ECMO therapy and less chronic lung disease than the control group (48%).

**Cardiovascular Effects**

Current recommendations are limited to 20 ppm as higher doses may be associated with methemoglobinemia and nitric dioxide formation. The Neonatal Inhaled Nitric Oxide Research Group (NiNOS) observed the peak level of methemoglobin to be 2.4% +/- 1.85% in the iNO-treated group compared to controls. Once initiated, daily methemoglobin and nitrogen dioxide levels require close vigilance.

**Oxygen Saturation**

Preductal and postductal oxygen saturation/PaO2 measurements can differentiate PPHN from structural heart disease. Saturation differences of > 5-10% or PaO2 differences of 10 to 20 mmHg between the right upper and lower limbs are significant. In neonates with PPHN and atrial-level right-to-left shunting without a significant ductal shunt, the right arm and right leg saturations will be low. Contrariwise, infants with PDA and coarctation of the aorta may have differential cyanosis.