Leukotrienes exert their effects by binding receptors in an autocrine or paracrine fashion. These receptors are G protein-coupled receptors (GPCR) that, once bound, activate a G protein. Leukotriene receptors either activate the Gq protein, which leads to increases in intracellular calcium, or the Gi protein, which leads to decreases in the intracellular cAMP. Either of these G proteins then signals a cascade of kinase reactions, leading to changes in both transcriptional activity and cellular motility.

The different types of leukotrienes exert both common and distinctive effects. In general, LTB and the cysteinyl leukotrienes exert different effects by separate binding classes of receptors. LTB binds to B leukotriene receptors 1 and 2 (BLT1 and BLT2), respectively. LTB most notably acts as a potent neutrophil chemotactic receptor. This action emphasizes the inflammatory propellant nature of leukotrienes, as neutrophils are the primary produces of LTB as well. The cysteinyl leukotrienes bind to type 1 and type 2 cysteinyl leukotriene receptors (cysLT1 and cysLT2), respectively). cysLT1 primarily mediates airway changes, including bronchoconstriction, airway edema, and mucus secretion. cysLT2, on the other hand, is principally an inflammatory stimulator as it evokes increases in vascular permeability and tissue fibrosis but has little effect on the airways. It is worth noting that leukotriene mediated increases in vascular permeability are 3 to 4 times more potent than histamine.

Collectively, the different types of leukotrienes also exert common effects. Leukotrienes promote the movement of almost all leukocyte types into tissues and amplify the effects of type 2 T helper cells. Additionally, there is a proposal that leukotrienes also exert a negative inotropic influence on the heart, stimulate prostaglandin synthesis in macrophages, and induce gastrointestinal smooth muscle constriction.