Physicians should thoroughly educate patients after diagnosing them with condyloma acuminata. Patients should be advised to notify sexual partners and practice safe sex practices, such as using condoms. Clinicians should present all treatment options to the patient, along with an explanation of clearance and recurrence rates. Patients need to understand that surgical modalities are the only treatment options with recurrence rates approaching 100 percent after a single treatment. Therefore, physicians should explain the importance of follow up appointments and the necessity of multiple treatment courses to clear condyloma acuminata. Also, patients with extensive or refractory lesions may need a referral to a specialist for surgical removal of the genital lesions.

An interprofessional team is necessary for the effective management of condyloma acuminata. Patient counseling points for prevention were discussed above, and are the responsibility of all healthcare team members; clinicians, nursing, and pharmacists. Once diagnosed, the clinician can consult with the pharmacist regarding the treatment options available short of surgery. If the case is surgical, a surgeon should be consulted and brought in on the case. Nursing can assist with the surgery, and perform followup assessments on both surgical and non-surgical cases, evaluating the effectiveness of pharmaceutical treatments in the latter. Open communication between the members of the interprofessional team is vital for improved outcomes.