The overarching mechanism of breathing to ventilate alveoli breaks down into four aspects: lung compliance, chest wall compliance, airway resistance, and rate of ventilation. These components work to facilitate the principle that as the lung expands, the air pressure in the alveoli drops, causing air to move into the lungs. As lung volume decreases, pressure increases, forcing air out of the lungs.

Lung compliance is based on the elastic properties of the supporting tissues surrounding the alveoli and the surface tension of the alveoli. The mathematical equation is:

- Lung compliance = 1/elastance or change in lung volume/change in lung pressure

Elastic properties are best exemplified by rubber bands.  When stretched, how easily and forcefully does the tissue return to its original configuration?  Elasticity is controlled by the content of elastin (stretchy fibers) and collagen (stiff structural fibers) within lung tissue. The surface tension of the alveoli describes the ease at which the alveoli are allowed to expand. A high surface tension tends to cause alveoli to collapse and not expand with aeration. Surface tension is reduced by type II pneumocyte cells within the lung which produce a liquid secretion composed of approximately 40% dipalmitoylphosphatidylcholine, 40 % other phospholipids, and 20 % other lipids.

Chest wall compliance is similarly based on elastic properties. However, this is more of a balance of chest wall elastic recoil, which tries to increase lung volume, and the lung’s elastic properties, which are trying to decrease lung volume.

Airway resistance is based on the physics principle of Ohm’s law where:

- Flow rate = change in pressure/resistance of the airway

- Resistance = 8(viscosity of air)(length of the tube)/(3.14)(radius of the tube)^4

Looking at the math involved, it is important to make some basic assumptions. The viscosity of air does not change, and the length of the airway does not change. This leaves the only variable in the equation that physiologically adjusts to be the diameter of the airway. The resistance of breathing, therefore is primarily controlled by the airway diameter. Diameter change has three primary etiologies: intraluminal, such as secretions blocking the airway; intramural, such as edema or the interstitial space; or extraluminal, such as loss of interstitial collagen and elastic traction tissues.

Finally, the rate of ventilation increases the exchange rate of oxygen from the environmental air into the lung and removes carbon dioxide out of the lung to maintain favorable concentrations of these gasses to facilitate diffusion.

**Diffusion**

Diffusion is the principle that substances will passively move from an area of higher concentration into an area of lower concentration. Ventilation functions to create an environment where oxygen is in high concentration in the lung and carbon dioxide is in lower concentration in the lung, relative to pulmonary capillaries. However, equally important to diffusion rate is the solubility of a gas in liquid, gas density, and available surface area for diffusion to occur within the lung. Carbon dioxide is highly soluble in physiologic conditions; therefore, oxygen is the limiting factor of concern here. Gas densities are negligible in physiologic conditions. Total available surface area, however, is a very important variable in pulmonary pathology. As total alveolar surface area decreases relative to available arteriolar perfusion the available potential space to diffuse oxygen into blood decreases. A malformation in any of these parameters may lead to hypoxia. The primary notation for monitoring the diffusion gradient of oxygen is the A-a gradient. A-a oxygen gradient is calculated as:

- A-a oxygen gradient = PAO - PaO

PaO is measured by arterial blood gas, while PAO is calculated using the alveolar gas equation:

- PAO  =  (FiO2 x  [Patm  -  PH2O])  -  (PaCO2 ÷ R)

Where FiO2 is the fraction of inspired oxygen (0.21 at room air), Patm is the atmospheric pressure (760 mmHg at sea level), PH2O is the partial pressure of water (47 mmHg at 37 degrees C), PaCO2 is the arterial carbon dioxide tension, and R is the respiratory quotient. The respiratory quotient is approximately 0.8 at steady state but varies according to the relative utilization of carbohydrate, protein, and fat.