The vast majority of patients who experience a natural death, meaning no medical, life-saving interventions to counter the process, follow a stereotypical pattern of signs and symptoms in the time leading up to death. This time frame is often referred to as "actively dying" or "imminent death." It is important for healthcare providers to be familiar with this process, not only so they know what to expect when providing direct care to patients during this time, but also so they can guide the family in understanding what to expect during this process and providing support as needed.

- Early stage: Loss of mobility and becoming bed bound; loss of interest or ability to drink and eat; cognitive changes to include increased time sleeping or experiencing delirium. Delirium can be a hyperactive or agitated state or a hypoactive state. The trademark point of delirium is there is an acute change in the level of arousal.

- Middle stage: Further decline in mental status to becoming obtunded or slow arousal with stimulation and only brief periods of wakefulness. Patients often exhibit the "death rattle" which a noisy breathing pattern caused by a pooling of oral secretions due to the loss of the swallowing reflex.

- Late stage: Coma; fever, possibly due to aspiration pneumonia; an altered respiratory pattern which can be periods of apnea alternated with hyperpnea or irregular breathing; and mottled extremities due to the constriction of the peripheral circulation

The timeline for each patient is variable. A patient may experience these signs and symptoms over 24 hours or for longer than 14 days.