Lenvatinib is a multiple receptor tyrosine kinase inhibitor that is FDA-approved and indicated for the treatment of radioactive iodine-refractory differentiated thyroid cancer (DTC), unresectable hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC), and advanced renal cell carcinoma (RCC). The care for patients suffering from such malignancies prompts critical care from an interprofessional team of healthcare professionals. Early diagnosis and management can decrease life-long complications, increase the quality of life and decrease mortality. The interprofessional team includes a primary care clinician, an oncologist, a nurse, and a pharmacist.

Primary care physicians and specialists should thoroughly educate their patients about the disease course and management and the potential adverse effects of therapy that may arise. The primary care clinician, oncologist, and pharmacy oncology specialist team should routinely monitor renal function and liver enzymes, as lenvatinib is metabolized and cleared in the liver and kidneys, respectively, and dosage modifications may be necessary. When treating HCC, the body weight should also be routinely monitored as the dosage of therapy is determined based on actual body weight. This is where a specialized oncology pharmacist can provide valuable input to the interprofessional healthcare team.

Lenvatinib has a wide array of adverse effects, and routine follow-ups are vital to prevent complications and long-term harm. Anti-emetics should be considered with the use of lenvatinib due to nausea and vomiting. An EKG should be done, and the QT interval should be reviewed prior to selecting which medication to use, as certain anti-emetics can prolong the QT interval. Cardiac impairment and QT-interval prolongation are also adverse effects of lenvatinib.

Hypertension is the most reported side effect, and routine blood pressure checks are advised. Early detection can be made by 24-hour blood pressure monitoring while taking lenvatinib. Pateints with an underlying history of hypertension should have their blood pressure controlled and maintained in a stable range before initiating therapy. Patients with uncontrolled increases in their blood pressure while receiving optimal therapy for blood pressure should discontinue lenvatinib. In the occurrence of cardiac impairment such as heart failure, cardiomyopathy, or ventricular dysfunction, a cardiologist should be consulted. Thyroid function monitoring should also be routine as lenvatinib use can result in a hypofunctiong thyroid.

During reproductive animal investigations, lenvatinib has been shown to cause harm to the fetus and be present in breast milk. Pregnant women should be advised about its likely effects on the fetus and should discontinue breastfeeding for one week following the last dosage of lenvatinib. Interprofessional interaction between healthcare providers and patients is essential to strengthening patient rapport and forming a therapeutic alliance. Patients' compliance with therapy is vital in the management of malignancies. This will, in turn, minimize treatment delays and enhance outcomes and the quality of life.