The deficiency of any one of these nutrients can cause serious health concerns. Hence, it is essential to consume a diet that is rich in both macronutrients and micronutrients.

**Carbohydrates**

About 50 to 55% of the daily calories should come from carbohydrates, which are composed of monosaccharides that include fructose, glucose, and galactose. Each gram of carbohydrate contains energy equivalent to 4 kcal. Complex carbohydrates with a low glycemic index steadily raise the blood sugar level and are preferred over simple carbohydrates such as dextrose.

**Proteins**

Proteins are comprised of subunits called amino acids. These subunits provide energy and are essential for the construction of structural units of the body e.g., muscle, bone, and ligaments. Around 30% of the dry body weight is attributed to proteins. Approximately 20% of daily calories should come from sources rich in protein such as red and white meat, egg, and legumes. The daily recommendation for protein intake is 1.6 g/kg body weight for an adult. Some amino acids e.g., leucine and valine, are called essential; these are not synthesized by the body and must be obtained in the diet. Plant-sourced proteins, when consumed in replacement to animal proteins, have been shown to decrease cancer and cardiovascular disease-related mortality in a large prospective study.

Marasmus is a type of protein-energy malnutrition resulting from the deficiency of energy-producing nutrients such as carbohydrates, proteins, and fats. On physical examination, the patient has generalized wasting, loss of subcutaneous fat, and muscle bulk. Another type of protein-energy malnutrition is kwashiorkor, which occurs in children consuming a diet that may be rich in energy but is deficient in proteins. The presence of skin findings e.g., pedal edema, dermatitis, skin depigmentation, hair loss, and loosening of teeth, differentiate kwashiorkor from marasmus. However, a child with marasmus can develop pitting edema due to protein deficiency; this is marasmic-kwashiorkor.

**Fats**

Fats are composed of glycerol and fatty acids; these are high energy molecules that help the body grow, keep it warm, and serve as an inventory in case of emergency. Certain fatty acids (essential), e.g., omega-3 and omega-6, are required for the synthesis of eicosanoids such as prostaglandins and leukotrienes and should be consumed in the diet. About 25 to 30% of the daily calories should come from fats, out of which saturated fats should not be more than 10%.

Cholesterol can be synthesized by the human body and hence is not essentially necessary in the diet. However, when consumed, it should not be more than 300 mg/day. A high-fat diet can lead to the development of obesity and is associated with an increased risk of cardiovascular disease.

**Dietary Fiber**

Fiber improves digestive health by creating bulk in the stool and stimulating peristalsis. It prevents constipation and diarrhea and is a protector against colon cancer. Fruits and vegetables are the chief sources of fiber, and the recommendation is that one should consume at least five servings/day. The daily recommended amount of dietary fiber intake is 38 gram/day and 25 gram/day for men and women age 19 to 50 years, respectively. In children, the goal fiber intake is age+5 grams. Consuming a diet rich in fiber can help improve the lipid profile, increase tolerability to statins, and reduce the risk of developing atherosclerosis hence preventing cardiovascular disease.

**Minerals and Trace Elements**

Calcium and phosphorus are required for healthy bone development, while potassium, sodium, and chloride are the major electrolytes in the intracellular and extracellular compartments. An imbalance of these electrolytes can lead to drastic fluid shifts. Trace elements such as chromium, copper, and selenium also play an essential role in metabolic reactions, and their deficiency can lead to various diseases. The recommended daily allowance (RDA) of calcium is 1000 mg for both male and female adults. Females require an increased quantity of iron as compared to men due to the cyclic loss of blood during menstruation; hence the RDA for iron is 18 mg in females as compared to 8 mg in males. RDA for copper, zinc, and selenium is 30 μg, 900 μg, and 55 μg, respectively. Salt intake should be limited to fewer than 6 grams per day, as an increased quantity could lead to the development of hypertension.

The DASH diet, which is low in sodium and fat, helps improve hypertension and total cholesterol. In a recent study, the consumption of the DASH diet led to a 13% reduction in 10 years of Framingham Risk Score for cardiovascular disease in the subjects.

**Vitamins**

Water-soluble (B, C) and fat-soluble (A, D, E, and K) vitamins have several vital roles. Vitamin A, also called retinol (RDA= 700 μg-900 μg retinol activity equivalents (RAE)/day), plays an essential role in the regeneration of epithelial cells and the development of rhodopsin, a photoreceptor pigment in the retina. Deficiency of vitamin A can cause xerophthalmia, keratomalacia, and night-blindness.  A cross-sectional study done on pregnant and lactating women in Ethiopia revealed that 13.7% of the women had night blindness, and 0.4% had Bitot's spot.

Thiamine (vitamin B1, RDA= 1.1mg/day) in the form of thiamine pyrophosphate (TPP) serves as a coenzyme in catabolic reactions of sugars and amino acids. Deficiency of vitamin B1 can cause wet beriberi, dry beriberi, and Wernicke-Korsakoff syndrome. Wernicke syndrome has distinct features of ophthalmoplegia, gait disturbances, and confusion, while Korsakoff syndrome includes confabulation and amnesia. It is a medical emergency and should be treated with intravenous thiamine and dextrose.

Scurvy presents with symptoms of skin bruises, petechiae, loosening of teeth, bleeding gums, slow wound healing, and mood changes. It occurs due to deficiency of vitamin C (RDA= 90 mg/day), which acts as a cofactor for both prolyl hydroxylase and lysyl hydroxylase, which help stabilize collagen. Collagen is a structural protein and is essential for healthy blood vessels, bones, cartilage, and connective tissue.

Vitamin D (RDA= 600IU/day) helps the absorption of calcium from both the gut and kidneys. A deficiency of vitamin D in childhood and adulthood can cause rickets and osteomalacia, respectively. On physical examination, children with rickets present with frontal bossing, pigeon chest deformity, bowing of legs, and rachitic rosary.

Vitamin E (RDA= 33IU/day [synthetic]) is an antioxidant, and its deficiency can lead to neurotoxicity and anemia.

Vitamin K (RDA= 120μg/day) plays an important role in the coagulation cascade. The gut flora helps convert vitamin K1 into vitamin K2, which is one of the main sources of the vitamin.

**Water**

Dehydration can occur due to inadequate consumption of water and classifies into three categories based on the percentage of body fluid loss. Loss of <5%, 5% to 10%, and >10% of body weight loss categorizes as mild, moderate, and severe dehydration, respectively. WHO has classified dehydration into no, some, and severe dehydration based on the physical examination. Patients with severe dehydration are lethargic, have sunken eyes, skin pinch goes back slowly, and the patient cannot drink on his own.

Patients with some dehydration are irritable, drink eagerly, have sunken eyes, and the skin pinch goes back slowly. Those with normal physical features are labeled as having no dehydration. Mild to moderate dehydration is treatable with oral fluids, while patients with severe dehydration or shock should be treated with intravenous fluid replacement. A recent study reported that people consuming less than the recommended amount of water per day have a constantly elevated level of serum arginine vasopressin (AVP). This hormone promotes reabsorption of water from kidneys and constricts arterioles to raise blood pressure.

In a recent systematic review, decreased intake of water was related to a higher incidence of urolithiasis. While adequate water intake does not diminish the incidence of obesity or type II diabetes mellitus, it most certainly reduces the daily caloric intake.