The evaluation should include a complete medical history with an emphasis on the head and neck region. Although the typical patient profile is changing, the patient is usually an older male with a history of smoking and/or alcohol use with a non-resolving oral cavity/tongue lesion. A history of accidental trauma to the region is often reported by patients. The most commonly reported symptom is localized pain. Dysphagia, weight loss, dysarthria, and odynophagia are also common. The patient’s ability to tolerate his usual diet should be addressed. Any history of recently noticed neck masses or nodules is also fundamental, as this may represent locoregional metastatic disease. Recent onset of unilateral nasal obstruction, unilateral hearing loss, or unilateral otalgia is worrisome for disease extension beyond the oral cavity to the pharyngeal region.

The examination should include a complete physical exam with an emphasis on the head and neck region. The neck should be thoroughly examined for palpable lymphadenopathy, especially the submental, submandibular, and jugulodigastric regions. An invasive examination of the patient’s oral cavity should be performed. This includes a detailed description of the lesion or mass in question, including but not limited to location, general appearance, color, shape, margins, and the presence or absence of ulceration. Thorough palpation should also be performed with the intention of assessing the regions of the tongue that are involved or spared by the tumor. Palpation of the base of the tongue/vallecula region is also encouraged, as it may reveal asymmetrically indurated or protruding areas. Several specific clinical signs and symptoms may offer insight into the extent of tumor extension.

Hypoglossal nerve or tongue muscle involvement may manifest as ipsilateral tongue deviation. Lingual nerve involvement may manifest as an altered sensation in the tongue. Inferior alveolar nerve involvement manifests as numbness in the chin, lower lip, and/or mandibular teeth and indicates more advanced disease. Lastly, an awake fiberoptic examination of the patient’s upper airway is also recommended, as the usual risk factors for oral cavity carcinoma are common to other head and neck sites. A flexible nasolaryngoscopy under local anesthesia excludes grossly suspicious pathology in the nasal cavity, nasopharynx, oropharynx, hypopharynx, and larynx.