The amino acids with nonpolar R groups include glycine (G, Gly, NH2-CH2-COOH), alanine (A, Ala, CH3-CH(NH2)-COOH), valine (V, Val, (CH3)2-CH-CH(NH2)-COOH), leucine (L, Leu, (CH3)2-CH-CH2-CH(NH2)-COOH), methionine (M, Met, CH3-S-(CH2)2-CH(NH2)-COOH ), isoleucine (I, Ile, CH3-CH2-CH(CH3)-CH(NH2)-COOH), phenylalanine (F, Phe, Ph-CH2-CH(NH2)-COOH), tyrosine (Y, Tyr, HO-Ph-CH2-CH(NH2)-COOH), and tryptophan (W, Trp, Ph-NH-CH=C-CH2-CH(NH2)-COOH). Gly, Ala, Val, Leu, Met, and Ile have aliphatic R groups, and Phe, Tyr, and Trp have aromatic R groups. The aliphatic or aromatic group makes the amino acids hydrophobic (also called "water fear") or group with no tendency to be close to aqueous solutions. The globular proteins will opportunistically bury the hydrophobic side chains inside the protein interior by folding into a three-dimensional shape in aqueous solutions.

The amino acids with polar uncharged R groups are serine (S, Ser, HO-CH2-CH(NH2)-COOH), threonine (T, Thr, CH3-CH(OH)-CH(NH2)-COOH), cysteine (C, Cys, HS-CH2-CH(NH2)-COOH), proline (P, Pro, NH-(CH2)3-CH-COOH), asparagine (N, Asn, H2N-CO-CH2-CH(NH2)-COOH) and glutamine (Q, Gln, H2N-CO-(CH2)2-CH(NH2)-COOH). The side chains of these amino acids possess functional spectrum groups. Most have one or more atoms, such as oxygen, nitrogen, or sulfur, with electron pairs, allowing hydrogen bonding to water or other molecules.

Also, aspartate (D, Asp, HOOC-CH2-CH(NH2)-COOH) and glutamate (E, Glu, HOOC-(CH2)2-CH(NH2)-COOH) are amino acids with negatively charged R groups. On the contrary, lysine (K, H2N-(CH2)4-CH(NH2)-COOH), arginine (R, Arg, HN=C(NH2)-NH-(CH2)3-CH(NH2)-COOH), and histidine (H, His, NH-CH=N-CH=C-CH2-CH(NH2)-COOH) are amino acids with positively charged R groups.

The amino acids are linked with their neighbors in a specific order by covalent bonds, also known as peptide bonds. These particular bonds are the amide linkages that form when the amino group reacts with the carboxylate carbon connecting two amino acids. The free amino group at one end of the polypeptide is typically called the amino-terminal or N-terminal. In contrast, the open carboxyl group at the other end is labeled as the carboxyl-terminal or C-terminal. Protein sequences are written or read from the N-to-C terminal direction. The chains of the amino acids or progression of the amino acids distinguish exquisitely one protein from another. The organism's DNA is specific in coding a particular sequence of amino acids. Each protein consists of one or more polypeptide chains. Proteins are polymers of 50 or more amino acids, while peptides are shorter amino acid polymers. A protease, which is also known as peptidase or proteinase, is an enzyme that catalyzes proteolysis. This phenomenon is constituted by the breakdown of proteins into smaller polypeptides and, eventually, single amino acids. Proteases cleave the peptide bonds within proteins by hydrolysis, which is a chemical reaction where the water breaks bonds. Acids, alkalis, or enzymes may be employed to determine protein hydrolysis.