Understanding the embryology of the pulmonary artery is imperative to demonstrate thorough anatomic knowledge on the subject. The most critical embryological components in the formation of the main pulmonary artery and the right and left pulmonary arteries are the sixth aortic arch, the truncus arteriosus, the conus cordis, and neural crest cells.

The sixth aortic arch gives rise to both the right and left pulmonary arteries and the ligamentum arteriosum. The ligamentum arteriosum is the ductus arteriosus during fetal development. The ductus arteriosus serves to allow oxygenated fetal blood to bypass the developing lungs and move directly into the aorta. Both the right and left sixth aortic arches initially contribute to the development of pulmonary arterial flow, but as the right-sided arch degenerates, the left sixth arch contributes the vasculature for both pulmonary arteries.

The intricate relationship of the truncus arteriosus, conus cordis, and neural crest cells in the fifth week of fetal development coordinates the proper formation of the right and left ventricular outflow tracts, the main pulmonary artery and ascending aorta, respectively.

Oppositional ridges form within the truncus arteriosus: one along the right superior aspect and the other along the left inferior aspect. The right ridge progresses distally and leftward, while the left ridge progresses distally and rightward, twisting as they meet. Simultaneously, oppositional swellings develop within the conus cordis along the right dorsal and left ventral aspects. Each of these ridges, or swellings, acts under the influence of neural crest cells. As the truncal ridges converge, they divide the truncus arteriosus into the main pulmonary artery and the ascending aorta. When the conus ridges converge, they form the right ventricular outflow tract, positioned anterolaterally, and the left ventricular outflow tract, positioned posteromedially.