Embryologically, most craniofacial structures form between 4 and 8 weeks of gestational age, and a developmental abnormality during this period may result in orofacial clefting. A primary cleft palate occurs due to a failure of fusion between the lateral palatine processes and the median palatine process. A secondary cleft palate results from a failure of the lateral palatine processes and the nasal septum to fuse. Histologically, when the palatal epithelium forms in utero, the nasal cavity epithelium will differentiate into columnar ciliated epithelium between the sixth and twelfth weeks of gestation. Conversely, the epithelium covering the palate's oral cavity side will differentiate into the stratified squamous epithelium.

Anatomically, the palate is divided into primary and secondary palates by the incisive foramen (also called the anterior palatine or nasopalatine foramen), with the primary palate located anterior to this foramen and the secondary palate located posterior to it. The primary palate contains a small central segment of the alveolar ridge and hard palate, along with the maxillary incisors (the premaxilla). The secondary palate contains the remainder of the teeth and the alveolar ridge, as well as the hard and soft palates. The incisive foramen's location is in the midline, osseous part of the oral hard palate, immediately posterior to the central incisor teeth, and corresponds to the medial palatine and incisive sutures' junction. In patients with palatal clefting, the defect will involve the soft palate and either part of the hard palate or the hard palate in its entirety. Essentially, the cleft may include the secondary or the primary and secondary palates and may be unilateral or bilateral if the primary palate is involved because primary palate clefts run lateral to the premaxilla, but secondary palate clefts run in the midline posterior to the incisive foramen (see figures).

In addition to bony anomalies, patients with palatal clefting possess abnormal velopharyngeal musculature, as described originally by Fergusson and Veau. In cases of cleft palate, rather than inserting into the midline soft palate aponeurosis, the tensor veli palatini muscle is partially attached to the hard palate's posterior border laterally and is not properly aligned to glide around the pterygoid hamuli and functions as a muscular sling. The levator veli palatini muscle also demonstrates an abnormal insertion at the cleft margins in the anterior half to two-thirds of the velum rather than meeting the palatine aponeurosis.

The blood supply to the soft and hard palates derives from the descending palatine artery, which emerges from the greater palatine foramen. When reconstructing the palate, it is critical to preserve this blood vessel, as inadvertent injury may cause hemipalatal necrosis, particularly when the palatal flaps are monopedicled.

Some patients may present with submucous palatal clefting, characterized by abnormal speech and velopharyngeal insufficiency in the absence of an overt palatal cleft. The physical examination may reveal a bifid uvula, a zona pellucida, and/or a palpable notch on the posterior margin of the hard palate. Depending on the patient's age and the severity of the cleft, management may include or be limited to speech therapy; however, most patients with submucous palatal clefting require a velopharyngoplasty, followed by speech therapy in order to improve soft palate function. Ideally, the soft palate moves cephalically and posteriorly to separate the nasopharynx from the oropharynx when pronouncing syllables that contain "p," "k," and "s" due to the action of the levator veli palatini muscle. For this reason, it is critical to reorient this muscle's fibers carefully during cleft palate repair.