The history and physical exam of sickle cell patients range from being asymptomatic to a broad range of presentations. Patients are completely asymptomatic during the first 6 months of life due to the presence of fetal hemoglobin which gradually decreases, and HbS begins to predominate. The clinical presentation of SCD is variable depending on the type of complication and the body system affected. A few of the common presentations are described below.

**Vaso-Occlusive Crisis (VOC)**

This is the most common presentation of SCD. Microvascular occlusion (the cardinal pathophysiologic cause of acute pain) leads to ischemia and hypoxia, followed by tissue and vascular damage and inflammation, the release of inflammatory mediators, all of which activate nociceptors. Reperfusion intensifies the inflammation and resultant pain. Patients complain of severe debilitating pain in any part of the body but typically in the long bones, back, pelvis, chest and the abdomen. Symptoms may start as early as six months of age with pain and swelling in both hands and feet (dactylitis). In most instances, there are no reliable signs or tests to indicate the presence or absence of pain associated with VOC.

**Acute Chest Syndrome (ACS)**

ACS is defined as the appearance of a new pulmonary infiltrate on chest radiography accompanied by a fever and respiratory symptoms, including a cough, tachypnea, and chest pain. It is hypothesized that ACS is the result of hypoxia and an inflammatory mediator-induced increase in adhesion of the pulmonary microvasculature to sickled erythrocytes. This process is coupled with a reduction in nitric oxide (NO), which would normally counteract it. The most common symptoms in patients with ACS are fever, cough, chest pain, dyspnea, and lung exam may show reduced air entry, rales, and sometimes wheeze. ACS can progress rapidly to hypoxemia and respiratory failure if not treated promptly. When possible to identify infectious organisms, chlamydia, Streptococcus pneumonia, and Mycoplasma predominate.

**Infections**

Patients with SCD are especially at risk for infections with encapsulated organisms because of their functional asplenia, as well as because of functionally immunocompromised state (increased bone marrow turnover and altered complement activation). Penicillin prophylaxis in children and widespread use of the pneumococcal vaccine has made tremendous strides in reducing the incidence of bacterial infections and sepsis.

**Pulmonary Hypertension (PHTN)**

PHTN has an incidence of 6% to 10% and a mortality of 2% to 5%. PHTN is believed to be caused in large part by changes in medial smooth muscle and endothelial cells. The key clinical finding is reduced exercise capacity (45% of patients are New York Heart Association class III or IV). Diagnostic findings include an increased N-terminal pro-brain natriuretic peptide (NT-proBNP), an increased tricuspid valve regurgitated jet velocity on echocardiography, and increased pulmonary pressures on right heart catheterization.

**Cerebrovascular Accidents (CVA)/Stroke**

CVA can occur in children as young as two years of age, with 11% of patients with SCD having a stroke by 20 years of age. However, silent cerebral infarcts (SCI) associated with the small-vessel disease are more common than overt strokes, with 34% of patients with SCD having evidence of SCI by age 14 years. Transcranial Doppler is an effective screening test started at age of two years in SCD patients to identify those at higher risk of CVA.

**Pulmonary Embolism (PE)**

The incidence of PE is higher in patients with SCD. There is a 50-fold to 100-fold increase in annual incidence in inpatients with SCD compared to those without SCD.

**Renal Complications**

Renal complications are extremely common in SCD, with 30% of adults developing chronic renal failure. This is due to the low partial pressure of oxygen, low pH, and high osmolality in the renal medulla which contribute to erythrocyte dehydration and vaso-occlusion. Microalbuminuria and proteinuria are common diagnostic findings.

**Eye Complications**

Proliferative retinopathy is the most common ophthalmologic complication of SCD (more common in HbSC, as high as 70%) and results from occlusion of the peripheral retinal vasculature.

**Splenic Sequestration**

Splenic sequestration is a potentially catastrophic complication of SCD and is characterized by an acute decrease in hemoglobin level, which can result in severe abdominal pain and circulatory collapse that is more common in the pediatric population, especially HbSS anemia. This due to splenic auto-infarction occurring around six years of age. However, this can be seen in adults with HbSC and other hemoglobinopathies.

**Priapism**associated with SCD is typical of the low-flow type associated with stasis, hypoxia, and ischemia.

**Cholelithiasis**and biliary sludge develop as a result of chronic hemolysis and increased bilirubin turnover.

**Osteonecrosis**

The femoral and humeral heads are common sites of osteonecrosis, which occurs as a result of increased pressure from increased erythrocyte marrow or vascular occlusion. Surgical treatment is sometimes indicated.

**Aplastic Crisis**

Parvovirus B19-induced aplastic crisis caused by interruption of erythropoiesis can lead to severe anemia and cardiovascular decompensation. This self-limited infection typically lasts 7 to 10 days and can be life-threatening.