Managing a colostomy is generally done by a nurse or an entero-stomal therapist, but providers should be aware of the condition of the stoma in case intervention may be required.

There are different types of colostomy bags or appliances available, depending on the type of stoma. The 2-piece system consists of a base-plate attached to the skin with a removable ostomy bag. Although it is very durable and long-lasting, it requires an amount of skill to use and has a weaker adhesive and does not fit very well. The one-piece system consists of a single unit wherein the skin barrier and the pouch are joined. It is simpler to use but must be replaced every 1 to 3 days. The closed pouch system is generally used by patients who have a constant elimination pattern and have to be discarded after a single-use.

The open-ended pouches are also commonly used and consist of a single piece attached to the skin around the stoma with a drainable pouch and can be left attached to the skin while removing stomal content. Generally in a colostomy, as compared to an ileostomy, a closed bag must be required, unless the content is excessively fluid, when a drainable bag may also be used. In an end colostomy, like after a Hartmann procedure, a colostomy plug can also be used.

Differently sized bags are available, and they may be used by different people or by the same person at different times during the day or during different activities. For example, a larger sized bag may be used while sleeping at night, whereas a smaller sized bag may be used during sexual activity or while exercising. Pediatric sized stoma bags are also available.

Stoma caps are like lids applied over the stoma. They may be worn by certain people like those with continent ileostomies or those who require stomal irrigation for movement at their discretion, for short intervals during the day.