The principles of management of NVG are as follows:

- Identifying and managing the etiological factor (diabetes, carotid artery obstruction, or other causes as enumerated in Table 1) causing retinal ischemia.

- Treatment of the retinal ischemia by doing pan-retinal photocoagulation or intravitreal injections of anti-VEGF agents.

- Control of intraocular pressure medically and surgically.

- Control of inflammation using topical corticosteroid drops.

- Mydriatics such as topical atropine drops

Identifying and managing the etiological factors (as described under the section of etiology) and investigations related to those factors (as described under the section of systemic investigations) are crucial in curtailing the ongoing mechanism of retinal ischemia. This also prevents the contralateral eye from developing NVG in the patients with unilateral NVG at presentation. Patients with uncontrolled diabetes, hypertension, hyperlipidemia, and nephropathy should be managed with the help of a physician.

Patients with severe carotid artery obstruction may need carotid endarterectomy, as per the discretion of the vascular surgeon. Blood dyscrasias and hematological abnormalities need to be managed as per the internist and hematologist. Patients with uveitis will need corticosteroid treatments, cycloplegics, and management of the specific etiology of uveitis. Intra-ocular tumors such as choroidal melanoma or retinoblastoma require treatments specific to the tumor characteristics and available treatments.

The treatment of retinal ischemia is comprised of pan-retinal photocoagulation (PRP) and intravitreal anti-VEGF injections. PRP does not immediately reduce neovascularization but has a longer treatment effect when compared to anti-VEGF injections. As a result, a combination of these treatments is often given initially. Typical settings of PRP include spot size of 400 to 500 microns, laser burns spaced one burn-width apart, grade 3 laser burns, and 1200 to 1600 burns per sitting, if planned in 2 sittings. Usually, the PRP is completed in 2 or 3 sittings, separated five days apart. [Figure-3] However, the presence of media haze, including cornea edema due to raised IOP, cataract, and vitreous hemorrhage, precludes the delivery of PRP.

The presence of corneal edema may necessitate intravitreal injection of anti-VEGF agents along with topical and systemic antiglaucoma medications to reduce the IOP and hence improve the corneal clarity, after which PRP can be performed. In the presence of cataracts obscuring the view to the fundus, intravitreal injection of anti-VEGF agents is required to reduce the NVI and NVA. Additionally, topical and systemic antiglaucoma medications need to be used to reduce the IOP. After the start of regression of anterior segment neovascularization and decrease in IOP, cataract surgery can then be performed. In the presence of vitreous hemorrhage, intravitreal injection of anti-VEGF agents along with topical and systemic antiglaucoma medications should be started immediately and pars plana vitrectomy considered as soon as feasible. Intravitreal injections are useful in decreasing the VEGF drive in the retina of the eyes with NVG and are very important in managing retinal ischemia.

Intraocular pressure management often requires both topical and systemic medications initially, and ultimately surgical management is often necessary. Topical beta-blockers, alpha agonists, and carbonic anhydrase inhibitors are frequently used in the management of IOP in eyes with NVG. Prostaglandin analogs can increase inflammation but are still often used as maximum medical treatment may be necessary. Systemic carbonic anhydrase inhibitors are also useful in the short-term management of IOP but must be used cautiously in patients with renal impairment.  Surgical management of IOP is indicated where the maximal medical management fails to control the IOP. Surgical management of high IOP in the eyes with NVG includes trabeculectomy or glaucoma drainage device. Though trabeculectomy is less preferred in eyes with NVG due to their high failure rate, there are some studies describing improved success rates of trabeculectomy augmented by anti-metabolites such as mitomycin C (MMC) or 5-Fluorouracil.

In one study, the success rate after trabeculectomy with MMC was reported to be 62% at the end of 1 year post-operatively; however, this decreased to 51.7% at the end of 5 years. Preoperative intravitreal anti-VEGF agents have been shown to reduce the failure rate of trabeculectomy in the eyes with NVG.

While there is no consensus regarding the surgical approach to NVG, recent studies suggest early implantation of GDD for the successful management of NVG.

Eyes with NVG often have associated inflammation, especially in the acute phase, which can be treated with topical corticosteroid eye drops. Prednisolone acetate 1% can be used in tapered doses.

The pain and discomfort due to cyclospasm in the eyes with NVG can be mitigated with the help of cycloplegic eye drops such as atropine or cyclopentolate.

Eyes with NVG, no perception of light (PL), and no pain do not need treatment and can be observed. However, if these eyes are painful, they need to be treated with pressure-lowering drops, cycloplegics, and possibly TSCPC.