Complications can occur during and after central venous catheter placement. The risk of complications is increased when central venous catheters are placed without ultrasound guidance, including an increased number of performed attempts and a higher chance for incidental placement into an artery or surrounding structures.

After catheter placement, the most frequent complication is infection. Infection should be considered in patients with an indwelling catheter who have fevers, erythema at the insertion site, new-onset swelling, purulent drainage, leukocytosis, or hemodynamic instability. A thorough workup should be initiated with the catheter as a potential etiology, and removal of the catheter should be strongly considered.

Other common complications include catheter occlusion.

Catheter thrombosis can contribute to morbidity and mortality if not addressed appropriately. A majority of catheter-related thrombosis occurs within the upper extremities.

Mechanical occlusion of the catheter can occur if there is any kinking or clamping in the catheter tubing at any location or external compression from a suture or other sources. However, thrombolytic agents, such as alteplase, can be used if there is still a concern for thrombosis after troubleshooting the nonfunctional catheter with other methods and ruling out additional causes. Frequent catheter flushing with either heparin or normal saline can prevent or minimize thrombosis in certain situations. Studies have shown a minimal difference in the efficacy of intermittent locking with either normal saline or heparin.