Definitive diagnosis of endometrial cancer depends on histology. A complete personal and family medical history and thorough physical examination are fundamental. Abnormal findings will determine the next appropriate steps to take toward establishing differential diagnoses. The possibility of normal intrauterine or abnormal pregnancy should always be considered in women of reproductive age with AUB or amenorrhea unless postmenopausal status has been confirmed. When symptoms, signs, and/or family history suggest the possible presence of gynecologic pathology, basic laboratory evaluation, cervical-vaginal Pap smear, and transvaginal TVU scanning generally are considered the next steps in diagnosis. Abnormal Pap smears at any age demand evaluation.

TVU can focus the need for tissue diagnosis in women with PMB. Although a consensus panel set a limit of less than or equal to 5 mm endometrial thickness measured by TVU before endometrial biopsy is considered necessary to evaluate PMB cost-effectively, a more recent systematic review and meta-analysis has recommended a cutoff level of less than or equal to 3 mm endometrial thickness for the exclusion of endometrial cancer in women with PMB.

Although rarely positive in patients with lower grade endometrioid carcinomas, a preoperative chest radiograph should be scrutinized for evident metastases, which would advance the disease and call for consideration of adjuvant antineoplastic chemotherapy. If parametrial invasion or adnexal involvement and/or synchronous ovarian tumors are suspected from physical examination, preliminary TVU may be used, reserving magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) for more difficult cases.