**The Current Definition of Bruxism**

In 2013, a consensus was obtained by an international group of experts on a clear definition of bruxism as the repetitive masticatory muscle activity characterized by tooth clenching or grinding, or bracing or thrusting of the mandible, occurring during sleep (sleep bruxism) or wakefulness (awake bruxism).

In the masticatory system, bracing refers to rigidly maintaining a mandibular position, and thrusting can be interpreted as moving the mandible in an anterior or lateral direction.

Sleep and awake bruxism should be considered different entities; therefore, they are defined separately.

The phrase "in otherwise healthy individuals" is added to emphasize that bruxism is not a disorder in most individuals but could be a sign of a condition in some, e.g., epilepsy, obstructive sleep apnoea, and REM behavior disorder.

**Is Bruxism a Disorder?**

Whereas a disorder is a condition that inherently causes harm and dysfunction in an individual,

****Diagnosing Bruxism****

Diagnosing bruxism may pose a challenge for the treating physician. In the clinical setting, the diagnosis of awake and sleep bruxism is usually based on patients' self reports (questionnaires and oral history) and clinical examination.

The patients must be well informed about what clenching, bracing, and thrusting mean and asked to monitor the behavior during a specific period, e.g., one to two weeks.

Electromyographic (EMG) recordings help determine both awake and sleep bruxism.

**Grading System**

Lobbezoo et al.

1- Sleep or awake bruxism is **possible**when is based on self-report only.2- Sleep or awake bruxism is**probable**when is based on self-report plus clinical examination.3- Sleep bruxism is**definite**when is based on self-reporting, clinical inspection, and polysomnographic recording, ideally accompanied by audio and video recordings.