Hyperactivity of the buccinator muscle can cause excessive pressure on the underlying hard tissues resulting in narrow arches and malocclusion.

Damage to the facial nerve can lead to paralysis of the buccinator muscles, which can lead to difficult mastication as the non-functioning of this muscle can cause repeated laceration of the cheek mucosa.

Abnormal attachment of this muscle may interfere with the proper prosthodontic management and maintaining oral hygiene. It will also restrict the cheek and lip movement leading to difficulty in mastication and phonation.

The muscle has been shown to have an indirect involvement during parafunctional movements.

**Clinical Implication in Prosthodontics**

In the oral cavity, inward forces by the orbicularis oris and the buccinator muscle get balanced by the outward forces of the tongue. While making an impression for a completely edentulous patient, molding must be done by muscle function in such a manner that it is in harmony with the surrounding musculature.

The buccinator, along with orbicularis oris and pharyngeal constrictor, forms a functional unit (buccinator mechanism) which is essential for orofacial functions (swallowing, sucking, whistling, chewing, vowel pronunciation). Food tends to accumulate in the vestibule during chewing if the buccinator is weakened or paralyzed.

The buccinator muscle plays a role in stabilizing the denture by gripping the polished surface of the denture. Also, the longitudinal fibers hold the bolus of food between the teeth during mastication. The maxillary bundle of this muscle tends to raise the upper denture, whereas the mandibular bundle of this muscle depresses the lower denture, thus aiding in denture stability and retention.