In most cases, adhesive capsulitis is a self-limited disease with high rates of spontaneous recovery within 18 to 30 months. Treatment is focused on symptomatic relief and improving ROM.

- NSAIDs: During the initial phase, NSAIDs can be used to aid with pain control.

- Physical therapy: Therapy has limited evidence supporting its benefit, but patients often in the recovery phase may benefit from gentle range of motion exercises, stretching, and graded resistance training. These have been shown to reduce pain and increase function. Patients and providers should not allow vigorous rehab, which can lead to worsening symptoms.

- Oral corticosteroids: These provide short-term pain relief for improved ROM and function. The benefits often do not last longer than a few weeks, and the clinician should be cognizant of the side effects associated with oral steroid use.

- Intra-articular steroid injection: Injections have been shown to improve function, decrease pain, and increase ROM. Like oral steroids, the duration of the effects of steroid injections is limited as providers must be aware of side effects. Often patients who receive injections early in their disease course are more likely to obtain a benefit. Multiple injections can be given to provide symptomatic relief.

- Hydrosilation: In this treatment modality, the joint is injected with saline and steroid to dilate the glenohumeral capsule. This has been shown to reduce pain and improve ROM and function in the short term. Current evidence shows no significant difference in outcomes when comparing hydrodilatation to intra-articular steroid injection.

- Manipulation under anesthesia: this is reserved for more refractory cases that do not respond to the modalities mentioned above. There is an increased risk of humerus fractures. The patient's arm is supported by a small lever arm (close to the shoulder), and the shoulder is gently manipulated in flexion, abduction, external rotation, and 90° abduction. To prevent complications, it is essential to highlight that no movement should be forced if "extra" resistance is felt. Injection triamcinolone mixed with bupivacaine is injected into the shoulder joint to prevent inflammation.

- Arthroscopic capsular release: This is reserved for refractory cases. Typically, if symptoms do not improve with conservative measures within 10 to 12 months, referral to an orthopedic surgeon is recommended. The entry is usually tricky as the joint capsule is thick and contracted. After making the standard posterior or lateral portal entry, rotator cuff interval, coracohumeral ligament, middle glenohumeral ligament, anterior capsule, and posterior capsule are released. The inferior capsule adhesiolysis is done by just manipulation because of its proximity to the axillary nerve. At the end of the procedure, the subacromial space is inspected for possible debridement of inflamed tissue and bursa. Injection triamcinolone mixed with bupivacaine is injected into the shoulder joint to prevent inflammation. Early passive and active range of motion exercises is started following arthroscopic capsular release. The literature has not demonstrated the superiority of arthroscopic capsular release over manipulation under anesthesia in terms of clinical efficacy.

- Open capsular release: Patients with strokes or head injuries and those with posttraumatic or postsurgical adhesive capsulitis who have substantial adhesions and contractures limiting arthroscopic surgery are candidates for open release. The open procedure has higher morbidity as compared to arthroscopic capsular release.

**Indications for Surgery**

- The patient fails a trial of prednisone or NSAIDs.

- No response to glenohumeral or subacromial injections

- No response respond to physical therapy

**Contraindications for Surgery**

- The patient has had an inadequate course of steroids or NSAIDs.

- The patient has not had any attempt at conservative therapy.

- There is an acute infection.

- The patient has a concomitant malignancy in the shoulder.

- The patient has a neurological deficit or nerve complaint originating from the cervical spine.