Gene expression is a very strictly regulated process and is altered in response to developmental cues, therapeutic drugs, environmental changes, or diseases. Gene regulation is critical for an organism to optimize their metabolic activity and respond to changes in a variety of extracellular and intracellular signals. The pioneering work by Francois Jacob and Jacques Monod, in 1961, depicted a classic example of how genetic mechanisms can be altered in response to changing environmental stimulants to regulate the bacterial metabolic activities. The operon model depicting this phenomenon was based on the metabolism of lactose in Escherichia coli.

Genes involved in bacterial metabolic pathways are clustered together and coordinately transcribed under a common promoter. These structural genes, the promoter, and additional sequences that regulate their expression are called an operon. The clustering of genes allows coordinated regulation and expression of the genes and provides rapid adaptation to various environmental changes. An inducible operon is one whose expression increases quantitatively in response to an enhancer, an inducer, or a positive regulator. The lac operon is a classic example of an inducible operon and is induced by lactose and its structural analogs: isopropyl beta-D-1 thiogalactopyranoside(IPTG) and thiomethyl galactoside(TMG).

Many other inducible operons have been identified since introducing the operon model that plays a key role in bacterial metabolism and survival against host defense mechanisms. Examples include the gal operon regulating the metabolism of galactose and induced in the presence of D-galactose; L-arabinose operon metabolizing arabinose and induced by it.