The dire consequences are associated with healthcare provider impairment. Often the impairment goes unreported or untreated because of the following:

- Alcohol and substance users often do not admit they have a problem.

- Alcohol and substance using health professionals tend to self-diagnose and self-treat and do not seek help from other professionals.

- Colleagues may be fearful of reporting due to the potential for reprisal.

- Patients are often uncomfortable taking action against health professionals responsible for their care.

- Lapses in clinical judgment and performance are usually late signs of impairment, making diagnosis difficult unless the practitioner admits they have a problem.

Impaired practitioners, as well as their colleagues, and patients are unlikely to take action until an alcohol or drug problem, has reached a critical level and resulted in a significant healthcare disaster or a legal entanglement.

For this reason, healthcare workers must recognize a clear ethical, moral, and legal duty to identify and report a colleague who is impaired. Unfortunately, while most health professionals consider alcohol and drug use to be a disease, health professionals are often reluctant to report their concerns. It is difficult for a colleague to confront a potentially impaired healthcare provider for fear of damaging the professional's reputation, especially if the suspicion is proved to be wrong.

Regrettably, only an average of 2 out of 3 healthcare practitioners with direct, personal knowledge of a colleague's impairment will report a peer to the proper authority professionals despite the legal risk for not reporting. However, in many cases, reporting may be the only approach that encourages the impaired doctor, nurse, or allied health professional to seek evaluation and treatment.

Impairment may be due to alcohol,  street drugs, or taking prescription drugs from a patient, friend, or family member. Health professionals may take injectable medications from a patient or dilute the drug with saline.

The following are the most commonly used medications:

- Benzodiazepines

- Cocaine

- Ecstasy

- Heroin

- Ketamine

- Marijuana

- Methamphetamines

- Opioids

- Sleeping pills

- Stimulants

Impaired health professionals are often difficult to identify because they are often bright, well-trained, devious, careful, and make a strong effort to avoid being caught. When the signs or symptoms of alcohol or drug use finally get noticed, the problem is typically ongoing for a long time.

The following signs and symptoms of alcohol and drug use can help a health practitioner identify a potential problem:

**Symptoms of Alcohol and Drug Use Disorder**

- Abnormal wasted opioids

- Altered orders

- Arriving to work late

- Difficulty meeting deadlines

- A discrepancy in controlled substance records

- Dishonesty

- Documentation errors

- Excessive sick time

- Frequent mistakes

- Frequent report of patients not receiving pain relief

- Frequent unexplained absences

- Increased opioids sign-outs

- Leaving work early

- Maximum use of pain medications

- Mood changes

- Not performing narcotic counts

- Obsession with opioids

- Offering to medicate patients

- Paranoid

- Poor charting

- Poor quality work

- Rounding at odd hours

**Signs of Alcohol and Drug Use**

- Anger management issues

- Bloodshot eyes

- Constricted pupils

- Defensiveness

- Denial

- Dilated pupils

- Diminished alertness

- Diaphoresis

- Disheveled appearance

- Distracted

- Fatigue

- Frequent accidents

- Frequent pain complaints

- Frequent use of gum or mints

- Hyperactivity

- Hypoactivity

- Insomnia

- Intoxication at social functions

- Isolation

- Lying

- Mood changes

- Impossible reasons for behavior

- Perforation of the nasal septum

- Poor concentration

- Poor judgment

- Runny nose

- Sedated

- Sleepiness

- Slurred speech

- Suicidal thoughts

- Track marks

- Tremors

- Unexplained nausea, vomiting, or diarrhea

- Unsteady gait

- Watery eyes

- Wearing long-sleeves at inappropriate times (hiding track marks)

- Weight gain

- Weight loss

**Behaviors Associated With Drug Diversion**

- Altered orders for drugs

- Controlled substance discrepancies

- Frequent trips to the bathroom

- Frequent medical loss

- Frequent corrections on medication records

- Higher-than-average opioid administration

- Higher-than-average opioid wastage

- Incorrect counts (particularly opioids)

- Patients complaining of poor pain relief

- Tampering with capsules or vials

- Unexplained disappearance

Many health professionals may turn to alcohol and drugs when going through a stressful time in their lives. They may use illicit substances to help them cope with problems such as family issues, malpractice cases, work stress, or financial pressures.

Alcohol and drug addiction is compulsive behavior. It may develop from an unhappy life, poor life choices, a family history of addiction, boredom, denial, or thrill-seeking.

**Institutional Considerations**

Most health professionals lack training and education regarding the signs and symptoms of addiction, identifying those addicted, and the correct manner to engage in the intervention.

All health professionals should receive education regarding alcohol and substance use disorders. Employers need to assist in improving physician, nurse, and allied health professional knowledge about the signs and symptoms, how to report, and the treatment options available.

- Employers can and should provide strategies to workers that promote patient safety and provide assistance in reporting concerning health professionals.

- Employers should offer guidelines that promote safe practices and a defined reporting mechanism for concerning situations.

- Employers should offer assistance to health professionals who suffer from alcohol and substance use.

The policy at any healthcare facility should be an alcohol and drug-free environment. The following mechanisms can decrease worksite impairment:

- Pre-employment drug testing

- Cause testing (if suspicion exists)

- Random testing

- Regular practice evaluations

Each of these is controversial. While most institutions support pre-employment and cause testing, less support for random testing of healthcare professionals exists. Further, not all professionals working in a hospital setting are necessarily employees of the institution. This fact may make it difficult for an institution to mandate screening.

Institutions should promote a culture that delineates the expectations of employees and consequences. It should also have a policy that supports providing help with alcohol and drug use disorder.

Institutions have an opportunity to help identify employees and practitioners with alcohol and drug impairment. In particular, supervisors should be trained in the signs and symptoms of alcohol and drug use disorder. They should be familiar with the institution's policies and procedures for getting the individual the help they need.