The etiology of GSDs is best understood by following the metabolic events leading to the synthesis (glycogenesis) and degradation of glycogen (glycogenolysis).GYS2 gene and one in skeletal muscle encoded by the GYS1 gene. Both forms of GS work by linking (alpha-1,4 links) a glucose monomer to the growing glycogen polymer. As indicated in Figure 1, glycogen has two different types of linkages, alpha-1,4 links and alpha-1,6 links.

About 95% of linkages in glycogen are alpha-1,4 links.GYS2 gene will prevent glycogen from being synthesized in the liver. This is the cause of GSD type 0a. Similarly, the absence or malfunction of muscle glycogen synthase due to mutations in the GYS1 gene will prevent glycogen from being synthesized in muscles, and this is the cause of GSD type 0b.

While glycogen synthase can catalyze the alpha-1,4 glucose linkages in glycogen, a different enzyme, glycogen branching enzyme (GBE1), is needed to produce the branching alpha-1,6 linkages. Mutations in the glycogen branching enzyme can result in the production of glycogen with an abnormal structure. This is the cause of GSD type IV.

While GSD 0a and GSD 0b are due to insufficient glycogen storage, most GSDs are unable to remove glucose from glycogen (glycogenolysis), resulting in excess glycogen tissue storage. The first step in glycogenolysis is the release of glucose-1-phosphate (G-1-P) from glycogen by the action of glycogen phosphorylase. GSD type V is caused by mutations in the glycogen phosphorylase gene-specific for muscle (PYGM). Mutations in the glycogen phosphorylase gene specific for the liver (PYGL) cause GSD type VI.G6PC gene.

It should be noted that skeletal muscles lack glucose-6-phosphatase and therefore do not release glucose into the blood. GSDs type I results from genetic disorders in the metabolism of glucose-6-phosphatase.G6PC gene. Glucose-6-phosphate is synthesized in the cytoplasm of hepatocytes and must be transported into the lumen of the endoplasmic reticulum (ER), where it is acted upon by glucose-6-phosphatase yielding glucose, which is transported back to the cytoplasm and then through the hepatic GLUT2 transporter into the blood.

Glucose-6-phosphate translocase1 (G6PT1) is the transporter protein that provides a G-6-P channel between the cytoplasm and the ER. The G6PT protein is made of three subunits termed G6PT1, G6PT2, and G6PT3 (Figure 2). Mutations in the SLC37A4 gene, which encodes the G6PT1 protein, are responsible for GSD type Ib (Figure 1). Fanconi-Bickel disease is a rare GSD caused by a GLUT2 deficiency due to a mutation in the SLC2A2 gene.

As mentioned above, glycogen is a branched polymer. While glycogen phosphorylase works well at removing glucose from alpha-(1,4)-linkages, it does not work at branch points. Branch points are alpha-1,6 linkages. For removal of branch points, a glycogen debranching enzyme (GDE) is required, which in mammals is called “ammylo-alpha-1,6-glucosidase, 4-alpha-glucanotransferase” encoded by the gene AGL.AGL gene, resulting in either a nonfunctional GDE enzyme (GSD type IIIa or type IIIb) or a GDE with reduced function (GSD type IIIc and IIId).

GSD type II is unique among GSDs because it is also classified as a lysosomal storage disease (LSD).GAA, which breaks down glycogen into glucose for use as a cellular energy source. Mutation in the GAA gene results in the toxic accumulation of glycogen in lysosomes.