**Methods**

PVB procedures can vary depending on patient anatomy and the location of the arterial obstruction. However, in most cases, there are common configurations to redirect the flow. The key to a functional bypass is establishing the proximal and distal anastomoses in disease-free regions. The following technique describes the aortoiliac disease. However, the principles for surgical interventions in other anatomical involvement are consistent.

**Aortoiliac disease:**An iliofemoral bypass, which connects the ipsilateral or contralateral iliac artery to the common femoral artery (CFA), can be employed.Bilateral aortoiliac disease: An aortobifemoral bypass connects the abdominal aorta with bilateral CFA to bypass the occlusion. An axillary-femoral bypass may be considered if a patient fails this intervention or has a contraindication for the procedure. In this procedure, the axillary artery is first connected to the ipsilateral CFA, which is then connected to the contralateral CFA. For an open technique, the patient positioning is supine with arms abducted to 90 degrees. The patient should undergo prepping from the nipples to the knees. The CFA, superficial, and deep femoral arteries bilaterally are isolated through bilateral groin incisions. It is essential to be sure that the distal portions of the vessels are soft, so they are suitable for clamping. Aortic exposure is typically through a midline incision (transperitoneal approach); however, some prefer a retroperitoneal or transverse incision.

The retroperitoneum is entered, typically infracolically and after the duodenum is mobilized to the right. The aorta gets dissected below the level of the renal arteries. Most try to remain to the right of the inferior mesenteric vein to avoid violating the left mesocolon. The renal vein can be mobilized by ligation of its tributaries. Exposure of the aorta needs to be taken down to the level of the inferior mesenteric artery. Tunnels within the retroperitoneum, posterior to the ureters, are carried down to the groin incisions. On the left side, the tunnel is often brought posterior to the inferior mesenteric artery to help with keeping the graft isolated from the left mesocolon.

The surgeon divides the aorta and a portion resected proximal to the inferior mesenteric artery. The distal aorta is oversewn. The chosen graft is anastomosed to the proximal aorta, most commonly in an end-to-end fashion using a 3-0 or 4-0 running permanent suture.

The limbs of the graft are then flushed with heparinized saline, clamped, and passed through the tunnels into the groin incisions. Clamps are applied to the CFA, and an arteriotomy is made, sometimes down to the level of the profunda, thus requiring a profundaplasty. Endarterectomy follows, if necessary. The graft is anastomosed to the CFA in an end-to-side running manner, usually with a 4-0 or 5-0 permanent suture. Before completion of the anastomosis, usual back bleeding, forward bleeding, and flushing are employed. The opposite femoral artery is addressed similarly. Blood flow is restored to the CFA, then the profunda femoris, and lastly, the superficial femoral artery. However, before unclamping, anesthesia should be notified because of the expected hypotension with reperfusion. The retroperitoneum should be closed in layers to adequately omit the graft from the GI tract. If unable to sufficiently close the retroperitoneum, an omental flap should be created.

End-to-end anastomosis is preferred because it allows the graft to lie flatter and thus may lessen the chance of future aortoenteric fistula. This method also better allows for retrograde perfusion into the inferior mesenteric artery. However, in cases with bilateral external iliac artery occlusion, an end-to-side or formal reconstruction of one of the IIA is needed to ensure blood flow delivery to the pelvis.

Conduits for bypass include artificial grafts (polytetrafluoroethylene and Dacron) and autologous saphenous vein (reversed, non-reversed, and in situ). For most infra-inguinal bypasses, an autologous vein graft is preferred. Aortoiliac bypasses require conduits with a larger lumen. Thus synthetic grafts are commonly used.