The most frequently reported symptom remains physical activity intolerance. Other symptoms include painful muscle cramps, weakness, and fatigue. Muscle pain and stiffness sometimes can lead to painful contractures. All these symptoms are much pronounced soon after starting activity and alleviated with exercise cessation. In cases of sudden, persistent muscle contraction during high-intensity exercise, severe muscle damage can occur resulting in a massive release of muscle proteins, i.e., creatinine kinase (typical level >1,000 U/l) and myoglobin in blood, as well as myoglobinuria (excretion of myoglobin in urine) presenting as dark-colored urine. In rare instances, acute renal failure and catastrophic hyperkalemia can ensue from an episode of rhabdomyolysis (muscle breakdown).

A unique feature associated with this disorder called the “second-wind phenomenon” is seen in most patients and is characterized by improved symptoms after approximately 10 minutes of gentle aerobic activity.

McArdle disease usually presents in the first or second decade of life. Patients more than 40 years of age complain of weakness and wasting of muscles.

Clinical heterogeneity is widely seen in McArdle disease. Some patients present with very mild symptoms, such as tiredness without cramps. On the other hand, progressive weakness ensues in the 6th or 7th decade of life. Contrary to this, fatal infantile McArdle syndrome which is the severe and rapidly progressive form appears shortly after birth.

Seizures have been described in 4% of patients.

Classic McArdle disease presents with the following examination findings:

- Proximal muscle weakness - most notable following exercise

- Fixed limb weakness - usually in the proximal muscle groups

- Muscle wasting

The fatal infantile variant can have the following examination findings:

- Hypotonia

- Diminished deep tendon reflexes