# Continuing Education Activity

Nonorganic functional hearing loss is a unique condition in which hearing loss is present on audiological assessment despite the absence of corresponding organic impairment in the auditory system. It can result from a variety of underlying etiologies. A prompt and accurate diagnosis followed by appropriate treatment is necessary to prevent the morbidity associated with this condition. This activity reviews the evaluation and treatment of nonorganic functional hearing loss and highlights the role of the interprofessional team in improving care for patients with this condition.

**Objectives:**
- Outline the etiology of nonorganic functional hearing loss.
- Describe a typical patient history associated with nonorganic functional hearing loss.
- Explain the interpretation of audiological and diagnostic tests for nonorganic functional hearing loss.
- Summarize the management considerations for patients with nonorganic functional hearing loss.

# Introduction

Normal hearing involves the complex, coordinated interplay of many closely associated anatomical structures within the ear and beyond. On the other hand, hearing loss occurs when pathology results in audiometric hearing thresholds falling below 25 decibels hearing level (dB HL) - a scale based on normative hearing thresholds as opposed to decibels of sound pressure level, which reflect the actual amount of sound energy produced. Damage or pathology of any of the multiple components of the auditory system, i.e., tympanic membrane, middle ear ossicles, cochlea, nerves, neural pathways, nuclei, and central processing centers, can contribute to hearing loss. Amongst the myriad causes of hearing loss, a distinct yet often unrecognized entity is nonorganic functional hearing loss.

Nonorganic functional hearing loss is that hearing loss evident on audiological testing, which has no corresponding organic impairment in the auditory system or a hearing loss that seems to be more severe than can be explained by the pathology identified in the auditory system.

Other terms for this condition include “non-organic hearing loss (NOHL),” “functional hearing loss,” “pseudohypacusis,” “hysterical hearing loss,” “conversion hearing loss,” "malingering,” “feigning,” “psychogenic deafness,” “simulated hearing loss,” and “dissociative deafness.” Many nonorganic functional hearing loss cases go undetected, so that sufferers can be prescribed unnecessary, sometimes harmful, treatments. Nonorganic functional hearing loss is a condition encountered by otolaryngologists, audiologists, general practitioners, and psychiatrists.

# Etiology

Nonorganic functional hearing loss may result from conscious or unconscious motives along a spectrum from malingering to conversion disorder. The Austen-Lynch model describes the causative factors of nonorganic functional hearing loss based on the patient’s level of intent in demonstrating the hearing deficit.

The three categories described are conversion disorder (low level of intent), factitious disorder (moderate level of intent), and malingering (high level of intent). These three entities exist on a continuum. The lower the level of intent, the more internal and unconscious the rewards of the hearing deficit.

The frequency of the etiologies of nonorganic functional hearing loss differs between children and adults. Etiologies also differ among subpopulations within these groups. In adults, nonorganic functional hearing loss is frequently due to malingering motivated by monetary gains or compensatory claims.

In children, emotionally or physically traumatic events may cause nonorganic functional hearing loss to present as conversion disorder.

The Austen-Lynch model also hypothesizes that the motives behind nonorganic functional hearing loss may not remain static. It posits movement up the continuum, from greater to lesser intention, or movement down the continuum from lesser to greater intention. An example of movement down the continuum would be an individual that begins with a conversion disorder; however, the increased sympathy shown by peers may cause conscious awareness of the external gains.

These gains serve as motivations for the perpetuation of the symptoms. Depending on whether the gains are internal or external, the individual may begin to feign the symptoms, progressing from a conversion disorder to malingering or a factitious disorder.

# Epidemiology

Marked differences exist between centers in the reported frequency of the diagnosis of nonorganic functional hearing loss.

Nonorganic functional hearing loss incidence varies from 2% to 7%. Nonorganic functional hearing loss is more prevalent in children when compared to the general population.

In 1965, Berger et al. suggested that the increased prevalence of nonorganic functional hearing loss in this group may be due to educational stress resulting from a transfer to secondary school.

This is especially true for children with below-average intelligence because they may manage primary school with few or no problems, but transfer to more challenging secondary school may serve as a trigger for nonorganic functional hearing loss.

In 2010, Holenweg et al. found that the age distribution of nonorganic functional hearing loss was greater even in adults between 19 and 57 years of age compared to children.

# Pathophysiology

Nonorganic functional hearing loss implies an absence of anatomical or physiological pathology within the auditory system. In malingering, the symptoms are intentionally feigned or grossly exaggerated. The driving force behind these behaviors is secondary gain, such as financial compensation.

In factitious disorder, symptoms are intentionally feigned or exaggerated for psychological gains, such as care or compassion from others. The driving force behind these behaviors is the benefits obtained from assuming a sick role.

In conversion disorder, symptoms are unintentionally produced. This psychological change is often preceded by stresses such as interpersonal conflicts.

Conversion disorder represents a psychological defense mechanism in which emotional trauma is unconsciously translated into physical disability. The somatic symptom represents the resolution, although symbolic, of a psychological conflict.

# History and Physical

Obtaining a thorough history and physical examination is paramount when attempting to identify nonorganic functional hearing loss or exclude any underlying organic pathology. Many behaviors and clinical clues may be revealed during history taking and physical examination, guiding the examiner to suspect nonorganic functional hearing loss. Therefore, the examiner must observe the patient's behaviors keenly throughout the examination and history-taking process. The patient may cup the ear and rely excessively on lip reading and yet be able to answer the examiner when he turns away from the patient. Other patients may speak softly (patients with hearing loss often speak loudly as they cannot hear their own voices well) and appear nervous.

Such behaviors are important clues suggesting nonorganic functional hearing loss. In cases of unilateral hearing loss, however, reactions to sounds and communication abilities cannot be used to suggest nonorganic functional hearing loss.

The examiner should also note the source of the patient's referral, as insurance/compensatory claims companies often refer malingerers for evaluation.

A thorough history of any cause of emotional conflict or distress must be taken. Family problems, difficulties at work or school, recent psychological trauma, a sense of a lack of attention by parents (in the case of children), or a recent diagnosis of a life-threatening illness may be present.

History of psychiatric illness is important to note, as is a history of previous hearing loss or ear disease. Concomitant non-audiological symptoms such as unexplained weight loss and insomnia should be considered possible indicators of underlying psychological stress contributing to nonorganic functional hearing loss.

Anxiety over new school environments (e.g., skipping a grade, transferring to secondary school) may cause nonorganic functional hearing loss in children. In other cases, some children of higher than average intelligence may feel burdened by expectations to excel academically.

In contrast to this, children of less than average intelligence and those with learning difficulties may feel distressed that they cannot keep up with their peers. Many children with nonorganic functional hearing loss know people who are hard of hearing or may have suffered from hearing loss previously due to organic causes.

An otological examination should include careful inspection of the pinna, external auditory canal, and tympanic membrane. Tympanic membranes are generally normal in patients with nonorganic functional hearing loss. Occasionally, findings such as dulling of the tympanic membrane, tympanic membrane retractions, wax, and healed tympanic membrane perforations may be seen. In these cases, although a pathology does exist, the hearing loss exhibited is far greater than what would be expected if the patient does have nonorganic functional hearing loss.

# Evaluation

Lack of consistency in audiological testing is the mainstay of nonorganic functional hearing loss diagnosis.

An objective audiological assessment is necessary to establish a diagnosis. In the nonorganic functional hearing loss, the objective audiological tests show significantly better hearing thresholds than what would be expected from the subjective audiological assessment.

Subjective audiological tests include tuning fork tests (Rinne and Weber tests), pure tone audiometry (PTA), and speech audiometry.

**Rinne and Weber Tests**

Rinne and Weber tests may not align with the results obtained with PTA testing; i.e., a sensorineural hearing loss type curve may be seen on PTA with Rinne and Weber tests' findings suggesting conductive hearing loss and vice versa.

**Pure Tone Audiometry**

The test-retest variability of hearing thresholds determined by PTA is often greater than expected in cases of nonorganic functional hearing loss. Variability in excess of 15 dB HL is highly suspicious for a nonorganic etiology.

The lack of a shadow curve in the PTA of the normal ear, in the case of unilateral hearing loss, and the lack of occasional false-positive button presses by the patient during PTA are suggestive of nonorganic functional hearing loss.

Diagnosis is usually easier in children as they are likely to produce consistently inaccurate results on repeated testing.

**Speech Audiometry**

In cases of nonorganic functional hearing loss, speech audiometry usually shows better hearing thresholds than those predicted from PTA values.

Objective audiological tests used to confirm the diagnosis of nonorganic functional hearing loss include auditory brainstem responses (ABR), otoacoustic emissions (OAE), and auditory steady-state responses (ASSR).

**Auditory Brainstem Response**

In ABR testing, five electrical waves are produced by signal transmission through different anatomical structures within the auditory pathway:

- Waves I and II: proximal and distal cochlear nerve, respectively

- Wave III: second-order neurons near or in the cochlear nucleus

- Wave IV: third-order neurons near or in the superior olivary complex

- Wave V: termination of the lateral lemniscus in the inferior colliculus

The presence of these waves at normal auditory thresholds suggests that the corresponding structure is functioning adequately and, therefore, helps rule out organic pathology.

**Otoacoustic Emissions**

OAEs determine the integrity of the outer hair cells.

**Other Audiological Tests**

Auditory steady-state response (ASSR) is rarely used to diagnose nonorganic functional hearing loss.

Stapedial reflexes are generally elicited at values much higher than the threshold determined by PTA in cases of organic hearing loss. In the nonorganic functional hearing loss, stapedial reflexes are present within 10 dB of the patient's threshold or at values much lower than expected.

The Stenger test is also used to help diagnose unilateral nonorganic functional hearing loss, but it is of limited usefulness in children.

Because the auditory system is programmed to recognize only the louder of the two identical sounds, patients with nonorganic hearing loss will often fail to press the response button, while patients with organic unilateral hearing loss will still hear the sound in the normal ear and signal response. Other tests include the delayed auditory feedback speech test and Lombard reflex test.

# Treatment / Management

After establishing the diagnosis of nonorganic functional hearing loss, management strategies range from observation to counseling and psychiatric intervention.

A few patients recover without any intervention; however, pursuing this tack without a thorough evaluation runs the risk of failing to recognize possible underlying psychiatric conditions, which may lead to a relapse or worsening of symptoms. Appropriate counseling includes highlighting the inconsistencies in audiological testing in a nonconfrontational manner. Explanation, reassurance, and encouragement are often effective techniques.

The hearing loss should be acknowledged as real; the patient should not be held accountable for the hearing loss.

Assessing which patients need psychiatric intervention and which patients do not is a clinical challenge. Psychiatric needs must be evaluated on an individual basis.

Austen and Lynch suggest that the underlying need motivating the hearing loss must be elucidated and treated. This prevents the nonorganic hearing loss from returning or being converted to another nonorganic behavior.

# Differential Diagnosis

The diagnosis of nonorganic functional hearing loss can only be made when other organic pathologies have been excluded. Subjective audiological testing usually reveals a pattern coherent with sensorineural hearing loss.

Causes of organic sensorineural hearing loss include:

- Noise exposure

- Trauma

- Infection

- Ménière disease

- Autoimmune disease

- Perilymph fistula

- Otosclerosis

- Genetically-inherited hearing loss

- Tumor

- Exposure to ototoxic agents

- Metabolic dysfunction

As the onset of nonorganic functional hearing loss is often sudden, causes of sudden sensorineural hearing loss must also be excluded. Sudden sensorineural hearing loss can be due to ototoxicity, vascular occlusion, autoimmune diseases, viral infection, and even acoustic neuroma.

Auditory processing disorders, auditory neuropathy, and cortical auditory disorders should also be considered in the differential diagnosis.

The diagnosis of nonorganic functional hearing loss is likely to be made when there is great variability in audiological test results, with objective audiological tests showing an absence of pathology in the auditory system. A history of recent psychological stress usually precedes the onset of symptoms. Inconsistent and suspicious behaviors during the examination may alert the clinician to suspect nonorganic functional hearing loss.

# Prognosis

Nonorganic functional hearing loss has a generally good prognosis if the diagnosis is made and appropriate treatment is initiated. Spontaneous recovery has been noted in many studies.

However, in those patients with spontaneous recovery, relapse can occur in up to 25% of patients within a year. Factors indicating a better prognosis include prompt recognition, appropriate treatment, assessment of predisposing stress, and the absence of comorbid medical or psychiatric illness.

# Complications

The complications of nonorganic hearing loss arise most often due to misdiagnosis or delay in diagnosis. Unnecessary investigations, medical treatments, and even surgeries may result.

Enrollment of patients with nonorganic functional hearing loss in cochlear implant programs has been reported. In these cases, the actual cause of the hearing loss remains undiagnosed and leads to the prolongation of the patient’s suffering. Nonorganic functional hearing loss may present similarly to sudden sensorineural hearing loss. Given that an important treatment for sudden sensorineural hearing loss is systemic or intratympanic corticosteroids, nonorganic functional hearing loss should be ruled out before administering medications.

Steroids are not indicated in nonorganic functional hearing loss, and they may produce harmful side effects, particularly in children. In some cases, if nonorganic hearing loss is diagnosed but the underlying conflict is not resolved, later presentations of other nonorganic conditions such as visual disturbances may occur.

# Deterrence and Patient Education

Nonorganic functional hearing loss can have a significant impact on patients’ lives. Many patients have underlying psychiatric conflicts; therefore, appropriate patient education is critical. Patients should be counseled about discrepancies in audiological test results and encouraged that the condition will improve. If there is a need for specialist consultation with a psychiatrist, patients must be educated on the value of such interventions.

The need for close follow-up and the value of regular visits to the treating physician should be emphasized. Parents and teachers of children with nonorganic functional hearing loss need to be informed that the hearing loss is real to the child and that the child should not be blamed for the condition.

# Enhancing Healthcare Team Outcomes

While an audiologist and an otolaryngologist are predominantly involved in the care of an individual with nonorganic functional hearing loss, the role of an interprofessional team approach cannot be overstated. The audiologist is ideally placed to observe clues that indicate nonorganic hearing loss during testing.

Psychiatrists and psychologists may need to be consulted in cases of great psychological distress. Their role focuses on identifying the stressor and the underlying condition, followed by appropriate counseling.

Continuous contact with the patient’s general physician is recommended. The patient is unlikely to provide an accurate psychological history, and the general physician can fulfill this role.

A child neurologist may need to be consulted in cases of serious developmental disorders in children. Finally, when children are involved, their parents and teachers are essential allies during treatment.