**Non-pharmacologic Management**

Avoiding exposure to environmental factors that may provoke asthma personal or second-hand tobacco smoke, food or drug triggers, and pollutants and irritants is vital.

**STEP Therapy for Asthma**

The following discussion will highlight the step therapy proposed by EPR-3.

The preferred treatment option for intermittent asthma, as well as for quick relief of asthma symptoms and the prevention of exercise-induced bronchoconstriction is a short-acting beta-2 agonist. This is referred to as STEP 1. Albuterol and levalbuterol are examples of short-acting bronchodilators. They have a quick onset of action, within 5 to 15 minutes, and a duration of action of 4 to 6 hours. Their administration is most often by nebulizer or inhaler.

STEPS 2-6 refer to options for persistent asthma. In each of these steps, inhaled corticosteroids are a component of the preferred treatment regimen.

The preferred treatment for step 2 is a low-dose inhaled corticosteroid (ICS). Montelukast can be an alternative. Montelukast is a leukotriene receptor antagonist available in 4 mg granules, or 4 mg and 5 mg chewable tablets, as well as in a 10 mg tablet formulation. Single evening dosing prescribing is by age and FDA approved for asthma control from 12 months of age.

The preferred option for step 3 is a medium dose ICS in the 0 to 4-year-old children. In the 5 to 11 year age group, the preferred option is either a medium-dose ICS or a combination ICS + long-acting beta-agonist (LABA) or leukotriene receptor antagonist (LTRA). For those ages 12 years through adulthood, the preferred choice is a low dose of ICS + LABA or medium-dose ICS. There was a black-box warning on LABAs due to concerns about increasing deaths in patients taking LABAs; however, according to more recent studies, LABAs demonstrated safety when combined with inhaled corticosteroids. LABA monotherapy is indeed associated with an increase in asthma-related mortality and serious adverse events.

Step 4 in the 0 to 4-year-old age range is a medium dose ICS + either a LABA or montelukast. In ages, 5 to 11 years and 12 and above, a medium dose ICS + LABA is the preferred option.

Step 5 for 0-4 years is high dose ICS + either LABA or montelukast; in 5-11 years and 12 and above, a high dose ICS + LABA. EPR-3 also recommends consideration of omalizumab for ages 12 and above. Since the publication of these guidelines, Omalizumab has received FDA approval for ages 6 years and above. Omalizumab is a monoclonal antibody indicated for moderate to severe persistent asthma with objective evidence of perennial aeroallergen sensitivity and inadequate control with ICS.

Step 6 for ages 0-4 years is a high dose ICS + either LABA or montelukast or oral corticosteroids; for ages 5-11 years – high dose ICS + LABA + oral systemic corticosteroid; and for ages 12 and up, high dose ICS + LABA + oral corticosteroid are preferred. Omalizumab may be a consideration for appropriate patients with allergy.

Theophylline is a medication that may be an alternative medication in Steps 2 through 6. However, its use requires caution due to its narrow therapeutic range and potential side effects, including diuresis, tremors, and headaches.

Asthma action plans are recommended for all patients with asthma. These are individualized to and developed in partnership with each patient. They include detailed directions on how to manage asthma with instructions for when the patient is well, beginning to feel symptoms, and in an acute exacerbation that necessitates medical evaluation.

**Management of Acute Exacerbations**

Initial management of a child who presents to the emergency department with an acute asthma exacerbation includes bronchodilators and steroids.

Albuterol:

2.5 - 5 mg of nebulized albuterol should be given as initial management and can be re-dosed every 20 minutes. If the child is 5 years or older, 5 mg is the recommended dose. If a child is experiencing significant respiratory distress and is declining between doses, it may be re-dosed more frequently, or continuous nebulization of albuterol may be required.

Ipratropium:

Dosing of 250 to 500 mcg of ipratropium should be co-administered with albuterol for three doses in moderate to severe exacerbations.

Corticosteroids:

Oral and IV steroids have been demonstrated to have equivalent potency in treating acute asthma exacerbations. Patients should be given prednisolone PO or methylprednisolone IV 1 to 2 mg/kg/day or dexamethasone 0.6 mg/kg PO or IV depending on their level of respiratory distress and ability to swallow. Dexamethasone has been shown non-inferior to a short course of prednisone or prednisolone for an acute exacerbation.

Magnesium sulfate:

If the child continues to experience respiratory distress, they should receive magnesium sulfate at a dose of 50 mg/kg (up to 2 to 4 g) over 15 to 30 minutes.

In exacerbations that are refractory to the above, epinephrine (1 per 1000 concentration) at a dose of 0.01 mg/kg or terbutaline at a dose of 0.01 mg/kg, should be considered. These also have beta-agonist properties and thus promote bronchodilation.

Supplemental oxygen can be applied to maintain oxygen saturation above 90 to 92%, and heliox can be considered to aid in delivering oxygen to lower airways. If patients have been treated with all of the above and still are experiencing respiratory distress, non-invasive positive pressure ventilation should commence as it may alleviate muscle fatigue and assist in maximizing inspiration.

Intubation should be avoided in the asthmatic patient as there are several associated risks. Intubation may aggravate bronchospasm, induce laryngospasm, and increase the risk of barotrauma. Ketamine (at a dose of 1 to 2 mg/kg) is the preferred induction agent due to bronchodilator effects; it is also unlikely to cause hypotension. If intubated, asthmatic patients may require deep sedation or paralysis. On the ventilator, the I to E ratio should be 1:3 to allow for adequate expiratory time, tidal volume goal of 6-8 cc/kg, plateau pressure goal should be 30 or less, and PEEP of 5 or greater. Lung protective settings minimize alveolar collapse while reducing the risk of barotrauma.

**About the Devices**

Metered-dose inhalers

- Delivers the drug directly to the airway, though there is a significant amount (up to 90%) that is deposited in the oropharynx even if used correctly

- Should be inhaled shortly after initiating a slow, full inspiration and breath should be held for 10 seconds at full inflation

- Can be challenging to use in children less than 5 and in those with acute exacerbation

- Coordination of firing the inhaler and timing the inspiration becomes less important if using a spacer device. Some literature argues for the use of a spacer in all patients.

Nebulizers

- Useful in young children and those in acute exacerbation

- Allows for delivery of a higher dose to the airways, though only about 12% actually reaches the lungs

- Similar efficacy to inhalers when the inhalers are used correctly, though may patients have more confidence in the nebulizer as it is something they are continuously watching

Oral Medications

- Tablets and syrups bypass the requirement for coordinating inhalation and may bypass obstructed airways, though they may have systemic effects.

Injected medications

- Subcutaneous or intramuscular injections merit consideration in acute exacerbations in patients who are in acute exacerbations and are very ill

- Injectable medications include epinephrine and terbutaline, though they have systemic effects.

**When to refer to Pediatric Pulmonology**

Referral to a pulmonologist is necessary for patients who display signs of severe disease or have other complicating conditions. A patient should be referred for pulmonology care if he or she has had a life-threatening exacerbation or exacerbation requiring hospitalization, is not meeting goals of therapy after 3 to 6 months, is being considered for immunotherapy, requires step 4 or higher care (though in children 0 to 4, Step 2 or higher may be considered for referral), or has needed more than 2 bursts of oral steroids in a year. A child who has co-morbidities that complicate the diagnosis or the condition, in whom specialized testing is necessary, or in whom there is a complex psycho-social environment with sub-optimal compliance or exposure to provoking factors should also be considered for referral.