The visual pathway and pupillary light reflex pathway are complex coordinated systems in which multiple components participate with precision. Even one lesion in the pathway can severely deteriorate the quality of vision. The location of the lesion is associated with the extent and type of vision deficit.

**Optic Nerve**

A lesion in the optic nerve anterior to the optic chiasm leads to vision loss in the ipsilateral eye. Damage to the right optic nerve will result in the right anopia and compromise the entire visual field in the right eye. Damage to the optic nerve will also affect the pupillary reflex pathway. When a light is shined in the left eye with a damaged optic nerve, the light will not project to the retina for further response and pupillary constriction will be absent in both eyes. When a light is shined in the other eye without a damaged optic nerve, bilateral pupillary constriction will occur, which confirms that the optic nerve, not the oculomotor nerve, is damaged in the left eye.

**Oculomotor Nerve**

Damage to the oculomotor nerve, which presents parasympathetic outputs, results in sympathetic actions that are not balanced by the parasympathetic. These sympathetic symptoms include pupillary dilation, reduced or loss of pupillary light reflex, and compromised accommodation of the lens. When a light is shined in the left eye with a damaged oculomotor nerve, the light will project onto the retina, and the signal will arrive at bilateral Edinger-Westphal nuclei. However, only the right eye will show the pupillary constriction because the left eye’s efferent pathway has suffered disruption. A light shining in the right eye will also lead to a monocular pupillary constriction in the right eye and not the left eye.

**Visual System**

Damage at the optic chiasm leads to the bitemporal hemianopia. This condition frequently results from a pituitary lesion due to the proximity of the optic chiasm to the pituitary gland or an aneurysm of the anterior communicating artery. When the optic chiasm injury is present, the nasal retinal fibers that decussate at the chiasm get damaged. The temporal retinal fibers that do not cross but ipsilaterally project to the lateral geniculate nucleus will be unaffected. Because the images displayed on the back of the eye are upside-down and backward, the temporal half of the visual field projected onto the nasal portion of the retina would be lost. When the optic tract is damaged, the same side of the visual field is affected on both eyes. Each optic tract relays the visual signal from both eyes by projecting the ipsilateral temporal fibers and the contralateral nasal fibers. When the right optic tract gets injured, the left side of the visual field would be lost in both eyes and result in the left homonymous hemianopia.