Complications of metacarpal fractures are similar to those of most fractures, including nonunion, malunion, hand stiffness, and infection. For post-surgical patients, infections require treatment with antibiotics, hardware removal, and infected tissue debridement. Depending on the timing of the infection, skeletal fixation or reconstruction may require postponement until the resolution of the infection.

Stiffness can be detrimental in patients with hand fractures, especially when they occur in the dominant hand. For patients undergoing splinting or percutaneous pinning, exercises should begin at four weeks or as soon as achieving clinical union. However, those with plate fixation can be exercised immediately upon the removal of the sutures, which commonly occurs at the first post-op visit.

Metacarpal nonunions are rare and occur in as few as 0.2 to 0.7% of patients.

Malunion can be best observed by physical examination and plain films looking at knuckle height or abnormal digit rotation and scissoring and can lead to post-traumatic arthritis in articular fractures. For rotational or length deformities, corrective osteotomies can help to restore proper digit cascade, and for articular malunions, arthroplasty and fusion are two salvage options to attain acceptable outcomes.

As with any surgical procedure, damage to soft tissues, nerves, or arteries is possible. Care must be taken to preserve these structures, especially each neurovascular bundle and the dorsal sensory nerves in the hand, when performing dorsal approaches to the metacarpals for ORIF.

Plate fixation runs a risk of tendon irritation and, in the worst cases, rupture. If plates are used, periosteal closure should be done whenever possible to reduce this risk. Healthcare providers should evaluate extensor tendon function following operative and nonoperative management of these injuries.