HBOT initiates generalized vasoconstriction of healthy blood vessels. Exposure to partial pressures of oxygen of at least 2 ATA is known to induce arteriolar vasoconstriction and increase systemic vascular resistance. The main mechanism that leads to this vasoconstriction involves a reduction of nitric oxide production in the endothelium. The hyperoxic environment leads to increased oxidation of nitric oxide (NO) radicals produced by the endothelium, thus leading to a loss of the vasorelaxant effect. Additionally, some research has shown that HBOT leads to alterations in other vasodilator compounds, such as prostaglandins, which contribute to the net vasoconstriction effect. Another contributing factor involves central vasoregulation. It is thought that hyperoxia stimulates the sympathetic nervous system to promote vasoconstriction. Humans have been shown to have an augmentation of sympathetic nervous system activity, measured by the levels of plasma epinephrine and norepinephrine during these conditions.

The net increase in arteriolar vasoconstriction and systemic vascular resistance leads to an overall decrease in tissue edema and increased tissue oxygenation. Although vasoconstriction partially impedes blood flow, the hyperoxygenation of the plasma results in an overall gain in delivered oxygen. The central nervous system (CNS) is unique, however, in that short-term hyperoxia causes increased cerebral vasoconstriction and furthers the reduction of blood flow. However, even with the reduction of cerebral blood flow, the cerebrum receives more oxygen than it would otherwise.

HBOT stimulates vagal activity leading to sinus bradycardia. The mechanism behind the vagal activation involves the stimulation of neurons in the dorsal motor nucleus of vagus and nucleus solitarius. These brainstem neurons play important roles in the cardioinhibitory center and underlie the hyperbaric reflex bradycardia. There is also an increase in RR-interval variability and high-frequency variability in electrocardiogram analysis. These findings are interpreted as indicating that HBOT leads to parasympathetic activity and increases vagal tone. It has been suggested that another factor leading to the slowed heart rate is a nitrogen-dependent beta-blockade of the heart. However, there is yet to be strong evidence for that claim. The bradycardia that is associated with HBOT is considered to be a result of both the increased oxygen and the increased pressure. Hyperoxia is notably the major factor responsible for initiating and maintaining the bradycardia. However, there is a measurable non-oxygen dependent bradycardia that is associated with hyperbaric pressures. Both forces play an important role in the bradycardia associated with HBOT.

Other cardiovascular effects of hyperbaric hyperoxic conditions include a reduction of cardiac output, stroke volume, and ventricular contractility. The reduction of cardiac output is thought to be primarily due to the hyperoxic induced bradycardia. However, slightly diminished cardiac contractility may also be a contributing factor. In most patients, blood pressure remains unchanged during HBOT. The mitochondrial respiratory rate is an essential component of myocardial function because it influences the production of adenosine triphosphate during oxidative phosphorylation. Mitochondrial phosphorylation depends on oxygen tension. The hyperbaric hyperoxic conditions can provide oxygen to areas of the myocardium (or other tissues) that have low oxygen tensions. This allows the cells to continue to generate energy and maintains the physiological capability of the myocardium or other tissues.

A baroreflex-mediated mechanism primarily links the HBOT-induced cardiovascular responses of vasoconstriction, arterial hypertension, bradycardia, and reduced cardiac output. HBO-induced vasoconstriction triggers the baroreflex, and thus, acts via the vagal parasympathetic system to cause profound bradycardia without significant decreases in regional or systemic vascular resistance. The hyperoxic vasoconstriction activates mechanoreceptors located in the aortic arch and carotid sinuses which act as the major baroreceptors. The afferent discharges from these arterial baroreceptors evoke CNS responses that suppress sympathetic activity and promote parasympathetic outflow.

Increased systemic vascular resistance in the setting of left ventricular dysfunction may lead to pulmonary edema although at least one study found that mild impairment of ejection fraction (less than 40%) was fairly safe.

Exposure to hyperbaric environments has been shown to cause electrical activity disturbances in the heart occasionally. Arrhythmias under these conditions are believed to be due to an increase in vagal tone as well as heart distension from blood redistribution into the chest. The increased hydrostatic pressure from HBOT also decreases myocyte excitability and conduction by affecting the myocardial cell membrane directly. Additionally, alteration of cardiac excitation-contraction coupling may be another cause of arrhythmias. The most prominent conduction abnormality noted is QT interval prolongation. The QT prolongation is consistent with the level of bradycardia and is more prominent with decreasing heart rates. An increase in the incidence of junctional escape rhythms and isolated premature beats has also occasionally been measured in clinical studies. These conduction abnormalities, however, are fairly insignificant in terms of physiological consequences for the patient.

Neovascularization is another very important aspect of HBOT. Angiogenesis is dependent on the secretory function of the fibroblast laying down a matrix that can be invaded by capillary budding into it. The other essential component is a gradient of well-oxygenation to near anoxic tissues. VEGF is the main growth factor responsible for initiating the cascade of processes leading to new blood vessel formation. VEGF is induced by oxygen and has been shown to increase in level with increased oxygen tensions. HBO improves the elasticity of the RBC and reduces platelet aggregation. This, combined with the ability of the plasma to carry dissolved oxygen to areas where RBCs cannot reach, has a beneficial effect on the oxygenation of many hypoxic tissues in various circulatory disorders.

Lastly, it is also important to know the possible mechanical adverse effects associated with HBOT such as lung collapse, middle ear rupture, sinus damage, and changes in vision etc. The therapy usually does not last more than 2 hours.