An interprofessional team, including an interventional cardiologist and cardiothoracic surgeon, is required to treat the ventricular septal rupture. The ultimate treatment of ventricular septal rupture is a surgical repair.

To stabilize the patient, the afterload must be reduced with vasodilators. These agents may also decrease the left to right shunt associated with the VSR. Intravenous nitroglycerin is often used to improve myocardial blood flow and vasodilate the vessels. Inotropic support may be required in patients with low cardiac output. However, vasopressors can increase afterload and worsen the left to right shunt. The intra-aortic balloon pump (IABP) is vital for temporary hemodynamic support in these patients. The device lowers afterload and also decreases the shunt; at the same time, it facilitates coronary perfusion. As soon as the patient is stable, they should have surgery performed. Surgery should only be delayed in the following cases:

- No evidence of cardiogenic shock

- Patient having good perfusion and cardiac output

- Minimal or no signs of congestive heart failure

- Minimal use of vasopressors

- No retention of fluid

- Normal kidney function

**Surgical Closure**

There are two surgical techniques for repairing ventricular septal rupture, including the Daggett procedure and the David procedure.

- Daggett procedure: Patch over the defect with sutures in both the ventricles (infarct inclusion technique)

- David procedure: Patch over the rupture with stitches in the left ventricle only (infarct exclusion technique)

The repair of a posterior ventricular septal rupture is more challenging than an anterior rupture due to the proximity of papillary muscles. If the ventricular septal rupture develops within 24 hours of an MI, surgical intervention is more difficult as it is difficult to differentiate between healthy and newly infarcted tissue. Also, at this point, the muscle is weak and not able to hold the sutures. Additional procedures that may be required during the report of a VSR include mitral valve replacement, coronary artery bypass, and resection of the left ventricular aneurysm.

**Percutaneous Closure**

With advances in techniques, the percutaneous closure of a VSR has been developed as well. In some patients, a balloon catheter has been used to occlude the shunt. However, this is only a temporary fix. Because a large amount of prosthetic material is used to close the VSR, anticoagulation is recommended after surgery. Unfortunately, even in the best hands, residual VSR develops in 10%-25% of cases. If the VSD is small and the shunt is not large, the patient may be observed. Otherwise, repeat surgery is recommended. Some patients have benefited from percutaneous closure after the initial surgical approach. However, complications like embolization, ventricular perforation, and ventricular arrhythmias have been reported.

The mortality of surgical intervention within 24 hours of acute myocardial infarction is over sixty percent. In contrast, the untreated ventricular septal rupture has a mortality of 40% to 80%. Late surgical intervention has a good prognosis; however, this may not be an option for a patient with hemodynamic compromise. Surgical intervention within seven days of this complication has a mortality of 54.1%. On the other hand, surgery after seven days has a death rate of 18.4%.