Diltiazem is available in many dosage forms and strengths, making it imperative to be cautious when prescribing, dispensing, and administering this medication. There have been reports of diltiazem overdose in amounts ranging from <1 g to 18 g. In cases with the known outcome, most patients recovered, and in cases with a fatal outcome, the majority involved multiple drug ingestion.

**Clinical Features**

- Profound bradycardia

- Dizziness

- End organ dysfunction

- Hypotension

- AV block

- Cardiac failure

- Cardiac arrest

**Management**

- Treat according to ACLS protocol for arrhythmias and hypotension.

- Whole bowel irrigation for gastrointestinal decontamination

- Administer IV calcium gluconate or calcium chloride.

- Administer IV atropine (0.60 to 1.0 mg) for bradycardia.

- IV glucagon enhances intracellular levels of cyclic adenosine monophosphate and increases heart rate.

- Severe toxicity may respond to hyperinsulinemia/euglycemia therapy(HIET).

- Lipid emulsion therapy in significant cardiotoxicity.

- Transvenous pacemaker to assist with electrical conduction. If there are no contraindications, an intra-aortic balloon pump can be deployed.

- Extracorporeal membrane oxygenation is used for  Massive diltiazem overdose.

- CCBs, including diltiazem, are extremely protein-bound; consequently, extracorporeal removal by hemodialysis is ineffective.

- Administer vasopressors and inotropic agents (e.g., dopamine or norepinephrine) for severe hypotension and cardiac failure.

- The use of vasopressors is common in patients with diltiazem overdose and is associated with promising clinical outcomes.