The goal of treatment of open-angle glaucoma is:

- Prevention of progression of optic nerve head changes

- Prevention of deterioration of visual field

To achieve this goal, the concept of Target IOP was introduced.  It is the upper limit of IOP, below which it is estimated that the visual field and the optic nerve head/RNFL parameters will not deteriorate, and the quality of life of the patient will not get compromised.

**Glaucoma medications:**

Debate exists over the optimal time to initiate treatment of Open-angle glaucoma with some physicians initiating treatment of IOP once it reaches above only 21 mmHg, and others reserving treatment either until there is evidence of optic nerve damage or if the patient is at high risk of damage or progression of open-angle glaucoma.

Treatment should be initiated if signs of damage as a result of open-angle glaucoma are evident (e.g., disc hemorrhage, nerve fiber layer defects, asymmetric cupping, vertical ovalization or notching of the cup) or if symptoms of elevated IOP are present (e.g., halos, blurred vision, pain, IOP consistently above 28 mmHg to 30mmHg) due to the high risk of optic nerve damage in the setting of elevated IOP. Some physicians begin a monocular trial with medications only in one eye, to assess the effectiveness and side effects of chosen medications before treating both eyes. However, different eyes might have a different response to the same drug, asymmetric IOP fluctuation may occur, and the drug may have a contralateral effect.

A target IOP should be set individually depending on the severity of structural and functional damage, baseline IOP, age, race, family history, corneal thickness, corneal hysteresis, and other risk factors.

Follow-up should also be scheduled based on the level of success in IOP reduction between visits (e.g., more frequent follow-up with slower progression in treatment response) and the severity of optic nerve damage/visual field loss.

Overall, treatment should be individualized, taking into consideration the risk factors, systemic complications of medication use, the patient’s life expectancy, medical history, concomitant conditions, and the patient’s desire to receive treatment. The target IOP should be revised based on the behavior of optic nerve head damage and visual function (visual field).

If IOP/visual field/optic nerve head worsens while the patient is on medical therapy the compliance to therapy must be checked. Also, systemic factors including diabetes, smoking, and nocturnal hypotension should be controlled. The physician should himself/herself confirm from the patient the drops and how many times the patient is using these. A check should also be done to note if the administration of topical drops is correct or not. Closure of eyelids after administration of drops with nasolacrimal duct occlusion may prevent systemic absorption of the topical medication.

**Topical medications:**

Prostaglandin analog- Reduces IOP by 25% -33%. The usual dose in once daily. Side effects include lengthening of eyelashes, pigmentation of lids/ iris, exacerbation of uveitis/herpetic infection, and cystoid macular edema. It is preferred as initial therapy.

- Latanoprost

- Travoprost

- Bimatoprost

- Tafluprost

- Latanoprostene Bunod- This molecule donates has nitric oxide-donating property.

Adrenergic agents: Reduces IOP by 20%-25%. Brimonidine may cause allergic blepharoconjunctivitis and apnea/lethargy/bradycardia in children.

- Brimonidine

- Apraclonidine

Beta-blockers: Reduces IOP by 20%-25%. Non-selective beta-blockers should be avoided in chronic obstructive pulmonary disease and asthma. Other contraindications include heart block, hypotension, and bradycardia.

- Non-selective-

- Timolol

- Selective

- Betaxolol

Carbonic anhydrase inhibitor: Reduces IOP by 15%-20%.

- Dorzolamide

- Brinzolamide

Cholinergic/parasympathomimetic agents: Reduces IOP by 20%-25%.

- Pilocarpine

**Systemic agents:**

These are used in the acute rise of IOP or when topical medications are not tolerated.

Carbonic anhydrase inhibitor:

- Acetazolamide

Osmotic agents

- Mannitol

- Glycerol

**Laser Therapy for OAG:**

**Laser trabeculoplasty**

The indications of laser trabeculoplasty include

- As a primary therapy for OAG

- To reduce the number of glaucoma drops

- Non-compliance/intolerance to medical therapy

- Failure of medical therapy as a less invasive alternative therapy compared to surgery

The available methods of laser trabeculoplasty are:

- ALT (Argon laser trabeculoplasty)- More than 75% of unoperated eyes have a good reduction of IOP initially. Within 5 years, 30% to >50% eyes need additional surgical management. Repeat ALT usually (90%) fails to control IOP by 2 years.

- SLT (Selective laser trabeculoplasty)- It uses Q-switched frequency doubled Nd-YAG. The efficacy of SLT is similar to ALT.

- Micropulse laser trabeculoplasty-

**Diode Laser Cyclophotocoagulation (DLCP)**

DLCP is a method for ablation of the ciliary processes which secrete aqueous. Indications for DLCP include:

- Uncontrolled IOP in eyes with ambulatory vision if chances of surgical success are poor

- Uncontrolled IOP in painful blind eyes or eyes with minimal visual potential

- Uncontrolled IOP with maximal medication after failed glaucoma surgery/ies

**Surgical Management of OAG:**

Indications for surgical management of glaucoma are

- IOP above target pressure or progression of visual fields and optic disc changes despite good compliance and maximally tolerable glaucoma medication

- To avoid excessive glaucoma drops

- Significant barriers to effective and regular medication use including cost, compliance, physical disability, inconvenience, side effects, psychosocial

- Primary therapy for advanced glaucoma requiring very low target IOP

- Patient preference over other options

Surgical options include

- Trabeculectomy- Success rate may vary from 31-88%. The success rate increases with the use of mitomycin C or 5-fluorouracil. These agents, however, increase the risk of late-onset bleb leak, hypotony, and bleb-related infection.

- Glaucoma drainage device- Molteno, Baerveldt, Ahmed.

- Non-penetrating glaucoma surgery:

- Deep sclerectomy
- Viscocanalostomy
- Canaloplasty

- Minimally invasive or micro-invasive glaucoma surgery (MIGS)
- 'increasing trabecular outflow (Trabectome, iStent, Hydrus stent, gonioscopy-assisted transluminal trabeculotomy, excimer laser trabeculotomy);
- suprachoroidal shunts (Cypass micro-stent);
- reducing aqueous production (endocyclophotocoagulation); and
- subconjunctival filtration (XEN gel stent)'

**Cyclocryotherapy**

This is another method of cycloablation using cryotherapy usually reserved for painfully blind eyes.

**Painful blind eyes from glaucoma may need**

- Enucleation

- Retrobulbar injection of absolute alcohol