Opioid therapy should begin as a trial for a pre-defined period, usually less than 30 days. Treatment goals should be established prior to the initiation of opioid therapy. These should include the hoped-for level of relief of pain, anxiety, and depression as well as the desired return of function. Goals should also include avoiding unnecessary opioid use. The plan should include therapy selection, progress measures, and additional consultations, evaluations, referrals, and therapies. The provider should:

- Start at the lowest possible dose and then titrate to effect

- Start with short-acting opioid formulations

- Discuss the need for frequent risk/benefit assessments

- Instruct the patient regarding the signs and symptoms of respiratory depression

- Reassess risk/benefit with each dose increase

- Justify decisions to titrate dose to 90 mg or more morphine equivalent dose

- Be knowledgeable of federal and state opioid prescribing regulations

- Be knowledgeable of patient monitoring, equianalgesic dosing, and cross-tolerance with opioid conversion

- Augment treatment with nonopioid or, if necessary, immediate-release opioids over long-acting opioids

- Taper opioid dose whenever possible

**Consent and Treatment**

**The opioid prescription should include documented informed consent and a treatment agreement addressing:**

- Drug interactions

- Physical dependence

- Side effects

- Tolerance

- Physical dependence

- Driving and motor skill impairment

- Limited evidence of long-term benefit

- Addiction, dependence, misuse

- Risk/benefit profile of the drug prescribed

- Signs/symptoms of overdose

Prescribing policies should be clearly described, including policies regarding the number and frequency of refills and procedures for lost or stolen medications.

**Patient and Physician Treatment Agreement**

- The patient should agree to use medications safely, avoid "doctor shopping," and consent to urine drug testing

- The prescriber should agree to address problems, followup visits, and scheduled refills

Reasons for opioid therapy change or discontinuation should be listed. Agreements can also include follow-up visits, monitoring, and safe storage and disposal of unused drugs. If the patient does not speak English, an interpreter should be used.

**Discontinuing Opioid Therapy**

Discontinuing opioid therapy should be based on a physician-patient discussion. Opioids should be discontinued when the pain has resolved, side effects develop, analgesia is inadequate, quality of life is not improved, function is deteriorating, or there is evidence of aberrant medication use. Opioids should be tapered slowly and withdrawal should be managed by an addiction specialist.