The sequential treatment of pudendal neuralgia relieves or reduces symptoms in most patients. After successful pudendal nerve blocks, pain reduction usually permits a return to a normal lifestyle. Complete cures over 12 years have been reported, with some extending to 20 years. Overall success for pudendal nerve blocks is about 80%, while surgery provides extended relief in properly selected patients in 60% to 80% of those treated. Although there are occasional reports of immediate and total relief following surgery, most clinicians report pain/symptom control gradually improving over 6 to 24 months or longer. Therefore, patients should be given realistic expectations, and a post-operative treatment/monitoring program should be established.

Alternative treatments such as sacral neuromodulation, cryotherapy, pulse radiofrequency ablation, and lipofilling are promising and can reasonably be considered in intractable cases (particularly sacral neuromodulation, which is safe, minimally invasive, widely available, and generally underutilized for pudendal neuralgia) even though the medical literature is incomplete on these treatment modalities as good success rates have been reported but only in small, short term studies.

The success of the various treatment modalities may be influenced by:

- The degree of nerve injury and duration of compression

- The skill and experience of the individual treating physicians and their ability to work together as a multidisciplinary team

- The availability and use of adjunctive services such as pain management, interventional radiology, psychology, physical therapy, etc.

- Failure to recognize that the persistence of symptoms is a consistently reported part of the normal healing process even after definitive therapy

- Central sensitization is common in patients with pudendal neuropathy and may amplify the persistence or intensity of symptoms

- Concurrent neuropathies that may occur in pudendal neuropathy patients may require additional treatment

- Iliohypogastric and ilioinguinal neurectomies may be necessary to fully eliminate inguinal/lower quadrant pain

The leading cause of recurrent symptoms of pudendal neuralgia is the early resumption of the activities which originally aggravated the condition, such as cycling, exercising, jogging, and prolonged sitting. For example, after the sacrospinous ligament has been surgically removed or decompressed and the “lobster claw” released, the Valsalva maneuver during lifting or squatting may force the pelvic floor to compress the nerve against the sacrotuberous ligament again and re-aggravate the injury with a return of symptoms.