Hemorrhoids have been identified as cushions of vascular tissue located within the anal canal. Hemorrhoids themselves are normal but hemorrhoidal disease is not. Patients often have a poor understanding of anorectal complaints, and often referring providers have little training regarding hemorrhoidal disease. Internal hemorrhoids are vascular cushions that consist of elastic and connective tissue, and they are enveloped with Trietz suspensory ligament, which envelopes the entire corpus cavernous recti.

External hemorrhoids are distal to the dentate line, often confluent with the anal verge, enervated withs somatic sensory branches of the pudendal nerve. They contain the same sort of vascular sinusoids, but they are larger and predominantly venous. The slow flow through the external hemorrhoids leaves them prone to thrombosis. They are covered with squamous epithelium, the anoderm, and skin and are well innervated. They tend to appear in the classic anatomical spots of left lateral, right anterior, and right posterior, as described by Miles in 1919. Anywhere between 3-6 terminating branches of the hemorrhoidal arteries supply the area. This was demonstrated by Thomson in a cadaveric study in 1975.

The pathophysiology of hemorrhoidal disease begins with a combination of straining, a poorly balanced diet, and poor bowel habits. This can lead to increased vascularity, inflammation, anal sphincter hypertonicity, and possible connective tissue enzymatic imbalance. This process leads to deterioration of Treitz muscle, which causes downward displacement of these cushions. The AV anastomosis distends and causes pooling in the veins and further worsens the deterioration in the muscle. The traditional concept of hemorrhoids being "varicose veins" is perpetuated in all medical dictionaries and most textbooks of medicine.