- CIDP is a type an immune-mediated disorder that affects the myelinated structures of the peripheral nervous system

- It can be monophasic, progressive, relapse-remitting developing over more than 8 weeks which distinguishes it from AIDP and GBS variants

- It is typically symmetric, affecting proximal and distal sensorimotor patterns, with a demyelinating nerve conduction pattern that includes a focal or multi-focal distal latency prolongation, decreased or block in conduction, prolonged or absent F-wave latency, temporal dispersion, and increased duration.

- Atypical variants include DADS, CISP, MADSAM/Lewis-Sumner syndrome, focal/diffuse brachial or lumbosacral plexopathy, pure motor, and pure sensory.

- The pathophysiology includes a chronic, maladaptive self-targeting of myelinated components of the neurons by the coordinated activation of innate (macrophages) and adaptive immune systems, including humoral (B and T cell) and cell (T-cell) based mechanisms.

- Typical symptoms include symmetric large> small fiber paresthesias, paraparesis, diffuse fatigue, and areflexia.

- Atypical symptoms include asymmetric allodynia, painful cervical/lumbar radiculomyelopathies, multiple cranial nerve neuropathies, bulbar (dysarthria, dysphagia, dyspnea), and autonomic symptoms (e.g., dysrhythmias, urinary retention, and constipation), tremors, and spasticity.

- Uncontrolled diabetes mellitus type II is a strong risk factor for developing CIDP.

- Alternate differential diagnosis includes toxic, metabolic, systemic, infectious, iatrogenic, hereditary, neoplastic, and multifocal motor neuropathies.

- Supporting ancillary testing includes a CSF with albumocytologic dissociation, gadolinium-enhancing hypertrophy of the neuroaxis, delayed somatosensory evoked potentials, or biopsy with unequivocal evidence of demyelination/remyelination.

- Treatment includes acute and chronic immunomodulatory treatments such as serial IVIG, plasmapheresis, prednisone, mycophenolate mofetil, azathioprine, cyclophosphamide, cyclosporine, and in special cases, rituximab

- Complications of therapy include infusion reaction, headaches, infections, renal failure, and hypercoagulability.

- Prognosis is variable and can depend on age, clinical course, responsiveness to treatment, and electrophysiological findings.

- Aggressive rehabilitation is instrumental for the long-term recovery of CIDP patients