AML is characterized by mutations of the genes involved in hematopoiesis. These mutations result in a clonal expansion of undifferentiated myeloid precursors (blasts) in the peripheral blood and bone marrow resulting in ineffective erythropoiesis and bone marrow failure. Recent studies also revealed that it could arise from a series of recurrent hematopoietic stem cell genetic alterations which get accumulated with age. In most cases, AML appears as de novo in a previously healthy person. The exact cause of genetic mutations is unclear, but few risk factors include exposure to radiation, chemotherapeutic agents, and smoking. AML can also evolve from myeloproliferative disorders (MPD), myelodysplastic syndrome (MDS), paroxysmal nocturnal hemoglobinuria, and aplastic anemia. Familial causes of genetic mutations should also be considered.

AML is a highly heterogeneous disease with a variable prognosis. It can result from genetic mutations, chromosomal translocations, or changes in molecular levels. About 97% of the cases have been studied to have genetic mutations. Despite its heterogeneity, it can be categorized into favorable, intermediate, or adverse-risk groups based on cytogenetics. The prognosis within these categories varies widely. The chromosomal translocations t (8;21), t (15;17), or inv (16) have a favorable prognosis with 3-year overall survival (OS) rate of about 66% and 33% in patients younger than 60 and older than 60 years of age respectively. People with t (9;11), monosomy 5 or 7, and normal cytogenetics (CN-AML) have an intermediate risk. A high risk of treatment failure and death was noted in people with t (6;9), inv (3). or 11q changes. The presence of c-KIT mutations in patients with t (8;21) increases the risk of relapse and decreases the OS.

About 25% to 30% of AML patients have Nucleophosmin 1 (NPM1) mutations. This is the most common mutation found in AML and has a female predominance. Clinically, the mutation has monocytic morphology and in the absence of FMS-like tyrosine kinase 3 or FLT3-ITD, predicts favorable OS. NPM1 mutations are chemosensitive to intensive chemotherapy in both young and old patients. It is associated with other recurrent genetic abnormalities such as FLT3-ITD (40%), FLT3-TKD (10% to 15%), and IDH mutations (25%).

FLT3 is strongly expressed in hematopoietic stem cells with important roles in cell survival and proliferation. Mutations involving the Internal tandem duplications (ITD) and the tyrosine kinase domain (TKD) of the FLT3 gene have been found in 20% of AML cases and 30% to 45% of CN-AML patients. Both the mutations activate FLT3 signaling, promoting blast proliferation. Patients with FLT3 mutations can have severe leukocytosis. FLT3-ITD mutations have been associated with an increased risk of relapse. Tyrosine kinase inhibitors (TKI) are being tested in FLT3 mutated AML patients. Unfortunately, when used alone, TKIs showed only a transient reduction of blasts, and even if initially effective, the subsequent acquisition of secondary mutations induces resistance over time.

Runt-related transcription factor (RUNX1) is an essential component of hematopoiesis. It is also known as AML1 protein or core-binding factor subunit alpha-2 (CBFA2). RUNX1 is located at chromosome 21 and is frequently translocated with the ETO (Eight Two One)/RUNX1T1 gene located on chromosome 8q22, creating an AML-ETO or t(8;21)(q22;q22) AML which is seen in about 12% of AML cases. They are commonly associated with trisomy 13, trisomy 21 and show resistance to standard induction therapy.

Mutations in isocitrate dehydrogenase (IDH) are oncogenic. They are seen in 15% to 20% of all AML cases and 25% to 30% of patients with CN-AML. More commonly seen in older individuals.

TP53 mutations are associated with very poor prognosis and are resistant to chemotherapy.