Dexamethasone use is contraindicated if patients have systemic fungal infections, hypersensitivity to dexamethasone, or cerebral malaria. Another contraindication is to administer live or live-attenuated vaccines during dexamethasone use. The immune system will be suppressed, placing the patient at risk of infection. It is still permissible to administer killed or inactivated vaccines. However, it bears mentioning that corticosteroids may attenuate immune response, and it is unpredictable if immunity develops.

In patients with cirrhosis, diverticulitis, myasthenia gravis, renal insufficiency, or ulcerative diseases such as peptic ulcer disease or ulcerative colitis, it is important to use caution when prescribing dexamethasone.

Recommendations include using dexamethasone cautiously during pregnancy as there is an increased risk of oral cleft formation.

Clinical experience has shown that large doses can increase blood pressure. In patients with recent myocardial infarction, it is advised to caution as an increase in free wall rupture of the left ventricle has been reported using dexamethasone.

Suppression of the hypothalamus-pituitary-adrenal axis (HPA axis) occurs with use, and therefore the rapid withdrawal of dexamethasone is not recommended. It is important to gradually increase and decrease any corticosteroid due to its effect on the HPA axis.

Latent diseases such as fungal (candida, cryptococcus, pneumocystis), parasitic (toxoplasmosis, amebiasis, Strongyloides), and bacterial (mycobacterium, Nocardia) infections may become active due to suppression of the immune system.

Steroid use may inhibit bone formation and may lead to the formation of osteoporosis. Therefore, caution is necessary when prescribing dexamethasone to populations at higher risk for osteoporosis.