Damage to the facial nerve can have various etiologies including iatrogenic, trauma, stroke, idiopathic Bell palsy, neoplasm, or granulomatous meningitis. It is very important not only to recognize the cause of the paralysis but also the side at which the lesion has occurred. The precise neurologic examination allows us to point to the side of the lesion with the greatest likelihood.

**Supranuclear Lesion**

This occurs as a result of damage to the UMN of the facial nerve. The most common cause of this condition is a lacunar stroke in the posterior limb of the internal capsule. However, UMN lesions can be caused by damage to any part of the corticobulbar tract as it travels from the primary motor cortex in the precentral gyrus of the frontal lobe. From there, the corticobulbar tract descends through the corona radiata and the anterior part of the posterior limb of the internal capsule, and then further in the crus cerebri to the caudal portion of the ventrolateral pontine tegmentum. In the pons, axons of UMN synapse with lower motor neurons in the facial motor nucleus. As was described previously, the supranuclear innervation is bilateral to the muscles of the upper part of the face and contralateral to the muscles of the middle and lower part of the face. UMN lesion results in paralysis of the contralateral middle and lower parts of the face with sparing of the muscles of the forehead and the orbicularis oculi muscle.

**Nuclear or Infranuclear****Lesion**

Lesions that involve the facial motor nucleus or the infranuclear portion of the facial nerve result in complete paralysis of all the facial muscles on the ipsilateral side. The patient presents with mouth droop, flattening of the nasolabial fold, inability to close eye, and smoothing of the brow on the damaged side.

The precise anatomic location of the lesion can be evaluated by the characteristics of the dysfunctions and involvement of associated structures:

- PonsLesion of ventral pons: ipsilateral facial plegia, palsy of lateral rectus muscle (abducens nerve), contralateral hemiplegia (corticospinal fibers)Lesion of pontine tegmentum: ipsilateral facial plegia, contralateral hemiplegia, paralysis of conjugate gaze to the side of the lesion (pontine paramedian reticular formation)

- Cerebellopontine angleIpsilateral facial plegia, decreased secretion of saliva and tears, hyperacusis, and loss of taste (ageusia) in anterior two-thirds of the ipsilateral part of the tongue. In addition, other cranial nerves can be damaged. If the vestibulocochlear nerve is involved, further findings can present as deafness, vertigo, tinnitus; the trigeminal nerve – ipsilateral sensory loss over face and absence of corneal reflex

- Facial canal between the internal acoustic meatus and the geniculate ganglionIpsilateral facial plegia, decreased secretion of saliva and tears, hyperacusis and ageusia to anterior two-thirds of the ipsilateral part of the tongue

- Facial canal between geniculate ganglion and nerve to the stapedius muscleIpsilateral facial plegia, decreased salivary secretion, ageusia to anterior two-thirds of the ipsilateral part of the tongue, hyperacusis.

- Facial canal between nerve to stapedius and leaving of chorda tympaniIpsilateral facial plegia, decreased salivary secretion, ageusia to anterior two-thirds of the ipsilateral part of the tongue

- After giving the branch of chorda tympaniIpsilateral facial plegia

**Bell Palsy**

Bell palsy is an idiopathic form of facial nerve palsy. One theory is that it is caused by edema because of a viral infection. Bell palsy can be distinguished from other causes of facial paralysis by rapid onset over several hours and lack of trauma. What is more, this kind of facial paralysis is very often self-limiting, and the patient usually recovers within days to weeks. Residual symptoms can include facial weakness, synkinesis, tearing, and contracture. Patients can benefit from early initiation of steroids as this prevents the progression of edema, diminishes chances of further damage, and speeds recovery. There is no established evidence for the use of antiviral agents. Eye patching and artificial tears protect from corneal scarring.