- Medical conditions that can result in the development of a phobia include substance use particularly hallucinogens and sympathomimetics, central nervous system (CNS) tumors, and cerebrovascular diseases. However, in these conditions, phobic symptoms are unlikely in the absence of additional findings on physical, neurological, and mental status examinations.

- Schizophrenic patients may also present with phobic symptoms. However,  patients with a phobia have intact insight into their irrational fears and lack psychotic symptoms associated with schizophrenia.

- It is also important to rule out panic disorder, agoraphobia, and avoidant personality disorder. It can be difficult to distinguish specific phobia from panic disorder, agoraphobia, and avoidant personality disorder. However, in specific phobias, these patients tend to experience anxiety or fear immediately upon exposure to the phobic stimulus. In addition, patients with specific phobia do not exhibit signs of fear or anxiety when they are not facing or anticipating the phobic stimulus.

- It is important to rule out other conditions such as hypochondriasis, obsessive-compulsive disorder, and paranoid personality disorder. There is a subtle difference between hypochondriasis and specific phobia. For example, patients with hypochondriasis fear having the disease, and patients with specific phobia fear contracting the disease. The same holds true for the difference between obsessive-compulsive disorder and specific phobia. For example, patients with OCD may avoid knives because they have compulsive thoughts of harming their children; whereas, patients with a specific phobia may avoid knives because they fear cutting themselves. Patients with paranoid personality disorder have generalized fear, which is not found in patients with specific phobia.