Following radical inguinal orchiectomy, postoperative reconstructive surgery with prosthetic testicle is gaining popularity. The operation is comparable to an inguinal herniorrhaphy, and the patient should do limited physical activity for a brief post-surgery period. A short course of pain management medication is advised. Complications are rare but can include wound infection, hematoma, anesthetic risk, and inguinal skin numbness.

Surveillance for seminomas after initial management is as follows:

Clinical stage I seminoma after orchiectomy alone:

- **Year 1**: History and physical examination (H&P) every 3-6 months, CT scan of abdomen +/- pelvis at 3, 6, and 12 months.

- **Years 2 and 3**: H&P and CT scan of abdomen +/- pelvis every 6-12 months.

- **Years 4 and 5**: H&P annually, and CT scan of abdomen +/- pelvis every 12-24 months.

*At any point in five years, a chest x-ray is recommended as clinically indicated, and chest CT with contrast is obtained if the patient is symptomatic. Serum tumor markers are optional with H&P.

Clinical stage I seminoma after adjuvant therapy (chemotherapy or radiation):

- **Years 1 and 2**: H&P every 6-12 months, and CT scan of abdomen +/- pelvis annually

- **Year 3**: H&P and CT of abdomen +/- pelvis annually

- **Years 4 and 5**: H&P annually

*At any point in five years, a chest x-ray is recommended as clinically indicated, and chest CT with contrast is obtained if the patient is symptomatic. Serum tumor markers are optional with H&P.

Clinical stage IIA and non-bulky IIB seminoma after radiation or chemotherapy:

- **Year 1**: H&P every three months, CT scan of abdomen +/- pelvis at three months and then every 6-12 months, and chest x-ray every six months.

- **Year 2**: H&P every six months, CT scan of abdomen +/- pelvis annually, and chest x-ray every six months.

- **Year 3**: H&P every six months, and CT scan of abdomen +/- pelvis annually.

- **Year 4 and 5**: H&P every six months and CT scan fo abdomen +/- pelvis as clinically indicated.

*Serum tumor markers are optional with H&P.

Clinical bulky stage IIB, IIC, and stage III seminoma after chemotherapy:

- **Year 1**: H&P with serum tumor markers every two months, CT scan of abdomen/pelvis every four months, and chest X-ray every two months.

- **Year 2**: H&P with serum tumor markers every three months, CT scan of abdomen/pelvis every six months, and chest X-ray every three months.

- **Years 3 and 4**: H&P with serum tumor markers every six months, CT scan of abdomen/pelvis chest X-ray annually.

- **Year 5**: H&P with serum tumor markers annually, CT scan of abdomen/pelvis as clinically indicated, and chest X-ray annually.