Hidradenitis suppurativa is a complex condition with numerous comorbidities. An interprofessional approach is most effective in the management of this disease.

Although hidradenitis suppurativa is considered a dermatologic condition, individuals do not always present to the dermatology office with symptoms. Often family and internal medicine clinicians, pediatricians, and obstetricians/gynecologists are the individual's first contact within the health care system. It is critical for primary care providers to recognize hidradenitis suppurativa based on the morphology, location, and chronicity of lesions and begin the correct treatment early in the disease process. Depending on the severity of the disease and the training of the primary providers, they may treat independently or refer to specialists, including dermatologists, surgeons, wound care, and pain management.

Besides clinicians, nurses, pharmacists, and other allied healthcare providers may also form part of the interprofessional team treating hidradenitis suppurativa. NUrses can counsel patients, assist with the history and examination, and serve as a contact point for the clinicians for patients and other team members. Pharmacists will verify drug dosing, check for interactions, and counsel patients on proper administration. Since there is a significant psychosocial impact associated with this disease, the treatment team should also include providers of mental health support. If not provided at the primary care level, psychiatrists, psychologists, or counselors should be involved as needed. ALl interprofessional team members are responsible for accurately documenting their observations and interventions in the patient's health record, so all team members have the same data from which to operate. Open communication is essential if anyone on the care team notes an issue with the patient's case. This interprofessional paradigm will drive optimal patient outcomes. [Level 5]