Boundaries of the ischioanal fossa are:

- The apex is the intersecting fibers of the obturator internus and the levator ani muscles: these are the condensed fibers of the medial aspect of the parietal pelvic fascia covering the obturator internus muscle, named arcus tendineus of the endopelvic fascia, on which the iliococcygeus portion of the levator ani muscle inserts. The sacrospinous ligament delimits the lateral-posterior aspect.

- The base is oriented inferiorly and posteriorly; it is delimitated by the gluteus maximus muscle and the sacrotuberous ligament, the coccyx, the anococcygeal raphe, the external anal sphincter, the posterior margin of the superficial perineal fascia, and the posterior border of the transversus superficialis muscle of the perineum.

- The floor is the skin of the posterior quadrants of the perineum limited by the ischial tuberosities and the coccyx and separated by the anococcygeal raphe.

- The roof comprises the inferior fascia covering the levator ani muscle.

- The pyramid wall comprises the puborectalis muscle and the pubococcygeal muscle covering the anal canal, and the external anal sphincter.

- The lateral wall is formed by the medial aspect of the obturator fascia, the ischial tuberosity, and the obturator internus muscle. The fascia covering the lateral wall duplicates to form the canal in which the pudendal vessels run. The sacrotuberous ligament inserts on the ischial tuberosity; it blends the fibers with the tendon of the biceps femoris muscle and continues to the inferior pubic angle as the falciform ligament.

The ischioanal fossa anteriorly continues to the pubic bones between the muscular layers and the fascia of the levator ani muscle above and the deep, transverse perineal muscle and the compressor urethra muscle below, running laterally to the urogenital organs. As a result, the fatty space assumes a wedge-shape around the portion of the pelvic viscera under the levator ani muscle, from the pubis to the coccyx.

- Internal pudendal artery, vein, and nerve.

- Inferior rectal artery and vein

- Inferior rectal nerve

- Posterior scrotal vessels and nerves

- Perineal branch of S4 and perforating cutaneous nerve

- Lymphatics

- Subcutaneous fat is abundant on both sides of the anal canal, which permits distension of the anal canal during defecation. The different adipose tissue around the anal canal and into the ischioanal fossa could help the tone of the plate of the levator ani muscle to balance the gradient pressures of the different intra-and extra-peritoneal spaces of the abdomen, pelvis, and perineum.