**Open/ Standard Discectomy (SD)**

After administering general anesthesia, the patient gets positioned prone on a spine frame (Wilson or Allen Bow) or a dedicated table. Transverse pads at the iliac crest and chest allow for flexion of the hips to increase interlaminar distance while avoiding pressure on the abdomen to reduce central venous pressure.  Palpation of bony landmarks, including the sacrum and iliac crests corresponding to the L4-L5 disc level, may guide the start point and trajectory of the surgical approach. After appropriate sterile skin prep, localization using a spinal needle and fluoroscopic control confirms the target level. A 3 to 4-cm longitudinal incision is marked at the midline centered about the radiographic marker.

The skin incision is made with a sharp scalpel, and subcutaneous dissection with electrocautery reveals the lumbar fascia; this is incised just off of midline, as identified by palpating the spinous processes, ipsilateral to the disc pathology addressed. This fascia should span the interspinous distance at the target level. A radiographic marker may be used to confirm the spinal level and cranially directed trajectory in line with the interspinous space on a lateral fluoroscopic image. Using electrocautery, a subperiosteal elevation of paraspinal musculature from the superior and inferior spinous processes is completed down to the laminar junction. Lateral dissection continues bluntly with a Cobb elevator as far laterally as the facet joint taking care not to violate its capsule. Visualization of the interlaminar space is essential; removing dissected muscle tissue in the surgical field, proper retraction, and diligent hemostasis using electrocautery is crucial. At this point, the surgeon releases the ligamentum flavum from its attachment on the anterior aspect of the lamina of the superior vertebra using a curette. An angled Woodson elevator may then be inserted anterior to the ligamentum, directed caudally, to protect the dura beneath. The ligamentum is then incised sharply to allow for its retraction with a Penfield elevator and visualization of the exiting nerve root and associated epidural fat. The medial aspect of the inferior facet of the superior vertebra may require resection to allow for adequate exposure. A Penfield or blunt probe is then passed into the neuroforamen to mobilize the root, enabling its medial retraction. With adequate visualization of the intervertebral disc space, removal of fragmented or herniated tissue may then be carried out using pituitary rongeurs. If a portion of the herniation remains beneath the posterior longitudinal ligament, a scalpel may be necessary to incise the annulus for access. Care must be taken to probe the epidural space using a Woodson elevator in all directions for any additional disc or ligamentous tissue.

Additionally, it is advisable to irrigate the disc space with saline via a bulb syringe to express any loose disc fragments that may have gone unvisualized.   Meticulous hemostasis via bipolar electrocautery is achieved, and the wound is liberally irrigated with saline. The fascial and subcutaneous layers are closed with absorbable sutures, and the skin closure is by surgeon preference.

**Minimally Invasive Surgery (MIS) Tubular Discectomy**

The patient is positioned and prepped as described above. A 1.5 to 2.0 cm surgical incision is marked longitudinally, 1.5 cm off midline on the affected side.  A stab incision with a #15 scalpel allows the introduction of a guide pin or K-wire, which is advanced under lateral fluoroscopy to ensure appropriate depth as well as docking to the lamina cranial to the affected level. Once the start point and trajectory are confirmed, the full skin incision is made, and a fascial incision is centered over the wire. Sequential dilator retractors are placed to create a working channel that may be anchored to the operating table.  Magnifying surgical loupes or intra-operative microscopic are useful adjuncts to aid in visualization. Utilizing instruments appropriately designed for a tubular approach, the remainder of the procedure takes place as described above. Meticulous hemostasis is achieved, the tubular retractor system is removed, and the closure of subcutaneous tissue and skin completes the case.

**Micro-endoscopic Discectomy (MED)**

The patient is positioned and prepped as described above. Beginning at a start point 1 to 2 cm off of midline ipsilateral to pathology, the anatomical space bound by traversing nerve root, exiting nerve root, and superior aspect of the caudal vertebra known as a Kambin triangle is approached at the target level using a spinal needle. A 5 to 10mm skin incision is made, and successive cannulated dilators under fluoroscopic guidance allow for the introduction of an 18 mm operating canal through which the endoscope for visualization of the disc space, traversing and exiting nerve roots, and the passing of instruments are made. A laminotomy of the cranial vertebra may be made, and targeted nerve roots may be decompressed using endoscopic curettes, rongeurs, drills, and bipolar electrocautery. Herniated disc material may thus be removed. A single small endoscopic incision is closed with a subcuticular suture.

**Full endoscopic discectomy (FE)**

- The approach is lateral and trans-foraminal.

- The entry point is 12 to 14 cm off the midline, at an angle of 20° to 30°.

- This approach is not recommended for sequestrated intra-canal fragments.

**Post-Operative Care**

Typically, patients may be discharged on the first postoperative day after an uncomplicated discectomy. An additional postoperative stay may be necessary for physical therapy rehabilitation or oral pain control.  Discectomy on an outpatient basis has been described and practiced at some centers.

**Postoperative advice:**

- Light activities can be resumed at 2 weeks.

- Routine activities can be resumed at 6 weeks.

- Strenuous labor or contact sports can be resumed after 12 weeks.

Rehabilitation plays an integral part.