The clinical significance of the sympathetic nervous system is vast as it affects many organ systems. Of the many physiological and pathological processes, pheochromocytoma, erections and priapism, diabetic neuropathy, and orthostatic hypotension are described below.

Pheochromocytomas are tumors that arise from chromaffin cells present in the adrenal medulla or paraganglion cells that secrete excess amounts of catecholamines (norepinephrine, epinephrine). Because of this catecholamine release, the symptoms are largely that of sympathetic activation, such as hypertension, tachycardia/palpitations, hyperglycemia, and diaphoresis.

Erections are a product of parasympathetic activity. In the resting state, the SANS predominates, and the penis remains flaccid. However, if the sympathetic fibers to the penis are damaged or compromised, a sustained erection of over 4 hours, called priapism, can occur and result in devastating consequences to the penis. This condition can result from spinal cord or cauda equina injury as the sympathetic input is damaged, and the parasympathetic tone dominates.

Diabetic autonomic neuropathy is one of the most common causes of sympathetic nerve neuropathy. This sympathetic denervation can lead to impaired myocardial coronary blood flow and reduced myocardial contractility.

Lastly, orthostatic hypotension is a common problem caused by the failure of noradrenergic neurotransmission. It is defined as a drop of systolic blood pressure by at least 20 mmHg or diastolic by 10 mmHg.