The common differential diagnoses include:

- Post-extubation stridor, laryngospasm

- Angioedema, anaphylaxis

- Foreign body in the airway

- Post-surgical hematomas causing airway compression

- Vocal cord palsies following neck surgeries

- Sleep apnoeas

Post extubation stridor is symptomatic (varying severity) form of laryngotracheal narrowing in an extubated patient. It is clinically diagnosed by the unique inspiratory crowing sound. About two-thirds of post-extubation stridor is caused by severe post-intubation laryngeal edema, and nearly half of the patients with post-extubation laryngeal edema will get reintubated. Laryngospasm is the exaggerated glottic closure reflex due to the stimulation of the superior laryngeal nerve. It could happen abruptly in patients who are extubated after anesthesia. This occurs in patients who are not adequately conscious of countering the laryngeal reflexes in response to vocal cord irritating events like endotracheal tube removal, pooling of secretions, blood, or foreign body in the airway. Treatment is the removal of inciting cause, positive pressure bag, and masking with a simultaneous jaw thrust maneuver. Larson's maneuver is the application of pressure with fingertips at the laryngospasm notch, which could rapidly reverse the condition.

Angiooedema could occur due to various drugs, including opioids, calcium-channel blockers, fibrinolytic agents, and NSAIDs. It usually responds to steroids and antihistaminics. Anaphylaxis is treated with adrenaline injection. Severe bronchospasm and pulmonary edema can sometimes mimic laryngeal edema. Post-extubation stridor could rarely cause negative pressure pulmonary edema.