Topical treatments are considered to be first-line therapy in granuloma faciale include:

- Calcineurin inhibitors especially tacrolimus are considered to be the first line topical treatment for GF. Topical calcineurin inhibitors decrease T-cell activation and also decrease the upregulation of interleukin-2

- Corticosteroids as topical or intralesional therapy have been reported to be effective in granuloma faciale include with variable results. Intralesional corticosteroids can are an option in combination with cryotherapy. The most common dose of intralesional corticosteroids used is triamcinolone acetonide 5 to 20 mg/ml once weekly or once monthly infiltrations.

- A case report discussed the efficacy of topical dapsone 5% gel with a good outcome.

- Intralesional rituximab was tried in three cases at a dose of 10 mg/ml once monthly, with relatively good results.

Systemic treatments:

- Dapsone at dose 50 to 150 mg/day has demonstrated effectiveness as a treatment option for granuloma faciale.

- Systemic corticosteroids have been reported to be effective but with only partial improvement in most cases.

- Clofazimine is an anti-leprosy treatment with anti-inflammatory and anti-proliferative effects for lymphocytes and carcinoma cells. It has received minimal discussion as a treatment of GF at a dose of 300 mg/day with good effect after 3 to 5 months of treatment.

Surgical and other therapies:

- Cryotherapy with liquid nitrogen as a single treatment seems to be a good choice for treating GF.

- Various types of laser are discussed in medical literature with the variable outcomes depending on the lesion, type of laser used, and the operating physician as well, and this includes:

- Pulsed dye laser (PDL). It targets oxyhemoglobin in blood vessels. Good cosmetic outcomes have been reported, especially for superficial lesions. For the maximal possible benefit, several sittings may be necessary. The time interval between laser treatments is about 2 to 4 months. PDL correlates with a lower risk of scarring as compared to other types of laser, and its main side effects are pain during the procedure and bruising after the procedure.

- Potassium-titanyl-phosphate (KTP) - 532-nm has been reported to be effective with good results reported after 5 to 10 days of daily treatment, without significant scarring.

- Carbon-dioxide (CO2) laser.

- Argon laser at 480 to 520 nm. This type of laser has a more selective effect on oxyhemoglobin than CO2 laser, but it causes further non-specific tissue destruction due to diffusion of the created heat over a large area.

- Phototherapy including topical psoralen-ultraviolet A (PUVA).

- Surgical excision with and without grafting. Dermabrasion is a therapeutic choice as well.