Combined antiretroviral therapy (cART) remains the gold standard for the treatment of HIV and opportunistic infection prevention. Primary prophylaxis for Pneumocystis jirovecii pneumonia (PCP) should be initiated when the patient’s CD4 count <200cells/microL, CD4% is <14%, and patients have a detectable viral load. Also, patients that suffer from any AIDS-defining illness should be started on primary prophylaxis for other opportunistic pathogens, such as PCP.

For recipients of solid organ transplant, guidelines recommend primary prophylaxis for a minimum of 6 months after transplant. Some patients, such as lung and small bowel transplant recipients or those with a history of PCP infection or chronic cytomegalovirus infection, have indications for lifelong prophylaxis. Patients with a kidney transplant are recommended to receive prophylaxis during and after treatment of acute rejection, but guidelines are not universally delineated.

Guidelines for PCP prophylaxis in non-HIV immunocompromised patients due to other conditions are not well established. For patients undergoing stem-cell transplantation guidelines recommend primary prophylaxis for at least 6 months after graft transplant, and longer if patients are receiving immunosuppressive therapy for a longer period. For patients with hematologic and solid malignancies, specifically patients with acute lymphocytic leukemia (ALL), prolonged CD4 count <200cells/microL, or on long-term steroid therapy, primary prophylaxis is usually continued until CD4 count >200cells/microL or while on chemotherapy. For other malignancies, the risk is not well-established, and usually, it is given for the duration of chemotherapy. For patients suffering from rheumatologic conditions and connective tissue diseases, there are no guidelines, but the general recommendations are to initiate prophylaxis if patients are on long-term steroid treatment or other immunosuppressive therapy.

Other populations that experts agree would benefit from initiation of primary prophylaxis are patients with severe protein malnutrition, primary immune deficiencies, and a persistent CD4 count of <200cells/microL.