Upon presentation, if phimosis is severe enough to cause urinary obstruction, the patient should be urgently catheterized and seen by a specialist. If unable to place a catheter, the patient may require more invasive interventions such as a dorsal slit.

**Nonspecific Balanoposthitis**- is the most common etiology in children. This condition is usually due to poor hygiene. There should be no ulcers or lesions, and although some preputial discharge can be present on a physical exam, there should be no urethral drainage. Assessment is by milking the urethra from the base of the penis to the glans.  Treatment involves gentle cleaning of the area 2 to 3 times per day. If physiologic phimosis is present, forceful prepuce retraction should be avoided. In patients able to retract the foreskin, clean the area with gentle use of cotton swab. After commencing a proper hygiene routine, symptoms usually resolve within five days.

**Irritant Balanoposthitis**- usually presents as mild erythema with or without pruritus. It is more common in patients presenting with atopic dermatitis. This condition may be due to frequent or aggressive washing with soap.

**Candidal infection**- a common cause of balanoposthitis in children may present in association with or secondary to diaper dermatitis. Its classic description is an erythematous rash with satellite lesions that is tender to palpation. In adults, it can present in association with diabetes mellitus,  immunosuppressive disorders, or the use of broad-spectrum antibiotics. This condition can have topical treatment with seven days of miconazole 0.25% cream applied on each diaper change. Nystatin cream 100000 u/gram TID for two weeks is also an option.

**Bacterial Balanoposthitis**- should be suspected in the presence of intense erythema along with transudative or exudative preputial discharge.

Common aerobic bacteria are Streptococcus pyogenes and Staphylococcus aureus. Mild cases can receive therapy with topical antibiotics such as mupirocin 2% cream TID for 7 to 14 days. In severe cases or when phimosis prevents topical treatment, therapy should commence with oral antibiotics such as cephalexin or erythromycin for one week.

**Sexually transmitted infections**- If present, urethral drainage when milking the penis from the base should prompt evaluation and treatment for sexually transmitted infections such as gonorrhea and chlamydia.Neisseria gonorrhea or Chlamydia trachomatis can receive treatment with a single dose of ceftriaxone 250 mg IM and a single dose of azithromycin 1g PO. A painless ulcer may indicate syphilis infection, which can be treated with Penicillin G 50000U/kg IM once. In children, sexual abuse evaluation should also merit consideration in the presence of urethral discharge.

**Anaerobic bacterial infection**- should be suspected in cases with erythema, edema, and foul-smelling exudate. Mild cases can be treated with topical metronidazole, while more severe cases should have treatment with oral antibiotics such as oral metronidazole for seven days.

**Circinate Balanitis**- is described as pale macules with white margins that may coalesce, which can occur in isolation or association with reactive arthritis. Treatment includes management of any underlying conditions and the use of topical steroids such as hydrocortisone 1%, applying a thin layer BID for 1 to 2 weeks.

**Viral Balanoposthitis**- includes herpes simplex virus and human papillomavirus. Herpes simplex presents as an erythematous base with overlying vesicles that may rupture. A first episode is treated with oral acyclovir for 7 to 10 days, whereas for recurrent episodes, 5-day treatment is appropriate. Human papillomavirus can present as diffuse erythema, and treatment includes podophyllotoxin 0.5% gel BID for three days repeated weekly for up to 4 weeks.

**Fixed drug eruptions**- described as round, erythematous patches that turn darker with or without associated edema and vesicles that appear after using medications including tetracyclines, phenolphthalein, phenacetin, NSAIDs, barbiturates, and sulfa-drugs.