- **Faulty learning or dialectal influence.**Children with no anatomical or neurological disorders may present with mild hypernasality secondary to mislearning or exaggerated regional dialects that emphases nasal characteristics.

- **Speech Sound Disorder (SSD)**is a broad speech impediment where patients are unable to correctly form sounds of certain words. Children will commonly try and substitute, omit, or change the sounds of certain phonemes, resulting in unintelligible speech. Although this is commonly seen in young children, most kids self-correct their speech by 4 years old. SSD can be divided into articulation disorders which involve a deficit in the motor production of sound, and phonologic disorders which are characterized by trouble learning the different speech sounds and recognizing their distinct meanings.

- **Childhood apraxia of speech (CAS)**is a rare neurological condition that impedes a child’s ability to produce sound precisely and consistently. It involves a deficit in motor programming and planning and children are unable to express what they want to say into the necessary fine oral-motor movements. They have inconsistent errors in consonant and vowel production when repeating sentences.

- **Tonsillar hypertrophy**can restrict VP closure and cause VPD. Symptoms can be improved after tonsillectomy. Evaluation and treatment of tonsillar hypertrophy should occur prior to any surgical interventions for VPD, as pharyngoplasty in the setting of tonsillar hypertrophy can further obstruct the airway.