Barbiturates have historically been a widely prescribed class of drugs in outpatient and inpatient settings. Barbiturates are controlled substances; thus, all DEA prescription requirements must be met. The prescription drug monitoring program(PDMP) can identify potential misuse and abuse.

- After 2011, major manufacturers no longer produced thiopental or methohexital

- the preferred routine IV anesthetic induction agent has become propofol due to its availability, rapid onset, and offset

Phenobarbital continues to be used as a second-line antiepileptic drug in the US and has frequent use in low-resource countries as a first-line drug due to its low cost. All healthcare workers, including physicians, and nurse practitioners who prescribe these agents, must be fully aware of the adverse drug reactions, misuse, drug-drug interactions, and the potential to develop physical dependence. When barbiturates are used in anesthesia, supervision by anesthetics and certified registered nurse anesthetists (CRNAs) is necessary. Movement disorder specialists should oversee the use of primidone for essential tremors. Given the potential for severe adverse events, including death, a pharmacist should verify the dosing and perform a thorough medication reconciliation to ensure no drug interactions, particularly additive CNS depressing effects.

The healthcare team must know how to resuscitate the patient in case of an overdose; MICU-level care and consultation with a critical care physician are often required. A toxicologist should be consulted in case of severe overdose. A psychiatrist should be consulted once the patient has recovered in case of an overdose. Prescribing barbiturates and follow-up monitoring requires an interprofessional team approach, including clinicians (MD, DO, NP, PA), specialists, specialty-trained nurses, and pharmacists, all collaborating across disciplines to achieve optimal patient outcomes related to barbiturate therapy. [Level 5]