Several conditions can present with the movement abnormalities seen as an adverse effect of neuroleptic use. Patients presenting with involuntary movements should be evaluated for possible seizures and stroke, both of which can mimic dystonias. TD and dystonias present with similar symptoms, and the key to distinguishing them is the symptom course with relation to neuroleptic initiation. Other primary movement disorders, like Parkinson disease, and mannerisms and stereotypes, which are common in patients with autism and schizophrenia, should likewise be considered in the differential diagnosis.

In accidental or intentional overdose, neuroleptic agents can mimic a variety of other sedating medications, including benzodiazepines, cyclic antidepressants, central alpha-2 agonists, antiepileptics, and skeletal muscle relaxants. There is no physical examination or laboratory finding to differentiate these presentations from each other reliably; history and medication review is often the key to distinguishing these diagnoses. Fortunately, supportive care is similar in these overdoses. Other diagnoses that should be considered and systematically excluded in the case of a sedated patient on neuroleptic agents include including hypoglycemia, acute liver failure, large territory cerebral infarction or bleeding, infections of the nervous system, and electrolyte disturbances.

In the case of a patient presenting with altered mental status and high temperature concerning for NMS, several other etiologies must be considered and ruled out. As with all patients presenting with altered mental status, a fingerstick blood glucose should be checked to rule out hypoglycemia as an etiology. It is important to remember that, while it should be treated, the presence of hypoglycemia does not exclude toxicity from a neuroleptic agent. Sepsis, which can present similarly to NMS, is an important consideration in these patients. Cultures of the blood and any other potential sources should be obtained. If the diagnosis of sepsis is a possibility, the patient should be given broad-spectrum antibiotics until the diagnosis has been ruled out, as untreated sepsis carries a very high mortality rate. Serotonin syndrome is another diagnostic consideration in patients presenting with hyperthermia and altered mental status. It is a clinical syndrome of altered mental status, neuromuscular abnormalities, and autonomic hyperactivity caused by excess serotonin, typically due to therapeutic medication or interactions between medications.

- Anticholinergic toxicity

- Antidepressant toxicity

- Salicylate toxicity

- Cocaine toxicity

- Antihistamine toxicity

- Selective serotonin reuptake inhibitor toxicity

- Delirium tremens

- Heat exhaustion

- Heatstroke

- Lithium toxicity

- Methamphetamine toxicity

- Neuroleptic malignant syndrome

- Rhabdomyolysis

- Status epilepticus

- Torsade de pointes

- Withdrawal syndromes