Prior to initiating treatment with upadacitinib, negative tuberculosis (TB) test is required as it may activate a latent TB infection. During the course of treatment with upadacitinib, patients should also be tested for TB routinely. A complete blood count (CBC) should also be monitored before starting therapy and routinely, as it is not recommended to initiate upadacitinib in subjects with an absolute lymphocyte count (ALC) below 500 cells/mm^3 and absolute neutrophil count (ANC) below 1000 cells/mm^3. Lymphopenia, neutropenia, and anemia have been reported. Liver function tests (LFT) should be checked before beginning therapy and regularly after that, as patients with severe hepatic impairment are not recommended to start treatment.

Patients should also be monitored for serious infections while on therapy, as severe bacterial, viral, fungal, tuberculous, and opportunistic infections have transpired, which have led to hospitalization and mortality in patients receiving upadacitinib. In such occurrences, the treatment regime must be interrupted and halted. Monitoring for reactivation of previous hepatitis B virus (HBV) or HZV infections is recommended, as these infections were reported during clinical studies. Upadacitinib should be discontinued temporarily till HZV is resolved.

Subjects at increased risk for skin cancers and are receiving treatment are advised to have routine skin examinations as they have an increased chance of non-melanoma skin cancers (NMSCs). Patients receiving upadacitinib with concomitant NSAID use should be monitored for new-onset gastrointestinal manifestations, as GI perforations have been reported during clinical studies.