The pathophysiology of cardiac muscle is based on damage to cardiac muscle cells, leading to inappropriate contractility.

**Cardiomyopathy:**This is a genetic or acquired disorder of the myocardium associated with cardiac dysfunction. According to the World Health Organization, there exist five main categories of non-ischemic cardiomyopathy: dilated cardiomyopathy (DCM), hypertrophic cardiomyopathy (HCM), restrictive cardiomyopathy (RCM), arrhythmogenic right ventricular cardiomyopathy (ARVC), and unclassified cardiomyopathies.

- **Dilated cardiomyopathy (DCM):**This is dilation and impaired contraction of one or both ventricles that cannot be explained by coronary artery disease, valvular disease, or hypertension. Patients with DCM present with decreased systolic contraction and symptoms of heart failure. Inherited forms of DCM have shown mutations in at least 40 individual genes, many of which encode structural components of the sarcomere and desmosome.

- **Hypertrophic cardiomyopathy (HCM):**This condition is an autosomal dominant disease leading to a thickened (hypertrophied) left ventricle and abnormal heart contraction caused by a mutation in the sarcomere protein genes. This hypertrophied left ventricle leads to outflow obstruction, diastolic dysfunction, mitral regurgitation, and myocardial ischemia. In severe cases, sudden cardiac death may occur.

- **Restrictive cardiomyopathy (RCM):**THis results in impaired ventricular filling in the setting of nondilated ventricles. RCM is typically characterized by nondilated nonhypertrophied ventricles, with biatrial enlargement secondary to increased atrial pressures. Three diseases in which RCM may be seen include sarcoidosis, amyloidosis, and hemochromatosis.

- **Arrhythmogenic right ventricular cardiomyopathy (ARVC):**This is the replacement of the myocardium with fibrofatty tissue leading to an increased predisposition to ventricular tachycardia and sudden cardiac death, especially in young adults and athletes. The release of exercise-induced catecholamines provokes ventricular arrhythmias in predisposed individuals. ARVM typically affects the right ventricle.

- **Unclassified cardiomyopathies:**

- 
              
- **Stress-induced cardiomyopathy (Takotsubo cardiomyopathy):**also known as "broken heart syndrome," a reversible transient ballooning of the apex of the left ventricle leading to wall motion abnormalities brought on by severe emotional or physical stress.
              
              
- **Cirrhotic cardiomyopathy:**This is a condition of diastolic and systolic dysfunction, impaired cardiac response to stress, and ECG abnormalities (QT prolongation) in patients with cirrhosis. Cardiac function is typically altered only under stressful conditions.

- **Ischemic cardiomyopathy (ICM) is**a form of dilated cardiomyopathy related to coronary artery disease (CAD). ICM is the decreased ability of the heart to properly pump blood throughout the body due to myocardial damage from cardiac ischemia. The lack of blood supply to the cardiomyocytes leads to cell death, cardiac fibrosis, and left ventricular enlargement and dilation.

**Heart Failure:**impairment of ventricular filling and systolic ejection of blood due to structural and functional defects of the myocardium. In the specific assessment of heart failure, the left ventricular ejection fraction (LVEF) is crucial. If a heart failure patient has an ejection fraction (EF) greater than or equal to 50%, this is diagnosed as heart failure with preserved ejection fraction (HFpEF). An ejection fraction less than or equal to 40% is termed heart failure with reduced ejection fraction (HFrEF), and an ejection fraction of 41 to 49% is diagnosed as heart failure with mid-range ejection fraction (HFmrEF). Distinguishing between these three types of heart failure is of clinical importance, as each has its own specific set of treatments and medications.

**Myocarditis:**an inflammatory disease of the myocardium most commonly caused by acute rheumatic fever or viral infections (Coxsackie virus, parvovirus B19). The long-term outcome of untreated myocarditis is dilated cardiomyopathy with heart failure.