Health care simulation is a growing field that combines innovative technologies and adult learning theory to train medical professionals in clinical skills and practices reproducibly.

The intended purpose of an assessment is to determine whether an assessment tool gives valid and reliable results that are wholly attributable to the learner.

Threats to validity can weaken the validity of an assessment.

To develop a curriculum and subsequent assessment, a literature search should take place to find previously developed measures for outcomes. If the assessment tool is to be modified for a particular setting or learners, describe the modifications and include support for how these changes improve suitability for the novel situation.

Assessment for theoretical knowledge in clinical clerkships is generally constructed around learner performance in examinations and assignments.

Methods to evaluate procedural skills will be different than those used in clinical clerkships where simulation is most commonly used as a teaching modality.

Medical training requires a high level of cognitive function and confidence in the decision-making process. These abilities are fundamental to being a leader; thus, there is an essential need to provide opportunities for clinicians to develop leadership abilities.

Medical science is an ever-evolving field with advances in all aspects of patient care that stem from basic, translational, and clinical investigations. Clinicians, therefore, engage in lifelong learning to keep up with these changes throughout their professional lives.

Providing higher quality care and reducing variation in healthcare delivery were significant motivators for the implementation of CBME as multiple studies demonstrated systemic failures in healthcare improvement and indications that residency training has a significant influence in future performance.