Diuretics, beta-blockers, angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitors, angiotensin receptor blockers, angiotensin receptor neprilysin inhibitor, hydralazine plus nitrate, digoxin, and aldosterone antagonists can produce an improvement in symptoms and are indicated for patients with HF based on their functional classification and severity of symptoms. Combination therapy with these agents improves outcomes and reduces hospitalizations in patients with HF.

Improved patient survival has been documented with the use of beta-blockers, angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitors, angiotensin receptor neprilysin inhibitor, hydralazine plus nitrate, and aldosterone antagonists. More limited evidence of survival benefit is available for diuretic therapy. Diuretic therapy is mainly used for symptom control. Angiotensin receptor neprilysin inhibitors should not be given within 36 hrs of angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitors dose.

In African-Americans, hydralazine plus oral nitrate is indicated in patients with persistent NYHA class III to IV HF and LVEF less than 40%, despite optimal medical therapy (beta-blocker, angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitors, ARB, aldosterone antagonist (if indicated), and diuretics.

Device therapy: Implantable cardioverter-defibrillator (ICD) is used for primary or secondary prevention of sudden cardiac death. Cardiac resynchronization therapy with biventricular pacing can improve symptoms and survival in selected patients who are in sinus rhythm and have a reduced left ventricular ejection fraction and a prolonged QRS duration. Most patients who satisfy the criteria for cardiac resynchronization therapy implantation are also candidates for an implantable cardioverter-defibrillator and receive a combined device.

A ventricular assist device (bridge to transplant or as a destination therapy) or cardiac transplant is reserved for those with severe disease despite all other measures.