The relevant complications for the various dental emergencies differ depending on the specific diagnosis and category being considered.

**Traumatic Dental Emergencies**

Complications of traumatic dental emergencies include pulp necrosis, pulpal obliteration, tooth discoloration, dental or periodontal abscesses, fistula formation, and root resorption.

**Infectious Dental Emergencies**

The most common complication of dental infections is tooth loss. However, if left untreated, dental infections can spread both contiguously and hematogenously, with the potential to cause numerous complications. Through contiguous spread, dental and periodontal infections can lead to osteomyelitis of the mandible or maxilla, deep neck space infections (which include Ludwig angina, retropharyngeal abscess, and mediastinitis), and rarely intracranial infections (which include cavernous sinus thrombosis, meningitis, and subdural empyema). If patients with dental infections become bacteremic, there is the potential for hematogenous spread, which can lead to endocarditis.

Specifically, Ludwig’s angina and retropharyngeal abscesses can compromise a patient’s airway. Patients experiencing Ludwig’s angina may present with soft tissue edema involving the face, oral cavity, and neck, which leads to trismus, respiratory distress, voice changes, and the inability to tolerate oral secretions. In these cases, stridor is an ominous sign, and the provider should have a low threshold to intubate before respiratory distress develops utilizing advanced airway equipment, such as video laryngoscopy and/or fiber optics.

Patients presenting with retropharyngeal abscesses are also ill-appearing and present similarly to patients with Ludwig’s angina; however, they are less likely to have facial or neck edema and are more likely to experience neck stiffness with their discomfort usually exacerbated with cervical extension.

All these sequelae portend high morbidity and mortality, and because their presentations can be varied, healthcare providers must include them in the differential diagnosis for ill-appearing patients experiencing dental infections.

**Post-procedural Dental Emergencies**

The most frequent complication for patients with post-extraction or postoperative bleeding experience is a return visit to their dental practitioner or the emergency department. They may also develop large intraoral hematomas that rarely can compromise their airway. In cases where hemostasis is difficult to achieve, patients may require blood transfusions or hospitalization.

Alveolar osteitis is self-limiting, and there is no evidence correlating it as a risk factor for developing additional dental complications.