Multiple neurological conditions cause dysarthria, so the natural course and clinical features can differ. The presentation can be acute in patients with acute ischemic stroke, whereas it can be delayed in neurodegenerative diseases like ALS.

Based on the Mayo classification, there are salient features of dysarthria

**Flaccid:**Speech is slow, with hypernasality and breathy vocal quality. One of the most common examples in clinical practice is idiopathic peripheral facial paralysis, in which the patient presents with facial paralysis and drooling. Another common cause is Guillain–Barre syndrome.

**Spastic:**Speech is harsh, with low pitch and constant errors. Speech evaluation shows hypernasality, reduced intelligibility, palatal elevation, and slow speech rate. Patients have signs of pseudobulbar palsy with dysphagia, hyperactive jaw jerk, and pseudobulbar affect. Patients with dysarthria-clumsy hand syndrome are noted to have facial weakness, dysarthria, and extremity dysmetria.

**Hypokinetic dysarthria:**This is seen in PD due to the loss of dopaminergic neurons. Speech is monotone and poorly articulated and tends to be quiet. Delays in speech initiation mixed with rushing of words can be seen. Other characteristic signs, such as masked facial features, resting tremors, cogwheeling, and festinating gait, can be observed at the examination.

**Hyperkinetic dysarthria:**This is seen with basal ganglia lesions and associated hyperkinetic movement disorders, such as HD. Speech is harsh, with variation in loudness and rate of speech. There are occasional stoppages while speaking.

**Ataxic dysarthria:**This is commonly seen with disorders of the cerebellum or its connections. Speech has a “scanning” quality or irregular rhythm with the explosion of syllables. Prosody is impaired, with each syllable being pronounced slowly, and there is a pause after every syllable. There is decreased motor coordination manifested by axial and appendicular ataxia depending on the part of the cerebellum affected.

**Mixed dysarthria:**Two or more central nervous system components are affected in this type. This can be seen with ALS and multiple sclerosis. Speech is slow, prosody is disrupted, voice is strained, and there is marked hypernasality.