**Attachment in Infancy**

All normally developing infants develop attachment relationships with their caregivers. Infant-Parent attachment is key for the social and emotional outcome of a child’s development. The type of attachment that exists between a child and the parent is associated with emotional and behavioral problems or lack thereof.

There are four types of attachments, and they are divided into organized and disorganized and are further classified into secure or insecure. The type of attachment a child has is the result of the response of the caregiver when a child is searching for attachment. A child searches for attachment when he or she feels threatened, scared, or insecure. Organized types are those where the child knows what to do with the caregiver. Examples of this are that a child might know that he can approach or avoid the person who cares for him/her. Secure attachments are those that have a very low risk of developing adjustment problems in the future.

The first type is organized and secure attachment. These infants have prompt loving responses to the stressors of the infant. The infant knows how the caregiver will respond, making it organized and secure.

Evidence has demonstrated that when an infant has an organized and secure attachment type of relationship, it is protective from social and emotional maladjustments in later infancy and adolescent years. Specifically, the disorganized attachment is strongly predictive of serious maladjustments and psychological issues. They are more sensitive to stress, have issues with controlling emotions, and tend to present with aggressive behaviors—about 80% of children who have been victims of abuse display a disorganized attachment. During childhood, they can present with conditions like oppositional defiant disorder, bad classroom behaviors, low performance in mathematics, and low self-esteem. Adolescents may present with more psychiatric diseases and impaired operational skills as well as poor self-control.

**School Readiness**

School readiness is defined as the optimal relationship between the readiness of the child, the readiness of school, and the family’s interactions that support the child that will ensure the success of a child in school. These three aspects can be discussed individually. When it comes to the child, this means adequate physical, social, and emotional development. These include good health and growth and being able to communicate (listening and speaking)and have behavioral control. In regards to school, there should be an easy transition between school and home, and parents must be able to have an interaction with the school. Teachers must be committed to provide instruction to children and be willing to change their approach if the initial one is not resulting well. As for the family, this aspect begins as early as prenatal care, and having a primary physician for the child, nutrition must be optimal, and parents need to be willing to take time to help their children.

There are five needs of children that determine school readiness.

- Proper nutrition, clothing, shelter, education, and preventive physical and mental health services.

- Nurturing relationships with their caretakers

- Have the opportunity to develop skills and talents to help in the community

- Protection from abuse to themselves and protection from violence exposure

- Caretakers that allows children to heal physically and mentally, as this develops a reliance on them.

All of a child’s experience with early development, in whatever setting they are in (home, daycare, or preschool), influences their education. If children have a routine and are supported emotionally, they can learn better and be more resilient as they grow.

**Temperament**

Temperament in children encompasses the different reactions and ability of a child to self-regulate. These can be formed within the first year of life, and they include physiologic and emotional reactions. It is inherited, and it is also stable. However, it is influenced by environmental and social interactions. Temperament also has a great impact on child development, both socially and emotionally. It is believed that it plays a role in social interactions, cognition, and adjustment.

A difficult temperament includes a baby that is difficult to soothe, a child that reacts highly to a stimulus, or a very fussy child.

**Temper Tantrums**

Temper tantrums are very common in children. A temper tantrum is an intense period of demonstrating frustration or anger that is disproportionate to the situation. Some of the behaviors that children demonstrate during temper tantrums are hitting, screaming, waiving the extremities, falling to the floor, headbanging, throwing of kicking things, holding their breath. A child has temper tantrums mostly. After all, they cannot communicate because they cannot cope with a situation, but it can also be because they are looking for attention. The child might be hungry, sick, or frustrated and make a temper tantrum to communicate this.

It is important to know that temper tantrums are a normal part of child development. It is a transition while they are learning to control emotions and become more independent. The age they appear the most are 2-3 years of age. If temper tantrum persists beyond this age, it may indicate that the child still has not learned coping mechanisms. Once a child can communicate and express their feelings, temper tantrums subside.

Temper tantrums can be abnormal, however. The time of duration and age may indicate that it is not a normal part of a child’s development. If a tantrum lasts more than 15 minutes, if the child is more than 5 years of age, if the child injures him/herself, destroys something, or injures another person, if there is another behavior accompanying the tantrum (for example enuresis) or if the behavior between tantrums does not return to baseline.

The best treatment for temper tantrums is to prevent them. Identifying triggers. Having daily routines is a way of avoiding inconsistencies and the child knows what to expect from their caretaker. Children should be taught early about feelings. This way when they are ready to communicate, they know how to express these in words.  Once a temper tantrum starts, the caretaker should stay calm, offer a “time-out”, ignore the behavior but make sure that the child is not in danger. It is correct to leave the room and wait for the tantrum to stop.