The arterial vasculature supplies distinct brain territories.

**Anterior Cerebral Artery, AChaA, and its Branches**

- The recurrent artery (of Heubner) is the largest artery arising from A1 or proximal A2.

- Basal perforating arteries (medial lenticulostriate arteries) arising from ACA and Acom A supply the anterior perforated substance, the dorsal surface of the optic nerve and optic chiasm, the optic tract, the suprachiasmatic portion of the hypothalamus, the rostrum of the corpus callosum, the lower surface of the frontal lobe and the medial part of the Sylvian fissure.

The Peri-callosal artery is the distal part of the artery surrounding the corpus callosum. It gives rise to its largest branch: the callosomarginal artery. The callosomarginal artery is recognizable as it courses in or near the cingulate sulcus. Both callosomarginal and distal peri-callosal artery give 5 main cortical branches. They are orbitofrontal, frontopolar, internal frontal, paracentral and parietal arteries. The cortical branches supply the basal surface of the frontal lobe, the superior frontal gyrus and the anterior two-thirds of the medial hemisphere (including the pre-central, central and post-central gyri). Some distal ACA may supply part of the contralateral hemisphere.

**Anterior Choroidal Artery**

The anterior choroidal artery (AChA) is a small but relatively constant vessel that arises from the posteromedial aspect of the supra-clinoid ICA a short distance above the PCom A origin. The AChA may exist either as a single trunk or a plexus of small vessels. AChA territory is variable and may include the optic tract, the posterior limb of the internal capsule, cerebral peduncle, choroid plexus, and medial temporal lobe.

**Middle Cerebral Artery**

The proximal segment (M1) courses laterally to the optic chiasm to reach the medial entrance of the Sylvian fissure. During its journey, it describes two parts: pre and post bifurcation. This main trunk mainly bifurcates but, in some instances, may trifurcate. M1 harbors perforating branches, named lateral lenticulo-striate arteries, which supply most of the caudate nucleus, internal capsule, basal ganglia. Its cortical branches supply the anterior pole of the temporal lobe. The insular segment (M2) consists of 6 to 8 main arteries that lie over the insula and end on top of the circular sulcus. The distal segments M3 and M4 lie from the surface of the lateral cerebral fissure to most of the lateral surface of the brain. Its cortical branches are orbitofrontal, pre-frontal, pre and postcentral sulcus, parietal, angular, temporal, and temporal-occipital arteries. M3 and M4 territory cover almost the entire lateral surface of the brain. Although anastomoses are developed between the ACA, MCA and PCA arterial territories, watershed areas exist on the cortical surface leading to vulnerable brain areas during hypotensive events.

**Posterior Cerebral Artery**

From the basilar bifurcation to the junction with Pcom A, the proximal segment (P1) of PCA gives numbers of important perforating branches that supply the brainstem, thalamus, oculomotor and trochlear nuclei. P2 courses between the junction and the posterior aspect of the midbrain where it gives thalamoperforating, thalamogeniculate, peduncular perforating, posterior choroidal and posterior temporal arteries. The distal part of PCA (P3 and P4) extends from the quadrigeminal plate to the calcarine fissure where they supply the occipital lobe, part of the parietal and temporal lobe and the posterior third of the medial brain hemisphere.

**Vertebrobasilar System**

The intradural portion of the vertebral artery (VA) courses anteromedially through the foramen magnum, runs superomedially toward the midline where the two VAs unite to form the basilar artery (BA).

From the confluence of the VAs, the Basilar courses superiorly in front of the medulla, pons and bifurcate at the junction pons/mesencephalon where it gives the posterior cerebral arteries. Along its course, BA gives the anterior inferior cerebellar arteries (AICA), pontine perforating branches and the superior cerebellar arteries (SCA). BA supplies the brainstem, midbrain, part of the thalamus, posterior internal capsule, the mid- and upper cerebellum and vermis.