Normal bladder function is the result of coordination between the somatic and autonomic nervous systems. There are generally two stages of urination: filling and voiding. During the filling stage, the sympathetic innervation of the bladder derived from the thoracolumbar spinal cord (Th10 to L2) inhibits the detrusor muscle of the bladder and activates the base of the bladder, bladder neck and urethra by way of the hypogastric nerves. During the emptying stage, the parasympathetic innervation of the bladder derived from the pelvic nerves (S2 – S4) activates the detrusor muscle of the bladder and relaxes urethral smooth muscle. At the same time, the somatic or volitional nervous system relaxes the external urethral sphincter via the pudendal nerve giving voluntary control to urination.

Surgery can alter the complex urinary signaling pathway in any number of ways, making postoperative urinary retention a relatively common occurrence. Anesthesia, medications, pain, and the physiologic changes of surgery itself as well as local destruction all have potential effects on a patient’s micturition and particularly autonomic nervous system.

Anesthesia can pharmacologically impact normal micturition. General, spinal, and regional anesthetics can all lead to POUR by suppressing micturition control and reflexes at both the central nervous system level (pontine micturition center) and the level of the peripheral nervous system by blocking neural transmission in the sacral spinal cord.

Perioperative medications may also play a role in the development of POUR. Opioids, in particular, decrease the sensation of bladder distension by inhibiting the parasympathetics servicing the bladder while also increasing the bladder neck tone through overstimulation of the sympathetic nervous system leading to an increase in outlet obstruction.

Surgical pain, via activation of the sympathetic nervous system or colloquially termed “fight or flight” nervous system, leads to detrusor relaxation and bladder neck contraction—essentially a constant bladder filling stage as described by the mechanisms above.

Finally, the destruction of anatomy vital to voiding can lead to POUR as well. Pelvic surgeries, in particular, place the autonomic nervous system and pelvic plexi at risk. Great efforts have been made to embrace nerve-sparing procedures when able.