Open heart surgery is the traditional approach to reach the heart via opening the thorax by sternotomy or upper hemisternotomy. CABG is one of the most frequent operations in the world. Once the pericardial sac is opened (with inverted T incision sparing both side phrenic nerves), cannulation, CPB, and cardioplegia being applied the heart can be moved to identify the arteries of interest. Epiaortic ultrasound is used to assess atherosclerosis of the ascending aorta. When grafts have been harvested, they can be connected in direct, y or t manner to the coronaries and the aorta. Following anastomis, the success is proven by checking flow rates through the grafts. After finishing CPB, the thorax is closed in a stepwise approach and finally securing the sternum with wires. Pleural and mediastinal suction drains are left in place for the following postoperative days. Intraoperatively placed epicardial electrodes connected to an external pacemaker help to treat rhythmic complications but are removed before hospital discharge.

OPCAB is especially useful in patients with high operative risk

Minimally invasive surgery (MIDCAB) and endoscopic coronary artery bypass grafting (TECAB) are done through smaller incisions, video-guided, and with the help of special instruments. It requires additional training, hence, it is offered only in some centers. Patients may profit from less surgical trauma and faster postoperative convalescence. Many procedures can be done through a minimally invasive technique. Since the invention of the robotic surgery, these systems have also found their ways into the cardiac operating room.

The myocardium can be protected by using cardioplegia and hypothermia.

There are certain valve-repairing techniques such as bicuspidization, DeVega, and clover technique for the tricuspid valve and Alfieri edge-to-edge, foldoplasty, neochordae, and sliding plasty for the mitral valve. Aneurysms and dissections of the ascending aorta may be operated using David, Yacoub, or Bentall techniques depending on the requirement to replace or spare the aortic valve.