Any evaluation of suspected egg allergy should always begin with a detailed history and physical examination.  History should include dietary intake of an egg (amount, frequency per day, form.), reactions (i.e., diarrhea, rash, etc.) and the time of onset of symptoms after ingestion of egg or egg-containing product.  Family history may also provide important clues, especially if there is documented or suspected egg allergy in a parent or sibling.

Diagnostic evaluation for suspected hen egg allergy includes skin testing (in which small quantities of allergenic egg proteins are introduced subcutaneously and monitored for reaction), egg-specific serum IgE levels, and oral food challenges.  Although food diaries (a written log of everything the patient consumes) are non-diagnostic, they can be useful in identifying egg as a potential allergen. Among the diagnostics evaluations for egg allergy, the double-blinded, placebo-controlled oral food challenge is considered the gold standard for assessment and diagnosis of suspected egg allergy.  Unlike egg-specific serum IgE levels, the oral food challenge should be done under the close supervision of a trained professional for the significant possibility of anaphylaxis.

Skin testing involves the introduction of an allergen into the subcutaneous tissue.  The allergen introduction prompts the cross-linking of antigen-specific IgE to mast cells, resulting in degranulation and subsequent urticaria. The food allergens are applied with respective positive (histamine) and negative (saline) controls.  Upon introduction of the egg allergen to the skin, a reaction is observed. Mast cell degranulation occurs in the presence of egg protein IgE antibody, leading to the release of histamine. It is generally accepted that a weal of 3 mm or greater in diameter is considered a positive result. Skin testing, however, can have a higher rate of false negatives, mainly if the patient used antihistamines or Benadryl within a week before skin allergen testing. Also, skin testing should not be performed for several weeks after an episode of anaphylaxis since anaphylaxis can lead to a temporary nonreactivity of the skin, thus increasing the false-negative rates.

Immunoassay diagnostics include radioallergosorbent tests (RASTs) and fluorescent enzyme immunoassay (FEIA).  They are less sensitive than skin testing but are not affected by prior antihistamine use. If there is a concern for significant anaphylaxis, immunoassays can be used safely.  Test results for egg allergen serum IgE levels are measured in kUA/L units and provide important predictive levels of experiencing an allergic response to an oral food challenge.  According to

Oral food challenges (especially double-blinded, placebo-controlled) are the gold standard for the diagnosis of egg allergy.  The utility of an oral food challenge depends on several factors. If an egg is not a component of a patient’s daily diet and can just be avoided, an oral food challenge may not be warranted.  In addition, if the patient has a clinical history suspicious of egg allergy coupled with elevated egg-specific IgE serum levels, the oral food challenge may be deemed unnecessary.

Open oral food challenges involve the gradual oral introduction of an egg to a patient.  Both the patient and observer are both aware of that egg is being introduced, leading to increased susceptibility to bias (especially if symptoms present).  The open oral food challenge, however, is easy to perform as it requires no special preparation. Single-blinded oral food challenges involve the oral introduction of egg in a vehicle (I.e., in another food source in opaque capsules) to blind the patient to what intervention is performed.  It eliminates patient bias but is still prone to observer bias.

Oral food challenges require adequate preparation for accurate results.  All antihistamines, beta-agonists, and beta-blockers (including eye drops) should be discontinued for a specified amount of time before an oral food challenge.  The oral food challenge should be done under the clinical supervision of a trained physician trained in treating anaphylaxis should it occur.