Opioids are a class of analgesics commonly employed in the treatment of acute and chronic pain conditions.

The use of opioids in treating chronic non-cancer pain is a current area of controversy due to the potential risk of patients' physical dependence on opioid medications.

Several tools have undergone development for assessing the risk of developing opioid use disorder. The Opioid Risk Tool (ORT) is a validated screening instrument commonly used in practice to evaluate the risk of future aberrant opioid use among chronic nonmalignant pain patients who receive prescribed opioids for pain relief.

Webster et al. developed the ORT questionnaire., in 2005, as a self-performed screening tool designed for use by adult patients in primary care settings before beginning opioid treatment for pain management.

- Family history of substance abuse including alcohol (Female=1; Male=3), illegal drugs (2;3), and/or prescription drugs (4;4)

- Personal history of substance abuse including alcohol (Female=3; Male=3), illegal drugs (4;4), and/or prescription drugs (5;5)

- Whether the patient age range is between 16 to 45 years (1;1)

- A history of preadolescent sexual abuse (3;0)

- Psychological disease including attention deficit hyperactivity disorder (ADHD), obsessive-compulsive disorder (OCD), bipolar disorder, schizophrenia (2;2); and/or depression (1;1)

Scores are summed, and a score of 3 or below suggests a low risk for future opioid abuse, while a score of 4 to 7 indicates moderate risk. A score of 8 or greater suggests a high risk of future abusive drug-related behavior. According to the ORT, there are several interactive versions of the ORT available online, which allow for quick calculation of a patient's risk.

Cheatle et al. have recently developed and validated a weighted ORT eliminating the gender-specific history of preadolescent sexual abuse. Of note, they found that this revised ORT was able to better predict the development of OUD in individuals with chronic nonmalignant pain on long-term opioid therapy.

Other opioid risk screening tools include the Screener and Opioid Assessment for Patients with Pain Revised (SOAPP-R), developed to predict aberrant drug-related behaviors before initiation of long-term opioid therapy;