To adequately explain the physiology of the heart, we must first define essential terms. First, diastole and systole. Diastole is the phase of the cardiac cycle that consists of relaxation and filling of the ventricles with blood. Systole is the phase of the cardiac cycle that consists of contraction of the ventricles and ejection of the blood. Preload is defined as the volume at which the heart is most filled with blood at the end of diastole; this value is equal to end diastolic volume (EDV). End Systolic Volume (ESV) is the volume of blood remaining in the ventricles after systole. Afterload is the pressure the left ventricle must overcome to eject blood into the Aorta during systole. Heart rate (HR) is the number of beats of the heart per minute; normal values are accepted as 60 to 100 beats per minute (BPM). Cardiac output (CO) is defined as HR multiplied by stroke volume (SV); SV is the volume of blood moved out of the left ventricle at the end of systole. SV can be calculated by SV = EDV - ESV, which demonstrates the highest volume of blood in the heart, minus the volume left after contraction, is equal to the volume that we pumped out into the body. Lastly, a good illustration of the filling and contraction of the heart is a fireplace bellow. The bellow moves air through its nozzle, but with a greater spreading of the 2 handles, more air is pushed out. The heart is similar in that the preload drives contraction through elasticity and compliance. As the heart expands more with increased filling, it can contract with more force due to its compliance. This demonstrates the importance of preload as a factor in the efficiency of the heart, and pathophysiology of this mechanism will be discussed in later sections.

**Cardiac Cycle**

Blood flow through the cardiovascular system can be broken into 2 systems: the lungs and the body. We will view the heart in 2 sides: the right and the left side. The right side of the heart is responsible for taking unoxygenated blood from the body via the inferior vena cava (IVC) and superior vena cava (SVC) and sending it to the lungs via the pulmonary artery to get oxygenated. The left side of the heart takes oxygenated blood from the lungs via the pulmonary veins and pumping it to tissues throughout the body via the aorta. Because the pulmonary vasculature has a lower blood pressure than the aorta, the right side of the heart is a significantly lower pressure system than the left side of the heart. The concept of pressure physiology will be discussed later in this article; however, the key principle is that for blood to move from one area to the next, it must overcome the pressure in the next area. Because the left side of the heart must overcome a greater pressure, it is a higher pressure environment than that of the right side of the heart. As pathology changes the associated systems, the heart will adapt to supply tissues with oxygen adequately.

Pressure gradients rule both the left and right systems of the heart. This concept is essential to understanding how the heart functions and how changes in these systems create changes in the heart.

**Right Heart
**

Starting with diastole in the right heart, blood flows freely into the right atrium (RA) from the SVC and IVC. As blood pools in the right atrium, it increases pressure building on the tricuspid valve (TV). The key concept to blood flow within the heart is that pressure in one chamber must overcome the pressure in the subsequent chamber to move positions; that is to say, as pressure increases in the right atrium and overcomes the pressure in the right ventricle, it will open the tricuspid valve and begin to fill the right ventricle. As blood fills the right ventricle, it now must overcome the pressure on the other side of the closed pulmonary valve; this is a low-pressure circuit. Although the right atrium can overcome the right ventricular pressure with passive filling and contraction in diastole, the right ventricle must use isovolumetric contraction during systole to overcome the pressure coming from the pulmonary vasculature. In an isovolumetric contraction, the tricuspid valve closes, and the heart will begin to contract with both the tricuspid valve and pulmonary valve (PV) closed. As pressure increases during this contraction, it will eventually overcome the pressure coming from the pulmonary artery, and the pulmonary valve will open, shunting blood to the lungs to get oxygenated.

An example of pathology affecting this circuit would be pulmonary hypertension. Because the lungs create an environment of higher pressure in this scenario, the heart must now contract with more force to overcome this pressure. Over time, as with a biceps muscle curling weights, the right ventricle will begin to hypertrophy in response to this increased workload. Hypertrophy of the heart can cause a myriad of pathology including disruption in the electrical circuit, decreased filling capacity, and alteration of heart valves.

**Left Heart
**

The oxygenated blood from the lungs now enters the left atrium freely via the pulmonary veins. Similar to the right side, the left, now a high-pressure circuit, must overcome pressure gradients. The left atrium will passively fill and contract until it has overcome the pressure in the left ventricle and mitral valve (MV), and will open the valve and begin to fill the left ventricle. Identical to the right side, the Left Ventricle will fill and undergo isovolumetric contraction during systole to overcome the pressure coming from the aorta (the body). This pressure is significantly higher than the right side. As the mitral valve and aortic valve (AV) are closed, the heart contracts to increase pressure and will overcome the pressure in the aorta, thus opening the aortic valve and sending oxygenated blood to the body.

An example of pathology affecting this circuit would be systemic hypertension. Similar to the right side, chronic systemic hypertension will increase the pressure of the aorta and cause a response by the heart to increase workload, thus causing hypertrophy of the left ventricle and eventual pathology as described in the previous example.

As you begin to understand these circuits, it is imperative to include not just the heart but also where the blood is going. For clinical thinking, the left side of the heart also involves the systemic blood supply; as does the right side of the heart with the pulmonary vasculature. With diseases affecting these circuits, we can now follow the blood flow from one compartment to the next and understand how, for instance, chronic obstrictive pulmonary disease (COPD) can create pulmonary hypertension, thus causing an increased workload on the right side of the heart and subsequent pathology.