In most pediatric foot deformities, the diagnosis is clinical; however, radiographic imaging is performed to confirm the diagnosis and assist with preoperative planning. The standard method of radiologic evaluation of the foot involves weight-bearing or simulated weight-bearing anteroposterior (dorsoventral) and lateral views. Diagnosing foot alignment abnormalities should be approached cautiously when non-weight-bearing radiographs are obtained. In some cases, more specific views may be required. In complex cases, CT or MRI may be performed when more imaging detail is required or when multiple structures are involved.

The proximally-located talus is considered fixed at the ankle because it has no direct musculotendinous attachments. The calcaneus is linked to the midfoot and forefoot and moves as a unit with these structures relative to the talus. In a normal foot, on the anteroposterior view, the axis of the talus extends through the base of the first metatarsal (Media item 1). With hindfoot varus, the more distal calcaneus is angulated inward, and the axis of the talus passes lateral to the base of the first metatarsal. With hindfoot valgus, the more distal calcaneus is angulated outward, and the axis of the talus passes medial to the base of the first metatarsal.

The normal lateral talocalcaneal angle is approximately 45 degrees at birth, decreasing to 30 degrees in older children and adults. With hindfoot varus, the lateral talocalcaneal angle is decreased (more parallel), whereas, with hindfoot valgus, the angle is increased.

Normal elevation of the middle metatarsals relative to the fifth metatarsal reflects the foot's transverse arch. The anterior calcaneus is slightly inclined upward. Accentuating this upward inclination is called the calcaneus position of the os calcis. The equinus position is the downward inclination of the distal calcaneus. Normal calcaneal tilt and normal slight downward tilt of the distal metatarsals create a slight longitudinal concavity in the osseous contour of the bottom of the foot.

**Clubfoot:**The diagnosis of clubfoot is clinical; therefore, a radiograph examination is not always performed. Moreover, on some occasions, clubfoot may be diagnosed antenatally. If x-rays are performed, the dorsiflexion lateral (Turco) and anteroposterior (AP) views are ordered (Media item 2). In the Turco view, there is more hindfoot (between the calcaneus and the talus) parallelism, with a talocalcaneal angle of less than 25. The AP radiograph also reveals hindfoot parallelism, with a talocalcaneal angle (Kite angle) of less than 20 (normal angle is 20-40 degrees).

**Planovalgus:**Although the diagnosis is clinical, further evaluation is warranted in some cases. Radiographic imaging may be performed in symptomatic pes cavovarus cases to exclude simultaneous concomitant pathologies of the foot (Media item 3). Imaging may also be performed in rigid flatfoot deformity. Anteroposterior, lateral, and oblique weight-bearing x-rays may be ordered. If Meary’s angle (angle between the talus and first metatarsal) in the lateral radiograph is more than 4 plantarflexed (normal is 0), then pes planovalgus is likely.

**Cavovarus:**The diagnosis is mostly clinical. Anteroposterior (AP) and lateral radiographs are often performed (Media item 4). In AR radiograph, a talocalcaneal angle below 20 degrees (normal 20-45 degrees) indicates hindfoot varus deformity, and metatarsal overlap indicates forefoot pronation. In the lateral foot radiograph, the talo-first ray angle (Meary’s angle) of above 4 with dorsal apex indicates midfoot cavus (normal close to 0). An inclination angle above 30 degrees and a 'double talar dome' sign indicates midfoot cavus deformity.

Further imaging can be performed as needed, such as CT or MRI. As almost two-thirds of the cases are associated with a neurological condition, most commonly Charcot-Marie-Tooth, further studies may be required, such as genetic testing and electrodiagnostic studies (EMG and nerve conduction studies) to establish the cause of the deformity.

**Congenital vertical talus:**CVT is usually diagnosed in the first months of life; therefore, the relationship of the talus, calcaneus, and metatarsals becomes essential. Anteroposterior (AP) and lateral imaging of the foot are required (Media item 5). A forced plantarflexion lateral radiograph is required to establish the diagnosis of CVT. In the AP radiograph, the talocalcaneal angle is greater than 40 (normal 20 to 40 degrees). In the lateral radiograph, the longitudinal axis of the talus is not parallel to (passes below from) the longitudinal axis of the first metatarsal, and dorsal talonavicular dislocation is noted. With forced plantarflexion of the foot, the longitudinal axes of the talus and first metatarsal remain not parallel, which is pathognomonic of the CVT. Forced dorsiflexion lateral radiograph may reveal the hindfoot equinus.

As CVT is commonly associated with neurological or genetic conditions, further work-up, such as MRI, nerve conduction studies, or genetic testing, may be warranted in case of characteristic findings from the physical exam.

**Congenital oblique talus:**Anteroposterior (AP) and lateral radiograph of the foot are required (Media item 6). In the AP radiograph, the talocalcaneal angle will be increased (normal 20-40 degrees). In the lateral radiograph, the talus's longitudinal axis passes below the first metatarsal axis with dorsal subluxation of the talonavicular joint. With forced lateral flexion, however, the talonavicular joint is reduced, and the axes of the talus and first metatarsal become parallel because of its flexible deformity. Further evaluation (MRI, nerve conduction studies, genetic testing) may be required to exclude neuromuscular or genetic causes of COT.

**Metatarsus adductus:**In the pediatric population, the diagnosis is clinical. The lack of tarsal bone ossification does not allow radiographic angles to be properly assessed, and therefore radiographs provide low reliability in this population. Clinically, many tests have been proposed in the literature. The Bleck’s heel bisector is the most used today, or 'heel bisector method.'

The test is performed with the patient prone and the knees flexed at 90 degrees. An imaginary line is then observed from the bisection of the heel to the forefoot. The severity of the metatarsus adductus is determined to be mild if the line falls on the third toe, moderate if it is between the third and fourth toes, and severe if it is between the fourth and fifth toes.

**Skew foot:**Anteroposterior (AP) and lateral foot radiographs need to confirm the diagnosis (Media item 7). In the AP radiograph, the talocalcaneal angle will be increased (normal 20 to 40 degrees). The 1 metatarsal angle described by Barriolhet is increased (normal 50 to 70 degrees) and reveals forefoot adduction. The medial cuneiform medially deviates, while the navicular may be laterally deviated in the AP radiograph. In the lateral foot radiograph, the navicular bone may be dorsiflexed and medial cuneiform plantarflexed.