Hyperlipidemia, in particular elevated LDL (hypercholesterolemia), is one of the most prevalent risk factors contributing to the evolution of atherosclerosis and consequent vascular disease. It is simply defined as elevated concentrations of lipids or fats within the blood. Numerous factors contribute to the development of atherosclerosis, including endothelial damage, hyperlipidemia, inflammatory and immunologic factors, plaque erosion or rupture, hypertension, and smoking. Atherosclerosis frequently remains asymptomatic until plaque stenosis reaches 70 to 80% of the vessel's diameter. Atherosclerosis originates after underlying endothelial damage occurs, which appears to stem from the loss of nitric oxide within the endothelium. This process leads to increased inflammation directly around the site of dysfunction, permitting the accumulation of lipids within the innermost layer of the endothelial wall. The lipids are then engulfed by macrophages, leading to the establishment of "foam cells." This cholesterol build-up within the "foam cells" causes subsequent mitochondrial dysfunction, apoptosis, and, ultimately, necrosis of the underlying tissues. Smooth muscle cells encapsulate the pack of "foam cells" or debris, which produces a fibrotic plaque that inhibits the underlying lipids (debris) from being destroyed

Tissue factor, alongside increased platelet activity, is known as a primary initiator of coagulation, which increases the risk for plaque rupture and thrombosis. Atherosclerotic plaques evolve via two distinct mechanisms: a slower, chronic plaque build-up that progressively leads to luminal stenosis, versus an acute onset of rapid luminal obstruction secondary to plaque rupture and thrombosis

For most patients, hyperlipidemia is polygenic in inheritance, and the manifestation of the disorder is considerably influenced by factors such as (central) obesity, saturated fat intake, and the cholesterol content within a person's diet. Another mechanism involves elevated levels of "apo B-100" lipoproteins within the plasma, which may lead to atherosclerotic disease, even when the patient has no other risk factors. It is often that there is a combination of genetic and environmental factors at play that ultimately contribute to a person's risk of developing hyperlipidemia and cardiovascular disease.

Many systemic diseases, which stimulate an inflammatory sub-layer with clinical or sub-clinical values, can cause dyslipidemia and atherosclerotic problems. Some examples:

- Psoriasis

- Crohn disease

- Inflammatory bowel disease

- Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease

- Depression

- Chronic pain

- Pediatric alopecia areata

- Chronic kidney disease