Any patient who is suspected to have paraneoplastic limbic encephalitis should undergo the following tests:

- Blood test for monoclonal antibodies (anti-Hu, anti-Ta, anti-Ma, anti-GABA B receptor, and anti NMDA receptor) but the absence of this antibodies does not exclude the disease.

- MRI may show hyperintense signals in the temporal lobe, hippocampal areas, insula, amygdala, or cingulate gyrus. T2-weighted images and fluid-attenuated inversion recovery will support the diagnosis

- Lumber puncture should be negative for malignant cells or infection and may show pleocytosis, elevation of protein levels, and intensification of immunoglobulin synthesis and oligoclonal bands.

- EEG frequently shows sharp and slow waves in electroencephalography.

Other tests may be done such as PET-CT which will show abnormal metabolic activities in the limbic system.

Diagnosis is difficult and should be by exclusion because clinical markers are often absent. A study on 1047 patients used the following criteria to diagnose paraneoplastic limbic encephalitis. The patient should achieve all of the following 4 points to make the diagnosis in this study:

- The clinical picture of the syndrome; symptoms and signs

- An interval of less than 4 years between the onset of the neurological symptoms or signs and the diagnosis of the tumor

- Exclusion of other neuro-oncological complications

- At least one of the following:

- CSF with inflammatory changes but negative cytology

- MRI showing abnormalities in the temporal lobe

- EEG showing epileptic activities in the temporal lobe

Not all of the patients will fulfill these criteria, but the diagnosis of paraneoplastic limbic encephalitis also may be done in the presence of neuropathological examination.

Other diagnostic criteria which may be used include Graus and Saiz criteria. These include the following:

- Subacute onset of seizure or confusion (less than 12 weeks)

- Neuropathological or radiological involvement of limbic system

- Exclusion of other causes

- Diagnosing the tumor within 5 years of diagnosing the syndrome