Malignant peripheral nerve sheath tumor: An aggressive neurogenic neoplasm arising from peripheral nerve or pre-existing nerve sheath tumor, including neurofibromas. Approximately 50% of cases are associated with NF1. A history of rapid growth in a prior stable neurofibroma is suspicious.  Histologically there may be areas of admixed neurofibroma. The malignant portion will show increased cellularity, mitoses, and necrosis. Immunohistochemistry: S100 focally positive in approximately 50% of tumors.

Schwannoma: A benign peripheral nerve sheath tumor comprised predominantly of Schwann cells. Associated with somatic and germline mutations in NF2. Histologically often more cellular, circumscribed, with Verocay bodies and Antoni A and B areas. Immunohistochemistry: Diffuse, uniform staining with S100.

Perineuroma: A rare, benign mesenchymal tumor comprised of perineural cells. No definitive association with neurofibromatosis. Immunohistochemistry: EMA(+), Claudin-1(+), GLUT1(+) S100(-), CD34(+/-).

Dermatofibroma: A benign proliferation of fibroblasts and histiocytes within the dermis. Often presents as an indurated papule. Immunohistochemistry: FXIIIA(+), CD163(+), CD68(+), CD34(-).

Dermatofibrosarcoma protuberans: A low-grade fibroblastic sarcoma affecting the dermis and subcutis, with COL1A1-PDGFB gene fusion. This lesion is locally aggressive with a high rate of recurrence (50%) and increased risk of progression and metastasis. Immunohistochemistry: Diffuse CD34(+), S100(-), FXIIIA(-).

Superficial leiomyoma: A benign dermal smooth muscle neoplasm, often arising from arrector pili (pilo-leiomyoma). Immunohistochemistry: SMA(+), MSA(+), Desmin (+).

Neurotized melanocytic nevus: A benign nevus with melanocytic nests and loose neurotized stroma. Immunohistochemistry: Melanocytic markers(+).

Ganglioneuroma: A benign tumor of neural crest origin, comprised of ganglion cells arising from nerves. Most commonly found in the posterior mediastinum and retroperitoneum. Immunohistochemistry: S100 protein stains Schwann cells and synaptophysin stains ganglion cells.

Plexiform fibrohistiocytic tumor: An infiltrative mesenchymal neoplasm, most commonly at the dermal-subcutaneous junction, comprised of fibroblasts and histiocytes. Immunohistochemistry: SMA(+), S100 protein (-).

Desmoplastic melanoma: An invasive melanoma that often resembles a dermal scar. Frequently there is an associated melanoma in-situ. Often large at diagnosis, there can be peripheral lymphoid aggregates and cytologic atypia. Immunohistochemistry: S100 and SOX10 (+).