There are seven extrinsic muscles of the back: the trapezius, the latissimus dorsi, the levator scapulae, the rhomboids (major and minor), and the serratus posterior (superior and inferior):

The trapezius is the most superficial muscle of the back and is made up of two triangles that together make the shape of a trapezoid, thus its name. This muscle originates from the center of the spinal column and skull; the fibers connect to the middle portion of the superior nuchal line, the external occipital protuberance, the ligamentum nuchae, and the apices of the spinous processes of C7-T12. The fibers run laterally toward the shoulder where they attach. The superior fibers descend to connect to the posterior border of the distal third of the clavicle; the middle fibers run horizontally to connect to the superior portion of the scapular spine; the inferior fibers ascend toward the apex of the scapula.

Latissimus dorsi is the largest extrinsic back muscle, spanning across the entire lateral side of the back. It originates from the lateral sides of the spinous processes of T7 to T12, the thoracodorsal fascia, which connects to the spinous processes of the lumbar and sacral vertebrae, the posterior portion of the iliac crest, and proximal 1/3 of ribs 9 through 12. The fibers ascend in a superolateral fashion towards its insertion point, the floor of the bicipital groove of the humerus.

Levator scapulae is a thin muscle that descends from the neck to the scapula. It originates from the transverse processes of C1 (atlas), C2 (axis), C3, and C4. The fibers run diagonally from these points to the medial scapular border just above where the spine of the scapula connects. Origination points of this muscle can vary in the neck and posterior skull.

The rhomboids: rhomboid minor and rhomboid major; these two muscles originate from the spines and supraspinous ligaments of the cervical and thoracic vertebrae. Rhomboideus minor is the smaller of the two muscles and is located superiorly. It originates from the seventh cervical vertebrae and first thoracic vertebrae and attaches to the medial border of the scapula at the point where the spine connects. The rhomboid major originates from the second to the fifth thoracic vertebrae and attaches just below the rhomboid minor on the medial border of the scapula.

The serratus posterior muscles, separated into superior and inferior, are attached to the spinous processes of the vertebrae and the ribs. The superior muscle originates from spinous processes of C7-T3 and attaches to ribs two through five. The inferior muscle originates from T11-L1 and attaches to ribs 9 through 12.