Patients presenting with a subarachnoid hemorrhage classically present with a “thunderclap” headache (characterized as a severe headache that develops within seconds to minutes and has a maximal intensity at its onset), neck stiffness, vomiting, and decreased level of consciousness, hemiparesis, and occasionally, seizures.

Neck stiffness typically does not occur until about 6 hours after the onset of a SAH. Asymmetrical pupil size and loss of the pupillary light reflex may indicate brain herniation caused by rising intracranial pressure. Terson syndrome (vitreous hemorrhage resulting from a severe SAH) occurs in anywhere from 3% to 13% of cases.

Electrocardiographic changes may include large U waves, T wave abnormalities, QT prolongation, Q waves, high R waves, cardiac dysthymias, and ST changes (elevation or depression).

Patients may report a history of a head injury before the onset of symptoms or a known history of a cerebral aneurysm. Other risk factors include high blood pressure, smoking, family history, connective tissue disorders, and drug/alcohol abuse.

Patients may also report having a history of a prior severe headache and/or a history of a small bleed with resolving symptoms within the past month. This is considered a sentinel bleed, which often precedes a more severe SAH. A headache from a sentinel bleed is extremely difficult to diagnose, as CT and LP can be unreliable in these cases.

Some physical exam findings include an oculomotor abnormality/palsy, which may indicate the posterior communicating artery as the source of the bleeding.