The management of kidney failure is usually done with an interprofessional team of healthcare professionals dedicated to preserving renal function. Kidney failure has enormous morbidity and mortality, costing the healthcare system billions of dollars each year. Today most hospitals have a kidney failure nurse whose job is to educate patients on the causes, detection, and prevention of kidney failure. The pharmacist also needs to regularly audit patient medications for those that are nephrotoxic. When monitoring patients with kidney failure, the nurse should note the urine output, levels of potassium, blood sugar and creatinine. Control of blood pressure and blood sugars is vital in the prevention of kidney disease. The diabetic nurse should closely monitor the renal function of all diabetics and refer patients to the nephrologist if the renal function is deteriorating. The pharmacist should emphasize the importance of medication compliance for treatment of blood pressure. These patients should have close follow up to ensure that the renal function is not deteriorating. Finally, the patient needs to be given advice on healthy eating, exercise, discontinuing tobacco and abstaining from alcohol. Kidney disease is not well managed can lead to complete renal failure, which requires dialysis.

**Outcomes**

Recovery from acute renal failure depends on the cause of the disease. If the cause is reversible, the prognosis is good and leans toward a full recovery. Partial recovery of renal function may occur if the injury does not fully resolve. Severe cases of acute renal failure can result in death.

- The prognosis for hospitalized patients with AKI depends largely on the site (ICU or floor).

- The mortality rate of patients with AKI on a ventilator is about 80%.

- AKI patients are at increased risk for progressing into CKD during their lifetime.

- CKD is correlated with high morbidity and mortality. Cardiovascular mortality is 10 to 30 times higher in ESRD patients treated with dialysis compared to those in the general population.