- Simulation education had its roots in the aviation and space industry, but anesthesia advanced the modern renaissance of medical simulation; in the past 2 to 3 decades, simulation-based medical education has increasingly played an essential role in the field of pediatrics.

- Appropriate use of simulation technology for specific learning objectives requires careful consideration.

- Several best practices of SBME include debriefing/feedback, deliberate practice, and mastery learning.

- Simulation can be utilized for both formative and summative assessment.

- The debrief with dedicated feedback is cited as the most valuable part of the simulation session.

- Deliberate practice involves direct, immediate feedback or coaching to ensure the practice is done correctly.

- Mastery learning sets the minimum competency requirement goal for the learner to perform independently without coaching and is seen in ACGME residency requirements and other clinical and procedure skills training.

- Rapid cycle deliberate practice is a form of deliberate practice that incorporates constructive criticism during simulation, but with each mistake or feedback, the simulation restarts to ensure the practice is done correctly.

- Simulation is ideally suited to teach pediatric cardiopulmonary resuscitation skills, procedural skills, trauma, and disaster management.

- More innovative uses of simulation in pediatrics include the practice of delivering bad news, medical error disclosure, family-centered care, and system-integration.

- Medical student education and resident education will improve with early and frequent use of SBME specific to pediatrics that address learning gaps like differences in pathophysiology and training in rarely encountered procedures and clinical scenarios.

- Pediatric procedures can be taught to a minimum competency by using validated checklists and/or Global Rating Scales to measure learner performance.

- Simulation can assist in evaluating is communication skills. With an improvement in communication and teamwork skills, patient outcomes can be improved.

- Increasing demand for simulation education is being driven by increased work hour restrictions, increased safety measures, and decreased exposure to high acuity patient scenarios.