The optimal treatment approach continues to be poorly defined, primarily because many recommendations regarding management originate from expert opinion and small observational case studies rather than randomized trials.

Medical treatment for patients with LS endocarditis is not well established, partially due to the scarcity of information on the natural progression of the disease in untreated patients. The underlying disease (SLE or APS) also requires treatment. Anticoagulation merits consideration as secondary prevention for thromboembolic phenomena in patients who have had a thromboembolic event. Warfarin with an INR goal of 2 to 3 has been considered the gold standard in patients with newly diagnosed APS presenting with their first thrombosis. In cases of significant valvular dysfunction, surgical decisions should be according to established guidelines for valvular heart disease. Patients with LS should be closely followed up during treatment, as they can still develop thromboembolic phenomena while on anticoagulation.

Surgery: The indications for surgery (vegetation excision or valve replacement) are the same as for infective endocarditis (e.g., heart failure, acute valve rupture), but reports suggest that prevention of recurrent embolization is the most common reason for surgery. In contrast to infective endocarditis, where complete removal of infected tissue is essential, preservation of the valve may be possible in some cases of NBTE. Most case studies also report postoperative anticoagulation when feasible, especially in those with a systemic reason for embolization (e.g., antiphospholipid syndrome).

Treatment for underlying disease — Clinicians should treat the underlying condition (e.g., malignancy, systemic lupus erythematosus) when appropriate. However, due to the metastatic nature of some malignancies, this strategy is often ineffective in the absence of effective systemic therapy.