Patients should be scheduled for the imaging procedure during the early follicular phase for the patient. This phase is early in the patient's menstrual cycle and is superior to the luteal phase because the endometrial lining is thinner, which increases patency.

A speculum is placed in the vagina, and the cervix is visualized and cleansed in the usual manner. Patient setup: On a fluoroscopic table in the dorsal lithotomy position, the patient should have her arms laterally or behind her head. There should be no metal in the field of examination. Speculum examination and cleansing to visualize the cervix are then performed.

A tenaculum is generally used, and a metal cannula with a rubber acorn tip allows a cervical seal. The protruding metal tip is placed through the cervix, and a cannula is fixed to the tenaculum. This can be used to manipulate the uterus to ensure complete visualization due to radiographs. A plastic catheter with an inflatable balloon is an additional technique, and a thin catheter and shallow acorn can be used.

Prior to placement, contrast should be injected through the device to avoid air in the cavity which can interfere with images.

A scout radiograph of the pelvis is obtained before the contrast medium is instilled after the instruments have been placed. Slow injection of contrast can decrease patient discomfort.

Generally, at least four radiographs are obtained:

- Early filling of the uterus to detect defects.

- After complete filling of the uterus to detect shape.

- Evaluate the fallopian tubes

- Free peritoneal spill.

Other films may be necessary.

The media used is a radio-opaque dye that has changed over the years. By reducing osmolality, water-soluble contrast agents have improved safety and tolerance for HSG. Initial agents were hyperosmolar (> 1000 mOsmol/kg) and ionic. Plasma has an osmolarity of between 275 to 290 mOsm/kg. Subsequently, nonionic agents with 2 to 3 times the osmolality of plasma have been developed. Nonionic iso-osmolar contrast agents such as iodixanol and iotrolan are available (see reference).

Transient discomfort is common and usually described as crampy in nature, and if it occurs, its intensity may vary from mild to severe.

Physiological reactions, such as nausea, vomiting, flushing, chills, and vasovagal reactions, may occur. [ACR Committee on Drugs and Contrast Media. ACR Manual on Contrast Media American College of Radiology; 2021.]