Hypodontia poses cosmetic problems. Supernumerary teeth may lead to disturbances in eruption, crowding, and deviation of the adjacent teeth. In that case, extraction merits consideration. Gemination can also cause esthetic problems as it usually appears in the anterior region of the maxilla. Also, the attempt to divide leaves behind deep grooves on the surface of the geminated tooth, which makes it more susceptible to caries, plaque accumulation, and periodontal problems. It may sometime also interfere in the eruption process of the adjacent tooth.

Fusion may lead to crowding, occlusal disturbances, and esthetic problems. Since the fused teeth have a greater surface area and root mass, resorption may become further delayed, leading to delayed or ectopic eruption of its permanent successor.

Concrescence may give rise to complications such as a fracture of the maxillary tuberosity or floor of the maxillary sinus during the extraction of the teeth. In such cases, sectioning the tooth should precede extraction.

In dilaceration, the bend act as a nidus for bacterial invasion resulting in pulp necrosis and periapical inflammation. It poses difficulty during endodontic, orthodontic, and extraction procedures. Also, it may lead to a longer retention of the primary tooth resulting in delayed eruption or non-eruption of the permanent successor.

Dens invaginatus may act as a channel through which microorganisms enter the tooth making the tooth more susceptible to caries. Dens evaginatus, on the other hand, may fracture or abrade due to forces exerted on it when the tooth comes in occlusion; this may expose the pulp resulting in endodontic complications.

Taurodontism poses an endodontic challenge as it may be difficult to locate the canals. Peg laterals may affect the esthetic requiring prosthetic correction.