Infectious colitis may result from infection with:

- Bacterial infections: including Campylobacter jejuni, Salmonella, Shigella, Escherichia coli (including these subgroups - enterotoxigenic E. coli, enteropathogenic E. coli, enterohemorrhagic E. coli, enteroinvasive E. coli, enteroaggregative E. coli), Yersinia enterocolitica, Clostridium difficile, and Mycobacterium tuberculosis.

- Viral infection: Norovirus, Rotavirus, Adenovirus, and Cytomegalovirus (CMV).

- Parasitic infection such as Entamoeba histolytica (causes amoebic colitis)

- Sexually transmitted infections: Particularly infections affecting the rectum in patients with HIV infection and men who have sex with men may include the following infections: Neisseria gonorrhoeae, Chlamydia trachomatis (causes lymphogranuloma venereum), Herpes simplex 1 and 2, and Treponema pallidum (causes syphilis).

Enterotoxigenic E. coli is the leading cause of traveler’s diarrhea. Enteroaggregative E. coli can cause traveler’s diarrhea, but it is not the leading cause. Enterohemorrhagic E. coli has two main serotypes E. coli O157: H7 and non-O157: H7; the natural reservoirs of both serotypes are cows. Therefore, the infection is related to the consumption of inadequately cooked beef, or contaminated milk or vegetables. They are responsible for outbreaks in developed countries.

Two of these subgroups cause non-bloody diarrhea: enterotoxigenic E. coli and enteroaggregative E. coli; both produce enterotoxins that induce chloride and water secretion and inhibit their absorption. However, enterohemorrhagic E. coli (both strains E coli O157: H7 and non-O157: H7) causes bloody diarrhea and produce Shiga-like toxins, resulting in a clinical picture similar to Shigella
dysenteriae infection.

Both enteropathogenic E. coli and enteroinvasive E. coli do not produce toxins. Enteropathogenic E. coli is responsible for outbreaks, particularly in children less than two years of age, while enteroinvasive E. coli causes acute self-limited colitis and is responsible for outbreaks mainly in developing countries. However, the outbreaks in Nottingham, the UK, in 2004, highlight the need for its consideration as a potential pathogen in foodborne outbreaks in Europe.

Children (in daycare centers), elderly (in nursing homes), and immunocompromised individuals are susceptible to these infections. The fecal-oral route, animal host, and ingestion of contaminated food and water are the usual modes of infection.

Food and water contaminations with pathogenic bacteria may cause large outbreaks of diseases.