Complications include bleeding, pain, and infection at the point of needle entry. If the approach is made too high in the intercostal space, damage to the coastal vasculature and nerve injury is possible. If too much fluid is removed or if the fluid is removed too rapidly (eg, using negative pressure chambers), re-expansion (aka post-expansion) pulmonary edema may occur. Removal of significant fluid volumes may also induce vasovagal physiology. If the procedural needle/catheter is passed through diseased tissue prior to entering the chest cavity, that process can be extended into the chest space. For example, passing the needle through a thoracic or pleural tumor can seed the thoracic cavity, or passing the needle through a chest wall abscess or otherwise infected tissue can result in empyema.

If the insertion site is too low, splenic and hepatic puncture can occur.

With the exception of localized pain from the actual procedure, pneumothorax is the most common complication and is reported in 12-30% of cases. Pre and post-chest radiographs are appropriate routine practice.

Rare cases of retained intrapleural or intrathoracic catheter fragments have been reported. This is typically only seen when a catheter over trochar technique is used. To aid in repositioning the catheter is advanced back over the trochar resulting in tear and failure of the catheter integrity.

It is essential to document the presence and location of lung sliding before the procedure. (best examined with a greater than 5 MHz vascular probe). The disappearance of lung sliding or B-lines is suggestive of the interval development of a pneumothorax. Indications of chest tube placement to manage the pneumothorax following thoracentesis are 1. large pneumothorax, 2. progressive, 3.  symptomatic pneumothorax. The occurrence of pneumothorax in mechanically ventilated patients should be managed with chest tube placement.