Polysomnogram (PSG) should be performed during the patient's habitual sleep period. Patients present to the sleep center in the evening and are given questionnaires to quantify their subjective report of perceived sleepiness such as the Epworth Sleepiness Scale (ESS) or the Stanford Sleepiness Scale (SSS). A careful medication review is also performed. Upon completion of these forms, the patient should be allowed to use the restroom before attaching the various methods of data gathering as above. The technician then instructs the patient to await further instructions for calibrations and leaves the room.

The calibrations include equipment and physiologic calibration. The initial calibration of the equipment is done by sending a known signal through all recording channels. The signal is then sent through individual channels and frequency filters so the signals can be adjusted based on the center's standard operating procedures. Physiologic calibration occurs after the monitoring mechanisms are connected to the patient, which includes a series of eye, jaw, and foot movements and breathing changes. The technologist observes the output for correlation with the patient's actions.

After the calibrations are complete, the patient should be left in a cool, dark, and quiet room to promote sleep. At the same time, the technician must remain vigilant while monitoring the patient's PSG recordings and any physiologic abnormalities, as well as the video feed. Emergency procedures to call for medical help should be implemented and practiced regularly. The procedure is ended the following morning, and patients must be rested enough to drive if driving themselves. The patient must sleep for at least 2 hours during the PSG to be considered a valid study.