The thyroid gland begins development during the fourth gestational week as an endodermal thickening of the floor of the primitive pharynx. Its final resting place is located in the anterior inferior visceral compartment of the neck and lies deep to the omohyoid, sternohyoid, and sternothyroid muscles. It is encased in the pretracheal fascia and accompanied by the pharynx, trachea, esophagus, and recurrent laryngeal nerve.

The metabolically active hormones the thyroid secretes are T4 and T3 (around 93% T4 and 7% T3). T3 is four times more potent than T4, and the vast majority of T4 converts to T3 in the tissues. The half-life of T4 is seven days, while T3 has a much shorter half-life. Multiple proteins bind to T3 and T4. These proteins include thyroxine-binding globulin, transthyretin (TTR), and albumin. Production of the thyroid hormones by follicles lined by cuboidal epithelial cells occurs inside the thyroid gland. These follicles secrete colloid, which is composed of thyroglobulin and contains the thyroid hormones T3 and T4. At least 50 milligrams of iodine per year or 1 milligram per week are necessary for adequate hormone production.

Iodine is concentrated within the thyroid cell by a sodium-iodide symporter that pumps one iodide molecule and two sodium ions. The serum TSH level highly influences the activity of this symporter. A peroxidase enzyme then oxidizes iodide ions to iodine.

Thyroid hormone influences virtually all cells in the body by activating or repressing a variety of genes after binding to thyroid hormone receptors. Ninety percent of the intracellular thyroid hormone that binds to and influences cellular function is T3, which has been converted from T4 by the removal of an iodide ion. The thyroid hormone receptors associated with the DNA within the target genes are bound to retinoid X receptors at specific thyroid hormone response elements. Once bound, the transcription process begins, and hundreds of new intracellular proteins, mostly enzymes, are formed. One particular gene of importance is the gene that regulates the expression of calcium ATPase, which is especially important in maintaining efficient cardiac output.

Myxedema coma is a potentially fatal complication, and prompt diagnosis is an important factor in reducing mortality.

A brief description of organ system-specific pathologic manifestations is described below.

**Cardiac Manifestations**

Diastolic hypertension is one of the cardiovascular compensatory mechanisms in hypothyroidism. Hypothermia and decreased respiratory drive cause peripheral vasoconstriction, resulting in loss of protective mechanism and development of hypotension. Common cardiovascular symptoms include hypotension, shock, arrhythmia, and heart block. Myxedema causes decreased myocardial contractility and reduced cardiac output, which leads to hypotension.

**Neurological Manifestations**

Myxedema coma course is commonly a slow progression to coma. Typically patients do not present with coma, especially in the early phase, but they present with lethargy. Hence the name of myxedema coma itself can be misleading. Other findings may include depression, disorientation, decrease deep tendon reflexes, psychosis, slow mentation, paranoia, and poor recall.

**Respiratory Manifestations**

Hypoventilation in myxedema coma is due to impaired hypoxic and hypercapnic ventilatory response and the associated diaphragmatic muscle weakness.

**Gastrointestinal Manifestations**

Myxedema coma commonly causes abdominal pain, nausea, vomiting, ileus, anorexia, constipation, and ascites.

**Renal and Electrolyte Manifestations**

Typical findings in myxedema coma are hyponatremia and decreased glomerular filtration rate.

**Hematologic Manifestations**

Patients with myxedema coma have an increased risk of bleeding due to an acquired von Willebrand syndrome type 1 and a decrease in factors V, VII, VIII, IX, and X.