The management of elevated hemidiaphragm is determined by the severity of the disease and the underlying etiology. The severity of the disease is assessed by the level of respiratory impairment based on patient presentation, imaging, and lab results. Those with elevated hemidiaphragm should also be evaluated for chronic comorbidities such as chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD), heart failure, or obesity that can augment the severity of respiratory symptoms. The most definitive treatment for elevated hemidiaphragm is to treat the underlying pathology.

A patient presenting with respiratory distress or complete diaphragm paralysis may require endotracheal intubation and ventilation. However, most patients with elevated hemidiaphragm are asymptomatic. Asymptomatic patients with idiopathic etiology may not require any intervention. Elevated hemidiaphragm caused by phrenic nerve impairment can be transient and may resolve without further intervention. In some patients, training targeted to strengthen inspiratory muscles, including the diaphragm, has shown benefit. Based on the severity of phrenic nerve impairment and diaphragm weakness, or the presence of respiratory symptoms, ventilator support at bedtime can be helpful.

Patients with elevated hemidiaphragm should be monitored with imaging studies periodically. No definitive test or timeline has been established for this screening. However, to minimize radiation exposure, an ultrasound every 3-6 months may be the ideal choice of monitoring the condition. Ultrasound is quickly becoming the gold standard as it shows the movement and size of the diaphragm in real-time for an adequate comparison over time.

In situations where diaphragmatic palsy has progressed to complete paralysis, the diaphragm has not healed within one year, or the work of breathing has increased, a more invasive approach with surgical diaphragmatic plication may be warranted. In several studies, diaphragm plication showed evidence of decreased dyspnea and improved lung function by 10 to 30%.

Intervention with phrenic nerve pacing may provide significant improvement of symptoms in patients with diaphragm palsy due to spinal cord injury and neuromuscular disease.