**History**

In the initial stages of Eales disease, patients may not be having any symptoms. Mostly young males present with cobwebs floating in front of the eye called floaters with or without associated diminution of vision and photopsia.

**Physical Examination**

- Visual acuity - Since the disease predominantly affects the peripheral retina and spares the macula, visual acuity at presentation is generally 20/40 or better. Although vision may be poor in cases with vitreous hemorrhage or cystoid macular edema. No perception of light may be reported in cases with long-standing retinal detachment and in neovascular glaucoma leading to optic atrophy.

- Anterior segment - Anterior uveitis is uncommonly seen, and if at all present, it is non-granulomatous. Granulomatous uveitis, if seen, should point in the direction of sarcoidosis.

- Vitreous - Vitritis is uncommon. Mild vitreous haze may be observed over areas of vasculitis. Late stages may have a recurrent vitreous hemorrhage. Dense vitreous hemorrhage will preclude the view of the fundus. Hemorrhage in the vitreous is usually because of delicate proliferating new blood vessels.

- Optic nerve - Neovascularisaton may develop in the late stages. Optic disc pallor usually develops in cases of neovascular glaucoma.

- Retina

Early (Inflammatory) Stage

The hallmark of this stage is periphlebitis.

Middle (Ischemic) Stage

Capillary ischemia is characteristic of this stage. Veno-venous shunts and venous beadings may be noted. Ischemia leads to increased production of VEGF, which may lead to macular edema or the proliferative stage.

Late (Proliferative) Stage

Neovascularisation occurs at the boundary of the non-perfused and perfused retina. This neovascularization may lead to repeated hemorrhages in the vitreous, which may or may not be associated with retinal detachment.