# Introduction

Muscarinic receptors are G-coupled protein receptors involved in the parasympathetic nervous system. The only exception to these receptors is the sweat glands, which possess muscarinic receptors but are part of the sympathetic nervous system. They are named due to their increased sensitivity to muscarine, a component found in certain species of mushrooms.

# Issues of Concern

Acetylcholine is closely associated with muscarinic receptors and activation of the parasympathetic nervous system, except for sweat glands, which are part of the sympathetic response. Overstimulation of these receptors can lead to an increased parasympathetic response leading to harmful effects. Several common diseases can be associated with dysfunctional muscarinic receptors. One major overstimulation of the parasympathetic nervous system is COPD and asthma due to the increased bronchial constriction, which leads to shortness of breath and difficulty breathing. Treatment of COPD involves anticholinergics, whereas asthma treatment uses drugs that cause a reversal of acetylcholine binding or an increase of sympathetic to decrease symptoms.

Muscarinic receptors are prevalent on the detrusor muscle and are involved with contraction. Dysfunction of these receptors leads to overstimulation and increased contraction of the bladder.

# Cellular Level

The muscarinic receptor consists of M1, M2, M3, M4, and M5 receptor subtypes. All muscarinic receptors are part of the G-protein coupled receptors (GPCRs). A molecule activates GPCRs; in this case, muscarinic receptors become activated by the neurotransmitter acetylcholine. Activation of GPCRs leads to ligand binding, which leads to the generation of second messengers depending on which class of G protein is present in the receptor. Gq receptors are excitatory and generate phospholipase C and protein kinase C (PKC). Phospholipase C will then produce second messengers, diacylglycerol (DAG) and inositol triphosphate (IP3). DAG and IP3 work to increase protein kinase and calcium intracellularly, which provide the mechanism for an excitatory reaction. Gi receptors are inhibitory and cause a decrease of adenylyl cyclase, leading to the reduction of protein kinase A. With decreased protein kinase A, cellular levels of cyclic adenosine monophosphate decrease and cause an inhibitory reaction within the cell. M1, M3, M5 are stimulatory receptors and are composed of the Gq protein, whereas M2 and M4 receptors are inhibitory receptors and are composed of the Gi protein.

# Organ Systems Involved

The M1 receptor (Gq) is present in the cerebral cortex, hippocampus, and throughout the brain. The muscarinic receptors in these locations appear to play a role in cognitive functioning.

# Pathophysiology

There are an estimated 358 million patients in the world affected by asthma. Asthma symptoms of dyspnea are secondary to bronchoconstriction and smooth muscle constriction. The increased parasympathetic activity can account for this constriction, including overstimulation of muscarinic receptors by increased release of acetylcholine.

Overactive bladder is a syndrome where the detrusor muscle is overactive, causing symptoms of urinary frequency, urgency, and, in some cases, bladder incontinence. There are greater numbers of M2 receptors in the detrusor muscle; however, the smaller population of M3 receptors is most associated with the contraction of the bladder.

Myopia is more commonly known as nearsightedness, a pervasive disorder with one-third of the United States population affected. Multiple studies have shown that muscarinic receptors, especially the M3 subtype, are involved in developing myopia. Scientists believe that muscarinic receptors are involved in axial elongation, which is present in cases of myopia.

# Clinical Significance

Either inhibition or stimulation can treat several different diseases and disorders of muscarinic receptors in the affected area. Identifying muscarinic receptors involved in specific pathologies can allow for the development of antagonists and agonists to help decrease symptoms. In asthma and some COPD cases, a long-acting beta2 agonist (LABA) is used to upregulate sympathetic control in the airways and decrease constriction. Several add-on treatments for asthma have come onto the market throughout the years, and several of these include muscarinic receptor antagonists, also known as long-acting muscarinic antagonists (LAMAs). One of the most recently developed LAMA is tiotropium, which acts on M3 receptors. Tiotropium inhibits smooth muscle cells of the airways and submucosal glands to decrease airway constriction and mucus secretion.

Muscarinic antagonists are frequently used in the treatment of overactive bladder. Antagonists work to reduce the spastic contraction of the detrusor muscle.

One of the most clinically relevant muscarinic antagonists is atropine. It is an anticholinergic drug that utilizes competitive inhibition to block acetylcholine from binding to muscarinic receptors. In the SA node of the heart, atropine works to block acetylcholine from binding to M2 receptors, which helps downregulate the parasympathetic response and upregulate the sympathetic response in the SA node to increase heart rate and cardiac contractility.