While each hospital will likely have its policy, several safety concerns should precede patient transfers.

- Perform proper hand hygiene

- Check the patient’s chart/room for any additional precautions

- Introduce the team to the patient

- Confirm the patient’s identification

- Ensure patient privacy

- Assess ABCDs (airway, breathing, circulation, and disability)

- 
              
- Airway: if airway compromise is possible, electively intubate the patient with an endotracheal tube. Some patients require a nasogastric tube placement to prevent gastric contents' aspiration during the transfer, while other patients may require cervical spine stabilization. 
              
              
- Breathing: control ventilation with optimized arterial blood gas levels. Ensure adequate oxygenation at all times.
              
              
- Circulation: critically ill patients typically have two large-bore IV cannulas in place before transfer in the event of shock or bleeding.
              
              
- Disability: Patients with altered mental status or head injury should have their Glasgow Coma Scale monitored before, during, and after the transfer.

- Ensure that all tubes, attachments, monitors, attached machines, patient wristbands, and lines are placed properly

- Obtain necessary equipment (slider board, full-size sheet/reducing sheet, etc.)

- Special considerations:

- 
              
- Providers should avoid using their weight to lift patients. Instead, patients should use their strength during transfers when possible.
              
              
- Providers should stay close to patients at all times during the transfer to keep the patient’s weight close to the provider’s center of gravity.
              
              
- Be careful not to let patients wrap their arms around the provider’s head.
              
              
- If there is a communication barrier, the best resource is demonstrating the transfer using another person. Afterward, the patient is given hand signals to start the transfer.