The onus for IVIG therapy's success lies mainly in the treating clinician to achieve treatment goals, as every patient needs a unique and tailored infusion regime. The first and primary means of achieving this is by having a correct diagnosis, and this occurs through efficient interprofessional communication between specialists. More often than not, the diagnosis may fall on the category where off-label use of IVIG is required (as evidenced by a large number of such conditions), and assessing the appropriateness of IVIG therapy must be balanced against the morbidity of the condition. Clinicians and other providers can accomplish this by staying up-to-date on the current guidelines from the authorities such as the American Academy of Allergy, Asthma & Immunology, the European Academy of Allergy and Clinical Immunology, and the World Allergy Organization. Recently available scientific evidence of IVIG use in specific disease trials or studies should always be used along with clinician's experience to guide the decision on dosage, targeted optimal IgG levels, choice of IVIG product, and course of treatment and should be modified in a patient-centric setting. The choice of IVIG products needs special attention as the products are not generic and only a particular product, but not the other may meet the patient's needs.

IVIG therapy is a consistently evolving practice. More large-scale clinical trials are needed to assess the efficacy of treatment in specific conditions that may not be feasible in other rare conditions. In such situations, a treating clinician is responsible for publishing individual case studies and being part of a collective framework in establishing guidelines for IVIG therapy. Nurses play an evident role in patient care during IVIG infusion and promptly report any adverse reaction to the clinical team to tackle the situation immediately. The government and health authorities can influence the type of product approved in the local market and serve a fundamental role. The cost of IVIG and the availability in low and middle-income countries is challenging, and governmental/national measures to reduce the costs will bring the IVIG therapy to the doorstep of the poor. Finally, the hospital authorities must be well-equipped to handle the transfusion and play a role in establishing standard IVIG protocols for well-established diseases. The hospital's research office should encourage more projects to address the off-label use in rare conditions. WIth appropriate interprofessional teamwork involving clinicians (MDs, DOs, PAs, and NPs), specialists, nurses, and pharmacists, IVIG therapy can produce better patient outcomes, be expanded to cover more conditions, and result in fewer adverse events. [Level 5]