The peripheral blood (PB) and bone marrow (BM) findings of the different diseases are as follows:

Chronic myeloid leukemia (CML): The clinical course of the disease is divided into the chronic phase, accelerated phase, and blast crisis; histopathology varies with phases of the CML. Peripheral blood findings are positive for leukocytosis, with slight elevation of eosinophils, basophils, and monocytes. In patients with chronic phase, hypercellular bone marrow, myeloid hyperplasia with a left shift in maturation, and myeloblasts up to 10% are present. In accelerated phase, myeloblasts range from 10% to 19%, basophils 20% or higher, additional clonal chromosomal abnormality or other diagnostic criteria should be presented, and in blast crisis, myeloblasts are greater than 20%, which is the transformation to acute myeloid leukemia.

Polycythemia vera (PV): PB in pre-polycythemic and overt polycythemic stage shows normochromic and normocytic RBCs, erythrocytosis with elevated hemoglobin (greater than 16.5 g/dL in male and 16.0 g/dL in female), leukocytosis, and thrombocytosis; however, in concomitant iron deficiency, PB shows a microcytic and hypochromic picture. In the post-polycythemic myelofibrosis stage, PB is characterized by leukoerythroblastosis, with teardrop-shaped RBCs and poikilocytosis. The BM findings in the pre-polycythemic and overt polycythemic stage are significant for hypercellularity and panmyelosis, with a variable proliferation of granulocyte precursors, erythroid cells, and megakaryocytes.

Essential thrombocythemia (ET): PB findings are significant for thrombocytosis (450 X 10^9/L or higher) with platelet anisocytosis. In post-ET myelofibrosis, PB is notable for leukoerythroblastosis, with teardrop-shaped RBCs and poikilocytosis. The BM aspiration and biopsy show mild hypercellularity without any dyserythropoiesis, macrocytosis, and dysgranulopoiesis.

Primary myelofibrosis (PMF): PB shows a leukoerythroblastic picture with immature granulocytes and nucleated RBC. The BM aspirate is usually a dry tap ("punctio sicca"), but biopsy is characterized by a various degree of fibrosis along with atypical morphology of megakaryocytes.

Chronic neutrophilic leukemia (CNL): PB is characterized by leukocytosis (WBC 25 X 10^9/L) with segmented or band neutrophils (80% or higher), few neutrophil precursors (less than 10%), and rare myeloblasts. The BM aspirate and biopsy demonstrates hypercellularity and mature granulocytosis with normal maturation and no dysgranulopoiesis.

Chronic eosinophilic leukemia (CEL): Characterized by peripheral eosinophilia (1,500/uL or higher), BM with elevated eosinophils, myeloblasts less than 20% and a clonal abnormality.