While no international consensus exists on the most appropriate type of therapy, it is commonly accepted that therapy should commence as soon as possible.

**Epileptic Manifestations**

In the presence of a crisis (usually mild and infrequent), several antiepileptic drugs are effective, and the control of convulsions is generally easy to do. Several “spike-suppressing” medications, including valproate, clobazam, levetiracetam, ethosuximide, are usually preferred. The use of carbamazepine, oxcarbazepine, phenytoin, and phenobarbital should be avoided as they can exacerbate epileptiform discharge from ESES.

**Speech Therapy and Behavioral Programs**

Speech therapy includes a series of patient-centered approaches aimed at the recovery of language skills. These therapies commonly use augmentative and alternative communication devices aimed at speech training. In younger children, however, this type of approach may not be effective due to poor compliance. In these cases, a therapeutic plan should provide, in its first step, the involvement of a psychomotor therapist, later supported by the speech therapist. Furthermore, psychomotricity has a fundamental value in dealing with behavioral and relational alterations.

**Other Treatments**

Corticosteroids (e.g., prednisone orally 1 mg/kg/day for 6 months or prednisolone orally 2 mg/kg/day for at least three months before gradual tapering) could be helpful for improvement or at least stabilization in language, cognition, and behavior skills.

Multiple subpial transections (MST) in the posterior temporal lobe of the dominant hemisphere is a surgical approach that tries to interrupt epilepsy while preserving the eloquent cortex. It consists of the transection of the horizontal corticocortical fibers while sparing the vertical cortico-subcortical fibers. In 1999, Grote et al. showed that MST might induce the restoration of language abilities in children with Landau-Kleffner syndrome.