Proper geriatric care requires an interprofessional approach involving specialists from different aspects of healthcare. Apart from the regular assessment of other body functions, oral health also requires assessment, and thus a dental practitioner should be involved. If the patient needs a denture and has inadequate ridge support, which is one reason for unstable dentures, the dentist may opt for some surgical procedure s to enhance the rehabilitative outcome. In such cases, teamwork between the dentist and the patient’s general physician is necessary as geriatric patients may be suffering from some systemic illness or may be on medication that precludes surgery.

In cancer patients in whom mandibular and/or tongue resection has taken place, and the oral surgeon is fabricating a denture, it is challenging to achieve retention and stability. These patients may experience psychological issues, with very few returning to presurgical levels of social function. In such cases, since rehabilitation is complicated, a combined and well-planned effort is required that involves many disciplines such as the oral surgeon, prosthodontist, speech therapist, psychiatrist, social service workers, and dietician.

Also, before starting the treatment of completely edentulous patients, a thorough examination of the oral cavity must be done as inspection of the oral cavity can give us crucial information regarding the dryness of the oral mucosa. The hyposalivation may be due to some medication or any illness. The dentist and family physician should adopt the interprofessional team approach, especially for geriatric patients, although all patients will benefit from this paradigm. [Level 5]