The presence of mutated or overexpressed RTKs has important therapeutic and prognostic implications in a number of cancers. In the past two decades, a multitude of drugs targeting these RTKs has been developed, with some resulting in significant improvements in clinical outcomes. These drugs come in two forms: monoclonal antibodies that prevent receptor dimerization or growth factor binding or as small molecule tyrosine kinase inhibitors that prevent TKD phosphorylation. The result in both cases in the inhibition of proliferation and the promotion of apoptosis in malignant cells.

Examples of monoclonal antibodies are trastuzumab and pertuzumab, which target different epitopes on HER2 to prevent receptor dimerization. Both have indications for localized and metastatic breast cancers that overexpress HER2; trastuzumab is also useful in HER2+ metastatic gastric cancer. These drugs have had profound impacts on the outcomes of breast cancer patients. For instance, before the development of these drugs, overall survival (OS) in patients with HER2+ metastatic breast cancer treated with chemotherapy alone was approximately 20 months. Today, the addition of trastuzumab and pertuzumab to standard chemotherapy has increased the overall survival to approximately 56 months in these same patients. Once considered to have the worst prognosis, both local and metastatic HER2+ breast cancer now have a median survival similar to luminal breast cancers.

Cetuximab and panitumumab are two monoclonal antibodies that antagonize EGFR/EGF binding. Their most common use is in the treatment of metastatic colon cancer. When combined with standard FOLFOX or FOLFIRI chemotherapy in the primary treatment of metastatic colon cancer, these drugs increase progression-free survival (PFS) by approximately 1.5 mo (8.5 to 10 months). A significant increase in OS is seen only with panitumumab (23.8 vs. 19.4 mo). These benefits are present only in patients who are RAS wild type, as inhibition of RTK-ligand binding is rendered useless in the context of a constitutively active downstream protein kinase.

Ramucirumab is the only monoclonal antibody targeting the VEGFR, functioning to inhibit tumor angiogenesis. Specifically, it prevents VEGF binding to VEGFR-2. It is indicated only in advanced or metastatic colorectal, gastric, and non-small cell lung cancer that has progressed or relapsed after first-line therapy. Given this use, it has a more limited clinical significance. For example, in patients with advanced or metastatic gastric and gastroesophageal cancer who had failed fluoropyrimidine or platinum-based therapy, the median overall survival was 5.2 months in the ramucirumab group vs. 3.8 months in the placebo group.

The number of small-molecule tyrosine kinase inhibitors (TKI) greatly exceeds the number of RTK targeted monoclonal antibodies. And unlike the antibodies, most TKIs are capable of inhibiting numerous RTKs and can be used in a wider variety of cancers. For these reasons, a complete discussion of the clinical significance of RTKs is beyond the scope of this text, but some examples appear below.

As described in the “Pathophysiology” section above, a portion of patients with adenocarcinoma of the lung have genetic alterations in the gene coding for EGFR, most notably an exon 21 substitution or exon 19 deletion. Monotherapy with the TKIs osimertinib, erlotinib, gefitinib, and afatinib are all approved in metastatic lung adenocarcinoma harboring these mutations. Studies have demonstrated these drugs have improved PFS, but have a similar OS to chemotherapy, alone in this population.

Other clinical uses of targeted TKI therapies include lapatinib as second or third-line treatment in metastatic HER2+ breast cancer,

Drugs targeting RTK ligands have also undergone development, as have drugs that target mutated protein kinases in their downstream signaling pathways. An example of the former is the bevacizumab, which binds VEGF and prevents it from binding VEGFRs. Examples of the latter include dabrafenib and vemurafenib, which target RAF protein kinases with the V600E mutation, and trametinib, inhibiting MEK. The most extensive use of these drugs is in melanomas with the BRAF V600E mutation.