Very often, in patients with headaches, the diagnosis can be established by careful history taking and physical examination. Primary headaches are not life-threatening and do not require imaging in the emergency department. Many types of secondary headaches (e.g., TMJ, uncomplicated otitis media, hangover headache) are similarly benign and require little or no additional workup beyond a thorough history and physical. Though less common, more serious etiologies of secondary headache must be considered before establishing a primary headache diagnosis.

History should be geared toward obtaining a detailed account of the current headache, a full review of systems, and a description of any prior headache disorder or headache history. In addition, specific questions relating to any possible life-threatening causes of secondary headache should be asked, as the answers and any examination findings will direct additional testing or emergent therapy.

As with any chief complaint of pain, the history should begin with the following questions:

- Where is the pain located?

- When did the pain begin?

- What was the patient doing when the pain began?

- How has the pain progressed? Is it improving, worsening, or constant?

- What is the quality of the pain?

- What is the severity of the pain?

- Does anything make the pain better or worse?

- Does the pain radiate?

- Has the patient experienced pain like this in the past?

Important additional questions to ask are:

- What is the patient's medical history?

- Does the patient take new medications, or have they recently changed them?

- Does the patient take "blood thinners"?

- Is this the worst headache the patient has ever experienced?

- Was the pain maximal at the onset?

- Has the patient had any difficulty moving or speaking normally?

- Did the patient have nausea or vomiting?

- Does the patient have a fever?

- Does the patient have any changes in vision or hearing?

- Does the patient have eye pain?

- Does the patient have any neck or facial pain?

- Did the patient have a seizure?

- Does the patient have dizziness?

- Does the patient have any sensitivity to light?

- Does the patient feel generally weak?

- Is there a weakness in a specific area of their body?

- Has the patient traveled recently?

- Has the patient been around sick contacts?

- Is the patient less than six weeks postpartum?

- Does the patient have a history of immunosuppression or take immunosuppressive medication?

A thorough physical examination is important in all patients presenting with headaches. Although the neurologic exam is the most obvious imperative, it is also crucial to perform a complete HEENT exam, which may uncover findings suggestive of either benign (sinusitis, otitis, odontogenic headache) or serious conditions (e.g., papilledema suggesting intracranial pressure, temporal artery tenderness suggesting giant cell arteritis).

Certain clinical features suggest that a patient is very unlikely to have a serious etiology of headaches.

Low-risk features include:

- Age under 50 years

- Features typical of primary headaches

- History of similar headache

- Normal neurologic exam

- No change in the usual headache pattern

- No high-risk comorbidities

- No new or concerning findings on history or physical

SNOOP: Red flags for dangerous underlying conditions

- S: Systemic illness (fever, cancer, pregnancy, HIV)

- N: Neurologic signs or symptoms (confusion, focal neurologic signs, seizures, papilledema)

- O: Onset is new or sudden (especially if age over 50)

- O: Other associated features (head trauma, drugs or toxins, headache awakens from sleep or worse with Valsalva, precipitated by coughing or exertion)

- P: Previous headache history with progression or change in characteristics

History and physical are usually sufficient to diagnose primary headaches, provided no high-risk features are present. For primary headaches, physicians must be able to differentiate the type of primary headache to initiate proper therapy.

Clinical features of primary headache subtypes:

Children and adolescents: Bilateral in majority

Adults: Unilateral in 60 to 70%, bifrontal or global in 30%

Gradual onset, crescendo pattern, pulsating, moderate or severe, aggravated by routine activity

Pain begins quickly, reaching maximal intensity in minutes. Quality is deep, constant, excruciating, or explosive.

Patient most comfortable resting in a dark, quiet room

Ipsilateral lacrimation and redness to the eye, nasal congestion or rhinorrhea, pallor, diaphoresis, horner syndrome, and restlessness

**Table 1. Characteristics of migraine, tension-type, and cluster headache syndromes**

Conversely, if patients have high-risk features or a history and physical not compatible with primary headache, the etiology of secondary headache must be investigated. As is often the case in clinical medicine, pattern recognition is useful. The following are several of the most important critical diagnoses of secondary headaches to consider and their key clinical features:

-  Subarachnoid Hemorrhage

- "Thunderclap" headache that is sudden, with maximal pain at onset, and often described as the "worst headache of my life."
- The headaches are associated with nausea or vomiting, neck pain and/or stiffness, and focal neurological deficits.
- History may include age greater than 50, loss of consciousness, known vascular aneurysms, connective tissue diseases, polycystic kidney disease, family members with SAH, or a history of poorly controlled hypertension.
- Physical exam findings may include hemotympanum, focal neurological deficits, or nuchal rigidity.

-  Cervical artery dissection

- Symptoms include headache, neck pain, dizziness or unsteadiness, double vision, focal weakness, confusion, and stroke-like symptoms in a younger patient.
- History may include trauma to the head or neck.
- Physical exam findings may include carotid bruit, cerebellar deficits, visual field deficits, bulbar deficits, and asymmetric strength or motor findings.

- Meningitis and encephalitis

- Symptoms may include fever, headache, nuchal rigidity, altered mental status, non-specific flu-like prodrome, nausea, vomiting, focal neurological deficits, photophobia, and seizures.
- History may include non-vaccination, immunocompromised state, close-quarter living, recent travel, tick or mosquito bite,  and sick contacts.
- Physical exam findings may include Kernig sign (painful knee extension on hip flexion), Brudzinski sign (passive hip flexion on active neck flexion), papilledema, or petechial rash.

-  Dural sinus thrombosis

- Symptoms include headache, blurry vision or visual field deficits, nausea, and vomiting. The history may include infection, head trauma, inherited or acquired hypercoagulable disorders of the patient or family members, or other causes of hypercoagulability such as systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE), sickle cell anemia, OCP use, cancer, pregnancy, estrogen use, previous thromboembolic events, antiphospholipid syndrome, and dehydration.
- The physical exam may reveal papilledema and focal neurological and/or cranial nerve deficits.

-  Ischemic or hemorrhagic stroke/cerebrovascular accident

- Symptoms correspond to the anatomic area of the brain affected. Focal neurological deficits are the most common and specific findings. Other symptoms may include headache, nausea, vomiting, vertigo, aphasia, confusion, and visual deficits.
- History may include previous ischemic or hemorrhagic events, tobacco use, diabetes, hyperlipidemia,  hypertension, and other vascular risk factors.
- The physical exam may include neurological deficits, altered mental status, and facial droop.

-  Carbon monoxide poisoning

- Symptoms may include headache, dizziness, ataxia, confusion, nausea, and vomiting.
- History may include the use of indoor heaters, house fires, and exposure to car exhaust.
- The physical exam may reveal pink-tinged skin, wheezing, hyperventilation, singed nares, and an edematous oropharynx.

-  Acute angle-closure glaucoma

- Symptoms may include unilateral or bilateral eye pain, photophobia, changes in or loss of vision, and sudden onset of headache.
- The history may include older age, exacerbation of symptoms in a dark room, and family history.
- Physical exam findings may include decreased visual acuity, conjunctival injection, increased intraocular pressure (60 to 90 mmHg is diagnostic), a shallow anterior chamber, and a fixed and mid-dilated pupil.

-  Idiopathic intracranial hypertension

- Symptoms may include headaches not responding to analgesia, changes in vision, nausea, vomiting, and the headache worse when supine.
- History may include female gender, childbearing age, obesity, and new medication use. Specific medications implicated in IIH include oral contraceptives and tetracycline antibiotics, as well as lithium and vitamin A.
- Physical exam findings may include papilledema, bradycardia, and visual field deficits.

-  Hypertensive emergencies

- Symptoms include headache, changes in vision, nausea and vomiting, confusion, seizure, and oliguria or anuria.
- History may include pregnancy (preeclampsia/eclampsia), history of hypertension, medication noncompliance, and autonomic dysregulation syndromes, including those secondary to stroke, pheochromocytoma, and neuromuscular diseases.
- Physical exam findings may include altered mental status, symptoms of heart failure, bradycardia, papilledema, jaundice, and a renal vein bruit.

- Temporal (giant cell) arteritis

- Symptoms may include unilateral headache, painless monocular vision loss, jaw claudication, and proximal muscle weakness.
- History may include older age (greater than 65), polymyalgia rheumatica, and female gender.
- Physical exam findings may include tenderness along the temporal bone, papilledema, and decreased strength of proximal muscle groups.