The pyramidal tract originates from the cerebral cortex, and it divides into two main tracts: the corticospinal tract and the corticobulbar tract. Each of these tracts carry efferent signals to either the spinal cord or the brainstem.

The spinal cord receives fibers from the corticospinal tract, which control the movements in the limbs and trunk. The corticospinal tract originates mainly from the primary motor cortex and premotor area, while also receiving fibers from the somatosensory cortex, cingulate gyrus, and the parietal lobe. Along its descent, it passes through the corona radiata and internal capsule, cerebral peduncles, pons, and upper medulla. Decussation of the fibers (i.e., the crossing of fibers to the opposite side of the body) occurs at the level of the lower medulla, where 85 to 90% of the fibers cross to form the lateral corticospinal tract (LCST). Within the spinal cord, the lateral corticospinal tract descends in the lateral funiculus and terminates at each level of the spinal cord by synapsing with lower motor neurons controlling gross and fine motor movements. Non-decussating fibers continue on the same side within the spinal cord as the anterior corticospinal tract (ACST) and control the proximal muscles as well as the trunk.

The corticobulbar tract is involved in the movement of the face, head, and neck. Its fibers originate in the primary motor cortex, descend similarly to the corticospinal tract through the corona radiata and the internal capsule, and exit to synapse with the lower motor neurons of the cranial nerves. These fibers innervate all cranial nerves bilaterally except cranial nerves VII and XII, which receive their innervation from the contralateral cortex.