The prevertebral muscles have been considered in developing muscular flaps for reconstructive procedures. The longus capitis is the more commonly utilized prevertebral muscle in these cases. The longus capitis is near the cervical sympathetic trunk, superior cervical ganglion, and carotid sheath. With its close spatial relationship to important structures, the longus capitis can be a pedicled flap for head and neck defect repairs with negligible morbidity.

Transoral surgical resection of oropharyngeal tumors rarely results in exposure of the internal carotid artery. This exposed internal carotid artery can result in a very rare but catastrophic complication of rupture and severe bleeding. This complication is preventable by using prevertebral muscle flaps around the internal carotid artery.

The anterior surface of the longus colli communicates with the prevertebral fascia, pharynx, esophagus, the cervical sympathetic trunk, the carotid sheath, the inferior thyroid artery, and the recurrent laryngeal nerve. The posterior surface of the longus colli communicates with the cervical spine. The medial border of the longus colli can be used as a landmark to expose the cervical disc spaces and the uncinate process of the cervical spine during a cervical discectomy or corpectomy procedure as a means to avoid injury to the sympathetic trunk.

The rectus capitis lateralis communicates with the internal jugular vein, the vertebral artery, the occipital artery, and the suboccipital nerve. The rectus capitis lateralis can serve as a surgical landmark in a skull base approach for safe exposure of the jugular foramen.