When considering the use of nicotinic ganglion blockers, it is of the utmost importance to do a thorough and complete review of a patient’s circumstances. These agents are no longer commonly used due to the development of more novel pharmaceutical agents. For this reason, it is of particular importance for healthcare professionals to discern if the use of a nicotinic ganglionic blocker is genuinely required. Members of the healthcare team whose involvement is crucial include physicians, nurses, and pharmacists. If it is determined that the use of a nicotinic ganglionic blocker is warranted, there must be an open line of communication between various members of the healthcare team. A patient-centered approach is necessary to determine appropriate dosing, the timing of administration, and the route of administration. Doing so can prevent any serious adverse reactions from affecting the patient. For example, patients with a history of renal disease should be monitored closely due to the blood pressure-lowering effects and the kidney’s particular sensitivity to decreased blood flood. The physician must be cognizant of any potential adverse reactions and must effectively ascertain whether the use of a nicotinic ganglion blocker is warranted. The pharmacist can verify that the prescribed dose is both safe and effective. The nurse can perform regular follow-up checks to ensure the patient is tolerating the drug well.

Controlled hypotension during surgery offers a variety of alleged advantages. The first and principal of which is reduced operative blood loss, subsequently leading to decreased operative time. Secondly, the transfusion requirement becomes reduced, and this translates to a reduced risk of transfusion reaction. Thirdly, controlled hypotension results in a reduction in the anesthesia requirement. The decreased anesthesia requirement allows for more rapid patient recovery time with improved postoperative well-being of the patient.