# Definition/Introduction

The neurological exam is a practice that dates back to the late 1800s. Joseph Babinski and Wilhelm Erb were the first to discover the clinical application of a neurological exam. The practice has since become standard procedure across the world. The importance of this exam stems from its ability to determine the integrity of both the central and peripheral nervous systems. Beyond this, the utilization of a neurological exam allows for the determination of whether pain in the extremities results from peripheral or central tissue.

If reflex testing indicates the possibility of a neural insult, then further testing should be conducted, inclusive of cranial nerve assessment, the brachioradialis reflex, clonus in the upper extremity, and Hoffman’s reflex.

The brachioradialis muscle itself is a flexor of the forearm at the elbow that also participates in the supination and pronation of the forearm. It originates from the proximal two-thirds of the lateral supracondylar ridge of the humerus and inserts into the lateral aspect of the styloid process of the radius.

The brachioradialis reflex is a deep tendon reflex involving the C5 and C6 nerve roots through its innervation by the radial nerve. Babinski first introduced the testing of this reflex in 1910.

**Muscle Involvement**

The brachioradialis is superficial, on the radial side of the forearm within the superficial extensor compartment.

Anatomical variations exist within the muscle; however, there have been studies to determine the most typical presentations of motor units. The results of one of such studies showed that motor units receive innervation by a mean of four distinct endplate zones separated by a minimum of 15 mm and a maximum of 55 mm along the proximal-distal axis. Further study showed that terminal waves were present in distally innervated motor units but not in proximally innervated motor units. This finding indicates that distal motor units have tendinous termination as compared to the intra-fascicular termination of the proximal motor units. Taken together, these two findings point to the brachioradialis muscle having a series-fibered architecture composed of overlapping bands of muscle fibers. It is this organization of the muscle fibers that determines the biomechanical action of the brachioradialis muscle along with its force-generating capacity and its neural control. One postulation for the series-fibered architecture observed in the brachioradialis muscle is the allowance it makes for a significant mechanical exertion while preserving short enough muscle fibers for the effective coupling of electrical and mechanical forces.

**Innervation**

The input from C5 and C6 travels along the radial nerve to innervate the brachioradialis and cause the action of elbow flexion.

**Blood Supply**

The main blood supply of the brachioradialis muscle is the recurrent radial branch of the radial artery. This branch also provides blood flow to the supinator muscle. The recurrent radial branch comes off the radial artery just distal to the radial head. From that point, it crosses back up the arm to anastomose with the radial collateral branch from the deep brachial artery

# Issues of Concern

**Reflex Mechanism**

A reflex occurs when a force, in this context a tap, stretches the muscle-tendon. Through the stretching of the muscle, stretch receptors within the muscle spindle become activated. This action then initiates impulse conduction along a reflex arc consisting of an afferent signal to the spinal cord and an efferent signal to the muscle, which causes the muscle to twitch.

Reflexes, however, are not solely dependent upon excitation; inhibition is also necessary for a reflex to occur. Specifically, a signal branch from the 1a afferent neuron to an inhibitory interneuron is activated to inhibit the opposing muscle group during the reflex. Additional modulation of the monosynaptic junction of the 1a afferent neuron and the motor neuron is provided by the descending corticospinal tract, which in most cases, serves to dampen the reflex response. Due to the involvement of the descending corticospinal tract, a reflex divides into lower and upper motor neuron components. The lower motor neuron components include the peripheral nerves and spinal segment, whereas the upper motor neuron portion consists of the descending corticospinal tract. Injury to either the lower or upper motor neuron portion can result in pathology.

The foundation of reflexes is the propagation of vibration waves from the point of impact to the stretch receptors within the muscle spindle. Failure of this to occur means that either the muscle was unable to sense the impact, or the muscle was unable to propagate the signal. In either situation, the result is a lack of muscle response as no sensory neuron, nor subsequent reflex arcs or motor neurons were activated. One study which explored this phenomenon in the brachioradialis muscle found that a gamma efferent block created by procaine injection was able to decrease the excitability of muscle spindles. This finding is of importance when conducting procedures on the muscle itself.

**Testing**

The evocation of deep tendon reflexes forms a crucial part of the neurological examination as it reveals information about the status of the portions of the nervous system, which contribute to the reflexes tested.

For the testing of the brachioradialis reflex, the examiner places the patient in a seated position. From there, the clinician uses his or her forearm to support the patient’s forearm in a slightly pronated position. The physician supports the patient’s forearm rather than asking the patient to maintain the position to achieve relaxation of the muscle. Once in position, the physician delivers a series of quick hits to the area of the styloid process of the radius at the point of brachioradialis insertion.

Interpretation of the test is dependent upon muscle movement observed as a result of the striking of the brachioradialis tendon. The striking of the muscle-tendon should produce flexion and supination of the forearm. In cases where it does so, that would be considered a negative test. A positive test is indicated by either finger flexion or slight elbow extension.

Elicitation of the brachioradialis reflex can pose some difficulty due to the insertion point of the tendon. Generally, however, the aim is to strike the tendon perpendicularly to the plane of the hammer. Again, this should occur in the area of the styloid process of the radius, which is the point of insertion of the brachioradialis tendon. A myriad of tools for eliciting reflexes exists, including both specialized and improvised hammers. There are three groups of specialized hammers: triangular in shape, T-shaped, and circular. For eliciting the brachioradialis reflex, there is no preference given to the type of hammer utilized other than ensuring that it has a flat edge with which to strike the tendon.

**Grading**

Reflex responses are graded based on the amplitude. Numerous scales have been applied to the grading of reflexes; however, a commonly used scale is the NINDS Muscle Stretch Reflex Scale, which is empirically supported. This is a four-point scale ranging from 0 to 4. A score of 0 indicates the reflex is absent. A score of 1 indicates that a trace response of the reflex is present with reinforcement. A score of 2 indicates that a reflex is present; however, its amplitude is within the lower half of the normal range. A present reflex that falls within the upper half of the normal range warrants a score of 3. An enhanced reflex, meaning that the response is greater than normal, is equivalent to a score of 4; this could include clonus if present.

**Absence of Reflex**

Compression of the C5 and C6 spinal nerves results in the loss of contraction of both the biceps and the brachioradialis muscles. As a result, the patient can lose their brachioradialis. While the lesion at C5 to C6 eliminates the brachioradialis reflex though a lower motor neuron lesion, it also exaggerates all reflexes below that level. These reflexes undergo stimulation via an upper motor neuron and include the finger flexion reflexes caused by C8. In the case where C5 and C6 are intact yet neither the biceps nor the brachioradialis is capable of contraction, then there must be a lesion to the anterior horn cell unless the damage affects the reflex arc. If the damage is to the anterior horns rather than the spinal nerves, then the reflex contraction is reduced in an amount proportionate to the reduction seen in muscle power.

# Clinical Significance

Brachioradialis reflex testing can constitute an important portion of the neurological exam. For one, in cases where the patient has hyperreflexia of the brachioradialis, it may point to the presence of hyperactive stretch reflexes caused by the presence of an upper motor lesion.

While the brachioradialis reflex is not in and of itself diagnostic, it can be used to rule in or out possible explanations for symptoms seen. Included within these possibilities are upper and lower motor neuron lesions as described above, as well as cervical spine dysfunction among others. In a study looking at 249 patients with symptoms associated with cervical spine dysfunction, and abnormal brachioradialis reflex was seen, through multivariate analysis, to be able to rule in cervical spine dysfunction when coupled with any two of the following signs: gait deviation, a positive Hoffman’s test, a positive Babinski test, or an age greater than 45 years old.

While the testing of the brachioradialis reflex has been shown to be of importance, the significance of an abnormal reflex in asymptomatic individuals has yet to be determined. One studied aimed at answering this was done over the course of 6 months and involved 277 asymptomatic, neurologically normal individuals. The mean age of the participants was 27 years old with the youngest participant being 16 and the eldest 78. The brachioradialis reflex was found to be abnormal in 75 (27.6%) of the participants. 39% of the participants exhibiting the abnormal response exhibited it bilaterally, and 10% also had a positive Hoffman’s signs. No other signs of myelopathy were found in these participants. Due to these findings, the result was held that an abnormal brachioradialis reflex when present in isolation is potentially a variation of a normal clinical response.

As both the biceps brachii and the brachioradialis muscle receive innervation from C5 and C6 and work to flex the elbow, studies have been conducted to separate the effects of their respective reflexes. In one study an automated system was used to create controlled passive movement stretch reflexes in patients with upper motor lesions. Analysis of the results showed that the brachioradialis has an earlier and larger stretch response.

# Nursing, Allied Health, and Interprofessional Team Interventions

The body of literature on the brachioradialis reflex and its testing largely consists of large and small randomized clinical trials (RCTs), giving it evidence levels of either one or two depending upon the clarity of the results of the study.