Lung segments are defined by the segmental bronchi and associated vascular supply. The right lung is composed of 3 lobes: the upper lobe, the middle lobe, and the lower lobe. The left lung is composed of 2 lobes: the upper lobe and the lower lobe. Parenchymal segments are labeled with S#. Bronchial anatomy is correlated with segmental anatomy and is labeled with B#. Pulmonary arterial anatomy correlates with segmental anatomy and is labeled with A#. Pulmonary venous anatomy correlates with segmental anatomy and is labeled with V#. Each lung has 10 anatomic segments.

**Right Lung**

Upper Lobe – The apical segment (S1) is the most superior aspect of the lung. It is defined by B1, A1, and V1. The posterior segment (S2) incorporated the inferior posterior aspect of the upper lobe. It is defined by B2, A2, and V2. The anterior segment (S3) encompasses the inferior anterior aspect of the upper lobe. It is defined by B3, A4, and V4. These segments might be resected individually or together.

Middle Lobe – The lateral segment (S4) is at the middle lobe's posterior and lateral aspect. It is defined by B4, A4, and V4. The medial segment (S5) is at the anterior and medial aspect of the middle lobe. It is defined by B5, A5, and V5. Individual middle lobe segmentectomies are not commonly performed.

Lower Lobe – The right lower lobe comprises two segments, with the basilar segment containing 4 subsegments. The superior segment (S6) is at the superior posterior aspect of the lobe. It is defined by B6, A6, and V6. The basilar segment encompasses the remainder of the inferior aspect of the lobe. It has four subsegments. The medial basal segment (S7) is at the medal base of the lobe. It is defined by B7, A7, and V7. The anterior basal segment (S8) composes the anterior aspect of the lobe. It is defined by B8, A8, and V8. The lateral basal segment (S9) is at the lower lobe's lateral aspect between the anterior and posterior basal segments. It is defined by B9, A9, and V9. The posterior basal segment (S10) composes the posterior aspect of the lobe. It is defined by B10, A10, and V10. Individual basilar subsegmental resections are technically difficult and not commonly performed. Removal of the entire basilar segment is more commonly performed.

**Left Lung**

Upper Lobe – The left upper lobe has two segments and four subsegments. The upper segment is divided into the apicoposterior and anterior segments. The lingular segment, correlating to the right middle lobe, is divided into superior and inferior segments. The apicoposterior segment (S1+2) forms the superior and posterior aspects of the upper lobe. It is defined by B1+2, A1+2, and V1+2. The anterior segment (S3) forms the anterior and inferior aspects of the upper segment down to the lingula. It is defined by B3, A3, and V3. The superior segment (S4) forms the superior aspect of the lingula. It is defined by B4, A4, and V4. The inferior segment (S5) encompasses the remaining inferior aspect of the lingula. It is defined by B5, A5, and V5. Left upper lobe segmentectomies are most commonly performed by removing the entire segment, upper segment, or lingular segment, and not at the individual subsegmental level.

Lower Lobe – The left lower lobe comprises two segments, but the basilar segment only has 3 subsegments. The superior segment of the lower lobe (S6) forms the superior aspect of the lobe. It is defined by B6, A6, and V6. The basilar segment has three subsegments. The anteromedial basal segment (S8) forms the anterior aspect of the lobe. It is defined by B8, A8, and V8. The lateral basal segment (S9) forms the lobe between the anteromedial and posterior basal segments. It is defined by B9, A9, and V9. The posterior basal segment (S10) forms the posterior aspect of the lobe. It is defined by B10, A10, and V10. Left lower lobe segmentectomies are also commonly performed at the larger segment level, superior and basilar segments, rather than at the subsegmental level.

**Lymph Node Stations:**The mediastinum consists of 14 lymph node stations described and numbered by Mountain and Dresler in 1997. N2 nodes are within the mediastinal pleural envelope. N2 nodes are within the visceral pleura.

Superior Mediastinum – Station 1 consists of the highest mediastinal nodes. These are found at the level of the left brachiocephalic vein crossing the trachea in the midline. Station 2 consists of the upper paratracheal nodes. These are found at the level of the aortic arch. Station 3 consists of the retrotracheal nodes. Station 4 consists of the lower paratracheal nodes. These are found between the aortic arch and the right main bronchus on the right and between the aortic arch and the left main bronchus.

Aortic Nodes – Station 5 consists of the subaortic nodes. These are found lateral to the ligamentum arteriosum along the pulmonary artery. Station 6 consists of the para-aortic nodes. These are found anterior to the aortic arch.

Inferior Mediastinum – Station 7 consists of subcarinal nodes. These are found inferior to the tracheal carina. Station 8 consists of paraesophageal nodes. These are found inferior to the subcarinal nodes along the esophagus. Station 9 consists of pulmonary ligament nodes. These are found within the inferior pulmonary ligament bilaterally.

N1 Nodes – Station 10 consists of hilar nodes. These are found at the mainstem bronchi. Station 11 consists of interlobar nodes. These are found at the level of proximal lobar bronchi. Station 12 consists of lobar nodes. These are found at the level of distal lobar bronchi. Station 13 consists of segmental nodes. These are found at the level of segmental bronchi. Station 14 consists of subsegmental nodes. These are found at the level of subsegmental bronchi.