Simulation instructors have a wide variety of tools at their disposal to assist with achieving individual learning objectives. Simulation designers must ensure that the fidelity (or realism) and the complexity of the tools chosen match the learning objectives as well as the learner's ability. For instance, first-year medical students would likely not benefit from running codes on high fidelity manakins just as seasoned practicing emergency medicine physicians would likely not benefit from gathering medical histories form standardized patients. Some simulation modalities are listed below:

- Task Trainers: Devices or models used for training a particular task: Can be as mundane as store-bought chicken legs to practice suturing to more advanced such as pericardiocentesis models.

- High Fidelity Manakins: Manakins that closely resemble live patients with technology imbedded to simulate disease or physical exam findings

- Standardized Patients: These are actors trained to represent patients and disease.

- Hybrid Simulations: Simulation that incorporates multiple modalities to achieve objectives. For instance, a standardized patient could present in a hypertensive emergency requiring arterial line placement with a task trainer provided to perform the arterial line.

- Virtual Reality: Simulated virtual environments to train specific actions and tasks.

- Games: These are simulation designs where learners are challenged to "win" the game with objectives designed to foster learning. SIM Wars are games designed to inspire competition and foster learning procedural skills.