In 2016, the Infectious Disease Society of America published treatment guidelines for coccidioidomycosis. Coccidioidomycosis has a wide clinical spectrum of presentation. Patients can have a mild respiratory illness with infiltrates or can have chronic pulmonary disease presenting as nodules, cavities, or fibrocavitary disease. In a small percentage of mostly immunocompromised patients, the coccidioidomycosis can present as disseminated disease. The preferred drug is Diflucan in a dose of 400 mg to 1200 mg daily. Itraconazole is an alternative, but there are increased drug interactions with itraconazole.

Pulmonary Infections

Primary pulmonary infections, if severe, should be treated. Some of the reasons to treat a patient are as follows:

- weight loss of 10% or more

- intense night sweats persisting symptoms longer than three weeks

- infiltrates involving more than one-half of one lung or bilateral lung involvement

- prominent hilar adenopathy

- CF antibody test titers of equal to or greater than 1:16

- inability to work due to symptoms

- symptoms persist for 12 months

- patient age greater than 55 years.

Three months of treatment with oral azole should suffice.

Asymptomatic pulmonary nodules due to coccidiosis infection should be followed by imaging. If the nodule is growing, and if there is a concern for malignancy, then resection of the nodule should be considered. Post-resection, there is no need to treat unless the patient is immunocompromised. Some experts would treat for three months as mop up therapy if there were live yeasts present in the pathology specimen (unpublished data).

Asymptomatic cavities should be followed with serial imaging. If the cavity persists for over two years, is close to the pleura, or is enlarging, some experts recommend resection to avoid future complications, although good evidence is lacking. Cavitary coccidioidomycosis can be treated if there is local discomfort, superinfection with other fungi, or bacteria if there is hemoptysis or rupture of the cavity into the pleural space with resulting pyopneumothorax. Treatment durations are about three to six months.

Treatment with azoles, such as fluconazole, is recommended for patients with fibrocavitary disease. If there is sufficient response, these patients should be treated for a year. Surgical management may be needed for severe localized disease, particularly if hemoptysis has occurred.

In patients who have diffuse pneumonia, such as with bilateral diffuse reticulonodular or miliary infiltrates, Amphotericin B may be used. These patients have had exposure to a large inoculum, or there could be an underlying unrecognized immunocompromised state. Patients with diffuse pneumonia should also be evaluated for extrapulmonary coccidiosis infection.

Coccidioides Meningitis

Coccidioides meningitis does not respond to intravenous (IV) Amphotericin due to poor bioavailability across the blood-brain barrier (BBB). It can present in a variety of ways, but the most common symptom is a headache. Hydrocephalus is common and may be present early or late during the disease and is a common complication. The most common life-threatening complication of coccidial meningitis in the modern era is CNS vasculitis leading to cerebral ischemia, infarction, and hemorrhage. Clinically, a patient may present with cerebral infarction and stroke. Spinal arachnoiditis (SA) may occur as a complication, but unlike infarctions and hydrocephalus, arachnoiditis is not an initial presentation. Recently, there has been an increase in the incidence of spinal arachnoiditis post-treatment with azole antifungal agents. SA responds better to intrathecal amphotericin B. Cerebral abscesses and mass lesions secondary to Coccidioides infection have rarely been reported. Eosinophils in CSF are uncommon, but when present, are suggestive of the diagnosis. More typical is the lymphocytic predominance but often neutrophil predominance is seen. Fluconazole was demonstrated to be equivalent to amphotericin B in 1988 and since then has been the drug of choice at 800 mg to 1200 mg daily dose. Both clinical and CSF parameters should be monitored at least monthly. Once improvement occurs, follow-up may be done every three months for life. Therapy is lifelong in these patients.

HIV Patients

The infection rate has declined dramatically since the advent of antiretroviral therapy (ART). The pulmonary disease is often diffuse and can be confused with Pneumocystis jiroveci pneumonia. During the peak of the epidemic, about half of the patients with coccidiosis infection were outside of endemic areas. Therefore, coccidioidomycosis in HIV patients should be in the differential regardless of the location. The symptoms of meningitis in HIV patients are identical to those of non-HIV patients. A headache is frequently present.

All HIV patients with clinically active coccidioidomycosis must be treated if CD4 counts are below 250. Patients on ART, whose CD4 counts are over 250 and stable, can safely stop therapy. Patients who had meningitis should continue therapy indefinitely. All localized pulmonary infections should be treated in patients with HIV. While oral azole can be used for a mild infection, amphotericin B is preferable for moderate to severe infections. Combination therapy with azole and amphotericin B is recommended in severe infections.