**Accessory Navicular Bone**

The accessory navicular bone is a condition where a supernumerary ossicle presents adjacent to the navicular tuberosity on the medial side, as a result of irregular embryogenic development. Bauhin, in 1605, described it as an anatomic variant that occurs in 4 to 21% of the population. Women are more often to have this condition than men, and 50 to 90% of the cases are bilateral. It is generally visible in the radiographic examination from the age of 9 years. Most of the time, this condition was asymptomatic and occasionally diagnosed during a radiological study of the foot, however in particular circumstances, people with an accessory of the navicular could experience medial foot pain caused by injury of the fibrous connection between the navicular and its accessory, that aggravated by weight-bearing activities, walking, and running. Friction against footwear could also produce medial foot pain, especially if there is a large medial protrusion present.

Accessory navicular bones got classified into three groups in 1978, according to their morphology, position, and also its connection to the navicular bone.

- Type I- also called os tibiale externum or os naviculare secundarium; it represents 30% of the total accessory type. It is considered as a 2 to 3 mm sesamoid bone with ovoid morphology, embedded within the distal part of the posterior tibial tendon.

- Type II - also known as prehallux or bifurcate hallux. This type of accessory navicular represented 50 to 60% of all types and formed due to a secondary ossification center within the navicular bone in the embryonic state. It has a triangular or heart-shaped morphology with a 12 mm length of its major axis and is connected to the navicular bone by fibrocartilage or hyaline cartilage forming a synchondrosis joint.

- Type III - also known as a cornuated navicular; it has a prominent navicular tuberosity and is considered a result of a fusion of type II.

Conservative treatment, such as immobilization and anti-inflammatory medication, has often been adequate since it is commonly asymptomatic and only produces a mild grade of pain. However, in some cases of recurrent symptomatic issues and failure of conservative treatment, then a bony excision with an anatomic repair of the posterior tibial tendon might be necessary.