Patients presenting with MALA may be critically ill and unable to provide history, so broad laboratory testing is reasonable. MALA is also a diagnosis of exclusion, so other etiologies of elevated lactate levels and metabolic acidosis should be ruled out first. Initial testing should include a point of care blood glucose, blood gas analysis to assess the acid-base status, basic metabolic profile to assess the patient for electrolyte abnormalities, bicarbonate level, renal function, and lactate level.

A metformin level can be obtained if there is a concern for metformin toxicity based on history and labs. Metformin levels are usually a send-out to a reference lab. As such, they are not immediately useful in determining the etiology of the patient’s presentation, and the levels do not always correlate with the severity of MALA. Nevertheless, a level may be obtained to inform downstream patient care and determine the etiology of an acute presentation of lactic acidosis.

Additional lab investigations include complete blood count to assess for SIRS criteria and other causes of shock such as hemorrhage, hepatic panel, and coagulation studies to evaluate liver dysfunction or injury, blood cultures, urinalysis, and urine culture. Computed tomography of the abdomen may aid in differentiating MALA from other etiologies such as ischemic gut. Specific drug concentrations should be obtained of acetaminophen, salicylate, ethanol, and in the right clinical setting, ethylene glycol and methanol.

An electrocardiogram should be performed to evaluate cardiac rhythm and conduction delays from potential electrolyte abnormalities or coingestants. Troponin should also be obtained to assess for cardiac injury. Continuous cardiac monitoring should be initiated. Computed tomography of the head may also be indicated in the undifferentiated patient with altered mental status.