Any pathological process leading to uninhibited secretion of gastric acid will lead to peptic ulcer disease. Several of these pathologic processes are due to uninhibited gastrin-mediated secretion of gastric acid.

Helicobacter pylori gastritis is associated with increased gastrin levels, likely secondary to the reduction in somatostatin secreting D-cells and subsequent dysregulation of gastrin secretion by G-cells.

Hypochlorhydria secondary to the destruction of gastric parietal cells in pernicious anemia is associated with increased activity of G-cells, resulting in hypergastrinemia. Diffuse hyperplastic nodules found in the gastric mucosa of patients with pernicious anemia may be attributed to the trophic effect of gastrin on the gastric endocrine cells.

Cessation of proton pump inhibitor (PPI) therapy by patients who have been on chronic PPI therapy often results in refractory gastritis. This is due to a paradoxical increase in gastrin in response to H/K ATPase inhibition by PPIs. Upon cessation of PPI therapy, uninhibited H/K ATPase becomes hyperactive in the presence of elevated gastrin levels resulting in gastritis. Fortunately, this refractory gastritis is self-resolving, as gastrin levels will return to normal with the continued cessation of PPI therapy.

Due to the trophic effect of gastrin, elevated gastrin levels in patients on chronic PPI therapy also raise concern for the potentiation of gastric cancer. Chronically elevated gastrin levels also draw concern due to the trophic effect of gastrin and its association with gastrointestinal cancers. CCKB receptors are upregulated in gastric cancer, and in vitro studies have demonstrated gastrin's ability to enhance the proliferation of human gastric cancer cell lines and colonic cancer cell lines.

Zollinger-Ellison Syndrome (ZES) is characterized by the presence of gastrinoma, hypersecretion of gastric acid, peptic ulcers, and secretory diarrhea. Gastrinoma is an unregulated gastrin-secreting neuroendocrine tumor (NET). Biopsy of the tumor will reveal typical NET histological patterns that stain positive for chromogranin A, synaptophysin, and gastrin. Unregulated secretion of gastrin by gastrinomas leads to hyperstimulation and hyperplasia of gastric mucosal parietal cells and ECL cells. Hyperplasia and hyperactivity of these cells result in excessive secretion of gastric acid into the stomach. The gastric acid subsequently overwhelms the defense mechanisms of the lining of the gastric mucosa, causing ulceration of the stomach and duodenum.

ZES is confirmed by the presence of elevated fasting serum gastrin concentration far more than 100 pg/ml in association with increased basal gastric acid secretion and/or low gastric pH below 2.0. Another useful test to confirm the diagnosis is the secretin stimulation test, potentially resulting in increased gastrin to over 120 pg/ml over basal.

A normal fasting serum gastrin level virtually excludes ZES. 70% to 75% of gastrinomas are sporadic; however, 25% to 30% of these tumors are associated with type 1 multiple endocrine neoplasia (MEN1).

It is essential to manage the symptoms associated with elevated gastrin levels, especially peptic ulceration. Surgery is the only curative therapy for gastrinomas. It is recommended in patients with non-metastatic sporadic gastrinomas or MEN1-associated gastrinomas greater than 2 cm in diameter. Specifically, excision/enucleation of pancreatic gastrinomas is effective, while duodenal gastrinomas often require duodenectomy as there are usually multiple duodenal tumors present.

Non-surgical therapy for ZES is based on treating symptoms and the prevention of complications secondary to peptic ulcers. Proton pump inhibitors (PPI) are first-line medical therapy. They directly decrease the secretion of gastric acid into the stomach, thus reducing the ability of the gastric acid to overwhelm the mucosal defenses and prevent the occurrence of peptic ulcers. In an initial prospective study of patients with gastrinoma refractive to H2 blocker therapy, symptoms were resolved in 23 of the 29 total patients. Due to the high success in managing these patients with PPIs, surgery is no longer required to manage the hypersecretion of gastric acid.