As for all undifferentiated patient presentations, a thorough history and physical exam are key for minimizing diagnostic uncertainty. It is essential to obtain a complete past medical history, medication history, and detailed description (ideally a sample, if possible) of the toxicant, route, amount, and exposure time. Equally important is to understand the reason for consumption (e.g., accidental, intentional) and the presence of co-ingestions such as alcohol or illicit drugs. Plant alkaloid toxicities may produce a variety of major toxidromes, which are discussed below.

The tropane alkaloids atropine, hyoscyamine, and scopolamine, also known as the belladonna alkaloids, are known to cause classic anticholinergic syndrome via their potent antimuscarinic effects. Clinical effects can be seen between 1 to 4 hours post-ingestion. Initially, these are characterized by blurred vision, photophobia, mydriasis, tachycardia, urinary retention, dry mucous membranes and skin, and reduced bowel sounds. These early signs and symptoms may be followed by hyperthermia as well as alterations in mental status, including confusion, agitation, combativeness, coma, and even death in severe cases.

Commonly, patients will experience amnesia to events following ingestion. Important to note is that not all characteristics of this toxidrome will necessarily be present in every case. These plant metabolites have been exploited for their hallucinogenic properties recreationally via the consumption of brewed teas and seeds. Plants containing these phytochemicals from the family Solanaceae may also be smoked. Datura stramonium (jimsonweed), the chief source of such seeds, is found in the United States and Southern Canada, and poisoning may lead to acute anticholinergic poisoning and death in both children and adults. Recreational ingestions exceed unintentional ingestions as the main cause of toxicity. The duration of the effect of belladonna poisoning may last from a few hours to days, depending on the dose of exposure.

The widely distributed pyrrolizidine alkaloids found in food and phytomedicine vary considerably in their toxic potencies. Approximately one-half of the pyrrolizidines characterized thus far are toxic when ingested, with hepatotoxic, genotoxic, tumorigenic, and teratogenic effects. Prenatal exposure can lead to fetal pulmonary and hepatic defects. They may also be transmitted through breast milk. Acute hepatocellular necrosis can occur after ingestion of 10 to 20 mg of the alkaloid, likely caused by an oxidant effect. Liver damage can be induced by hepato-sinusoidal obstruction syndrome or veno-occlusive disease. Consumption of herbal medicines containing these phytochemicals has also been shown to upregulate ethanol-induced hepatotoxicity via enhancement of the apoptotic effects of ethanol.

Arecoline, pilocarpine, and physostigmine represent the cholinergic alkaloids whose acute toxicity is caused by the accumulation of excessive levels of acetylcholine, which may lead to characteristic features of the cholinergic toxidrome: lacrimation, vomiting, and diarrhea. Severe toxicity may lead to bradycardia, bronchospasm, bronchorrhea, convulsions, coma, respiratory depression, and death. Chronic exposure to arecoline, which represents the major oxidative alkaloid in the seeds of Areca catechu, also known as areca (betel) nuts, has also been associated with oral cancer.

Pilocarpine, used to treat glaucoma, is a stimulator of ocular muscarinic receptors. Physostigmine, derived from the Calabar bean (Physostigma venenosum), is a reversible acetylcholinesterase inhibitor that was used both diagnostically and therapeutically in anticholinergic overdose. It is not currently available.

Nicotinic toxicity can be caused by several alkaloids, which, in addition to nicotine, include sparteine, lobeline, cytisine, and the active agent in poison hemlock, coniine. The hallmark presentation of early nicotinic toxicity is vomiting. At sufficient doses, excessive stimulation of both pre-ganglionic and post-ganglionic nicotinic acetylcholine receptors leads to a toxidrome with features of both sympathomimetic toxicity and cholinergic toxicity. Severe nicotine poisoning can result in fasciculations, mydriasis, tachycardia, hyperthermia, hypertension, seizures, respiratory depression, and death. Hepatitis, rhabdomyolysis, and acute tubular necrosis have also been observed.

The psychotropic plant alkaloids mescaline and lysergic acid act upon serotonin receptors to generate hallucinogenic effects. The peyote cactus (Lophophora williamsii) found in northern Mexico and the southwestern United States serves as a source of the phenethylamine mescaline. Consumption of morning glory (Ipomoea spp) seeds can induce intoxicating effects via the tryptamine lysergic acid, another serotonergic hallucinogen.

Opioids are derived from the poppy plant (Papaver spp.) and represent the alkaloidal central nervous system depressants with notable clinical utility for analgesia. Toxic amounts of these substances may lead to respiratory depression, miosis, and in severe cases, death. On the other hand, alkaloidal central nervous system stimulants include ephedrine, synephrine, and cathinone. Ephedrine from the Ephedra spp. and certain Sida cordifolia spp. was banned in the US by the FDA in 2004 due to adverse cardiovascular events and death, even among those without pre-existing cardiovascular disease.

Isoquinoline alkaloids include structurally similar sanguinarine, hydrastine, and berberine. Berberine has demonstrated cardiac and respiratory depression, smooth muscle contraction, and uterine contraction. A mass sanguinarine poisoning from the consumption of a Mexican prickly poppy (Argemone mexicana) resulted in gastrointestinal symptoms, hepatomegaly, anemia, skin darkening and lesions, erythema, and peripheral edema. On the severe end, affected individuals may experience ascites, congestive heart failure, and myocarditis. Hydrastine ingestion has been reported to cause movement disorders that resemble poisoning by a non-isoquinoline alkaloid, strychnine, found in Strychnos nux-vomica. Poisoning from these alkaloids is associated with muscle spasms, weakness, rigidity, and death via respiratory muscle involvement.

Both hydrastine and strychnine inhibit the central nervous system glycine receptor and can also mimic acute tetanus toxicity. In contrast to tetanus toxicity, however, a poisoned individual may exhibit periods of muscle weakness or flaccidity. Sources of strychnine include rodenticides, contaminated heroin or cocaine, and an herbal remedy for arthritis called “maqianzi.”

Swainsonine is an indolizidine alkaloid known to cause a lysosomal storage disease by inhibiting glycoprotein glycosylation. It is a known teratogen, and toxicity includes pancreatic and hepatic disease, respiratory depression, and chronic neurologic disease with weakness and failure to thrive.