Reactive perforating collagenosis is a rare benign skin disorder. When the primary care provider, nurse practitioner, and internist see patients with skin disorders, they should be referred to a dermatologist to confirm the diagnosis. The mainstay of treatment is avoiding trauma to decrease risk factors for acquiring reactive perforating collagenosis lesions. Treatment is also aimed at controlling pruritus with topical corticosteroids, emollients, and systemic antihistamines. The use of keratolytics, topical and oral retinoids, phototherapy, liquid nitrogen, methotrexate, and allopurinol have been reported without much improvement of the lesions. No randomized controlled trials have evaluated the treatments for reactive perforating collagenosis, and all treatment suggestions are the result of case reports. Unfortunately, most patients will have a relapsing and remitting course of lesions throughout their life. Typically these patients are managed chronically by a dermatologist, nurse practitioner, and nurse specializing in dermatology. The patients require regular follow up visits, close monitoring, and education in regards to the disease process and treatment. Generally, the nurse practitioner and nurse can manage followup and involve the dermatologist if there are concerns such as a progression of the disease or the pruritis becomes intractable. The best care of these patients to produce the best outcome is an interprofessional team managing treatment, patient education, and follow up. [Level 5]