The motor, sensory, and sympathetic nerve innervation of the external female genitalia originate from the pudendal nerve. The pudendal nerve is made up of the second, third, and fourth sacral spinal roots. The pudendal nerve will enter the pelvis via the lesser sciatic foramen. Once pass the lesser sciatic foramen, the pudendal nerve will travel in the pudendal canal towards the ischial spines. The pudendal nerve then encircles the ischial spine and form branches that innervate the perineum and the external genitalia. The pudendal nerve will branch into three main branches: the dorsal nerve for the clitoris, the perineal nerve for the external genitalia, and the inferior rectal nerve. The dorsal nerve of the clitoris provides the afferent part for clitoral erection. In addition to the dorsal nerve of the clitoris, the clitoris's cavernous tissue is innervated by the cavernous nerves from the uterovaginal plexus. As for the perineal nerve branch, it will provide sensory to the external genitalia via the posterior labial nerves. The perineal nerve also gives off a branch that provides motor innervation to the external urethral sphincter. The perineal nerve also gives off muscular nerve branches that innervate the muscles of the perineum. These muscles are the bulbospongiosus, ischiocavernosus, levator ani (iliococcygeus, pubococcygeus, and puborectalis muscle), and pubovaginalis muscles. Lastly, the inferior rectal nerve will provide innervation to the perianal skin and the external anal sphincter. The labia majora also received addition innervation from the anterior labial nerves (branches of the ilioinguinal nerve). The mons pubis also receives additional sensory innervation from the genitofemoral nerve.

It is common to anesthetize the pudendal nerve during childbirth. The landmark for the injection of anesthetic is the ischial spines. The physician will palpate for the ischial spine from the inside of the vaginal canal. Then the anesthetic will be injected towards the ischial spine to block the sensory territory of the pudendal nerve; this may be done to decrease pain sensation during child delivery, to numb the perineum before an episiotomy, or for the relief of chronic pelvic pain syndromes.