Routine blood work is rarely diagnostic but can find the presence of neutropenia as a correlating risk factor.

Imaging can be valuable in evaluating the extent of the disease. Radiological imaging studies are required to investigate areas with suspected mucormycosis, specifically in the brain, paranasal sinuses, lungs, and abdomen, always guided by the clinic.

The first intervention in the suspicion of rhinocerebral mucormycosis is with the endoscopic evaluation and biopsy of the sinuses to examine for tissue necrosis and to obtain examples of tissue, the presence of characteristic hyphae provides a presumptive diagnosis. The area of highest-yield, and greatest accuracy, is to biopsy the middle turbinate. A computed tomography (CT) scan can help evaluate contiguous structures such as the eyes and brain, findings in CT scan included soft tissue edema of cavity mucosa, sinus mucoperiosteal thickening, bone erosions, and orbital invasions.

Patients with immunosuppression and respiratory symptoms should have a CT chest for possible pulmonary mucormycosis. The presentation of the infection does not differ from pneumonia; therefore, the diagnosis is difficult. Chest radiologic findings are pleural effusion, nodules, consolidation, and ground-glass infiltrates. Bronchoalveolar lavage can show broad nonseptate hyphae.

If there is a concern for gastrointestinal mucormycosis (abdominal pain, gastrointestinal bleeding), a CT scan to evaluate for colitis is necessary.  Once confirmed, colitis should be further investigated by endoscopy with biopsy.  The presence of characteristic hyphae in the biopsy provides a presumptive diagnosis.