**Intraoral Approach**

Place the patient in a seated position so that the maxillary occlusal plane forms a 45-degree angle with the floor. Use a cotton-tipped applicator to apply a topical anesthetic to the oral mucosa of the gum line above the maxillary canine. The infraorbital foramen can be approximated by having a patient look straight ahead and imagining a line down from the pupil to the inferior border of the infraorbital ridge, bicuspid teeth, and mental foramen. Find the inferior orbital rim with the index and middle fingers of the non-injecting hand. Once it is located, the palpating finger should remain in place to prevent losing landmarks and stop the needle from entering the orbit. Retract the cheek with the thumb of the non-injecting hand and then insert the needle into the mucosa above the upper second bicuspid approximately 0.5 cm from the buccal surface. The needle should be directed superiorly and remain parallel to the second bicuspid until it is palpated near the foramen. Before injecting the anesthetic, it is important to aspirate to ensure the needle is not within a vessel. Inject the anesthetic into the space. It is important to avoid injecting the anesthetic into the foramen by keeping firm pressure on the inferior orbital rim with the palpating finger.

**Extraoral Approach**

The infraorbital foramen can be approximated by having the patient look straight ahead and imagining a line down from the pupil to the inferior border of the infraorbital ridge, bicuspid teeth, and mental foramen. Find the inferior border on the infraorbital rim. Cleanse the skin over the infraorbital foramen with an antiseptic agent and sterile gauze. Insert the needle through the skin, subcutaneous tissue, and muscle. Before injecting the anesthetic, aspirate to ensure the needle is not within a vessel. Inject the anesthetic. Due to the proximity of the facial nerve when the extraoral approach is used, it is best to use an anesthetic agent that does not contain added medication with vasoconstrictor properties. The overlying tissues should appear edematous. Massage the area for 10 to 15 seconds after removing the needle.