A careful and detailed history taking is necessary to rule out malingering.

- Watch carefully for discrepancies in person's behavior while taking prolonged, detailed history.

- Dig deep into patient's personality (anti-social personality disorder, histrionic personality traits).

- Find out about the legal status of the patient.

- Ask rapid questions and see the incoherence between answers.

- Ask an open-ended and leading questions. (Questioning about symptoms not related to the "illness faked by the patient" may also induce a positive answer. The patient not knowing much about the assumed disease may say yes to any question).

- Watch for exaggeration of psychiatric symptoms like hallucinations and delusions.

**Mental Status Exam**

- Appearance and behavior: May appear disheveled, uncombed hair, untidy clothing, no eye contact, no rapport building. Irritated hostile behavior

- Mood: Answers low or elated and never normal euthymic. Cannot mimic lack of effect, anhedonia

- Thoughts: Exaggerated delusions, but cannot mimic formal thought disorders like schizophrenia; confused at times with true psychiatric thought disorders as patient with psychosis or schizophrenia can have bizarre delusions and unshakable beliefs

- Perception: Exaggerated hallucinations, both visual and auditory

- Insight: Have good insight about the disease. Almost always acknowledge suffering from the disease they fake

- Cognition: Cannot be assessed properly at times, because the patient may be noncompliant and may lie

Multiple examinations should be performed, and incoherences between the results should be noted. Various tasks are given to patients and performance on different occasions are noted. The inconsistent score in the same task performed multiple times suggest malingering.

Other areas to be investigated include:

- History of hospitalization, medication

- Current history of medication

- Family history

- Social history