History and physical exam are essential to categorize the event as brief resolved unexplained event or to assign an alternate diagnosis. It is useful to ascertain the history with a clear focus on the circumstances before, during, and after the event. Features to be clarified before the event include the location of the event (home/daycare), whether the infant was awake or asleep, infant position (supine/prone, other), and activity (feeding, the presence of anything in the mouth, vomit/spit up). A thorough description of the event including if the infant was active or quiet, responsive or unresponsive, breathing, not breathing, or struggling to breathe, choking or gagging, appeared limp, rigid, or seizing, seemed distressed or alarmed, and change in skin or lip color (red, pale, blue). After the event, determine the approximate duration of the event, abrupt or gradual termination, spontaneous termination, or any interventions used (picking up, rubbing, CPR), and behavior before returning to normal (quiet, startled, fussy, or crying). Other useful information about recent illness, associated symptoms, history of illnesses especially apparent life-threatening event/brief resolved unexplained event, antenatal/perinatal history including gestational age, developmental delays, family history of early deaths especially, SIDS/apparent life-threatening event or presence of cardiac arrhythmias. Social history should focus on identifying the availability of social support systems and access to resources.

Infants presenting with brief resolved unexplained events are well and appear to have normal vital signs and physical exam findings. However, a thorough physical exam is required to identify those with a high-risk brief resolved unexplained event or find the trigger to an alternate diagnosis.