# Continuing Education Activity

The nucleoside reverse transcriptase inhibitor (NRTI) emtricitabine is used in combination with other antiretroviral therapy (ART) in the treatment of HIV-1, HIV-2, and hepatitis B virus (HBV). It is also used in combination therapy for pre-exposure prophylaxis (PrEP) to prevent HIV infection. Emtricitabine is FDA-approved for use in HIV treatment but is not FDA-approved for the treatment of HBV. This activity will highlight the mechanism of action, adverse event profile, pharmacology, monitoring, and relevant interactions of emtricitabine, pertinent for members of the interprofessional team in the treatment of patients with HIV or who require HIV prophylaxis.

**Objectives:**
- Review the mechanism of action of NRTIs including emtricitabine.
- Identify the regimens for HIV treatment and prevention that use emtricitabine as a component.
- Outline the need for monitoring and followup when prescribing antiretroviral therapy where emtricitabine is involved.
- Explain the importance of improving care coordination among the interprofessional team to enhance the delivery of care for patients when using ART, including with emtricitabine.

# Indications

Antiretroviral therapy (ART) has become the mainstay treatment for patients living with human immunodeficiency virus (HIV). The nucleoside reverse transcriptase inhibitor (NRTI) emtricitabine is used in combination with other ART in the treatment of HIV-1, HIV-2, and hepatitis B virus (HBV).

The FDA-approved, combined drug, containing emtricitabine and tenofovir is used as pre-exposure prophylaxis (PrEP) to prevent HIV infection.

Another indication for emtricitabine is as post-exposure prophylaxis (PEP) after possible exposure to HIV infection. Potential sources of HIV transmission include receptive anal intercourse, insertive anal intercourse, receptive vaginal intercourse, insertive vaginal intercourse, blood transfusion, needlestick injury, sharing needles among intravenous drug users, and mucous membrane exposure.

# Mechanism of Action

Emtricitabine, a cytosine analog that works as a nucleoside reverse transcriptase inhibitor (NRTI). The chemical structure is 5-Fluoro-1-[2R,5S)-2-(hydroxymethyl)-[1,3]oxathiolane-5-yl]cytosine (FTC).

# Administration

Emtricitabine is typically administered orally once a day in combination with other antiretroviral therapy (ART).

Emtricitabine has been studied at doses of 25 mg twice per day, 100 mg once daily, 100 mg twice daily, 200 mg once daily, and 200 mg twice per day.

Emtricitabine (200 mg) and tenofovir (300 mg) used as pre-exposure prophylaxis are prescribed as a once-daily oral tablet.

# Adverse Effects

The adverse effects of emtricitabine are similar to those of other nucleoside reverse transcriptase inhibitors (NRTIs) and include headache, muscle weakness, arthralgia, fatigue, fever, abdominal pain, nausea, vomiting, diarrhea, depression, anxiety, insomnia, rhinitis, cough, and pharyngitis.

Emtricitabine combined with tenofovir used as pre-exposure prophylaxis (PrEP) is safe with short-term use of about 2 to 3 years.

# Contraindications

Patients with an allergy to any constituent of emtricitabine should avoid taking this drug. Emtricitabine combined with tenofovir as pre-exposure prophylaxis (PrEP) is contraindicated as monotherapy for patients with a positive HIV status. This monotherapy can lead to HIV drug resistance to antiretroviral therapy (ART). Emtricitabine alone has not demonstrated any significant drug interactions.

# Toxicity

Emtricitabine, along with the other drugs in the nucleoside reverse transcriptase inhibitor (NRTI) category, interacts with mitochondrial DNA polymerase, causing myopathy and neuropathy. This toxic interaction also has associations with hepatic steatosis and lactic acidosis. Emtricitabine has not shown any adverse effects on the mitochondrial function of developing fetuses and is not known to be teratogenic. There has been no evidence of emtricitabine affecting the fertility rates of women taking the drug.

# Enhancing Healthcare Team Outcomes

HIV prevention and treatment are the responsibility of an integrated, interprofessional health team comprised of primary care physicians, physician assistants, nurse practitioners, specialty care physicians, nurses, office staff, pharmacists, and laboratory technicians. HIV prevention begins with health education on safer sex practices from the patient’s primary care physician. The primary care providers need to be non-judgmental and well-versed in taking a detailed sexual history using open-ended questions, as well as asking all aspects of the social history, including alcohol and drug use.

For high-risk individuals, the benefits of protection from daily pre-exposure prophylaxis (PrEP) can be discussed with patients. The daily PrEP recommended is a combination once-daily pill with emtricitabine and tenofovir. The patient should receive proper education from the primary providers, nurses, and pharmacists before prescribing and using PrEP. These guidelines include using PrEP consistently for one week before sexual activity to allow for adequate drug levels to build in rectal, penile, and vaginal tissue. Patients should also receive reminders to continue PrEP for one week after the last sexual encounter if wanting to discontinue this medication.

Every patient should receive an HIV test at least once in their lives, with specific populations needing more frequent testing. Men having sex with men, transgender women, and intravenous drug users should have HIV testing at least one time per year and as frequently as every three months. Patients who present with sexually transmitted infections and HCV should be screened for HIV more often.

Finally, it is the responsibility of health care providers to advertise the short-term use of drugs like emtricitabine in combination with other HIV medications as post-exposure prophylaxis (PEP).