# Continuing Education Activity

Pubic symphysis diastasis (PSD) following childbirth via vaginal delivery is a rare but debilitating condition. Widening of the cartilaginous joint during pregnancy before childbirth is physiologic and assists in expanding the birth canal for successful delivery. However, reports of non-physiologic pubic diastasis exceeding that typically required for childbirth (typically greater than 1 centimeter) can leave mothers with debility and extreme pain. The incidence of complete separation of the pubic symphysis is reported to be within 1 in 300 to 1:30,000, with many instances likely undiagnosed. This activity reviews the evaluation, treatment, and complications of postpartum pubic symphysis diastasis and highlights the role of the interprofessional team in the care of patients with this condition.

**Objectives:**
- Describe the typical presenting features of postpartum pubic symphysis diastasis.
- Review the evaluation of postpartum pubic symphysis diastasis.
- Outline the treatment of postpartum pubic symphysis diastasis.
- Summarize how enhanced coordination of the interprofessional team can lead to more rapid recognition of postpartum pubic symphysis diastasis and subsequently decrease the time to treatment.

# Introduction

Pubic symphysis diastasis (PSD) following childbirth via vaginal delivery is a rare but debilitating condition. Widening of the cartilaginous joint during pregnancy before childbirth is physiologic and assists in expanding the birth canal for successful delivery.

# Etiology

Identified risk factors for postpartum pubic symphysis diastasis include primigravid women, multiple gestations, and prolonged active labor.

- Biomechanical strain of the pelvic ligaments and associated hyper-lordosis; anatomical pelvic variations and "contracted pelvis"

- Metabolic (calcium) and hormonal (relaxin and progesterone) changes leading to ligamentous laxity

- Extreme weakening of the joint

- Tearing of the fibrocartilaginous disc during delivery

- Narrowing, sclerosis, and degeneration of the pubic joint

- Muscle weakness

- Increased pregnancy-related weight gain

- A very long or a very short second stage of labor

# Epidemiology

The incidence of pathologic, complete separation of the pubic symphysis following pregnancy is reported to be within 1 in 300 to 1:30,000, with many instances likely undiagnosed.

# Pathophysiology

Relaxin, a hormone secreted by the placenta during pregnancy, peaks during the first trimester and again in the peripartum period in females.

# History and Physical

Patients can present with pubic symphysis diastasis before delivery, during delivery, or most commonly postpartum. The postpartum presentation is most common, and presentation can encounter delay as spinal epidural anesthesia administered during the birthing process can mask the symptoms. The typical presentation involving pubic symphysis diastasis following pregnancy is unrelenting pain in the anterior pelvis and suprapubic region, with or without pain localized over the sacroiliac joints from associated posterior pelvic ring ligamentous injury. Pain from the anterior pelvis can radiate and manifest in the hip joints and radiate down the legs. Patients will often have extreme difficulty with weight-bearing and can retain urine often requiring the use of an indwelling Foley catheter.

Patients will have difficulty with both active and passive straight leg raise and changes in bed positioning. On physical examination, patients will often present in distress secondary to pain, pain with palpation or attempted manipulation of the pelvic girdle, and pain with attempted weight-bearing or ambulation. The literature describes soft tissue edema or hematoma on the pubis and perineum,

# Evaluation

When postpartum pubic diastasis is suspected clinically, an ultrasound scan can be diagnostic and used for screening,

# Treatment / Management

Treatments described for pelvis diastasis include non-operative treatment with application of pelvic binder coupled with physical therapy and immediate weight-bearing, non-weight bearing with bedrest, closed reduction with application of binder, application of anterior external fixator with or without sacroiliac screw fixation, and anterior internal fixation with plate and screws. In most cases, conservative, non-operative management is recommended and yields good functional outcomes. While early operative management has been advocated in cases where pubic diastasis measures more than 4 cm, the patient is at increased risk for perioperative complications in the postpartum state. Distorted pelvic anatomy, increased pelvic vascularity, and peripartum hypercoagulability complicates surgical intervention and must be considerations.

# Differential Diagnosis

Diagnosis of pubic symphysis diastasis is often straightforward, however other causes of hip, back, and leg pain all warrant consideration by the evaluating clinician. Considerations include an examination for labial and perianal tears and lacerations, venous thrombus embolisms, musculoskeletal low back pain, and lumbosacral radiculopathy. Additionally, pubic osteolysis, osteitis pubis, bone infection (osteomyelitis, tuberculosis, syphilis), tumors, postpartum fracture, abscess, and osteomyelitis have to be considered.

# Prognosis

The prognosis is very good for the majority of patients who experience postpartum pubic symphysis diastasis, and in most cases, full recovery without persistent pain is the expectation.

# Complications

Reported complications from pubic symphysis separation during pregnancy are rare. Urinary outflow obstruction, hematoma formation, and sustained painful ambulation are the most common complaints in case studies. Venous thrombus embolism is also reported and likely attributable to prolonged immobilization.

# Deterrence and Patient Education

Women should receive education informing them that PSD is a rare event, but pubic lesions are frequent. Predisposing factors are both fetal, and maternal, mainly due to macrosomia, and pelvic imbalances impairing the childbirth process. Unresolved pelvic lesions from past deliveries or lumbopelvic pain during pregnancy is a preventable risk factor for dystocia.

# Pearls and Other Issues

PSD occurs spontaneously during complicated deliveries, but symphysiotomy is performed for treatment of obstructed labor and shoulder dystocia in countries where cesarean section is not immediately available, and maternal mortality from cesarean delivery remains high.

# Enhancing Healthcare Team Outcomes

Enhancing outcomes associated with postpartum pubic symphysis diastasis rely on clinician knowledge of the injury leading to early detection, diagnosis, and treatment. Early imaging studies including ultrasound and a standard AP pelvis radiograph, in cases of sustained or out-of-proportion pelvic pain following childbirth, should be considered. Interprofessional communication between obstetric and orthopedic clinicians is important in early diagnosis. Team-centered patient care including physical medicine and rehabilitation as well as physical and occupational therapy should be utilized to optimize outcomes.