The treatment options are a digital evacuation of the impacted fecal mass or the rectal administration of stool softening agents, usually enemas or suppositories.

**Manual Disimpaction**

In many cases of fecal impaction, manual disimpaction is required. This is a helpful procedure if one can palpate hard stool in the rectal area. The procedure is best done using ample lubrication and gently removing the impacted stool with the index finger. Sometimes, the procedure can be aided with the use of an anoscope and suction. Most patients find immediate relief once fecal disimpaction is performed.

**Proximal and Distal Fecal Impaction**

If the abdominal x-ray reveals that the fecal impaction is located distally, then the use of enemas and suppositories can be helpful. The enema is best delivered with a Foley catheter past the hardened stool. The best method is to use ample water and combine it with docusate or sorbitol. It is important to administer small amounts of enema so as not to create discomfort in the patient. Once the enema is administered, one can help the process of evacuation by gently massaging the lower abdomen. This process may have to be repeated several times until only clear liquid passes. It’s also important to pay attention to the patient’s complaints. During disimpaction, discomfort is normal, but the pain isn’t. If a patient complains of pain, it’s best to stop the enema and reevaluate.

For proximal fecal impaction, the ideal laxative is polyethylene glycol. One may have to administer from 1 to 3 liters of polyethylene glycol over a period of hours before a response is seen. If abdominal cramps and nausea occur, then no more polyethylene glycol should be ingested. Another laxative that can help with proximal impaction is magnesium citrate.

Polyethylene glycol can be given orally if conditions like volvulus or structural bowel obstruction due to any cause are ruled out. Administration of an appropriate laxative or fiber supplement with increased intake of water after the evacuation of the impacted fecal mass is administered to prevent recurrence. Early surgical evaluation and intervention are necessary if there are associated signs of peritonitis. Stercoral perforation is associated with a high mortality in the elderly if not recognized and treated early.

**Barium Impaction**

Sometimes impaction occurs after a barium study. Barium is not water soluble and can become a hard solid mass once the water is absorbed. Barium impaction is more likely to occur in patients who already have a functional or anatomical abnormality of the lower gastrointestinal tract. Barium impaction is also very common in people who have undergone some type of intestinal bypass procedure.

To prevent barium impaction, all patients should be encouraged to consume extra fluids. In some cases use of an osmotic laxative like sorbitol or milk of magnesia may be helpful. Barium impaction is usually seen on plain abdominal x-rays. Sometimes there may be perforation of the colon, which can also be visualized on the plain x-ray. If a perforation is noted, immediate surgery is required. If there is no perforation, barium removal is done similar to fecal impaction.

**Lower Gastrointestinal and Rectal Surgery**

In many people who have undergone repair of anal fistulas and removal of hemorrhoids, fecal impaction is quite rare but constipation is very common. The reason for fecal impaction is multifactorial and related to use of opiates, sphincter spasm, edema around the anal tissues, and a fear of going to the bathroom. In most mild cases, administration of an enema is sufficient; but in severe cases, one may need to perform manual disimpaction in the operating room. The patient will usually need some type of anesthesia to relax the anal sphincter complex before the fecal impaction can be removed.

These patients are encouraged to change their lifestyle, drink ample water, exercise, and eat a high fiber diet to prevent constipation.