PAVSD is a rare disease and presents with a wide variety of clinical signs and symptoms overlapping with other congenital anomalies. Patients may initially present with vague symptoms like feeding difficulty and lethargy. A comprehensive evaluation is required to reach a final diagnosis and that too with the consultation from different departments like pediatric cardiology, pediatric surgery, geneticists, etc. History and physical exam are usually not enough and investigations are required to diagnose it. [Level 4]

Mostly, the pediatricians are the ones who see these patients first. Since it is a rare condition, they are usually referred to pediatric cardiologists when echocardiographic or CT/MRI scans reveal the cardiac defects. Radiologists play a vital role in determining the underlying defect. It is vital to get the pediatric surgeons involved in plan and assessment. The nutritionists are an essential part of the team to take care of the nutritional requirement of the patient as they often face feeding difficulties.

Geneticists are also an important part of the team to provide counseling on future pregnancies. As the mainstay of treatment is surgery, the preoperative, as well as postoperative management, is crucial and needs anesthetists to play their role effectively. Pharmacists are responsible for the correct dosage of the medicine. A team-based approach is crucial to providing the best possible care to these patients. The outcomes of a PAVSD depend on the time of presentation and extent of severity. However, to improve outcomes, prompt consultation with an interprofessional group of specialists is recommended.