**Inhalational Injuries**

Inhalational injuries accompanying burns are associated with a significant increase in morbidity and mortality.  Burn patients with inhalational injuries require 30% to 50% more fluid resuscitation compared to their non-inhalational injury counterparts. Chest radiographs may appear benign until further complications develop, such as infection or atelectasis. It may take several days for inhalational injuries to become clinically evident.

- Supraglottic

- The most common type of inhalational injury to the supraglottic region is typically thermal injury. The main anesthetic concern related to injury to the supraglottic region is upper airway edema which can obstruct the airway and create difficulties with intubation. Exposure to direct heat and steam may result in the development of swelling of various structures (i.e., face, tongue, epiglottis, glottis), making mask ventilation and visualization of the glottis more difficult. As the burn shock phase progresses, this problem may be compounded. Supraglottic inhalational injuries can be assessed on physical examination and using tools such as fiberoptic bronchoscopy to directly examine the oropharynx and vocal cords for edema. Those with upper airway edema exhibiting mental status changes, stridor, hoarseness, or mucosal edema should be treated with early intubation to prevent further airway complications and impending respiratory arrest. The subglottic structures are generally protected from thermal injuries due to the glottis's innate nature to close, as well as the upper airway's ability to dissipate heat.  Supraglottic swelling typically resolves in 3 to 6 days. The ideal anesthetic approach to a patient with significant supraglottic injuries is to maximize local anesthetic usage and minimize general anesthetics with a fiberoptic approach.  This allows ample time to investigate/navigate a difficult airway while maintaining spontaneous patient respiration, thus reducing the risk of patient harm and manipulation of the airway.

- Subglottic

- Injury below the glottis is typically caused by the inhalation of noxious chemicals and irritants. These inhaled substances cause direct damage and stimulate inflammation resulting in airway mucosal hyperemia, potential bronchospasm, and mucosal sloughing from inhibiting mucociliary escalator function. Mucociliary impairment contributes to a build-up of bacteria and mucosal debris, increasing the risk of pneumonia in the days following the initial injury. The inflammatory processes inhibit hypoxic pulmonary vasoconstriction resulting in right-to-left shunting of blood, consequently hypoxia. Alveolar collapse occurs because of a loss of surfactant production or plugging by debris. Intermittent bronchospasm and airway edema can further limit oxygenation by inhibiting oxygen delivery to the alveoli. The patient on a ventilator may demonstrate a prolonged expiratory phase and elevated peak inspiratory pressures to suggest these findings. Mucus sloughing resulting in cast formation can obstruct the limited real estate remaining in the airways. Bronchoscopy can be utilized intraoperatively to remove casts and improve airway pressures and oxygenation.  Widespread cast formation in airways redistributes tidal volumes to un-obstructed airways resulting in excessive pulmonary pressures to healthy lung tissue propagating barotrauma. This barotrauma can result in acute respiratory distress syndrome (ARDS) and pneumothorax. Acute respiratory distress syndrome occurs within a week of inciting events and cannot be explained by congestive heart failure or hypervolemia. ARDS can be further classified as PaO2/FiO2 ratios; mild ARDS (200 to 300 PaO2/FiO2), moderate ARDS (100 to 200 PaO2/FiO2), and severe ARDS (<100 PaO2/FiO2). The primary means of diagnosis of the subglottic injury is clinical by may be supplemented by bronchoscopy. Subglottic inhalational injuries become significant to anesthesiologists due to the necessity of lung-protective ventilation strategies such as low tidal volume (4 to 6 mL/kg) and properly titrated positive end-expiratory pressures to limit barotrauma.

- Systemic

- The systemic effects of inhalational injuries include hypoxia, acidosis, and systemic inflammation resulting in pulmonary edema. Carbon monoxide and cyanide are soluble in blood, inflicting direct damage to tissues and may inhibit oxygenation. These systemic effects can be checked intraoperatively through arterial blood gas and laboratory studies when clinically indicated. Carbon monoxide inhibits hemoglobin's ability to carry oxygen and has a much higher affinity for hemoglobin than oxygen. Carboxyhemoglobin levels greater than 15% are considered toxic. The burning of nitrogenous materials produces cyanide. Cyanide inhibits oxygen utilization by interacting with the cytochrome system of mitochondria. It blocks the last step of oxidative phosphorylation, preventing the conversion of pyruvate to adenosine triphosphate (ATP); cells may only generate ATP from anaerobic metabolism. Clinical characteristics of cyanide toxicity include an anion gap metabolic acidosis in the presence of ample oxygen delivery. The intraoperative patient with persistent hypoxia and acidosis may be suffering from carbon monoxide or cyanide toxicity.

**Carbon Monoxide Poisoning**

Pulse oximetry can create a false reassurance of appropriate oxygenation in the setting of carbon monoxide poisoning. Pulse oximetry cannot distinguish between oxyhemoglobin and carboxyhemoglobin. Measurement of carboxyhemoglobin through laboratory studies can be used to quantify the degree of carbon monoxide poisoning. If time is of the essence, a carbon monoxide-oximeter can be utilized. However, these are typically not readily available in modern hospitals. Carbon monoxide has a greater affinity for hemoglobin (about 230 to 270 times more affinity than oxygen) which causes the oxygen-hemoglobin dissociation curve to shift to the left resulting in impairment of delivery of oxygen to the tissues. Indications of carbon monoxide poisoning may include alterations in mental statuses (such as confusion and agitation), nausea, dizziness, and headaches. Any patient with suspected carbon monoxide poisoning should receive 100% oxygen without hesitation. Administration of normobaric 100% oxygen can reduce the half-life of carbon monoxide to 40 to 80 minutes from 240 to 320 minutes, thus expediting recovery.  When the carboxyhemoglobin level drops below 10%, 100% oxygen can be discontinued, but the patient should still be observed for approximately 24 hours to ensure the patient is not advancing towards respiratory compromise. Patients with a carboxyhemoglobin >20% should be considered for intubation and mechanical ventilation to further expedite carbon monoxide elimination and improve tissue oxygenation. Patients requiring mechanical ventilation with accompanying carbon monoxide poisoning should receive 100% FiO2 until carboxyhemoglobin levels normalize to expedite dissociation with hemoglobin. Hyperbaric oxygen therapy can also be considered in severe cases of carbon monoxide poisoning.