Evaluation of a patient suspected of having nephrolithiasis should invariably commence with a comprehensive history and physical exam.

The next recommended step in management is a urinalysis, which includes a urinary dipstick and microscopic examination of the urine for blood and crystals. The dipstick urinalysis will also measure the urinary pH. (An acidic urinary pH favors the presence of uric acid stones.) It can also suggest an underlying infection and should be followed by a microscopic urinalysis, urine culture and sensitivity if the dipstick or microscopic urinalysis shows pus cells in urine. Positive nitrites is also suggestive of an infection. The presence of hematuria is suggestive but not diagnosis of nephrolithiasis. The microscopic urinalysis can also identify urinary crystals which are not apparent on dipstick examinations. The presence of diamond or barrel-shaped crystals of uric acid stones.

Serum chemistry measurements should be done to check the levels of calcium, sodium, potassium, chloride, bicarbonate, and uric acid. (Serum uric acid may need to be ordered separately if it is not part of the automated chemistry panel.) An elevated level of uric acid in serum could suggest the presence of underlying primary gout and increases the likelihood of uric acid urolithiasis.

Stone chemical analysis is suggested whenever possible when a patient presents with the kidney stone. Computerized tomography (CT) scans without contrast are a reliable tool to identify and locate urinary calculi. Non-contrast scans are recommended since intravenous contrast can make stones harder to see. Due to the difference in density, they may also be able to distinguish uric acid calculi from other stones, however, it is usually easier to obtain a plain x-ray of the abdomen.  Large calcific stones (>4 mm) should be easily visible on the plain x-ray.  If not, then a uric acid stone is more likely. Calculi are classified based on the distinction in the attenuation of rays by separate stones.

Non enhanced (non-contrast) Helical CT of the abdomen and pelvis is the single most sensitive and specific test for diagnosing urolithiasis. It also can identify radiolucent stones that are not visible on plain abdominal X-rays. A plain abdominal X-ray and a renal ultrasound can be performed if a CT scan is not available.  More than 70% of renal calculi are radio-opaque, and thus detectable on X-ray. Ultrasonography has relatively low sensitivity but is indicated in pregnant women and can be useful in patients who come for a follow-up in an outpatient setting.

Metabolic testing comprises at least one, and sometimes two, 24-hour urine samples. It is indicated and recommended in high-risk patients, recurrent stone formers, and in patients who develop stones for the first time but are highly motivated to minimize future stone production. Patients with intestinal malabsorption disorders, recurrent urinary tract infections, renal tubular acidosis, gout, diabetes mellitus, renal failure, high anesthesia risk, children, and those with a solitary kidney are all high-risk patients and metabolic testing is recommended. The urine is tested for pH, volume, calcium, oxalate, citrate, uric acid, creatinine, sodium, phosphate, magnesium, and qualitative cystine. Sulfates and urea nitrogen in urine can correlate with the intake of animal protein in the diet.

The importance of metabolic testing is that it can assist in determining the stone composition, supervise dietary management, identify specific chemical problems which will help guide therapy. Successful treatment requires significant patient compliance, discipline, and motivation. Evaluation of 24-hour urine testing can be complicated, but excellent published guides are now available for free download on the internet.