# Continuing Education Activity

ALK-negative anaplastic large cell lymphoma (ALK(-) ALCL) is an uncommon CD30-positive T-cell lymphoma that presents a major diagnostic challenge. It affects individuals in a wide age range and a variety of nodal and extranodal sites. Both morphologically and immunohistochemically, anaplastic large cell lymphoma (ALCL) can mimic many other hematologic and non-hematologic malignancies. This activity explains how to properly evaluate for ALK-negative anaplastic large cell lymphoma and highlights the role of the interprofessional team in caring for patients with this condition.

**Objectives:**
- Review the histopathology of ALK-negative anaplastic large cell lymphoma.
- Describe the presentation of ALK-negative anaplastic large cell lymphoma.
- Summarize the treatment of ALK-negative anaplastic large cell lymphoma.
- Explain various modalities to improve care coordination among interprofessional team members in order to improve outcomes for patients affected by ALK-negative anaplastic large cell lymphoma.

# Introduction

ALK-negative anaplastic large cell lymphoma (ALK(-) ALCL) is an uncommon CD30-positive T-cell lymphoma that presents a major diagnostic challenge. It affects individuals in a wide age range and a variety of nodal and extranodal sites. Both morphologically and immunohistochemically, anaplastic large cell lymphoma (ALCL) can mimic many other hematologic and non-hematologic malignancies. Lack of expression of pan T-cell markers and a spectrum of histologic appearances can be misleading. Recent research has shown that DUSP22 rearrangements occur in ALK(-) ALCL with a favorable prognosis. This article provides an overview of the many challenges associated with the diagnosis of this entity.

# Etiology

No causative agents or predisposing factors have so far been demonstrated with ALCL. There is no convincing evidence for Epstein-Barr virus or human T-cell leukemia virus involvement in the origin of ALCL. In addition, the correlation between ALCL and immunologic disorders has not been well documented

# Epidemiology

Anaplastic large cell lymphoma (ALCL) refers to a group of CD30-positive T-cell lymphomas that have overlapping morphologies and immunophenotypes but have different genetics and clinical behavior. The 2017 World Health Organization Classification (WHO) characterizes ALCL into three distinct subsets: ALK-positive ALCL, ALK-negative ALCL (ALK(-) ALCL), and breast implant-associated ALCL. ALK-positive refers to the presence of chromosomal rearrangements of the ALK gene at 2p23 with varied gene partners. These tumors typically have a favorable prognosis. In contrast, ALK(-) ALCL lacks ALK gene rearrangements and generally have poorer outcomes than ALK-positive ALCLs with more variable genetic and clinical features

In most studies, about 40% to 50% of systemic ALCLs are ALK-negative

# Histopathology

ALK(-) ALCL tends to grow cohesively and invade lymph node sinuses. The WHO classification describes several histologic patterns including common, small cell, lymphohistiocytic, and Hodgkin-like. In the common pattern, the tumor cells have abundant cytoplasm with wreath-like nuclei (see image). The small cell pattern is typically associated with ALK-positive and not ALK(-) ALCL. This pattern consists of small to medium-sized neoplastic cells with pale cytoplasm and centrally located nuclei referred to as “fried egg cells.” In the lymphohistiocytic pattern, the tumor cells are mixed with reactive histiocytes which sometimes show erythrophagocytosis. The Hodgkin-like pattern is characterized by morphological features similar to nodular sclerosis classical Hodgkin lymphoma. All patterns demonstrate some examples of a characteristic cell type known as the “hallmark” cell which is a large cell with abundant cytoplasm, containing a nucleus that is horseshoe or kidney-shaped around a prominent central Golgi zone. Sometimes, the nucleus may appear “doughnut” shaped when it envelops the Golgi

The architecture of involved organs or lymph nodes is usually effaced by a solid, sheet-like infiltrate of tumor cells. Frequently within lymph nodes, the neoplastic cells appear as cohesive groups within sinuses, mimicking carcinoma. When bone marrow is involved, the pattern is typically nodular but may also be interstitial

# History and Physical

Patients usually present with B symptoms with advanced stage III to IV disease with peripheral or abdominal lymphadenopathy.

# Evaluation

The most critical stain for diagnosing ALK(-) ALCL is the diffuse and strong positivity for CD30. It is usually membranous and in the Golgi staining region, although diffuse cytoplasmic positivity is also common. Usually, at least one T-cell antigen is expressed such as CD2, CD3, CD5, and CD7. If there is a loss of T-cell antigens (“null-cell phenotype”), CD43 may be useful to establish the lesion as hematolymphoid. CD45 is not reliably positive. CD4 is typically positive, and CD8 is negative. Many express the cytotoxic molecules TIA-1, Granzyme-B, perforin, and clusterin. Vimentin may be positive and should not be interpreted as evidence of mesenchymal origin. EBV-latent membrane protein type 1 and EBER in situ hybridization are negative in ALK(-) ALCL

Until recently, the genetics of ALK(-) ALCL has been unknown. Recent studies have shown that 30% of ALK(-) ALCL have chromosomal rearrangements of DUSP22 and 8% have chromosomal rearrangements of TP63

Gene expression profiling is also useful as a diagnostic tool to distinguish peripheral T-cell lymphoma not otherwise specified (PTCL-NOS) and cutaneous ALCL from ALK(-) ALCL. IRF4 (interferon regulatory factor-4) translocations are suggestive of cutaneous ALCL over other CD30 positive lymphoproliferative disorders. Systemic ALCL tends to have other IRF4 abnormalities but no translocations TNFRSF8, BATF3, and TMOD1) whose co-expression could potentially separate ALK(-) ALCL from peripheral T-cell lymphomas. The study found that when these three genes are expressed, ALK(-), ALCL could be distinguished from PTCL-NOS with an overall accuracy near 97% in unrelated groups of patients

# Treatment / Management

There is no known optimal therapy for ALK(-) ALCL due to disease rarity, heterogeneity of clinical presentation, and lack of randomized trials focused on this lymphoma. ALK(-) ALCL is usually analyzed with other T-cell lymphomas, including most peripheral T-cell lymphoma categories, so there are few retrospective studies focused solely on adult patients with ALK(-) ALCL. Chemotherapy for peripheral T-cell lymphomas is derived from experiences in treating aggressive B-cell lymphomas. ALK(-) ALCL is generally responsive to doxorubicin-based chemotherapy regimens, but relapses are frequent

# Differential Diagnosis

Biopsies of ALK(-) ALCL are challenging and require exclusion of other malignancies. ALK(-) ALCL can mimic other non-hematologic malignancies such as sarcomas, carcinomas, germ cell tumors, and melanomas both cytologically and histologically. This is especially true in lesions characterized predominately by anaplasia and pleomorphism when “hallmark cells” with horseshoe-shaped or wreath-like nuclei are difficult to appreciate

In the absence of clear histologic clues to the cell of origin, a typical initial immunohistochemical workup will often attempt to broadly classify the lesion as carcinoma (with a pancytokeratin cocktail), melanoma (with S100 or more specific markers), or lymphoma (with CD45). If the initial round of stains is either negative or only positive for CD45, CD30 should be performed as part of a more directed panel. To differentiate between ALCL and metastatic carcinoma, epithelial membrane antigen (EMA) staining should be avoided as it is more common in ALK-positive ALCL (83%) than in ALK(-) ALCL (43%)

Detection of diffuse and strong CD30 expression should raise a high suspicion of ALCL. Many other lymphoid neoplasms may be variably CD30 positive: classical Hodgkin lymphoma, diffuse large B-cell lymphoma, PTCL-NOS, enteropathy associated T-cell lymphoma (type 2), extranodal NK/T-cell lymphoma, nasal type, and transformed mycosis fungoides. Non-neoplastic immunoblast proliferations show variable CD30 positivity as well. Other tumors such as embryonal carcinoma are typically CD30 positive but are excluded by keratin expression.  Although there are many entities which may express CD30, they typically not have the diffuse and strong pattern that is seen in ALCL.

Differentiating ALK(-) ALCL from other CD30 positive T cell lymphoproliferative disorders can be challenging because of shared morphologic and immunophenotypical features. This pattern of CD30 expression is important to distinguish ALK(-) ALCL from other peripheral T cell lymphomas that have variable CD30 expression. An exception to this rule is the variable CD30 staining seen in the small-cell variant of ALK-positive ALCL

IHC plays a relevant role in distinguishing ALK(-) ALCL from classical Hodgkin lymphoma (CHL). This is especially useful if there is a high concentration of malignant cells in a case of CHL, as is seen in the syncytial variant. CHL is recognizable for B-cell marker expression and dim PAX-5 positivity, CD15, and occasionally EBER. MUM1 does not distinguish between ALCL and CHL. Only exceptional cases of ALCL express PAX-5

There is no specific immunophenotypic or genetic features to define ALK(-) ALCL; the immunophenotype of primary cutaneous and systemic ALK(-) ALCL are indistinguishable

# Prognosis

Recent studies have shown differences in overall prognosis among patients with ALK(-) ALCL based on the presence of different chromosomal rearrangements. For instance, 30% of patients with ALK(-) ALCL have been found to have the DUSP22 rearrangement with a 90% five-year overall survival rate, which is similar to that of ALK-positive ALCL. 8% of ALK(-) ALCL patients have the TP63 rearrangement with a far worse five-year overall survival rate of 17%. Finally, the 5-year overall survival rate of patients lacking ALK, DUSP22, or TP63 rearrangement is 42%

# Pearls and Other Issues

ALK(-) ALCL is a T-cell lymphoma characterized by large, anaplastic lymphoid cells with uniform, strong expression of CD30 but a lack of ALK protein expression. It tends to grow cohesively and invade lymph node sinuses. It also has a vast morphologic spectrum and may mimic other entities featuring pleomorphic and anaplastic cells with wreath-like or horseshoe-shaped nuclei. Morphology and immunohistochemistry are the mainstays used to distinguish this entity from other ALK-positive ALCL, CD30 positive T-cell lymphomas, and classical Hodgkin lymphoma as well as other non-hematologic malignancies such as carcinomas, sarcomas, and melanomas. ALK(-) ALCL has a poorer prognosis than ALK-positive ALCL, but it has a better prognosis than peripheral T-cell Lymphoma, NOS. Molecular studies have identified DUSP22 rearranged ALK(-) ALCL as having a prognosis similar to ALK-positive ALCL. Regarding treatment, ALK(-) ALCL is generally responsive to doxorubicin-containing chemotherapy (CHOP regimen), but relapses are frequent. CD30 is a newer therapeutic target and brentuximab vedotin (anti CD30) has been used for relapsed/refractory systemic ALCL.

# Enhancing Healthcare Team Outcomes

When healthcare professionals see patients with symptoms suggestive of lymphoma, prompt referral to an oncologist/hematologist is recommended. These patients may present with solitary or localized skin lesions such as tumors, nodules. Prior to undertaking treatment, the type of lymphoma needs to be ascertained.  ALK(-) ALCL is a T-cell lymphoma characterized by large, anaplastic lymphoid cells with uniform, strong expression of CD30 but a lack of ALK protein expression. It tends to grow cohesively and invade lymph node sinuses. ALK(-) ALCL has a poorer prognosis than ALK-positive ALCL, but it has a better prognosis than peripheral T-cell Lymphoma, NOS. Molecular studies have identified DUSP22 rearranged ALK(-) ALCL as having a prognosis similar to ALK-positive ALCL. Regarding treatment, ALK(-) ALCL is generally responsive to doxorubicin-containing chemotherapy (CHOP regimen), but relapses are frequent. CD30 is a newer therapeutic target and brentuximab vedotin (anti CD30) has been used for relapsed/refractory systemic ALCL.