MEN2A syndrome affects 60% to 90% of MEN2 families while MEN2B affects only 5% of MEN2 families. All of these conditions are due to one of the several RET proto-oncogene mutations which play an important role in the growth and differentiation of the structures mostly evolved from neural crest cells.

**Thyroid Gland**

Medullar thyroid cancer (MTC) is the most common manifestation of MEN2A and MEN2B with 100% penetrance and usually the first manifestation in MEN2 patients. MTC is a neuroendocrine tumor of the thyroid gland caused by the hyperplasia of calcitonin-producing parafollicular C-cells, the only cells in the thyroid gland derived from neural crest cells.

**Adrenal Glands**

Pheochromocytoma, a typically benign adrenal medullary tumor (usually bilateral and multicentric), occurs in 40% to 50% of patients with MEN2A or MEN2B; the frequency and penetration highly depend on the specific type of mutation. The adrenal medulla is also a derivative of neural crest cells. Usually, it is identified as a part of the screening process in the patients with known or suspected MEN2. One must always take care of bilateral or extra-renal pheochromocytoma. Although it is rare for pheochromocytoma to appear before MTC, it can be the initial manifestation of MEN2 with the classic symptoms of pheochromocytoma such as paroxysmal attacks of a headache, anxiety, diaphoresis, and palpitations. The mean age of presentation is 25 to 32 years, and it may appear as early as 8 to 12 years of age.

**Parathyroid Glands**

Primary hyperparathyroidism is present is 10% to 25% of patients with MEN 2A, while it is not associated with MEN 2B. The condition is usually mild and asymptomatic.

**Skin**

Cutaneous lichen amyloidosis (CLA) also termed lichen planus amyloidosis (LPA), is a rare skin condition that is associated with MEN2A. It is thought to be a primary neuropathy and presents with pruritic, pigmented, scaly papules usually in extensor surfaces of extremities and interscapular region. Histology has shown amyloid deposition.

**Digestive Tract**

Hirschsprung disease (HD), also known as chronic aganglionic megacolon, also is associated with MEN2A. It is characterized by the absence of autonomic ganglion cells within the parasympathetic chain of the sigmoid colon, resulting in peristalsis, chronic obstruction, and megacolon.

**Musculoskeletal**

Marfanoid habitus, kyphoscoliosis/lordosis, joint laxity, mucosal neuromas typically at lips and tongue, and intestinal ganglioneuromas are conditions exclusively associated with the MEN2B syndrome.