**Anatomy**

**Ulna**The ulna is the medially located forearm bone and narrows distally. The crucial anatomical parts of the distal ulna are the metaphysis, styloid, and head. Biomechanically the distal ulna acts as a stationary object for the radius to move around. This arrangement causes various load changes on the wrist depending on the grip and degree of pronation-supination. The ulnocarpal joint carries around 20% of the load capacity when in a neutral position.

**Ulnar Styloid**The ulnar styloid is a bony protrusion on the distal aspect of the ulnar head and is the attachment site for the superficial dorsal and palmar radioulnar ligaments. These ligaments are primary stabilizers of the DRUJ. The ulnar styloid is also an attachment site for the TFCC, providing support and protection for the ulnar side of the wrist.

**Distal Radioulnar Joint (DRUJ)**Assessment of DRUJ stability is essential in determining if a distal ulna fracture requires surgical correction. The DRUJ maintains equilibrium during rapid energy load transfers between the forearm and the wrist during forearm pronation-supination. (Xiao, 2021) Thus, the DRUJ is crucial in facilitating the efficient lifting of objects.

**Ulnar Head**The dome and the seat comprise the ulnar head, known as the "keystone" for the DRUJ. The dome abuts the carpus, and the cartilage-covered seat articulates with the sigmoid notch to form the DRUJ.

**Fovea**The fovea acts as the central axis of rotation for the ulnar head. In contrast to the styloid, it provides the attachment site for the deep dorsal and palmar radioulnar ligaments (aka, ligamentum subcruentum) that support the DRUJ. It also attaches to the TFCC, an intricate support system that preserves ulnar-sided wrist stability.

**Triangular Fibrocartilage Complex (TFCC)**The TFCC prevents excessive DRUJ translation via the deep dorsal and volar radioulnar ligaments. (Xiao, 2021) Due to the complex interactions between the distal ulna, radius, carpus, and TFCC, consensus on the pathophysiology and treatment of the distal ulna has not been achieved.

**Pathology**

**Ulnar Styloid Fractures**The level of importance the ulnar styloid has on wrist stability has long been debated.

**Non-Styloid Distal Ulnar Fractures**Injuries not limited to or not involving the ulnar styloid are less common but generally portend worse outcomes. Isolated distal ulna fractures (injuries without a concomitant distal radius fracture) and ulnar head fractures most correlate with wrist instability as they cause injuries to the interosseous membrane, DRUJ, and TFCC.