A low-frequency convex probe is best for a transabdominal ultrasound. Alternatively, a phased array probe can be used if a convex probe is not available. The settings on the ultrasound machine should be set to the desired exam being performed, for example, abdominal, FAST, vascular. The settings on the machine optimize image quality for the scan being performed. Generally, the probe indicator is always aimed cephalad (toward the patient’s head) or to the patient’s right side. Specific scanning technique is utilized depending on the organ or pathology being evaluated. For example, when evaluating the gallbladder, the probe is placed in a sagittal plane (with the indicator cephalad) in the right upper quadrant just inferior to the costal margin. The operator then slides the probe medial and lateral along the costal margin while maintaining the sagittal plane (cephalad) evaluating for the optimal sonographic window for image acquisition. Asking the patient to take a deep breath and hold it causes the diaphragm to contract, displacing the liver and gallbladder inferior, and aiding in image acquisition. A coronal scan of the right upper quadrant is another technique that can allow for gallbladder evaluation. With the probe placed on the patient’s right in the mid-axillary line, indicator cephalad, the operator can then fan the probe anterior and posterior through the liver in an attempt to acquire an optimal window to evaluate the gallbladder. The gallbladder is then evaluated for (1) stones or sludge, (2) wall thickening (normal less than 3 mm), (3) presence of a sonographic Murphy's sign, and (4) pericholecystic fluid.