Is the DASH diet exclusively preferred only for treating HTN?

Since the formulation of the DASH diet pattern, it has been studied extensively to look for its effects on multiple other diseases.

Several studies have shown that the DASH diet helps lower blood glucose levels, triglycerides, LDL-C, and insulin resistance. This makes the DASH diet an essential adjunct to pharmacological therapy in metabolic syndromes, a major epidemic in this country. It also has been a successful tool in weight management. In certain populations, adherence to the DASH diet has shown significant improvements in the control of type 2 diabetes. It is a preferred diet in patients with heart failure due to its emphasis on reducing dietary sodium and encouraging the intake of potassium, magnesium, and calcium.

DASH diet has also shown a reduction in the incidence of colorectal cancer, mainly in the white population. The DASH diet has also been proven helpful to some extent in chronic liver disease, diverticular disease, and celiac disease.

DASH diet can be pertinent to the prevention of chronic heart failure and its management. Prospective observational studies have shown that a diet consistent with DASH eating patterns has lower rates of incidence of heart failure in women and decreases the prevalence of hospitalization from heart failure and death in men.

Dash diet is an essential strategy for lowering blood pressure in patients with diabetes mellitus type 2. The American Diabetic Association recommends that patients with diabetes who are at risk should consume the US Department of Agriculture’s Dietary Reference Intake (DRI) for fiber, whole grains, and macronutrients. Moreover, these patients should limit saturated fat to < 7% total daily calories, reduce trans fat intake, reduce cholesterol to < 200 mg/day, and limit sugar-sweetened beverages. Because the DASH diet meets these recommendations, adherence in patients with diabetes mellitus should be advocated for adequate blood pressure control.

Based on these studies, it is safe to say that DASH can be a very useful tool for physicians to tackle these diseases more efficiently when combined with pharmacological intervention. Compared to some other diet patterns, it has the added advantage of having clear guidelines on the serving sizes and food groups, making it easier for the physicians to prescribe and monitor their patient's improvement.