Management of uric acid kidney stones includes lifestyle changes, medical treatment focusing on decreasing uric acid production and excretion, and urinary alkalinization.

**Dietary Interventions**

High intake of fruits and vegetables, low intake of purine-rich diets and animal proteins are necessary to reduce the burden of uric acid production in patients with uric acid nephrolithiasis. Orange juice and lemonade are often recommended but very large amounts are necessary for any meaningful change in urinary pH.

**Medical Management**

- Increased fluid intake with adequate 24-hour urine output (2,000 to 2,500 ml/day). A minimum of 2,000 ml of the daily urinary volume is recommended and 2,500 ml or more is considered optimal.

- Urinary alkalinization: Helps in the dissolution and prevention of all uric acid stones. The goal is a urinary pH that is consistently around 6.5. Ultrasound and CT scans can be used to monitor the response to treatment. Potassium citrate is usually preferred but sodium citrate and sodium bicarbonate can also be used.  However, sodium-based alkalinizing agents will tend to increase urinary calcium excretion and may promote the formation of calcium-based nephrolithiasis. 
- Potassium citrate: 15 to 30 mEq, two or three times a day
- Sodium bicarbonate: 500 to 1000 mg three times a day
- Acetazolamide: 500 mg per day (lowers urinary pH but also lowers citrate excretion)
- Litholyte (urinary alkalinizer and citrate supplement with reduced potassium content. It includes sodium bicarbonate, magnesium citrate, and potassium citrate. Overall, about half the potassium of potassium citrate but equivalent citrate load.) Cytra-2 is similar.

- Xanthine oxidase inhibitors are used in patients with hyperuricemia or hyperuricosuria. Adjust as needed for optimal serum uric acid levels of 6 mg/dl or less and urinary levels of 600 mg/day or less.

- Allopurinol: 100 to 300 mg per day, the usual dose is 300 mg
- Febuxostat: 40 to 80 mg per day (typically used when the patient does not tolerate allopurinol for some reason)

- Analgesic use: Patients with acute nephrolithiasis should be managed with adequate analgesia after ruling out an acute abdominal surgical condition and obstructive pyelonephritis (pyonephrosis). Non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDS) are preferred to opioids as NSAIDs can be used as monotherapy and they have an additional anti-prostaglandin effect. On the other hand, opioids like pethidine increase vomiting, reduce bowel motility, and also require higher doses to show therapeutic effects.

- Medical expulsive therapy: The use of selective alpha-blockers, such as tamsulosin, has been shown to help facilitate spontaneous stone passage. This benefit is most useful for smaller stones in the distal ureter. The overall benefit appears to facilitate spontaneous stone passage by about 30%.

- Antibiotics: Their use in stone cases with fever, sepsis, or infection is obvious, but some experts suggest adding a brief, low level of antibiotics as prophylaxis upon diagnosis as patients can develop potentially dangerous infections later that complicate their treatment.

**Surgical Management**

Surgical management is done when medical treatment fails or urinary tract infections develop.

- Extracorporeal shock wave lithotripsy: for calcific and radio-opaque kidney stones less than 2 cm. Uric acid stones can be treated also but will need contrast (IV or injected via retrograde ureteral catheter) to make the stones visible for targeting.

- Ureteroscopic stone laser fragmentation and retrieval: for kidney and ureteral stones less than 2 cm.

- Percutaneous nephrolithotomy: for larger kidney stones (greater than 2 to 2.5 cm).