Given that the SWOT Analysis looks at factors both inside and outside an entity, it is also occasionally labeled as an Internal-External Analysis. In consideration of the broad nature of the tool, it has both organizational and individual utility. Although borne out of the business world, it does have clinical applicability such as at the organizational level.

At the level of hospital or clinical offices, implementation of SWOT is achievable by asking questions such as the following:

**Strengths:**

- What are the organization's advantages?

- What can you do better than others?

- What unique or lowest-cost services can you provide patients?

- What do patients in your market see as your organization's strength?

**Weaknesses:**

- Upon what factors could the organization improve?

- What are patients in your market likely to see as your organization's weakness?

- What lack of services loses your organization patients?

**Opportunities:**

- What good opportunities are available to your organization?

- What are the new and exciting trends your organization can try?

- What new changes to governmental regulation/policy can benefit your organization?

**Threats:**

- What problems does your organization face?

- Of what are your organization's competitors taking advantage?

- Do evolving technologies and new services threatening your organization's position in the minds of patients?

- Does your facility have cash-flow problems?

- Could any of your weaknesses threaten quality patient care?