Tetracycline, azithromycin, doxycycline, and rifampicin are effective antimicrobials for scrub typhus. Several studies particularly in doxycycline and azithromycin have used different dosing regimens including a loading dose of both agents followed by maintenance doses with an average duration of treatment with doxycycline for 7 days and 3 days in the case of azithromycin.

**Doxycycline**

It has been the mainstay of treatment for most rickettsial diseases, including scrub typhus given at a dose of 100 mg IV or orally twice daily for 7 to 14 days. However, several reports have indicated suspected doxycycline resistance.

**Azithromycin**

It is an excellent alternative, particularly when resistance to doxycycline is suspected.O. tsutsugamushi.

**Rifampicin**

It is another option. However, the risk of inducing resistant tuberculosis must be weighted in undiagnosed patients, and hence clinicians should not regard this agent as a first-line treatment option but should consider it as a second-line treatment option after exclusion of active tuberculosis.

**Chemoprophylaxis**

It can be given with a weekly dose of 200 mg of doxycycline. This is, however, controversial as there are limited studies favoring it, but this may be suggested for those with a high occupational risk such as agricultural laborers.

Despite these measures, patients may present with multi-organ dysfunction syndrome, a life-threatening complication of scrub typhus, and require an interprofessional approach and management involving ICU care. Patients in the ICU frequently require IV fluids and patients with ARDS may need mechanical ventilation. However, timely symptomatic treatment and antibiotic therapy can lead to patient recovery without end-organ deficits.