**Types of Compliance:**

For practical purposes, lung compliance measurement uses different methods. Based on the method of measurement, lung compliance can categorize as static or dynamic.

- Static Compliance: It represents pulmonary compliance at a given fixed volume when there is no airflow, and muscles are relaxed. This situation takes place when transpulmonary pressure equals the elastic recoil pressure of the lungs. It only measures the elastic resistance. Its measurement uses a simple water manometer, but electrical transducers are now more commonly used. In the conscious individual, it is difficult to achieve complete certainty of respiratory muscle relaxation. But the compliance measurement is considered valid since the static pressure difference is unaffected by any muscle activity. In cases of a paralyzed individual as in the operating theatre, it is straightforward to measure static compliance using recordings captured through electrical transducers. Therapeutically, it serves to select the ideal level of positive end-expiratory pressure, which is calculated based on the following formula:

Cstat = V / (Pplat – PEEP)

Where,

Pplat = Plateau pressure, PEEP = Positive End Expiratory Pressure

- Dynamic Compliance: It is the continuous measurement of pulmonary compliance calculated at each point representing schematic changes during rhythmic breathing.

**Compliance Diagram**

When different readings of the lung volume are taken at specific measured pressure points and then plotted on a diagram, a pressure-volume curve representing both elastic and airway resistance properties of the lung is obtained

**Importance of Compliance**

Lung compliance is inversely proportional to elastance. This elastic resistance is both due to the elastic property of lung tissue or parenchyma and the surface elastic force. Any changes occurring to these forces could lead to changes in compliance. Compliance determines 65% of the work of breathing. If the lung has low compliance, it requires more work from breathing muscles to inflate the lungs. In specific pathologies, continuous monitoring of the lung compliance curve is useful to understand the progression of the condition and to decide on therapeutic settings needed for ventilator management.

**Factors Affecting Pulmonary Compliance**

Elastic Property of the Lung Tissue: These result from the collagen and elastin fibers meshed inside the lung parenchyma. When the lung is outside the body system and in a deflated state, these fibers fully contract due to elasticity. When the lung expands, they elongate and exert even more elastic force, similar to a rubber band. Thus the flexibility of these fibers determines the compliance of the lungs. They could be damaged or affected by specific pulmonary pathologies.

Surface Tension Elastic Force: One of the important concepts affecting lung compliance is the elastic property of the lung contributed to by the surface tension of the alveolar lining.

Similarly, water lining the inner surface of the alveoli attempt to force air out of the alveoli and tries to collapse it. This force is the surface tension elastic force. Its minimum value is 35 to 41 dyne/cm.

Surfactant: If you measure the alveolar pressure using surface tension exerted by the lining fluid based on the Laplace law: Pressure = 2 x T (Surface Tension) / R (Radius), one notes that the pressure within the smaller alveoli would be higher than the pressure within large alveoli which will collapse the small alveoli. However, in a typical scenario, this doesn't happen. It occurs where surfactants play a role.

Lung Volume: Compliance is related to the lung volume, considering the formula relating volume and pressure. However, to eliminate this variable, specific compliance is measured using the formula: Specific Compliance = Compliance/ FRC (Functional Residual Capacity).

Age: This factor minimally influences compliance. Pulmonary compliance increases with age are owing to the structural changes in the lung elastin fibers.