Many muscles use the lumbar vertebrae as attachment points. These muscles allow for smooth, controlled movement in different functional planes. These muscles also serve a secondary role in stabilization, protection, and proprioception. Three major muscle groups originate or insert onto the lumbar spine and aid movement. First, the extensor group consists of the erector spinae and the multifidi. This group lies posterior to the lumbar spine. In this region, the erector spinae muscles include the longissimus thoracis and iliocostalis lumborum. The contraction of this group results in an extension moment at the lumbar spine.

The flexor group lies anterior to the lumbar spine and allows for trunk and hip flexion. The psoas major originates from the T12-L4 transverse processes and joins the iliacus in the thigh to become the iliopsoas (composite muscle). The iliopsoas plays a crucial role in hip flexion and assists with arching the lumbar spine. The abdominal musculature (internal/external oblique, rectus abdominis) plays a more important role in truncal flexion. Finally, a concerted effort involving several muscles is required to create rotation and lateral flexion (side-bending) of the lumbar spine. The quadratus lumborum, psoas major, abdominal musculature, and multifidi play an important role in creating these motions.

Muscle strains in the lumbar region are typically the result of abnormal tension placed upon a tendon; this can occur from overstretching a muscle, repetitive use, or muscle tearing from excessive force. Most lumbar muscle strains will respond to conservative treatment.