The initial evaluation should begin with a rapid assessment of the patient's airway and effort of breathing. First, ensure that the airway maintains patent and can move air in and out of the lungs. Assess the patient's rate and depth of breathing, and evaluate for hypoxia or cyanosis and if the patient looks like they are decompensating secondary to fatigue.

If the patient is hemodynamic stable with stridor, obtain a thorough history of present illness, review of systems, and medical history. Keys to the correct diagnosis can be delineated based on patient age, acuity of onset, and history of exposure to allergens or infectious sources.  In the stable patient with stridor, additional testing, including imaging, radiography, and endoscopy, may be performed.

In the patient is unstable, there may be signs of respiratory distress, gasping, drooling, fatigue, cyanosis, and these signs prompt a more rapid evaluation and rapid management to ensure airway patency. This can include endotracheal intubation or emergency surgical airway.

Laboratory testing may include a complete blood count (CBC) if an infectious source is suspected; however, this is usually not necessary for diagnosis. A rapid viral panel may be obtained to assess for parainfluenza viruses in the pediatric patient.

Radiography, including a lateral plain film, may be obtained to assess the size of the retropharyngeal space, in which a widened space may indicate a retropharyngeal abscess. A mnemonic can be used, "6 at C2, and 22 at C6," to remember that the normal retropharyngeal space should not be greater than 6 mm at the level of C2 and not more than 22 mm at the level of C6. This view may also aid in visualizing an enlarged epiglottis. An anteroposterior view to assessing for subglottic narrowing such as the "steeple" sign in croup.  A chest radiograph can be obtained in suspected foreign body aspiration. However, a negative chest radiograph does not rule this out.

Computed tomography (CT) can be considered when there is diagnostic uncertainty in a stable patient with stridor. CT of the chest and neck can evaluate for an infectious source such as cellulitis as well as stenotic lesions or foreign bodies. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) can help discern tracheal stenosis in pediatric patients.

Laryngoscopy and bronchoscopy can help visualize the airways to establish a definitive diagnosis. If the patient appears critically ill, then endotracheal intubation should be performed if the cause of stridor is thought to be epiglottitis or bacterial tracheitis.