Historically, SSEPs were monitored during spine surgeries. The use of SSEPs improved neurosurgical outcomes, but case reports of motor injury despite normal somatosensory function emerged.

The blood supply of these pathways is largely distinct, with one anterior spinal artery and dual posterior spinal arteries. Comprehensive detection of focal spinal cord ischemia requires monitoring of both tracts. Thus, SSEP and MEP monitoring is required to monitor both motor and sensory components of the spinal cord or to identify localized compression or ischemia.

Knowledge of the anatomy and blood supply of the corticospinal tract is required to understand where disruption in motor evoked potential monitoring may occur. The blood supply of the corticospinal motor tract is supplied by a single anterior spinal artery, which runs from the foramen magnum to the filum terminate, with contributions from five to ten radicular arteries. This anterior spinal artery supplies 75% of the spinal cord, including the descending motor tracts. The posterior spinal cord has a more robust blood supply, with two posterior arteries that are redundantly supplied from arteries from each vertebral body. In contrast, the anterior tracts are more susceptible to ischemic injury, particularly within the thoracic region, due to a less robust collateral blood supply.

MEPs monitor the corticospinal tract beginning with a stimulus at the motor cortex, which travels along the corticospinal tract of the spinal cord to the nerve root, and then the peripheral nerve before terminating in a muscle belly.

The surgeon often requests a set of MEPs to be performed during critical moments of the case and is notified before the signals are sent because evoked potentials trigger muscle contractions, resulting in patient movement.

The neurophysiologist carefully interprets the waveform of the motor evoked potentials throughout the surgical case. The most important components of MEP signals are wave amplitude and signal latency. Amplitude is a measure of signal strength or intensity (typically measured in millivolts), depicted graphically as the height of the waveform. The latency can be conceptualized as the speed (typically measured in milliseconds) at which the signal is propagated. While thresholds for clinical significance vary, many centers use a decrease in amplitude of 50% as the cutoff. Some centers also evaluate latency, using an increase of 10% as the cutoff for clinical significance.