Escitalopram and SSRIs have a lower toxicity profile than older antidepressants. Despite this, they have been associated with significant adverse effects.

Escitalopram can cause a syndrome of inappropriate antidiuretic hormone secretion (SSRI-induced SIADH), leading to hyponatremia, especially in elderly patients.

QT prolongation is defined as a corrected QT interval on an EKG greater than 500 ms or an increase from a baseline interval of more than 60 ms.

Serotonin syndrome, a potentially life-threatening side effect, results from excess serotonin in the peripheral and central nervous systems. This medical condition can lead to symptoms of neuromuscular excitation and autonomic stimulation. Serotonin syndrome is more likely to occur in patients taking high-dose SSRIs, who have overdosed, or patients taking more than one serotonergic drug, especially if they work by different mechanisms (an SSRI plus a monoamine oxidase inhibitor, for example).

**Drug Withdrawal:**Escitalopram can cause withdrawal symptoms like dizziness, nausea, and lethargy if abruptly stopped.

**Drug-Drug Interactions**

- A combination of escitalopram and rasagiline should be avoided due to the risk of serotonin syndrome.

- SSRIs, including escitalopram, inhibit platelet function, risk of bleeding increases when given antiplatelet agents.

- The risk of bleeding also increases when escitalopram is administered with NSAIDs.

- A study reported that patients administered an SSRI with aspirin or dual antiplatelet therapy(DAPT) after acute myocardial infarction had an increased risk of bleeding.

- Increased risk of QT prolongation exists when escitalopram is given with other agents that can prolong QTc intervals, such as amiodarone, especially in patients with chronic kidney disease.