**Recognition and Intervention**

Once a practitioner identifies a potentially trafficked person, it is imperative to establish a private, quiet, safe place to assess the patient further, much like in cases of child or elder abuse. Building rapport and providing an opportunity for the victim to feel empowered are of utmost importance. Building rapport with the patient can build trust and begin to establish a trusted network of people and institutions to assist the victim. Do not start a dialogue until you can select a safe, private, and secure place.

In this era of mobile devices where a smartphone is always within easy grasp, ensure cell phones are off and not nearby. Cell phones can be another way the traffickers control the victim. The victim may have arrived alone but is always on the cell phone. The cell phone may be the trafficker's way of "keeping tabs" or listening to everything going on in the room.

Maintain eye contact during conversation, speak slowly and quietly, and avoid looking down at the potential victim. Instead, sit in a nearby chair where on-level eye contact, unless contrary to the patient's cultural norms, is possible. Ensure an environment where the victim can establish a sense of power and control. This empowering safe zone may allow the patient to open up and admit to being a victim. More importantly, ensuring the patient feels safe and empowered may provide the opportunity to identify the patient as a victim of human trafficking, share available resources, and convince the patient to trust and accept help.

Before starting the conversation, ask the patient if it is safe to talk now and if they feel comfortable with you in the room or if they prefer someone else. Never assume it is safe for the victim; they must confirm that it is safe. Safety is critical for the victim, staff, and nearby patients. Trafficking protocols will guide your care and determine a preset location readily available for an interview or a few minutes alone with the patient. A bereavement room for family notification in the event of trauma or sudden death may be one such place.

Inform the potential victim of trafficking that you are mandated by law to report certain disclosures. Monitor their verbal and nonverbal cues. Be alert to your facial expressions, body language, and any nonverbal signals you are exhibiting. Avoid stereotyping and revictimizing the potential victim as they disclose information.

**Communicating with Potential Victims**

Communicating with victims of human trafficking can be intimidating for healthcare providers. The Department of HHS created a resource called Messages for Communicating with Victims of Human Trafficking as part of their Rescue and Restore Campaign in 2016. These messages assist healthcare providers in building a rapport with the victim and promoting a trusting environment.

**Sample Messages to Ease Communication**

Sample messages for communicating with a victim of human trafficking, according to the Department of HHS.

- We are here to help you, and our priority is your safety. We can keep you safe and protected.

- We can provide you with the medical care you need as well as find you a place to stay.

- Everyone has the right to live without being abused or hurt, and that includes you.

- You deserve a chance to live on your own and take care of yourself, be independent, and make your own choices. We can help you with that.

- We can get you help to protect your family and your children.

- You have rights and deserve to be treated according to those rights.

- You can trust me. I will do everything in my power to help you. Assistance is available for you under the law, and special visas allow you to live safely in this country.

- No one should have to be afraid all the time. We can help.

- Help us, so this does not happen to anyone else.

- You can decide what is best for you, but let me provide you with a number to call for help 24 hours a day. You do not even have to tell them your name if you do not want to. They are there to help you anytime day or night. The National Human Trafficking Resource Center hotline number is 1.888.373.7888.

Do not make false promises. Only offer what you can provide.

Providers are not required to determine if a crime or a prosecutable offense has occurred. However, they can foster an empowering, caring environment to identify a victim for a potential rescue, provide invaluable resources to restore their lives, and help them to begin healing emotionally and physically.

**Creating an Opportunity for Intervention**

The trafficker may be the accompanying family member that declines to leave the patient alone. Similar to intimate partner violence, the provider creates an opportunity to take the patient to the bathroom for a urine sample or to radiology for an x-ray or CT scan, informing the family member that they cannot go with the patient. Another way to get the victim alone is to notify the alleged family or significant other that hospital policy requires you to interview and examine everyone alone.

Before you separate the potential victim from the family member or controlling individual, make sure you or a dedicated, trained staff member has the time to conduct an interview/assessment at that moment.

Traffickers can be parents, "boyfriends," husbands, women, men, friends, and those you would otherwise see as protectors. Do not talk with the patient about suspected trafficking, if the patient cannot be interviewed in private. The trafficker may cause the victim serious bodily injury after removing them from the facility if alerted that the healthcare provider is suspicious of the situation.

**Safety**

Assessment of the level of danger or threat to the patient and staff is imperative. Pay attention to your immediate area and follow preset protocols by your institution in notifying law enforcement and security personnel.

The NHTRC can assist you in threat level assessment, danger risk, and contacting law enforcement if the patient consents. Is the trafficker still nearby? How will the trafficker act if the victim does not return? Are there minors or other family members that are in danger? Is the patient a minor?

An interprofessional approach is best, if available, with a trained social worker nearby as predetermined in your trafficking protocol. Follow preset policies and procedures regarding abuse and neglect at your institution and according to local and state statutes. The NHTRC hotline offers invaluable assistance with resources, assessment, and the best courses of action.

Just like when intimate partner violence occurs, ensure the patient has a safe place to go upon discharge.

**Reporting**

If a patient reveals they are a victim of human trafficking, ask the patient if it is all right to call the NHTRC hotline number. Encourage the patient to call and provide them with the phone number. It may be dangerous for them to keep the number on hand, so ask them if they can memorize it or give them a "shoe" or "key" card that can be hidden in their shoe or other discrete location.

The National Human Trafficking and Resource Center hotline number is available around the clock and reporting information is confidential to the extent of the law. The NHTRC is a tip hotline, a place to find out about services and to ask for help. The hotline can translate and communicate with individuals in more than 200 languages. A caller does not need to disclose personal information to the hotline; the caller can remain anonymous.

The NHTRC is available to help healthcare providers in the event of a potential trafficking case when no protocols are available. Healthcare providers can gain information on social referrals such as anti-trafficking organizations, shelters, local social services agencies, legal services, and law enforcement numbers. Tip reporting is available. The hotline website provides training information and technical support. The NHTRC can guide a provider in the assessment of a potential victim.

- Report Online or Access Resources & Referrals: www.traffickingresourcecenter.org

- Call: 1-888-373-7888 (24/7). Email: nhtrc@polarisproject.org. Live chat: www.traffickingresourcecenter.org

**Mandatory Reporting/HIPAA Considerations**

Guidelines for reporting suspected human trafficking cases will vary depending on the facility, location, and state and federal laws. Adults may not want to report the incident; thus, the decision to alert law enforcement is based on predetermined protocols and local or state laws coupled with patient wishes. Some states mandate reporting if serious bodily injury or a firearm is involved.

Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act (HIPAA) concerns are essential considerations. The practitioner must obtain permission from an adult victim of human trafficking to release any protected health information (PHI) or personally identifiable health information to the NHTRC. The NHTRC may be contacted and provided general information for a consult as long as no protected, identifiable health information is released. If the victim is under 18 and involved in a commercial sex act, follow mandatory state reporting laws for child abuse and institutional child abuse policies.

HIPAA will permit the release of protected health information under certain circumstances such as suspected injury or abuse. For example, if the law mandates a disclosure as in the case of child abuse or neglect, elder abuse or neglect, and in cases reportable to the medical examiner. Reporting is permissible under HIPAA regulations if the disclosure involves a crime and is an emergency, is necessary to prevent harm with patient consent, and in any situation where local, state, or federal law requires reporting. However, follow institutional guidelines and policies in place for HIPAA reporting requirements.