Surgeons may use the gracilis tendon in reconstructive surgery of the anterior cruciate ligament (ACL) of the knee. The gracilis muscle also has surgical use in patients who have lost the muscular function of their digits, patients with facial palsy, or brachial plexus injuries. Since the gracilis can be split into independent neuromuscular compartments, utilizing a muscle transfer technique that applies more than one functioning compartment can achieve good functional outcomes. Additionally, the gracilis muscle may be used as a free tissue flap because it has predictable neurovascular pedicles, which can be used to repair large pelvic and perineal wounds, temporoparietal defects, and anovaginal and rectovaginal fistulas.

The gracilis muscle is part of the medial hamstring group, which provides rotational, valgus, and anterior translation stability to the knee. When the gracilis is harvested to use as a graft for surgeries such as ulnar collateral ligament reconstruction, external rotation of the knee is increased slightly, with no difference seen in anterior translation. When harvesting only the semitendinosus muscle, there is an increase in external rotation and anterior translation of the knee. When harvesting both the gracilis muscle and the semitendinosus for ACL reconstruction, a significant increase in external rotation and anterior translation occurs.

Additionally, when knees were ACL-deficient, and the semitendinosus and gracilis were both harvested, a significant increase in external rotation and anterior translation occurred, indicating the importance of the medial hamstring group in stabilizing the knee in patients who are ACL-deficient and further providing evidence for pre-ACL reconstruction hamstring strengthening. In patients who are high-performing athletes, altering knee dynamics may be detrimental to performance. Therefore, evaluating sport-specific demands in high-performing athletes when determining what ACL reconstruction graft to use is recommended. Similar consideration is advised when using a gracilis harvesting procedure to repair conditions such as ulnar collateral ligament rupture.

Open or arthroscopic techniques can be utilized when harvesting the gracilis and semitendinosus tendons for a hamstring autograft ACL reconstruction. Awareness of structures associated with those tendons is important when utilizing those techniques. The gracilis and semitendinosus tendons connect via intertendinous bands. They are each surrounded by a dense fascia that connects them to surrounding soft tissue, and each tendon may have accessory bands that connect them to each other or structures such as the sartorius, gastrocnemius, or crural fascia. A smooth tendon harvest requires the dissection of any intertendinous or accessory bands and the dense fascia surrounding each tendon.

When selecting what tendon to use for ligament reconstruction surgery, biomechanical properties such as elastic modulus (ability to resist elastic deformation) should be accounted for to see if the graft tissue can simulate the function of the original tissue it is replacing. The gracilis and semitendinosus tendons have a statistically significant higher elastic modulus when compared to the patellar tendon, quadriceps tendon, and iliotibial band (ITB). Additionally, there is a statistically significant lower strain in the gracilis and semitendinosus tendons compared to the patellar tendon and ITB. Therefore, the hamstring tendons demonstrate better strength as ACL reconstruction grafts when compared to the patellar tendon, quadriceps tendon, and ITB grafts.

However, graft success is a multifactorial issue. Pre-operative status and rehabilitation, surgical technique, and post-operative rehabilitation play a role in graft success or failure and should be accounted for before selecting a graft for ACL reconstruction. Additionally, patient goals merit consideration when determining which graft is most appropriate.