Laboratory studies lack specificity and cannot distinguish NASH from NAFLD; however, initial evaluation should include an assessment of a complete hepatic panel, lipid panel, and iron. Lab tests may be used to evaluate insuline resistane which include Homeostasis Model Assessment (normal value<3.99)

patients with alcoholic-liver disease may have or have not elevated serum aminotransferase levels. The absolute level of liver enzyme elevation does not related to the severity of alcohol liver disease but the pattern of elevation in liver enzymes is helpful in making a diagnosis alcoholic liver disease. AST level is typically two to three times greater than ALT in alcoholic liver injury. Also, these patients have an elevated serum gamma-glutamyltranspeptidase (GGT).

Imaging studies play a key role in the diagnosis of NAFLD. The mainstay is ultrasonography; it is least invasive, and relatively inexpensive. The sensitivity for an ultrasound to detect NAFLD is in the range of 60% to 90% with a specificity around 90%. Unenhanced abdominal computed tomography and magnetic resonance are alternatives but are more costly and are not significantly superior to ultrasonography.

Diagnosis of NASH requires a liver biopsy; however, not all patients with NAFLD require a liver biopsy. The decision to proceed with histological examination depends on risk factors, laboratory workup, and disease severity. According to the 2012 guidelines from American Association for the Study of Liver Disease (AASLD), liver biopsy should be reserved for subjects who will 'benefit,' for subjects with potentially competing diagnosis, and for children with either an unclear diagnosis or in whom consideration is being given for medication.

Liver biopsy has moderate risk of complicationsand is invasive, subject to sampling error and is expensive.