The patient history should focus on determining if one of the traumatic or nontraumatic events mentioned above has occurred, thus placing a patient at risk for ACS. Underlying etiologies such as bleeding diathesis, renal disease, peripheral vascular disease, or cardiac arrhythmias should be explored. Any history of intravenous or intramuscular drug injection should be sought. On physical exam, impending ACS is characterized by the five ‘Ps’-increasing Pain out of proportion to appearance, Paresthesia, Paresis, Pallor, and distal Pulse deficit. Discomfort with passive stretch and/or tenseness of a muscle compartment are common. The major compartments in the leg are the anterior, lateral, deep posterior, and superficial posterior. The two significant compartments of the forearm are the dorsal and volar. Anterior compartment syndrome of the leg is characterized by pain exacerbated by plantarflexion. The muscles of this compartment are the tibialis anterior, the extensor digitorum longus, the extensor hallucis longus, and the peroneus tertius. Lateral compartment syndrome is characterized by pain exacerbated by inversion of the foot. The muscles of this compartment are the peroneus longus and the peroneus brevis. The superficial posterior compartment of the leg contains the soleus, gastrocnemius, and the plantaris muscles, and the superficial posterior compartment syndrome is characterized by pain on dorsiflexion of the foot. The deep posterior compartment contains the tibialis posterior, flexor hallucis longus, the flexor digitorum longus, and the popliteus muscles. Pain exacerbated by extending the toes is characteristic of this compartment syndrome. The volar compartment syndrome of the forearm has pain exacerbated by the extension of the wrist. The dorsal compartment syndrome has pain worsening on wrist flexion versus resistance.