Angioplasty with stenting is currently the treatment of choice in patients with coronary artery disease like unstable angina, NSTEMI, STEMI, and spontaneous coronary artery perforation. Choice of stent depends on patient tolerance to dual antiplatelet therapy (DAPT) with minimal risk of bleeding.

The main issue concerning the fact that whether DAPT can be tolerated for a duration sufficient enough to guarantee the stent luminal surface re-endothelialization with minimal risk of bleeding and stent thrombosis. It is recommended that DAPT should be continued for at least 1 month following BMS, for 6 to 12 months following first-generation DES implantation, and 3 months of DAPT following newest-generation DES implantation. Stable angina is managed with medical therapy and lifestyle modification to control risk factor for disease progression. Risk stratification can be evaluated by workup including diagnostic angiography with fractional flow reserve measurement. Patients who can tolerate dual-antiplatelet therapy (DAPT) for at least 3 months should be implanted with DES. In patients with high risk of bleeding, when DAPT is contraindicated, or in patients suspected for DAPT discontinuation within thirty days post-stenting, BMS should be the preferred type of stent. In patients requiring surgery within 30 days after the stenting procedure, BMS should be preferred.

When the surgery is planned between the first and the third month following stenting, the choice between BMS and DES should be according to BA9-coated stent availability and the risk of restenosis as in patients at high bleeding risk. In patients who are poorly compliant with medical therapy, BMS should be preferred. In patients with atrial fibrillation and those on anticoagulant therapy, the use of the BA9-coated stent and 1 month of DAPT should be considered. In patients with high bleeding risk, single antiplatelet therapy after DES is a reasonable alternative if the BA9-coated stent is not available. BMS could be considered in coronary lesions at very low risk of restenosis (coronary vessel diameter greater than 3.5 mm), and in patients with a high bleeding risk profile. An additional pathway to be considered in the patient who has lesions at high risk for restenosis and may benefit from a DES is to perform transcatheter occlusion of the left atrial appendix and more safely continue DAPT.