Treatment of traction alopecia is based on factors like the chronicity of the disease and presence and absence of permanent alopecia. The treatment is decided by the stage of the disease. For practical purposes traction alopecia has been classified into three stages namely stage of prevention, stage of early traction alopecia and stage of longstanding traction alopecia.

In the stage of prevention, the strategies include educational messages for parents, children, adolescents and young adults, about hair care practices. This intervention is significant as hair follicles are most vulnerable during this period.

In the stage of early traction alopecia, when the follicular units are still intact, the strategy is aimed at reduction of the hair tension by use of hairstyles which reduce the tightness of the braid. Other strategies include complete avoidance of chemicals or heat and brushing the affected area. The use of topical or intralesional corticosteroids is recommended if there is an evidence of inflammation, in the form of scaling or erythema or tenderness in the scalp. The use of intralesional triamcinolone to the peripheries of the hair loss is advocated in such cases. Pustules may be treated with oral or topical antibiotics, considering their anti-inflammatory effect.

In long-standing disease stage, surgical options are the viable option considered. Hair transplant using techniques like micro-grafting, mini-grafting, and follicular unit transplantation is found to be effective. A novel therapy using alpha-1 adrenergic receptor agonists in the management of traction alopecia has been recently explored. The suggested hypothesis here is that alpha-1 adrenergic receptor agonists induce contraction of the arrector pili muscle thus increasing the force required to pluck the hair. Hence topical phenylephrine- a selective alpha-1 adrenergic receptor agonist has been tried for traction alopecia. It was found that this medication reduced hair loss secondary to traction in one study involving a sample of female patients. The same study also found that the threshold of traction required in causing epilation increased after the application of topical phenylephrine.