The evaluation of shrinking lung syndrome requires exclusion of other causes of shortness of breath and pleuritic chest pain in SLE patients. Laboratory, radiographic and functional testing are all helpful both in demonstrating the characteristic features of SLS and also in excluding differential diagnoses.

Routine blood testing is typically normal. A raised white cell count may be suggestive of infection. Raised levels of CRP may indicate serositis. The ESR may be raised in the context of active lupus. Renal function is expected to be normal unless there is co-existent lupus nephritis. Creatine kinase levels are typically normal unless active myositis elsewhere. The serological profile of the lupus patient should be clarified. A positive ANA is present in all cases. Positive antiphospholipid serology is noted in approximately 2/3 of patients. There may be evidence of hypocomplementemia, increased DNA binding (3/4 cases), and a positive ENA (including SS-A, SS-B, anti-RNP, and anti-Sm). However, these tests may also be normal and they neither confirm nor refute the diagnosis.

If the specific diagnosis of an autoimmune disease is unknown, then further testing to include a full autoimmune profile would be appropriate. Tests to consider would include rheumatoid factor, anti-CCP, and scleroderma-specific antibodies. Occasionally the connective tissue disease may be as of yet undifferentiated.

Measurement of arterial blood gases is variable, with some patients demonstrating normal results and some showing mild hypoxemia, worse on exertion.

Plain radiography of the chest is a crucial investigation. The most common finding is a unilateral or bilateral elevation of the hemidiaphragm, which is a characteristic feature of the condition. Reduced lung volumes are also common. Less common findings include linear atelectasis, pleural effusions, and pleural thickening.

CT imaging of the chest is required to exclude parenchymal lung abnormalities and exclude common differentials such as interstitial lung disease and pulmonary emboli. An echocardiogram may be required in addition depending on the clinical context.

Assessment of diaphragm motion by M-mode ultrasound is occasionally requested but not always diagnostic. It may demonstrate the abnormal diaphragmatic movement, which may be absent or paradoxical.

Interestingly, one study demonstrated normal or approximately normal diaphragm contractility in a high proportion of SLE patients with SLS (9/12) using phrenic nerve stimulation, indicating that normal diaphragmatic movement cannot be used as a marker to exclude the condition.

Pulmonary function testing classically demonstrates a restrictive deficit, along with reduced total lung capacity (TLC), reduced carbon monoxide transfer factor (DLCO), and reduced lung volumes.