PSS can result in significant ocular hypertension. With recurrent episodes of rising intraocular pressure over a protracted period, significant permanent optic nerve damage occurs. Other complications of this disease have been described earlier on. Patients suffering from PSS may be misdiagnosed, and this poses a challenge. In some cases, the patient does not present to the clinic because of the absence of distressing symptoms. The patient may be first seen at the primary care service center. Therefore, for prompt diagnosis of PSS, the optometrist, often the primary eye care provider, could be the first member of the healthcare team to see the patient and, as such, should be aware of the diagnosis of PSS. The optometrist should appropriately refer to the ophthalmologist to control IOP and intraocular inflammation. During disease-free intervals, the optometrist may monitor the patient, with IOP being a regularly monitored parameter.

The patient will require careful monitoring to detect optic nerve damage, and imaging of the optic nerve and other ancillary investigations may need to be performed by the ophthalmic technician. Cases of frequent recurrence and inflammation not responsive to topical steroids require aqueous biopsy and PCR analysis to screen for CMV and other viral DNA. Performing this essential investigation will require the help of a laboratory scientist. Since PSS can result in known complications, the services of different ophthalmic subspecialists will be necessary, such as uveitis, glaucoma, cataract, and cornea specialists.

This team must collaborate effectively for the improved outcome of the PSS patient. Furthermore, compliance with medications is essential to achieve control of the IOP and inflammation. The pharmacist should emphasize this need for compliance to the patient at the point of dispensing medications. The patient should also be counseled on the appropriate technique for instillation of topical medications by the pharmacist and ophthalmic nurse and informed of the consequence of non-use of the eye drops.

Lastly, as some PSS patients have more frequent acute attacks than others, this group of patients will require closer monitoring. Eyedrops for such patients may be tapered off slowly. Therefore communication to such patients on when to return to the clinic should be unambiguous. The counselor should ensure that the PSS patient can be seen between appointments if they experience an attack before the next appointment.