The recognition of radiologic signs, such as the Ghon complex, can be the first alert that pulmonary tuberculosis is present; radiologists play a critical role in the diagnosis of pulmonary tuberculosis. In addition, alerting other healthcare team members to the presence of a Ghon focus allows for initiating treatment and enacting isolation precautions to protect hospital workers and other patients from potential exposure. However, radiologists are often not the first clinicians that evaluate the radiograph. Therefore, the ability of clinicians to recognize the radiographic signs of possible tubercular infection helps to ensure patient safety. Additionally, members of the infection prevention teams coordinate with treating providers to ensure that patients with potentially active tuberculosis are placed under appropriate isolation precautions to halt transmission.

Healthcare workers are at a ten times higher risk of becoming infected by M. tuberculosis when compared to the general population.M. tuberculosis aerosolizes into the air around an infected patient with regular respiratory activity, but coughing can connote greater infectivity.

Nurses should know the signs and symptoms of active TB to minimize their risk of exposure to infected patients. The signs and symptoms of active TB include but are not limited to cough, hemoptysis, unintentional weight loss, fever and chills, night sweats, loss of appetite, and fatigue.

After identifying a patient with potentially active TB, nurses and healthcare workers should follow their healthcare facilities' protocols for minimizing their occupational exposure to TB and place patients in airborne precautions to protect other hospitalized patients.

In addition to minimizing the healthcare workers' risk of exposure to TB, the risk of TB exposure to the inpatient population should be minimized by using airborne isolation rooms equipped with negative pressure air circulation; this limits exposure to contaminated room air to those outside of the patient isolation area.