Treatment of trismus is directed at the inciting etiology and is most commonly managed symptomatically. Symptom-directed interventions, including heat therapy, analgesics (NSAIDs), and muscle relaxants, are usually prescribed in the acute phase and are the mainstays for treating uncomplicated transient trismus. Heat therapy includes applying moist hot towels for 15 to 20 min per hour.

Further dental treatment must be avoided until the trismus resolves,

Stretching exercises may be indicated after the acute phase or in patients with post-traumatic and post-operative trismus, particularly when persisting longer than one week. The exercises typically consist of repeated attempts to open the mouth against applied resistance, usually divided into multiple sessions per day.

Physical therapy is performed in an attempt to alleviate edema and fibrosis, restore blood circulation, improve range of motion and muscle strength, and keep the muscle active.

Trismus may become chronic in the setting of fibrosis or ongoing radiotherapy. These cases may benefit from intensive physiotherapy, sometimes utilizing commercially available jaw motion rehabilitation devices or microcurrent therapy, particularly in patients refractory to more conservative approaches. Some authors have also described treatment with xanthine derivatives such as pentoxifylline.

If trismus does not improve after 2 to 3 days, or in cases of extreme trismus, referral to an oral and maxillofacial surgeon should be considered.

Extreme trismus cases that are repeatedly refractory to treatment require surgical procedures, like reducing the mandibular height to achieve a larger mouth opening, coronoidectomy, or tissue release and free flap reconstruction.

The treatment of trismus is summarized in the table below.

Heat Therapy
Moist hot towels

Physiotherapy

Mouth opening and lateral movements

Analgesics

NSAIDs, such as aspirin.

Muscle Relaxation

Benzodiazepine, such as diazepam