Although the lesions of granuloma annulare usually regress, they tend to recur. For this reason, and for cosmetic reasons, treatment sometimes is indicated. Physicians try many therapies, but there is little research-based evidence to support them. Further, in one study conducted with 67 granuloma annulare patients, researchers did not find a significant difference between the duration of lesions between untreated and treated patients.

Despite the lack of evidence, experts agree that intralesional steroid injection is first-line therapy for lesions of granuloma annulare. There are reports of improvement after certain types of trauma to the lesions such as biopsy, pricking, incision, and cryotherapy. Phototherapy has shown promising results in some studies. There are reports of success with both excimer laser and pulsed dye laser. Hydroxychloroquine has shown success in a few small studies and reports. Although more evidence is needed to prove efficacy, some researchers believe that hydroxychloroquine should be first-line therapy for generalized granuloma annulare. Tumor necrosis factor-alpha inhibitors have shown efficacy in treating generalized and recalcitrant granuloma annulare. However, as mentioned above, there are reports of TNF-alpha inhibitors triggering or exacerbating the disease, so more research is needed to weigh the risks and the benefits of using TNF-alpha inhibitors to treat this disease. Physicians have also tried surgical excision, but lesions tend to recur.

In addition to the therapy mentioned above, vitamin E, isotretinoin, tetracyclines, intralesional interferons, topical imiquimod, niacinamide, oral calcitriol, dapsone, hydroxyurea, topical tacrolimus, clofazimine, and rifampin have been tried and reported to be effective in small studies.