The LAD carries almost 50% of the blood carried by the coronary circulation.  During systole, the heart muscle squeezes over the perforating arteriolar branches and causes complete cessation of flow.  All coronary flow, therefore, occurs during diastole when the pressure from the cardiac contraction is not obstructing the blood flow.  Therefore, the coronary flow is dependent on diastolic blood pressure.  Just like any other capillary bed, the coronary circulation is controlled by local autoregulation mediated by demand dependent arteriolar dilatation.

**Structure**

The coronary arteries run on the epicardial surface of the heart to avoid being compressed by the cardiac muscle when it contracts.  The left anterior descending artery (LAD) is the largest coronary artery runs anterior to the interventricular septum in the anterior interventricular groove, extending from the base of the heart to the apex.  The LAD gives two sets of branches. The septal branches perforate the interventricular septum to supply the anterior two-thirds of the septum.  These are numbered as S1, S2, onwards starting from base to the apex.  The second set of branches course over the anterior aspect of the left ventricle and are called diagonal branches.  These are also numbered D1, D2, onwards starting from proximal to distal.  Around the apex, the LAD anastomoses with the terminal branches of the posterior descending artery which is usually a branch of the right coronary artery.

Depending upon the length of the LAD, the LAD is classified into four types: type-I – does not supply the left ventricular (LV) apex, type-2 – supplies part of the apex, the rest being supplied by the right coronary both, type3 – supplies the entire apex, and type-4 – supplies the apex and >25% of the inferior wall (wrap around).

A small left conus branch usually arises from the proximal LAD and anastomoses with its counterpart from the right coronary artery around the aortic conus and also with the vasa vasorum of the aorta and the pulmonary artery.

Usually, a couple of small right ventricular branches also arise from the LAD supplying small parts of the anterior right ventricle.

Multiple anastomoses exist between the coronary arteries.  The terminal LAD anastomosis with the terminal branches of the posterior descending artery (PDA) in the posterior interventricular groove about 90% of the time.  In 10% of the cases, no such anastomoses exist.  Within the interventricular septum, septal branches of the LAD freely anastomose with the septal branches of the PDA.  However, the flow in all of these anastomoses is small and does not suffice in case of sudden occlusion of a parent vessel.  If the parent vessel occludes slowly, often the anastomoses can gradually enlarge to provide meaningful flow.

The LAD and its branches are epicardial and give off “end-arteries,” in effect arterioles that perforate the myocardium to supply it.