There is not a clear gold standard for the treatment of extensor tendon lacerations.

Tendon injury repair may include primary repair, secondary repair, immediate reconstruction with a tendon graft, staged tendon reconstruction, and tendon transfer. The greater the number of tissues involved in the injury, the more challenging it is to restore the hand function.

Preserving or restoring appropriate tendon length is crucial to the outcome of repair, as even seemingly minor changes in tension can have a detrimental effect on finger movement.

Miller’s criteria are used to evaluate extensor tendon injuries, and they have shown that laceration severity, the zone of injury, surgical technique used for repair, accompanying trauma to surrounding tissues, hand therapy, and patient compliance are all important to the outcome.

Surgery is indicated if

- more than 25% of the tendon has been cut

- the patient is unable to extend the digit

- there is associated contamination requiring a formal washout and debridement

- the joint is unstable

- conservative approach trial has failed

- the patient can comply with the postoperative protocol.

The procedure can be performed under a local anesthetic or a nerve block, with the patient supine and the arm at their side on an arm table. A pneumatic tourniquet is very useful to control bleeding intraoperatively. Because of varying morphology depending on the zone of injury, treatment is best planned by anatomic classification.

Proximal zones (VI to IX) can take a 3-0 suture, but the size needs to be reduced the more distal the injury.

Contaminated wounds may need to be washed out and left to repair at a later date when the wound bed is clean. If the cut is clear and both ends are seen, they can be repaired in an emergency setting. Alternatively, the skin may be loosely closed over the lacerated tendons as a temporary measure if a surgical repair is required in theatre. Extensor tendon injuries should be managed in extension splinting to avoid exacerbating the injury and tendon end separation.

Partial injuries can be managed with wound care and splinting, but most complete injuries require a primary repair. If not immediately possible patient may be a candidate for delayed treatment, two-stage reconstruction, tendon transfer, or graft, but these may result in subpar outcomes. Often that is due to stiffness and reduced range of motion (ROM). This is seen in both adult and pediatric populations, although it is much more pronounced in the former.

If immobilization in children is difficult due to small digit size, a K wire fixation may be considered. Alternatively, an alumifoam splint can be incorporated into the cast.

**Zone 1**

Zone 1 lacerations are lacerations at or distal to DIPJ and can be referred to as open mallet finger.

**Zone 2**

Zone two injuries are overlaying the middle phalanx. Injures of over 50% of the tendon should be repaired.

**Zone 3**

A zone three laceration is over the PIPJ and results in a boutonniere deformity. It disrupts the central slip. Absent or weak PIPJ extension is a positive finding. It can be either reconstructed directly, or a tendon flap can be raised from the proximal part of it.

**Zone 4**

The injuries are over the proximal phalanx and usually involve the broad extensor mechanism.

**Zone 5**

These are over the MCPJ and must be assumed to be human bites until proven otherwise. They ought to be repaired, and care must be taken to ensure sagittal bands are intact or repaired to ensure central tendon position and a good clinical outcome. If there is a bite involved, the wound must be extended, washed out, left open, and the patient should be started on antibiotics after the cultures have been sent off from the theatre.

**Zone 6**

This area covers the dorsum of the hand over the metacarpals. There may not necessarily be a loss of extension at MCPJ in these injuries because of the presence of the junctures, even if the laceration involves the whole tendon. This makes diagnosis more difficult if not explored.

**Zone 7**

These injuries happen underneath the extensor retinaculum, and it is unclear if releasing it to visualize the damage and repair it is necessary, and there’s no other way to repair the damage.

**Zone 8**

This zone lies in the distal forearm, and lacerations are likely to involve more than just one tendon, as well as muscle bellies themselves and musculotendinous junction. Repair should start with the thumb and wrist extensor and move from there.

**Thumb**

Mallet is less likely here as the tendon is broader, but if it occurs, it should be repaired primarily.