Before OSHA regulations in the United States within the workplace, an average of 38 work-related deaths occurred daily, or nearly 14,000 deaths annually. Today, the rate of work-related deaths has decreased to just 14 per day despite a significantly larger workforce.

Despite the strides made by OSHA regulations toward complete safety in the workplace, accidents do still occur and account for roughly 5,000 work-related deaths per year currently. The workplace can be particularly dangerous for professionals whose job description entails working in a potentially harmful situation, such as those exposed to formaldehyde.

Formaldehyde is of concern, given its implications on the health of those exposed to it. Common exposure places to this hazardous chemical include biopsy immersion, sample registration, and gross anatomy labs. Monitoring exposure levels requires devices specifically designed to measure the concentration of formaldehyde in the air. OSHA guidelines state that the permissible exposure limit (PEL), or the highest allowable exposure dose, for formaldehyde, including its gas and solution forms, in the workplace is 0.75 parts formaldehyde per million parts of air (ppm) which is calculated as a weighted average over an 8-hour timeframe.

For short-term exposures, the PEL is two ppm over 15 minutes. Additionally, the threshold for increased monitoring and initiating medical surveillance of workers is 0.5 ppm over 8 hours. Daily use of devices to measure formaldehyde concentration would be necessary to prevent overexposure. However, this may not be standard practice in many laboratories as no single device has emerged as the standard real-time detection method.

Some devices or techniques that can be used to detect formaldehyde levels include:

- Photometry utilizes the yellow absorbance pattern produced by the reaction with formaldehyde in the air and beta-diketone and can detect concentrations between 0.005 to 5 ppm every 3 minutes to 2 hours.

- Fluorimetry utilizes gaseous formaldehyde trapped in an aqueous solution within a stripping coil, allowing the measurement of formaldehyde levels between 0.001 to 3 ppm every 2 seconds to 2 minutes.

- Electrochemical oxidation, the most commercially available measurement technique, utilizes a metal electrocatalyst and measures concentrations of oxidized formaldehyde as low as .005 ppm.

- Infrared spectroscopy utilizes infrared light to induce chemical vibration patterns that are unique to the chemical structure of a molecule. This technique can detect concentrations between .001 to 10 ppm.

- Cavity ring-down spectroscopy utilizes a laser shined into highly reflective mirrors to measure absolute optical extinction based on the scatter and absorption of light in aerosol samples. The technique can determine formaldehyde levels within seconds at concentrations at or less than .001 ppm.

- Mass spectrometry ionizes formaldehyde molecules to create a mass-to-charge ratio that can be used to quantify the abundance of formaldehyde in a sample within 2 seconds at concentrations between .007 to 4 ppm.

Despite multiple options, no technique is widely used in pathology laboratories to put employees at risk for adverse events without being aware of the problem. The significance of this problem is highlighted by a study that showed the ambient formaldehyde concentration in a gross anatomy lab was between 0.23 to 1.03 ppm, and individual exposure concentrations ranged from 0.45-1.08 ppm during a single session.

To combat formaldehyde exposure and its associated complications, OSHA has established standards for employers to follow to maximize worker safety, including:

- Initial monitoring to determine which employees may be at or above the standard exposure limits mentioned previously.

- Implement practical controls that will reduce the worker exposure or provide respirators.

- Label all solutions containing over 0.1% formaldehyde and materials releasing formaldehyde concentrations over 0.1 ppm as hazardous.

- Label any materials releasing formaldehyde concentrations over 0.5 ppm as a potential cancer hazard.

- Train any employee who may be exposed to over 0.1 ppm when beginning the position and when new formaldehyde sources are placed in the workplace. This training should be repeated annually.

- Providing appropriate personal protective equipment to prevent skin and eye contacts

- Provide stations to wash off formaldehyde splashes.

- Provide medical surveillance for workers exposed to formaldehyde for signs and symptoms of overexposure.

Additionally, many approaches have been developed to reduce further exposure, including working in ventilated fume hoods and supplemental ventilation systems, using absorbent materials to collect excess formalin from tissues, using formaldehyde neutralizing kits for formaldehyde neutralizing kits spills, and placing tissue samples in containers pre-filled with formaldehyde.

The container that holds the formaldehyde in a clinical laboratory should also follow OSHA guidelines. Their guidelines suggest that any container holding either formaldehyde or material that releases formaldehyde should be labeled as such if levels released into the air are more significant than 0.1 ppm. Further, anything that can release over 0.5 ppm into the air should be labeled as containing formaldehyde and also as a respiratory sensitizing agent and carcinogen.