Acalculous cholecystitis is a life-threatening disorder that can rapidly prove fatal. Most patients are old, frail and have many comorbidities. Because of the complexity in management, the condition is best managed by an interprofessional team that includes the following:

Patients with acalculous cholecystitis are often very ill and need ICU monitoring. The nurses looking after these patients must have a high suspicion of the disorder because often the signs and symptoms of sepsis are vague. Fluid intake and output have to be closely monitored together with the respiratory status. These patients need DVT and peptic ulcer prophylaxis and incentive spirometry.

Because the patients are kept NPO, a dietary consult should be requested to determine the need for IV nutrition.

The radiologist must be aware of the patient's admission because percutaneous drainage of the gallbladder may be urgently required. The gastroenterologist may need to perform an endoscopy to place a stent at the ampulla of Vater to decompress the gallbladder.

Because patients are frail, bedside physical therapy is needed to regain muscle function and strength.

Finally, the general surgeon may need to perform an urgent cholecystectomy in patients with gangrene.

**Outcomes**

The outcome of patients with acalculous cholecystitis is guarded. Over the years the mortality of acalculous cholecystitis has decreased but still remains about 10% despite optimal treatment. These patients often develop fulminant sepsis, ARDS, multiorgan failure and also have a high incidence of adverse cerebrovascular events. Most case reports indicate poor outcomes and even patients who survive have a prolonged recovery period but never attain full functional recovery.