The makeup of the patellofemoral joint is the undersurface of the patella and the cartilaginous anterior surface of the distal femur, comprising the trochlear groove. The proper biomechanics of the patellofemoral joint requires an intact and anatomic trochlear groove and inline congruent forces acting on the patella so that it can glide across the trochlear groove smoothly. Any disruption in this mechanism will produce dislocation of the patella out of the trochlear groove.

The bony structures of the patellofemoral joint do provide inherent stability to the patella, and any defect in the bony surface will result in instability. The majority of the patella articulation occurs between the lateral facet and the lateral trochlear groove. The normal trochlear groove has a large depth and steepness that provides inherent stability to the patellofemoral joint.

Besides bony support, even more important to the stability of the patella is the soft tissue envelope. The quadriceps insert at the superior patella and encase the patella until it merges with the patellar tendon. The patellar tendon originates at the inferior aspect of the patella and inserts onto the tibial tubercle. The quadriceps tendon, patella, and patellar tendon combined make up the extensor mechanism of the knee. Disruption of the extensor mechanism along its length will result in significant patellar instability and maltracking.

The medial ligamentous constraints are just as important. The medial patellofemoral ligament (MPFL), patellomeniscal ligament, patellotibial ligament, and retinaculum of the knee capsule all play roles in preventing lateral patella motion and keeping the patella congruent in the trochlear groove. The strongest of these is the MPFL, which originates from the adductor tubercle to insert onto the superior medial border of the patella. The MPFL is the primary restraint to lateral patellar instability.

Radiographically, Schottles point can be determined on fluoroscopy and is an accurate reproducible location for the femoral attachment. Schottles point is described as 1 mm anterior to the posterior cortex line, 2.5 mm distal to the posterior origin of the medial femoral condyle, and proximal to the posterior point of Blumensaats line.

Lateral soft tissue restraints also can contribute to patellar instability but to a lesser degree. Studies have shown lateral structures to contribute to 22% of lateral translation and stability in lateral patellar dislocations.

Dynamic stability is also a contributor to patellar stability. The vastus medialis muscle confers medial restraint to lateral translation. The vastus lateralis confers a lateral restraint to medial translation.

Knee alignment is a key factor in patellar stability. The normal alignment of the knee joint is at 6 degrees of valgus. The mechanical axis of the knee is a line drawn from the center of the hip to the center of the ankle. This should cross through the center of the knee. The anatomic axis of the knee is a line that goes through the center of the femoral and tibial shaft. In general, the anatomic axis of the femur is 6 degrees from the mechanical axis. Therefore, the knee angle (femorotibial angle) is approximately 6 degrees of valgus (in relation to the mechanical axis). An increased valgus at the knee off normal will force the patella out of the trochlear groove laterally and contribute to patellar instability.

Normal femoral anteversion is 15 to 20 degrees. Femoral anteversion > 20 degrees increases the risk for patellar dislocation laterally because it produces a high laterally directed force across the patella.

External tibial torsion also will contribute to lateral patellar instability. Normal tibial external rotation during childhood is 15 degrees.

The combination of increased femoral anteversion, increased genu valgus, and increased external tibia torsion is named "miserable malalignment syndrome." All these entities increase the Q-angle and subsequently increase the risk for patellar instability.

Trochlear dysplasia is a disease characterized by a shallow trochlear groove. It is thought to be caused by either congenital factors or lateral patellar tracking. Lateral patellar tracking will eventually flatten the trochlear groove leading to patellar instability. Regardless of the cause, trochlear dysplasia results in a loss of the inherent bony stability of the patellofemoral joint.

Lastly, disorders that affect collagen include Ehlers-Danlos syndrome or Down Syndrome. These diseases cause a chronic progression of ligamentous laxity. When the soft tissue structures around the knee become lax, the patella loses its restraints, and these patients typically will complain of habitual dislocations. These patients will have a classic presentation of Ehlers-Danlos with hyperelastic skin, joint hypermobility, and generalized ligamentous laxity. The classic findings from Beighton are passive hyperextension of the digits >90 degrees, passive abduction of the thumb to the forearm, hyperextension of the knee, hyperextension of the elbows, and forward bending with palms on the floor.

Other anatomical factors:

- Patella alta - causes the patella to not articulate with the sulcus

- Excessive lateral patellar tilt caused by poor quadriceps flexibility and tight lateral structures

- Lateral femoral condyle hypoplasia

- Muscular

- Dysplasia of the vastus medialis oblique (VMO) muscle
- Overpull of ITB or vastus lateralis muscle