**Toxoplasmosis:**

A perinatal, or more rarely prenatal, initial infection of Toxoplasma gondii classically causes a baby to be born with retinal lesions, hydrocephalus, and intracranial calcifications but is also associated with anemia, jaundice, hepatosplenomegaly, and thrombocytopenia. Approximately 75% of those infected in utero will be asymptomatic at birth, but as they grow, they will be at significant risk for developing motor dysfunction, cerebellar dysfunction, microcephaly, seizures, chorioretinitis, intellectual disabilities, and sensorineural hearing loss.

**Other:**

Despite there being 60 million new cases of varicella infection each year, CVS is rather rare, only 130 cases reported since 1947, but mortality rates are 30% in the first few months. CVS often causes skin lesions, limb hypoplasia, neurological abnormalities, and developmental delay. There is no evidence that infants born asymptomatic will develop symptoms in the future.

Syphilis infects 5.6 million people per year.T. pallidum in utero the bleaker the outcome. Pregnant women can be treated with benzathine penicillin G to diminish the bacterial load and decrease the likelihood of complications during pregnancy.

Parvovirus B19 only affects 1 to 5% of pregnant women, but the consequences can be devastating. This infection can lead to spontaneous abortion, severe neurodevelopmental deficits, and hydrops fetalis but 67 to 76% of infants are born to mothers infected with parvovirus B19 are unaffected.

**Rubella:**

Infants perinatally infected with rubella are often asymptomatic but may later develop hearing loss, blindness, heart defects, encephalitis, endocrinopathies as well as behavioral and intellectual deficits. Children suspected of having congenital rubella must be surveilled carefully for the onset of new symptoms. The prevalence of congenital rubella is as high as approximately 175 per 100000 live births in the developing Americas.

**CMV:**

Though commonly asymptomatic in healthy adults, CMV affects an estimated 60% of people in the United States (age-adjusted).****

**HSV:**

Approximately 50 to 70% of people in developed countries and nearly 100% of those in developing countries are seropositive for oral herpes simplex virus (HSV-1). Genital herpes simplex virus (HSV-2) is present in approximately 10 to 40% of the population and about 22% of pregnant women.