The carotid triangle contains many superficial and surgically accessible vessels and nerves. This clinical approach includes any number of procedures involving the carotid arteries, internal jugular vein, and hypoglossal nerve.

**Clinical Significance of the Carotid Body & Sinus**

At the bifurcation of the common carotid lies the carotid sinus, a baroreceptor hub innervated by the carotid branch of the ninth cranial nerve. Any increased pressure in the circulatory system can cause elevated stretch tension in the sinus, leading to an autonomic adjustment causing lowered blood pressure, reduced heart rate, and even decreased respiratory rate. Clinicians can attempt carotid sinus massage, which can terminate cardiac arrhythmias such as supraventricular tachycardia in some individuals.

This area is also significant for the carotid body, a chemoreceptor for blood oxygen contents which can become overstimulated or hyperplastic in chronically hypoxic conditions like high altitudes or chronic obstructive pulmonary disease.

**Clinical Significance of the Internal Jugular Vein**

The internal jugular vein has considerable significance. In patients with congestive heart failure or inferior wall infarctions of the myocardium, the back-flow and increased pressure in the right heart circulatory system can cause engorgement of the vein. A jugular venous pressure pulse tracing can be used to view the waveform and track various cardiovascular pathologies.

Clinicians can also use this vein for establishing catheter access for mediations, dialysis, and parenteral nutrition. There remains a risk of hematoma or puncture and hemorrhage if incorrect access leads into the carotid artery.