Several preparations of vitamin D are available. Vitamin D3 (cholecalciferol), when compared with vitamin D2 (ergocalciferol), has been shown to be more efficacious in achieving optimal 25-hydroxyvitamin D levels, thus favoring vitamin D3 as a treatment of choice.

**Prevention of Vitamin D deficiency**

Adults less than 65 years of age who do not have year-round effective sun exposure shall consume 600 to 800 international units of vitamin D3 daily to prevent deficiency. Older adults 65 years of age or more shall consume 800 to 1000 international units of vitamin D3 daily to prevent deficiency and to reduce the risk of fractures and falls.

**Management of Vitamin D deficiency**

The amount of vitamin D required to treat the deficiency depends largely on the degree of the deficiency and underlying risk factors.

- Initial supplementation for 8 weeks with Vitamin D3 either 6,000 IU daily or 50,000 IU weekly can be considered.

- A higher-dose initial supplementation with vitamin D3 at 10,000 IU daily may be needed in high-risk adults who are vitamin D deficient (African Americans, Hispanics, obese, taking certain medications, malabsorption syndrome). Once serum 25-hydroxyvitamin D level exceeds 30ng/mL, 3000 to 6000 IU/day maintenance dose is recommended.

- Children who are vitamin D deficient require 2000 IU/day of vitamin D3 or 50,000 IU of vitamin D3 once weekly for 6 weeks. Once the serum 25(OH)D level exceeds 30 ng/mL, 1000 IU/day maintenance treatment is recommended. According to the American Academy of Pediatrics, infants who are breastfed and children who consume less than 1 L of vitamin D-fortified milk need 400 IU of vitamin D supplementation.

- Calcitriol can be considered where the deficiency persists despite treatment with vitamin D2 and/or D3. The serum calcium level shall be closely monitored in these individuals due to an increased risk of hypercalcemia secondary to calcitriol.

- Calcidiol can be considered in patients with fat malabsorption or severe liver disease.