Removal of the tumor is the best treatment for cancer cachexia. When definitive treatment is not possible, there has been some success with multiple treatment modalities.

**Supportive Care**

Intervention from the stage of pre-cachexia is best. Early nutritional intervention can improve nutritional status. This may reduce the inflammatory response. Stabilization of body weight during chemotherapy often results in reduced toxicity and better overall survival. The following have all shown limited success.

- Antiemetics

- Exogenous pancreas extract

- Frequent small feedings

- Home-made food supplements may be better tolerated

- Oral and parenteral nutritional supplements

- Treatment of stomatitis

- Transfusions of blood components

**Exercise**

Exercise is safe during active cancer treatments. It improves muscle strength, bone health, and quality of life, while decreasing depression, fatigue, and psychosocial distress. Physical activity can reduce the risk of comorbidities negatively affecting cancer survivors. There is evidence indicating that exercise is associated with a reduction in overall mortality. Physical exercise can improve insulin sensitivity, modulate muscle metabolism, and reduce inflammation. Exercise has anti-inflammatory benefits. It up-regulates anti-inflammatory cytokines in skeletal muscle and adipose tissue. Recommendations should be made to exercise early in the treatment of cancer. Physical therapy evaluation can be helpful. Caregiver participation improves compliance.

**Pharmacologic Management**

Multiple agents with different mechanisms of action can be used alone or in combination.

Olanzapine, a selective monoaminergic antagonist, has a strong affinity for dopamine and serotonin receptors. It has been used at low doses showing improvement in weight and nutritional status with a low incidence of side effects.

Ghrelin and its analogs, including anamorelin, are useful in some patients with cachexia. Side effects included nausea and hyperglycemia.

Recombinant-human GH with insulin has been evaluated and showed improved whole-body protein net balance.

Anabolic-androgenic steroids have been used to promote muscle growth and strength. Nandrolone decanoate was studied in patients with non-small cell lung cancer. The treated group had less weight loss, but survival was comparable. Fluoxymesterone, an anabolic steroid, was found to be inferior to megestrol acetate or dexamethasone.

Enobosarm (GTx-024) is an androgen receptor modulator. It has tissue-selective anabolic effects in muscle and bone. One study showed an increase in lean body mass.

Thalidomide suppresses TNF production in patients with cancer. It has been used in combination with medroxyprogesterone or megestrol acetate, oral eicosapentaenoic acid, and L-carnitine, resulting in a significant increase in lean body mass significantly, decreased fatigue, and improved appetite.

MABp1 (Xilonix; Xbiotech, Inc., Austin, TX) is a fully-humanized, monoclonal anti-IL-1a antibody. It is a receptor antagonist that resulted in partial remission or stabilization of cachexia.

Corticosteroids have been found in uncontrolled studies to diminish anorexia, asthenia, and pain in patients with cancer. The improvements did not persist, and all nutritional status returned to baseline with no differences in the mortality rate.

Megestrol acetate has been used historically. It improves appetite and increases body fat more than lean body mass. There is a reduction of serum levels of IL-1a and b, IL-2, IL-6, and TNF-a.

Medroxyprogesterone acetate is a synthetic progestagen that also has been used. It reduces the production of cytokines and serotonin. It increases appetite in cancer patients but does not cause weight gain.

Metoclopramide can be used for patients with delayed gastric emptying or gastroparesis.

Dronabinol and Marijuana Dronabinol (Delta 9-tetrahydrocannabinol, THC) have been studied. Cannabinoids have not shown to be more effective than megestrol despite improved appetite.

The anti-tnf antibody has been studied with conflicting results.

Eicosapentaenoic acid was found to have antitumor and anti-cachexia activities in animal cachexia models, but randomized clinical studies show no unique benefit of EPA.

Myostatin inhibitors may be a new potential therapeutic target. Activin type-2 receptor (ActRIIB) has been used to treat muscle wasting. ActRIIB is a high-affinity activin type 2 receptor that is known to mediate the signaling via a subset of TGF-b family ligands, including myostatin, activin, GDF11, and others.

Bimagrumab is a fully-humanized anti-ActRII monoclonal antibody that is to be studied for non-small cell lung cancer-associated cachexia.

NSAIDs, including indomethacin and celecoxib, have not been shown to improve nutritional status.

Hydrazine sulfate is an inhibitor of the enzyme phosphoenolpyruvate carboxykinase. It interrupts gluconeogenesis in animals. Studies have shown no benefit.

Beta-hydroxy-beta-methyl butyrate with L-arginine and L-glutamine has been used for cachexia. HMB is a metabolite of leucine and interferes with the activation of NF-kB. In tumor-bearing mice, it inhibited PIF-induced protein degradation and attenuated the increased protein degradation.

OHR/AVR118 (OHR Pharmaceuticals, Inc., New York, NY) is a broad-spectrum peptide-nucleic acid immunomodulator that is theorized to have cytoprotective properties. A study in patients with cancer showed stabilization of body mass and muscle mass, increased appetite, and enhanced quality of life.

Total parenteral nutrition (TPN) has not been shown to have significant benefits for patients undergoing chemotherapy or radiation therapy regarding tolerance, response, or survival.

Cyproheptadine is a serotonin and histamine receptor antagonist. It can help with weight gain in carcinoid tumor patients.