Most patients with Graves disease present with classic signs and symptoms of hyperthyroidism. Initial presentation of Graves disease with only Graves orbitopathy or pretibial myxedema is rare. Presentation depends on the age of onset, severity, and duration of hyperthyroidism. In the elderly population, symptoms may be subtle or masked, and they may present with non-specific signs and symptoms like fatigue, weight loss, and new onset atrial fibrillation. Atypical presentation of hyperthyroidism in elderly is also referred as apathetic thyrotoxicosis.

In younger patients, common presentations include heat intolerance, sweating, fatigue, weight loss, palpitation, hyper defecation, and tremors. Other features include insomnia, anxiety, nervousness, hyperkinesia, dyspnea, muscle weakness, pruritus, polyuria, oligomenorrhea or amenorrhea in the female, loss of libido, and neck fullness. Eye symptoms include lids swelling, ocular pain, conjunctival redness, double vision. Palpable goiter is more common in the younger population, age younger than 60 years.  Up to 10 % of patients may have weight gain.

Physical signs of hyperthyroidism include tachycardia, systolic hypertension with increased pulse pressure, signs of heart failure (like edema, rales, jugular venous distension, tachypnea), atrial fibrillation, fine tremors, hyperkinesia, hyperreflexia, warm and moist skin, palmar erythema and onycholysis, hair loss, diffuse palpable goiter with thyroid bruit and altered mental status.

Signs of extrathyroidal manifestations of Graves’ disease include ophthalmopathy like eyelid retraction, proptosis, periorbital edema, chemosis, scleral injection, exposure keratitis. Thyroid dermopathy causes marked thickening of the skin, mainly over tibia which is rare, seen in 2% to 3% of cases.