Milrinone can be a useful medication for providing cardiac support in patients with acute and chronic heart failure, providing intraoperative cardiac support, and acting as a bridge to definitive surgical or mechanical support or for palliative support in specific patient populations. However, ICU providers should carefully perform a risk-benefit analysis before initiating patients on this medication due to toxicity and the risks associated with invasive monitoring. Nurses should be familiar with the dosing of the drug and provide additional monitoring for adverse effects and patient compliance. Pharmacists should work closely with the prescriber, verify dosing, and perform medication reconciliation to prevent drug-drug interactions, communicating with other team members if they note any concerns. Given milrinone's toxicity and potential adverse event profile, an interprofessional, collaborative team effort is the best way to drive patient outcomes and optimally prevent adverse events. [Level 5]

In a study, an interprofessional collaborative practice (IPCP) intervention was evaluated to improve a healthcare team, healthcare system, and patient outcomes for hospitalized patients with HF. The team intervention successfully enhanced team outcomes among patients with acute decompensated heart failure. The team training intervention included communication structures and tools, leadership workshops, and the introduction of Structured Interprofessional Bedside Rounding (SIBR) in AHF units.