The utilization of atherectomy has been increasing but remains low compared with the prevalence of heavily calcified lesions.

Despite the success seen in the ORBIT II trial, multiple high-risk groups were not included: patients with unprotected left main disease and those with ejection fraction < 25%. These high-risk individuals were included in a 2018 study, including all patients undergoing OA at three separate institutions. One year following OA, 87.3% had not experienced a MACE or cerebrovascular event, demonstrating that OA is an option for treatment in patients with severely calcified and complex coronary anatomy.

Since the advent of OA, there have been questions on the economic value of atherectomy and preparation of calcified lesions before PCI. This was addressed by performing a cost savings analysis using the ORBIT II data and comparing it with medicare provider analysis and review (MedPar) data. In the study, the first significant finding was the decrease in the index procedure cost of $3590 per patient. This was considered to be due to decreased average length of stay for patients in ORBIT II (1.8 days vs. 4.24 days). The second major finding was a decreased procedure-related readmission rate for coronary artery bypass surgery at one month in ORBIT II compared with MedPar data, resulting in a decreased cost of $704. In total, the combined savings per patient was $4294 in patients undergoing OA.

Given the outcomes of the ORBIT II and real word multicenter trials, larger trials are needed to evaluate the utility of OA in patients with severe coronary calcification. This is being addressed in the ongoing evaluation of treatment strategies for severe calcific coronary arteries: orbital atherectomy vs. conventional angioplasty technique, before implantation of drug-eluting stents: ECLIPSE trial. This is a multicenter, randomized control since 2017, with an estimated end date in February 2022. Primary endpoints include the final minimum stent area after the procedure via OCT and target vessel failure.