The diagnosis of gyrate atrophy of the choroid and retina depends on the presence of the characteristic clinical features of the condition and the presence of elevated plasma ornithine level, which is essential for the diagnosis of the condition and is usually 10 to 20 times higher than the normal plasma ornithine level.

Regarding the **ophthalmic evaluation of the condition**, fluorescein angiography of patients with GA shows prominent retinal pigment epithelium (RPE) transmission window defects which start in the peripheral retina and correspond to the areas of RPE and choriocapillaris atrophy that characterize the disease with a hyperfluorescent lining along the borders of these defects. Large choroidal vessels are clearly seen through these defects. These defects gradually enlarge in size on follow-up and progress to coalesce together.

GA can also be evaluated and followed up using ultra-widefield imaging, which allows superior imaging of the retinal periphery simultaneously with the posterior pole.

Visual field testing is useful in follow-up using both static and kinetic perimetry and shows progressive visual field constriction and loss of sensitivity with age, which can be slowed with appropriate treatment.

Fundus autofluorescence, which is an indicator of RPE structure, may help demonstrate and follow up areas of chorioretinal atrophy as characteristic hypoautofluorescent areas.

Optical coherence tomography is useful in the evaluation of the macular area and can show variable features including intraretinal cystic spaces.