The management of thallium toxicity is by an interprofessional team that includes an emergency provider, poison control, internist, neurologist, nurse practitioners, and intensivist. The triage nurse should follow protocols for patients suspected of poisoning and have them admitted right away. The next step is to notify the emergency provider, who will communicate with the interprofessional team.

The initial management of a patient with thallium toxicity follows the trauma ABCDE protocol. The nurses play an active role in resuscitation by ensuring IV access, providing oxygenation, documenting the event, and placing the patient on monitoring devices. Activated charcoal can be used for patients presenting within one hour of ingestion. If the patient had dermal exposure, their skin is to be washed with soap and water. For eye exposure, irrigation of the eyes with room temperature water is necessary.

Activated charcoal and Prussian blue may be used for gastrointestinal ingestion. Prussian blue has been shown to be more successful and is approved by the United States Food and Drug Administration. After resuscitation, it should be determined how and why the patient ingested thallium; if it was intentional, then the patient must be seen by a mental health nurse prior to discharge. Finally, the patient must be seen by the neurologist to determine the extent of neurological deficits.

Only through open communication with the members of the interprofessional team can the morbidity of thallium toxicity be lowered.

**Outcomes**

The prognosis for patients with thallium toxicity depends on the dose ingested and the presence of neurological symptoms. Those with minimal symptoms can fully recover with treatment, but patients with severe toxicity may continue to have neuropsychiatric deficits for a long time. (Level V)