The diagnosis of Fuchs uveitis syndrome is primarily clinical, based on history and complete eye examination. Alternative methods of examining the eye can prove useful with an atypical presentation. Anterior chamber paracentesis can be done to analyze the aqueous humor. Finding rubella-specific antibodies in the aqueous humor is non-specific, but in their absence, it would decrease the probability of the patient having FUS.

In-vivo confocal microscopy (IVCM) is a non-invasive procedure that can help observe ocular structures on the cellular level. A study published in 2009 that focused on observing patients with FUS using IVCM provided high-resolution images of the cornea’s endothelium and the consistent keratic precipitates that patients with FUS experience. The images were compared to those of uveitis caused by an infectious etiology, and both images shared various similarities, further enforcing FUS’s infectious cause. Even though IVCM helped identify the possible etiology of FUS, this non-invasive procedure is not routinely used.

Further imaging studies such as enhanced depth imaging optical coherence tomography (EDI-OCT) have also been used to evaluate the morphology present in FUS. FUS eyes had a decreased thickness of the iris compared to eyes without pathology, as well as statistically significant extra-foveal and subfoveal choroidal thinning. While studies regarding different imaging modalities have primarily been used in an attempt to refine the knowledge concerning FUS, none have changed the diagnostic criteria.