**Alteplase**

Alteplase administration is via the intravenous route. However, for catheter clearance, it is administered directly into the catheter.

**Acute Myocardial Infarction**

To manage acute myocardial infarction in adults, administer alteplase as soon as possible after the onset of symptoms. The patient's weight determines the dose to be administered, which is not to exceed 100 mg irrespective of the selected administration method (accelerated infusion preferred by the AHA/ACCA or slower, 3-hour infusion as per manufacturer's labeling).

Accelerated infusion (1 to 1/2 hr):

- For patients who weigh less than or equal to 67 kg: 15 mg IVP bolus is administered over 1 to 2 minutes, followed by 0.75 mg/kg intravenous (IV) infusion given over 30 minutes (not to exceed 50 mg), followed by 0.5 mg/kg IV over the following 60 minutes (not to exceed 35 mg over 1 hour).

- For patients who weigh greater than 67 kg: (A total of 100 mg is infused over 1.5 hours) 15 mg intravenous pyelogram (IVP) bolus is administered over 1 to 2 minutes, followed by 50 mg IV infusion during the next 30 minutes, and then the remaining 35 mg over the following 60 minutes.

3-hour infusion:

- For patients who weigh less than 65 kg: A dose of 0.075 mg/kg IVP bolus is administered over 1 to 2 minutes, followed by a 0.675 mg/kg infusion over the rest of the first hour, and, lastly, 0.25 mg/kg IV over the next 2 hours.

- Patients weighing 65 kg or more: A 100 mg total dose is infused over 3 hours. Six to 10 mg IVP bolus is given over 1 to 2 minutes, followed by 50 to 54 mg over the rest of the first hour (i.e., 60 mg in the first hour including 6 to 10 mg bolus), and then 20 mg/hr over the next 2 hours.

**Pulmonary Embolism**

- Infuse 100 mg IV over 2 hours. Institute parenteral anticoagulation towards the end of or immediately following the alteplase infusion when the thrombin time or PTT returns to less than two times the reference range.

**Acute Ischemic Stroke**

- A dose of 0.9 mg/kg is given through IV infusion, not to exceed 90 mg total dose. Ten percent of the total dose is administered initially as an IV bolus over 1 minute, and the remaining is gradually infused over 60 minutes.

Dosing considerations for acute ischemic stroke:

- Intracranial hemorrhage should be excluded as the primary cause of stroke before initiation of treatment.

- Administer alteplase as soon as possible but ideally within 3 hours after onset of symptoms.

- Monitor and control the blood pressure during and after administration.

- In patients who have not recently used oral anticoagulants or heparin, treatment can start before the availability of coagulation study test results.

- Discontinue if the pretreatment INR is greater than 1.7 or the aPTT is elevated.

**Arterial Thrombosis and Embolism**

- 0.05 to 0.1 mg/kg/hr is given by transcatheter intra-arterial infusion for about 1 to 8 hours or until the lysis of the thrombus.

**Central Venous Catheter Occlusion**

- 1 mg/mL, intracatheter

- Adult patients who weigh less than 30 kg: Administer 110% of the lumen volume of the catheter (intracatheter), not exceeding 2 mg/2 mL; then retain in the catheter for around 0.5 to 2 hours; can instill a second dose if the catheter remains occluded.

- Patients who weigh greater than or equal to 30 kg: Administer 2 mg/2 mL; retain in the catheter for around 0.5 to 2 hours; can instill a second dose if the catheter remains occluded.

- Pediatric patients who weigh less than 30 kg: Administer 110% of the measured internal lumen volume of the catheter with alteplase, not exceeding 2 mg/2 mL.

- Pediatric patients who weigh 30 kg or more: Instill 2 mg of alteplase into the occluded catheter.

After 30 minutes of dwell time, assess the function of the catheter by attempting to aspirate blood; if one cannot aspirate blood 120 minutes after dwell time, a second dose may be administered, and repeat the process.

If there is a restoration of catheter function, aspirate around 4 to 5 mL of blood in patients who weigh 10 kg or more (aspirate around 3 mL if the patient weighs less than 10 kg) to remove the drug and the residual clot. Then gently irrigate with 0.9% NaCl.

**Pleural Catheter or Chest Tube Drainage**

- Concurrent TPA and human deoxyribonuclease (DNAse) can be administered intrapleurally through the chest tube or pleural catheters. It has been shown to assist with better drainage of thick loculated effusions like empyema.

**Reteplase**

- Reteplase is administered intravenously as soon as possible after the onset of symptoms.

- Adults patients: Initially administer 10 units IV bolus (over 2 minutes) with the second dose given 30 minutes after first (for a total cumulative dose of 20 units). An IV line is used to administer the bolus injection, and no other medication should be simultaneously injected or infused through this IV line.

- Pediatric patient safety and efficacy are not established.

**Tenecteplase**

- Tenecteplase is administered intravenously as soon as possible after the onset of symptoms.

- In adult patients, administer a 30 to 50 mg IV bolus over 5 seconds one time (based on weight): 30 mg for patients weighing less than 60 kg; 35 mg for patients weighing 60 to 70 kg; 40 mg for patients weighing 70-80 kg; 45 mg for patients weighing 80 to 90 kg; 50 mg for patients weighing more than 90 kg.

- Pediatric patient safety and efficacy not established.