Traditionally EMS providers have traveled into the contamination area to retrieve victims and bring them to appropriate decontamination sites near healthcare facilities in a so-called “scoop and go” type of mission.

The area of greatest risk is titled the hot zone. This is the immediate area of the CBRN+ET threat, often the area of most casualties.  Traditionally victims were retrieved by EMS providers in PPE and brought into an adjacent warm zone. The warm zone is a safe distance from the hot zone and is an area where triage and decontamination may take place. After decontamination, patients can cross the cold line and enter the cold zone where definitive medical management can occur, or safe transport to health care facilities can occur. The cold zone will also house the incident command post where leadership manages the consequences of the specific threats.

If the patient is incapacitated, then their vitals need to be measured. It can be challenging to assess a patient’s vitals while in OSHA PPE levels A, B, and C. The decreased visibility from the hood and decreased dexterity from glove thickness are often cited as main detractors for diagnosing and treating victims in real life or mannequins in training.

Chest compressions for cardiopulmonary resuscitation (CPR) have been found to be of great importance. This is a physically demanding process for the operator delivering compressions, that becomes more demanding when utilizing PPE protection levels. The suits increase temperatures with exertion, can cause fogging and visual impairment of the face shield, and decrease sensorium leading to lowered quality and rate of chest compressions, specifically decreased depth and rate. One study has shown a decrease in CPR effectiveness of 30% while in PPE.

The risk of apnea and cardiac arrest have been found to be high in events of CBRN+ET.

Endotracheal intubation is considered the gold standard for definitive airway management. ETI has shown to handle secretions of victims in CBRN+ET events better. It requires the operator to position the patient to view the glottis. The view of the glottis can be seen by the operator when rostral to the patient’s head and viewing the glottis through the pharyngeal, tracheal axis intersection. Medications are used to sedate the patient and relax musculature to allow for the passing of the ET tube through the glottis. The tube is then secured, and the patient is treated with a BVM until a ventilator is available. Studies on mannequins have shown direct laryngoscopy (DL) to be the fastest practice for ETI.

Patients can and will often require venous access for the delivery of fluids or medications for early resuscitation during CBRN+ET events. This has been studied multiple times and placing peripheral IVs has been found to be challenging in PPE due to decreased dexterity and sensorium. Interosseous placement (IO) has been found to take significantly less time than intravenous access (IV) while wearing PPE.

Patients that achieve resuscitation are later decontaminated. This can take up to 12 minutes per person.