# Continuing Education Activity

Leriche Syndrome also commonly referred to as aortoiliac occlusive disease, is caused by severe atherosclerosis affecting the distal abdominal aorta, iliac arteries, and femoro-popliteal vessels. Leriche Syndrome presents with a triad of claudication, impotence, and absence of femoral pulses. This activity reviews the evaluation and treatment of Leriche syndrome and the role of the interprofessional team in evaluating and treating this condition.

**Objectives:**
- Describe the cause of Leriche syndrome.
- Discuss the diagnostic triad associated with Leriche syndrome.
- Outline the diagnostic workup required when Leriche syndrome is suspected.
- Summarize the evaluation and treatment of Leriche syndrome and the role of the interprofessional team in evaluating and treating this condition.

# Introduction

Leriche Syndrome (LS), also commonly referred to as aortoiliac occlusive disease (AIOD), is a product of atherosclerosis affecting the distal abdominal aorta, iliac arteries, and femoropopliteal vessels. ****LS was first described in 1914 by Robert Grahman, but it was not until later that the trio of symptoms was documented as a syndrome. This was done by Henri Leriche, a French surgeon, and physiologist, now known as the father of LS. The extent and localization of atherosclerotic occlusions relative to these arteries determine the classification of the disease. AIOD is classified as Type I (confined to the distal abdominal aorta and common iliac arteries), Type II (predominately distal abdominal aorta with disease extension into common iliac and external iliac arteries), and Type III (affecting the aortoiliac segment and femoropopliteal vessels).

# Etiology

Leriche Syndrome is caused by atherosclerosis. Modifiable risk factors for atherosclerosis include hypertension, diabetes mellitus, nicotine, hyperlipidemia, hyperglycemia, and homocysteine. Non-modifiable risk factors for atherosclerosis include age, gender, race, and family history.

# Epidemiology

Patients with peripheral arterial disease (PAD) may be asymptomatic (10%), so the exact prevalence and incidence of Leriche Syndrome are unknown. However, the prevalence of PAD increases in aging populations. The prevalence of PAD is 14% for patients older than 69 years of age.

# Pathophysiology

Leriche Syndrome occurs secondary to atherosclerotic induced arterial wall injury leading to two out of three factors involved in Virchow triad, endothelial damage, and thrombosis. Once endothelial damage occurs, a resultant inflammatory response leads to lipid accumulation in smooth muscle cells and macrophages, which eventually leads to the formation of a plaque in the arterial lumen. Eventually, aortoiliac segments become stenotic by more than 50%, the resultant oxygen debt during exercise causes claudication. Once PAD becomes extensive in the aortoiliac segment, the majority of men with Leriche Syndrome present with impotence and sexual dysfunction secondary to reduced penile arterial flow.

# History and Physical

Patients commonly present with claudication, which is cramping in the lower extremities (hips, thighs, buttocks) reproducible by exercise. A detailed history is essential in determining the location, severity, and duration of symptoms. While impotence and sexual dysfunction may occur in the majority of patients, the hallmark of Leriche Syndrome is reduced or absent femoral pulses.

# Evaluation

A serum lipid profile (total cholesterol, LDL, HDL, TG) as well as HbA1c (if diabetic), lipoprotein A, and homocysteine levels should be obtained.

# Treatment / Management

Surgical treatment options for Leriche Syndrome include thromboendarterectomy (TEA), aortobifemoral bypass (AFB), and percutaneous transluminal angioplasty (PTA) with or without stenting. ********

# Differential Diagnosis

Numerous vascular conditions can mimic the symptoms of Leriche Syndrome and must be considered in the differential diagnosis. Arterial dissection, particularly in the iliac arteries may cause claudication and absent femoral pulses mimicking the symptom profile of Leriche Syndrome.

# Prognosis

Without treatment, the prognosis of Leriche Syndrome is poor. However, with modern medicine outcomes are good. In some cases with slow progression or onset of LS, collaterals may develop as a self-compensating mechanism.

# Complications

Limb ischemia

# Consultations

A quick consultation of either vascular surgery or interventional cardiology should be placed if MTS is suspected.

# Deterrence and Patient Education

All patients should be encouraged to prevent/treat all modifiable risk factors such as hypertension, diabetes mellitus, nicotine, hyperlipidemia, hyperglycemia, and homocysteine.

# Pearls and Other Issues

With the complexity of LS is it highly recommended a purposeful interprofessional team be involved when LS is suspected.

# Enhancing Healthcare Team Outcomes

Multiple studies have been done investigating the benefit of utilizing an interprofessional team to enhance patient satisfaction as well as healthcare outcomes; the results are stunning. In lite of this new evidence, it now recommended that all institutions involved in percutaneous interventions or cardiothoracic interventions should set in place algorithms and encourage interprofessional communication.