The potential toxicity of cholinesterase inhibitors is due to their mechanism of action. The spectrum of toxicity can vary from patient to patient, which is also complicated by the type of cholinesterase inhibitor to which a patient suffers exposure. SLUDGE syndrome, as described above, is the most recognized form of toxicity for cholinesterase inhibitors. Severe respiratory depression can also present.

Involuntary movements due to increased acetylcholine at neuromuscular junctions can also be a sign of toxicity. Muscle fibrillation, fasciculations, and paralysis should raise the suspicion of toxicity.

Miosis is a common sign of cholinergic toxicity. The excess acetylcholine causes the contraction of the sphincter pupillae muscle that encompasses the iris. Miosis is considered one of the most sensitive signs of exposure to aerosol cholinesterase inhibitors (organophosphates, pesticides).

First-line treatments for suspected cholinesterase inhibitor toxicity include atropine, 2-PAM (pralidoxime), and diazepam. Atropine occupies muscarinic receptor sites, therefore reducing the binding of acetylcholine. However, it does not counteract nicotinic effects such as muscle fasciculations and weakness, so ventilation may still be necessary.

2-PAM functions by reversing the binding of cholinesterase inhibitors to acetylcholinesterase. When administered together, 2-PAM and atropine have a synergistic effect.

Seizures due to cholinesterase inhibitor toxicity are more apparent in pediatric patients and adults exposed to nerve agents, hence requiring immediate management with diazepam.