When evaluating a problematic wound in previously radiated tissue, it is important to determine that the problem is from soft tissue radionecrosis and not from another cause. Typically, the accumulative dose of radiation has been over 3000 cGy and more commonly is 5000 cGy. For example, a squamous cell carcinoma of the skin previously treated with 1000 cGy of radiation would be very unlikely to develop a future skin ulcer from the delayed effects of radiation therapy. More likely, in this scenario, the skin ulcer may represent a recurrence of the skin cancer and biopsy should be done.

When approaching a problematic wound in radiation-damaged tissue, it is best to take a systematic approach, starting with obtaining answers to the following questions:

- Is the macrovascular supply to the tissue adequate?

- Is there an active infection and have the host factors for wound healing been addressed (proper nutrition, tobacco use cessation, reducing pressure and avoidance of repeat trauma to the tissue)?

- Is the ulceration or symptom from recurring cancer?

The macrovascular status, if wound in the extremities, can be evaluated with palpation of pulses, ankle brachial index, arterial duplex and angiography may be appropriate. Also, transcutaneous oxygen measurement (TCOM) can be done to assess the oxygenation of the tissue, and the TCOM should be greater than 40 mm Hg PaO2 to predict a good chance of wound healing.

Wound cultures or bacterial cultures on tissue biopsy can be helpful to target antimicrobial therapy and treatments tailored to secondary infections which are common in soft tissue radionecrosis. Often, it is difficult to determine if the tissue necrosis is from the delayed effects of radiation or secondary infection. Methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus (MRSA) is especially problematic because of its pathogenicity and antimicrobial resistance. Therapy should be tailored based on the antimicrobial sensitivity.

Cancer recurrence or secondary cancers should always be considered, and there should be a low index of suspicion for doing a biopsy. Radiation therapy causes damage to DNA and can cause cell mutation and carcinogenesis.

Not all soft tissue radionecrosis is easily identified on clinical exam, and further imagining studies or procedures should be done to do adequate workup of the patient’s symptoms. For example, hemorrhagic cystitis or proctitis can be a delayed effect of radiation therapy for pelvic cancers. Evaluation of hemorrhagic cystitis and proctitis will often require cystoscopy or colonoscopy for diagnosis and further treatment. A biopsy can be done during such procedures to confirm the diagnosis and help to look for cancer recurrence or secondary cancers. Often the diagnosis can be confirmed by CT exam or MRI scanning. Demyelination of the spinal cord in the setting of delayed effects of radiation therapy and electrical pains into the lower extremity with the extension of the spine can be characteristic of soft tissue radionecrosis of the spine.