**Aim:**

- Provide good rehabilitation with proper refractive correction

- Prevention of amblyopia

- Prevention of development of strabismus

- Prevention of recurrent eyelid infection and conjunctivitis

**1. Optical correction:**Biconvex lenses (plus) are recommended to converge the light rays on the neurosensory retina. Basic principles of prescribing glasses are:

- The amount of total hyperopia should always be elicited by cycloplegic retinoscopy, especially in children.

- Symptomatic patients and young children should always be treated with proper refractive correction.

- Young children should be prescribed full hyperopic correction gradual tapering during school age.

- The maximum accepted plus power with a clear vision (20/20) should be prescribed.

- A gradual increase in hyperopic correction from the comfortably accepted power in school-aged children may be necessary as full correction may produce blurring at distant. A short course of cycloplegic agents may improve the acceptance of hyperopic correction.

- Accommodative convergence should be treated with full hyperopic correction. Developing/developed amblyopia should undergo a thorough evaluation, and full hyperopic correction with occlusion therapy should be prescribed.

- Hyperopic children should have a reevaluation every 3 to 6 months.

**American Academy of Ophthalmology (AAO)**has given a guideline about when to prescribe glasses in hyperopia in young children.

Dependent factors are

- Iso-metropia (similar refractive error in both eyes)

- Anisometropia (dis-similar errors of refraction between eyes)

- Presence/absence of strabismus.

Isoametropic eyes without tropia should be prescribed glasses if the hyperopia is at least:

- Age under 1-year: +6D

- Age of 1-year to less than 2 years: +5D

- Age of 2-year to less than 3 years: +4.50D

- Age of 3-year to less than 4 years: +3.50D

Cases having hyperopic iso-metropia with esotropia need to be prescribed glasses when the minimum refraction is at least:

- Age less than 2 years: +2D

- Age of 2-year to less than 4 years: +1.50D

Hyperopic anisometropia without strabismus should be corrected if it is at least:

- Age under 1-year: +2.50D

- Age of 1-year to less than 2 years: +2D

- Age of 2-year to less than 4 years: +1.50D

Glasses and contact lenses can be used as rehabilitation devices. Contact lenses are usually prescribed in cases of unilateral hyperopia or a large difference in hyperopia between eyes.

**2. Surgical treatment:**Preoperative stable refraction (cycloplegic and manifest)

- Slit-lamp biomicroscopy: to rule out allergic blepharoconjunctivitis and dry eye syndromes

- Refraction testing (cycloplegic and manual) both distant and near vision

- Corneal thickness and topography, wavefront analysis

- Intraocular pressure

- Pupil size estimation in dark and mesopic conditions

- Fundoscopy

So, all the investigations are of utmost importance before any sort of kerato-refractive surgery.

- **Incisional refractive procedure;**
- **Hexagonal keratotomy:**It was done in the past to treat low to moderate degrees of hyperopia previously.
- **Lamellar refractive procedure: hyperopic keratomileusis of Barraquer:**It is of historical importance and basis of modern laser in-situ keratomileusis (LASIK) procedure.

- **Laser-based refractive procedures:******
- **Thermal laser keratoplasty:**Thallium-holmium-chromium (THC): yttrium aluminum garnet (YAG) laser is used to create a contraction of the collagen matrix of the stroma of the cornea in eight areas of the optical zone with pulse energies of 159-199 milli-joule.

Currently, this procedure has approval for a temporary reduction of hyperopia of +0.75 to +2.50 diopters with  ≤ +/- 0.75 diopters of astigmatism by the United States Food and Drug Administration (USFDA). The patients should be of at least 40 years of age. The refraction should be documented to be stable for the prior six months (change of  ≤ 0.50D in spherical and cylindrical components of the manifest refraction).

- **Hyperopic photorefractive keratectomy (PRK):**It's a lengthy procedure by which a large burn is created with an excited dimer (excimer) laser. The cornea becomes dry and dehydrated, and epithelial healing is delayed.

- **Hyperopic LASIK:**Patient selection depends on stable preoperative refractions, corneal thickness, intraocular pressure, pupil size, fundoscopy, and corneal topography. It can correct up to 6 diopters of hyperopia. The procedure is performed under topical anesthesia, and it can also be performed with pilocarpine-induced miosis on same day cycloplegia.

Contraindications include chronic eye or corneal diseases, systemic illness, unstable refraction, dry eyes, contact lens intolerance, chronic pain syndromes, pregnancy, and lactation.

Complications of LASIK include refractive regression, postoperative dry eyes, halos during night driving, and diminished corneal sensations.Pseudomonas, Mycobacterium chelonae) keratitis, noninfectious (diffuse lamellar) keratitis, and interface fluid are not uncommon.

- **Hyperopic laser subepithelial keratomileusis (LASEK):**Here, with the help of 20% ethyl alcohol for 60 seconds, the epithelium of the cornea is loosened and separated. Then stromal ablation is performed by the excimer laser. Sometimes it is augmented by 0.02% mitomycin c after corneal ablation.****

- **Hyperopic epiploic LASIK (EPI-LASIK):**It is similar to LASEK, but here epikeratome is used to raise the epithelial flap, not alcohol. So, alcohol-related toxicities are negated.

- **Hyperopic customized-LASIK (C-LASIK):**It is either topography or wavefront-guided ablation procedure to correct associated astigmatism and aberrations, with wavefront-guided procedures having better contrast sensitivity and less glare.

- **Other refractive procedures:**
- **Conductive keratoplasty (CK):**USFDA approved this for the treatment of mild-moderate hyperopia with minimal astigmatism for a temporary basis. After two years, it was approved for presbyopia with an endpoint of -1.00 to -2.00 diopters for the nondominant eye. It is a radiofrequency energy-based procedure to create shrinkage of stromal collagen. It increases the converging power of the cornea.
- **Small incision lenticule extraction (SMILE):**It is the recent advancement in the management of hyperopia. It was first performed in donor eyes where concave lenticule extraction was performed, and interlamellar concave gap air bubbles were noted.

- **Intraocular Procedures:**Phakic intraocular lenses**refractive lens exchange**is another option for a high degree of hyperopia or where corneal procedures are contraindicated and associated with cataract cases.

- **Management of angle-closure related to hyperopia:**Hyperopia is one of the risk factors of angle-closure disease.****