Current management of a vestibular migraine consists of conventional migraine management as there is currently no accepted specific treatment for this disease.

Sargent’s experience suggests that triptan therapy is rarely of benefit in the acute treatment of a vestibular migraine despite small reports suggesting modest benefit in acute vertigo attacks.

Current recommendations for vestibular migraine prevention include lifestyle changes such as avoidance of dietary, behavioral, or sleep hygiene triggers.

A 2017 randomized controlled trial by Liu, et al. demonstrated the efficacy and safety of venlafaxine, flunarizine, and valproic acid in the prophylaxis of vestibular migraine. Each treatment demonstrated unique treatment properties such as venlafaxine which showed an advantage in the treatment of emotional symptoms. Venlafaxine and valproic acid also were shown to be preferable to flunarizine in decreasing the frequency of vertiginous attacks. Valproic acid seemed to be less effective than venlafaxine and flunarizine in decreasing vertigo severity.

The American Headache Society, American Academy of Neurology recommends the following therapies as possibilities for an episodic migraine: butterbur, divalproate, metoprolol, propranolol, timolol, and topiramate.

Physiotherapy may play a role in treating some of the associated sequelae of vestibular migraine which include anxiety, visual dependence, and/or loss of confidence.

Those with interictal symptoms of imbalance could consider vestibular rehabilitation therapy as a potential treatment modality.

Currently, no surgical management is recommended for vestibular migraine and may result in worsening of illness is associated with Meniere syndrome (Wise SR & Sargent EW; presentation 2013).