No specific treatment is needed for most patients with acute, uncomplicated HAV infection beyond supportive care. Complete recovery from symptoms may take several weeks to months. In the rare case of fulminant hepatitis from HAV infection, liver transplantation may be a life-saving measure. Extrahepatic complications are managed routinely.

According to the WHO, the most effective way to prevent HAV infection is to improve sanitation, food safety, and immunization practices. In the United States, vaccination against hepatitis A is available as inactivated, single-antigen vaccines (HAVRIX and VAQTA) or in combination with hepatitis B (TWINRIX). The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention recommends vaccination for children 12 months or older, travelers to endemic countries, gays, illegal drug users, individuals with occupational risk exposure, persons with clotting factor disorders or chronic liver disease. Standard adult dosing recommends administration of two doses of the vaccine 6 to 12 months apart. These vaccines are highly efficacious were seroconversion rates approaching 100%.

Until more recently, immunoglobulin was the only treatment for post-exposure prophylaxis again HAV. However, animal studies and clinical trials demonstrated the efficacy of post-exposure immunization with an inactivated HAV vaccine has led the CDC to recommend the vaccine instead of immunoglobulin for exposure to HAV in healthy individuals aged 1 to 40 years. For individuals 41 years and older, immunoglobulin administration is preferred due to the risk of more severe clinical presentation and limited evidence of vaccine efficacy in this age group. Children less than 12 months, individuals with chronic liver disease, and immunocompromised persons should also receive immunoglobulin.