Due to their negative inotropic and chronotropic actions, beta-adrenergic receptor antagonists (e.g., carvedilol and metoprolol) are typically indicated in individuals with chronic cardiovascular disease (hypertension, coronary artery disease, congestive heart failure) with a significant reduction in mortality.

The FDA-approved indication for labetalol is the treatment of arterial hypertension, which ranges from acute hypertensive crises (urgent/emergency) to stable chronic hypertension. Labetalol in clinical practice has several common off-label uses that include acute hypertension in pregnancy and hypertension associated with acute ischemic stroke, and intracranial hemorrhage, including subarachnoid hemorrhage. Today, labetalol is usually reserved for the acute management of hypertensive crises.

Labetalol is often chosen as treatment of acute hypertension by anesthesia providers peri-operatively as it produces a dose-related decrease in blood pressure without reflex tachycardia without significant reduction in heart rate. These effects are produced through a mixture of its alpha- and beta-blocking effects. The hemodynamic effects of labetalol are variable, with small, insignificant changes in cardiac output seen in some studies and small decreases in total peripheral vascular resistance. This hemodynamic profile is favorable in the perioperative setting when the anesthesia provider desires rapid reduction of blood pressure without the reflex tachycardia, which can potentially further compromise a patient's hemodynamics under general anesthesia. Similarly, labetalol is a common anti-hypertensive given in the post-anesthesia care unit, again due to its HR sparing effects and better control of blood pressure.

Labetalol is one of the most commonly used anti-hypertensives medications used for the treatment of hypertension during pregnancy. Hypertension during pregnancy is an increasingly common and a leading cause of maternal mortality and morbidity worldwide.  Severe hypertension requires prompt treatment with rapid-acting antihypertensive agents such as labetalol to avoid stroke and placental abruption. Previously, intravenous hydralazine was utilized as a first-line drug for this purpose, although there is a growing experience with other agents, including intravenous labetalol and oral nifedipine. There appears to be a growing concern about the neonatal effects of hydralazine. Treatment aims to lower blood pressure during pregnancy into the mild range (less than 160/100 mm Hg), reduce the risk of stroke and other maternal cardiovascular complications.

Due to the alpha1-receptor antagonistic activity of labetalol, blood pressure is lowered more in the standing than in the supine position, but this can lead to symptoms of postural hypotension. When deciding to administer intravenous labetalol, the postural component needs to be considered when positioning the patient for treatment. Also, the patient should not be allowed to move to an erect position unmonitored until their ability to do so safely is established.