Once the diagnosis of AAD is confirmed or highly suspected, urgent cardiothoracic or vascular surgery consultation should be obtained, regardless of the dissection location. Acute dissections involving the ascending aorta are considered surgical emergencies. The patient should have an arterial line and central venous catheter for monitoring. A foley should be inserted to assess urine output.

Concurrently commence medical therapy including providing adequate analgesia (morphine is the preferred analgesic, as it decreases sympathetic output as well) and administering a short-acting IV beta-blockers aiming for a heart rate of ~60 bpm (reductions in heart rate and blood pressure reduces aortic wall tension and limit the extent of dissection). In patients with contraindications to b-blockade non-dihydropyridine calcium channel blockers can be used for rate control.  If the systolic blood pressure remains elevated, nitroprusside can be added to achieve a systolic blood pressure goal of 100 to 120 mmHg (maintain blood pressure in this range as long as there is no compromise of mentation or urine output). Other agents that can be used to lower blood pressure include esmolol, labetalol, or diltiazem. B-blockers should be used with caution in the settings of acute aortic regurgitation because they block compensatory tachycardia.

In hypotensive patients, intravenous fluids administration is a reasonable first approach. Vasopressors can be added, if needed, to maintain adequate perfusion but may cause further false lumen propagation. Inotropic agents should be avoided as they are likely to increase the force and rate of ventricular contraction and therefore worsen aortic wall stress.

Surgical therapy for type A AAD involves excision of the intimal tear, obliteration of entry into the false lumen proximally, and reconstitution of the aorta with the interposition of a synthetic vascular graft. Surgical intervention for type B AAD tends to be reserved for patients who have a complicated course. Endovascular stent-grafting (TEVAR) has been employed as a less invasive alternative to surgery, primarily for patients with complicated type B dissections.

For AAD involving the ascending aorta, the aorta has to be replaced and the valve has to be assessed. In most cases, the aortic valve may also have to be excised and replaced with a prosthetic valve. Dissections involving the descending aorta are complex and there is a risk of paraplegia. The most difficult dissections are those that involve the aortic arch. Surgical mortality varies from 5-20%. Even those who survive have a long recovery.

Because of the high surgical mortality, today endovascular procedures are being performed for AAD. Endovascular stent placement is associated with significantly lower morbidity compared to surgery but the key is patient selection.