In incomplete or nondisplaced fractures, it is necessary to investigate painful spots and the presence of small petechiae. Suspecting possible associated lesions is important. The medial aspect of the elbow (LCI), the interosseous membrane, and the distal ulnar radius joint should be evaluated, especially in complex cases. When there is a doubt as to the size and displacement of the fragment, it is useful to test with a local anesthetic injection to determine if it causes mechanical blockages, which indicates the need for surgical treatment.

**Associated Injuries**

Most complex injuries have been associated with lateral and medial ligaments injuries and interosseous membrane (Essex Lopresti). It is useful to make the radius climbing and descending in the surgery and to identify it with the intensifier climbing at elbow level and with the distal radioulnar joint to diagnose this type of injury. Capitulum, coronoid, and olecranon are among the most frequent related fractures.

Assessing the elbow, shoulder, and wrist stability is helpful.

**Images**

Anteroposterior and lateral x-rays are useful. If there is pain in the wrist and comminuted fractures, it is useful to request x-rays to compare them. CT scans ease planning in complex cases.

**Classification**

Mason is a widely-used classification system. Type 1 is a nondisplaced fracture. Type 2 is displaced with one fragment fracture. Type 3 is a comminuted fracture.  Johnston suggests Type 4to be any fracture with elbow luxation. Lately, Morrey has included the classical description of joint fractures, those of the neck,  quantifying them to 30% approximately and displacements between 2 mm.

Hotchkiss modifies the types mentioned above with ones by therapeutic criteria. Type 1 fractures are nondisplaced or mínimum displaced fractures (below 2 mm). Type 2 fractures have a partial head displacement that blocks the pronation and supination, and repairable with internal fixation. Type 3 injuries are nonrepairable fractures with internal fixation.