# Continuing Education Activity

Acute infectious gastroenteritis is a common illness seen around the world, and most cases are caused by viral pathogens. The acute diarrheal disease is generally self-limited. In the United States, infectious gastroenteritis can lead to significant morbidity, especially for young or elderly patients, and in underdeveloped countries, these diseases are a significant cause of death, especially in infants. According to the Centers for Disease Control, viral gastroenteritis infections account for over 200,000 childhood deaths per year worldwide. Viral gastroenteritis commonly causes nausea, vomiting, diarrhea, anorexia, weight loss, and dehydration. Isolated cases can occur, but viral gastroenteritis more commonly occurs in outbreaks within close communities such as daycare centers, nursing facilities, and cruise ships. This activity examines when this condition should be considered on differential diagnosis and how to properly evaluate it. This activity highlights the role of the interprofessional team in caring for patients with this condition.

**Objectives:**
- Describe the pathophysiology of viral gastroenteritis.
- Identify the most common causes of acute viral gastroenteritis.
- Describe the typical historical and physical exam features of acute viral gastroenteritis.
- Explain the importance of collaboration between interprofessional teams to help select which patients can be managed on an outpatient basis versus which patients require inpatient management for acute viral gastroenteritis.

# Introduction

Acute infectious gastroenteritis is a common illness seen around the world. Viral pathogens cause most of these cases. Acute diarrheal disease is generally self-limiting in industrialized nations but can have significant morbidity for young and elderly patients. In underdeveloped countries, viral diarrheal diseases are a significant cause of death, especially in infants.

# Etiology

Several different viruses including rotavirus, norovirus, adenovirus, and astroviruses account for most cases of acute viral gastroenteritis. Most are transmitted via the fecal-oral route, including contaminated food and water. Transmission has also been shown to occur via fomites, vomitus, and possibly airborne methods. Norovirus is more resistant to chlorine and ethanol inactivation than other viruses.

**Rotavirus**

Rotavirus is a double-stranded RNA virus named for the wheel-like appearance of its viral capsid on an electron micrograph. Rotavirus infection is universal among humans, and almost all children acquire antibodies by age 3

Throughout recorded history, rotavirus has been the leading cause of episodic infantile illness worldwide. However, in 2006 an oral vaccine was introduced. Since the introduction and utilization of this vaccine, the United States and many other industrialized countries have seen a sharp decline in the number and severity of gastroenteritis cases caused by rotavirus. Before 2006, it was estimated that over 3.5 million infants were affected annually in the United States and that rotavirus led to 440,000 deaths annually worldwide in children less than five years old

**Norovirus**

Norovirus is a single-stranded RNA member of the calicivirus family

Norovirus presents most commonly with abdominal cramps and nausea followed by vomiting and/or diarrhea. Onset can be abrupt. Symptoms also include myalgias, malaise, and low-grade fevers up to 39 C. Diarrhea is non-bloody and can consist of multiple bowel movements per day. The illness is self-limiting, and most patients have recovered in 72 hours without sequelae

Norovirus infection causes histopathologic changes in the jejunum of blunted villi with intact mucosa

Since the advent of the rotavirus vaccine, norovirus has become the most common cause of viral gastroenteritis in the United States, responsible for 19 to 21 million total illnesses per year. It is estimated to cause 56,000-71,000 hospitalizations and 570-800 deaths annually in the United States

Other viral causes of acute viral gastroenteritis include adenovirus, Sapovirus, and astrovirus

# Epidemiology

The most frequent cause of diarrheal disease worldwide is acute viral gastroenteritis. Men and women are affected equally. Norovirus is the most common viral cause. It is responsible for 90% of epidemic diarrheal cases worldwide and approximately 50% of all viral gastroenteritis cases. It accounts for 19 to 21 million cases of diarrheal illness annually in the United States alone. Norovirus causes 50% of all foodborne diarrheal outbreaks

# Pathophysiology

The clinical manifestations of viral gastroenteritis are due to the effects that the viruses, along with specific cytotoxins, have on the enterocytes of the intestine. The virus uses the enterocyte to replicate, leading to interference with brush border enzyme production, which in turn leads to malabsorption and osmotic diarrhea

# History and Physical

Acute gastroenteritis is defined by loose or watery diarrhea that consists of 3 or more bowel movements in a day. Other symptoms may include nausea, vomiting, fever, or abdominal pain

Upon physical exam, it is important to address any abnormal vital signs. Mild fever is common in viral gastroenteritis, but high fever (greater than 39 C) should trigger concern for causes that are not viral in origin. Additionally, tachycardia and tachypnea may be present due to fever and dehydration. An assessment for dehydration is of the utmost importance, especially in patients who demonstrate extremes of age, chronic illness, or immunosuppression. These patient groups are at a much higher risk for severe complications due to dehydration. Another physical exam finding may include mild, diffuse abdominal tenderness. Significant tenderness to palpation, guarding, rebound, or point-specific tenderness should lead the clinician to consider other causes of symptomatology.

# Evaluation

Due to the lack of readily available viral testing capabilities in most clinics and emergency departments, acute viral gastroenteritis is a clinical diagnosis. Therefore, patients who appear clinically well-hydrated and who lack risk factors for severe disease do not necessarily warrant further testing. Diagnostics are used to help rule out other causes of the patient’s symptoms. Complete blood counts may reveal a mild leukocytosis in a patient with viral gastroenteritis. Other serum inflammatory markers may also show mild elevation. Patients who are suffering from significant dehydration may demonstrate hemoconcentration on complete blood count testing as well as electrolyte disturbances on chemistry panels. Dehydration may also present as acute kidney injury, evidenced by changes in the BUN and creatinine on a chemistry panel.

Imaging studies of the abdomen most often appear normal. CT scans may reveal mild, diffuse colonic wall thickening or other inflammatory changes of the bowel. However, there are no specific findings, and CT scanning should be performed to rule out other, more severe etiologies. Stool studies may be obtained, but readily available laboratory testing assays assess only for bacterial causes and do not diagnose specific viral causes. Patients with bloody stool, high fever, severe abdominal pain, or severe dehydration warrant stool studies as these symptoms are not consistent with simple viral gastroenteritis.

# Treatment / Management

The treatment of viral gastroenteritis is based on symptomatic support

Debate exists over antidiarrheal medication usage. Medications such as diphenoxylate/atropine or loperamide are not recommended in patients who are 65 or older. Younger patients may benefit from antimotility medications

Most patients who present to outpatient clinics or the emergency department with acute viral gastroenteritis can be discharged home safely. Adults often benefit from antiemetic medications at home although home antiemetic medication is not recommended in young children. Patients who may benefit from hospital observation or admission are those that demonstrate signs or symptoms of dehydration, intractable vomiting, severe electrolyte disturbances, significant renal failure, severe abdominal pain, or pregnancy.

# Differential Diagnosis

Although acute viral gastroenteritis is generally a self-limiting illness in the industrialized world, it is essential for a clinician to be aware of and rule out other, more severe causes of the patient’s symptoms. Food poisoning due to bacterial toxins frequently causes symptoms very similar to viral gastroenteritis, though the treatment for food poisoning often parallels that of viral gastroenteritis. Bacterial and protozoal causes of gastroenteritis can potentially mimic symptoms of viral gastroenteritis but often require a different treatment approach and may carry higher morbidity potential. Pathogens such as Salmonella, Escherichia coli, Shigella, Campylobacter, Giardia lamblia, and Clostridium difficile may be potential causes in those patients who present with atypical symptoms of viral gastroenteritis. Other acute abdominal pathology including but not limited to acute appendicitis, diverticulitis, inflammatory bowel disease, bowel obstruction, or cholecystitis needs to be investigated if the patient’s history or physical exam warrants it. Many cases of missed abdominal pathology are initially diagnosed as viral gastroenteritis. Viral upper respiratory illnesses and certain types of bacterial pneumonia may also present with symptoms similar to that of viral gastroenteritis.

# Prognosis

The prognosis in most cases is very good. The condition is self-limited in most cases. However, it is vital that the patient continue to maintain oral hydration even f he or she does not seek medical care. Mortality does occur at extremes of age and in immunosuppressed individuals. Today, Calciviruses are associated with more deaths than rotaviruses. Noroviruses have been involved in many nursing home outbreaks and the diarrhea is often severe. Newer strains of norovirus have evolved and continue to be more virulent.

# Enhancing Healthcare Team Outcomes

Many patients with gastroenteritis present to the emergency department. However, because there are so many causes of gastroenteritis, the emergency department physician, nurse practitioner, and internist need to rule out other serious disorders first become making a diagnosis of viral gastroenteritis, which is a clinical diagnosis aided with laboratory data. Food poisoning due to bacterial toxins frequently causes symptoms very similar to viral gastroenteritis, though the treatment for food poisoning often parallels that of viral gastroenteritis. Bacterial and protozoal causes of gastroenteritis can potentially mimic symptoms of viral gastroenteritis but often require a different treatment approach and may carry higher morbidity potential.

There is generally no immunity to viruses causing gastroenteritis and thus, multiple infections in the first few years of life are not uncommon. Today, clinicians should educate parents about the rotavirus vaccine which does provide good immunity. However, at the same time, nurses should educate caregivers on proper hygiene and handwashing to prevent fecal-oral transmission. During an epidemic, the infectious disease nurse should ensure that the family has access to clean water and proper sanitation facilities.

Primary care clinicians need to know that if there is any doubt about the diagnosis, the infectious disease expert should be consulted before discharging the patient. Most patients with viral gastroenteritis improve with supportive measures including hydration and bowel rest.