The natural history of acquired untreated syphilis has been divided into four stages: primary syphilis, secondary syphilis, latent syphilis, and tertiary syphilis. Ocular manifestations can occur at any stage of the disease with varied presentations.

In clinical practice, it is important to note that many patients who present with ocular signs of syphilis do not necessarily have the systemic signs of syphilis. The ocular symptoms in secondary syphilis occur as late as 6 months after the initial infection when many of the systemic manifestations have already resolved. Nearly 50 percent of patients with ocular manifestations in tertiary syphilis have associated systemic signs of the disease.

The common presentations at different stages are discussed below.

**Primary Syphilis**

As mentioned earlier, lesions of primary syphilis occur due to the direct inoculation of T. pallidum at the local site. Ocular manifestations of primary syphilis are limited to chancres of the eyelid and the conjunctiva due to direct contact with secretions or from contaminated fingers.

**Secondary Syphilis**

If untreated, primary syphilis progresses to secondary syphilis in 4 to 10 weeks. A generalized maculopapular or pustular rash is characteristic of secondary syphilis and may involve palms of the hands, soles of the feet, and/or trunk. The rash may involve the eyelids and can lead to blepharitis and madarosis. Conjunctivitis, episcleritis, scleritis, keratitis, iridocyclitis with or without iris nodules have all been reported in secondary syphilis.

- Anterior uveitis is usually unilateral, to begin with, and can be either granulomatous or non-granulomatous type. Iris roseolae are relatively specific for syphilis but are rarely observed. They are described as dilated vascular tufts in the middle third of the iris surface and are easily identified on slit-lamp biomicroscopy.

- Posterior segment involvement usually occurs in late secondary syphilis. Vitritis, necrotizing retinitis, chorioretinitis, retinal vasculitis, and optic neuritis have been reported to occur in secondary syphilis.

- Acute posterior placoid chorioretinopathy (APPC) is a characteristic lesion of syphilis and is frequently seen in patients with secondary and late latent syphilis. It presents as one or more yellowish placoid like retinochoroidal lesions that are typically located in the macular region. The margin of the lesion is usually round and more prominent. This lesion was originally described by Donald Gass and may result from an infection with T. pallidum of the RPE layer in the posterior pole. However, many believe that the lesion occurs as a consequence of indirect immune-mediated hypersensitivity.

- Acute meningitis is reported in 1% to 2% of patients with secondary syphilis, which can cause increased intracranial pressure, and the patient may present with papilledema. Other neuro-ophthalmic manifestations of secondary syphilis include optic neuritis, optic neuropathy, and Argyll Robertson pupil.

Tertiary Syphilis: The gumma is a chronic granulomatous lesion that heals with scarring and is a typical lesion of tertiary syphilis. Gummas commonly develop in the skin and can involve the eyelids. Gummatous dacryoadenitis have also been reported.

Congenital syphilis: The most common manifestation of congenital syphilis is bilateral interstitial keratitis. Pigmentary retinitis and secondary glaucoma can also occur as a result of congenital syphilitic keratouveitis.