The American College of Obstetrics and Gynecology recommends that all women of reproductive age group irrespective of ethnicity should be offered preconception and prenatal CF carrier screening as a routine part of obstetric care.

Antenatal diagnosis of meconium ileus is possible based on sonographic features suggesting hyperechoic masses (inspissated meconium in the terminal ileum), dilated bowel, and non-visualization of the gallbladder. The diagnosis then groups according to the risk factors associated. Sonographic features of MI seen on routine prenatal ultrasound in a mother with a negative CF carrier screen is low risk while those seen in parents who are known CF carriers and all pregnancies following the birth of a CF-affected child are considered high risk.

In the second and third trimesters, fetal meconium is normally hypoechoic or isoechoic to adjacent abdominal structures, while MI presents as a hyperechoic mass that has a sonographic density greater than that of bone or liver. After detecting a hyperechoic bowel on ultrasound, the fetus requires a followup ultrasound every 6 weeks or less. Also, a perinatologist consultation is recommended so that the planned delivery can be at a tertiary care center that has an experienced neonatal intensive care unit (NICU) team along with a pediatric surgeon.

An infant that presents with bilious emesis is assumed to have a small bowel obstruction (SBO). The determination of etiology is by ordering both flat and upright abdominal films. In MI, dilated loops of bowel with or without air-fluid levels are present on the abdominal films. When meconium mixes with swallowed air, the classic “soap-bubble” sign can show in the distal small intestine. If there has been a contained or previously open intestinal perforation, abdominal calcifications may also be present. In the case of complete obstruction, air will be absent in the rectum.

A diagnostic contrast enema should be ordered in a stable infant to detect a microcolon due to disuse below the obstruction in the terminal ileum. It also helps to identify malrotation by localizing the cecum’s position. If malrotation is suspected, an upper gastrointestinal series needs to be done to confirm the diagnosis and to better evaluate for midgut volvulus. Also, a pediatric surgeon should be consulted to confirm the diagnosis.

If the infant is hemodynamically unstable or has a distended abdomen with peritoneal signs on physical exam, a complex MI should be suspected, and the infant should immediately get transferred to the operating room.

The infant should also have a sweat test to confirm or rule out the diagnosis of cystic fibrosis (CF). Since MI in CF patients usually correlates with pancreatic insufficiency, a fecal elastase test should also be performed to evaluate pancreatic function.