Prosthetic valve endocarditis is associated with high morbidity and mortality. A comprehensive health care team is required to be cautious in the workup and treatment of this disease.

Treatment of PVE needs to be started early, in an inpatient setting, and monitored by an interdisciplinary team of physicians, nurses, and pharmacists to assure the appropriate treatment and prevent complications. As treatment is usually extended over six to eight weeks, patients will complete treatment in an outpatient setting, at short term nursing facility, or home with home IV infusion.

When a patient presents with suspected PVE, the physician starts the empiric antibiotics treatment, initiates the appropriate workup for confirmation of diagnosis, and identifies the causative organism. Antibiotics should be tailored to target the organism as per susceptibility results. Usually, physicians follow the necessary laboratory testing to prevent any possible renal or liver toxicity and monitor for signs or symptoms of PVE related complications. The pharmacist has to check the antibiotics regimen, monitor for any possible drug to drug interaction, and monitor any possible toxicity. Nurses are responsible for appropriately administering the medications and monitoring for any possible side effects during the hospital stay.

After discharge from the hospital, the team is responsible for appropriate follow-up on the patient’s adherence to treatment and monitoring possible side effects. The Doctor has to order appropriate laboratory tests to monitor possible toxicity and monitor drug levels in coordination with the pharmacist. The home visiting nurse will assure the adherence, will evaluated for appropriate intravenous administration of antibiotics, monitor the IV line side, monitor for any adverse reactions, and evaluate the patient for any possible signs or symptoms of PVE related complications.

If medication compliance was a concern for a certain patient, both pharmacists and nurses should inform the clinician. This also includes drug adverse reactions or changes in a household environment. This comprehensive interprofessional team effort is needed to ensure high-quality patient care and to have the maximum benefits of the regimen.