UBC:

Plain Radiograph: Well marginated, metaphyseal, juxtaepiphyseal, central cystic, purely lytic, moderately expansile lesion along the long axis of the long bone are usually diagnostic of UBC. The cyst never causes a cortical breach; prominent inner wall cortical ridges may give it the multiloculated appearance. There is no periosteal reaction. In case of fracture, there may be a small cortical fragment on the floor of cyst called a fallen fragment sign, which is considered pathognomonic of UBC with a fracture. UBC starts as a metaphyseal lesion, abutting the epiphysis in children. With time it moves into diaphysis. The lesion is considered as active when it is within 1 cm of the physis, and stable when closer to the diaphysis.

CT: shows thick-walled cysts with pseudoseptations. It is useful in assessing the fracture risk of cysts and imaging of adjacent involved structures.

MRI: shows T2 hyperintense cysts and gadolinium enhancement of cyst wall and septa.

Bone scintigraphy and positron emission tomography are inconclusive.

Cystography: is done to study venous drainage within the cyst.

ABC:

Primary Diagnosis: Suspect ABC on clinical examination and imaging:

Imaging characteristics: Radiograph reveals an expansile lytic, eccentric metaphyseal lesion, that remains contained by a thin cortical wall. The cyst can be well-marginated or mildly permeative mimicking malignancy. A smooth periosteal reaction usually covers the cyst. Bone scan shows peripheral tracer uptake and a central area of decreased uptake called "doughnut sign."

CT and MRI further help in delineating cyst characteristics, soft tissue involvement, and aggressiveness of a tumor. CT is particularly useful in delineating cysts in areas like spine and pelvis. When differentiating UBC and ABC on MRI, the presence of the double density fluid and intralesional septations indicates ABC. Imaging further helps in planning surgical management.

Diagnosis: Biopsy should take place in all cases for confirmation