**History**

Detailed history taking and a thorough physical exam are essential to rule out the different causes of rectal bleeding, such as anal fissure, rectal prolapse, fistulas, inflammatory bowel disease, and neoplasia.

A comprehensive review of the patient's comorbidities and medications is warranted. Special attention should be given to comorbidities that may contribute to bleeding tendencies or those that require the patient to take anticoagulants such as an artificial heart valve or atrial fibrillation. With regards to medications, special attention should be given to NSAIDs, anticoagulants, and antiplatelet agents as possible contributing factors to rectal bleeding.

Anal pain associated with defecation may suggest anal fissures. A change in bowel habits, as well as significant weight loss in older patients, may hint at a malignancy.

The most common cause of rectal bleeding in the middle-aged and older population is hemorrhoids, which are often asymptomatic. They may be described as soft, painless protrusions in the anal canal. In essence, there is a downward displacement of the hemorrhoidal cushions, which causes venous dilatation and, hence, symptoms.

**Physical Exam**

The physical exam should begin with an assessment of hemodynamic status via the measurement of vital signs. Attention should be paid to low blood pressure, tachycardia, and/or a high respiratory rate, as these may indicate hemodynamic instability and necessitate rapid escalation of care.

A focused exam for lower GI bleeding should include an abdominal exam with assessment for pain, masses, distention, and signs of cirrhosis, which might hint toward rectal varices. Perineum inspection should be carried out with the patient lying in the left lateral decubitus position under a light source to evaluate for old blood, thrombosed vessels, prolapsing hemorrhoids, fissures, or protruding masses.

The rectal exam should follow inspection of the anus for any skin tags protruding, sentinel piles, fissures, protruding piles, or any other apparent abnormalities that could be causing the bleed. A rectal exam can be uncomfortable and painful for patients, particularly in the case of acute fissures. In this case, inspection, while gently spreading the buttocks, helps in visualizing most anal fissures and is sufficient for diagnosis. A digital rectal exam should be done to assess for masses and internal hemorrhoids and to obtain stool for a fecal occult blood test (FOBT). Gross blood may also be visible after the exam. The digital rectal exam is contraindicated in immunocompromised patients, given the possibility of introducing pathogens, which could potentially cause life-threatening infections.