**Determining Which Patients To Counsel**

Before initiating a conversation about weight, the first step is determining which patients are overweight or obese. Body mass index (BMI) and waist circumference are standard methods to screen for excess weight. BMI is easy to perform in most clinical settings and is often calculated as part of the vital signs in the electronic medical record. BMI is a screening tool used to identify patients who would benefit most from weight counseling and is a reliable determinant of adiposity-related health risks. Although it is a helpful tool, BMI must be used in combination with examining the patient and evaluating their muscle mass and body habitus. In addition, measuring a patient's BMI at every visit will help practitioners identify significant changes in body weight that may coincide with the development of other chronic diseases.

Waist circumference is a screening tool that measures abdominal (central) fat and is a surrogate marker for cardiometabolic health.

**BMI Criteria for Underweight, Normal Weight, Overweight and Obese**

- Overweight (25.0–29.9 kg/m^2)

- Obesity class I (30.0–34.9 kg/m^2)

- Obesity class II (35.0–39.0 kg/m^2)

- Obesity class III (≥40.0 kg/m^2)

**Waist Circumference Criteria for Increased Cardiovascular Risk**

- Men, ≥102 cm

- Women, ≥88 cm

Waist circumference measurements are unnecessary for patients with BMIs ≥35.0 kg/m^2.

**Limitations in BMI**

BMI is less accurate for assessing healthy weight in some groups because it does not distinguish the weight proportion due to fat or muscle. BMI is, therefore, less accurate in certain populations, including certain ethnic groups (such as South Asian, Chinese, and Japanese population groups), weight-lifters, pregnant women, the elderly, people with a physical disability, people with eating disorders, people under 18 years of age, and those with extreme obesity. Among Asians, lower BMI cut-offs for overweight (≥23.0 kg/m^2) and obese (≥27.0 kg/m^2) are utilized to account for increased health risks.