# Continuing Education Activity

Many diseases and conditions list pain as a component of their presentation; as a result, pain management is of great importance to clinicians and patients alike. Acetaminophen (APAP - also known as paracetamol in many countries) is a non-opioid analgesic and antipyretic agent used to treat pain and fever. It is used as a single agent for mild to moderate pain and combined with an opioid analgesic for severe pain. This activity outlines the use, dosing, indications, contraindications, toxicity, and toxicity management of acetaminophen and highlights the role of the interprofessional team in caring for patients who take acetaminophen.

**Objectives:**
- Identify the indications for acetaminophen use.
- Describe the potential toxicity of acetaminophen.
- Explain how to monitor for acetaminophen toxicity. 
- Review interprofessional team strategies for improving care coordination so that acetaminophen therapy is optimized as a useful tool to improve patient outcomes in pain management.

# Indications

Acetaminophen (APAP) is a non-opioid analgesic and antipyretic agent used to treat pain and fever. Clinicians can use it for their patients as a single agent for mild to moderate pain and in combination with an opioid analgesic for severe pain.

# Mechanism of Action

Acetaminophen, also called N-**a**cetyl**p**ara-**a**mino**p**henol (APAP) or paracetamol, is one of the most widely used over-the-counter analgesic and antipyretic agents.

Regardless, the reduction of the COX pathway activity by acetaminophen is thought to inhibit the synthesis of prostaglandins in the central nervous system, leading to its analgesic and antipyretic effects. The analgesic properties may be due to a stimulating effect on the descending serotonergic pathways in the central nervous system (CNS). Other studies have suggested that acetaminophen or one of its metabolites, e.g., AM 404, also can activate the cannabinoid system e.g., by inhibiting the uptake or degradation of anandamide and 2-arachidonoylglyerol, contributing to its analgesic action.

# Administration

Acetaminophen can be administered orally, rectally, or intravenously (IV).

- **Oral:**Acetaminophen is available as a tablet, capsule, syrup, oral solution, or suspension.

- **Rectal:**Acetaminophen is available as a rectal suppository for both adult and pediatric patient populations.

- **Intravenous:**Acetaminophen also comes as an IV infusion for administration.

Tompkins D. et al. reviewed the literature on the efficacy of intravenous (IV) acetaminophen in postoperative pain control.

# Adverse Effects

Adverse effects of acetaminophen administered orally or rectally may include the following:

- Skin rash, hypersensitivity reactions

- Nephrotoxicity (elevations in BUN, creatinine)

- Hematological: anemia, leukopenia, neutropenia, pancytopenia

- Metabolic and electrolyte

- 
              
- Decreased serum bicarbonate
              
              
- Decreased concentrations of sodium and calcium
              
              
- Hyperammonemia
              
              
- Hyperchloremia
              
              
- Hyperuricemia
              
              
- Increased serum glucose
              
              
- Increased bilirubin and alkaline phosphatase

Additional adverse effects of acetaminophen administered intravenously include nausea, vomiting, constipation, pruritus, and abdominal pain.

Rare but serious adverse effects include hypersensitivity, anaphylactic reactions, and serious and even fatal skin reactions. These include toxic epidermal necrolysis, acute generalized exanthematous pustulosis, and Stevens-Johnson syndrome.

**FDA Boxed Warnings**

**Hepatotoxicity**

Acetaminophen use has been linked to liver failure and sometimes has led to liver transplants or death. The hepatotoxicity occurring with acetaminophen use typically correlates with high doses of acetaminophen that exceed the recommended maximum dose.

**Dosing Errors**

There is also an FDA boxed warning to avoid dosing errors, particularly when administering acetaminophen to pediatric patients, as well as making sure that the total daily dose of acetaminophen does not exceed the recommended maximum when taking into account all medications that contain acetaminophen.

Although these effects, warnings, and associations have been documented, acetaminophen remains a safe and effective medication when used correctly. The current manufacturer dose recommendation is limited to between 3 and 3.25 grams in 24 hours, depending on the formulation. However, toxicity is rare at less than 150 mg/kg for an adult or 200 mg/kg for a child.

# Contraindications

Contraindications to using acetaminophen include hypersensitivity to acetaminophen, severe hepatic impairment, or severe active hepatic disease. However, there is a general debate among experts as to whether hepatic impairment is truly a limiting factor, as it would likely be associated with decreased production of the toxic metabolite, N-acetyl-p-benzoquinoneimine (NAPQI).

# Monitoring

Patients treated with acetaminophen should have monitoring for desired clinical effects, such as pain or fever relief. Serum concentrations are unnecessary when appropriately dosed. In overdose settings, laboratory evaluation is necessary. In acute overdoses in which ingestion occurs over less than eight hours, a serum APAP concentration should be assessed and plotted on the Rumack-Matthew nomogram, with the time course starting at the onset of ingestion, to determine toxicity and need for treatment. Nonacute ingestions require an assessment of acetaminophen concentration and transaminases, and treatment should occur.

Additionally, caution is necessary for patients with renal or hepatic impairment or patients with alcoholic liver disease, glucose 6-phosphate dehydrogenase deficiency, or severe hypovolemia. However, there is evidence that acetaminophen may be safe to use in the setting of alcoholic liver disease.

Acetaminophen can cross the placental barrier, but there is no evidence of increased teratogenic effects due to using normal doses of acetaminophen during pregnancy.

Pregnant women should exercise caution when using acetaminophen early in pregnancy because of increasing evidence that in utero acetaminophen exposure to the fetus might increase the risk of neurological, reproductive, and urogenital disorders.

MacIntyre I. et al. conducted a double-blind, placebo-controlled, crossover clinical trial on the effects of oral acetaminophen on daytime systolic blood pressure.

# Toxicity

Acetaminophen is responsible for an estimated 500 deaths and 50000 emergency department visits in the United States annually.

Normally, NAPQI is neutralized by glutathione to nontoxic metabolites. However, with excessive doses of acetaminophen, the normal phase II drug metabolism pathways become depleted, and the CYP450 pathway metabolizes a higher portion of the acetaminophen taken, resulting in high concentrations of NAPQI formation, and the limited glutathione stores can become depleted. Without glutathione, NAPQI concentrations build up, and NAPQI, as a reactive intermediate, can react with cellular macromolecules, proteins, lipids, and nucleic acids. This phenomenon can lead to centrilobular (Zone 3) hepatic injury and hepatocellular death. There can also be nephrotoxicity.

The only approved antidote for acetaminophen overdose and toxicity is N-acetylcysteine (NAC).

An important thing to remember is that most patients do not have symptoms in the first few hours of ingestion of toxic doses of acetaminophen and may only have abdominal pain and nausea as symptoms for the first 12 to 24 hours. These symptoms may dissipate between 24 and 72 hours, although AST/ALT concentrations may be abnormal. Patients who present more than 24 hours following ingestion of toxic doses of acetaminophen may have symptoms such as nausea, vomiting, jaundice, abdominal pain, and hypotension. These patients may require airway management, intravenous fluids, vasopressors, hemodialysis, or management of cerebral edema or other symptoms as they arise.

# Enhancing Healthcare Team Outcomes

The most crucial aspect of acetaminophen toxicity is prevention. As part of the interprofessional healthcare team, clinicians (MDs, DOs, NPs, and PAs), nurses, and pharmacists. Pharmacists and nurses need to emphasize the maximum dose permitted daily. Patients also need to understand how to look for acetaminophen in various medications and calculate the dose they receive when they combine products. Pharmacists need to perform medication reconciliation to look for drug interactions and verify that there are not too many acetaminophen-containing drugs in the regimen. If there are concerns, the pharmacist should report them to the nurse and prescriber. All team members must document their findings and keep the entire team in the information loop regarding the patient's case.

With the recent changes in maximum daily dosing for acetaminophen, all interprofessional team members must be aware of the new guidelines and remain current should any new guidance come out.

If toxicity occurs or there is suspicion of toxicity, management also requires an interprofessional team of clinicians, nurses, and pharmacists. Specific protocols have been designed to direct the interprofessional team when patients present to emergency departments with acute acetaminophen toxicity. Emergency physicians, nurses, toxicologists, pharmacists, and psychiatrists developed one such protocol.