Treatment of venous gas embolism is largely supportive. The first intervention should be to discontinue any gasses such as nitrous oxide, which may be flowing into the patient. One hundred percent O2 supplementation may be used to correct hypoxia/hypoxemia as well as decrease the size of the bubble due to a diffusion gradient allowing nitrogen to leave the gas embolus. For severe venous gas embolism causing hemodynamic instability, cardiac massage may be beneficial. Cardiac massage would move air out of the pulmonary outflow vasculature and into the smaller vessels, thus improving blood flow. If a catheter is already in place, such as a subclavian vein catheter, it is possible to advance the catheter into the heart and "suck out" the gas emboli.

Positioning in the left lateral decubitus may be beneficial during this procedure so as to trap the emboli in the right heart for easier removal. However, there is no data supporting the emergent placement of an intravenous catheter for venous gas embolism management if one is not already in place.

Inotropic agents such as dobutamine and ephedrine may be used if the right heart function is compromised. This will increase preload to the left heart resulting in improved cardiac output.

While hyperbaric oxygen therapy is commonly used in arterial gas embolism, its use in venous gas embolism is not routine. Most patients with small venous gas embolisms have few, if any, symptoms and do not require treatment. Generally, with smaller venous gas embolisms, the embolus will eventually reach the lungs, become trapped, and diminish in size as the patient breathes. In cases of severe hemodynamic instability, hyperbaric oxygen therapy may be considered, but there is no data clearly demonstrating benefit.

If air embolism is suspected after chest trauma and the arrest does not respond to CPR, one may need to perform an immediate thoracotomy and clamp the hilum. However, this is a major undertaking with enormous morbidity and low survival rates. It should never be performed by a non-thoracic surgeon.