Alexander disease is a very rare neurodegenerative disease that generally presents in the infantile period, although other variants are occasionally seen. This disorder, first described in 1949 by W. Stewart Alexander, is part of a group of neurological disorders, which is collectively known as leukodystrophies. These disorders are a group of rare, progressive, metabolic, genetic diseases (neurogenetic diseases) that predominantly affect the white matter of the central nervous system (CNS) with or without peripheral nervous system involvement and characterized by abnormal development or destruction of the myelin sheath.

Alexander disease is caused by a mutation in the GFAP gene that codes for the fibrillar acid glial protein and represents the only known example of a genetic disorder affecting astrocyte cells. It is, thus, an example of a primary disease of astrocytes. The disease has multiple clinical forms spanning from newborn to adult, and typically, the early onset of the disease correlates with an increase in severity. Interestingly, before the genetic features were well understood, various names were used to characterize features of Alexander disease such as 'dysmyelinogenic leukodystrophy' or 'demyelinogenic leukodystrophy' or 'fibrinoid degeneration of astrocytes' or 'Leukodystrophy with Rosenthal fibers.' However, these terms are not typically used anymore.

The diagnosis can be made based on clinical and imaging features. After the diagnosis is suspected, genetic testing is usually done for confirmation. The treatment of Alexander disease is largely supportive (e.g., anticonvulsants for seizures), and patients have a variable life expectancy. The neonatal type is related to severe disability or death within two years. Children affected children by the infantile form (within 2-4 years of age) survive weeks to several years. On the contrary, when the disease begins after 4-5 years (juvenile and adult forms), survival is variable and can even reach 30 years of age and more.

This chapter is aimed at describing the etiology, clinical evaluation, and management options available for Alexander disease. Moreover, the importance of the interprofessional team to improve outcomes for patients affected by this heritable disorder is also addressed.