No formally accepted diagnostic criteria exist for paraneoplastic pemphigus.

Anhalt’s et al. original PNP diagnostic criteria have as their basis on five immunological, histological, and clinical features:

**Clinical**

Painful mucosal erosions with or without accompanying polymorphous cutaneous lesions in the setting of an underlying malignancy

**Histopathology**

Suprabasal (intraepidermal) acantholysis, interface dermatitis, and keratinocyte necrosis

**DIF (Direct Immunofluorescence)**

IgG and complement (C3) deposition within the intercellular spaces of the epidermis, often with linear, granular basement membrane zone deposition

**IIF (Indirect Immunofluorescence)**

Detection of autoantibodies targeting intercellular proteins found in transitional or stratified squamous epithelia

**Immunoprecipitation**

Precipitation of a characteristic proteins desmoplakin 1 (250 kD), bullous pemphigoid antigen (230 kD), desmoplakin 2 (210 kD), periplakin (190kD), alpha-2-macroglobulin-like-1 antigen (170 kD)

Joly et al. evaluated these diagnostic criteria and identified three features with both high specificity (84%-100%) and sensitivity (82-86%).

- Presence of an underlying lymphoproliferative disorder

- An IIF positive for autoantibodies on rat bladder

- Detection of autoantibodies against periplakin and envoplakin on immunoblot

As more atypical presentations and disease manifestations of PNP get reported, researchers continue to propose variants to the classic diagnostic criteria. For instance, Camisa and Helm created diagnostic guidelines that classify criteria as either major or minor. PNP diagnosis requires three major criteria, or two major and two minor criteria.

**Major Criteria**

- Polymorphic mucocutaneous eruptions

- Concomitant internal neoplasm

- Serum antibodies with a specific immunoprecipitation pattern

**Minor Criteria**

- Acantholysis observed histologically

- DIF displaying intercellular and basement membrane staining

-  IIF staining positive on rat bladder epithelium

**Diagnosis of PNP**

**Histopathology:**Dyskeratosis with suprabasal acantholysis with possible basilar vacuolization are classic histological features of PNP.

**Direct Immunofluorescence (DIF):**Typically reveals intercellular IgG and C3 in the epidermis, often in a net-like pattern between cells. Granular or linear IgG and C3 deposits along the basement membrane zone at the dermal-epidermal junction may also be present - a characteristic unique to PNP compared to other forms of pemphigus.****However, DIF can be negative in up to 50% of cases.

**Indirect Immunofluorescence (IIF):**The presence of circulating antibodies targeting the intercellular proteins of cells within stratified squamous or transitional epithelia are characteristic of PNP.

**Immunoprecipitation and Immunoblot:**Serologic detection of autoantibodies against the 210-kD band of envoplakin and the 190-kD band of periplakin is both sensitive and specific for the diagnosis of PNP.

**Additional Work-Up**

Upon diagnosis of PNP, evaluation for an underlying malignancy is mandatory. Suggested studies and labs include CBC, LDH, flow cytometry, and imaging of the chest, abdomen, and pelvis.