Visual acuity is a crucial aspect of the ophthalmic examination. A complete 8-point eye examination includes testing visual acuity, pupillary examination, evaluation of ocular motility and alignment, intraocular pressure (IOP), confrontation perimetry, external examination, slit-lamp examination, and examination of the ocular fundus.

Defining visual acuity is as simple as stating it is the clarity or sharpness of vision.

- Oculus uterque (OU) - both eyes

- Oculus sinister (OS) - left eye

- Oculus dexter (OD) - right eye

The numbers from a visual acuity exam all hinge on what a “normal” person can see at a distance of 20 feet or 6 meters. If visual acuity is documented as 20/20 or 6/6, this number describes that the patient being examined can see the same as what a normal person sees or would usually see at a distance of 20 feet or 6 meters. If vision is documented as 20/40 or 6/12, a person with this visual acuity can see an image or object at 20 feet that a normal person could have recognized at a distance as far as 40 feet or at 6 meters versus 12 meters, respectively.

Visual acuity is a quantification of the sharpness of sight. It specifies a threshold. The acuity of vision is determined by the smallest appreciable retinal image. It is the measure of the tiniest object clearly visible at a certain distance. To appreciate the form of an object, its several parts must be recognized. The angle created at the nodal point of the eye by the smallest resolvable object is known as the minimum angle of resolution (MAR).

**Four Types of Visual Acuity**

- Minimum (detectable) visible acuity – This signifies the detection of an object or whether the object is present or not. This is quantified by the visual angle made at the nodal center of the eye by the tiniest detectable object.

- Minimum (separable) resolvable acuity – This is indicated by the smallest separation between 2 parts of an object or 2 different objects resolvable as 2 different parts by the visual system. A person of normal sight, measured as 20/20 Snellen equivalent, can differentiate 2 objects that cast a visual angle of 1 minute (60 seconds or 0.017 degrees). Resolvable acuity is determined by the spacing of cones in the retina. However, some people can resolve a stimulus as small as 30 seconds of arc.

- Minimum recognizable acuity – This is denoted by the smallest feature that can be identified or recognized, like identifying a letter. Though 20/20 is considered the gold standard minimum recognizable acuity for humans, the mean visual acuity in age groups from 18 to 80 years may be better than 20/20. The sharpest mean visual acuity was noted in those aged 25 to 29 years.

- Minimum discriminable acuity – This is indicated by the smallest change in appreciable orientation, position, or size. It is also known as hyperacuity. The smallest misalignment we can realize is Vernier acuity, named after Pierre Vernier, who invented a scale used to navigate ships. Humans can proficiently detect whether adjacent lines are aligned (as in the Vernier scale), leading to the widespread use of this scale. The Vernier threshold for humans can be as low as 2 to 5 arc seconds.