The arterial pressure waveform is representative of arterial pressure throughout a cardiac cycle and is a useful indicator of arterial wall stiffening. The waveform can be broken into two distinct phases; systolic and diastolic. The systolic phase characteristically demonstrates a rapid upstroke caused by the opening of the aortic valve and left ventricular ejection, followed by a quick decline. In contrast, the diastolic phase demonstrates a gradual decline of arterial pressure and run-off of blood flow into the peripheral circulation. The demarcation of these two phases is a dicrotic notch formed by the closing of the aortic valve.

Two different waves form the arterial pressure wave: a forward wave and a reflected wave. The forward wave represents blood flow from the left ventricle during contraction. The reflected or reverse wave is created by structures that cause impedance (e.g., branch points, direction changes). The speed of the wave is known as the pulse wave velocity. In a young artery, the reflected wave reflects to the aortic root during diastole. In an older, stiffened artery, the reflected wave reflects to the aortic root during systole because it has an increased pulse wave velocity, allowing it to contribute to the forward wave resulting in an increased peak forward wave. Depending on the device used, a pulse wave velocity greater than 10 to 12 m/sec indicates arterial wall stiffening.

Other test modalities for increased arterial pressure include but are not limited to regular blood pressure checks with a sphygmomanometer, ankle-brachial index, angiography, and stress testing.