If present, the underlying systemic disease must be treated, but there is not an accepted correlation between the underlying systemic disease severity and the severity of pyoderma gangrenosum.

The use of systemic immunosuppression is determined by how fast the disease progresses. If the size of the lesion is rapidly growing, systemic medications like corticosteroids or cyclosporine may be used. The STOP GAP randomized control trial in 2015 compared oral prednisolone and oral cyclosporine in the treatment of pyoderma gangrenosum. The results did not show a significant difference in the speed of lesion healing with either medication. At six months, 47% of patients on cyclosporine had healed ulcers, and 47% of the patients on prednisolone had healed ulcers. Recurrence was similar among the two groups as were adverse reactions. However, serious adverse reactions such as infections were more common in the patients receiving prednisolone.

If a patient has a history of pyoderma gangrenosum, especially aggressive pyoderma gangrenosum, some physicians will use immunosuppressant drugs prophylactically before surgery to prevent the formation of pyoderma gangrenosum. One such regimen consists of methylprednisolone and cyclosporine combined. Obviously, avoiding unnecessary surgery or procedures is essential.

For more indolent or limited disease, topical or intralesional therapy alone may be sufficient. Topical and intralesional steroids, as well as topical tacrolimus, have been used with success. Other agents that have been tried are nicotine, topical dapsone, and sodium cromoglycate.

Wound care and pain control are key features in the treatment of pyoderma gangrenosum. Patients and healthcare providers must cleanse the wound to prevent infection. Debridement is important but must be performed very cautiously to ensure that only nonviable tissue is removed because of the aforementioned association with pathergy.

Other therapies that have been successful are anti-TNF-alpha drugs such as etanercept and adalimumab. Ustekinumab, an IL-12/23 inhibitor used in the treatment of psoriasis, has been reported to improve pyoderma gangrenosum. Other therapies that may be effective in the treatment of pyoderma gangrenosum include Canakinumab, an IL-1 beta monoclonal antibody, and tocilizumab, an anti IL-6 monoclonal antibody.