Evaluation of familial chylomicronemia syndrome is necessary if any patient presents with the signs and symptoms mentioned above. A complete, fasting lipid profile is essential. For diagnosis, blood triglycerides should be higher than 880 mg/dl for three consecutive blood draws. Though conditions other than FCS can cause elevated triglycerides levels, hypertriglyceridemia refractory to triglycerides lowering therapy should raise suspicion of familial chylomicronemia syndrome. One quick way to evaluate is to look for milky appearance and lipemic separation on refrigeration of the blood samples.

Further, for those who present with recurrent pancreatitis, careful past medical and family history (as mentioned above in history and physical), medications history, and alcohol use history should be obtained. Serum lipase should be checked over amylase as amylase can be affected by elevated chylomicrons. Computed tomography should be obtained for patients with recurrent abdominal pain to look for pancreatitis and its complications. Ultrasound of the right upper quadrant should also be performed to look for gallstones as a possible cause of pancreatitis.

Post-heparin lipoprotein lipase activity assay and genetic mutation analysis are diagnostic tests but are only available at specialized laboratories. In post-heparin LPL assay, injection of intravenous heparin fails or inadequately releases lipoprotein lipase from endothelial capillaries. Genetic tests are expensive, and some mutations can be overlooked since not all genetic mutations have been identified.