Although most conventional DMARDs have similar adverse effects, there are several adverse effects unique to each agent.

Hydroxychloroquine is unique in this respect as it has the best safety profile out of all the conventional DMARDs. Compared to other conventional DMARDs, hydroxychloroquine does not increase the risk of severe infections, nor does it cause hepatotoxicity or renal dysfunction. Common adverse effects of hydroxychloroquine include rash, diarrhea. A rare but significant adverse effect of hydroxychloroquine is retinopathy/maculopathy, which is seen with a higher cumulative dose. Risk factors for hydroxychloroquine maculopathy include more than 5 mg/kg/day dose, more than 5 years of therapy, advancing age, and chronic kidney disease. Patients on hydroxychloroquine are recommended to have regular ophthalmology evaluation with ocular coherence tomography, which is a very sensitive test for maculopathy and can diagnose it well before visual field defects occur. Other rare adverse effects of hydroxychloroquine include anemia, leukopenia, myopathy, and cardiomyopathy.

Methotrexate, leflunomide, and sulfasalazine are similar in their adverse effect profile. Gastrointestinal distress (nausea, abdominal pain, diarrhea), rash/allergic reaction, bone marrow suppression, hepatotoxicity, and higher incidence of common and sometimes serious infections are common adverse effects of all these agents. Both methotrexate and leflunomide can cause alopecia. Other adverse effects unique to methotrexate include interstitial lung disease, folic acid deficiency, and liver cirrhosis. Leflunomide can cause hypertension, peripheral neuropathy, and weight loss. Sulfasalazine has a very high risk of gastrointestinal distress. It can rarely cause DRESS syndrome as well.

The most concerning adverse effect of all biologic DMARDs is an increased risk of common and serious infections, including bacterial, fungal, and viral infections. Reactivation of tuberculosis, herpes zoster, and hepatitis B/C can also occur. Rarely, bone marrow suppression and hepatotoxicity have been reported with biologic DMARDs. Anti TNF agents can cause worsening of severe congestive heart failure, drug-induced lupus, demyelinating central nervous system (CNS) diseases. Lymphomas and non-melanoma skin cancers may be associated with Anti-TNF agents as well. Hyperlipidemia, elevated liver function test, and pancytopenia can be caused by IL-6 inhibitors and JAK inhibitors. Worsening of chronic obstructive airway disease has been reported secondary to abatacept. IL-17 inhibitors can cause/worsen inflammatory bowel disease. Progressive multifocal leukoencephalopathy has been reported in patients treated with rituximab.

**Drug Interactions**

Several medications such as non-steroidal anti-inflammatory agents (NSAIDs), proton pump inhibitors, sulfasalazine, and amoxicillin can interfere with renal excretion of methotrexate, increasing its efficacy and increasing the risk of adverse effects.

While the combination of a biologic DMARD with a conventional DMARD and the use of multiple conventional DMARDS is considered safe, it is not recommended to use a combination of different biologic DMARDs due to an increased risk of severe immunosuppression leading to severe and potentially life-threatening infections.