Mutagenesis occurs as a result of DNA replication errors, DNA damage, and lab techniques. Here we will break mutagenesis down into endogenous and exogenous causes.

**Endogenous**

- **Errors in DNA replication**: Our body possesses high and low-fidelity DNA polymerases. Although the error rate is minimal, high-fidelity polymerases and mismatch repair (MMR) mechanisms still make 1 in 10^6 to 10^8 base substitution per cell per generation. Furthermore, some errors occur due to replication slippage at repetitive sequences, which can lead to insertions and deletions. A mutation will result if these errors are not repaired before the next round of DNA replication.

- **Errors in DNA repair mechanisms**: The DNA damage response (DDR) is a group of mechanisms that sense DNA damage and promote repair. Errors in repair or mutations affecting the DDR network cause different cancers. There are multiple DNA repair mechanisms, including MMR, base excision repair (BER), nucleotide excision repair (NER), translesion synthesis (TLS), homologous recombination (HR), and non-homologous end-joining (NHEJ) pathways. If any of these repair mechanisms go awry, a cell is predisposed to DNA damage. For example, xeroderma pigmentosum (a rare autosomal recessive skin disorder that makes a person highly prone to developing skin cancer) is caused by a mutation in the NER pathway, resulting in a build-up of UV-associated damage. The TLS repair system and NHEJ are of interest to endogenous mutagenesis. During DNA replication, high-fidelity polymerases have difficulty passing damaged bases (e.g., pyrimidine dimers or crosslinked DNA), which will stall DNA replication. Failure to restart replication can result in double-stranded breaks, chromosomal rearrangements, and cell death. Therefore, it is often beneficial to circumvent these replicative arrests to promote cell survival. One mechanism to accomplish this is the TLS system. TLS involves DNA polymerases with larger active sites that allow them to tolerate and bypass DNA lesions. However, it comes at the expense of lower replication fidelity and high error rates, resulting in a greater likelihood of base substitutions.

- **Spontaneous base deamination**: Base deamination is when a nucleotide base loses an amine group, effectively changing the nucleotide. The following are major deamination reactions: cytosine to uracil (U), adenine to hypoxanthine, guanine to xanthine, and 5-methyl cytosine (5mC) to thymine. If these alterations are not repaired, there can be a change in the DNA sequence. For example, if cytosine deaminates to uracil, in two replication events, there will be a new A:T mutation. This G:C to A:T transition accounts for 33% of the single-site mutations that result in hereditary diseases in humans.

- **Oxidative DNA damage**: In normal cell physiology, reactive oxygen species (ROS) are a byproduct of the electron transport chain (ETC) and other cellular processes. ROS serves essential cellular roles, including redox signaling and immune defense. However, in high quantities, ROS becomes damaging to a cell and its DNA. There have been 100 different oxidative base lesions and 2-deoxyribose modifications described. One example is the oxidation of carbon #8 of guanine, forming 8-oxoguanine (8-OG). 8-OG incorrectly pairs with adenine (instead of cytosine), resulting in a G:C to A:T transition. Excess ROS are known to be associated with many diseases, including Alzheimer's disease, cancer, and heart failure.

- **Base methylation**: S-adenosylmethionine (SAM) is a molecule used as a methyl donor during physiologic DNA methylation. At a concentration of 4x10^-5M, SAM can generate over 4,000 methylated base changes per cell per day. The significance of this can be depicted in the methylated products O6-methylguanine and O4-methylamine. These products are highly mutagenic and result in G:C to A:T and T:A to C:G transition mutations.

- **Abasic sites**(i.e., apurinic and apyrimidinic sites): There are approximately 10,000 abasic sites made every day by spontaneous hydrolysis or DNA glycosylase cleavage. Abasic sites are unstable and commonly removed by endonucleases. In other cases, they are repaired by TLS polymerases. If these damage sites are not corrected, they may result in mutagenesis.

**Exogenous**

- **Ionizing radiation (IR)**: IR comes from the soil, radon, medical devices, and cosmic radiation, among others. It can damage DNA directly (e.g., DNA strand breaks) or indirectly (e.g., radiolysis of water molecules producing ROS). Ionizing radiation can generate a range of nucleotide base lesions, similar to that discussed for ROS, resulting in mutagenesis.

- **Ultraviolet (UV) radiation**: UV light falls between 100 to 400 nm, with the most harmful radiation at lower wavelengths. UV light damages DNA by direct and indirect (to nearby molecules) energy transfer. The two main products of UV damage are pyrimidine dimers and pyrimidine pyrimidone photoproducts. These byproducts distort the DNA helix, requiring the NER system or the error-prone TLS polymerases to bypass them. Pyrimidine dimers are known to cause C:G to T:A, T:A to C:G, and tandem CC to TT transition mutations.

- **Alkylating agents & Aromatic amines**: Alkylating agents (e.g., nitrogen mustard gas, methyl methanesulfonate [MMS], ethyl methanesulfonate [EMS], N-ethyl-N-nitrosourea [ENU]) have a high affinity for nitrogens on nucleotide bases, mainly N3 of adenine and N7 of guanine. MMS, for example, reacts with adenine and guanine to produce N3-methyladenine and N7-methylguanine, respectively. These methyl products are susceptible to N-glycosidic bond cleavage that can create abasic sites. Aromatic amines (e.g., 2-aminofluorene, previously used in insecticides) are metabolized by the CYP450 system and converted into alkylating agents. These products primarily cause lesions to the C8 position of guanine. C8-guanine lesions are known to give rise to base substitutions and frameshift mutations.

- **Polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbon (PAH)**: PAHs (e.g., dibenzo[a,l]pyrene, naphthalene, anthracene, and pyrene) are carbon compounds with two or more aromatic rings. They are commonly present in tobacco smoke, automobile exhaust, charred food, and combustion products of fossil fuels and organic matter. The CYP450 enzymes convert PAHs into reactive DNA intermediates that intercalate into DNA, ultimately forming a DNA adduct (a segment of DNA bound to a cancer-causing chemical). This results in DNA damage and, thus, can cause mutagenesis.

- **Crosslinking**: Crosslinking occurs when two nucleotides form a covalent link. Agents that are commonly associated with crosslinking include cyclophosphamide, cisplatin, and psoralens. Interstrand crosslinking blocks DNA replication and this requires repair or bypassing. TLS is one of these repair mechanisms and is associated with high substitution rates.

- **Insertional mutagenesis**: This is the process by which exogenous DNA integrates into host DNA. Insertional mutagenesis can be natural, mediated by transposons or viruses, or accomplished in a laboratory. Given there is an addition of nucleotides, insertional mutagenesis commonly results in frameshift mutations.

- **Other toxins**: Aflatoxin is a naturally occurring toxin fromAspergillus. The CYP450 system metabolizes aflatoxin into an active form that adducts with N7 of guanine, which results in depurination. Aflatoxin is a well-established liver carcinogen that is associated with hepatocellular carcinoma. N-nitrosamines are organic compounds commonly found in tobacco smoke, preserved meats, and the environment. They are metabolized by the CYP450 system to form DNA alkylating agents. N-nitrosamines have been implicated in nasopharyngeal, esophageal, and gastric.

- **Laboratory techniques**: Different laboratory techniques, including PCR, non-PCR, and gene-editing tools, are used to induce mutagenesis. These are discussed further in the "Testing/Methods" section below.