The peripheral venous system serves as a blood reserve and a channel for returning blood to the heart. The patency of blood veins, valves, and muscle pumps is necessary to function the venous system properly. To return to the central circulation, blood must travel against gravity and other pressures in the upright position. The veins of the lower extremities are classified as superficial (above the facial muscle layer), deep (below the fascial layer), and perforator.

The superficial venous system consists of the great saphenous vein (GSV) and small saphenous vein, in addition to several accessory veins. Deep veins are made up of axial veins. Perforating veins traverse the fascial layer connecting superficially to deep veins. Throughout the deep and superficial veins are a number of one-way bicuspid valves that allow blood to travel toward the heart while preventing it from returning to the feet.

Multiple processes contribute to the development of venous disease wherein venous pressure is elevated and blood return is impeded, such as valvular incompetence, thrombotic or non-thrombotic venous blockage, or extrinsic compression of the veins. These variables are worsened by dysfunctional muscular pumps, particularly in the calf muscles. These trajectories result in global or localized venous hypertension, especially when standing or walking. Persistent venous hypertension can result in hyperpigmentation of the skin, lipodermatosclerosis of the subcutaneous tissue, and, eventually, ulceration.

Preexisting vascular wall weakness, superficial phlebitis, or severe venous distention due to hormonal influences might result in a weakened superficial veins valve. In contrast, deep vein thrombosis or venous stenosis may cause dysfunction of the deep veins valve.