Individuals with suspected SAD should be referred for a psychiatric evaluation, and if available, evaluation by a child and adolescent psychiatrist is optimal. The initial goals are to develop rapport with the patient, obtain historical information in detail from the patient and affected caregiver(s), and conduct a mental status examination. Evaluation for applicable DSM-5-TR diagnostic criteria should be performed to make a formal diagnosis.

**Separation Anxiety Disorder DSM-5-TR Criteria**

1. Developmentally inappropriate and excessive anxiety when separated from whom the individual is attached, evidenced by at least 3 of the following:

- Recurrent excessive distress with actual or anticipated separation from home or attachment figure(s)

- Persistent and pervasive worry about losing the attachment figure(s) or possible harm befalling them, such as illness, injury, disasters, or death

- Persistent and pervasive worry that an untoward event will be experienced by the patient and lead to prolonged or permanent separation

- Reluctance or refusal to go out, such as to school or work, because of fear of separation

- Refusal to be alone at home or in other settings

- Refusal to sleep without being near the attachment figure(s)

- Repeated nightmares about separation

- Repeated physical symptoms when separation occurs or is anticipated

2. The symptoms must last at least 4 weeks in children and adolescents but typically occur for 6 months or more in adults.

3. The disturbance causes clinically significant impairment in a major life function (ie, academic or occupational functions).

4. The symptoms are not better explained by another psychiatric condition.

**Screening Tools**

Multiple screening tools for anxiety disorders in children exist and have wide availability and validation. When there is difficulty in obtaining the full diagnostic criteria from the interview alone, implementing a validated screening tool can be helpful in the diagnosis of SAD and in identifying possible comorbid conditions.

**Screen for Child Anxiety-Related Emotional Disorders (SCARED):**SCARED is one of the most commonly used assessment tools for diagnosing anxiety disorders in children. SCARED is a child and parent self-report measure evaluated in numerous settings worldwide.

The SCARED assessment tool can be used free of charge with an acceptable time burden on clinicians and families, making it an excellent tool for diagnosing and managing anxiety disorders in children. SCARED cutoffs can also be used to guide treatment. For example, an insufficient reduction in the SCARED score after an adequate trial of behavioral therapy may indicate the need for pharmacotherapy.

**Separation Anxiety Avoidance Inventory (SAAI):**SAAI is specifically designed to aid in diagnosing SAD. The SAAI child (SAAI-C) and parent (SAAI-P) versions have demonstrated good internal consistency, test-retest reliability, and construct and discriminant validity.

**Children's Separation Anxiety Scale (CSAS):**The CSAS consists of 20 items grouped into 4 factors:

- Worry about separation

- Distress about separation

- Opposition to separation

- Calm at separation

The unique feature of this tool is the presence of a positive factor, "calm at separation." Validation studies report good internal consistency with good temporal stability and test-retest reliability.

**Youth Anxiety Measure (YAM):**YAM is a new parent-child questionnaire developed to assess anxiety disorder symptoms in children and adolescents according to the DSM-5. The scale consists of 2 parts: part I consists of 28 items and measures the major anxiety disorders, including SAD, and part II contains 22 items relating to specific phobias and agoraphobia.

**Anxiety Disorder Interview Schedule (ADIS):**ADIS is a well-validated diagnostic interview suitable for measuring all anxiety disorders, mood disorders, and attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder in children.

**Pediatric Anxiety Rating Scale (PARS):**PARS is a clinician-rated scale of anxiety severity using the frequency of distress symptoms, avoidance behaviors, and interference in daily functioning.