Except for thyroid storm, hyperthyroidism in itself is rarely life-threatening but can pose a significant burden on a patient’s day-to-day routine. Hyperthyroidism can present with many symptoms and, if not managed, can lead to poor quality of life. Because there are many causes of hyperthyroidism, the condition is best managed by an interprofessional team.

The primary care providers, including the nurse practitioner, should educate patients on the importance of medication compliance. In addition, the patient should be informed by the pharmacist that certain products like contrast dyes, expectorants, food supplements, and seaweed tablets may contain high levels of iodine and interfere with therapy.

Inpatient management of a patient with hyperthyroidism does not always necessarily require consultation with an endocrinologist, but the presence of a thyroid storm may warrant consultation with an endocrinologist and possible admission to the intensive care unit due to potentially life-threatening complications such as tachycardia and hypertensive crisis. Nurses involved with patient care should be vigilant about the signs and symptoms of thyroid storm.

As mentioned previously, any consideration of RAI therapy in a female of reproductive potential should follow a negative beta-hCG, as pregnancy is an absolute contraindication to RAI therapy. Incorporating a mandatory pregnancy test as part of an overall care plan would help avoid potentially damaging radiation exposure.

Patients with graves disease will need an ophthalmology consult. For those who undergo thyroidectomy, lifelong treatment with levothyroxine is required.

The interprofessional team must communicate with other members to ensure that the patient is receiving the current standard of care treatment.