Treatment of thyroid storm consists of supportive measures like intravenous (IV) fluids, oxygen, cooling blankets, and acetaminophen, as well as specific measures to treat hyperthyroidism. If any precipitating factors, for example, infection, are present, that needs to be addressed. Patients with thyroid storm must be admitted to the intensive care unit with close cardiac monitoring and ventilatory support if needed.

**Specific Strategic Steps for Treatment**

- Therapy to control increased adrenergic tone: Beta-blocker

- Therapy to reduce thyroid hormone synthesis: Thionamide

- Therapy to reduce the release of thyroid hormone: Iodine solution

- Therapy to block peripheral conversion of T4 to T3: Iodinated radiocontrast agent, glucocorticoid, PTU, propranolol

- Therapy to reduce enterohepatic recycling of thyroid hormone: Bile acid sequestrant

After initial supportive measures, a beta-blocker should be started for any case of suspected thyroid storm. Typically, propranolol 40 mg to 80 mg is given every 4 to 6 hours. Then, either a loading dose of propylthiouracil (PTU) 500 mg to 1000 mg followed by 250 mg every 4 hours or Methimazole (MMI) 20 mg every 4 to 6 hours should be given. Propylthiouracil is favored because it has a small additional effect of blocking the peripheral conversion of T4 to T3. An hour after administering propylthiouracil or methimazole, give five drops of SSKI (supersaturated potassium iodide) by mouth every 6 hours. Always administer thionamide before starting iodine solution (SSKI) therapy.

In the first 24 hours of treatment, propylthiouracil decreases T3 level by 45%, but methimazole drops T3 level by only 10 % to 15%. Methimazole causes more rapid normalization of serum T3 levels after a few weeks of treatment, and it has less hepatotoxicity compared to propylthiouracil. Therefore, after initial stabilization, we should treat with methimazole, and if propylthiouracil was started at the beginning, it should be changed to methimazole later. For patients who cannot take oral antithyroid medicine, liquid preparation (pharmacist may have to compound) can be given as enemas. Sometimes, pharmacists can prepare an IV form of antithyroid medicine by dissolving the tablet.

Esmolol, a short-acting beta-blocker, at a loading dose of 250 mcg/kg to 500 mcg/kg followed by 50 mcg/kg to -100 mcg/kg/minute, can be given in an ICU setting. Cardiovascular beta-blockers like atenolol or metoprolol should be chosen for patients with reactive airway disease. If there is a contraindication for the use of beta-blockers, diltiazem is an alternative.

If thionamide therapy is contraindicated because of an allergic reaction, thyroidectomy is needed after treatment with a beta-blocker, hydrocortisone, cholestyramine, and iodine solution. Plasmapheresis is the last resort if all other measures fail.

Once patients’ clinical conditions improve, the iodine solution should be stopped, glucocorticoids can be tapered and stopped, and beta-blocker should be adjusted. Thionamide therapy should be titrated, and if propylthiouracil is used initially, it should be switched to methimazole. Patients should be recommended for definitive treatment with radioiodine (RAI) therapy or thyroidectomy.

Surgery may be required in patients with Graves disease to treat hyperthyroidism. These patients must be pretreated with beta-blockers, glucocorticoids, and iodine formulas. Surgery is usually done after 5 to 7 days.

In resistant cases that do not respond to conventional treatments, there is the potential help of therapeutic plasma exchange, as recently reported.