**Central Hypotonia**

Systemic diseases that tend to affect the entire central nervous system are the most frequent cause of hypotonia in neonates. Congestive heart failure in an infant born with a congenital heart defect is a frequent cause of hypotonia in newborns. Since most of the energy is used in breathing and pumping the blood to the body, the infants have significant hypotonia and weakness. Strength is difficult to assess because of the lack of any voluntary effort by an acutely ill infant. Another common cause is sepsis, which often presents with hypotonia, which can sometimes be severe as well. Newborns who have suffered a hypoxic-ischemic insult present with depressed consciousness in the neonatal period along with hypotonia. As time progresses, the infant gains consciousness and ends up having increased tone and hyperreflexia by the end of 2 to 3 months. Metabolic disorders also present with generalized hypotonia, but these infants commonly have an altered mental status. They may also appear septic, but the diagnosis is only made once the metabolic screen results are available.

Down syndrome (trisomy 21) is the most common chromosomal cause. Characteristic features include an up-slanting palpebral fissure, flat facial profile, single transverse palmar crease, and poor Moro reflex. Diagnosis can be confirmed with a high-resolution chromosome analysis or fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH).

Prader-Willi syndrome (PWS) is among the differential diagnosis in the case of unexplained hypotonia in neonates. The majority of cases (65%-75%) are due to a lack of expression of genes inherited paternally on chromosome 15. About one-fourth of cases are due to maternal disomy 15 (when both chromosomes are inherited from the mother, and there is an absence of paternal derived chromosome 15). Very few cases are because of a defect in the genetic imprinting. Patients with PWS have feeding difficulty, hypotonia, and failure to thrive in early infancy. This is replaced by excessive appetite and obesity in late infancy and childhood.

Peroxisomal disorders are a group of disorders that are a result of mutations in any of the 12 PEX genes, most common being the PEX 1 gene. These disorders can fall anywhere along the spectrum of severity. Zellweger syndrome is the most severe form, and infantile Refsum is the least severe form.

Benign congenital hypotonia is a nonprogressive disorder of the neuromuscular system. It is commonly seen and is a diagnosis of exclusion. Muscle tone improves with increasing age, but the patient often has delayed milestone achievement. History and physical examination are not suggestive of a neurologic or a metabolic cause. Routine blood tests, including muscle enzyme results, are normal. It is associated with the risk of joint dislocations later in life, and parents must be counseled about it.

Pompe disease (PD), a rare autosomal recessive disease, is caused by the deficiency of acid alpha-glucosidase deficiency. There is an accumulation of glycogen in the lysosomes in the heart and the skeletal muscle tissue. It can present as the classic infantile PD, which has less than 1% enzyme activity. It is seen in the neonatal period with marked hypotonia, failure to thrive, hepatomegaly, and often leads to death within the first year of life due to cardiac or respiratory causes if untreated. The electrocardiogram shows a short P-R interval and a wide QRS complex, which is a characteristic finding. A definitive diagnosis is made by a muscle biopsy, which shows a lower acid maltase enzyme activity.

**Peripheral hypotonia - Motor nerves, neuromuscular, drug toxicity, or muscular pathology:**

**A. Motor neuron disease**

Spinal muscular atrophy (SMA) is an autosomal recessive disease that involves the anterior horn cells in the spinal cord and motor nuclei of the brainstem. It is a progressive neuromuscular degenerative disorder that results in proximal muscle weakness and paralysis. There are 4 main types of SMA (SMA 1, SMA 2, SMA 3, and SMA 4), which are based on the age at which the disease presents (from pre/perinatal to adulthood) and the maximum motor function achieved.

**B. Neuromuscular junction abnormalities include myasthenic syndromes and botulism**

Congenital myasthenic syndromes are due to the mutations in genes that are responsible for the structure and function of the neuromuscular junction.

The transient acquired myasthenic syndrome is seen in neonates born to mothers with myasthenia gravis. There are antibodies against the acetylcholine receptors in the mother, which passively transfer the placenta and interfere with the neuromuscular transmission in the neonate. Symptoms are seen within 2 to 3 days of life and resolve within 2-4 weeks with complete recovery. The amount of antibody transferred across the placenta directly correlates with the severity of the symptoms. Symptoms include feeding difficulties, hypotonia, swallowing, and sucking difficulties, and they usually have a weak cry with an expressionless face. There may or may not be respiratory insufficiency. Treatment is symptomatic, which may include exchange transfusion, respiratory support as needed, and intravenous immunoglobulin (IVIg).

Infantile botulism is caused by Clostridium botulinum, which is an anaerobic, gram-positive bacteria. The spores are present in the soil and are also present in honey. Ingestion of spores leads to colonization of bacteria in the gut and leads to the release of a potent neurotoxin. The toxin produced is absorbed from the intestines. It acts on the presynaptic receptors, and the release of acetylcholine is inhibited. In foodborne botulism, there is ingestion of the preformed toxin, whereas, in infantile botulism, the toxin is produced in the gut. There is a continuous production of the toxin in infantile botulism as there is bacterial colonization of the large intestine. The affected age group is usually younger than 1 year, with a peak incidence at about 3 months. More severe symptoms are noticed in infants younger than 2 months of age. The first symptom to present is often constipation. Other characteristic features include cranial nerve involvement, respiratory problems, hypotonia, feeding difficulties, and decreased reflexes. The weakness appears to progress in a descending fashion. Diagnosis is made by isolating Clostridium botulinum bacteria itself or the botulinum neurotoxin from the stool. The prognosis is relatively good as recovery will be complete, but it takes several months. If proper care is provided, then there is a less than 2% case-fatality rate. Treatment is mostly supportive care with special attention to pulmonary hygiene and nutritional support. Antibiotics are avoided as they are not known to have any benefit, and they may lead to lysis of bacteria in the intestines resulting in the release of large amounts of toxins.

**C. Drug toxicity - magnesium and aminoglycosides**

Aminoglycosides provide coverage against gram-negative bacteria and are commonly used in neonates and infants when there is a concern for sepsis and/or meningitis. They are potentially toxic and can cause renal toxicity, ototoxicity, and neuromuscular blockade. Gentamicin has been found to have maximum neuromuscular blocking action. The effects on the neuromuscular junction are greater in the case of preterm neonates due to immature renal function leading to higher levels of the drug in the serum. Clinical features include weakness of muscle and hypotonia. Aminoglycosides must be avoided in patients with neuromuscular junction disorders such as infantile botulism and myasthenia like syndromes.

A magnesium level of more than 1.15 mmol/L (2.8mg/dL) is defined as hypermagnesemia in neonates. It is frequently seen in babies born to mothers who received treatment for eclampsia with magnesium sulfate. Clinical features include hypotonia, hypo/areflexia, respiratory depression, poor feeding, bradycardia, and ileus. The monitoring of the magnesium level and supportive care is often sufficient.

**D. Muscle disorders**

Congenital muscular dystrophies are inherited disorders. The classification is based on the clinical features in the patients and certain biochemical defects. The presentation can vary from a mild disorder with survival into adulthood to a fatal disease with a poor prognosis. The 2 most common types are:

- Congenital muscular dystrophy type 1A - Laminin-A2 is deficient in 30%-40% of patients. Clinical features include peripheral hypotonia, joint contractures, delayed motor milestone achievement, kyphoscoliosis, and respiratory problems. The disease begins at an early age during infancy or early childhood. Intelligence is normal in the majority of patients. Skeletal muscle biopsy would be significant for dystrophic changes. End-stage muscle disease has findings of increased muscle fibrosis.

- Ullrich congenital muscular dystrophy is another common cause of congenital muscular dystrophy. It presents with torticollis, kyphoscoliosis, distal joint hyperelasticity, and proximal joint contractures. Physiotherapy may improve scoliosis and contractures. Intelligence is often normal. Follicular hyperkeratosis may be an additional finding in some cases. Diagnosis is with genetic testing and biopsy of the skeletal muscle with immunohistochemical analysis.

Congenital myopathies are a group of muscle diseases that are classified based on certain characteristic features. They are present at birth and usually present with hypotonia, feeding problems, delay in milestone achievement, and muscle weakness.

- Central core/multi-mini core disease - usually does not progress or progresses very slowly. It is associated with malignant hyperthermia because of the defective ryanodine receptor. Biopsy of the muscle shows type 1 muscle fibers lacking oxidative enzyme activity.

- Nemaline myopathy presents with peripheral hypotonia at birth, scoliosis, and muscle weakness. A high arched palate and facial weakness are also noticed. 3 forms are inherited in an autosomal recessive manner, which includes the severe form seen in the neonatal period, the milder classic form, and the late-onset form.

- Myotubular myopathy - it mainly affects males. This should be suspected when there is neonatal hypotonia in a male, a positive family history of X-linked inheritance, macrocephaly, arachnodactyly, and cryptorchidism. The severe form presents with severe hypotonia, and patients often require respiratory support due to insufficiency. Prenatal history is significant for decreased fetal movements and polyhydramnios. Patients with the moderate form have a better prognosis. They achieve milestones earlier as compared to the severe form and mostly do not require respiratory support.