**PPD Skin Test Interpretation Based on CDC Guidelines**

The result of the PPD test is either positive or negative. However, the size of the induration diameter cutoff (5, 10, or 15 mm) for the test to be considered positive is based on certain risk factors. As the diameter cutoff increases, the sensitivity of this test declines, and the specificity increases. For instance, the sensitivity of this test is highest (98%) for a positivity cutoff of 5 mm of induration.

Induration of less than 5 mm is considered positive in the following cases:

- Individuals infected with HIV who have had close contact with an active contagious case

Induration of 5 mm or greater is considered positive in the following cases:

- Immunosuppressed individuals, including those receiving long-term steroids (the equivalent of prednisone ≥15 mg/day for ≥1 month), chemotherapy, or tumor necrosis factor-alpha inhibitors

- Individuals infected with HIV

- Close contact with patients with active TB

- Prior TB signs on chest radiography, such as fibronodular changes

- Organ transplant recipients

Induration of 10 mm or more is considered positive in the following cases:

- Emigrants from countries where TB is considered endemic, or the incidence of infection is greater than 25/100,000

- Employees and residents in high-risk settings, such as prisons, mycobacteriology labs, healthcare settings, and homeless shelters

- Injection drug users

- Mycobacteriology laboratory professionals

- Children less than four years of age

- Those with chronic medical conditions that increase the risk of reactivation TB, including diabetes mellitus, chronic renal failure on dialysis, silicosis, malignancy (leukemia, lymphoma, or cancer of the head, neck, or lung), a history of jejunoileal bypass

- Individuals weighing less than 90% of the ideal body weight

- Infants, children, and adolescents exposed to those in high-risk categories

Induration of 15 mm or more is considered positive in the following cases:

- Healthy individuals older than four years of age with a low likelihood of TB infection

**Positive PPD Skin Test**

If the risk of TB infection is very high, the PPD test need not be repeated. The greater the risk due to risk factors, the higher the positive predictive value of the PPD TST. A TB symptom assessment, physical examination, and chest radiograph usually follow the positive PPD test.

If there are no symptoms of TB and no evidence of active tuberculosis infection on the physical examination and chest radiograph, the patient most likely has latent TB (LTBI), and treatment should be initiated. However, if the clinical evaluation or chest radiograph is positive, additional tests, including a sputum test, urine test, or tissue biopsy, may be performed to confirm the diagnosis of active disease.

**Negative PPD Skin Test**

If the patient is at a high risk of developing an active TB infection, a repeat test is recommended if the initial test is negative. Repeat testing should also be performed if the initial test was done within eight weeks of known exposure. In very high-risk patients, the repeat test may also be negative secondary to a lack of immune response. In this situation, treatment may be considered.

**PPD Skin Test Conversion**

According to the CDC, a repeat PPD TST is considered positive if induration is greater than ten mm and has increased by at least six mm compared with the previous test. This test interpretation is less sensitive but more specific.

**PPD Skin Test Reversion**

The conversion of a previously positive test to a negative one is called Mantoux test reversion and is seen in fewer than 10% of individuals. This phenomenon may be seen in those with waning natural immunity, such as in older adults, where the previous positive PPD result was the result of a boosted response on two-step testing.