Forearm amputations require a deep understanding of the local musculoskeletal and neurovascular structures and a thorough knowledge of regional soft tissue to allow flaps, muscle, and tendon transfer to achieve the best functional outcome. In this article, we will focus on local structures.

The goal of trans-radial amputation is to preserve as much length as possible, as this directly correlates with the amount of pronation-supination that can occur. This is a crucial feature in maintaining the functional ability of the limbs and prostheses. It ranges from 120 for wrist disarticulations, down to 0 for very short stump lengths.

The forearm skeleton has the radius which rotates around the axis of the ulna. Arising from these are a total of 20 muscles divided into the anterior (flexor/pronator) and posterior (extensor/supinator) compartments. The two flexors of the upper arm – biceps brachii and brachialis both attach onto the radius and ulna, respectively. These are vital considerations, as tendon transfer of the biceps tendon from the radial tuberosity to the ulna in short amputations provides increased function.

Neurovascularly, there are three primary nerves – the median, ulna, and radial nerves. The median nerve provides primary innervation for the flexors directly and indirectly via the anterior interosseous branch, which supplied flexor pollicis longus and the lateral half of flexor digitorum profundus. The ulna nerve supplies the flexor carpi ulnaris and medial half of flexor digitorum profundus. The radial nerve is the primary nerve for the entire extensor compartment and branches into the posterior interosseous nerve, which supplies the extensors, abductor pollicis longus, and supinator muscles.

Primarily the skeletal considerations are paramount for functional outcomes, however soft tissue coverage can prove challenging. Depending on the cause, the consideration for tissue transfers or flaps may be required.