Synthetic progestins have longer half-lives (several hours) than endogenous progesterone (5 to 7 minutes). Metabolism of progestins occurs primarily by cytochrome P450 enzymes in the liver, and excretion is via the urine. In general, there are no examinations or tests needed before the initiation of contraception. The exceptions include blood pressure measurement if prescribing combined hormonal contraception, bimanual examination, and cervical inspection for IUDs. Women who have a current STI or those with a high likelihood of STI exposure should not undergo IUD insertion. Weight and BMI measurements are not needed for any contraceptive method but are recommended to establish a baseline. Any additional testing is not necessary for most women (i.e., medically uncomplicated). Routine follow-up appointments specifically for contraception are also unnecessary.

All contraceptive methods can be started at any time during the cycle if reasonably sure the woman is not pregnant.

The user failure rate with COCs is estimated to be 7%, and this rate with POPs is >7%.

Although the user failure rate is multifactorial, it is also essential to consider specific populations when advising patients on the best choice of contraception. For example, oral contraceptives can be challenging for adolescents due to daily adherence and refilling the prescription every month. The long-acting reversible methods (IUDs and implants) are considered first-line options for these patients by the American Academy of Pediatrics and the American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists.