**Prehospital Splinting Options**

- Arm sling - used to immobilize suspected shoulder injuries. They provide a pouch for the arm to sit with the weight of the extremity distributed to the neck and upper back.

- Shoulder immobilizer - a removable hook-and-loop fastener device that keeps the arm in a position across the upper abdomen. This splint allows for less movement and mobility than a sling and is easy to place in any setting.

- Knee immobilizer - a removable circumferential material that encases the knee joint and provides stabilization from the mid-thigh to the proximal ankle. This splint inhibits the knee from flexion and keeps the knee in a fixed extended state, which is helpful for certain knee joint injuries.

- Ankle stirrup - a splint that is quickly applied in the field. It consists of an air-padded wrap with hook-and-loop fastener straps securing the splint. It is used more for stable ankle injuries; however, when there is time restriction or limited supplies can be used to stabilize the ankle joint.

- Traction splints - are mostly used when there is a suspected fracture involving long bones. The splint consists of a metal exoskeleton that runs longitudinally on either side of the affected extremity. There are then straps between the parallel metal bars that secure the extremity to the splint. The splint extends further than the extremity and has a belt intended to be secured to the distal extremity. This strap can then provide axial traction by pulling the extremity distally to mimic normal bone stability and limb length.

- Air splints - are a deflated air bladder applied in a circumferential manner around the injured extremity. Once applied, they are inflated with air pressure, which applies compressive support to immobilize the covered area.

- Vacuum splints - are a deflated nylon splint filled with foam-like beads. They are applied longitudinally along the injured extremity and strapped circumferentially. The splint is then deflated with negative pressure, which allows the nylon and bead material to conform to the injured extremity providing rigid immobilization firmly.

- Rigid splints - are unpadded and consist of solid materials that are less flexible than other splints. Materials can consist of different metals, wood, plastic, or any available rigid material. When the rigid material is applied, the splint can then be secured to the extremity with the circumferential application of any available bandage, straps, or materials available. These materials can be used to make sugar tong, volar, ulnar gutter, posterior, and stirrup splints, to name a few.