The elbow joint is considered relatively stable; however, elbow dislocations are a fairly common occurrence. This injury frequently occurs during sporting activities when a person falls on an extended elbow. In most instances, the semilunar notch of the ulna is dislocated posteriorly from the distal humerus. If there is no fracture associated with the dislocation, it is described as simple, and the injury is often closed with no bony protrusion through the skin.
The stability of the elbow joint due to its bony structure means that significant force is required to disrupt the joint. Therefore, an associated fracture may be found along with the elbow dislocation thus classifying the dislocation as complex. Neurovascular complications are rare from a simple, closed, posterior dislocation. This activity reviews the etiology, presentation, evaluation, and management of posterior elbow dislocation, and reviews the role of the interprofessional team in evaluating, diagnosing, and managing the condition.

**Objectives:**
- Describe the mechanism of action that most commonly causes a posterior elbow dislocation.
- Outline the steps in an evaluation of a possible posterior elbow examination, including appropriate imaging where indicated.
- Review reduction and management options for a posterior elbow dislocation, including possible concomitant injuries.
- Explain why careful planning and discussion among interprofessional team members involved in the management of patients with posterior elbow dislocation will improve outcomes.