The surgical success depends on the accurate identification and localization of all the retinal breaks. A thorough pre-operative attempt should be made to search for all the breaks as any untreated break(s) can lead to surgical failure. It is reported that around 50% of the detachments have more than one break.

Lincoff established a set of rules for identifying the primary break(s) based on the topography of the detachment.

- The primary break(s) in a total bullous RRD should be located between 11 to 1’o clock.

- The primary break(s) in a superior RRD with one side below the horizontal meridian should be present within 1.5 clock hours from 12’o clock on the same side. It should be remembered that inferior breaks never lead to bullous RD. The break in a bullous inferior RD should be located in the superior half with fluid tracking down from the peripheral retina. The track can be made prominent by asking the patient to lie with their head in a hyperextended position.

- The primary break(s) in a temporal/ nasal RD should be located within 1.5 clock hours from the highest point of detachment.

- The primary break(s) in a superior RD with another bullous component should be located at the edge of the bullous part.

- The primary break(s) in an inferior symmetrical RD should be located at 6’o clock.

- The primary break(s) in an asymmetric inferior RD should be located within 1.5 clock hours from the highest point of RD.

- RD localized to the posterior pole in high myopic eyes with posterior staphyloma is usually caused by a macular hole.

The surgical steps include:

**1. Conjunctival peritomy**: A 360-degree circumferential peritomy is performed with the help of non-toothed conjunctival forceps and a blunt-tipped Wescott scissor. It can be performed either at the limbus or 2 to 3 mm away from it. Two radial incisions are usually given at 3 and 9’o clock to prevent the conjunctiva from tearing while retracting it to get adequate scleral exposure. Blunt-tipped Steven’s tenotomy scissors are then inserted in the subtenon’s space between two adjacent recti in all four quadrants and spread wide open (without cutting) to strip the intermuscular septum.

**2. Muscle bridling**: Traction sutures are placed on all four recti to move and stabilize the eyeball for performing the various surgical maneuvers. This is performed by placing a muscle hook on the sclera posterior to the muscle insertion, passing it under the muscle in a circumferential fashion, and then bringing it anteriorly to engage the muscle. It should be ensured that no resistance is felt while hooking the muscle. Any resistance suggests that the hook is not in the correct plane. In this case, the hook should be removed and re-inserted; otherwise, the muscle can get split. A braided 2.0 silk suture is used to bridle the muscles. Care must be exercised to avoid muscle injury and scleral perforation while passing the suture under the muscle. This can be achieved with the help of a modified muscle hook with a threading eyelet at its tip or passing an inverse suture in a tangential manner (instead of radial). The suture is then thrown into two knots. One knot is tied close to the muscle and used for stabilizing the muscle, while the other is tied close to the open end of the suture and used to pull the traction suture. The surgeon should ensure that the full thickness of muscle is included in the traction suture as incompletely included muscle can get ruptured while pulling the traction suture. The attachments of the tenon’s capsule to the recti and the sclera are then stripped off gently.

The usual sequence for muscle bridling is the medial rectus (MR), followed by the inferior rectus (IR), the LR, and finally, the SR muscle. Both the horizontal can be pulled inferiorly to get a better exposure while bridling the SR muscle. The heart rate should constantly be monitored while pulling the recti as it can trigger the oculocardiac reflex, leading to bradycardia. Any fall in the heart rate warrants immediate muscle release and intravenous atropine if bradycardia persists.

**3. Inspection**: The eyeball should be inspected for the presence of any areas of scleral thinning or anomalous vortex veins.

**4. Break(s) localization**: Indirect ophthalmoscopy is performed to localize the previously identified retinal breaks. The breaks are then marked on the scleral surface with the help of gentle diathermy, heated needle head, marker pen, cryoprobe, or other specially designed localizers. A small break is marked with a single spot in the center, while a large HST is marked with three spots, i.e.one at the posterior margin of the break and the other two at each end of the horns. Retinal dialysis is marked with one spot at each end and one at the posterior extent of its mid-point.

The presence of bullous RD can make precise identification of the anteroposterior location of break(s) difficult. Peyman et al. proposed that SRF drainage can make break localization easier. This technique is called as **D-ACE sequence**(Drainage-Air, Cryo, Encirclage).

**5. Treatment of retinal breaks**: The cryo-spots should be given contiguously all around the retinal break(s). An immediate tissue reaction is seen on applying cryotherapy in the form of retinal whitening, which progressively expands outwards in all directions. The treatment is continued for 2 or 3 seconds after a distinct whitening of the NSR is observed. In the case of a bullous RD, an orangish hue within the indented choroid can be taken as the endpoint. The surgeon should ensure that the scleral indentation produced around the break is due to the cryoprobe tip and not the shaft, as improper technique can lead to inadvertent posterior freeze. The shaft of the cryoprobe can be covered with a sleeve to prevent inadvertent cryo-treatment to the adjacent areas.

The tip of the cryoprobe should be allowed to thaw completely before attempting removal to avoid complications like choroidal hemorrhage or scleral avulsion. Care must be exercised to avoid damaging the vortex veins while moving the probe from one point to another. Excess cryotherapy should be avoided as it can cause RPE pigment dispersion, leading to ERM formation and proliferative vitreoretinopathy (PVR) changes.

It should be remembered that the breaks in the attached retina should be treated first. While treating a break, its anterior margin should be treated first. Suspicious lesions should always be treated. In fact, retinal breaks tend to become prominent after cryo-treatment as the red-colored breaks become better visible in the presence of white background.

**6. Placement of the exoplants**: Exoplants should be placed to support the retinal breaks. The tires should extend 30 degrees or 1 clock hour on either side of the tear and 1 or 2 mm beyond the posterior margin of the posterior-most break.

**7. Placement of scleral sutures**: The sutures can be placed either before or after placing the explants. Adequate exposure of the scleral surface is extremely crucial for placing the scleral sutured. This is achieved by pulling the traction sutures attached to the adjacent recti at an obtuse angle as well as retracting the conjunctiva. For example, the SR is pulled nasally, and LR is pulled inferiorly to place a suture in the supero-temporal quadrant. Laxity of the traction sutures while suturing can lead to scleral perforation.

Mattress sutures with an intrascleral length of 4 to 5 mm are placed parallel to the long axis of the explant in a square configuration at approximately half the scleral thickness. Irregular or nonparallel sutures produce a lesser indentation effect. The tip of the needle is placed on the scleral surface such that its tangent is parallel to the scleral surface. Gentle downward pressure is applied to create a small scleral indent, and the needle is advanced downwards until the desired depth is achieved. The needle is then advanced forward without applying any downward pressure, making sure that it is visible throughout its course. After an adequate intrascleral length is achieved, the needle is taken out by applying slight upward pressure. The tip of the needle can then be grasped to remove the needle along its curve. The needle should be removed gently, as applying too much downward pressure on the heel of the needle can lead to scleral perforation. The entrance and exit wounds should not be too shallow as they can partially tear out under tension.

While placing sutures around a circumferential explant, the posterior bite of the suture is taken first. Similarly, while placing sutures around a radial explant, the anteroposterior bite is taken first. While placing sutures in the inferior half, the posterior bite is taken in a forward direction, and the anterior bite is taken in a reverse manner. While placing sutures in the superior half, the surgeon has to fold their arm such that his hand faces up toward them and their elbow faces down toward the patient’s feet. Both the bites are then taken in a reverse manner.

The distance between the suture bites should be greater than the width of the explant so that the sclera partially envelops the explant, thus creating an indent. The suture should never lie between the explant and sclera as it increases the chances of scleral erosions.

i) Radial explant: The width of the sutures should be at least 1.5 times that of the explant. For example, sutures for placing a 5mm sponge should be placed at least 8mm apart. The assistant needs to tightly pull both the ends of the sponge during suture placement.

ii) Circumferential explant: The anterior bite is placed at least 1mm posterior to the muscle insertion. The suture bites are placed 1 to 2 mm wider than the buckle width on either side. For example, the posterior bite for placing tire number 276 or 277 is placed around 11 mm (1+1.5+7+1.5) posterior to the muscle insertion.

A Watzke sleeve or a clove hitch knot (CHK) is used to suture the encircling band end-to-end. Segmental buckles (without 360 degrees encirclage) have been found to be effective in eyes with localized shallow RD caused by a single break or retinal dialysis or multiple breaks localized within 1 or 2 clock hours.

**8. SRF drainage**brings the retinal break(s) closer to the RPE. This reverses the fluid flow and provides volume for the buckling element. The various indications for SRF drainage include bullous and chronic RD, high myopia, aphakia, inferior retinal break(s), old patients with poor RPE function, inability to localize any retinal break, and intolerance to high IOP (glaucoma).

The following points should be kept in mind while selecting the site for SRF drainage:

- Presence of sufficient SRF

- Avoid vertical meridian to avoid damaging the vortex veins

- Prefer location at or slightly anterior to the equator to reduce the chances of choroidal bleed as the choroid is less vascular in this region

- Prefer the nasal quadrant as any accidental subretinal bleed is less likely to track under the macula

- Prefer under the explant as any inadvertent retinal break gets supported

- Avoid area treated with cryotherapy to prevent choroidal hemorrhage secondary to the choroidal congestion

- Avoid areas with a large break to prevent vitreous loss

There are two major techniques for SRFD.

i) “Cut down technique”: The proposed site is treated with moderate cautery. A 3 mm scleral incision is then made deep enough to make a small knuckle of the dark choroid bulge into the incision. This knuckle of the choroid is treated with diathermy to coagulate the choroidal vessels. Pressure from the globe is completely relieved, and the choroidal knuckle is slowly penetrated with a needle for about 2 mm until SRF starts draining.

ii) Trans-scleral needle drainage: A 26G needle is used to perforate the sclera. The needle is slowly advanced until the resistance gives away, and SRF starts draining. This is achieved roughly when the hub of the needle penetrates.

Once SRF drainage starts, further drainage is facilitated by pulling the traction sutures to increase the intraocular pressure and pressing the sclera anterior to the drainage site. The endpoint of drainage is indicated by the appearance of pigment particles. If drainage stops pre-maturely, the drainage site should be inspected with indirect ophthalmoscopy to look for any retinal incarceration, which appears like star-shaped folds radiating from the drainage site. No attempt should be made to reposition the incarcerated retina as this can cause greater damage. Instead, another retinotomy should be made.

The eye usually becomes soft after SRF drainage and needs to be reformed with an intravitreal injection of saline or air. The assistant should not release the traction sutures until the lost volume is replaced, as hypotony can cause suprachoroidal effusion or hemorrhages, hyphaema, and pupillary constriction.

**9. Adjustment of the buckle height**: The loose scleral sutures are tightened to achieve an adequate buckle height. The knots can be rotated posteriorly to prevent conjunctival erosions. Excessive tightening of the encircling band should be avoided as this can lead to “fish-mouthing.”

**10. Final examination**: Retina should be examined to check the optic disc perfusion, the buckle height, the retinal breaks, and the site of SRF drainage. A pale disc or arterial pulsations warrant paracentesis to reduce the intraocular pressure

**11. Closure of tenon and conjunctiva**: The tenon’s capsule and conjunctiva are irrigated with a balanced salt solution to remove the blood clots and other debris as well as broad-spectrum antibiotics (gentamycin, 40 mg/mL). It is better to suture them in two different layers. A complete closure prevents complications like buckle exposure and buckle infection.

**12. Documentation**: All details regarding the break(s), site of SRF drainage, the type of explant used, the position of scleral sutures and Watzke sleeve or CHK, and any intraoperative complications should be correctly documented for future reference or re-surgery.