The ubiquitous fungi in the order Mucorales often thrive on decaying plant debris and soil. The most common genera causing human infections include Rhizopus, Lichtheimia, Apophysomyces, Mucor, and Rhizomucor. Human infections are less commonly caused by Cunninghamella and Saksenaea. The most commonly isolated mucormycosis species in the world is Rhizopus arrhizus, though Apophysomyces variabilis is most common in Asia, and Lichtheimia species is predominant in Europe.

The most common clinical presentation is rhino-orbital cerebral mucormycosis, and the commonest etiology for rhino-orbital cerebral mucormycosis is Rhizopus oryzae. Rhino-orbital cerebral mucormycosis almost always occurs in immunocompromised persons, including uncontrolled diabetes mellitus, especially with acidosis or ketoacidosis, steroid therapy, solid organ or hematopoietic stem cell transplant recipients, chemotherapy, hematologic dyscrasias, retroviral disease, and malnourishment. The preponderance is also noted in patients on deferoxamine therapy, iron overload state, and intravenous drug abuse. Cases of rhino-orbital cerebral mucormycosis occurring following facial burns or scleral buckling procedures have been reported. Rare reports of rhino-orbital cerebral mucormycosis have also been published in immunocompetent hosts.

The rapidly growing saprophytic fungi release a large number of spores into the environment. These sporangiospores are commonly inhaled by the host, and in hosts with normal immune status, the ciliary system directs the spores towards the pharynx, thereby eliminating them via the gastrointestinal system. The spores might also get colonized in the oral mucous membranes, nose, throat, and paranasal sinuses. Mucorales do not cause disease in the host with an intact immune system where phagocytosis could effectively contain the invasion and infection. When the phagocytosis is impaired due to immune deficiency, the germination of spores into hyphae with resultant angioinvasion is initiated. The initial site of infection in rhino-orbital cerebral mucormycosis is the nasal turbinates. An acute episode of sinusitis progresses into pan sinus involvement within a few days with contiguous spread to the palate, orbit, and brain resulting in severe tissue ischemia and necrosis due to the angioinvasive nature of the fungus.