The internal auditory canal begins in the temporal bone within the cranial cavity at an oval-shaped opening called the porus acusticus internus. The canal runs through the petrous segment of the temporal bone, which is located between the inner ear and posterior cranial fossa. It is lined by dura and filled with spinal fluid. The rounded and smooth canal is on average 8.5mm (5.5 to 10.mm) in length and about 4mm in diameter.

The canal narrows as it moves towards the fundus, a thin cribriform plate of bone that marks the lateral boundary of the canal. The fundus separates the internal auditory canal from the cochlea and vestibule which are located in close proximity.

The vestibulocochlear nerve runs most often posteriorly to the facial nerve in the internal auditory canal. In the lateral segment of the internal auditory canal, about 3 to -4mm from the fundus, the cochlear and vestibular nerves join to form one common nerve. The vestibular portion is further segmented into the superior and inferior portions at the fundus.

The singular canal is a significant landmark during surgery of the internal auditory canal and labyrinth. It carries the posterior ampullary nerves (PAN) and enters the internal auditory canal in the posteroinferior aspect near the fundus.

The facial nerve is found most often in the anterosuperior quadrant of the internal auditory canal. The facial nerve exits the internal auditory canal at the meatal foramen and continues towards the geniculate ganglion as the labyrinthine segment. The nervus intermedius is a branch of the facial nerve located posteriorly to the facial nerve and anterior to the superior vestibular nerve in the internal auditory canal.