- Nutrition to the bony tissue: periosteal blood vessel supplies the bony wall and internal osseous tissue up to some extent.

- Bone growth: During the development of the bone, the periosteum is thick and contains osteoprogenitor cells; Osteoblasts differentiated from the osteoprogenitor cells are crucial for the appositional growth of the bone.

- Repair: Osteoprogenitor cells present in the periosteum are multipotent stem cells (MSC) that can induce bone development whenever required, like with a fracture of the bone.

- Bone modeling and remodeling: Periosteum, endosteum, and its cells play a critical role in modeling and remodeling. 

- Bone remodeling is a process where osteoclasts and osteoblasts work sequentially to reshape and renew bone; the process continues throughout life. It divides into four phases; (a) recruitment and activation of osteoclasts, (b) resorption of old bony tissue, (c) apoptosis of osteoclasts, and activation of osteoblasts (d) laying of new organic matrix and mineralization.
- Bone modeling is a process to shape the bone during growth, development, and healing. Mechanical factors like stress, strain, tension, muscular attachment, etc. play an important role in bone modeling. Osteoblasts and osteoclast play an independent role in bone modeling.

- Calcium Homeostasis: Endosteum plays a role in the deposition of calcium in the matrix; as well, it is a medium for the transfer of calcium between the bony matrix and blood.

- The periosteum is a medium for the attachment of muscles, tendons, and ligaments to the bone. Tendon fibers perforate the outer layer of the periosteum and continue as the perforating fibers of Sharpey.

- Limiting membrane: Periosteum appears to prevent spilling out of the osseous tissue so also known as limiting membrane.