Since many of these patients are often victims of multisystem trauma, ATLS (Advanced Trauma Life Support) protocol should be followed. History should be obtained from EMS, the patient (if able to provide a coherent history), family, and witnesses. It is vital to obtain history about the mechanism of injury, any focal neurologic deficits that were appreciated, seizures, vomiting, or changes in level of consciousness since the injury. Other important questions relate to intoxication, use of anticoagulant or antiplatelet medications, and other comorbid diseases.

An important element of both the history obtained from EMS and the physical examination is the determination of the Glasgow coma scale (GCS), as this will be trended throughout the hospital stay. GCS is scored on a scale of 1-15 based on eye-opening, verbal response, and motor response. On further physical exam of the head-injured patient with coma or altered mental status, a single fixed and dilated pupil is concerning for uncal herniation. Bilateral fixed and dilated pupils may indicate severely increased ICP with poor perfusion, bilateral uncal herniation, or hypoxemia. Assess movement in the upper and lower extremities in response to the command and/or noxious stimuli. Decorticate posturing (upper extremity flexion and lower extremity extension) indicates a severe injury likely above the level of the midbrain. Decerebrate posturing (extension and internal rotation of both the upper and lower extremities with wrist/finger flexion) indicates a more caudal brain injury. Examine brainstem reflexes (respiratory pattern, pupillary reflex, corneal reflex, cough, and gag reflex) in comatose patients who are useful for purposes of diagnosis and prognostication.

The physical exam should be repeated frequently, as changes may indicate increasing ICP or impending herniation. Signs and symptoms of increasing ICP include systolic hypertension, bradycardia, agonal respirations (these first three are collectively known as Cushing's triad), severe headache, vision changes, nausea, vomiting, lethargy, focal weakness/paresthesias, or coma. Signs of impending brain shift or herniation may include progressive neurologic decline, unilateral/bilateral pupillary dilation, hemiparesis, or abnormal posturing.