Cholelithiasis or gallstones are hardened deposits of digestive fluid that can form in your gallbladder. The gallbladder is a small organ located just beneath the liver. The gallbladder holds a digestive fluid known as bile that is released into your small intestine. In the United States, 6% of men and 9% of women have gallstones, most of which are asymptomatic. In patients with asymptomatic gallstones discovered incidentally, the likelihood of developing symptoms or complications is 1% to 2% per year. Asymptomatic gallbladder stones found in a normal gallbladder and normal biliary tree do not need treatment unless they develop symptoms. However, approximately 20% of these asymptomatic gallstones will develop symptoms over 15 years of follow-up. These gallstones may go on further to develop complications such as cholecystitis, cholangitis, choledocholithiasis, gallstone pancreatitis, and rarely cholangiocarcinoma. This activity reviews the etiology, presentation, evaluation, and management of cholelithiasis, and reviews the role of the interprofessional team in evaluating, diagnosing, and managing the condition.

**Objectives:**
- Discuss the different etiologies that can result in cholelithiasis.
- Describe the evaluation process for potential cholelithiasis, including physical exam findings, laboratory analysis, and diagnostic imaging testing.
- Review the various treatment options for a patient with cholelithiasis.
- Evaluate possible interprofessional team strategies for improving care coordination and communication to advance the evaluation and treatment of cholelithiasis and improve outcomes.