Different imaging techniques are the most effective way to determine the size and location of an abscess. Pelvic ultrasound is the first method of choice to evaluate a pelvic mass in the women of reproductive age group. It can help in differentiating between the fluid-filled lesion and the solid lesion. It is a relatively easy and inexpensive method of imaging with no ionizing radiation. On ultrasound, an abscess appears a collection of pus with different sizes of delicate internal echoes. Transvaginal ultrasound is always superior to transabdominal ultrasound.

Ultrasound is still the safe and first method of choice in women of reproductive age group and tubo-ovarian abscess. A study conducted by Hiller et al. demonstrates that the majority of cases are multilocular 85%, and 73% had internal fluid echos, 95% has thick enhancing uniform abscess wall. Other common findings demonstrated were mesosalpinx 91% and infiltration into fat. A less common finding on CT was bowel thickening and infiltration of the uterosacral ligament.

Other radiological techniques used in diagnosis include computed tomography and magnetic resonance. Computed tomography (CT) and magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) are cross-sectional imaging methods often used in postoperative patients with suspected abscess. In postoperative patients, the ultrasound is less likely to locate the pelvic abscess because of the collection of postoperative air, open surgical wounds, and abundant gas.

Moreover, other investigations include complete blood count, blood culture, exudate culture and sensitivity, wet mount test of vaginal discharge, and a urine pregnancy test to rule out an intrauterine and ectopic pregnancy.