At one time, healthcare-associated infection (HAI) was viewed as an unavoidable risk of care. Systematic reviews of healthcare epidemiology in US hospitals has shown that 100% prevention of HAI may not be achievable. However, 65-70% of CLABSI and CAUTI and 55% of VAP and SSI may be preventable with infection prevention strategies.

Infection prevention and control programs are rooted in quality improvement activities that use protocols and interventions to decrease the risk of acquisition and transmission of infection within healthcare settings. Infection prevention teams work with healthcare providers and staff to develop, implement, and monitor protocols and interventions that aim to limit HAI. Education of healthcare providers, hand hygiene, cleaning and disinfecting medical equipment, environmental contamination prevention, isolation precautions, and surveillance of data analysis are examples of such interventions. These interventions should start with staff who are directly in contact with the patients, such as nurses, providers, medical technicians, and environmental service staff.

Pharmacists may be involved through the monitoring of antimicrobial stewardship programs to limit inappropriate antibiotic use and help to prevent resistant pathogens. Laboratory technicians can help with keeping track of antibiograms and susceptibility patterns to facilitate antibiotic stewardship programs.

Studies have shown that implementing infection prevention and control programs can reduce the length of stay and avoid additional costs. It is estimated that hospitals can avoid between 12,000 to 223,000 HAIs and save $142 million to $4.25 billion annually with infection prevention measures.

Most recent studies show a pay-off for healthcare systems to adopting HAI reduction programs. A study from 2015  to 2018 showed that the hospital cost of eliminating one HAI was $25,008. However, the profit was $582,464, which is highly encouraging to a hospital management perspective that reduction of HAI is profitable to hospitals.

With the growing body of evidence for monitoring HAI within the United States, the prevalence has significantly decreased in the last decade. Specifically, the prevention of SSI and CAUTI had the greatest success. This success is rooted in quality improvement initiatives for reducing SSI and CAUTI. The prevalence of pneumonia and CDI had little change in prevalence. This addresses a need for continued improvement in infection prevention and control programs. HAP, particularly NV-HAP, requires more attention and prevention efforts.

A recent model showed that the prevention of NV-HAP by 50% could save 9,886 lives, 487,622 additional hospital days, and $2.43 billion annually, resulting in significantly decreased morbidity, mortality, and financial burden.