The range of movement in the spine can subdivide into a neutral zone and an elastic zone. The neutral zone is the normal functional range of movement. There is very little stiffness of movement within the neutral zone. At the ends of the range of motion is the elastic zone, where the stiffness of the system increases. Because of the increased stiffness at the end ranges of movement, the load-displacement curve of the spine is non-linear with increased flexibility around the neutral position of the spine and increased passive resistance and decreased flexibility in the end ranges of motion.  Hence lumbar stability is the ability to maintain the spinal neutral zones during routine functional activity without causing the neurological deficit, significant deformity, or incapacitating pain.

Muscles provide stability in the neutral zone. Both strength and endurance are equally important. These factors contribute to endurance to maintain stability over long periods of static postures and increased strength when the spine is subject to suddenly increased stress like a fall or a sudden loading of the spine: both muscular strength and endurance decrease in patients with low back pain. The importance of the active system becomes apparent when attempting to link between clinically measurable parameters and back pain. Measures of lumbar lordosis, pelvic tilt, and leg length discrepancy, which measure the passive system does not seem to be as important as muscle strength and endurance, which are measures of the active system

Maintaining the spine in the neutral zone is important to prevent injury. In the elastic zone or at extremes of motion, there is likely a chance of injury when the spine is loaded. The work by Cholewicki and McGill on powerlifters with fluoroscopy showed that the active system prevents the spine from entering the elastic zone. Even when the powerlifters were in global full flexion, the individual lumbar segments were not in full flexion and remained in the neutral zone to protect the spine.

The mainstay of treatment in chronic low back pain is exercise and retraining to improve the strength and endurance of the muscles to provide stability during trunkal perturbations. Also, it is crucial to facilitate the proper and sequential firing of muscles. In a minority of patients, when non-surgical methods fail to address lumbar segmental instability, then surgical intervention through fusion may be necessary.