**Viable Pregnancy**

A stillbirth must be confirmed by ultrasound to rule out a live fetus. Fetal heart tones may be undetected by a fetoscope in the case of a viable pregnancy.

**Miscarriage**

A stillbirth must be differentiated from a miscarriage. The most accurate gestational age is calculated by comparing the estimated gestational age (EGA) calculated from the last menstrual period (LMP) with the (EGA) calculated from the first-trimester ultrasound and following established dating rules. If the LMP is unknown and there is no prior ultrasound, the EGA may be estimated by the birth weight or foot length of the fetus.

**Multifetal Pregnancy**

A multifetal pregnancy must be ruled out in the event there is a stillbirth accompanied by a living twin or triplet fetus.

**Underlying Maternal Illness**

Approximately 1/17 stillbirths are associated with severe maternal morbidity attributed to maternal illnesses.

**Infection**

Infections must be treated per CDC guidelines.

**Physical Assault**

Blunt trauma to the abdomen may result in fetal demise.

**The following are rarely associated with stillbirth but must be considered.**

**Poisoning**

The ingestion of drugs, food poisoning, or exposure to environmental toxins such as carbon monoxide may result in fetal demise and, if undiagnosed and untreated, may contribute to maternal morbidity and mortality.

**Abdominal Pregnancy**

This is very rare and is missed on ultrasound up to 45% of the time.

**Uterine Rupture**

This has been documented during medical induction for stillbirth in a patient with no prior history of uterine surgery and must be considered if indicated by the patient's symptoms.

**Partial Molar Pregnancy**

This fetus has 69 chromosomes and may present as a stillbirth. Triploidy is a fatal disorder. On occasion, a triploid fetus may survive for several months postnatally. Very rarely, due to mosaicism, the fetus may be diploid and the placenta triploid. A molar pregnancy is associated with a higher risk for preeclampsia and postpartum hemorrhage. Avoidance of pregnancy and surveillance of the quantitative Bhcg for up to one year is required to screen for persistent gestational trophoblastic disease.