The two most common techniques for nail anesthesia consist of the proximal digital block and the distal digital (wing or paronychial) block. The nerves that supply the nail travel along the lateral aspects of the finger. The **proximal digital block**utilizes this neural anatomy by injecting a local anesthetic in the lateral aspects of the finger base, which creates a field block and requires 10 to 15 minutes to become fully effective. A tourniquet can be placed to decrease blood in the surgical field and to prevent circulatory loss of the anesthetic. Common tools used for the tourniquet include gauze, Penrose drain, foley catheter, and surgical gloves.**distal digital block**, the injection site is found approximately 1 cm proximal and lateral to the angle of the proximal nail fold (PNF) and lateral nail folds (LNFs); this creates a localized block, requiring less anesthetic, and has a quicker effect. The preferred anesthetic is ropivacaine 1% due to its long duration, although any local anesthetic is a viable option.

Nail plate biopsy: This biopsy technique is relatively limited in diagnostic information and is primarily used for fungal culture. It is considered the simplest form of a nail biopsy. A portion of the nail plate is removed with a scissor or nail clipper. In most cases, this biopsy technique does not require anesthesia or hemostatic efforts. However, when a more proximal portion of the nail is required, the nail may be partially avulsed before the biopsy, which requires a digital block and hemostasis. Scarring is rare.

Nail bed biopsy: This is performed to diagnose skin lesions and rashes isolated under the nail plate. To perform a nail bed biopsy, the nail is commonly avulsed. Alternatively, a punch biopsy may be taken directly through the nail plate. After avulsion, the specimen is removed with an excisional biopsy taken longitudinally or via a punch biopsy tool. Biopsies larger than 3 mm in size often require a suture. Onycholysis may occur after the nail has regrown.

Nail fold biopsy: This is performed on the lateral nail folds to diagnose periungual lesions or rashes. The lesion is removed via a shave/punch tool or is excised with a scalpel. A nail elevator tool may be inserted below the surrounding nail fold to assist in easier removal of the lesion while also decreasing the nail matrix's risk of damage. Scarring is rare, and the biopsy site can be left to heal via secondary intention.

Nail matrix biopsy: The nail matrix biopsy is often employed to diagnose or rule out melanoma in patients with longitudinal melanonychia originating from the matrix. The nail may be partially or entirely avulsed, and the lesion is either biopsied via a punch tool or excised with a scalpel. It is important to note that it is best to excise the lesion horizontally rather than longitudinally, unlike nail bed biopsies. The biopsy site is often sutured for better cosmesis and regrowth of the nail. The site may be scarred, and the nail may regrow with a split nail deformity. Staining of the biopsy specimen before send-out can be helpful for orientation and histological interpretation by the pathologist.

Longitudinal nail biopsy: The longitudinal nail biopsy is often used for large and laterally located lesions or when a sample of the entire nail unit may be required to diagnose the underlying pathology. One such example is longitudinal melanonychia, which may be a sign of melanoma. With this technique, the nail matrix, bed, fold, and hyponychium are all sampled simultaneously and give the most diagnostic information. To perform the biopsy, an incision is made in-line with the lateral nail fold starting midway between the cuticle and distal interphalangeal joint crease and followed distally to the nail tip. Another incision is placed up to 3 mm medial or lateral to the initial incision within the nail plate to connect each incision's proximal and distal apices. The tissue is then lifted with a skin hook or forceps and removed with tissue scissors to bone depth. The biopsy site is then sutured for optimal healing and cosmesis. This technique is the most invasive nail biopsy technique and has the highest risk for scarring and nail dystrophy.

Hemostasis can be obtained via chemical coagulation with aluminum chloride, Monsel’s solution, or less common hyfrecation. A popular technique is holding pressure over the biopsy site. Alternatively, pressure can be applied over the digital arteries after the biopsy is complete. After waiting at least 5 minutes and ensuring there is hemostasis, cleaning and dressing application can commence.