The critical element in the treatment of malignant hyperthermia is immediate dantrolene administration. Once a malignant hyperthermia episode is suspected, all triggering agents must be discontinued and the patient hyperventilated with 100% oxygen with non-triggering anesthetic agents utilized for patient care, and surgery should be ended as soon as possible. Dantrolene in a dose of 2.5 mg/kg must be administered intravenously as soon as possible, up to a maximum dose of 10mg/kg until the reaction subsides. In addition to administering dantrolene, attention also must be paid to correct hyperthermia, acidosis, hypoxemia, arrhythmias, and preserving renal function. Arrhythmias can be treated with antiarrhythmic, and renal function can be protected from possible acute tubular necrosis (due to precipitation of released myoglobin from the skeletal muscles) by maintaining a urine flow of at least 2 ml/kg/hr with furosemide.

The management algorithm includes:

- Stop the triggering agent.

- Call for help.

- Administer dantrolene 2.5 mg/kg until the reaction subsides up to a maximum of 10 mg/kg.

- Increase ventilation to lower end-tidal CO2.

- Cooling measures (cold IV fluids and ice packs to exposed surfaces).

- Treat arrhythmias (e.g., amiodarone;  avoid calcium channel blockers).

- Laboratory studies include arterial blood gas, electrolytes (especially potassium), serum and urine myoglobin, and coagulation profile.

- Continue dantrolene at 1 mg/kg every 4 hours for 24 to 48 hours.

- Ensure urine output of 2 ml/kg/hr (mannitol 3 grams is included in each vial of dantrolene)

Better patient outcomes are associated with the rapidity of diagnosis, rapid treatment with dantrolene, and prevention of the rapid rise in core temperature by using cooling measures.

After the patient has been stabilized, they must be taken to the intensive care unit for at least 24 hours for monitoring and to watch for signs of recrudescence. Patients at the highest risk for recrudescence are those with a large muscle mass or who have undergone at least 150 minutes of anesthetic exposure before triggering.

Despite having been performed frequently in the past, pretreating malignant hyperthermia-susceptible patients with dantrolene does not play a role in their care and should not be done. Instead, these patients should receive a non-triggering anesthetic.