Although the indications may be relatively straightforward, it is important to note that there are numerous contraindications that, if ignored, can result in serious consequences. The first question is whether or not the source of blood has sustained contamination. Contamination can present as an infectious vs. noninfectious source. Infectious contamination can occur in any penetrating chest wound that may have pierced the diaphragm and affected the gastrointestinal tract. Careful inspection of the wound site is necessary, if possible, before using collected blood. If there is any ambiguity about its sterility, cross-matched blood should be used instead. Another source of contamination can include noninfectious sources. The use of blood from a site where a sterile solution may have been mixed with the blood (e.g., iodine, sterile water, alcohol, irrigation solutions, or chlorhexidine) should be avoided.

If it has been determined that the source of autotransfusion is contamination-free, there should be careful consideration for underlying pathology. If there is evidence of coagulopathy or evidence of disseminated intravascular coagulopathy (DIC), this requires management with specific blood component therapy instead of autotransfusion.

Some literature supports the avoidance of autotransfusion in sickle cell disease and cesarean delivery as a relative contraindication until the completion of further studies.

The following is a concise list of contraindications to autotransfusion:

- Septicemia

- Malignant cells in the bloodshed

- Renal or hepatic insufficiency

- Coagulopathies

- Blood that has been in the collection system for longer than institutional standards allow

Any of these contraindications could be rescinded if the patient is exsanguinating and there is not a sufficient supply of banked blood available.