**Anatomy**

Proximal humeral anatomy includes four potential "parts".  These parts were originally described by Neer

- anatomic neck

- represents the old epiphyseal plate

- surgical neck

- the anatomic region of the proximal humerus that is the weakest region of bone and located below the humeral head

- greater tuberosity

- anatomic footprint and insertion site for three of the four rotator cuff muscles; working anterior to posterior these include: 
- supraspinatus
- infraspinatus
- teres minor

- lesser tuberosity

- the insertion site for the subscapularis

Other osseous elements that are relevant to proximal humeral anatomy include the bicipital groove/intertubercular sulcus, medial calcar, and insertion sites for the deltoid, pectoralis major, and latissimus dorsi muscles

The humeral head articulates with shallow glenoid fossa of the scapula which allows for complex dynamic range of motion in many different planes. The anatomical neck can be identified as the fused epiphyseal plate which is obliquely directed and lies proximal to greater and lesser tubercles. The greater tuberosity is given additional management considerations given the concerns regarding even minimal (3- to 5-mm or greater)  displacement as this can lead to a significant compromise in patient outcomes following injury via impingement and rotator cuff dysfunction.

The intertubercular sulcus or groove separates the two tuberosities.  The tendon of the long head of biceps brachii runs through this groove

**Deforming forces**

The deforming forces relevant to PHFs include:

- pectoralis major: displaces humeral shaft anterior/medial

- supraspinatus, infraspinatus, teres minor: displace and lateral/externally rotate the greater tuberosity

- subscapularis: internally rotates the articular segment and/or lesser tuberosity

**Neurovascular considerations**

Several neurovascular structures are at risk of injury depending on the pattern of injury.  The most commonly injured nerve in PHFs is the axillary nerve.  Arterial injury occurs at about a 5% incidence rate and has a higher likelihood in elderly patients.  Two common scenarios relative to arterial artery injury at presentation include:

- displaced/comminuted surgical neck fractures

- subcoracoid dislocation of the humeral head

The posterior humeral circumflex artery is the main blood supply to the humeral head