There is no medical management that can delay the progression of asymptomatic aortic valve disease. Management is a two-prong approach focusing on optimizing other cardiac comorbidities such as hypertension, coronary artery disease, left ventricular dysfunction, atrial fibrillation, and other arrhythmias and vigilante serial evaluation to monitor for disease progression and early detection of symptoms. Patients with Stage B mild aortic valve disease should have echocardiograms every 3 to 5 years, moderate every 1 to 2 years. For patients with stage C1 severe asymptomatic disease, echocardiography is necessary every 6 to 12 months. Regardless of stage, the development of new symptoms will always warrant immediate evaluation.

Valve replacement for aortic stenosis is recommended for asymptomatic patients (evidenced by history and/or stress testing) with a high-gradient disease or asymptomatic patients with severe AS (C2) and a left ventricular ejection fraction less than 50%. Indications for valve replacement for stenotic patients include any patients with severe stenosis (C or D) undergoing other cardiac surgery. New guidelines also show that aortic valve replacement is reasonable in a subset of patients:

- Asymptomatic (C1) with severe AS and decreased exercise tolerance or exercise fall in blood pressure

- Symptomatic patients with low flow/low gradient and reduced LVEF (D2) but a low dose dobutamine stress study showing aortic velocity greater than 4 m/s (or mean pressure gradient greater than 40mm Hg) and a valve area less than 1cm2

- Symptomatic patients with low flow/low gradient severe AS (D3) who are normotensive and have LVEF greater than 50%, if clinical, hemodynamic, and anatomic data support valve obstruction as the most likely cause of symptoms

- Moderate AS (B) patients undergoing other cardiac surgery; valve replacement may be a consideration for asymptomatic patients with severe AS (C1) and evidence of rapid disease progression with low surgical risk.

Valve replacement for the treatment of aortic regurgitation is indicated for symptomatic patients with severe AR regardless of LV systolic function (D), asymptomatic patients with chronic severe AR and evidence of LV systolic dysfunction (EF less than 50%; i.e., C2),  and patients with severe AR (C or D) while undergoing cardiac surgery for any other indication. Valve replacement is reasonable for:

- Asymptomatic severe AR patients  and normal LV systolic function (EF greater than 50%) but severe dilation of the left ventricle (left ventricular end-diastolic pressure greater than 50mm Hg; i.e., C2)

- Moderate AR patients (B) who are undergoing other cardiac surgery

- Asymptomatic patients with severe AR and normal LV systolic function (C1) but with evidence of progressive severe LV dilation (greater than 65 mm) if the surgical risk is low

Patients, whom life expectancy after the replacement is less than one year and/or quality of life is not expected to improve, would not be candidates for valve replacement. However, if life expectancy is greater than one year, and predictions include improvement in the quality of life, there are two methods for aortic valve replacement, surgical or transcatheter. Transcatheter aortic valve replacement is only indicated for aortic stenosis, not for aortic regurgitation. Electing one method over the other is determined by evaluating the morbidity and mortality risk of surgical valve replacement, often utilizing the Society of Thoracic Surgeons Predicted Risk of Mortality (STS-PROM). If the risk of serious complications or death is greater than 50%, transcatheter aortic valve replacement (TAVR) is the preferred option. If the surgical risk is less than 50%, the consensus has been that SAVR is the preferred method. However, several studies are now showing that there is no difference in morbidity and mortality one year post-op between SAVR and TAVR and that TAVR is safe to use in any patient regardless of the risk level. There is one other procedure that sees occasional use for aortic stenosis patients, which is a balloon valvuloplasty.