Asymptomatic patients can be observed and reassured that ganglion cysts are benign and may spontaneously regress. Non-surgical treatment may be attempted depending on the location of the cyst. Dorsal wrist ganglion cysts can be aspirated, but there is a much higher recurrence rate than with surgical excision. Aspiration of volar wrist ganglion cysts is not generally performed due to their proximity to the radial artery. Surgery is indicated for patients with continuing symptoms who have failed conservative management. Surgical excision is usually performed as an outpatient procedure. Dorsal wrist ganglion cysts are approached through a transverse incision made directly over the cyst. Careful dissection is performed to expose the pedicle of the cyst and to avoid rupturing it, which would make excision of the capsular attachments more difficult. The pedicle and capsular attachments should be detached as close to the scapholunate ligament as possible without disrupting the integrity of the ligament. Failure to resect the pedicle of the ganglion cyst, its capsular attachments, and part of the capsule has been associated with a high rate of recurrence. Volar wrist ganglion cysts are often close to the radial artery or sometimes may surround the vessel. Blunt dissection should be used to mobilize the artery from the cyst with care taken to avoid injuring the vessel. The palmar cutaneous branch of the median nerve arises 5 cm proximal to the wrist joint and is also at risk with volar wrist ganglion cyst excision. The most common complication of surgical excision is a recurrence, and volar wrist ganglion cysts have a higher recurrence rate than dorsal wrist ganglion cysts. Ganglion cysts have a recurrence rate of approximately 15% to 20%.