- The most common adverse reaction with esmolol is a hemodynamic compromise, which happens to over 10% of all patients.

- The risk of asymptomatic (25%) and symptomatic (12%) hypotension occurs at all doses, but the risk is dose-dependent.

- Patients also experienced dizziness (3%), peripheral ischemia (1%), and infusion site reaction (8%), such as blistering/necrosis/thrombophlebitis.

- Rare side effects (less than 1% of patients without comorbidities) included bradycardia, decompensated heart failure, cardiac arrest, and heart block.

- Esmolol did not show any significant laboratory abnormalities, and patients tolerated the drug well while being infused for up to 24 hours. However, some cases of hyperkalemia with esmolol use have been reported. Therefore, electrolyte levels should be monitored for hyperkalemia in patients with renal disease.

- Hypoglycemic-induced tachycardia is often not present with the use of Esmolol, like other beta-blockers. Patients with diabetes who are on Esmolol should be closely monitored. Esmolol has also been reported to exacerbate coronary vasospasms, such as Prinzmetal’s Angina.

- In a setting of a patient with pheochromocytoma, esmolol should be given with an alpha-blocker not to have beta-blockage without opposed alpha. Patients with a history of hyperthyroidism should be closely monitored after discontinuation of esmolol may exacerbate hyperthyroidism. Esmolol may also aggravate arterial insufficiency in patients with a history of significant peripheral vascular disease.

- As the excipient contains methanol, esmolol should be avoided in patients with methanol poisoning.

**Drug-Drug Interactions**

Numerous drug-drug interactions exist with esmolol, the most significant being:

- Digoxin: 10% to 20% increase in digoxin levels, with may aggravate slow AV conduction and heart rate

- Anticholinesterases: Prolonged neuromuscular junction blockage and recovery time

- Calcium channel blockers: Decreases myocardial contractility and may trigger cardiac arrest.

- Vasoconstrictor and inotropic agents: Esmolol should not be used to control heart rate elevation in patients who receive peripheral vascular constrictive agents such as epinephrine, norepinephrine, and dopamine.