When evaluating a patient with a tracheal injury early detection, proper airway management, and appropriate treatment of the trachea and possible concomitant injuries are key. As discussed previously early detection requires a high degree of suspicion, physical exam findings, and radiographic or bronchoscopic identification. Once a tracheal injury has been identified, the first question that needs to be addressed is what to do with the patient’s airway. The ideal method for securing the airway in patients with tracheal injury is the awake placement of an endotracheal tube over a flexible bronchoscope and inflation of the cuff distal to the site of injury. Patients with tracheal injury may benefit from awake intubation in order to limit apnea and loss of the smooth muscle tone. Paralysis for intubation may lead to the collapse of a trachea that is already distorted and traumatized and being held open by the surrounding musculature. In situations where the patient is rapidly desaturating, hemodynamically unstable, and/or awake intubation is not tolerated rigid bronchoscopy with inhalation induction may be the method of choice. This method is especially beneficial if clots, tissue, or strictures impair viewing the area of injury.  However rigid bronchoscopy is more difficult in patients with cervical instability who are unable to extend the neck. Tracheostomy should be considered in patients with concomitant craniomaxillofacial injury or in whom previous attempts at endotracheal intubation were unsuccessful. Additionally, patients with penetrating cervical injuries could undergo the insertion of a tracheostomy tube directly through the site of injury thereby preserving tissue for future repair.

Conservative management in select patients is superior to surgical treatments.

Stenting has become a mainstay of treatment for tracheal injuries.  The two broad categories of stents are metallic and silicone with metallic stents having varying degrees of coating and both classes being offered in straight, T, and Y shapes to accommodate the variety of injuries that can occur. Placement of both classes of stents can be performed by a rigid or flexible bronchoscope. With regards to either modality ensure to secure the airway distal to the location requiring stenting and observe for potential complications. Complications of stents include migration, fracture, infection, biofilm formation, and obstruction with either defective mucus passage, or granulation tissue.  Future advancements in stent technology may yield drug-eluting stents, 3-dimensional printed stents, and biodegradable products to reduce the complications seen with conventional stents.

Surgical management even in patients with delayed identification of tracheal injury has proven beneficial in restoring lung function and reducing complications.

Once access has been obtained to the injured area, carefully debride the wound margins in preparation for primary closure using a 3-0 or 4-0 absorbable suture. Transverse wounds should be closed using a simple interrupted suture. Longitudinal repairs are most amenable to a continuous suture. In circumstances where extensive damage has occurred, circumferential resection with end to end anastomosis may be necessary and except for injuries to the carina is preferred to partial debridement with attempted primary repair. When the blood supply is impaired and there is a concern for dehiscence covering with pericardial or mediastinal fat flaps could be of benefit. In all closures, an absorbable suture should be used with the knots on the outside to avoid granuloma and stricture formation and potential lifelong irritation.

After repair, closed thoracic drainage and negative intrathoracic pressure may aid in the expansion of the lungs and occlusion of the repaired defect.