**Nonoperative Management**

Treat most distal ulna fractures nonoperatively. Stabilize the distal radius fracture first, then assess if the distal ulna fracture requires intervention. Maintain a high threshold for operating on ulnar styloid fractures unless greater than 2 mm of fracture displacement is present at its base. If the DRUJ is stable, treat with a long-arm cast for two to four weeks. If the DRUJ is unstable, closed reduction and immobilization with a long-arm cast for the first six weeks to limit pronation-supination.

After re-evaluation, a short arm cast is placed for an additional 4 to 6 weeks if the fracture is healing appropriately. (Xiao, 2021) An unstable DRUJ, however, may ultimately require surgical intervention. Mackay et al. in 2000 found no difference in outcomes with short-arm versus long-arm casting or arm positioning for isolated ulnar shaft fractures.

**Operative Management**

There is no standard treatment algorithm for distal ulna fractures.

**Kirschner Wire (K-wire)**

Consider Kirschner wires for the ulnar styloid base and distal metaphyseal fractures, as well as DRUJ injuries. They are quick and minimally invasive but relatively weak constructs that require removal after 4-6 weeks. (Xaio, 2021) Tension bands, suture fixation, and interosseous wiring are options for osteoporotic or complicated fracture patterns.

**Plate Screw Fixation**

Use lag screws for large oblique fracture fragments.

**Salvage Procedures**

Utilize salvage procedures when the degree of comminution and stability prohibit alternatives.

**Ulnar Styloid Fractures**

Nonoperative versus operative management is controversial. Conventional thought is greater than 2 mm of displacement of the styloid base warrants surgical correction, but there is some evidence to suggest this is not always necessary.

**Distal Ulnar Metaphyseal Fractures**

Undertreating these fractures can lead to interosseous membrane injury and decreased forearm function. The indications to operate are (1) persistent instability after the intervention, (2) the presence of severe comminution, (3) greater than 50 degrees of displacement, or (4) more than 10 degrees of angulation.

**Distal Ulnar Neck or Shaft Fractures**

It is controversial whether isolated ulnar shaft fractures should receive surgical intervention. In general, the two most utilized indications are irreducibility and greater than 5 mm (50% or more) of displacement.

**Isolated Ulnar Head Fractures**

Unlike other locations on the distal ulna, most of these fractures require surgery. Literature available on operative management is limited. Nonoperative management is reserved only for non-displaced ulnar head fractures with minimal comminution. Instability is defined as (1) significant displacement, (2) comminution, or (3) mild displacement but with intra-articular extension. Use buried headless screws for inter-articular extension, tension bands for ulnar styloid involvement, and condylar blade or internal locking plates for extraarticular extension.

**TFCC Injury**

TFCC tears typically heal without operative intervention. However, consider operative intervention for a persistently unstable DRUJ despite distal radius and ulna fixation.