5-FU exhibits poor absorption in the gastrointestinal tract when administered orally. Parenteral administration of 5-FU is preferable when treating visceral malignancies to optimize systemic bioavailability. 5-FU can be administered via intravenous bolus, continuous intravenous infusion over several days, and by ‘protracted’ infusion via an ambulatory pump for one to two weeks. When given intravenously, the terminal half-life of 5-FU is around 8 to 20 minutes due to rapid catabolism in the liver.

5-FU can also be applied topically in solutions or cream with strengths varying from 0.5% to 5% when the desired clinical use is for dermatologic conditions. Systemic absorption of topical 5-FU has been studied to range from less than 2% to 6% but can be up to 75 times greater if applied to diseased skin. In addition to topical 5-FU for dermatologic conditions, intralesional delivery is also useful for various conditions. Further studies are needed to determine the systemic absorption of intralesionally delivered 5-FU.

Some general dosing regimens follow based on indications. However, clinicians should refer to institutional protocols and the package inserts for specific dosing, including toxicity-related dose adjustments. There are also alternative regimens for some of the following conditions not covered here.

- Breast cancer: 500 mg/m^2/dose IV for a single dose on days 1 and 8 of a 28-day cycle.

- Gastric cancer: 

- Resectable disease: 200 mg/m^2/24 hours IV infusion on days 1 to 21 of a 21-day cycle. Use with cisplatin as part of a multi-drug chemotherapy regimen.
- Advanced disease: 750 to 1000 mg/m^2/24 hours IV infusion on days 1 to 4 of a 28-day cycle. Use with cisplatin.

- Colorectal cancer: 

- Bolus regimen: 
- Infusion regimen: 400 mg/m^2/dose IV for a single dose on day 1, then 1200 to 1500 mg/m^2/24 hour IV infusion on days 1 and 2 of a 14-day regimen. Use with leucovorin with or without irinotecan or oxaliplatin.

- Pancreatic cancer: 400 mg/m^2/dose IV on the first day, then 1200 mg/m^2/24 hours IV infusion on days 1 and 2 of a 14-day cycle. Give for 12 cycles as part of a multi-drug chemotherapy regimen.

Renal impairment does not require any dosing adjustments, although hemodialysis patients should reduce their dose by 50% on dialysis days. In hepatic impairment, caution is advised.

For topical 5-FU, dosing regimens include:

- Actinic keratosis: Apply the solution or 5% cream twice daily for 2 to 4 weeks.

- Superficial basal cell carcinoma: Apply 5% cream twice daily for 3 to 6 weeks.