Brainstem death is a clinical diagnosis made by an examiner. Ancillary tests are not essential for confirming brain death.

Brainstem death has to be certified by certified board members, which include:

-  Medical superintendent (MS) - in-charge of the hospital

-  The treating medical or critical care specialist

-  A neurologist or a neurosurgeon

Members from the organ donation or the transplantation team cannot be involved in this certification.

The clinical diagnosis of brain death should take place in three steps:

- Establishing the etiology

- Excluding possible reversible syndromes that may produce signs similar to brain death

- Demonstration of clinical signs of brain death including coma, brainstem areflexia, and apnea

However, when planning for organ donation, separate complete examinations by two physicians is recommended.

**Ethical morality -**justifying the use of limited medical resources, adding up the financial burden, and maximizing emotional toll to relatives in a hopeless clinical scenario

**The whole-brain death concept -**It is more prudent for the application of brainstem death rather than the whole brain death concept. It requires emphasis that though the brain stem is dead, there may still be some cortical and the hypothalamic functions (osmoregulation) intact in the patient. It is also distinct from cortical death (persistent vegetative state) wherein the brainstem functions are intact.

**Concerns with the apnea test -**There are inherent confounding clinical factors that can invalidate the apnea test, such as hypoxia, hypotension, cervical cord injuries. Moreover, hypercarbia by causing cerebral vasodilation can further impede upon the cascade of impending cerebral herniation, thereby further complication the clinical scenario.

**Public belief in brain death and organ procurement -**There can be a significant concern among the relatives and the public that organ donation occurs when the patient heart is still beating, and the person is not entirely dead. There can be looming fear that death will be declared prematurely for the sake of organ and tissue retrieval.

**Is the brain dead person really dead? -**Issues in defining biological death - certain pitfalls merit consideration while evaluating for brainstem death confirmation:

- **The inexperience**of the performing physician

- **Potential confounders**- such as hypothermia, drugs, alcohol

- **Inadequate consideration****during apnea test**- such as low pCO2, ventilator trigger settings

- **False Positive Brain Death Determination**in scenarios such as barbiturate coma, baclofen toxicity

- **False Negative Brain Death Determination**- spinal reflexes and automatisms, ventilator auto-triggering during the apnea test

- **Brain Death in Children**- From 37 weeks of gestational age to 30 days, two examinations 24 hours apart whereas in 30 days to 18 years child, two examinations 12 hours apart

- **Limitations of Ancillary Tests**- artifacts in EEG

- **Concerns relating to families and potential Organ donation**such as personal and religious beliefs

- **Failure to Maintain adequate environment for Organ donation**-Systolic blood pressure of 100 mm Hg, urine output of at least 0.5 ml/kg/h; normal serum electrolytes and a tidal volume, not more than 8 ml/kg