Suboccipital puncture is a procedure that was developed at the beginning of the last century. It was designed to obtain cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) for diagnostic and therapeutic purposes as an alternative to lumbar puncture. It was performed through a midline puncture below the occipital bone. Many years later, the puncture was modified, and it was performed as a lateral C1-C2 cervical puncture. Recently, the suboccipital puncture was popularized but using a lateral trajectory.

In 1908, Obregia performed the first in vivo midline suboccipital puncture.

A lateral C1-C2 cervical puncture technique was developed to do percutaneous cervical cordotomy by Mullan et al. in 1962, and by Rosomof et al. in 1965.

Cervical myelography led to the widespread use of the lateral cervical puncture in appropriate cases. Several years later, a controversy was commenced arguing that a cervical injection was not needed to perform a cervical myelogram recognizing that if enough contrast were injected in the lumbar spine by a lumbar puncture, there would be adequate visualization of the entire spine making a lateral cervical puncture or a suboccipital puncture unnecessary.

In 2017, Gong et al. described a lateral atlantooccipital space puncture (also called lateral cisterna magna puncture), where he performed 1008  procedures in 667 patients.

Both techniques are described in this review; the suboccipital puncture and the cervical C1-C2 puncture. Both should be well known, and on some occasions, one procedure can be used as an alternative to the other.