While the diagnosis of X-linked agammaglobulinemia may seem simple enough, managing patients with this disease are complex. Treatment of XLA can be expensive and requires the commitment of the patient’s parents, as well as treating physicians. This can require an interprofessional team that includes a hematologist, pediatrician, oncologist, geneticist, and primary care provider. The primary goal remains the prevention of infections, which can be achieved with methods such as frequent handwashing and good respiratory hygiene.

Immunoglobulin replacement therapy has altered the paradigm of XLA and greatly improved the quality of life for patients. However, there are still issues with this treatment method. One of the emerging problems is that replacement therapy fails to restore the IgA and IgM in commercial immunoglobulins; this can cause recurrent respiratory and gastrointestinal infections. There is little evidence available regarding the benefits of IgA and IgG rich immunoglobulins; hence this treatment cannot generally be offered to patients with XLA due to safety concerns. HSCT is an alternative treatment, but it is not routinely offered due to its tedious procedure and complications such as rejection, graft vs. host disease, and mortality. However, in under-developed countries, the cost and availability of IVIG lead patients to opt away from this treatment method.

The advent of newborn screening can allow pre-symptomatic treatment, thus reducing the risk of disease-related complications. New advances in the treatment of XLA, such as gene therapy, may show promising results in these patients, but this treatment modality is still in the developmental stages.

As with all chronic diseases, the patient’s quality of life going forward is of utmost concern. An assessment must be made of the burden on a patient’s health physically, mentally, and socially. This aspect of the disease needs to be addressed further for the improved outcome of these patients.

Despite early diagnosis and treatment with immunoglobulins, the prognosis for patients with XLA is guarded. The major cause of morbidity and mortality is from pulmonary complications such as bronchiectasis and cor pulmonale. These patients will also require constant medical treatment, and consequently, their quality of life may remain poor.