Infective endocarditis management is with prolonged duration of bactericidal antibiotics. The choice of antibiotic regimen (whether single or combination therapy) and the treatment duration are selected according to the pathogen’s susceptibility and resistance patterns, whether it’s a native or prosthetic valve endocarditis. Accordingly, the duration can vary from two weeks to as long as six weeks. Treatment is usually started in the hospital and completed as an outpatient once the fever subsides and the blood cultures are negative. But in some instances, antibiotic therapy alone is insufficient, and patients require surgery. Class I indications for surgery in patients with infective endocarditis include valvular dysfunction with symptoms of congestive heart failure, left-sided IE caused by S. aureus, fungal, or other highly resistant microorganisms, IE with conduction defects or heart block, annular or aortic abscess, persistent infection 5 to 7 days after initiation of antibiotic therapy.

The basic principles of infective endocarditis management are aggressive debridement with removal of all infected and necrotic tissue followed by reconstructive surgery. Intraoperative Transesophageal echocardiography is recommended as a Class I recommendation by the American Society of Echocardiography.

For native valve IE involving the aortic annulus, radical resection of all infected areas is necessary, leaving behind a rim of healthy tissue. Subsequent reconstructive surgery to correct the defects is necessary before prosthetic valve implantation. Type of reconstruction varies according to the size of the defect. For small to moderate-sized defects, autologous or bovine pericardial patches are sufficient, whereas larger defects require a Dacron patch.

For prosthetic aortic valve IE that spares the aortic root and annulus after radical resection, implantation of a new prosthetic valve (tissue or mechanical) is reasonable (Class IIa).