There is a general agreement that the key features of AS are similar to other subpopulations under the ASD umbrella. This article reviews the available ASD evaluation methods in two separate sections, screening, and diagnostic assessment.

**1. Screening**

Screening tests are not used for diagnosis; instead, they help to identify individuals who require further evaluation. General developmental screening for identification of language, cognitive, and motor delays is recommended at 9, 18, and 30 months of age. However, these tests are not sensitive enough to capture differences in social interaction, playing, and repetitive behaviors associated with ASD. Thereby, it has been recommended to screen for ASD through a combination of:

A- Routine developmental surveillance at all visits: Developmental surveillance for ASD includes asking parents or caregivers about their concerns, observing caregiver-child interactions, and monitoring symptoms in every routine well-child visit.

B- Standardized autism-specific screening tests at 18 and 24 months of age: Screening tools are designed based on the early manifestations of ASD that can be detected by providers or their caregivers. Some of these early indicators are called “red flags,” meaning that they should alert providers to a higher risk for ASD (Table 2).

Screening tools commonly used to screen ASD:

- Quantitative Checklist for Autism in Toddlers (Q-CHAT): one of the oldest methods, and used to detect autism in children younger than age 24 months.

- Modified Checklist for Autism in Toddlers (M-CHAT): A modified version of Q-CHAT, and the most studied and widely used tool for screening toddlers for ASD. It is useful for children younger than 30 months of age.

- Modified Checklist for Autism in Toddlers, Revised, with Follow up (M-CHAT-R/F): A two-phase parent screening method that is useful for research, educational and clinical purposes. It is useful for children younger than 30 months of age.

- Screening Tool for Autism in Toddlers and Young Children (STAT): A tool to screen children aged between 24 and 36 months. The STAT is administered by a trained professional examiner and requires specific training. It can be used to support a preliminary diagnosis of ASD.

- Autism Screening Instrument for Educational Planning, 3rd Version (ASIEP-3): A tool that is designed to identify children younger than 2 years and 11 months to 13 years, with a high level of autistic behavior. It is the most time-consuming screening tool, taking approximately 90–120 min to complete.

- Autism Behavior Checklist (ABC): The ABC is a subtest of ASIEP’s third version.

- Childhood Asperger Syndrome Test (CAST): A tool to screen children aged between 5 and 11 years who are suspected of having AS.

- Social Communication Questionnaire (SCQ): A tool to screen children older than 30 months of age.

- Ritvo Autism Asperger Diagnostic Scale-Revised (RAADS-R): A self-scoring ASD screening tool developed for adults

**2. Diagnostic Assessment**

Once the screening or developmental surveillance indicates a risk for diagnosis of ASD, a comprehensive diagnostic evaluation is indicated to determine the presence of ASD and the need for early intervention.

2.1 Standard psychiatric assessment

A standard psychiatric assessment involving a full interview with patients and caregivers is needed to obtain a thorough history including descriptions of behavior during formal testing, reports of behavior in other environments, past and current educational and behavioral interventions, family history, and relevant psychosocial issues. The history and examination should be conducted with careful consideration of diagnostic criteria according to DSM-5.

2.2. Assessment Tools

Various tools for the assessment of ASD have been developed. Although none of these questionnaires alone is sufficient for diagnosis, they can provide a structured approach and support a knowledgeable clinician in applying diagnostic criteria of ASD.

- Autism Diagnostic Interview-Revised (ADI-R)

- Autism Diagnostic Observation Schedule, Second Edition (ADOS-2)

- Diagnostic Interview for Social and Communication Disorders (DISCO)

- The Asperger Syndrome Diagnostic Scale (ASDS)

2.3. Evaluation of co-occurring developmental conditions

Attention to other potential comorbid diagnoses is also an essential component of assessment. Cooccurring conditions may impact the symptomology of ASD in different ways and at different ages of life. Therefore, formal assessment of language, cognitive, motor, sensory, and adaptive functions is an important part of the diagnostic process.

2.4. Medical workup

- Genetic testing: providers should recommend and offer a genetic evaluation to all families as part of the etiologic assessment. Potential benefits of establishing a genetic etiologic diagnosis include improved counseling provided to patient and family, preventing morbidity by treating medical conditions associated with the genotype, refining treatment options, and avoiding additional unnecessary tests.

- Neuroimaging: MRI is not recommended for routine assessment, although it may be indicated in the presence of certain conditions such as atypical regression, micro- or macrocephaly, seizures, or abnormal neurologic examination.

- EEG: is not recommended for routine assessment, although it may be indicated in certain cases with seizures, atypical regression, or other neurologic symptoms.

2.5. Physical Examination

A thorough and differential diagnosis-directed physical examination is essential to guide appropriate workup. This includes evaluation of growth, organomegaly, dysmorphic features, neurologic abnormalities, and skin manifestations of neurocutaneous disorders.