**MR personnel and non-MR personnel**:

All individuals working within at least Zone III of the MR environment should be documented as having successfully completed at least one of the MR safety live lectures or prerecorded presentations approved by the MR medical director. Attendance should be repeated at least annually, and appropriate documentation should be provided to confirm these ongoing educational efforts. These individuals shall be referred to henceforth as MR personnel.

There are two levels of MR personnel:

- Level 1 MR personnel: Those who have passed minimal safety educational efforts to ensure their own safety as they work within Zone III will be referred to henceforth as level 1 MR personnel.

- Level 2 MR personnel: Those who have been more extensively trained and educated in the broader aspects of MR safety issues, including, for example, issues related to the potential for thermal loading or burns and direct neuromuscular excitation from rapidly changing gradients, will be referred to henceforth as level 2 MR personnel. It is the responsibility of the MR medical director not only to identify the necessary training, but also to identify those individuals who qualify as level 2 MR personnel. It is understood that the medical director will have the necessary education and experience in MR safety to qualify as level 2 MR personnel.

All those are not having successfully complied with these MR safety instruction guidelines shall be referred to henceforth as non-MR personnel. Specifically, non-MR personnel will be the terminology used to refer to any individual or group who has not within the previous 12 months undergone the designated formal training in MR safety issues defined by the MR safety director of that installation.

**MR Technologist**

1. MR technologists should be ARRT registered technologists (RTs). Furthermore, all MR technologists must be trained as level 2 MR personnel during their orientation, prior to being permitted free access to Zone III.

2. All MR technologists will maintain current certification in American Heart Association basic life support at the healthcare provider level.

3. Except for emergent coverage, there should be a minimum of 2 MR technologists or one MR technologist and at least one other individual with the designation of MR personnel in the immediate Zone II through Zone IV environment. For emergent coverage, the MR technologist should scan with no other individuals in their Zone II through Zone IV environment as long as there is readily available emergent coverage by the designated department of radiology MR personnel (e.g., radiology house staff or Radiology Attendings). (ACR WHITE PAPER ON MAGNETIC RESONANCE (MR) SAFETY Combined Papers of 2002 and 2004)

4. MRI is always “on” and potentially dangerous regarding loose ferromagnetic materials that can fly into magnet bore, thus the four classic zones (I, the hallway, II MRI reception, III MRI tech control area, and IV, the magnet room itself.