An oropharyngeal exam is usually not performed to evaluate a suspected case of epiglottitis because manipulation of the oral cavity may lead to disaster, such as respiratory arrest. This diagnosis is primarily one of clinical suspicion. A lateral neck radiograph will show swelling of the epiglottis, also referred to as the “thumb sign.” It is not necessary to make the diagnosis but can be used to narrow down the provider’s differential diagnosis. This should only be performed in the most stable, comfortable, and cooperative of patients. A flexible fiberoptic laryngoscopy can be performed theoretically, but only in a very controlled setting such as the operating room due to the risk of inducing laryngospasm. This is almost always never done. If clinical suspicion for acute epiglottitis exists, the patient should be taken emergently to the operating room for airway examination under the most optimal conditions possible.

Ultrasonography has been mentioned as another way to evaluate these patients, revealing an “alphabet P sign” in a longitudinal view. This must also be weighed against the clinical condition and may be ill-advised in children. A complete blood count with differential, a blood culture, and an epiglottal culture should only be obtained in patients with a secured endotracheal tube.

CT scan of the neck is rarely needed and can precipitate disaster.  Placing the patient in a supine position can trigger respiratory crises. If this diagnosis is yielded unexpectedly on a CT scan, the child (or adult) should not be left alone in the radiology suite and should be transported emergently to the operating room for airway evaluation and intubation.

The chest x-ray may reveal concomitant pneumonia in 10-15% of patients. A lateral neck X-ray can be obtained in select cooperative patients as detailed previously (with great caution). A standard portable P-A X-ray may also suggest the diagnosis via a narrowing of the laryngotracheal area easily confused with the "steeple sign" of laryngotracheal bronchitis (croup). Therefore, this remains a purely clinical diagnosis.