The toxic effects related to bivalirudin administration primarily pertain to bleeding. There is no minimum toxic dose listed, and complications can occur at therapeutic doses.  In a study by Gleason et al., the no-observed-adverse-effect level, administered to rats intravenously over a 24 hour period, was 2000mg/kg/24 hours.

Approximately 1.4 to 3.8 % of patients will develop significant hemorrhage. Reports exist of intracranial bleeding, retroperitoneal bleeding, and clinically overt bleeding in patients undergoing PCI for the treatment of unstable angina**.**This risk increases with the concomitant use of aspirin and streptokinase.

In the event of bleeding, evaluation of the need for anticoagulation and the decision to reduce or discontinue the infusion requires clinical judgment.

Supportive care, including a fluid bolus and transfusion of platelets or packed red blood cells in thrombocytopenic/anemic patients, is recommended. In patients with continued bleeding, fresh frozen plasma, prothrombin complex concentrations, and cryoprecipitate may merit consideration. Note that this comes with an inherent risk of developing thromboembolic events.

There is no reversal agent available for bivalirudin.

Appropriate monitoring includes a CBC, prothrombin time (PT), aPTT, international normalized ratio (INR). Note that there may be variable responses with these values. Since bivalirudin excretion is primarily via the kidneys, the patient's renal function requires monitoring as well.