Appropriate workup of a patient with UVFP begins with a complete history and physical examination. And evaluation with a flexible nasolaryngoscope should be performed to assess the functional status of the vocal folds. If a patient presents with UVFP immediately following thyroid or other neck surgery (with known or suspected injury), a formal workup may not be warranted. However, if the cause of UVFP is unknown, imaging is mandated.  Due to the high incidence of malignancy, imaging of the skull base, neck, and chest is needed to evaluate the entire course of the RLN on both the right and left sides. Preference on imaging techniques vary depending on Otolaryngologist preference but may include chest x-rays, CT scans or MRI scans. If there is evidence of other cranial nerve involvement and concern for a high-vagal injury (such as palatal weakness), an MRI of the skull-base may be recommended to evaluate further.

One modality that may be used to help guide diagnostic and treatment decisions is laryngeal electromyography (LEMG). This can be used to help narrow the differential and help rule out cricoarytenoid (CA) joint dislocation as a cause of UVFP. CA joint dislocation would present with normal LEMG findings, indicating the neuromuscular junction is intact, but rather the immobility of the true vocal fold is due to joint dislocation. LEMG is most useful at 1 to 6 months following the injury/onset of paralysis. Findings on LEMG may include normal motor unit potentials, which indicate an intact neuromuscular junction, fibrillation potentials, which indicate denervation injury to the muscle, or poly-phasic action potentials, which indicate re-innervation of the muscle. Depending on the clinical scenario, these findings may be useful to help direct treatment options.