Each patient's unique circumstances, such as clinical course, symptoms, and the exact anatomy of the lesion, need to be analyzed to select the most appropriate treatment. For minor clinical manifestations such as inconsequential gelastic seizures, observation is recommended as brief and infrequent episodes are usually not disabling. Sometimes, surgery is performed to prevent secondary epileptogenesis, where uncontrolled seizures can provoke epileptogenesis in distant cortical regions.

**Antiepileptic Medications**

Antiepileptic medications usually do not control or improve gelastic seizures. They are mostly used for the control of associated tonic-clonic seizures, complex partial seizures, drop attacks, and atypical absences. They are less successful in diminishing seizures associated with hypothalamic hamartomas; thus, surgery is often recommended.

**Gonadotropin-releasing Hormone Agonists**

Precocious puberty can usually be treated successfully with medications. Leuprolide acetate inhibits the release of GnRH that is required to trigger puberty. It is generally administered intramuscularly once monthly for the duration that puberty needs to be suppressed.

**Surgical**

The gold-standard treatment is open surgical resection of the hamartoma. It provides the best outcome in seizure cessation and halts neurocognitive, behavioral, and psychiatric symptoms.

**Gamma knife radiosurgery****(GKR)**

GKR is a non-invasive radiosurgical technique that causes damage to the lesion. The exact mechanism of seizure control has not been determined due to the lack of lesion necrosis on follow-up MRIs. This finding suggests that a neuromodulatory event with diminished vascular supply and gliosis can be responsible. It serves as an excellent tool to treat lesions that are difficult to resect without causing neuroendocrine deficits. The therapeutic effect typically requires 6 to 18 months, but sometimes up to 3 years. GKR provides seizure freedom in 40% of the patients treated and provides a good alternative for treating small and medium-sized lesions.

**Stereotactic Thermoablation**

The lesion is heated to approximately 60°C to damage the tissue and prevent its ability to generate seizures. Treatment immediately provides results. Larger lesions need several passes to treat the entire lesion.

- Radiofrequency thermoablation: seizure control in up to 71% of patients (one-third require multiple treatments). It provides an excellent alternative to treat cases that do not respond to open surgical treatments.

- Laser-mediated ablation: heat the lesion using real-time MR thermography. It can obtain seizure control in nearly 60% of cases.