The radial nerve, along with the axillary artery, originates as a branch of the brachial plexus, specifically from the posterior cord of the plexus. The nerve is comprised of fibers from C5-T1 spinal roots. Proximally, the radial nerve is found posterior and inferior to the axillary artery. Once it exits the axilla, the nerve descends into the arm by passing anterior to the latissimus dorsi muscle insertion and then passes between the medial and long heads of the triceps muscle to eventually lie on the posterior surface of the humerus. The radial nerve has multiple branches, including the sensory posterior cutaneous branch of the forearm and the superficial radial nerve, as well as the motor deep radial nerve. The posterior cutaneous branch divides from the radial nerve proximal to the humeral lateral epicondyle, providing sensation to the elbow and the posterior forearm. Continuing distally, the radial nerve courses over the humeral spiral groove and emerges close to the lateral epicondyle. It subsequently pierces the lateral intermuscular septum to arrive at the anterior compartment of the arm, lying in-between the brachialis and brachioradialis muscles. Here, at the level of the antecubital fossa, it divides into its two terminal branches, the superficial and deep branches. The superficial branch is close to the radial artery, responsible for afferent innervation. This is a sensory branch, innervating the geographical area of the wrist dorsally and part of the thumb and index and middle fingers proximal to the DIP dorsally. The deep branch is responsible for motor innervation to the extensors of the forearm.

It is important to understand the anatomical path of the radial nerve as it has significant implications when attempting to achieve an anesthetic block along its course. The ideal locations of the anesthetic block described in the literature include locations above, at, and below the elbow. Above the elbow (above the bifurcation of the radial nerve into its terminal branches), the block can be done at a location 4 inches above the humeral lateral epicondyle between the brachialis and brachioradialis muscles. Additionally, the nerve can also be blocked at the level of the elbow in the antecubital fossa before the division into its terminal branches. Lastly, the superficial radial nerve can be anesthetized below the elbow at the level of the proximal third of the forearm.