Patients commonly present with chief complaints of "droopy eyes" or similar phrases, but "droopy eyes" often mean different things. In many cases, the anatomical issue in question is upper eyelid dermatochalasis. Sometimes, there may also be pseudoherniated fat in the upper eyelid or even lacrimal gland ptosis. Blepharoptosis commonly occurs with age as well, but what patients frequently overlook is the contribution of brow ptosis to the appearance of aging in the periorbital area and to upper visual field deficits. Therefore, it is incumbent upon the surgeon to evaluate the periorbital area thoroughly and to identify which patients are candidates for brow lifting, which may or may not be performed in conjunction with upper eyelid surgery, and then further to determine the optimal approach for brow lifting in the individual patient. In this article, we discuss the pretrichial brow lift approach, its benefits, and its limitations.

Since the first description of surgical brow lifting by Passot in 1919, myriad techniques have evolved to improve results. The traditional coronal approach was the first of the modern approaches developed in 1926 and was followed shortly thereafter by trichophytic and pretrichial variants.

As technology in facial plastic surgery has advanced and the focus has shifted towards minimally invasive procedures, endoscopic and transblepharoplasty techniques have gained popularity over open approaches. However, the coronal incision and its variants are still commonly employed in the following situations:

- Revision brow lifting after minimally invasive surgery that did not produce the desired result

- Advancing the frontal hairline while simultaneously performing a brow lift for aging face indications

- Advancing the frontal hairline while providing access for frontal cranioplasty in gender affirmation surgery for transgender females

- Accessing the frontal sinus, naso-orbito-ethmoid (NOE) region, brain, or anterior skull base for post-traumatic reconstruction or oncologic resection

- Accessing the frontal pericranium for the development of an osteoplastic flap

The choice of approach between coronal and pretrichial/trichophytic depends on whether any adjustment to the frontal hairline is necessary. A traditional coronal approach across the vertex of the scalp will elevate the hairline commensurately with the width of the scalp strip excised. Pretrichial/trichophytic approaches tend not to elevate the hairline and may even be used to lower it, if necessary. The choice between pretrichial and trichophytic approaches is generally based on surgeon and patient preference. The pretrichial approach places the incision directly anterior to the hairline, whereas the trichophytic approach runs a few millimeters posterior to the hairline in order to hide the scar. In some cases, such as for hairline adjustment, the incision may run partially anterior to the hairline and partially within it.