The diagnosis and management of hookworm infections necessitate an interprofessional approach, including histopathologist, infectious disease specialist, gastroenterologist, and general practitioner. Patients usually present to their general practitioner with general non-specific symptoms or anemia. Diagnosis requires a high index of suspicion with careful history and examination, especially in non-endemic areas, besides a thorough analysis of stool samples from experienced histopathologists. Referrals might be necessary for both infectious disease specialists or gastroenterologists, and both have to be mindful of such a diagnosis for suggestive presentations. Treatment requires collaboration between pharmacists, nurses, and physicians.

The pharmacist has to educate the patient about drug compliance. Ideally, an infectious disease specialty pharmacist can consult on the medication regimen, verifying dosing, offering alternative agents in the event of treatment failure, and ensuring there are no drug interactions that could compromise therapeutic effectiveness. Nurses should also educate travelers about hygiene and other safety issues when entering shallow waters in the tropics. Nursing can also assess the effectiveness of medical treatment on subsequent patient encounters and inform the clinical team members if a potential therapy change is necessary.

Prevention requires cooperation between public health specialists, general practitioners, and local authorities to improve sanitation and living conditions while raising awareness between affected patients and populations at risk. In the case of hookworm infections, the interprofessional team can expand beyond the usual players since it can present a public health issue in endemic areas, which will require even more broad-based collaboration among different healthcare team members as an interprofessional functional unit to drive individual and population outcomes effectively. [Level 5]