It is important to understand the ongoing bone remodeling that takes place and the elements involved in it to get a more complete picture of the pathophysiology of renal osteodystrophy. The two main cells in this process are osteoclasts that cut down or resorb the bone and osteoblasts that build-up or form new bone.

The process begins with the resorption of bone by the osteoclasts, which are activated by osteoblasts through a RANK-RANK ligand complex and intricately regulated by several factors like PTH, vitamin D, osteoprotegerin (OPG), etc. In reality, this complex first activates osteoclasts precursor cells, which in turn provoke the gene transcription by nuclear factor kappa B leading to an increase in osteoclasts and bone resorption.

Factors that stimulate the complex and aim to increase osteoclasts formation are PTH, vitamin D, and acidosis. Interleukins like IL-1,6, tumor necrosis factor, and MIF-1 alpha also activate osteoclasts. This will increase serum calcium levels by increasing bone resorption. Osteoprotegerin is an osteoclastogenesis inhibitory factor and ultimately decrease bone resorption.

The derangement in the levels of these factors mentioned, especially PTH, is the culprit in renal osteodystrophy. Patients suffering from chronic kidney disease (CKD) have an accelerated disease process due to the alteration in levels of other factors like phosphate, calcium, and vitamin D along with PTH. High bone turnover states involving an increased PTH act through the RANK complex to activate more osteoclasts. On the other hand, low bone turnover states have lower than normal PTH levels, which renders the bone incapable of integrating calcium into the new bone that is being formed.