There are different treatment modalities for carcinoid syndrome, which include somatostatin analogs, liver-directed treatment therapy, surgical debulking for early-stage low-grade neuroendocrine tumors, and chemotherapy for the treatment of poorly differentiated neuroendocrine tumors or refractory carcinoid syndrome.

Surgery plays a vital role in the treatment of carcinoid syndrome with or without metastases. If possible, always consider surgical resection of the primary tumor as well as nodal and liver metastases to reduce the tumor burden.

**Medical Management**

For medical management, there are two somatostatin analogs available, Octreotide and Lanreotide. Somatostatin is an amino acid peptide, which is an inhibitory hormone, which is synthesized by paracrine cells located ubiquitously throughout the gastrointestinal tract. It inhibits the release of most of the gastrointestinal, endocrine hormones. About 80% of neuroendocrine tumors have somatostatin receptors. Using somatostatin analog inhibits the release of biogenic amines, which leads to the control of symptoms such as flushing and diarrhea.

Octreotide is available as short-acting subcutaneous injection as well as depot form intramuscular injection (Sandostatin LAR), which can be administered monthly. Patients should start with 20 mg to 30 mg IM every four weeks, and a gradual dose increase may be necessary. Short-acting Octreotide can be started for a patient with severe or refractory symptoms.

Lanreotide is a long-acting formulation, which is administered at a dose of 60 mg to 120 mg every four weeks. It has similar efficacy as octreotide.

Both somatostatin analogs provide symptomatic relief in 50% to 70% of patients and biochemical responses in 40% to 60% of patients. Many studies have shown that Octreotide and Lanreotide also inhibit the proliferation of tumor cells.

The most common side effects associated with somatostatin analogs are nausea, abdominal bloating, and steatorrhea, which is due to pancreatic malabsorption. Supplementing pancreatic enzymes usually helps to alleviate adverse symptoms. Due to decreased motility and contraction of the gallbladder from somatostatin’s inhibitory effect, patients are at risk for developing biliary sludge and gallstones, which has to be discussed with patients before starting therapy.

**Surgical Treatment**

In patients with bronchial neuroendocrine tumors with carcinoid syndrome diagnosed at an early stage, surgical resection of the tumor leads to a complete cure of carcinoid syndrome. Patients who have surgically resectable hepatic metastases, surgical resection, or partial hepatectomy lead to symptomatic improvement. In patients with heavy tumor burden and widely metastatic disease, palliative cytoreductive or tumor debulking surgery has been reported to improve symptoms, morbidity, and mortality. Elective cholecystectomy can also be offered during surgery to prevent biliary sludging and gallstones, which can occur with somatostatin analog therapy. Endoscopic resection of early gastric and rectal neuroendocrine tumors (smaller than 1 cm) may lead to a complete cure of carcinoid syndrome.

In patients with cardiac neuroendocrine tumors with severe tricuspid regurgitation, tricuspid valve replacement may improve mortality.

A patient who is not a surgical candidate but has a higher tumor burden, especially hepatic metastases, can undergo percutaneous hepatic transarterial embolization. A radiolabeled yttrium 90 (Y) resin or glass microsphere has also been used for embolization; however, its long-term risk has not been identified.

**Refractory Symptoms**

For a patient with refractory symptoms, the following options are available:

1. Additional doses of short-acting octreotide or more frequent doses of depot Octreotide or Lanreotide (every three weeks in place of every four weeks).

2. Telotristat: An oral tryptophan hydroxylase inhibitor, recently approved for carcinoid syndrome, to be used in combination with somatostatin analogs to control diarrhea. It is given at the dose of 250 mg three times a day with meals.

3. Interferon: Interferon-alpha can be used in a patient who does not respond to a somatostatin analog. Interferon works by leading to cell cycle arrest in tumor cells, stimulation of T-cells, and inhibition of angiogenesis of tumor cells leading to tumor necrosis.

4. Antidiarrheal agents like loperamide, Lomotil, cholestyramine (especially for those who had bowel surgery).

5. Systemic therapy: The most common cytotoxic chemotherapy used in carcinoid syndrome is Everolimus, which is an mTOR inhibitor. Everolimus has shown to improve symptoms by increasing excretion of 5-HIAA, but studies have failed to show improvement in disease-free survival.

6. Peptide receptor radioligand therapy to deliver targeted radiation to somatostatin receptor-expressing tumors.

**Prevention and Management of Carcinoid Crisis**

**Carcinoid crisis**: Patients with carcinoid syndrome can present with severe hemodynamic instability due to severe acute attacks of sustained flushing with bronchoconstriction and hypotension. The factors that can precipitate carcinoid crises are sedatives, anesthetics, catecholamines, surgery, and necrosis of the tumor itself. It is caused by the acute release of an overwhelming number of vasoactive compounds.

A 24-hour urine 5-HIAA level should be performed in all patients with metastases. If elevated, prophylactic octreotide should be administered. In patients with functioning tumors or with hepatic metastasis, pre-operative Octreotide 300 mcg to 500 mcg IM/SQ is mandatory to prevent a carcinoid crisis. Additional dosing may be required intraoperatively. We must avoid adrenergic agents for blood pressure control, which can have a paradoxical effect.

If a carcinoid crisis occurs, Octreotide 500 mcg to 1000 mcg IV bolus should be given, followed by continuous infusion at 50mcg  to 200 mcg/hour. In the case of intraoperative hypotension, calcium products and Catecholamine should be avoided as they worsen the release of mediators from the tumor.

**Echocardiogram Recommendation**

An echocardiogram should be performed in patients with significant elevation (greater than five times the upper limit of normal) of serum serotonin/urine 5-HIAA, signs and symptoms of carcinoid heart disease, or if major surgery is planned.