**MECHANISM**

Molecular adsorbent recirculating system (MARS) is an extracorporeal hepatic support system that integrates the mechanisms of dialysis, ultrafiltration, and adsorption.

MARS exploits the usage of three different circuits- a blood circuit that utilizes hemodialyzer (MARS FLUX dialyzer), an albumin circuit that contains an anionic exchange column, and an activated charcoal adsorber, and a dialysate circuit that utilizes conventional dialyzer. Of the two pumps that drive the system, one pump drives the blood circuit and is catered by the standard hemodialyzer (HD)/conventional veno-venous hemofiltration (CVVH) equipment. The closed-loop albumin circuit interconnects the blood and dialysate circuits and is controlled by the pump provided by the MARS monitor.

Vascular access is obtained through a double lumen catheter either from the internal jugular vein, subclavian vein, or the femoral vein. Blood runs through the MARS FLUX dialyzer at a flow rate controlled between 150 TO 250 ml/min and its dialysis done against an albumin solution across an albumin permeated membrane. 600 ml of 10 to 20% albumin dialysate is used to fill the circuit and is run in a direction opposite to the blood flow across the hemodialyzer.

Based on the concepts of protein affinity and the difference in the concentration gradient of the solutes between the two compartments of the MARS FLUX dialyzer, the highly permeable membrane facilitates the diffusion of protein-bound and water-soluble toxins into the albumin dialysate. Albumin in the dialysate solution has free binding sites, and its affinity towards hydrophobic toxins in the circulating blood pulls them across the membrane and is thus retained by the dialysate. The MARS flux membrane doesn’t allow proteins larger than 50 kDa (example: growth factors) to diffuse across the membrane.

The albumin dialysate then circulates through an anionic exchanger and an activated carbon adsorber, which facilitates the removal of protein-bound toxins through the process of adsorption. Subsequently, the solution undergoes another cycle of detoxification where it is dialyzed against bicarbonate buffered dialysate in a diaFLUX dialyzer to clear it of water-soluble toxins and thereby, the purified albumin dialysate recirculates into the blood circuit for reuse.

Unfractionated heparin is administered during the therapy at a dosage of 1500 to 4000 IU/hour for effective anticoagulation. The monitoring of heparin therapy is via activated clotting time (ACT), maintained between 160 and 200 seconds.