Vaccination with the MMR vaccine requires a multi-disciplinary approach as the proper administration of the vaccine changes according to the patient population and the clinical scenario.

Vaccination of children with neurological diseases should follow accepted rules and vaccination schedules. One should remember that the risk of severe infection, the need for hospitalization, and complications in children with chronic disease are significantly higher than in the healthy population. Also, each infection causes a break in rehabilitation, adversely affecting the child's neurological status. Also, children with chronic diseases are more likely to be in health care facilities, making them more vulnerable to infection.

Contraindications to MMR vaccination in children with neurological diseases are limited and temporary. They include

- Undetermined neurological diagnosis

- Suspicion of progressive CNS disease with epilepsy

- Six months after the last convulsion seizure

- Unstabilized neurological condition

Contraindications to MMR vaccination do not constitute:

- Epilepsy with a good response to treatment (at least six months without seizures)

- A neurological disorder occurred before the start of vaccination.

In children who have epilepsy, the recommendation is to administer antipyretic drugs for 6 to 12 days after administration of MMR - fever that may occur as an adverse reaction may trigger seizures.

Another recommendation is to educate patients with a multi-disciplinary team about perceived but false risks of vaccination. For example, the association of MMR with autism spectrum disorder (ASD) is a subject that has aroused much controversy in recent years. Several antivaccine advocacy groups put the hypothesis linking autism and inflammatory bowel disease with MMR vaccination forward in the '90s of the last century.