Myocardial infarction (MI), colloquially known as "heart attack," is caused by decreased or complete cessation of blood flow to a portion of the myocardium. Myocardial infarction may be"silent," and go undetected, or it could be a catastrophic event leading to hemodynamic deterioration and sudden death. Most myocardial infarctions are due to underlying coronary artery disease, the leading cause of death in the United States. With coronary artery occlusion, the myocardium is deprived of oxygen. Prolonged deprivation of oxygen supply to the myocardium can lead to myocardial cell death and necrosis. Patients can present with chest discomfort or pressure that can radiate to the neck, jaw, shoulder, or arm. In addition to the history and physical exam, myocardial ischemia may be associated with ECG changes and elevated biochemical markers such as cardiac troponins. This activity describes the pathophysiology, evaluation, and management of myocardial infarction and highlights the role of the interprofessional team in improving care for affected patients.

**Objectives:**
- Review the basic pathophysiology of myocardial infarction.
- Explain the management protocol when presented with acute myocardial infarction, including all necessary laboratory and other diagnostic testing.
- Summarize the long-term management and rehabilitation for a patient post-MI.
- Explain interprofessional team strategies for improving care coordination and communication to advance the prevention and management of myocardial infarction leading to improved outcomes.