Gemfibrozil is an FDA-approved fibric acid agent (fibrate) to manage hypertriglyceridemia (particularly in type IV and V hyperlipidemia). Diet and exercise constitute the first-line treatment for mild and moderate hypertriglyceridemia. However, patients with no adequate therapeutic response to dietary measurements will benefit from the initiation of this medication. Very high levels of triglycerides represent a risk factor for the development of acute pancreatitis. Gemfibrozil is a useful medication for the reduction of triglycerides in patients with very high serum triglycerides levels.

This drug is also approved for decreasing the risk of developing coronary heart disease (Type IIb), particularly in patients without a history of subsisting coronary heart disease symptoms. In addition, gemfibrozil also provides a beneficial effect on patients with an inadequate response to weight loss, dietary treatment, exercise, and other medications (such as bile acid sequestrants and nicotinic acid, well known to decrease LDL-and increase HDL-cholesterol), and in individuals with a lipid profile consisting of low HDL-cholesterol levels, elevated LDL-cholesterol and elevated triglycerides.

It is recommended to investigate and rule out secondary causes of hyperlipidemia before beginning gemfibrozil therapy. Administration for two to three months is necessary before evaluating efficacy. Treatment discontinuation is recommended if there is an inadequate response within two to three months of receiving gemfibrozil therapy.

Clinicians have also used gemfibrozil under an orphan designation for the treatment of neuronal ceroid lipofuscinoses. According to recent clinical trials, gemfibrozil can be used safely and with potential efficacy as a supportive treatment for children with late neuronal ceroid lipofuscinoses and other lipid storage diseases. It also has been reported to increase longevity in mouse models of late infantile neuronal ceroid lipofuscinoses.