The portion of the tooth that is visible in the oral cavity is termed the crown. The crown is connected to the tooth root, situated within the periodontium, and is not clinically visible to evaluate health without imaging technology (Figure 1).

Enamel has an organized and complex structure, fundamental to its mechanical performance. The hydroxyapatite crystals align to form enamel rods (previously known as prisms) enclosed in a sheath of the organic matrix.

Dentine constitutes the main bulk of the tooth. Its global distribution can be broadly separated into three categories: a mineral phase, an organic matrix, and water, forming 70%, 20%, and 10%, respectively, of its weight.

Within the central portion of the tooth lies the dental pulp. The pulp chamber provides mechanical support and functions as a barrier to external stimuli and the oral microbiome. The dental pulp is a unique tissue that is richly innervated and has an extensive microvascular network.

The cell bodies of odontoblasts are present on the surface of the pulp, where they form a natural barrier between the pulp and the dentine. Their long processes extend through the dentinal tubules. Secondary dentin is deposited slowly throughout life once the tooth has erupted, resulting in a gradual reduction in the pulp chamber's size with age (pulpal recession). In the presence of external stimuli, such as with early dental caries, the odontoblasts respond by secreting reactionary (tertiary) dentin to protect the pulp.

The root surface is completely covered by a mineralized tissue called cementum, which provides attachment for the collagen fibers of the periodontal ligament. Thus, one end of the periodontal ligament attaches to the root cementum, and the other end attaches to the alveolar bone. The ends of the periodontal ligament's principal fibers are known as Sharpey fibers, a perforating connective tissue matrix where the periodontal ligaments attach to the cementum and bone. The dento-gingival junction, cementum, and periodontal ligament collectively form the periodontium, a support structure that anchors teeth within the surrounding alveolar bone.