After positioning the patient, timeout performed, and both the patient and operator prepping in a sterile fashion, the procedure can commence. This procedure can either take place with the addition of ultrasound or blind. There are also multiple different kits, some which have separate guidewires and some that have the needle, catheter, and guidewire in one self-contained apparatus. The procedure is similar, either way. Adequate anesthesia involves injecting 1 to 2 ml of lidocaine at the insertion point for adequate anesthesia.

If this procedure is done blind, the non-dominant hand is used to palpate the radial artery 1 to 2cm proximal to the wrist. The needle is then inserted in a proximal direction, at a 30 to 45-degree angle while watching for a blood flash. There should be bright red pulsatile blood returned with the correct vessel. Upon obtaining the flash, advance the needle slightly further. At this point, the clinician can drop the angle to approximately 10 degrees to aid the guidewire entering the vessels. At this point, the wire needs to be placed into the needle/catheter. Either place the separate guidewire into the needle/catheter or slide the wire down the all-inclusive device. It is possible to remove the needle from the catheter, depending upon the device used. There should not be any resistance to the wire. If there is, remove the wire and reposition the needle until the return of pulsatile blood. Once the wire is sufficiently in the vessel, slide the catheter over the wire and into the artery. The guidewire can now be removed from the catheter; however, before this, make sure to occlude the artery proximal to the insertion site to prevent blood loss from the catheter. Confirmation is also necessary that the transducer is set up and the lines are ready to connect to the arterial catheter. Once confirmed and the artery is occluded, remove the wire while still supporting the catheter as to make sure it will be dislodged. Attach the transducer line to the arterial catheter and release pressure on the artery. The catheter can now be secured to the patient with the silk suture. Sterile dressings are to be placed overtop.

This procedure is also performable under ultrasound guidance, which improves the success rate, especially the first stick success rate. The linear probe can be placed in the longitudinal or transverse plane, whichever is more comfortable for the operator. Once the catheter is visualized entering the artery, the probe is set down, and the remainder of the procedure is the same.