Acute, severe rectal bleeding requires initial hemodynamic assessment and the initiation of hemostatic resuscitation if needed to control the patient's vital signs. This may be achieved with IV fluids or vasopressors in more severe cases. Rectal bleeding severe enough to compromise the hemodynamic system is rare and is usually due to severe upper GI bleeding such as bleeding varices, perforated ulcer, or an aortoenteric fistula, and may mandate an upper GI endoscopy. If the patient undergoes endoscopy, bleeding can be controlled by certain procedures such as endoscopic cauterization, ligation, or direct injection to the bleeding site with either epinephrine or sclerosing agents.

Cauterization involves thermally ablating the site of bleeding with a unipolar or bipolar electrical cautery. Sclerosing agents are tissue irritants that cause vascular thrombosis and thus can be injected during hemostatic endoscopy. The most commonly used agents are ethanolamine oleate and sodium tetradecyl sulfate. If the patient undergoes an angiography, arterial embolization may be performed, especially if the bleeding vessels have been previously clipped as this makes them easily identifiable in imaging. If the patient is hemodynamically stable, they can be investigated and treated on an outpatient basis.**Hemorrhoids**

Management of hemorrhoids can be divided into conservative, office-based, and surgical categories. Conservative management revolves around the incorporation of high fiber options in the diet to minimize the risk of constipation and hence straining while defecating. Daily consumption of 25 grams of fiber for women and 38 grams of fiber for men is advised.

Office-based management mainly involves rubber band ligation, and it is the most widely used office technique for internal hemorrhoids. The procedure involves the application of a rubber band at the apex of internal hemorrhoids. This will cause the fixation of hemorrhoids in the anal canal, correcting the prolapse, with the additional benefit of decreasing blood flow resulting in a decrease in size.

Infrared coagulation is one of the most commonly used energy ablation methods for treating internal hemorrhoids. The heat generated from infrared radiation causes protein coagulation and local inflammation. Each hemorrhoidal complex is exposed to the radiation at 4 different locations, with the depth of the penetration being around 3 mm. This process causes tissue necrosis, eventually leading to fibrosis and scarring.

Operative management is reserved for patients who fail medical management, continue to have symptoms despite undergoing office-based procedures, present with extensive thrombosed hemorrhoids, or have other manifestations of advanced disease. Moreover, strangulated or gangrenous hemorrhoids will require immediate operative intervention as well. Closed excisional hemorrhoidectomy is the most commonly performed operation for this problem in the United States.

Stapled hemorrhoidectomy is another alternative to second and third-degree hemorrhoids. This technique involves placing a purse-string suture in a circumferential fashion into the submucosa above the transition zone. The tissue above the suture is then excised with the help of the transplant stapler. In women, a vaginal exam should be done before firing the stapler to ensure the purse-string suture has not incorporated the posterior vaginal wall.

Complications after hemorrhoidectomy include pain, urinary retention, hemorrhage, anal stenosis, infection, and fecal incontinence. Topical agents such as nitroglycerin and metronidazole have been shown to decrease post hemorrhoidectomy pain.

**Anal Fissures**

Conservative treatment includes stool softeners, nitroglycerin to loosen the anal sphincter, and warm baths. Surgical management may be an option in chronic or resistant cases where a sphincterotomy is performed.**Diverticular Bleeding**

Diverticular bleeding may cause severe rectal bleeding. The bleeding is controlled by endoscopic procedures such as epinephrine injection, clip placement, or ligation. In severe cases where diverticula cause significant, persistent bleeding that can't be controlled with endoscopic procedures, partial colectomy may be performed.

**Colon Cancer**

Management is based on removing the tumor and the associated part of the colon. Depending on the stage of the tumor, radical excision, which involves removing the affected part of the colon, the associated mesocolon, and local lymph nodes, may be required. The treatment plan may also involve adjuvant chemotherapy and radiotherapy.