Thoracic spinal nerves from T1 to T11 all have anterior rami corresponding with intercostal nerves. The space located between the parietal pleura and the posterior intercostal membrane is the location where every single intercostal nerve arises from their appropriate space. In the subcostal groove of every rib, the nerve lays beneath the intercostal vessels, and they are associated with the somatic nervous system.

Exclusive characteristics of the first intercostal nerve are that it is the smallest nerve of all of them, it is incorporated into the brachial plexus through a unique branch, and there is no anterior cutaneous branch. The second intercostal nerve has the sole distinctive feature that it is connected to the medial cutaneous nerve in both arms by the intercostobrachial nerve. That is responsible for the innervation of the skin surrounding the armpit, the upper medial side of the arm, and the second intercostal space as well.

Considering the pattern of innervation, the 1 to 6 intercostal nerves usually supply parietal pleura, skin, serratus posterior, levatores costarum, and intercostal muscles. The next five intercostal nerves supply innervation to several structures such as parietal peritoneum, skin, and different abdominal muscles (internal/external oblique, rectus abdominis, and transversus muscles).

A special peculiarity that differentiates the intercostal nerves from the other spinal nerves is that they do not constitute a plexus and trace an autonomous course.