**Histochemistry of the Lung**

Histochemical analyses of the lung can be carried out using lectin histochemistry (LC) or immunohistochemistry (IHC). Both methods can be performed on tissue slides. The normal lung cells can be typed as type I and type II pneumocytes based on histochemical analyses using lectin typing (glycotyping) Dolichos biflorus agglutinin for bronchial epithelial cells, Triticum Vulgaris (succinylated) for type I pneumocytes and Hippeastrum hybrid or Maclura pomifera lectins for type II pneumocytes. Alveolar macrophages are anti-CD68 positive, and alveolar lining show positivity for cytokeratin.

Further, IHC and LC can provide substantial insights into obstructive and restrictive pathologies as well as in lung cancer diagnosis.  Adenocarcinomas can be identified by differentiation markers that include TTF-1 and NapsinA.  Both these markers are expressed in more than 85% of the cases

**Cytochemistry of the Lung**

Cell analyses of the lung tissue can be carried out using electron microscopy and have recently included flow cytometric assays. Assessment of non-specific esterases: alpha-naphthyl acetate esterase (ANAE) and butyrate esterase (BUT), chloroacetate esterase (CHL), acid phosphatase (ACP), intracellular glycogen (PAS reaction), lipids (Sudan black B reaction-SBB) and iron (Perl's reaction) can be performed by a semiquantitative cytochemical method to identify diseases of the lung   ECM remodeling is the basis of pathologic changes in obstructive pulmonary diseases, and collagen alteration provides insight into the disease. The second-harmonic generation (SHG) technique used to quantify collagen has demonstrated effect analysis of lung diseases, with a biochemically distinct presentation of organization of collagen in asthma, COPD and idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis (IPF)