Aortic dissection is an acute process in which a tear in the internal face of the aorta leads to dissection through the laminas and formation of a new lumen (false lumen) and acute drop in systemic blood pressure, potentially leading to hemopericardium and cardiac tamponade

The media layer is formed by smooth muscle cells, elastic fibers, collagen fibers, and hyaluronic acid. Each of these components can be altered and weaken the structure leading to a less resistant vessel. Microscopic examination can evaluate each component with special stains: VVG, Alcian blue, Movat's pentachrome, Masson's trichrome, CME.

- Extracellular matrix: mucoid accumulation increase the intralamellar or translamellar space, creating the so-called "cystic degeneration" of the media that decreases the vessel resistance. The main component of mucin accumulation is chondroitin-6-sulfate

- Alteration of elastic fibers: fragmentation, thinning, disorganization. A normal aorta has a dense meshwork of elastic fibers that contribute substantially to its resistance to blood pressure.Fragmentation of elastic fibers extends the translamellar spaces decreasing the elasticity of the aorta. Thinning widens the intralamellar spaces. Disorganization refers to the nonparallel arrangement of fibers that are haphazardly arranged in a non-functional manner.

- Altered smooth muscle cells: nuclear loss, disorganization.Nuclear cell loss, so-called  “smooth muscle cell necrosis” can appear in bands or as wide areas where only the ghost cell contours are visible. Disarray of smooth muscle cells can be focal or nodular.

- Laminar medial collapse: collapsing of elastic fibers represent what is called “laminar medial necrosis” and is coupled with significant loss of interponed smooth muscle cells.

- Collagen fibers: fibrosis. This is the least common process in degenerative aortic disease.

Those findings are usually present combined with each other and must be recognized to accurately grade the medial degeneration (as mild/moderate/severe) from severity and distribution of the degenerative lesions

**Vasa Vasorum**

The vasa vasorum is a vascular network distributed around the outer layers of the media and the adventitia of the aorta. Its role is crucial in maintaining the oxygen and nutrient supply to the aorta itself. Reduced vascular efficacy of the vasa vasorum leads to medial alteration and necrosis. As proven empirically, obstruction of the vasa vasorum induces degenerative changes in the media with subsequent aortic dissection[17]. This can be physiologically caused by vascular thickening, tortuosity, and obstruction.

**Hypertension**

It is the single most important risk factor for the development of medial degeneration

**Aging**

With aging, there is a loss of elastin and an increase in collagen, fragmentation, and disarray of elastic fibers with different grades of the smooth muscle cell alterations

**Genetic Predisposition**

Marfan syndrome: in this genetic syndrome the fiber meshworks are altered, and the vessels are more prone to aneurysm formation.Other syndromes are associated with an altered aortic wall: Ehlers-Danlos, Loeys–Dietz syndrome (LDS), and Turner syndrome.

**Congenital diseases**

Tetralogy of Fallot, coarctation of the aorta, bicuspid aortic valve.