# Continuing Education Activity

Subarachnoid hemorrhages are true emergencies that demand prompt treatment. Subarachnoid hemorrhages result from a medical aneurysmal rupture or traumatic head injury, resulting in bleeding in the subarachnoid space between the arachnoid membrane and the pia mater surrounding the brain. Unfortunately, subarachnoid hemorrhages are often associated with poor outcomes. Nearly half of patients presenting with a subarachnoid hemorrhage caused by an underlying aneurysm die within 30 days, and a third of those who survive have complications. This activity reviews the etiology, pathophysiology, evaluation, and treatment of subarachnoid hemorrhages and highlights the role of interprofessional teams in caring for patients with subarachnoid hemorrhages.

**Objectives:**
- Identify the differential diagnosis for subarachnoid hemorrhage.
- Explain how to evaluate a patient with suspected subarachnoid hemorrhage.
- Describe treatment considerations for patients with subarachnoid hemorrhages.
- Summarize the roles of various interprofessional team members in caring for patients with subarachnoid hemorrhages and improving chances for survival and recovery.

# Introduction

A subarachnoid hemorrhage (SAH) results from a medical aneurysmal rupture or traumatic head injury.

Other associated symptoms may include neck pain, nausea/vomiting, and photophobia.

# Etiology

About 85% of cases of nontraumatic subarachnoid hemorrhage are secondary to a ruptured saccular aneurysm.

A family history of SAH increases the risk of SAH in individuals without any of these conditions. A study found that first-degree relatives of patients with SAH have a three-to-five-fold increased risk of SAH compared with the general population. Unruptured aneurysms in families with cerebral aneurysms are more likely to rupture than those without a family history.

A small proportion of aneurysmal subarachnoid hemorrhages is known to have a genetic association. The genetic susceptibility appears to be heterogenous with multiple chromosomes implicated.

# Epidemiology

The incidence of spontaneous subarachnoid hemorrhage is seen in about one per 10,000 people annually. Females are more commonly affected than males. Although this clinical entity is more common with older age, about 55% of patients with a SAH who present are under age 55.

Up to 10% of patients with a SAH report a history of bending over, lifting heavy objects, or performing other strenuous activities, at the onset of their symptoms.

# Pathophysiology

Saccular aneurysms account for most cases of SAH.

Fusiform aneurysms are caused by dilation of the entire circumference of the vessel, often formed as a result of atherosclerosis.

**Traumatic SAH**

Traumatic SAH commonly occurs near the site of a skull fracture and intracerebral contusion. Radiologic clues of a traumatic origin include localized bleeding in a superficial sulcus, an adjacent skull fracture, and a cerebral contusion with external evidence of traumatic injury.

# Histopathology

**Nontraumatic Subarachnoid Hemorrhage**

Histopathologically, a nontraumatic subarachnoid hemorrhage can be divided into two main types:

- Saccular aneurysm

- Fusiform aneurysm

- Dolicoecthatic

Aneurysms are described as saccular, fusiform, or dolicoecthatic, depending on their shape. Saccular aneurysms are pouch-or berry-like protrusions that arise from vascular bifurcations or from the side of a vessel and often have an irregular shape with secondary protrusions. Dilations or pathological increases in vessel caliber that do not lead to forming a separate saccular pouch are usually called fusiform aneurysms, whereas tortuous, dilated elongations of vessels are referred to as dolicoecthatic.

# History and Physical

Patients presenting with a subarachnoid hemorrhage classically present with a “thunderclap” headache (characterized as a severe headache that develops within seconds to minutes and has a maximal intensity at its onset), neck stiffness, vomiting, and decreased level of consciousness, hemiparesis, and occasionally, seizures.

Neck stiffness typically does not occur until about 6 hours after the onset of a SAH. Asymmetrical pupil size and loss of the pupillary light reflex may indicate brain herniation caused by rising intracranial pressure. Terson syndrome (vitreous hemorrhage resulting from a severe SAH) occurs in anywhere from 3% to 13% of cases.

Electrocardiographic changes may include large U waves, T wave abnormalities, QT prolongation, Q waves, high R waves, cardiac dysthymias, and ST changes (elevation or depression).

Patients may report a history of a head injury before the onset of symptoms or a known history of a cerebral aneurysm. Other risk factors include high blood pressure, smoking, family history, connective tissue disorders, and drug/alcohol abuse.

Patients may also report having a history of a prior severe headache and/or a history of a small bleed with resolving symptoms within the past month. This is considered a sentinel bleed, which often precedes a more severe SAH. A headache from a sentinel bleed is extremely difficult to diagnose, as CT and LP can be unreliable in these cases.

Some physical exam findings include an oculomotor abnormality/palsy, which may indicate the posterior communicating artery as the source of the bleeding.

# Evaluation

Generally, a non-contrast head CT is obtained on presentation.

However, If the non-contrast head CT is indeterminate or if the patient presents outside of the 6-hour window, a lumbar puncture (LP) is indicated.

Regarding laboratory testing, consistently elevated red blood cell counts in all cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) tubes may indicate a SAH. The CSF can also be examined for xanthochromia (yellow appearance to the centrifugate fluid) by spectrophotometry or visual examination.

Lastly, cerebral angiography or CT angiography can help to identify an aneurysmal source of the bleeding.

In 1968, Hunt and Hess established a SAH severity scale based on symptoms at presentation.

# Treatment / Management

Surgical correction of cerebral aneurysms was first introduced in the 1930s, and by the 1990s, coiling and clipping became popular as less-invasive treatment options for patients with SAH. The International Study of Unruptured Intracranial Aneurysms (ISUIA) has established prognostic data for patients with a history of a prior subarachnoid hemorrhage or patients who were found to have an aneurysm as an incidental finding on brain imaging. They have concluded that aneurysms smaller than 10 mm or an aneurysm that has never bled are unlikely to have a SAH and may not require surgical repair as a preventative measure.

The first step in managing a SAH is stabilizing the patient and getting an emergent neurosurgical evaluation.

Once the diagnosis of a SAH is made, most patients will be admitted to a neurosurgical intensive care unit, as up to 15% of these patients may have worsening bleeding during admission.

Patients with a large hematoma, decreased level of consciousness, or any focal neurological deficits may require surgical removal of the blood and/or occlusion of the bleeding site.

Aneurysms of the middle cerebral artery tend to be amenable to clipping, whereas those of the basilar artery and posterior cerebral artery are typically more accessible by endovascular coiling.

Early predictors of rebleeding include high systolic blood pressure, hematoma within the brain or ventricles, poor Hunt-Hess grade, posterior circulation aneurysms, and any aneurysms greater than 10 mm in size.

Calcium channel blockers such as nimodipine or verapamil are often used to prevent vasospasm.

# Differential Diagnosis

- Meningoencephalitis

- Cluster headache

- Adult seizures

- Intracranial hemorrhage

- Ischemic cerebrovascular accident

- Migraine

- Transient ischemic attack

# Prognosis

Unfortunately, subarachnoid hemorrhage is often associated with poor outcomes.

# Complications

Cerebral vasospasm typically occurs after the third day of onset and typically reaches its peak on the fifth to the seventh day.

Other reported complications of subarachnoid hemorrhage include hydrocephalus, hypopituitarism, cardiac decompensation, fluctuations in blood pressure and electrolyte levels, and seizures.

# Deterrence and Patient Education

At-risk patients may need to understand the possible presentation of subarachnoid hemorrhage; patients who have had subarachnoid hemorrhage often report they experienced the "worst headache I ever had." Other symptoms that require immediate attention include:

- Sudden facial, arm, or leg weakness or numbness, particularly unilaterally

- Sudden onset confusion or difficulties with speaking or understanding others

- Sudden loss of coordination or ability to walk or stand; difficulty maintaining balance

- Sudden excruciating headache with no apparent cause

The postoperative ICU period following subarachnoid hemorrhage is associated with significant morbidity and mortality risk. Patient expectations must be based on identified prognostic indicators for poor outcomes and educating the patient regarding optimal hemodynamic monitoring.

# Enhancing Healthcare Team Outcomes

Subarachnoid hemorrhage is a severe life-threatening emergency that demands prompt treatment. Most patients present to the emergency department; thus, the emergency department team must know how to assess the patient and order the appropriate tests. Neurocritical care and a neurosurgical consultation are mandatory.

This entails an interprofessional team approach to care involving clinicians, nurses, pharmacists, and physical and occupational therapists. When medication plays a role in managing the case, a pharmacist should be consulted to verify dosing and perform medication reconciliation. Neurocritical care nurses must be familiar with the management of these patients. All team members must keep meticulous records of their patient interactions and interventions so that everyone involved in care has the most accurate, up-to-date data on the case. If anyone notes a concern or deterioration or other change in status, they must immediately be able to reach out to the appropriate persons for additional workup or therapeutic action.

Unfortunately, the disorder carries a mortality of over 50%, irrespective of treatment. Even those who survive are left with disabling morbidity, hence the need for ongoing therapy. An ethics team should be involved early in the goals of care planning.