The most commonly used intraoperative neurophysiological monitoring (IONM) techniques for surgical procedures include:

- Somatosensory sensory evoked potential (SSEP)

- Motor-evoked potential (MEP)

- Spontaneous and triggered electromyography (EMG)

The evoked potential technique involves applying a stimulus that generates a neuronal response, measured as a graph of time (mS) on the x-axis and voltage(mV) on the y-axis, two significant characteristics of the measured waveform is amplitude and latency. These evoked potentials are very low amplitude and require averaging and summation across multiple stimulations to enhance their quality and distinguish these potentials from background noise and patients electroencephalogram. The time interval between electrical stimulation of neural structure and measuring the evoked response at the cerebral cortex is defined as latency. Evoked potential are classified according to the nerve tract being monitored.

The somatosensory evoked potentials (SSEP) are electrical potentials generated within the neuroaxis in response to stimulation of a peripheral nerve (e.g., the median nerve at the wrist or the posterior tibial nerve at the ankle)****(peripheral SSEP), or cervical spine (subcortical SSEP) or somatosensory cortex (cortical SSEP). These potentials travel from the periphery to the brain and are recorded by electrodes placed over the scalp and along the transmission pathway. SSEP is monitored continuously throughout procedures that give close to real-time monitoring of the sensory pathway.

Motor evoked potential (MEP) is generated by transcranial electrical stimulation using surface or subdermal needle electrodes on the scalp or direct electrical stimulation on the brain. Evoked potential are measured over the spinal cord below the surgery level or in the muscle of interest. At the spinal level, the evoked response is measured in the epidural or intrathecal space. Compound muscle action potential (CMAP) is routinely measured due to their sensitivity, specificity, and minimal invasiveness. The electrodes are placed on the muscle innervated by specific brain regions, nerve root, or cranial nerve needed to monitor. Frequently used sites are thenar muscles, tibialis anterior, and abductor hallucis; muscle group above the surgery level is used as a control.

Brain stem auditory evoked potential (BAEP), are recorded by delivering an auditory stimulus to one ear; the stimulus is loud, repetitive ticks produced by a device placed over or in the auditory canal. The response is measured from electrodes placed on the scalp or external ear to record ipsilateral and contralateral signals.

Visual evoked potential (VEP) is the electrical potentials initiated by visual stimuli recorded from the electrode on the scalp over the visual cortex. VEP recording requires three electrodes; the mid-occipital electrode is placed right above the external occipital protuberance (inion); the lateral occipital electrodes are placed 4 cm lateral on each side of the mid-occipital electrode.

Electromyography (EMG) records myoelectric signals from peripheral musculature to monitor selective nerve root function. One muscle group per nerve is monitored by using spontaneous EMG or triggered EMG technique. Spontaneous EMG, needle electrode is directly inserted into a muscle to record the electrical activity of that muscle; no stimulation is performed, surgical manipulation such as compression, stretching, or pulling of nerves produces myoelectric signals in the corresponding innervated muscles which are recorded. Triggered EMG, a monopolar electrode, stimulates the top of the pedicle screw with incremental current intensities. Needle electrodes are placed in the appropriate muscle groups to record electrical activity in response to the stimulation. Direct stimulation of nerve root using less than two mA can ensure an electrical activity in the appropriate muscle group. Triggered EMG is used to check proper pedicular screw placement; if the screw breaches the medial or inferior pedicle wall, it significantly reduces the stimulation threshold and increases the risk of damage to the exiting nerve root.

An electroencephalogram (EEG) measures the activity of the cerebral cortical neuron via the scalp electrode. Each scalp electrode collects around 6 cm2 synchronous cortical activity. This electrical activity is the summation of the postsynaptic potentials (inhibitory and excitatory) from pyramidal cells near each recording electrode.