# Introduction

The mechanisms of apoptosis may help elucidate the pathologies of uncontrolled cell growth or death. Apoptosis is under the mediation of two major pathways: the extrinsic or death receptor pathway and the intrinsic or mitochondrial pathway.

The BAX gene (Bcl-2 Associated X-protein) is a pro-apoptotic member of the Bcl-2 gene family; it encodes a 21-kDa protein named BAX-alpha, whose association with Bcl-2 researchers believe plays a critical role in regulating intrinsic apoptosis.

# Development

Research has shown that the Bax gene is located on chromosome 19 by utilizing fluorescent in-situ hybridization and human-hamster somatic cell hybrid DNA.

# Cellular

The intrinsic pathway of apoptosis becomes activated via decreased survival signals. The Bax gene encodes BCL2L4 protein that, upon activation, heterodimerizes with Bcl2 family proteins and alters cellular mitochondria to induce cell death.

# Biochemical

Due to alternative splicing, the Bax gene produces multiple isoforms, with Bax-alpha being the most predominant.

# Molecular Level

Bax and other pro-apoptotic members of the Bcl-2 family contain 4 Bcl-2 homologous (BH) domains. The BH3 domain contains the active binding site, which consists of alpha-helices embedded within a hydrophobic groove.

# Function

The Bax gene encodes BCL2L4 protein that, upon activation, heterodimerizes with Bcl2 family proteins and alters cellular mitochondria to induce cell death.

# Mechanism

Bax protein exists constitutively in the cytoplasm until activated. It binds to multiple anti-apoptotic proteins such as Bcl-xl that inhibit Bax translocation to the MOM; therefore, Bax mediated apoptosis is dependant on the concentration of both pro- and anti-apoptotic proteins.

# Testing

Researchers originally discovered Bax using immunoprecipitation studies with Bcl-2.

# Pathophysiology

Because of the Bax gene's role in cell apoptosis, dysfunction carries links to various pathologies related to cell accumulation (i.e., cancer) or cell loss (i.e., heart failure, Alzheimer disease).

# Clinical Significance

Bax dysregulation can lead to apoptotic dysfunction that increases the likelihood of multiple pathologies.  As a tumor suppressor gene, Bax has a critical role in preventing tumorigenesis, and loss of function often occurs in human tumors. Loss of function mutations can also lead to incomplete negative selection and peripheral tolerance dysfunction, thus causing autoimmune complications. Chronic neurodegenerative conditions, such as Huntington disease, Parkinson disease, or Alzheimer disease, often depend on aberrant apoptotic cell death. Lastly, although necrosis is the primary mechanism of injury during myocardial infarction, it has been seen that reperfusion injury is an apoptosis driven event.