Like any trauma patient, fluid management based on weight and burn size should immediately occur after the primary airway evaluation. However, fluid bolus administration in patients with burns without any evidence of hypovolemia is unnecessary and has several consequences, including further exacerbation of edema formation, and therefore should be avoided.

Burns with greater than 15% body surface area (BSA) in adults and 10% BSA in children require formal fluid resuscitation, calculated with the Lund and Browder chart for children and the Wallace rule of 9s for adults.

Goals for fluid resuscitation are generally accepted as urine output greater than 0.5ml/kg per hour, base deficit less than 2, systolic blood pressure greater than 90 mm Hg, and clinically with peripheral pulses palpable and no altered mental status. Although studies have shown these variables to be adequate predictors of fluid resuscitation, many physicians rely solely on urine output (UOP). In 1991, Dries and Waxman found that vital signs and urine output did not appreciably change after volume repletion, whereas measurements from pulmonary artery catheterization (PAC) were quite significant.

An exception to the previously stated UOP goal occurs in patients with rhabdomyolysis and/or acute renal failure, with mortality as high as 70% in severe burns. These patients require fluids at a rate that produces a UOP of 1 ml/kg hour.

According to the American Burn Association's practice guidelines, patients with greater than 15 percent total body surface area (TBSA) nonsuperficial burns should receive intravenous fluid resuscitation. Moreover, placement of two large-bore intravenous (IV) lines in unburned skin and, if possible, central venous access are indicated. However, the decision for the placement of the latter should be individualized. Also, IV lines can be placed even through burned skin if other alternatives are not possible to avoid delays in resuscitation.

The resuscitation of patients with burn trauma and the role of albumin solutions in the process remains equivocal. Despite the physiologic rationale to support the role of albumin administration in acute burn trauma, the significantly high mortality rate in the group of patients treated with albumin was against the albumin replacement.