Ewing sarcoma (ES) is an aggressive tumor of adolescents and young adults, which constitutes 10%-15% of all bone sarcomas. Ewing sarcoma can occur in a wide variety of locations with varying presentations. The most common anatomical sites include the pelvis, axial skeleton, and femur; however, it may occur in almost any bone or soft tissue. Patients with ES often present with local symptoms such as pain, stiffness, or swelling for a few weeks or months. More than 50% of the patients with ES have intermittent pain that worsens at night. Bone lesions or metastatic lesions within the long bone can present as pathological fractures. The pelvic location of ES can present as back pain. The presence of systemic symptoms, including fever and weight loss, often indicates metastatic disease. Around 20% of patients present with metastatic disease at the time of diagnosis, and among these cases, more than 20% have lung or pleura involvement.

Over the last 40 years, both local therapy and multi-agent adjuvant chemotherapy have achieved considerable progress in the treatment of localized disease that improved 5–year survival rate from less than 20% to greater than 70% but the recurrence rate remains high. Approximately 25% of patients with initially localized disease ultimately relapse. No standard therapy exists for relapsed and refractory ES, with survival rates being less than 30% in those with isolated lung metastases and less than 20% in those with bone and bone marrow involvement.

Symptoms of bone pain, joint pain, or palpable mass warrant assessment. A comprehensive physical examination is critical. Patients and their families should be educated on these presenting symptoms as they may potentially be related to an osseous neoplasm. ES is best managed with an interprofessional team approach. Optimal treatment of childhood cancer requires a high level of suspicion by the primary clinicians and early referral to the pediatric oncologist. The team should also include skilled radiologists, orthopedic surgeons, radiation oncologists, pathologists, and pharmacists. Early detection and treatment may reduce disease-related morbidity and complications.