**History**

In the elective setting, a focused medical history should include all aspects of symptomatology, and this includes onset, timing, exacerbating, and relieving factors.

Lower urinary tract symptoms can be divided into storage (frequency, nocturia, urgency) and voiding symptoms (stream, straining, hesitancy, prolonged micturition) and can help establish other causes of urinary symptoms such as urinary tract infections/overactive bladder, in addition to determining the site affected (bladder vs. prostate). Men with BPH are likely to report predominant symptoms of nocturia, poor stream, hesitancy, or prolonged micturition.

Red flags help point to more sinister causes of urinary symptoms such as bladder/prostate cancer, neurology such as cauda equina, or chronic high-pressure retention (which can lead to silent renal failure). The presence of these can be established by asking about visible haematuria/bone pain/weight loss, neurology, and nocturnal enuresis/incontinence, respectively.

Complete medication history should be taken, including any medications they have tried and use of anticoagulants or antiplatelets, which may increase the risk of intra-operative bleeding or need to be held before surgery.

The overall fitness of the patient should also be established to determine suitability for any future interventions (fitness for anesthesia, independence, exercise tolerance, ability to complete activities of daily living), and the symptom burden on quality of life should also be established.

**Physical Examination**

In the elective setting, the examination should include abdominal examination (looking for a palpable bladder/loin pain) and examination of external genitalia (meatal stenosis or phimosis). The examination should then conclude with a digital rectal examination making a note in particular of the size, shape (how many lobes), and consistency (smooth/hard/nodular) of the prostate (BPH is characterized by a smooth enlarged prostate).

Further bedside evaluation includes

- Urine dipstick (rule out other causes such as infection)

- Post-void residual volume (whether the bladder is emptied properly)

- IPSS (international prostate symptom score)

- Frequency-volume chart

**Questionnaires**

Both the American urological association symptom index and IPSS can be used to assess the impact of LUTS on quality of life.