# Continuing Education Activity

Acute-onset polyarticular arthritis is the most common presentation of viral arthritis. The most commonly implicated viruses are parvovirus, the alphaviruses, hepatitis B, hepatitis C, Epstein-Barr virus, and tropical viruses such as the Zika virus and the chikungunya virus. The diagnosis of viral arthritis should be considered in all patients presenting with acute-onset polyarticular symptoms. Although viruses cause only a small proportion of cases of acute arthritis, the differentiation of virally-mediated arthritis from primary rheumatological disease is important as it influences subsequent management. This activity examines when viral arthritis should be considered on differential diagnosis and how to evaluate it properly. This activity highlights the role of the interprofessional team in caring for patients with this condition.

**Objectives:**
- Describe the pathophysiology of viral arthritis.
- Differentiate primary rheumatological disease from virally-mediated arthritis.
- Identify management options for viral arthritis. 
- Explain the importance of improving care coordination, emphasizing communication between interprofessional medical teams, to enhance prompt and thorough delivery of care to patients with viral arthritis.

# Introduction

Acute-onset polyarticular arthritis is the most common presentation of viral arthritis. The most common viruses causing arthritis and/or arthralgias are parvovirus, the alphaviruses, hepatitis B, hepatitis C, Epstein-Barr virus (EBV), and tropical viruses, such as Zika and chikungunya (CHIKV). The diagnosis can be difficult to confirm but should be considered in all patients presenting with acute-onset polyarticular symptoms. Although viruses cause only a small proportion of all cases of acute arthritis, differentiation of virally mediated arthritis from primary rheumatological disease is important. Low-titer autoantibodies, such as rheumatoid factor and antinuclear antibody, can occur in the context of acute viral arthritis.

Overall, viral arthritis is milder than osteoarthritis or rheumatoid arthritis. Most patients respond to NSAIDs, and antiviral treatment is rarely needed.

# Etiology

Many viruses could be responsible for causing viral arthritis, the most common being Parvovirus, alphavirus, rubella, Hepatitis B, C, and flavivirus. Some other viruses can also cause arthritis/arthralgia rarely. These are EBV, HIV, mumps, herpes, and cytomegalovirus (CMV). Recently, there has been an increase in the occurrence of mosquito-borne virus-related arthropathies, such as the ones associated with Zika and CHIKV.  Occasionally, the virus causing arthritis could be related to the patient's comorbidities. For example, EBV causing viral arthritis in patients on immunosuppressive agents.

HIV-induced arthritis is more common than once believed. It may be the first presentation in at least 30% of HIV patients; however, it can occur at any stage of the viral illness. These patients are not at risk for developing septic arthritis, but they may be at risk for pyomyositis. In addition, some patients may develop reactive arthritis and even psoriatic arthritis.

# Epidemiology

Viral arthritis is reported worldwide, but the exact incidence and prevalence are unknown. This could be related to the multitude of viruses causing the arthritis syndrome, geographic variability, and, more often than not, the self-limited nature of the illness. Rates of viral arthritis are much higher in adults compared to children. Children tend to be susceptible to parvovirus B19, but they rarely develop arthritis.

# Pathophysiology

In the majority of patients with viral arthritis, the mechanisms are poorly understood. Viruses can initiate articular symptoms via different mechanisms. These include the direct invasion of the joint, immune complex formation, and immune modulation causing chronic inflammation. The joint synovium is considered home for many arthritis-causing viruses, which can recruit inflammatory cells to the joints and result in the inflammation cascade continuing. For example, in cases related to the alphaviruses, infected macrophages in the synovium are thought to be responsible for much of the pathology and inflammation through the release of pro-inflammatory cytokines and matrix metalloproteinases.

# History and Physical

The constellation of signs and symptoms related to viral arthritis seems to be related to the specific virus causing the infection. As a rule, patients with viral arthritis present with a self-limited episode of symmetric polyarticular arthritis or arthralgia. Monoarthritis is unusual. The presentation might involve fever, rash, and lymphadenopathy. In rare cases, viral arthritis can mimic the presentation of rheumatic diseases like rheumatoid arthritis, especially because these viral arthritis syndromes could be associated with the presence of autoantibodies, namely rheumatoid factor (RF) and antinuclear antibody (ANA). The titers are usually low and disappear quickly. Some viruses, like Chikungunya, are known to produce recurrent and many times chronic arthritis, but the majority of these infections are self-limiting, lasting less than 6 to 12 weeks.

# Evaluation

**Clinical Presentation and Pathophysiology Related to Individual Viral Entity**

- **Parvovirus B-19**: Commonly known for causing "fifth disease" or erythema infectiosum, parvovirus B-19 can also cause arthritis/arthralgia in children and adults. Joint symptoms occur in as many as 60% of infected adults.

- **Hepatitis Viruse****s**: Hepatitis A sometimes can cause arthralgias but usually no arthritis. Both hepatitis B (HBV) and hepatitis C (HCV) viruses can cause arthritis and arthralgia. Approximately 10% to 25 % of patients with HBV develop symptoms of arthralgia and arthritis. Arthritis in patients with HBV is mediated through the formation and deposition of immune complexes.

- **HIV**: The arthritis syndromes associated with HIV include many entities such as HIV-associated arthritis, reactive arthritis, septic arthritis, psoriatic arthritis, and rarely described painful articular syndrome.

- **EBV**: Arthralgias are the most common joint manifestation of Epstein-Barr viral infection, with the rare case of arthritis causing occasional large joint swelling. The joint signs and symptoms are self-limited, and treatment is symptomatic. A triggering role in the development of chronic inflammatory arthritis in RA has been proposed, but no definite evidence has been found.

- **Alphaviruses**: These viruses are mosquito-borne RNA viruses that cause epidemics of febrile arthralgia and polyarthritis. This group includes the Ross River virus, Barmah Forest virus, O'nyong-nyong, Sindbis virus group, Mayaro, and CHIKV.Aedes aegypti and Aedes albopictus are the vectors of CHIKV. The arthritis of CHIKV is typically symmetrical and most commonly involves the fingers, wrists, knees, and ankles. Raynaud phenomenon has been reported as well in some patients. Chronic symptoms of joint pain and swelling have been reported to be relapsing and remitting in a majority (up to 80%) of patients.

- **Flaviviruses**: Dengue and Zika virus are prominent members of this group causing febrile illnesses and symptoms of joint pain and swelling. As with the above-mentioned alphaviruses, the geographical distribution of these viruses has significantly expanded in recent times. Aedes aegypti is the principle vector for Dengue.

- **Other viruses**: Mumps, HTLV-1, rubella, and some enteroviruses can also cause arthralgia and arthritis.

**Diagnosis**

There is no single test or clinical presentation which is suggestive of viral arthritis. The diagnosis is mainly clinical, supported by other tests, including inflammatory markers, autoantibodies, and serology. A viral etiology should be suspected in a patient presenting with acute onset of arthralgias or polyarticular symptoms, especially if the duration of symptomatology has been less than six weeks. The presence of extra-articular symptoms, viz rash or lymphadenopathy, should be noted. Testing for antinuclear antibodies (ANA), rheumatoid factor (RF), and anti-citrullinated protein antibodies (ACPA) could be helpful if the features of inflammatory arthritis persist. In suspected cases of viral arthritis, the serum should be collected for serology. Serologic testing, however, must be directed against the specific viruses suspected based upon both epidemiologic and clinical data. As a general rule with serology, an IgM antibody response would be indicative of acute infection and would be converted to an IgG isotype after a few weeks. Due to the high rate of infections in the general population, for example, with EBV and hepatitis, positive IgG antibodies, especially if stable in titers, are non-diagnostic. Other laboratory features are related to the specific viral syndromes. For example, the detection of positive HBsAg elevated aminotransferases and IgM anti-HBc antibodies in a patient with recent-onset polyarthritis could provide the clue to the diagnosis of HBV-associated polyarthritis. Isolation of virus from the joint itself or viral cultures is not useful except in rare circumstances.

# Treatment / Management

Treatment in viral arthritis is generally symptomatic. NSAIDs and acetaminophen should be used for pain and inflammation. The use of corticosteroids is usually discouraged and not recommended. In some cases, as in arthritis-related to Hepatitis B/C or HIV, anti-viral treatment alone can lead to the resolution of the joint symptoms.

# Differential Diagnosis

- Lupus

- Psoriasis

- Lyme

- Gonorrhea

- Rheumatoid arthritis

- Osteoarthritis

- Ankylosing spondylitis

# Prognosis

Viral arthritis is a mild self-limited disorder in most people. There is no specific treatment, and recovery is usually complete in a matter of weeks. Joint dysfunction is acute and has no residual effects.

# Enhancing Healthcare Team Outcomes

Because of the difficulty in diagnosis, the disorder is best managed by an interprofessional team. Viral arthritis is uncommon but should be strongly considered in the differential diagnosis of polyarticular joint pain for less than six weeks.

High-risk groups include travelers from the endemic areas, healthcare workers, and IV drug abusers and should be specially considered. The early diagnosis and management are crucial for arboviruses; for example, Chikungunya from public health and epidemiological perspective.

The pharmacist, primary care provider, and nurse practitioner are in the ideal position to educate patients. The key is prevention by getting the relevant vaccines before travel, practicing safe sex, drinking clean water, and preventing mosquito bites.  Clinicians also should not assume that all joint pain is viral; sometimes, one has to rule out septic arthritis, Lyme disease, or gonococcal infection.

It should be recognized that many of these viral arthritis syndromes are associated with elevated markers of inflammation, namely rheumatoid factors and antinuclear antibodies. As mentioned, the titers for these markers are usually low and transient. Many of these cases can be managed in a primary care setting; however, if the arthralgia and joint swelling persist or worsen, referral to a rheumatologist would be prudent. [Level 5] With open communication between members of the team, the outcomes of viral arthritis can be significantly improved.