The radiologist's experience level, assessment in consensus, and the addition of the abduction and external rotation (ABER) view to improving the reproducibility and accuracy of the glenohumeral MRA are factors to consider for traumatic shoulder injury patients.

A prospective evaluation on the influence of the radiologist experience, consensus assessment, and the abduction and external rotation view upon the diagnostic performance of the MRA in patients with a traumatic anterior shoulder instability was assessed. 58 MRI examinations were utilized, 51 of which had additional ABER views. Six radiologists, R1 through R6, and three teams, T1 through T3, with differing experience levels, used a seven lesion standard scoring form; 45 of the 58 MRA exam findings were confirmed surgically. Sensitivity, specificity, Kappa coefficient, and differences in percent agreement or correct diagnosis were calculated per lesion and overall region types to assess the diagnostic accuracy and reproducibility. The results demonstrated that the most experienced radiologist, R1 and R2, and teams, T2 and T3, agreed significantly more in comparison to the lesser experienced radiologist, or T3 and T4 teams.

The most experienced radiologists and teams also had more consistent accuracy than the less experienced radiologists. Significant differences were found between radiologists noted in R1-R4 with a p=0.012, R3-R4 with a p=0.03, and teams T2-T3 with a p=0.014. There were significant differences between teams T1 and T2 and radiologists R3 and R4. Significant differences were discovered between T2 and R3, R4.

There was no overall significant difference between the radiologist assessments with or without the ABER view. The addition of this view did not improve the overall diagnostic performance. The radiologist's experience level and consensus assessment contributed to higher accuracy and reproducibility. With this information, to enhance healthcare team outcomes, utilizing an experienced radiologist for assessing a patient with a traumatic shoulder injury can yield a more accurate MRA examination. The addition of the ABER view did not necessarily yield a significant difference. More training and exposure to MRA can likely aid in improving an inexperienced radiologist's accuracy and interpretation of the examination.