**Contraindications**

Spinal motion restriction should not be used in the patient with penetrating trauma. In their 2010 publication, Haut et al. reviewed 45,284 patients entered into the National Trauma Data Bank (NTDB). They found that patients with penetrating trauma who underwent spinal immobilization in the field (defined as placement of a cervical collar and/or longboard) had mortality rates twice as high as those who did not.

**Complications**

The earlier ubiquitous use of the backboard revealed several significant complications, leading to an evidence-based transition from immobilization with a backboard to the current use of spinal motion restriction. The forceful strapping of patients against a rigid backboard is not compatible with the natural curvature of the spine, and such restriction may increase unwanted flexion, extension, and rotation. This effect is more pronounced in populations such as the elderly or those with ankylosing spondylitis who develop marked kyphosis or lordosis.

In a 2014 systematic review in The Journal of Trauma and Acute Care Surgery, five studies showed an increase in pain scores following immobilization.

When utilizing the backboard as a movement tool from extrication to ambulance, providers should monitor respiratory status closely. Studies have shown significant respiratory restriction in healthy patients who were strapped to a backboard with cervical collars. This restriction was greater in elderly kyphotic patients placed in a cervical collar.