**Maternal Complications**

Obesity in pregnancy increases the risk for both maternal and fetal complications. Gestational diabetes (GDM), new onset of diabetes in pregnant women without a prior history, is one of the most common complications associated with obesity in pregnancy. During pregnancy, there is a normal increase in insulin resistance mediated by placental secretion of diabetogenic hormones, such as growth hormone, corticotropin-releasing hormone, placental lactogen, and prolactin.

Studies have shown that obese women have a greater decrease in insulin sensitivity during pregnancy than normal-weight women and subsequently are at an increased risk of not only GDM but also associated morbidities, including preeclampsia, gestational hypertension, macrosomia, and cesarean deliveries.

Furthermore, obesity in pregnancy increases the risk of complications during labor and delivery. Observational studies have shown that obese women were more likely than women with BMI < 26 to have a slower labor progression and fetal distress and ultimately receive labor induction and oxytocin.

**Fetal/Neonatal****Complications**

Obesity in pregnancy is associated with fetal and neonatal complications. No one unifying mechanism is responsible for the adverse outcomes associated with maternal obesity, but increased insulin resistance, inflammation, and oxidative stress associated with obesity can take part in early placental and fetal dysfunction.

It has also been shown there is a several-fold increased incidence of congenital anomalies such as spina bifida, omphalocele, and cardiac defects in obese pregnant women.

Macrosomia, or large for gestational age (LGA), is another neonatal complication associated with obesity in pregnancy and increases the risk for operative delivery, poor delivery outcomes, and maternal and infant traumatic injuries.