Bazedoxifene is a selective estrogen receptor modulator used in conjunction with conjugated estrogen to treat osteoporosis and hot flashes in post-menopausal women. Following its FDA approval in late 2013, this drug has gained greater clinical acceptance over the years by the physician community. Yet while this drug is touted for its efficacy, using it requires a great deal of interprofessional communication between a patient's healthcare management team as it is targeted at a specific population with a particular set of symptoms.

In a previous phase 3, randomized and double-blind studies were conducted to evaluate the efficacy of conjugated estrogens/bazedoxifene on post-menopausal women. Most data have shown the drug to be effective for women between the age of 40 and 65. Still, the drug is contraindicated in women over 75.

Within the spectrum of possible clinicians a woman might want to consult before taking this drug includes her primary care physician, gynecologist, rheumatologist, endocrinologist, and, depending on the severity of osteoporosis or accompanying fractures, an orthopedic surgeon. Working with different physicians can provide a greater depth of understanding to the patient regarding the benefits of the drug and notable contraindications.

Without proper management and care coordination by health providers, it is possible the patient could experience adverse effects following the usage of this drug. Should an overdose or significant adverse effect occur that brings the patient to the emergency room, the ER clinician must be able to communicate with at least the patient's primary care physician and possibly one other specialist who either had the most frequent visits with the patient or prescribed her bazedoxifene/conjugated estrogens.

The primary care physician must educate a patient on the importance of integrating behavioral modifications with the patient's pharmaceutical regimen. For a post-menopausal woman, it is essential that she exercises regularly and eats nutritious food that promotes a healthy weight that is less susceptible to brittle bones and compounding fractures; in addition, it is pivotal that the patient avoids alcohol, smoking, and spicy foods that may exacerbate hot flash symptoms.

Lifestyle changes work in synergy with bazedoxifene/conjugated estrogens, and a team of medical providers must be able to facilitate necessary lifestyle changes alongside a focused drug treatment plan that would enhance patient-centered care and improve overall outcomes.