Auscultation of heart sounds is a foundational component in clinical physical examination. An abundant amount of on-going research has been produced on the proper technique and interpretation of heart auscultation. Heart sounds and murmurs have been described in terms of their timing in the cardiac cycle, intensity, how intensity changes during the cardiac cycle, sound wave shape, pitch, location where the sound is audible, radiation, rhythm, and response to physical exam maneuvers. These different characteristics are utilized to differentiate between physiologic and pathologic sounds.

**Systolic Sounds**

Clinically significant systolic heart murmurs can be further broken down into ejection and regurgitant murmurs.  Ejection murmurs are crescendo-decrescendo murmurs that occur as blood flows through an obstruction. The sound intensity increases as the pressure gradient across the obstruction increases.

**Diastolic Sounds**

Examples of diastolic murmurs are aortic and pulmonic valve regurgitation (AR & PR), tricuspid and mitral valve stenosis (TS & MS), S3 sounds, and S4 sounds. Diastolic heart sounds are more clinically significant because all diastolic murmurs are pathologic, except for some S3.

**Continuous Sounds**

Continuous sounds are created when there is a connection between two chambers or vessels that have differences in pressure. These sounds can be heard throughout the body, such as in the renal arteries from renal artery stenosis, or with the formation of an arteriovenous fistula, like those common in pregnancy. The cardiac lesion that creates a continuous murmur is a patent ductus arteriosus. This is a connection between the pulmonary artery and the aorta that is needed only for fetal development but sometimes persist after birth. It is said to be a “machine-like” sound best heard in the left upper sternal border.****