Normal reference ranges for the AFI vary depending on if the 5-95 or 3-97 percentiles are applied. For single gestations above 20 weeks, normal fluid is noted as an AFI between 5-24 cm, although some references prefer 25 cm as the upper limit. MVP in single gestation pregnancies is considered normal when measured to be between 2-8 cm. It is important to note that only MVP is used to assess the amniotic fluid volumes in multi-gestation pregnancies. In a diamniotic pregnancy, the MVP is measured in each amniotic sac, allowing the clinician to attribute fluid to each fetus. Although the normal range for twins is closer to 2.2-7.5 cm, it is conventionally defined normal as between 2-8 cm.

Oligohydramnios is diagnosed when amniotic fluid values fall below normal cut-offs. The list of potential causes is long and includes any condition causing uteroplacental insufficiency, anatomic issues with fetal urine production, and urinary tract obstructions.  In severe cases, early pulmonary hypoplasia and limb disfigurement occur result in significant perinatal morbidity and mortality.   Even among structurally normal fetuses, oligohydramnios' mortality has been shown to have a 50-fold increase compared to a fetus with normal amniotic fluid measurements.

As a result of these complications, the American College of Obstetrics and Gynecology recommends induction of pregnancy for isolated oligohydramnios between 36.0 and 37.6 weeks.

Polyhydramnios results from conditions in which there is increased production of amniotic fluid or decreased fetal swallowing. Causes of overproduction can include increased osmotic forces like hyperglycemia or hydrops, cardiac dysfunction, infection leading to decreased fetal swallowing occurs due to GI tract obstruction, impaired neurological swallowing pathways, and some cranial facial abnormities. The majority of cases are mild with no underlying etiology. As the severity of polyhydramnios increases, so does the incidence of fetal structural and genetic anomalies. Polyhydramnios graded in severity using AFIs (mild: 24-29.9 cm, moderate: 30-34.9 cm, or severe: 35 cm or more), or MVP (mild: 8-11 cm, moderate: 12-15 cm, or severe: >16 cm).

Polyhydramnios has been shown to increase perinatal mortality, to a lesser extent than oligohydramnios, with the rate dependent on the underlying cause. Perinatal morbidity associated with polyhydramnios includes an increase in preterm labor, macrosomia, nonvertex positions, nonreassuring fetal heart tracings, and Cesarea sections.

Twin-twin transfusion syndrome is a special case that warrants mentioning in the discussion of the amniotic fluid derangement due to its simultaneous presentation of both polyhydramnios and oligohydramnios during the same pregnancy. This syndrome occurs in 10% to 15% of diamniotic-monochorionic twins due to shared chorionic vessels.