# Continuing Education Activity

Pulmonary infarction (PI) is usually a complication of another primary disease state, most commonly a pulmonary embolism (PE). The broad differential diagnosis associated with PI is important, as associated signs and symptoms have limited specificity and PI may be the first indication of significant underlying pathology. This activity reviews how to properly evaluate for pulmonary infarction and further steps that should be taken when pulmonary infarction is present. This activity highlights the role of the interprofessional team in caring for patients with this condition.

**Objectives:**
- Review the characteristic presentation of pulmonary infarction. 
- Describe the typical evaluation findings in a patient with a pulmonary infarction. 
- Summarize the management options for a patient with a pulmonary infarction. 
- Explain why careful planning and discussion amongst interprofessional team members involved in the management of patients with pulmonary infarction will improve outcomes.

# Introduction

Pulmonary infarction (PI) is the result of an occlusion of a distal pulmonary artery. This then results in ischemia and possible hemorrhage or tissue necrosis of the pulmonary tissue distal to the occlusion. PI itself, is caused by another primary disease state, most commonly pulmonary embolism (PE). Understanding the broad differential diagnosis associated with PI is important, as associated signs and symptoms have limited specificity and PI may be the first indication of significant underlying pathology.

# Etiology

During several prospective and retrospective studies, researchers have investigated the prevalence of PI in association with PE, which is the most common etiology for the development of pulmonary infarction.

Smoking is a risk factor for all causes of PI including those associated with PE.

# Epidemiology

The incidence of pulmonary infarctions from all causes is not well studied as it is more studied in the subpopulation of those with pulmonary embolisms. The overall incidence of those with pulmonary embolism is approximately 1 in 1000 are complicated by pulmonary infarction at a rate of 16% to 31%.

# Pathophysiology

A unique thing about the lung is that it receives blood supply from more than just arterial circulation. This gives the lung some resiliency in the event of an insult such as a pulmonary embolism. The lung parenchyma receives its oxygen supply from a total of three non-redundant sources: deoxygenated blood from pulmonary arteries, oxygenated blood from the bronchial circulation, and direct oxygen diffusion from alveoli.

In patients with sickle cell disease, acute chest syndrome was found to be caused by vascular infarction by direct occlusion of sickle-type hemoglobin (HbS) in 16% of cases.

# Histopathology

The description of lung infarction of a thromboembolic etiology was first described by Virchow in 1856.

# History and Physical

Given pulmonary embolism serves as the etiology of pulmonary infarction in most cases, it is important to understand the clinical picture representing both conditions. The presenting features of a pulmonary infarction overlap those of a pulmonary embolism with a few important distinctions.

In patients with concurrent pulmonary embolism and pulmonary infarction, the following features have been shown to be present: dyspnea (69% to 78%), chest pain (49% to 70%), swelling or pain in a unilateral lower extremity (27% to 31%), fever (5% to 11%), and hemoptysis (4% to 19%).

Among patients incidentally found to have a pulmonary infarction after a biopsy of a radiographically discovered lung nodule, 65% of patients had no respiratory complaints, 26% had dyspnea, 7% had chest pain, and 5% had hemoptysis.

# Evaluation

Computed tomography (CT) is the most commonly used imaging technique that can diagnose PI in combination with appropriate clinical context. CT findings associated with pulmonary infarction include a feeding vessel or "vessel sign," central lucency, and a semicircular shape. The finding of air bronchograms made the presence of a PI less likely.

An x-ray image may be the first clue toward a diagnosis of pulmonary infarction. A "Hampton’s hump" (wedge-shaped consolidation at the lung periphery), Westermark’s sign (radiographic oligemia or increased lucency), and Fleischer sign (prominent pulmonary artery) are specific findings but lack sensitivity to be diagnostically sufficient. It has been quoted that a Hamptom hump had a sensitivity and specificity of 22% and 82% respectively.

In patients suspected of having infective endocarditis, consider that a pulmonary embolism or pulmonary infarction is a minor criterion in Duke's Criteria for Infective Carditis with a reported incidence ranging from 13% to 49%.

# Treatment / Management

Given the fact that PI can be fatal, signs of respiratory distress or hemodynamic collapse should be addressed immediately with supportive care measures. Patients with PI may develop obstructive shock associated with a PE or cardiorespiratory collapse secondary to hemodynamic collapse or persistent hypoxia.

In addition to supportive management, treatment is guided by the underlying condition that has led to the PI. PE initially requires anticoagulation. In patients requiring admission, heparin or low-molecular-weight heparin is started with the goal of transitioning to some of the newer direct oral anticoagulation (DOACs) medications like apixaban or rivaroxaban or some of the older medications like coumadin for continued outpatient management.

The average time of resolution of pulmonary infarction has not been well studied.  However, one retrospective review found that of 32 patients evaluated by CT scanning after pulmonary infarctions with intervals varying from 1 to 69 weeks after initial diagnosis, 10 were found to have continued evidence of PI at an average interval of 10 weeks after the initial diagnosis.

Current radiographic technology in the setting of the appropriate clinical picture makes it such that biopsy is rarely used to diagnose PI. A lung biopsy is typically reserved for investigating a pulmonary nodule, suspected mass, interstitial lung disease, or to collect a sample for culture.

# Differential Diagnosis

The differential diagnosis is broad and includes the following:

- Pulmonary embolism

- Acute chest syndrome (sickle cell anemia)

- Infective endocarditis

- Malignancy

- Heatstroke

- AV malformation

- Cocaine toxicity

- Diffuse intravascular coagulation

- Diffuse alveolar hemorrhage

- Iatrogenic instrumentation, for example, bronchial artery embolization, IV catheter ablation

- Amyloidosis

- Pulmonary infection like pneumonia or  aspergillosis

- Vasculitides

# Enhancing Healthcare Team Outcomes

While PE is the most likely cause of pulmonary infarction, there is a myriad of other diagnoses that must be considered. One must consider the variability in clinical presentations and similarities in radiographic results of disease states which mimic PI such as solitary lung nodules. Evidence of a pulmonary infarction on X-ray or CT imaging may be the first indicator the patient has a pulmonary embolism. If warranted, patients require education on tobacco cessation as this further increases the risk of PI.