# Continuing Education Activity

Capgras syndrome is the most prevalent delusional misidentification syndrome and is characterized as a delusion of doubles. Patients falsely believe that an identical person has replaced a person close to him or her. This activity aims to provide insight into this rare syndrome through an in-depth discussion about its symptoms, etiology, and pathophysiology. This activity highlights the interprofessional team's role in the evaluation and management of patients with Capgras syndrome.

**Objectives:**
- Identify and explain the symptoms of Capgras syndrome.
- Outline the pathophysiology of Capgras syndrome.
- Review the current evidence regarding violence in Capgras syndrome patients.
- Summarize how interprofessional team management of Capgras syndrome can improve patient outcomes.

# Introduction

Capgras syndrome (CS), or delusion of doubles, is a delusional misidentification syndrome.

Brain damage in the bifrontal, right limbic, and temporal regions can cause CS.

**Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders (DSM) Classification**

CS has not been addressed within the DSM-5 because of its rare nature. It suits either the persecutory or unspecified delusion type.

**Historical Perspective**

CS is named after Joseph Capgras, a psychiatrist of French origin. In 1923, Joseph Capgras first defined the disorder in a paper that reported a case of a French-origin woman who complained that corresponding doubles had replaced her husband and other persons she knew. The woman also believed that there existed a double of herself. The authors referred to this syndrome as "I'illusion des sosies," which translates to mean "the illusion of look-alikes."

Initially, CS was regarded as a psychiatric disorder, similar to delusions in schizophrenia. CS was connected to hysteria as seen predominantly in females.

# Etiology

Capgras syndrome is a complicated and organic condition caused by structural brain injuries with neuroanatomical damage.

Some psychologists hypothesized that patients with CS have conscious ability to recognize faces was still potent. Still, they may also present with damage to the system that facilitates emotional arousal to familiar faces.

CS can be seen with reduplicative paramnesia, a delusional misidentification syndrome in which a subject believes a location has been relocated. CS and reduplicative paramnesia are linked since they affect the same brain regions.

# Epidemiology

A study on the prevalence of Capgras syndrome found that its existence in psychiatric populations is under 1%.

The most common underlying primary psychiatric diagnoses in CS are schizoaffective disorder, schizophrenia, and bipolar affective disorder.

# Pathophysiology

The pathophysiology of Capgras syndrome lacks clarity due to its rare nature. Coltheart et al. described a dual factorial hypothesis of the delusional belief validated by the brain's imaging studies. The first prevents familiar faces from inducing an emotional response, while the second controls the ability to reject the delusional belief.

Undesirable effects from the right hemisphere and frontal lobe dysfunction result in low self-monitoring, ego boundaries, and familiarity with stimuli. Lesions on the bifrontal or right hemisphere cause a disconnection between the frontal lobes and the right temporal-limbic lobes or system, essential for the reconciliation of information about the self-identification of the subject.

**Psychodynamics of Capgras Syndrome**

In a review of the first five case reports of CS, Capgras noted that each case was distinct, and no single pattern emerged. The study revealed that the doubles were always of people tied to the patient with strong affective ties.

In their early studies in the 1920s, Capgras and Carrette discussed oedipal problems in women. They stated that this syndrome does not occur in men and that it was peculiar in women. Capgras also found feelings of strangeness in a few cases. Mechanisms suggested by many hypotheses by Capgras showed that a patient becomes aware of changes in their responses to significant persons in their lives. These dynamic changes may occur as a result of genuine changes in the other person.

Berson stated that psychodynamic explanations cluster around four primary themes that emphasize oedipal problems, feelings of strangeness, problems with ambivalence, and pathological splitting of internalized object representations.

**Violence in Capgras Syndrome**

A previous study has shown associations between CS with aggression and homicide.

# History and Physical

Capgras syndrome patients may present with a variety of symptoms, depending upon the underlying disorder. Irrespective of the etiology that consists of schizophrenia and schizoaffective disorders, Alzheimer disease (AD), dementia, Lewy body dementia, epilepsy, cerebrovascular accident (CVA), pituitary tumors, and advanced Parkinson disease (PD), the CS experience delusion of identical doubles that is close to them.

# Evaluation

Capgras syndrome is a clinical diagnosis. Its diagnosis is based on clinical assessment of symptoms.

# Treatment / Management

**Treatment and Management of Capgras Syndrome**

Generally, delusional disorders are challenging due to poor patient insight. Lack of empirical data poses a significant challenge to manage Capgras syndrome patients effectively.

**Counseling Patient and Family Education**

Due to the risk of violence meted on the misidentified person, it is crucial to assist CS patients' caregivers by utilizing communication techniques, counseling, medications, and reasonable problem-solving skills. Caregivers' feelings must be taken into consideration to reassure them. Better auditory interaction is advocated. Such communication is aimed primarily to circumvent CS patient's difficulty connecting with caregivers through face-to-face encounters. The caregiver needs to announce themselves and communicate clearly while out of sight to establish better emotional ties. The caregiver should self-evaluate to recognize gaps and strengths in managing the patients' condition while also relying on other family, friends, and relatives.

**Prognosis and Complications of Capgras Syndrome**

The onset of the Capgras syndrome can occur concurrently or later than the initiation of the comorbid psychosis. A study following 20 CS patients found the resolution of Capgras Syndrome symptoms after remission of the depressive disorder. The CS symptoms were more persistent in the schizophrenia patients that present with psychosis. If the onset of CS coincides with psychosis, the reappearance of the psychotic condition may return the CS symptoms.

CS symptoms may result in intrapersonal and interpersonal conflicts, along with poor social relationships. An individual with this kind of disorder is prone to self-harm and violence. There are also implications for the patient's family, as the stress on the caregiver and stigma-related stressors could further compound the issue.

# Differential Diagnosis

**Differential Diagnosis**

Capgras syndrome and delusional disorders generally may co-exist with other illnesses. Table 1 below shows the various medical conditions associated with the development of delusional disorders.

**Medical conditions**

**Examples of disease conditions**

Vascular disease

Atherosclerosis, hypertensive encephalopathy, and subarachnoid hemorrhage.

Neurodegenerative disorders

Alzheimer's disease, advanced Parkinson's disease, dementia.

Other CNS impairments

Epilepsy, fat embolism.

Infectious diseases

HIV/AIDS, acute viral encephalitis, malaria.

Metabolic disorders

Hypercalcemia, hypoglycemia.

Toxins

Mercury, manganese, arsenic.

There are fluctuating levels of consciousness, hallucinations, and poor cognitive abilities in delirium cases that are not present in cases of delusional disorders.

# Prognosis

The onset of the Capgras syndrome can occur concurrently or later than the initiation of the comorbid psychosis.

# Complications

Capgras syndrome symptoms may result in intrapersonal and interpersonal conflicts, along with poor social relationships. An individual with this kind of disorder is prone to self-harm and violence. There are also implications for the patient's family, as the stress on the caregiver and stigma-related stressors could further compound the issue.

# Consultations

It is necessary to rule out any medical and or neurological condition that may be causing Capgras syndrome. Lewy body dementia patients can have CS. It is also important to rule out any central nervous system lesions, vitamin B12 deficiency, diabetes mellitus, and hypothyroidism.

# Deterrence and Patient Education

In addition to pharmacotherapy, patient counseling and therapy sessions are the mainstays to manage Capgras syndrome effectively. Since the CS patients are at a higher risk of showing aggression and violence towards others, including caregivers, the psychodynamic therapy sessions play a crucial role in CS management. Patient education should focus on establishing emotional ties and effective communication with their caregiver. Overall, the patient should be advised to adhere to the disorder's medical and psychiatric management to control or treat primary underlying disorders.

**Counseling Caregiver and Family**

Due to the risk of violence meted on the misidentified person, it is crucial to assist CS patients' caregivers by utilizing communication techniques, counseling, medications, and reasonable problem-solving skills.

# Enhancing Healthcare Team Outcomes

Capgras syndrome, or delusion of doubles, is a delusional misidentification syndrome.

- Capgras syndrome is equally found both in males and females.

- Capgras is the clinical diagnosis. However, laboratory workup and imaging must be done to rule out other organic causes.

- Timely and accurate diagnosis of underlying disorders or medical conditions can assist in managing CS.

- Psychodynamic therapy intervention is vital in controlling CS symptoms and violence related to it.

Since managing CS is challenging, an interprofessional team is required to provide care effectively. Psychopharmacology and psychotherapy are important to manage CS. The team could consist of a psychiatrist, psychologist/therapist, physician, social worker, and caregivers/ relatives. Due to the lack of research data on CS, treating CS poses a considerable challenge. Antipsychotics have been found effective in managing symptoms.