# Continuing Education Activity

Seborrheic keratoses are epidermal skin tumors that commonly present in adult and elderly patients. They are benign skin lesions and often do not require treatment. However, it is essential to be able to differentiate these lesions from other benign and malignant skin tumors. This activity outlines the general evaluation and workup of Seborrheic keratoses in the outpatient setting and discusses common features of seborrheic keratosis as well as various treatment modalities that are available for the interprofessional team.

**Objectives:**
- Explain the common history and physical exam findings of seborrheic keratosis.
- Summarize the general workup, differential diagnosis, and confirming the diagnosis of seborrheic keratosis. 
- Review the various treatment modalities for seborrheic keratosis in the outpatient setting. 
- Identify the importance of improving care coordination between health professionals to improve the outcomes of patients with seborrheic keratosis.

# Introduction

Seborrheic keratosis is a common type of epidermal tumor that is prevalent throughout middle-aged and elderly individuals.

# Etiology

Seborrheic keratosis is caused by the benign proliferation of immature keratinocytes, resulting in well-demarcated, round or oval, flat-shaped macules. They are typically slow-growing, can increase in thickness over time, and they rarely resolve spontaneously.

# Epidemiology

Seborrheic keratosis is the commonest benign skin tumor, affecting over 80 million Americans.

# Pathophysiology

Seborrheic keratosis results from benign clonal expansion of epidermal keratinocytes. There is believed to be a genetic component for the development of a high number of seborrheic keratosis lesions. However, the exact familial inheritance is not known. The exact pathogenesis of this skin condition is also not known at this time, but there is a possible correlation with fibroblast growth factor receptor 3 (FGFR3) and or PIK3CA oncogenes.

# Histopathology

Under the microscope, seborrheic keratosis would typically show a proliferation of keratinocytes with keratin-filled cysts.

# History and Physical

A thorough history and complete physical exam are necessary when evaluating a patient with numerous seborrheic keratosis. Clinically, seborrheic keratoses have a dull, waxy, verrucous surface resulting in their characteristic “stuck on” appearance. The color of these lesions can vary from light to dark brown, yellow, and grey, and they can present as an isolated lesion to tens or even hundreds of lesions. These tumors can generally occur anywhere on the body, except for the palms, soles, and mucous membranes. Depending on the lesion location, there can be chronic inflammation, which leads to pain, pruritus, erythema, and bleeding around the site. Generally, seborrheic keratosis is benign and slow-growing lesions, however, there should be a concern if there is sudden growth or emergence of multiple seborrheic keratoses. The sign of Leser-Trelat refers to the sudden appearance of seborrheic keratosis that is suggestive of internal malignancy, commonly associated with gastrointestinal or pulmonary carcinomas.

# Evaluation

The basis for diagnosis and workup of seborrheic keratosis are generally on their overall appearance. If the tumors are dark, uniform, slow-growing, and have the typical “stuck on” verrucous appearance, there is a high probability that they are benign, and further workup is not necessary. Examination with a dermatoscope would further help differentiate benign features from dysplastic or malignant tumors. Dermatoscope findings for seborrheic keratosis generally show milia cysts, comedo-like openings, fissures, and ridges. Overlapping lesions or high numbers of seborrheic keratosis can make the diagnosis and workup of these lesions more difficult. Patients with high numbers of seborrheic keratoses should receive careful screening, as there can be an increased chance of missing co-existing melanoma or pigmented basal cell carcinoma.

Additionally, seborrheic keratosis is slow-growing and can become larger and thicker over time. There have been cases of a secondary tumor growing adjacent to or within a pre-existing seborrheic keratosis. A dermatologist referral should be a consideration in patients with a high number of lesions and high clinical suspicion of malignancy for a more thorough and team-oriented approach.

If there is uncertainty with the diagnosis or if there are other concerns for malignancy such as ulcerated lesions, rapid change in size, or overall very large lesions, a skin biopsy would be recommended to get a definitive answer.

# Treatment / Management

Various treatment modalities are available for the removal of seborrheic keratosis. Seborrheic keratosis is benign and typically does not warrant any treatment. However, a majority of patients still undergo some variation of therapy for these lesions. Usually, seborrheic keratoses removal is for cosmetic reasons or lesions that are consistently irritated and cause discomfort for the patient.

The most common and readily available treatment for seborrheic keratosis would be cryotherapy.

Another modality for the treatment of seborrheic keratosis would shave excisions. Typically, this treatment modality is for skin conditions primarily contained in the epidermis without the involvement of the dermis. These procedures require some type of local anesthesia, usually 1% lidocaine with or without epinephrine depending on the location of the lesion. A superficial excision is performed with a scalpel, special exfoliating blade, or double-edged razor blade to remove a thin slice of tissue containing the lesion. The specimen can then go to the lab for the exact pathology of the affected area. Another removal method for removal of seborrheic keratosis is electrodesiccation with or without curettage. This process is another method for removing superficial, epidermal lesions w/o invasion into the dermis. This technique usually requires the use of local anesthetic and can be performed in the office setting. This method uses the curette to scrape and remove the epidermal tissue followed by electrodesiccation with a hyfrecator or cautery unit; this is typically performed multiple times to ensure that there is adequate removal of the affected tissue. C&D (curettage and desiccation) provides efficient results and generally has a low rate of complications. Possible complications of C&D include infection, scarring, and hyperpigmentation.

Researchers are studying various types of topical agents are currently for the treatment of seborrheic keratosis. Topical gels and creams used for hyperkeratotic skin conditions (such as tazarotene, imiquimod cream, alpha-hydroxy acids, and urea ointment) as well as vitamin D analogs (tacalcitol, calcipotriol) have been used for treating these lesions. Although there have been some promising results with the reduction or resolution of the seborrheic keratosis lesions, the studies were small, and further research is needed to evaluate the efficacy of these topical medications. Other topical agents for the treatment of SK include a diclofenac gel and potassium dobesilate. Diclofenac is a topical NSAID, and potassium dobesilate is an inhibitor of the FGF signaling pathway, but these were also small studies, and their efficacy is not well established. The FDA recently approved a topical hydrogen peroxide solution for the treatment for seborrheic keratosis. In 2018, there was a randomized, double-blinded placebo control trial conducted using a topical 40% hydrogen peroxide solution.

Finally, laser therapy is another non-surgical option for patients in the treatment of seborrheic keratosis. There are two types of lasers utilized for the treatment of seborrheic keratosis, including ablative and non- ablative laser therapy. Ablative laser therapy includes (YAG and CO2 lasers), and non-ablative lasers (755 nm alexandrite laser) have been utilized for this purpose. Overall there have been multiple small studies, which have some efficacy in the treatment of seborrheic keratosis, however, further studies are needed.

# Differential Diagnosis

The overall differential diagnosis for seborrheic keratosis is broad and should include malignant melanoma, actinic keratosis, lentigo maligna, melanocytic nevus, squamous cell carcinoma, and pigmented basal cell carcinoma.

Differential Diagnosis of seborrheic keratosis:

- Malignant melanoma

- Actinic keratosis

- Lentigo maligna

- Melanocytic nevus

- Squamous cell carcinoma

- Pigmented basal cell carcinoma

# Prognosis

Seborrheic keratoses are benign lesions and have a good overall prognosis. The primary reason for the treatment of seborrheic keratosis is cosmetic. There are multiple treatment modalities, which have good outcomes with minimal side effects or complications. Patients with numerous seborrheic keratosis should be evaluated more carefully as the high number of lesions can mask concomitant malignant lesions. The sign of Leser-Trelat is suggestive of an internal malignancy and would be associated with a worse prognosis.

# Complications

Seborrheic keratoses are the most common type of benign skin lesions. They grow slowly, and they can become thicker over time. Depending on the location of these lesions, they can become irritated and cause pain and discomfort for the patient. Additionally, large numbers of these lesions can make the detection of other malignant skin lesions more difficult.

# Deterrence and Patient Education

It is essential to know that seborrheic keratoses are benign skin lesions that are very common in the adult and elderly population. Typically, there is no indication for the treatment of SK if there is no suspicion for malignancy. Seborrheic keratosis removal is primarily for aesthetic reasons or secondary to chronic irritation. There are a number of treatment options available, including cryotherapy, excision, and topical hydrogen peroxide solution.

# Pearls and Other Issues

The sign of Leser-Trelat refers to the sudden appearance of seborrheic keratosis that is suggestive of internal malignancy, such as gastrointestinal or pulmonary carcinomas.

# Enhancing Healthcare Team Outcomes

Seborrheic keratoses are the most common type of skin tumor seen by primary care physicians, nurse practitioners, and dermatologists in the outpatient setting. Generally, they are benign and present with distinguishing features. However, there can be some morphological similarities with other malignant skin lesions. Overlapping lesions or high numbers of seborrheic keratosis can make the diagnosis and workup of these lesions more difficult. Primary care clinicians, including the nurse practitioner, should consult with the dermatologist if the diagnosis remains in doubt.

Patients with large numbers of seborrheic keratosis need screening, as there can be an increased chance of missing co-existing malignant skin lesions. A team-oriented approach between nurses, primary care providers, and dermatologists would result in the best outcome for patients with seborrheic keratosis. Early incorporation of dermatologists in the patient’s care could aid in the screening and identification of any new or suspicious skin lesions. Additionally, they would be able to integrate the newest and current treatment modalities, such as laser therapy.  Nursing will often have more contact with the patient and can provide counseling as well as monitor treatment effectiveness following the procedure, and report to the managing clinician regarding their observations or if the patient has complications from treatment. While benign, seborrheic keratosis still require strong interprofessional teamwork between the clinicians (including specialists) and nursing to achieve optimal outcomes. [Level V]

**Outcomes**

The outcomes for patients with seborrheic keratosis are excellent.