Mattox maneuver is a surgical technique used to mobilize the left and central abdominal organs and viscera medially with their integrity maintained. Knowing and using the avascular appropriate plane of dissection and mobilization is the key to this maneuver. Dissection starts by mobilizing the left and sigmoid colon by incising the white line of Toldt. This line is a lateral avascular reflection of the visceral peritoneum covering the colon and its mesentery over the lateral abdominal wall to become the parietal peritoneum.  This opens the plane of dissection in the retroperitoneal space. Blunt dissection and mobilization can then be started in this plane. The splenic attachment to the diaphragm is then sharply dissected. The rest of the splenic attachments (to the colon and stomach) should be left intact. Most of the rest of dissection and mobilization is done bluntly with minimal sharp or cautery dissection. Dissection continues medially at the same avascular plane just superficial to the posterior abdominal muscles. Mobilization of the left colon mesentery with its main vessels, the left kidney and its pedicle, the spleen, the stomach, and the tail of the pancreas is done sequentially until the entire length of the aorta is explored.

Left-sided medial visceral rotation used for aortic exposure in elective vascular surgery was a known maneuver before Mattox Maneuver. There is one crucial anatomical detail which distinguishes these two. The Mattox maneuver always includes retracting left kidney because leaving it in place interposes the anterior renal fascia between the plane of dissection and the aorta. By leaving the left kidney in place, the left renal vein does not allow access to the anterior aspect of the aorta and predisposes left ureter to injury.