When spinal is performed to supplement general anesthesia for major surgery, it is usually performed while the patient is awake, allowing the patient to inform the anesthesiologist of pain or paresthesia experienced during the spinal. Such notice would warn the provider the needle may be in a nerve root, which would result in a slight withdrawal of the needle. Some believe the prevention of an intraneural injection may minimize the risk of a postoperative neurologic complication. Still, evidence for this is inconclusive. Indeed, spinal anesthesia is often performed in anesthetized children, and there is no convincing evidence this increases the risk of neurologic complications.

Regarding the sitting and lateral decubitus positions, it is unclear if one is superior to the other. However, some anesthesiologists may be more skilled in one position as compared with the other. Still, the midline is generally easier to identify in the sitting position. When sitting, patients are placed with their back perpendicular to the table, their elbows resting on a bedside table or hugging a pillow, and are instructed to flex their spine (like “an angry cat”) open the vertebral spaces. An assistant is beneficial in these cases to help the patient maintain their position and encourage them to “push out” their lower back. Patients lie on their side with the knees flexed in the lateral decubitus position, often referred to as the “fetal position.” They are also encouraged to flex their neck and move their head as close to their knees as possible. Using surface anatomy, the location of introducer placement can be identified. An imaginary line is drawn between the iliac crests, which most often correlates with the L4 spinous process or L4-L5 interspace, although this sometimes results in a spinal puncture at L3-L4, L5-S1, and sometimes L2-L3. Spinous processes identify the midline. If the patient is obese and is difficult to palpate the spinous processes, the intergluteal cleft may also help identify the midline.

Regardless if a single-shot spinal is being performed or a catheter inserted for continuous spinal, the two common choices for needle insertion are the midline or paramedian approach. For either approach, a sterile field is established with an antibacterial solution. A fenestrated drape is applied. The midline is identified as described above, and local anesthetic, most often lidocaine 1% - 2%, is injected at the needle insertion site. The introducer is inserted at a slight cephalad angle of 10 to 15 degrees. After the introducer has been inserted through the skin and subcutaneous tissue, the spinal needle (typically 24-27 gauge) is inserted through the introducer with its bevel parallel to midline. The user can feel texture changes as the needle passes through the supraspinous and interspinous ligaments and ligamentum flavum. A popping sensation is often palpable as the needle completes its course through the epidural space and as the dura is penetrated. The final length needed to achieve this penetration averages roughly 5 cm in adults.

A midline approach may prove unsuccessful due to severe arthritis, kyphoscoliosis before spine surgery, positioning difficulties, a small interspinous space caused by bony calcification, or calcification of spinal ligaments. In such cases, the paramedian approach may be employed, in which the needle is inserted through the skin 1 cm inferior and 1 cm lateral to the caudal tip of the L4 spinous process. The needle is then aimed 10 to 15 degrees cephalad and 10 to 15 degrees toward the midline. This results in dural puncture while avoiding the supraspinous and interspinous ligaments. Both midline and paramedian approaches may be used for either local anesthetic and/or opioid injections. Once in the subarachnoid space, the stylet is removed, and clear CSF should appear at the needle hub. Once CSF fluid is seen flowing through the needle, medications can be injected.

On occasion, a small amount of blood-tinged CSF flows initially, but CSF then clears. This occurs if the spinal needle pierced a vessel during entry and, as long as CSF clears, injection of local anesthetic and/or opioids may proceed.

In patients with no coagulation disorder and an atraumatic tap, the risk of SEH in cardiac surgery is estimated to be between 1 in 220,000 to 1 in 3,600.

When spinal opioids are administered for postoperative pain, a decision is required to perform the spinal before or after surgery. Performance at the end of surgery would prolong the length of postoperative analgesia. It is most common to perform the spinal before surgery, as this will help mitigate the stress response and lower the doses of anesthetics and analgesics required intraoperatively. Furthermore, the benefit of a few additional hours of postoperative analgesia is outweighed by the benefits achieved with preemptive analgesia, which has been demonstrated to result in benefits for up to one-year post-surgery.

**Side Effects**

Back-ache may occur after spinal due to bruising and/or a localized inflammatory response. Treatment includes cold compresses and oral analgesics such as acetaminophen or NSAIDs. These symptoms usually resolve within several days. Muscle spasm may be treated with a muscle relaxant. Persistent or severe back pain should result in an assessment of more serious complications.

Shivering, a side effect of spinal with a local anesthetic occurs in at least 40% of patients and is believed due to vasodilatation and a decrease in core temperature. While not a side effect of opioids, attempts should be made to pre-warm the patient and use warm IV fluids to minimize discomfort. Effective treatments include IV meperidine, tramadol, and clonidine.

Side effects of spinal opioids, nausea, vomiting, urinary retention, pruritus, and respiratory depression, are the same as intravenous opioids, although pruritus may be more severe with the IT route. Older literature contains case reports of severe respiratory depression progressing to respiratory arrest with IT opioids. It is now known that doses used in such cases were excessive. Indeed, most of the side effects are dose-related, with doses greater than 0.5 mg IT morphine resulting in significant side effects.

Respiratory depression is a particularly concerning side effect not only because it is life-threatening but also because it is often insidious. Indeed, patients in whom it occurs are often observed to be comfortable and sleeping and may therefore not attract attention from nurses or providers. Part of this state may be due to hypercarbia. Respiratory depression after ITM most often occurs 6-18 hours after intrathecal injection, though it may occur sooner if significant doses of IV narcotics are administered intraoperatively. Therefore, if ITM has been administered, it is advisable to use low doses of intravenous narcotics intraoperatively and for postoperative intravenous patient-controlled analgesia. Older literature reported respiratory depression as a serious concern when 1.0 mg or more of ITM was administered. Newer literature indicates that as little as 0.15 to 0.3 mg ITM can provide satisfactory pain control for pelvic or abdominal surgery, while as little as 0.3 mg may be adequate for median sternotomy. When low doses of ITM are used, optimal postop pain control will be assured by providing postoperative patient-controlled anesthesia with low dose fentanyl or morphine intravenously. Due to concern for respiratory depression, appropriate monitoring should be provided for patients who receive ITM. Guidelines are discussed below under postoperative monitoring. For same-day surgery, only low-dose fentanyl, 5 to 10 mcg, should be injected IT.