As mentioned, clonidine is an alpha-2 receptor and imidazoline-1 receptor agonist. These receptors have been found to work in tandem to produce the hypotensive effects of clonidine. By activating the presynaptic alpha-2 adrenergic receptors of the central nervous system, specifically in the rostral ventrolateral medulla and the nucleus tractus solitarii, the release of norepinephrine (NE) into neuronal synapses is inhibited. This inhibition then reduces sympathetic tone throughout the body, particularly decreasing the level of vasoconstriction, causing hypotension and bradycardia. A-2 receptors are also found in the locus coeruleus (LC), which plays a large role in autonomic function and states of arousal. Clonidine’s inhibitory effect on the LC causes disinhibition of the ventrolateral preoptic nucleus, which is responsible for the drug's sedative effect. The inhibition of the LC also contributes to the decrease in circulating norepinephrine and indirectly contributes to the hypotension and bradycardic effects.

In tandem with this, Imidazoline-1 receptors in the rostral ventrolateral medulla, which have a high affinity for clonidine, compound the inhibition of sympathetic neurotransmission when activated by clonidine. I-1 receptors are also found peripherally in the plasma membranes of the heart and kidneys and cause a decrease in peripheral vascular resistance, heart rate, and cardiac contractility. Clonidine’s effect on nitric oxide production in the endothelial cells and the subsequent vasodilation has also been discussed. Additionally, clonidine has been shown to affect GABA levels by several different mechanisms, which clearly play a role in sympathetic/parasympathetic regulation.