The classification of the suprahyoid muscles includes four muscles that run from the mandible to the hyoid bone. These four muscles come together to form the floor of the mouth. The paired mylohyoid muscle is one of these muscles, along with the geniohyoid muscle, digastric muscle, and stylohyoid muscle. These muscles play a vital role in mastication and are frequently referred to as accessory muscles of mastication by influencing the motion of the hyoid bone.

The mylohyoid muscle originates from the mylohyoid line of the mandible and inserts on the body of the hyoid bone. The mylohyoid muscle functions to depress the mandible and elevate both the oral cavity and the hyoid bone. The stylohyoid muscle has its origin from the styloid process of the temporal bone and inserts on the lateral surface of the body of the hyoid bone at its junction with the greater cornu. The contraction of the stylohyoid muscle elevates and retracts the hyoid bone, especially during swallowing. Two bellies comprise the digastric muscle; there are the anterior belly and the posterior belly of the digastric muscle. The posterior belly of the digastric muscle originates from the mastoid notch, which is a deep groove between the mastoid process and the styloid process of the temporal bone and inserts on the body of the hyoid bone. The anterior belly of the digastric muscle originates from the digastric fossa on the posterior surface of the mandible and inserts on the body of the hyoid bone. The contracture of the digastric muscles causes elevation of the hyoid bone, or depression of the mandible if the hyoid bone is being locked in place by the strap muscles. The geniohyoid muscle originates from the mental spine of the mandible and inserts on the body of the hyoid bone. Contraction of the geniohyoid muscle cause elevation and forward protrusion of the hyoid bone along with depression of the mandible.

During the first action of swallowing when a bolus of food gets driven from the oropharynx into the pharynx, the hyoid bone and the tongue are carried upward and forward by the anterior belly of the digastric muscle, mylohyoid muscle, and the geniohyoid muscle. In the second act of swallowing, when the bolus is passing through the pharynx, the elevation of the hyoid bone is organized by the combined action of all these suprahyoid muscles. After the bolus has passed through the pharynx, the hyoid bone is driven superior and posterior by the posterior belly of the digastric muscle and the stylohyoid muscle to prevent the regurgitation of food back into the oral cavity.