When suspecting vasculitis workup should include a complete blood cell count (CBC) (usually associated with neutrophilia, anemia, and thrombocytosis), kidney function (may be abnormal in renal involvement from GPA, Churg-Strauss, etc.), liver function studies, erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR) and/or C-reactive protein (CRP), [elevation in acute phase reactants noticed in most vasculitis], serologies for viral hepatitis (hepatitis B in PAN), serum cryoglobulins, and urinalysis with urinary sediment. Additional testing should include anti-neutrophil cytoplasmic antibodies (ANCA), anti-nuclear antibodies (ANA), complement levels (low complement levels associated with mixed cryoglobulinemia), immunoelectrophoresis (monoclonal gammopathies can occur in Hepatitis C related vasculitis) and work up to rule out vasculitis mimics including infections.

A radiographic evaluation, such as a chest x-ray or high-resolution computed tomography (HR-CT), is indicated in patients with respiratory symptoms. Biopsy of the involved tissue is essential for the diagnosis of many vasculitides. A temporal artery biopsy should always be part of the workup in cases of suspected GCA. Skin biopsy of purpuric lesions and renal biopsies in patients with glomerulonephritis have high diagnostic yields. CT imaging of the sinuses may be necessary for patients with suspected GPA. Vascular imaging, including magnetic resonance imaging (MRI), MR angiograms, CT angiograms, vascular ultrasound, and positron emission tomography (PET), may be used to detect large artery lesions.