Patients with ARMD are usually evaluated by an interprofessional healthcare team which may include a referral to a retina specialist. Primary care providers, optometrists, and general ophthalmologists play a key role in recognizing the signs and symptoms of worsening wet ARMD and referring patients to a retina specialist or other provider trained in the evaluation of wet ARMD and administration of intravitreal injections. Expeditious diagnosis and treatment are crucial to preventing irreversible vision loss. Pharmacists can provide the team and the patient with information on the drugs used, including potential interactions and adverse events, and verify proper dosing. Interprofessional teamwork will help yield the best possible patient outcomes in ARMD. [Level 5]

Although some believe that only retina specialists are qualified to administer intravitreal anti-VEGF agents, there is a shortage of such specialists, especially in rural areas. This, along with the growth of the aging population in the United States and other developed countries, has led to more comprehensive ophthalmologists learning how to evaluate and treat patients with wet ARMD. Despite this trend, comprehensive ophthalmologists should understand that care for patients with wet ARMD requires complex decision-making based on individual vitreoretinal pathology. Consultation or co-management with a retina specialist is recommended. [Level 5]

Patients with advanced ARMD should be considered for early referral for low-vision services. Vision impairment in patients with wet ARMD can prevent them from performing activities of daily living, and several aids are available to allow patients to read and perform other tasks.