**Pulmonary**

Scrub typhus is associated with the development of respiratory complications such as ARDS and the presence of pneumonitis has been suggested to be a marker of severe disease.

**Cardiac**

The exact pathogenesis of cardiac involvement in scrub typhus and its contribution to the final outcome is unclear. However, reversible cardiomegaly is seen in chest radiography in more than 80% of patients in one autopsy series.

**Neurological**

The pathophysiology of nervous system involvement in scrub typhus infections may be multifactorial, although the main mechanism appears to be due to vasculitis and perivasculitis in the endothelial cells where the proliferation of O. tsutsugamushi occurs. Scrub typhus meningitis, as in other forms, can present with headache or nuchal rigidity along with an altered sensorium or focal neurological deficits. Examination of the cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) may show pleocytosis, and sometimes results can mimic tuberculous meningitis, which can show lymphocytic pleocytosis with increased proteins.

**Gastrointestinal**

Gastrointestinal symptoms usually develop 3 to 7 days after the initiation of fever. Scrub typhus can present as an acute abdomen without an underlying surgical cause, and features like diarrhea, pancreatitis, gastrointestinal bleeding, and liver dysfunction manifested in the form of raised transaminases and bilirubin are not uncommon. Abdominal pain, abdominal tenderness, indigestion, nausea, and vomiting, along with splenomegaly, also happen frequently with scrub typhus.

**Renal**

Acute kidney injury (AKI) is an under-recognized complication of scrub typhus, and numerous factors contribute to its development. It is a predictor of mortality, and possible mechanisms include pre-renal failure due to septic shock, vasculitis of the renal vessels, rhabdomyolysis, and direct renal invasion.

**Others**

Rarely, scrub typhus may also manifest as disseminated intravascular coagulopathy and “hemophagocytic syndrome,” which is a rare but serious complication of scrub typhus infection. Patients may also develop papilledema, which is a very common ocular manifestation that occurs during the second to the third week may persist till convalescence. In pregnant women, those affected with scrub typhus were reported to have preterm deliveries; there can be miscarriages and delivery of small for gestational age babies. In a more severe outcome, neonatal deaths also have been reported.