Peripheral baroreceptors reside in the aortic arch and carotid sinus. The baroreceptors of the aortic arch transmit signals via the vagus nerve, or cranial nerve ten, to the solitary nucleus of the medulla. The location of the baroreceptors of the carotid sinus is where the common carotids bifurcate and transmit signals via the glossopharyngeal nerve, or cranial nerve nine, to the solitary nucleus of the medulla.

The aortic arch and carotid sinus have stretch fibers which send electrical signals to the brain based on how much stretch stimulus they receive. As blood pressure increases, there is an increase in the stretch of the fibers of the aortic arch and carotid sinus, and this increases signals to the brain. The nucleus solitarius is the portion of the brain that receives neural messages and makes changes to blood pressure based on afferent inputs from the vagus nerve via the aortic arch and glossopharyngeal nerve via the carotid sinus.

When increased blood pressure is detected,  there is increased stretch fiber stimulation along the aortic arch and carotid sinus. The vagus and glossopharyngeal nerves send afferent inputs to the solitary nucleus of the medulla; this then leads to the efferent signal that exits the brain to cause veins to dilate, serving as a storage basin for blood and fluid in the heart, and for arteries to dilate to decrease blood pressure. This response is because decreased efferent sympathetic outflow causes decreased vasoconstriction which leads to reduced total peripheral resistance. Efferent signals also cause the heart to lower heart rate and to decrease contractility, because there is an increase in parasympathetic efferent outflow to the sinoatrial node which will reduce the heart rate. There is also a decrease in efferent sympathetic outflow, which causes a reduction in contractility of the heart and decreased heart rate, leading to reduced cardiac output. The increase in blood pressure also causes the kidney to decrease salt or water retention, leading to a decrease in blood pressure. These efferent signals from the heart, veins, arteries, and kidneys are compensatory for the increased blood pressure detected. Baroreceptor activity returns to baseline level upon attaining homeostatic arterial pressure.

Hemorrhage, on the other hand, causes a decrease in blood pressure. This decreased blood pressure leads to fewer signals to be sent to stretch fibers in the aortic arch via the vagus nerve and carotid sinus via the glossopharyngeal nerve. Thus there are decreased inputs sent to the solitary nucleus of the medulla, which then leads to the efferent signal that exits the brain to cause veins and arteries to constrict, such that more fluid gets pushed into the heart and arteries. Efferent signals also cause the heart to increase heart rate and to increase contractility. These responses are because there is a decrease in parasympathetic efferent outflow which leads to an increase in heart rate to compensate. There is also an increase in efferent sympathetic outflow, which causes an increase in cardiac contractility, heart rate, vasoconstriction, and arterial pressure. This decrease in blood pressure also causes the kidney to increase salt or water retention, leading to an increase in blood pressure.  These efferent signals from the heart, veins, arteries, and kidneys are compensatory for the decreased blood pressure detected.