To better understand the role of various classes of medications in asthma it is very important to understand the basic physiology and pathophysiology of asthma. Asthma is a complex disease process that involves a multifaceted inappropriate immune reaction to an allergic antigen. It starts with an antigen-binding to dendritic cells. The cells process the antigen for presentation within the peripheral lymphoid tissue to naive helper T-lymphocytes (Th0). Th0 cells then trigger one of 2 immune cascades: a helper T-lymphocyte 1 (Th1) response or a helper T-lymphocyte 2 (Th2) response.

It appears that IL-12 is the determining factor for which the cascade pathway takes predominance. When IL-12 is present, Th1 cells are formed which leads to CD-8 cell-mediated immunity and neutrophilic mediated cytotoxic inflammatory responses that include the release of tissue necrosis factor and interferon gamma. When IL-12 is not present, a Th2 response occurs which leads to a more complicated cascade of interleukin and cytokine release from CD-4 cells including IL-4, IL-13, IL-9, IL-3, and IL-5.

Asthma is classically recognized as a typical Th2 disease, with increased IgE levels and eosinophilic inflammation in the airway. IL-4 and IL-13 trigger IgE production. IL-4 and IL-9 trigger mast cell activity. IL-3 triggers basophil activity. IL-5 is the primary trigger for eosinophil activity along with some input from IL-3 and GM-CSF. All components listed above are involved in the inflammatory response which leads to degranulation of histamine, prostaglandins, leukotrienes, among other enzymes. This induces bronchial hyper-responsiveness, increased mucous secretion, and ultimately airway obstruction and remodeling that is classic to asthma. Key points in this cascade that are currently susceptible to modulation include IgE and IL-5, while medications using IL-4 and IL-13 as targets are in clinical trials.

The initial binding of antigen-specific IgE to mast cell and basophil receptors sensitizes them for subsequent allergen exposure. Allergen re-exposure causes cross-linking of receptor-bound IgE, the immediate release of histamine and other granular-associated preformed mediators, as well as synthesis and release of lipid mediators, including leukotrienes and prostaglandins.

IL-5 is produced by Th2 cells and is necessary for the production, maturation, accumulation, and activation of eosinophils, as well as for their survival. In humans, IL-5 is primarily responsible for eosinophil proliferation and recruitment from bone marrow to ultimately aggregate in pulmonary tissue. Inhibiting IL-5 with monoclonal antibodies can reduce blood and bronchoalveolar eosinophilia caused by allergic triggers or chronic asthmatic disease.

Once stimulated by IL-5, eosinophils recruit to the lung tissues and release proinflammatory interleukin and cytokine mediators and growth factors which ultimately lead to bronchial remodeling. This causes an overall upregulation of the inflammatory process. These chemical signals induce ultimate bronchial hyper-responsiveness and smooth muscle contraction, vascular leakage, hypersecretion of mucus, and shedding of epithelial cells. All of which are characteristics responsible for the ill effects of an asthma exacerbation. Various medications have already been developed and many, which work on different inflammatory pathways, are in development.