A low-frequency curvilinear transducer is optimal for an abdominal and pelvic ultrasound to allow visualization of deep structures. A phased array transducer may also be used if the curvilinear is not available. The ultrasound machine setting should be set to "Abdominal."

**Kidneys**

When scanning for suspected pathology, it is helpful to view the asymptomatic side first to establish the appearance of the patient’s kidneys at baseline. For the right kidney, the transducer is placed at the mid-axillary line with the indicator pointed cephalad at the inferior intercostal margin. In this coronal plane, the lateral aspect of the liver is at the top of the screen, its inferior margin toward the left, and the right kidney is medial and inferior toward the bottom-right of the screen. To view the left kidney, the transducer should be placed at the left posterior axillary line superior to the level of the right kidney. The left kidney is more challenging to visualize fully because it lacks the large acoustic window of the liver and can be obscured by air in the stomach or bowels. In this plane, the left kidney is medial to the spleen.

To reduce posterior acoustic shadowing from ribs, the transducer may be rotated counterclockwise on the right and clockwise on the left to a slightly oblique angle that follows the contour of the intercostal spaces. The operator may also ask the patient to take and hold a deep breath to widen the intercostal spaces. Positioning the patient in the right lateral decubitus position can occasionally be helpful in visualizing the left kidney. On both sides, the operator should fan through the entire kidney in an anterior to posterior sweep to visualize all structures.

**Bladder**

The transducer should be placed in a sagittal plane immediately superior to the pubic symphysis with the indicator oriented cephalad to visualize the bladder. If full, the anechoic, urine-filled bladder will take up most of the anterior portion of the screen. The transducer is then turned 90-degrees counterclockwise, so the indicator is to the patient’s anatomic right to obtain the transverse view. While fanning through in this plane, the UVJs at the posterior-inferior aspect of the bladder should be interrogated for UVJ stones.