Several key mechanisms contributing to osmoregulation appear below:

Sympathetic regulation: Strong activation of the renal sympathetic nerves can constrict the renal arterioles and decrease renal blood flow and GFR, leading to increased fluid retention.

Autoregulation: Renal autoregulation helps maintain a relatively consistent GFR and establish delicate control of the excretion of water and solutes. In particular, the tubuloglomerular feedback mechanism of the macula densa serves to ensure steady delivery of sodium chloride to the distal tubule, consequently reducing spurious fluctuations in renal salt excretion.

Hormonal regulation:

- Angiotensin II has numerous direct effects on tubular function, including decreased medullary blood flow in the vasa recta, tubule hypertrophy, relative efferent arteriolar constriction leading to the maintenance (or rise) in GFR, and compensatory sodium absorption to maintain fluid balance. Angiotensin II also stimulates the production and release of aldosterone and ADH, both important hormonal contributors to electrolyte and fluid balance.

- Atrial natriuretic peptide gets released in response to elevated atrial pressure. It acts to increase GFR and sodium filtration as well as inhibit sodium uptake, leading to volume loss at the distal convoluted tubule.

- Aldosterone has effects on the distal tubule and collecting duct by increasing sodium uptake and potassium excretion into the urine; this is mediated via upregulation of basolateral Na+/K+ pumps, epithelial sodium channels, amongst other mechanisms, resulting in net fluid retention.

- ADH serves a primary function to increase solute-free water reabsorption in the nephrons (less water excretion) to bring down body fluid hypertonicity; this is induced by the insertion of water channels (aquaporin-2) on the apical membrane of the collecting duct.