Glipizide is an orally administered drug. Patients generally start on the lowest dose, with urine and blood sugar regularly monitored to determine dosing efficacy. In many patients with type 2 diabetes, glipizide as sole therapy is inadequate to achieve blood sugar control. Glipizide is often used with other oral hypoglycemics for maximal benefit. Hemoglobin glycosylation (HbA1c) should be monitored every 3 to 6 months to ensure therapeutic patient compliance. In patients with mild hyperglycemia, monotherapy with glipizide may be sufficient with changes in diet and exercise.

The immediate release dosage form should be administered 30 minutes before meals to achieve the most significant reduction in postprandial hyperglycemia. Administration of the extended-release dosage form should be with breakfast or the first meal of the day. Practitioners should instruct patients to swallow the tablets whole and not to chew, split, or crush the tablets.

The dose should be increased by 2.5 to 5 mg in a response-dependent manner, and several days should elapse between any dose changes. In some patients, dividing the dose twice a day may help, but this may also result in reduced compliance. The maximum recommended dose of glipizide is 40 mg daily. Failure to achieve a satisfactory therapeutic response at the highest dose is indicative of therapeutic failure, and merits consideration of a different oral hypoglycemic agent.

In elderly patients, those who are malnourished, severely ill patients, and those with impaired liver, adrenal, or renal function, glipizide should be initiated at a lower dose, and higher doses avoided, as this can lead to hypoglycemic episodes. Patients using beta-blockers may have an impaired ability to recognize hypoglycemia symptoms.

It is recommended to use sulfonylureas like glipizide carefully in patients with glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase deficiency. They can develop hemolytic anemia when treated with sulfonylureas. Consider switching to another hypoglycemic agent.

Glipizide can be used concomitantly with insulin, but the dose of glipizide will typically need to be at the lower end of the dose range to prevent hypoglycemia. If discontinuation of insulin becomes necessary, then the patient's urine and blood sugars should be monitored at least three times a day. Patients whose treatment regimen consists of 40 units of insulin plus glipizide may require hospital admission to discontinue insulin therapy safely. Severe bouts of hyperglycemia and hypoglycemia can occur when withdrawing insulin while taking glipizide.