# Continuing Education Activity

Vogt-Koyanagi-Harada disease (VKH) is a central nervous system condition that specifically affects vision and hearing. This activity describes the presentation, evaluation, and management of Vogt-Koyanagi-Harada disease. It also highlights the importance of early detection and treatment by an interprofessional team of this condition and a presentation of the complications of recurrent disease.

**Objectives:**
- Describe the known pathophysiology of Vogt-Koyanagi-Harada disease.
- Summarize the stages of Vogt-Koyanagi-Harada disease and the clinical findings in each stage.
- Outline the treatment modalities for Vogt-Koyanagi-Harada disease and the most recent data on outcomes.
- Review the importance of early identification and proper treatment to prevent the ocular complications of this condition.

# Introduction

Vogt-Koyanagi-Harada disease (VKH) is a central nervous system condition that specifically affects vision and hearing. Descriptions of this disease date back to the 12 century, but the disease is named after three 20 century physicians who described the collective manifestations of this disease. Alfred Vogt initially described bilateral iridocyclitis and eyebrow depigmentation in 1906, followed by Yoshizo Koyanagi’s 1926 description of bilateral serous detachments in association with cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) pleocytosis. Einosuke Harada identified the integumentary symptoms of the condition shortly thereafter. The disease presents with signs and symptoms of a loss of immune tolerance to melanocytes within the meninges, eyes, skin, hair, and ears.

This relatively rare condition has a distinct phenotypic picture in both its early and late manifestations. Despite identifiable clinical findings, the pathophysiologic mechanisms behind VKH have been challenging to identify. Over the last few years, some of the genetic and immunologic facets of VKH have been elucidated due to recent technological advances. Ophthalmic complications from this condition are numerous, and early identification and treatment can reduce morbidity.

VKH is primarily treated via medical therapy, but surgical options exist for complications of the disease, such as subretinal fibrosis, glaucoma, and cataracts. The prognosis is mainly dependent on what stage of the disease treatment is initiated but can range from quiescent with minimal symptoms to debilitating vision loss and pain.

# Etiology

The exact etiology of VKH is not firmly established, but current theories posit that patients develop T-cell mediated immunity against melanocytes following recovery from an inciting viral environmental factor.

Recent genetic studies have implicated the presence of human leukocyte antigen (HLA) cell surface markers HLA-DRB4, HLA-DRB1-04*05, and HLA-DRB-04*01, as well as non-HLA genes involving lymphocyte regulations in IL-12 production and IL17 production.

# Epidemiology

There are regional differences in the prevalence of VKH among patients presenting with uveitis – it is the most common cause of uveitis in India (prevalence 21.08%) and the second most common in Thailand. In the United States, VKH is a relatively rare cause of uveitis, representing only 3 to 4% of referrals to tertiary care centers.

Genetic studies may explain the difference in prevalence, as the DRB1-04*01 allele is more prevalent in East Asian populations and that HLA-DRB4 and HLA-DRB1 alleles are more correlated to the presence of VKH disease in affected populations.

Patients diagnosed with VKH are typically in the third or fourth decade of life (range: 3 years old to 78 years old).

# Pathophysiology

As a response to an environmental factor, Th1 mediated inflammation develops against melanocytes. Tyrosinase peptide is a known target of T-cells, specifically in melanocytes expressing HLA DRB1-04*05.

This inflammatory cascade leads to the formation of non-necrotizing granulomas in affected organs. In the eye, these are seen as sub-retinal pigment epithelial (RPE) aggregates named Dalen-Fuchs nodules, which may also be seen in other granulomatous processes, especially sympathetic ophthalmia.

# Histopathology

Histopathology of Dalen-Fuchs nodules shows granulomas consisting of epithelioid histiocytes. Hematoxylin and eosin staining of enucleated specimens show B-cells and T-cells in choroid and loss of choroidal melanocytes.

Recurrent episodes lead to an appearance known as a sunset-glow fundus, defined by progressive fundus depigmentation in the setting of optic disc pallor – a marker of poor visual outcome in these patients. In the late stage of VKH, peripheral fundus scars are seen histopathologically as chorioretinal atrophy and scarring; Dalen-Fuchs nodules are not common in this stage.

# History and Physical

There are four specific phases of VKH – prodromal, acute uveitic, chronic uveitic, and recurrent chronic phase.

The prodromal phase is often self-limited, lasts for hours to weeks, and has very subtle chorioretinal findings that are missed unless evaluated with ICG-angiography and correlated with cerebrospinal fluid analysis.

The acute uveitic phase consists of blurry vision and photophobia secondary to chorioretinal inflammation. Edema secondary to inflammation in this stage can extend to the retina, the optic nerve, or the ciliary body leading to the development of exudative retinal detachments, papillitis, and acute anatomic angle closure, respectively.

The chronic phase of the disease develops subsequently. This phase represents the formation of extraocular physical manifestations, including hearing manifestations, skin depigmentation, and ciliary depigmentation - commonly noted at the eyebrows, eyelashes, and scalp. Hearing manifestations include tinnitus, dysacusis, and hearing loss.

The recurrent chronic phase consists of symptoms of panuveitis, inflammation throughout the intraocular compartments, and subsequent vision-threatening signs such as sunset glow fundus, choroidal neovascular membranes, neovascularization of the iris, open- and closed-angle glaucoma, and subretinal fibrosis.

The VKH International Workshop has defined the three classifications of VKH disease: complete VKH disease, incomplete VKH disease, and suspected VKH disease. Complete disease indicates that both neurologic and dermatologic manifestations are present in addition to ocular disease findings. The incomplete disease presents with either dermatologic symptoms or neurologic manifestations of VKH. Suspected VKH disease presents with intraocular findings without evidence of dermatologic or neurologic manifestations. All classifications of VKH require the exclusion of other causes of intraocular findings, including a history of penetrating trauma, surgery, or infectious etiologies.

# Evaluation

VKH is a clinical diagnosis that requires a constellation of symptoms that can be supported with further laboratory and imaging evaluation. Patients undergo a complete history, focusing on the possible number of earlier episodes, meningeal symptoms, a history of eye or orbital pain, and hearing issues. Physical and slit lamp exams can reveal evidence of prior episodes because poliosis or vitiligo indicates that the patient has progressed through the chronic uveitic phase of the disease.

Cerebrospinal fluid testing during the prodromal phase of VKH has shown pleocytosis, which can persist for several weeks after the resolution of symptoms.

Indocyanine green angiography (ICGA), and to a lesser extent fluorescein angiography (FA), is established as the most important test for assessing VKH. ICGA can be used for diagnostic purposes but is also highly valuable for monitoring disease processes and responses to treatment.

During the acute uveitic phase of VKH, ICGA shows focal areas of delayed choroidal perfusion, peripapillary hypercyanescence, late multifocal pinpoint leakage, and pooling in areas of serous retinal detachment.

Optical coherence tomography (OCT) is a less invasive technique and has been utilized to study VKH and as a diagnostic tool. However, ICG angiography appears to be superior to OCT in the monitoring of chronic disease and changes.

Newer technologies like OCT-angiography (OCTA) are being evaluated for their usefulness in diagnosing and managing VKH. OCTA reveals flow void in the choriocapillaris, indicating decreased perfusion, and have been shown to correlate with the pinpoint hypercyanescence noted on ICGA. Additionally, studies of OCTA after initiation of treatment have shown a reduction in the flow void. Further study is needed to establish the role of OCTA in the management of VKH.

# Treatment / Management

For many years, the treatment for VKH was intravenous pulse corticosteroid therapy. Studies indicated that the duration of therapy was linked to the risk of recurrence and further complications from repeat inflammatory episodes. Recurrence in older studies was relatively frequent and occurred within six months of treatment.

Su-Tenon injection of triamcinolone is highly effective in leading to resolution without recurrence of ocular symptoms in up to 78% of patients, as exhibited in a study that followed patients for up to 3 years.

IMT has been utilized as an adjunct to steroids in patients with VKH. IMTs that have shown efficacy include alkylating agents, antimetabolites, and TNF-alpha inhibitors, among others.

Adalimumab has most recently been studied in recalcitrant cases of patients with corticosteroid-related complications and challenging pediatric cases. It has been shown good efficacy in controlling systemic disease with evidence of complete control of inflammation for at least six months in small case studies.

The role of surgery is limited to treating the complications of the disease, such as cataract extraction, surgical therapy to lower the IOP or the treatment of subsequent macular holes.

# Differential Diagnosis

**Sympathetic Ophthalmia**

- Sympathetic ophthalmia is an autoimmune condition that is a direct response of penetrating trauma or surgery to the eye, exposing ocular molecules as antigenic material leading to the immune system developing an inflammatory response to the uvea. This condition also leads to bilateral non-necrotizing granulomatous uveitis.

**VKH-like Medication Toxicity (checkpoint inhibitors)**

- Checkpoint inhibitors have been shown to cause “VKH-like” medication toxicity that resolves with discontinuation of the inciting medications.

**Choroidal Melanoma**

- Patients with choroidal melanoma may develop serous retinal detachments, and non-pigmented melanomas may appear as subretinal pigmentary loss similar to VKH.

**Infectious Posterior Uveitis**

- Syphilis, tuberculosis, and endogenous endophthalmitis can present with subretinal nodules, intraocular inflammation, and serous retinal detachment.

**Alport and Cogan Syndromes**

- Both Alport syndrome and Cogan syndrome can exhibit bilateral hearing deficits and retinal manifestations. Alport syndrome shows choroidal thickening but is characterized by significant inner retinal changes. Cogan syndrome is characterized by retinal vasculitis rather than subretinal changes.

**Sarcoidosis**

- Sarcoidosis is a distinct cause of posterior uveitis and can have multiple presentations. Periphlebitis and “candle-wax drippings” on fluorescein angiogram can help differentiate sarcoidosis from VKH.

**Systemic Lupus Erythematosus Chorioretinopathy**

- Serous retinal detachments may be seen in lupus choroidopathy, but patients with lupus choroidopathy do not typically show choroidal thickening and often have significant systemic manifestations of their disease.

# Pertinent Studies and Ongoing Trials

There is significant interest in preparing disease-specific drugs and therapy that can reduce medication toxicity and undesirable side effects. microRNA research has presented a possible disease-specific mechanism and is currently undergoing research for clinical use in VKH.

# Prognosis

VKH may have a relatively positive prognosis if treated early and effectively. There is a cumulative worsening of prognosis with recurrent bouts of disease.

Comparative studies show that treatment with both corticosteroid and supplementary IMT is necessary, decreasing the rate of sunset glow fundus from 60% in patients with VKH disease to 16%.

# Complications

VKH is a systemic disease, and complications of the disease include hearing loss, dysacusis, tinnitus, aural fullness, vitiligo, vertigo, and ophthalmic complications.

The most common integumentary symptoms of VKH are poliosis and vitiligo. Poliosis and vitiligo have been shown to slow and respond well to systemic treatment with corticosteroids and IMT. Further, topical treatment with calcineurin inhibitors and corticosteroids has shown reversal of depigmented areas of skin.

In the acute uveitic phase of the disease, VKH can lead to ciliary body inflammation and edema with subsequent closure of the anterior segment angle leading to acute angle-closure glaucoma.

Visually significant ophthalmic complications of chronic VKH include cataracts, glaucoma, neovascular glaucoma, macular holes, chronic retinal detachments, subretinal fibrosis, and choroidal neovascularization.

One study noted a desirable postoperative outcome with one month of inflammation control with IMT and corticosteroids. Notably, up to 10% of eyes can develop hyphema postoperatively, and ocular hypertension occurs in up to 13% of eyes postoperatively, but both conditions resolve spontaneously. Consistent with an intraocular inflammatory condition, up to 50% of patients with VKH develop posterior capsular opacification after phacoemulsification.

Ocular hypertension and glaucomatous optic neuropathy are common in patients with VKH. Up to 33% of patients with VKH will develop ocular hypertension. Significant risks for the development of ocular hypertension include poor visual acuity at initial presentation, time from symptoms to treatment, and the number of recurrent episodes of disease. Glaucoma develops in 16 to 18% of patients, and the primary cause of glaucoma in these patients is open-angle and not steroid-induced, but a significant percent of VKH patients who develop glaucoma developed glaucomatous optic neuropathy from pupillary block secondary to posterior synechiae.

Chronic serous retinal detachments leading to subretinal fibrosis are a significant cause of severe vision loss. Subretinal fibrosis occurs in 6% of eyes with VKH. Still, it has been shown to occur much earlier in Hispanic patients – roughly six months in Hispanic patients compared to 6 years in non-Hispanic patients. Subretinal fibrosis appears to be much more common in the Western Hemisphere, with rates as high as 6%, whereas studies in southern and eastern Asia have very few cases.

Subretinal fibrosis is also a poor prognostic indicator, with numerous studies showing worsening even with combined corticosteroid and IMT therapy. However, one study showed favorable outcomes with combination mycophenolate mofetil and systemic corticosteroids.

Choroidal neovascular membranes have been shown to occur in 14 to 17% of patients with VKH and are responsive to anti-VEGF therapy.

# Consultations

It is paramount that patients with VKH receive appropriate referrals to manage integumentary and auditory manifestations of the disease. Audiology, otorhinolaryngology, and dermatology referrals should be promptly initiated further to monitor the course of the patient’s disease.

# Deterrence and Patient Education

It is important to reinforce to patients that Vogt-Koyanagi-Harada disease is a systemic disease and one that can relapse and recur. Untreated recurrent episodes of the disease lead to progressively worse outcomes, and patients often require lifelong immunosuppressive therapy. Patients should be educated on the various manifestations of the disease to recognize when their condition is relapsing.

# Pearls and Other Issues

Although rare, VKH must be considered in cases of eye pain and associated headache and/or meningeal signs.

The therapy goals are not only to reduce clinically apparent disease but also to decrease the progression of the complications of VKH disease through proper identification and early treatment.

Corticosteroids have an established role in treating VKH, but data show increased recurrence and complications when used as monotherapy and without IMT.

# Enhancing Healthcare Team Outcomes

VKH, when caught early, can be effectively managed and treated by the appropriate specialties as part of a care team that includes primary care physicians, emergency room physicians, and specialists in low vision, otorhinolaryngology, ophthalmology, and audiology.