**HIPEC**

The limited effectiveness of systemic chemotherapy for peritoneal tumors, mostly due to the poor tumor blood supply and poor penetration, impedes its use after CRS. Instead, intraperitoneal chemotherapy is a common option in combination with CRS, especially in the presence of PC. Hyperthermia adds a direct cytotoxic advantage.

The practical role of this approach regarding additional survival benefits has shown variability. One multicenter Dutch randomized controlled trial showed significant improvement in disease-free survival and overall survival in a group of patients treated with CRS+HIPEC compared to the surgery-only treated group for the advanced ovarian disease.

- HIPEC Method: Closed.

- Drug: Mitomycin C

- Dosage: 40 mg

- The timing of drug delivery: 30 mg at time 0, 10 mg at 60 min.

- Volume of perfusate: 3 L

- Inflow temperature: 42 C

- Duration of perfusion: 90 min

Future studies, however, are needed to investigate the relative contribution or efficacy of each of the parameters. The proliferation of HIPEC treatment centers and ongoing prospective trials would possibly help in the standardization of the treatment and patient selection for optimal outcomes in the near future.

**PIPAC**

Another new therapeutic approach recently adopted in the treatment of peritoneal carcinomatosis is pressurized intraperitoneal aerosol chemotherapy (PIPAC). This innovative approach shows safety and feasibility, along with systemic chemotherapy, in treating patients with PC and extraperitoneal metastases. It also showed less renal and hepato-toxicity, along with fewer side effects.