# Continuing Education Activity

Lateral humeral condyle fractures are the second most commonly encountered elbow fractures after supracondylar fractures in the pediatric age group. These fractures are peculiar as they are intra-articular and are prone to displacement owing to the attachment of the forearm extensor muscles on the lateral condyle. Due to this, they can produce various complications, including elbow deformity, if not appropriately managed. This activity reviews the injury mechanism, presentation, evaluation, management, and post-operative care of pediatric lateral humeral condyle fractures. It highlights the common associated injuries, assessment pitfalls, and related complications of both operative and non-operative care to improve care for patients with this condition.

**Objectives:**
- Identify the etiology of lateral humeral condyle fractures in the pediatric population.
- Describe the clinical presentation, including history and physical findings in evaluating pediatric lateral humeral condyle fractures. 
- Outline the various treatment options for lateral humeral condyle fractures.
- Explain the importance of a close collaboration between the interprofessional team (surgical, radiological, nursing, and physiotherapeutic) in order to achieve and maximize functional recovery following pediatric lateral humeral condyle fractures.

# Introduction

Lateral humeral condyle fractures are the second most commonly encountered elbow fractures after supracondylar fractures in the pediatric age group. These fractures are peculiar as they are intra-articular and are prone to displacement owing to the attachment of the forearm extensor muscles on the lateral condyle. Due to this, they can produce various complications, including elbow deformity, if not appropriately managed.

Several classification systems have been developed to aid treatment recommendation, with a 2 mm displacement considered the general cut-off for fixation. Displaced fractures are at a higher risk of non-union. Malunion, cubitus varus, avascular necrosis, and post-operative infection are recognized complications following surgery.

# Etiology

Trauma is invariably associated with lateral humeral condyle fractures. Most of the presentations account for falls during outdoor/indoor activities and sports. The most common mechanism is a fall on the outstretched hand with the elbow in extension and the forearm in supination.

# Epidemiology

This injury is the second most common pediatric elbow fracture. Such fractures constitute 12-20% of all upper extremity fractures in children. The most common age group is between 4-10 years of age, with the peak incidence at six years. Interestingly, left-side injury is more common, with 67.4% of such injuries occurring in males.

Common associated injuries include ipsilateral elbow dislocations 11.4% (posterolateral as well as posteromedial) and ipsilateral upper limb fractures (olecranon 2.8%, forearm 1.5%, medial epicondyle 1.2%).

# Pathophysiology

Several theories have tried to describe the mechanism of injury behind this fracture. Milch first suggested a push-off theory. According to it, an upward and outward force applied through the radius is responsible for the fracture.

Most commonly, these are Salter-Harris type IV fractures (a fracture that transects the metaphysis, physis, and epiphysis).

# History and Physical

History of a fall onto an outstretched hand is very common. Elbow swelling and ecchymosis may be present. Ecchymosis on the lateral aspect may represent an unstable fracture causing a tear in brachioradialis aponeurosis. Tenderness to the lateral aspect of the elbow is usually present. Also, the elbow range of motion will be painful and restricted. However, all these signs can also be present in the more frequent supracondylar fractures. The latter is commonly associated with a higher degree of elbow deformity. Thorough palpation and evaluation of the whole of the upper limb are warranted. Also, a detailed examination of the peripheral pulses, digital sensation, and finger movements should be done.

# Evaluation

Due to the nature of this injury, a full neurovascular assessment is crucial during the initial presentation. This evaluation should include documentation of radial and ulnar pulses with nerve function (radial, ulnar, median, and anterior interosseous).

Plain radiographs should be obtained, including anteroposterior, lateral, and internal oblique views of the affected elbow. Because the fractured fragment will frequently lie posterolaterally, an internal oblique view is often useful in detecting minimally displaced fractures (<2 mm).

Magnetic resonance imaging is useful in assessing the integrity of the articular cartilage.

Multiple classifications have been suggested for pediatric lateral humeral condyle fractures. The classification by Milch et al. distinguishes between a type I and a type II pattern. Type I is characterized by a fracture line lateral to the trochlear groove. Because it does not extend to the trochlear groove, this is considered a stable fracture. Type II extends medially into the trochlear groove, thus creating a potentially unstable elbow.

A second classification by Jakob and then Weiss divides fracture patterns into three types according to displacement and congruency of the articular cartilage. Type I has less than 2mm displacement. Type II has ≥2mm displacement but intact articular cartilage. In type III, there is also ≥2mm displacement but associated disruption of the articular surface.

# Treatment / Management

Conservative treatment will generally be indicated in less displaced fractures in an above-elbow cast. Immobilization is advised for a minimum period of 4 weeks. Further immobilization for another two weeks may be indicated depending on fracture healing at this stage.

The indications of surgery are fracture displacement >2 mm and articular surface incongruency. Also, when there is a loss of reduction seen on serial radiographs, operative management is required. When fracture displacement exceeds 2mm, operative management is necessary. Closed reduction and percutaneous fixation are options where possible, mainly for Weiss type 2 and Song stage 2-4 fractures. The main goal of surgical management is to reduce the articular surface anatomically.

Cannulated screws can be an option with similar outcomes. This approach can prevent skin infections commonly associated with Kirschner wires, although they will require further surgery for their removal.

# Differential Diagnosis

Ipsilateral upper limb fractures must be ruled out, including elbow dislocations, as often, ipsilateral limb injuries carry different management options and poorer outcomes when present. The presentation of supracondylar fractures is quite similar to lateral condyle fractures.

# Prognosis

When promptly diagnosed and managed, the prognosis is favorable. Overall reported union rates for pediatric lateral humeral condyle fractures are 91%. Delayed presentation is associated with a future range of motion limitation and avascular necrosis. The prognosis largely depends on accurate fracture classification and its appropriate management. Fracture displacement is also a significant factor in clinical outcomes. A displacement of 2 mm appears to be a cut-off for conservative management and is associated with fewer complications.

# Complications

Malunion of the fracture can occur if the fracture unites in a non-anatomical position. It can lead to post-traumatic arthritis of the elbow if there is articular surface malreduction. Also, deformities like cubitus varus or sometimes cubitus valgus may be associated.

Lateral condyle fractures are generally intra-articular (Salter-Harris IV). Growth arrest can occur when the ossific nucleus is involved.

Non-union seems to be more common on lateral condyle fractures compared to other elbow fractures. Prior studies have placed the risk between 1 to 5% depending on the definition used.

Healing of a lateral condyle fracture can often lead to a wider distal humerus. Cubitus varus develops in more than 20% of patients, while a valgus deformity can occur in more than 10%. These deformities alter the normal physiological carrying angle (5 to 15 degrees). Healing in a slightly displaced fashion compared to the initial position seems to be responsible for a varus deformity. A bony prominence can sometimes be felt clinically or seen radiologically with little significance.

# Postoperative and Rehabilitation Care

K-wires are removed after 4-6 weeks. An additional cast is recommended after K-wore removal for 2 to 4 weeks. Immobilization in a long-arm cast (above the elbow) is indicated until there is clinical and radiographic evidence of healing. Range of movement exercises is started following cast removal. However, contact sports and heavy weight-lifting should be avoided for 1 to 2 months after the removal of the cast.

The mean arc of motion at the time of cast removal was 64 degrees in a study by Bernthal et al. Patients treated surgically had slower recoveries but no significant difference beyond week 18. Older age, a more extended period of immobilization, and more severe injuries will also have slower recoveries.

# Deterrence and Patient Education

Following such injuries, clear communication with patients and their guardians is crucial. They should be counseled and prognosticated about the course of the management, the treatment outcomes, and various complications that may be seen. While less severe patterns are associated with few complications, more severe fractures are at significant risk of complications even when treated surgically. Also, the importance of rehabilitation and physiotherapy in the form of a range of motion exercises should be stressed, or else elbow stiffness may frequently ensue. Rehabilitation following this injury and recovery of elbow arc of motion can take up to a year.

# Pearls and Other Issues

Lateral humeral condyle fractures are a common injury in the pediatric population. Due to its traumatic etiology, thorough assessment and imaging are crucial to deciding on management. The Weiss classification and Song classification schemes are two of the various systems used to categorize these fractures and help in treatment planning and decision-making. In summary, a cutoff of 2 mm displacement can be an option when determining conservative or surgical management. Closed reduction and internal pinning with two Kirschner wires is the recommendation when performing surgery, and closed reduction is possible. Weiss type 3 and Song stage 5 fractures require open reduction and internal fixation. Non-union, avascular necrosis, and several other complications can occur. Immobilization will generally be for a period of 4 to 6 weeks. Recovery of the elbow arc of motion will occur up to a year post-injury.

# Enhancing Healthcare Team Outcomes

Pediatric lateral humeral condyle fractures are complex elbow injuries requiring an interprofessional approach. Initial assessment by a clinician with neurovascular documentation is the first crucial step. Radiographers should know the importance of obtaining AP, lateral, and internal oblique views of the affected elbow. This imaging will aid in better visualization and management decision by the referring clinician. When further investigation is required, a radiologist should be consulted to discuss magnetic resonance imaging to evaluate the articular cartilage.

Nurses play a crucial role in managing these patients. During the initial assessment or in the postoperative period, they will be paramount in spotting neurovascular compromise. Rehabilitation is also key to ensuring good outcomes following this injury. Physiotherapists will be able to orient and counsel these patients to restore elbow function as much as possible. The interprofessional care model with open communication channels between various healthcare disciplines will yield the best results. [Level 5]