Cryptococcus was first identified in peach juice in Italy by Sanfelice in 1894. In 1895, the first human case was reported. This case was a young woman with a chronic, non-healing skin ulcer on her shin. Yeasts were found in her ulcer, and later at autopsy, yeasts were found in multiple internal organs. These yeasts were Cryptococcus neoformans. The sexual form of this fungus was identified in 1976 and named Filobasidiella neoformans. Thus far, 19 species of Cryptococcus have been identified. Two are pathogenic. There are two serotypes in each of these species. Cryptococcus neoformans var. neoformans is serotype D, Cryptococcus neoformans var. grubii is serotype A, and Cryptococcus gattii has two serotypes: B and C. The Cryptococcus neoformans genome was published in 2005.

Cryptococcus species are found in soil contaminated by guano. Cryptococcus gattii has a clear association with eucalyptus trees and a variety of coniferous trees.

The life cycle of this fungus involves two distinct forms, sexual and asexual. The asexual form exists as yeast that divides by narrow-based budding. Yeast forms are primarily seen in clinical specimens. The sexual forms exist in nature in two mating types, “alpha” or “a.” When opposite types mate, meiosis occurs, resulting in chains of basidiospores. These basidiospores are 1 micrometer to 2 micrometer long and are the infectious particles, which are inhaled and reach the alveoli.

Cryptococcus grows well on fungal or bacterial culture mediums in 48 to 72 hours. The colonies appear mucoid.