The mainstay treatment of hemophilia is factor replacement, either prophylactically or need-based.  Recombinant-derived Factor VIII and IX concentrates are available and prevent the risk of viral transmission.

The treatment of von Willebrand disease consists of desmopressin (DDAVP) or cryoprecipitate.  DDAVP will enhance the release of vWF in patients with Type 1 von Willebrand disease.  DDAVP is a synthetic derivative of antidiuretic hormone that acts on type 2 vasopressin receptors.  It works by stimulating the release of vWF from endothelial cells by way of signaling through the cyclic adenosine monophosphate pathway which prompts the release of Weibel-Palade bodies into the endothelial cells and eventually into the plasma.

**Replacement Products**

- There is a human plasma-derived concentrate of Factor VIII with an even higher concentration of vWF.  This product has been the subject of extensive study and deemed to be the safest option for factor replacement as it has undergone a pasteurization process to inactivate any blood-borne viruses.  It has approval from the Food and Drug Administration (FDA) for the treatment and prevention of bleeding disorders in adult patients with Hemophilia A, as well as adult and pediatric patients with von Willebrand disease.

Factor VIII replacement with human plasma-derived concentrate of Factor VIII requires a simple weight-based calculation.  The patient’s weight (in kg) is multiplied by the desired percent level of Factor VIII, assuming that starting levels are 0. That number then gets multiplied by the volume of distribution, which is approximately 0.5.

Alphanate is another commercially available, virally inactivated product with Factor VIII and ristocetin cofactor activity essential for vWF support.  The FDA has approved its use for both adults and children with Hemophilia A or von Willebrand disease who require treatment or prevention of spontaneous or trauma-related bleeding, including surgery.

- Factor IX concentrate is a commercially available product and has been subject to various purification techniques to eliminate the risk of viral transmission during its administration.  These products have FDA approval for use in the setting of prevention and control of bleeding in patients with a factor IX deficiency.

**Allogenic Replacement Therapy**

- Fresh frozen plasma (FFP) contains Factor VIII and vWF, but large volumes are needed to obtain adequate factor levels (20 to 25mL/kg).

- Cryoprecipitate is a human plasma-derived product containing high levels of Factor VIII, vWF and fibrinogen (Factor I).  It comes packaged in small volumes, so multiple bags are often required to obtain the adequate level of the factor desired.   Virus inactivation is not routinely applied to these products therefore virally inactivated replacement products are considered a safer alternative to FFP and cryoprecipitate.  The absence of factor IX in cryoprecipitate negates its use in Hemophilia B.

- Platelet transfusions are necessary when bleeding continues despite normal Factor VIII levels.  Platelets can transport and localize the vWF from the site of the vascular injury.

**Antifibrinolytic Acid Therapy**

- Aminocaproic acid is a synthetic analog of lysine used to control or prevent hemorrhage.  It competitively reduces the conversion of plasminogen to plasmin thereby inhibiting fibrinolysis and promoting clot formation.  It is typically administered as an intravenous infusion during a surgical procedure but is also available in an oral form for home use in patients with bleeding disorders.  It is available as a mouthwash or a tablet for oral bleeding, recurrent epistaxis or menorrhagia.  This agent is FDA approved in the treatment of patients with bleeding disorders and is often useful as an adjunct therapy in patients with coagulopathic potential.

- Tranexamic acid is a synthetic medication made from lysine which acts by competitively inhibiting plasminogen activation and is considered more potent than aminocaproic acid.  At higher concentrations, it can act as a non-competitive inhibitor of plasmin.  It has ten times the potency of aminocaproic acid and is FDA approved for use in patients with bleeding disorders.  It is available in intravenous and oral formulations.  The oral preparation can also help in the treatment of recurrent minor bleeding issues that occur at home and in preparation for dental work.****

**Hormonal Treatments**

Oral contraceptives such as oral progestins and depot medroxyprogesterone have been shown to be effective in women with Type 1 von Willebrand disease with menorrhagia by significantly elevating circulating vWF levels.  While the exact mechanism of estrogens influence on vWF is not entirely understood, it is hypothesized to occur as a result of its lipophilic nature, allowing it to penetrate the cytoplasm of the nuclear receptors thereby increasing gene transcription of the various clotting proteins.