Patients, especially high-level athletes, should be educated regarding the risk of nonunion in specific fracture patterns. The clinician should conduct a thorough discussion of both operative and nonoperative management.

**Rehabilitation**

The progression of rehabilitation is primarily dictated by the type and severity of the fracture, the resulting treatment approach selected by the orthopedic physician, and the established protocol provided by each referring orthopedic professional. Limited evidence is available regarding one specific rehabilitation protocol following a metatarsal fracture. As such, it is imperative for the rehabilitation team to coordinate with the referring orthopedic professionals on desired rehab timeline and components. In addition, the rehabilitation approach is also determined by the patient's initial status and overall goals, with a more aggressive approach instituted for athletes, including early limb loading and anti-gravity treadmills as means to avoid increased gaps in training.

In general, rehabilitation consists of 3 phases: Phase 1 emphasizes ambulation and assistive device/orthotic training, range of motion (ROM) exercises, and pain/edema management. Phase 2 is a continuation of ROM exercises with the introduction and progression of resistance exercises, manual soft tissue mobilization and scar management, continued gait training and use of anti-gravity treadmill/assistive device/orthotic training, and exercises to promote and maintain the strength of lower extremities/upper extremities during rehab efforts. Phase 3 includes full ROM of affected joints in the foot and ankle, progression of resistance and strength training of both the affected joint and lower extremities, progression of gait training with an emphasis on normalizing gait pattern without assistive device use, implementation of stability and proprioceptive exercises, and progression of motions specific to the sport if rehabbing an athlete (including agility and coordination drills as appropriate).