**Screening for Suicidal Ideation**

A variety of SI screening and suicide risk assessment scales have been validated and meet the Joint Commission's requirement for primary care, ED, and behavioral health professionals to assess individuals with behavioral health issues. However, an over-reliance on any scale should be avoided.  Literature shows the intensity of SI fluctuates, but more importantly, no scale has been shown to predict imminent suicide risk accurately.  Depending on what scales are used, the same individual often scores positive for SI on one scale and negative on others.

Healthcare professionals must be mindful to guard against assumptions, stereotypes, and behaviors that suggest impatience, negativity, or minimize the patient's concerns.

**Initial Assessment of Suicide Risk in ED:**2017 Emergency Nurses Association Clinical Guidelines reported a moderate amount of evidence (Level B) that supports the validity, feasibility, and reliability of these tools for use in ED)

- Ask Suicide-Screening Questions (ASQ) is a 4-question screening tool for pediatric/young adults who present to ED with medical complaints. It is recommended to administer without the parent/guardian being present.

- Manchester Self-Harm Rule (MSHR) uses 4 questions to identify the ED patient's risk of suicide or repeating self-harm based on their history.

- Risk of Suicide Questionnaire (RSQ) is a 4-question screening tool suitable for 8 years through adult; it takes 90 seconds to complete.

**Discharge/Disposition Assessment from ED:**2017 ENA Clinical Guidelines report a moderate amount of evidence (Level B) for these instrument in the ED setting:

- Behavioral Health Screening Emergency Department (BHS-ED) is a shorter 10-minute web-based version of the comprehensive BHS tool. The BHS-ED focuses on depression, suicidal ideation, posttraumatic stress, risk behaviors, and stress.

- Columbia Suicide Severity Rating Scale (C-SSRS) Assesses for risk behavior, SI and guides the assessment of the lethality of the suicide risk. Joint Commission states that it can be used in all settings, with all ages, however using "the C-SSRS Full Version without the risk assessment is not sufficient to qualify as an evidence-based suicide risk assessment process. Assessment of the risk and protective factors, in a structured or unstructured way, is required in addition to the suicide inquiry" is stated on the Joint Commission Suicide Prevention Resources website.

- Geriatric Depression Scale (GDS) uses a 15-question depression scale to evaluate and depressive symptoms and SI. Some evidence this relationship between depression and suicidality was stronger in the old-old than in the young-old.

- The ReACT Self-Harm uses data collected based on 4 elements of concern to assist with disposition decisions related to follow-up.

**Additional screening and assessment tools:**The Joint Commission included several of these in its list of validated instruments.

- Beck Hopelessness Scale (BHS) - A 20-item questionnaire measuring pessimism/hopelessness, a construct related to SI.

- Beck Scale for Suicide Ideation (BSI) - Joint Commission approved BSI, a 21-item self-report instrument for detecting and measuring the current intensity of the patients’ specific attitudes, behaviors, and plans to commit suicide during the past week. The BSI was developed as a self-report version of the interviewer-administered Scale for Suicide Ideation. The first 5 questions can be used as a screening tool.

- Scale for Suicide Ideation-Worst (SSI-W) Joint Commission approved SSI-W for in-patient and out-patient areas use: This 19-item rating scale developed by Beck is interviewer-administered and measures the intensity of patients’ specific attitudes, behaviors, and plans to commit suicide at the period when they were the most suicidal. The instrument is validated and reliable and takes 10 minutes to complete.

- Death/Suicide Implicit Association Test (IAT)

- Geriatric Suicide Ideation Scale (GSIS)

- Nurses Global Assessment of Suicide Risk (NGASR) identified as a reliable tool, particularly useful for novices, to aid in overall clinical assessment

- Patient Health Questionnaire (PHQ-2 and PHQ-9)

- Scale for Suicidal Ideation (SSI), a classic 19-item questionnaire for clinicians or self-ratings (paper or computer-based), validated translations to numerous languages

**Lacks sufficient validity for ED use:**Research evidence suggests these scales currently lack sufficient validity to use for screening or assessing the risk of suicide.

- SAD Person Scale (SPS) Systematic review concluded this tool could not currently predict suicide.

- Modified SAD Persons Scale (MSPS) Not useful for predicting suicide in ED patients

**Clinical Interview Considerations**

In addition to the patient's current expression of SI, it is important to determine if there is a personal history of suicide attempts, interrupted or aborted attempts. Additionally, even if no prior SI or plans/attempts have occurred, any reckless, self-endangering behaviors or self-inflicted harm, such as cutting, should be queried. The lifetime risk of suicide increases with prior self-harm, but the reason is unknown.  Some theories suggest that prior self-harm habituates the individual to tolerating pain and normalizes self-harming behaviors, thereby increasing one's capability for suicide.

**Interviewing to Assess Suicidal Ideation**

Literature shows nurses, particularly those who do not work in mental health, frequently have negative views toward people who self-harm, but education and reflective learning activities produce more favorable attitudes.

Examples of SI assessment questions from literature, including VA/DoD Clinical Practice Guideline for Assessment and Management of Patients at Risk for Suicide, Registered Nurses Association of Ontario Best Practice Guidelines for Assessment and Care of Adults at Risk of Suicidal Ideation and Behaviour (2009), Clinical Guidelines from the American Psychiatric Association Clinical Guidelines for Assessment of Suicidal Adults (2016):

**Characteristics of Current SI**- onset, frequency, duration, intensity, triggers, associated factors, ability to control, attribution, passive or active SI thoughts

a) Suicidal Ideation – Ask questions to elicit thoughts on living and dying. Distinguishing between passive and active SI is typically done to identify if there is an imminent short-term risk, although literature shows attempts do occur without prior expressing of SI, and long-term risk is equal with passive and active SI. The nature of SI can fluctuate rapidly, so assessing worst-ever and more recent fluctuations is advised. Age of ideator may influence the character of ideations.

- Ambivalent thoughts between continuing to live vs. wanting to die are common.

- Often death is not the goal but the only option the ideator can envision as a solution to present or upcoming crisis. (e.g., financial issues, job loss, legal problems, relationship issues) Executive functioning issues may limit the ability to problem-solve or identify other options

- What is the character of ideations? (passive wishes to never awaken and/or actively kill oneself)

- How frequent are ideations? Recently increased? (several times/week, daily, hourly)

- How long do the thoughts/urges last? (minutes, hours, constant)

- What are triggers that are associated with the onset, duration, and intensity of these thoughts? (e.g., when alone, at night, after arguments, while drinking?)

- How much control do they have over the thoughts? (e.g., controllable except when drinking?)

- What does death represent? (e.g., punishment, reunion, escape)

b) Plan –  Asking about a plan is crucial because the presence of a plan is a key variable that is associated with suicide risk. Detailed plans are associated with more serious attempts

- Inquire if the person has thought of possible plans, considered options, or chosen a method? (e.g., overdose, firearm, suffocation, jumping, MVA, etc.)

- If a present plan is denied, inquire about any previous plans (Lifetime risk is associated with SI/plan at worst-ever, low-point)

- Has the person taken steps to put a plan in place? (e.g. identified a location(s), considered logistics, etc.)

- How detailed and specific is the plan? (e.g., precise or vague locations, etc.)

- Have they done anything to prepare? (e.g., hoarding medications, purchased rope, etc.)

- Have they rehearsed the plan mentally or role-played any aspect(s) of the plan? (e.g., putting a rope around the neck, holding/positioning firearm, etc.)

- Is there a specific time/date or event that was chosen for the attempt? (e.g., an anniversary, a red line)

- Motivation - (e.g., suicide pact, bereavement; attention, to escape humiliation/shame; delusional thoughts or command hallucinations; revenge, etc.)

c) Access to Means – Assess to lethal means increases the risk of a lethal attempt.

- Does the person have access to the chosen method? (e.g., access to a firearm, medications, etc.)

- Does the individual have career-based knowledge or familiarity? (e.g., military, police, anesthesiologist, etc.)

- Is the chosen plan plausible? How easy would it be for the patient to access such means or put plans in place?

d) Intent – To what extent does the patient intend to die? Note: Anything above zero intent to die is considered to affirm suicidal intent.

- What is the primary reason for self-harming thoughts? (e.g., attention, punish self or other(s), insurance benefit, etc.)

- What is the intensity of the person's desire to die? (level of ambivalence with life/death?)

- Has the person made preparations for death? (e.g., put affairs in order/will/note, prepared the location, gave away gifts/possession(s), etc.)

- Does the plan include steps to minimize being discovered? (e.g., time of day and/or location where unlikely to be rescued is associated with higher lethality)

- Has the person shared intent with anybody? (e.g., sought medical care, confided to anybody about their hopelessness, SI)

e) Lethality – The healthcare professional's objective appraisal of the lethality of the plan or attempt is not as important as whether the person believes it could be lethal.

- Did the person believe that the chosen method and plan would be lethal?

- Would the chosen method and plan allow for discovery and lifesaving intervention?

- Does the plan include the use of alcohol or drugs?

f) Protective factors – Are there any people or circumstances that allow the patient to want to go on living?

- Are there any barriers that prevent the person from taking their life?

- Would the person want to continue living if certain issues/factors could be resolved?

- Social factors (sense of responsibility to others; cultural and religious beliefs?)

- Quality and strength of therapeutic alliance with a counselor, healthcare professionals, etc.

g) Previous attempts or aborted/interrupted attempts? (Prior attempts are associated with increased risk future attempts, literature shows a significant but weak correlation)

- Ask about past or aborted suicide attempts? (When? What were the precipitants? What was the method? What was the medical severity? Were alcohol or drugs involved?

- Has the person had prior intentional self-injury without suicide intent? Ask when. What was the precipitant? What was the medical severity? Where drugs or alcohol involved?

**Present/Past Risk factors that Should be Assessed**

Anxiety symptoms and panic attacks; Impulsivity; Psychotic thoughts; Anger/aggression; Mood - depression, hopelessness; Substance use (alcohol or other); Trauma; Prior history of a psychiatric hospitalization; a history of suicidal behaviors in biological relatives

Health and psychosocial stressors - Painful, chronic, debilitating, disfiguring or terminal medical illness; insomnia; head injury; neurological disease; financial, legal, occupational/school or relationship problems