To obtain the best outcomes, the management of warts should be under an interprofessional team. Patients with warts may present to the primary provider, dermatologist, urgent care clinic, or the nurse practitioner. The key to the management of warts is patient education. Once a diagnosis of warts is made, the patient should be educated on preventing trauma and transmission. The patient should be told to avoid nail-biting, wear proper shoe wear at the swimming pool, and wear gloves when working with meat products. Patients should be told that warts can disappear spontaneously, and the decision to seek treatment should not be undertaken lightly. The pharmacists should educate the patient about the topical treatments, their efficiency, and adverse effects. Finally, the patient should understand that no treatment works immediately, and many sessions are required- which not only adds to the cost but also increases the risk of adverse reactions. Individuals at risk for warts like butchers and animal workers should wear gloves and appropriate garments. Patients should be told that is the wart does not cause symptoms, it may be left alone. Only through open communication between the clinicians can the morbidity of warts be reduced. (Level V)

**Outcomes**

When looking at outcomes, it is important to be aware that nearly two-thirds of warts resolve spontaneously over 12-24 months, and there is almost no scarring or any residual defect. However, when warts are medically or surgically treated, inevitably, there is scarring, pain, cost, and adverse effects. More important, every single treatment for warts is associated with failures. Warts are generally asymptomatic but can be painful in some people, depending on their location. Malignant change has been reported in warts, but this is a rare occurrence (Level V).