Clubfoot is often identifiable during routine intrauterine ultrasound of the fetus during the antenatal period. However, in countries without a prenatal ultrasound screening program, initial identification will usually occur at birth or during newborn screening.

During an examination of the foot, there are distinctive deformities associated with clubfoot. These include midfoot cavus, forefoot adductus, hindfoot varus as well as hindfoot equinus. These deformities may vary relative to the extent of deformity and their stiffness.

The above deformities are gradable to ascertain the severity of the clubfoot. Numerous scoring systems exist; however, the Pirani system is the most common system used, having demonstrated to be easily reproducible and reliable.

The Pirani system involves assessing six separate parameters in the foot. Each parameter is individually scored 0, 0.5, or 1 depending on severity. This ranking gives a minimum score per foot of 0, and a maximum of 6. Three parameters involve the hindfoot, and three involve the midfoot.

**Hindfoot**

Posterior crease:

Correct equinus deformity and assess crease over the posterior aspect of Achilles tendon.

- 0 – multiple fine creases.

- 0.5 – Two or three moderate creases.

- 1 – Single deep crease.

Equinus:

Correct equinus as much as able with the knee in extension.

- 0 – Able to dorsiflex beyond plantigrade.

- 5 – Able to reach plantigrade.

- 1 – Unable to meet plantigrade.

Empty heel:

Palpate directly over calcaneum posteriorly.

- 0 – Calcaneum easily palpable beneath the skin.

- 5 – Layer of tissue felt between finger and calcaneum, but calcaneum palpable.

- 1 - Calcaneum not palpable.

**Midfoot**

Medial crease:

Correct cavus deformity by gently lifting the 2nd toe and assess medial plantar crease.

- 0 – multiple fine creases.

- 5 – Two or three moderate creases.

- 1 – Single deep crease.

Curved lateral border of the foot:

The examiner holds a pen or other straight object along the lateral border of the calcaneus.

- 0 – Lateral border is straight in line with the pen without deviation.

- 5 – Lateral border of the foot deviates from the pen at the level of metatarsals.

- 1 – Lateral border of the foot deviates from the pen at the level of the calcaneocuboid joint.

Lateral head of the talus:

Palpate head of the talus and passively correct the clubfoot deformity to feel if the:

- 0 – Lateral head of talus covered by navicular on passive correction of the deformity.

- 5 – Lateral head of talus partially covered on passive correction of the deformity.

- 1 -Lateral head of talus remains uncovered on the passive correction of the deformity.

A higher Pirani score at the beginning of treatment correlates with an increase in the number of casts required as well as an increased requirement for Achilles tenotomy. Therefore the scoring system can be used for counseling of the family, as well as for monitoring the progressive correction of the deformity.

In unilateral cases, the affected foot is often smaller than the contralateral side, and the calf may appear underdeveloped.  In up to 80% of patients, clubfoot appears to be an isolated deformity, although in the other in 20% of cases, it may be seen in association with other conditions such as arthrogryposis or diastrophic dysplasia.

Clubfoot may be associated with specific syndromes and deformities; therefore, care is necessary to examine the baby comprehensively and appropriately. The clinician should direct particular attention to the back for evidence of spina bifida or myelomeningocele.

In syndromes affecting collagen such as arthrogryposis, a deformity may also be evident in other joints.

Hips should have appropriate screening for developmental dysplasia. Though there is no clear causative link yet found, research has identified a correlation. Patients with clubfoot are approximately 25 times more likely to have developmental dysplasia of the hip than those without dysplasia.