The following technique describes an internal jugular (IJ) vein catheter tunneled to the chest wall, commonly found in dialysis patients while awaiting maturation of their AV fistula.

As stated above, the IJ is easily accessed at the apex of the Sedillot triangle, bordered medially by the sternal head of the sternocleidomastoid (SCM), laterally by the clavicular head of the SCM, and inferior by the clavicle.

Using a scalpel, a small, 0.5 cm incision is then made in the skin at the insertion site. Two dilators of increasing size are passed over the wire under fluoroscopy; the second dilator contains a peel-away sheath, which is left in place after the dilator is removed. At all times, care must be taken to maintain control of the guidewire. A marking pen is used to mark the catheter exit site (or subcutaneous port site), which is then incised with a scalpel. The catheter length is then measured to ensure the tip of the catheter will reside at the cavoatrial junction. Using a tunneler with a tapered tip at one end and the catheter attached at the other end, the catheter is tunneled along the subcutaneous tissue from the chest wall over the clavicle and toward the neck. The catheter is then detached from the tunneler and fed through the sheath. Care must be taken not to twist the catheter when placed through the sheath as this can cause kinking and flipping of the catheter. Afterwhich, the sheath is peeled away from the catheter with care taken not to dislodge the catheter. The location of the catheter tip is then confirmed with fluoroscopy.

The catheters are aspirated and flushed with saline (or heparinized saline) to confirm good inflow and outflow. The catheter is then locked with heparin. The neck incision is closed with a single subcuticular 4-0 monocryl stitch. The catheter is secured with two interrupted non-absorbable stitches (this writer prefers 3-0 braided nylon).

Post-procedure, a chest X-ray is ordered to confirm the correct position of the catheter tip at the cavoatrial junction and assess for a postoperative pneumothorax.

When using ultrasound for venous access, the IJ will typically appear overlying the carotid artery. When in the Trendelenberg position, the vein will generally appear larger than the artery. To clearly distinguish the vein from the artery, pressure should be applied to the ultrasound probe. This will result in compression of the IJ; however, the artery will stay circular and pulsatile. When cannulating the vein, the tip of the needle should be visualized at all times to prevent arterial or pleural injury. Depending upon the ultrasound device in use, color Doppler can also be used to distinguish the artery from the vein.