Pulmonary surfactant is a lipoprotein complex responsible for preventing the collapse of alveoli and increasing lung compliance.

Therapeutically, surfactant administration is also indicated in infants with meconium aspiration syndrome. Surfactant use, in this case, will recover oxygenation and reduce the need for extracorporeal membrane oxygenation (ECMO). Also, infants who undergo intubation for any reason, irrespective of their gestational age or infants with respiratory failure requiring mechanical ventilation, can receive surfactant therapy.

Prophylactic use of surfactant is indicated in neonates who are predisposed to the development of NRDS. These include those born before 32 weeks gestation and those with low birth weights (less than 1300 gm). In premature infants at risk for developing RDS, the surfactant administration with brief lung-protective ventilation (followed by extubation to nasal CPAP) has been found to lower the incidence of mechanical ventilation, air leak syndromes and result in a lower incidence of pneumothorax, pulmonary interstitial emphysema and improved survival without bronchopulmonary dysplasia. Prophylactic surfactant is also indicated in infants with laboratory evidence of surfactant deficiency (lecithin/sphingomyelin ratio of less than 2 to 1, evidence of lung immaturity on bubble stability test, or absence of phosphatidylglycerol). Surfactant replacement therapy may also be considered in other situations like worsening pulmonary hemorrhage.

The use of surfactant may also be beneficial in severe respiratory syncytial virus-induced respiratory failure.