**Transcutaneous Approach**

This includes a stairstep incision involving a subciliary incision followed by elevation of skin muscle flap after preserving the pretarsal muscles in place. This is followed by division of the orbitomalar ligament, pre-periosteal dissection, and incision of the orbital septum at the level of arcus marginalis. The herniated fat pad can be either excised or redraped to the malar region. Lateral canthal support is crucial to support the lower eyelid position. Excision of the skin can be done by pinching the excess skin. Care should be taken to limit excision on the medial side of the eye to avoid undue tension, which may lead to ectropion.

**Transconjunctival Approach**

Transconjunctival lower eyelid blepharoplasty can be either done through a preseptal or transseptal approach. The transseptal approach provides direct access to the post septal fat, which facilitates either excision or repositioning after the release of the orbitomalar ligaments. Stretching the lower eyelid during exposure can aggravate the pre-existing tarsoligamentous laxity. Therefore, routine canthal support should be performed in these cases. Transconjunctival blepharoplasty mainly addresses herniated fat rather than skin laxity. Excess skin can be addressed by either skin pinch excision or postoperative laser treatment. Smoothening the lower eyelid appearance is one of the main limitations of the transconjunctival approach, as removing or tightening the orbicularis is not applicable.

**Lateral Canthal Support**

The lower eyelid laxity should be carefully evaluated preoperatively. This can be assessed by the previously mentioned snapback and lid distraction tests. Choice of the method of lateral canthal supports depends on the degree of skin laxity and the globe position. Canthopexy is usually sufficient for mild degrees of lateral canthal laxity, while canthoplasty is more suitable for extensive lateral canthal laxity. The decision about which procedure to do is usually made intraoperatively. Canthopexy can be performed if the amount of laxity can be corrected by simply tucking the lower lid edges against the globe. However, canthoplasty is recommended in cases with extensive laxity.

**Technical Steps**

**Canthopexy**

- Make a 5mm incision horizontally starting from the lateral canthus. This can be joined with the subciliary incision in cases of transcutaneous blepharoplasty.

- Deepen the incision to expose the lateral canthal tendon and lateral edge of the tarsal plate

- Dissect to expose part of the periosteum of the lateral orbital wall

- Double-armed sutures are passed through the lateral canthal tendon and then secured to the inner aspect of the lateral orbital wall. Double bites of the lateral canthus should be taken and secured to the lateral orbital wall periosteum as deep as possible.

- Suture the orbicularis muscle on top of the deep canthal sutures followed by skin suturing

**Canthoplasty**

- Make horizontal incision as previously described in canthopexy

- Deepen the incision to expose the lateral canthus and the lateral tarsal strip.

- Divide the lower limb of the lateral canthus tendon from the upper and the common canthal ligament to allow greater mobility.

- Separate the conjunctiva from the lateral tarsal plate to allow easy mobilization of the lateral canthus.

- Excision of the excess skin, orbicularis muscle, and conjunctiva

- Expose the lateral orbital periosteum and secure the sutures in the same manner previously described.

- Suture the orbicularis muscle and the skin.

**Choice of the Level of Anchoring Suture**

Choice of the level of the anchoring point depends on the eye prominence. The standard position is to secure it at the horizontal pupillary line. In cases of deep-seated eyes, the sutures should be secured deeper in the lateral orbital wall and at the level of the inferior pupil. However, in cases of prominent eyes with a negative vector, the suture should be placed at the level of the superior pupil. If downward retraction of the lower eyelid is still present after canthal support, a release procedure can be performed to elevate the lower lid position. This includes the release of the inferior retinaculum, lower eyelid retractors, and or capsulopalpebral fascia. This then can be supported by the insertion of a spacer such as acellular dermal matrix or ear cartilage.

**Choice of Suture Material**

Most surgeons prefer to use non-absorbable sutures when doing canthal anchoring, e.g., double-armed 4-0 prolene suture with a small half-circle needle. Each arm of the suture should be secured in the desired position of anchoring. On the other hand, fewer surgeons prefer absorbable sutures such as 4-0 PDS. They argue that canthal anchoring sutures are not needed permanently, and using absorbable sutures prevents the risk of stitch sinus or infection. However, these complications are uncommon. In cases of canthoplasty, the upper and lower eyelid should be carefully and precisely aligned with 6-0 buried vicryl sutures to prevent canthal webbing.

**Postoperative Care**

The patient should rest in bed with his head up for the first day after surgery. Regular use of cold compresses is highly recommended, especially in the first two days. Sutures are usually removed within one week. Moreover, any strenuous activity and heavy activities should be avoided in the first two weeks after surgery.