# Continuing Education Activity

Cardiorenal syndrome includes multiple subtypes based on underlying pathology and chronicity. Each subtype involves unique pathophysiology, and thus, the management strategy for each subtype is different management strategies. This activity outlines the evaluation and management of the five subtypes of cardiorenal syndrome and highlights the role of the interprofessional team in evaluating and treating patients with this condition.

**Objectives:**
- Identify the etiologies of cardiorenal syndrome.
- Describe the expected history and physical findings in a patient with each subtype of cardiorenal syndrome.
- Outline the treatment and management options available for patients with each subtype of cardiorenal syndrome.
- Explain the interprofessional team strategies for improving care coordination and communication to advance the treatment of cardiorenal syndrome and improve patient outcomes.

# Introduction

The definition of cardiorenal syndrome is “any acute or chronic problem in the heart or kidneys that could result in an acute or chronic problem of the other.”

# Etiology

There are five subtypes of cardiorenal syndrome:

- Type 1: a sharp decline in cardiac function that results in an acute decrease in renal function

- Type 2: chronic cardiac dysfunction that results in a sustained reduction in renal function

- Type 3: a sharp decline in renal function that results in an acute reduction in cardiac function

- Type 4: a chronic decline in kidney function that results in chronic cardiac dysfunction

- Type 5: systemic diseases that result in both cardiac and renal dysfunction

Each type has its unique pathophysiology with unique management strategies and varying prognoses.

# Epidemiology

The 2007 report on the 118465 patients admitted with acutely decompensated heart failure in the ADHERE database showed that 9.0% of patients had normal renal function on admission whereas 27.4% had mild renal dysfunction (defined as GFR 60 to 89 mL-min-1.73 m), 43.5% had moderate renal dysfunction (GFR 30 to 59 mL-min-1.73 m), 13.1% had severe renal dysfunction (GFR 15 to 29 mL-min-1.73 m), and 7.0% had a GFR less than 15 mL-min-1.73 or were on chronic dialysis.

# Pathophysiology

Type 1 cardiorenal syndrome occurs when there is acute decompensation of cardiac function leading to a decrease in glomerular filtration. Researchers have previously proposed a decline in cardiac output with decreased renal perfusion as the leading underlying cause for worsening kidney function in cardiorenal syndrome types 1 and 2.  However, recent studies have postulated that increased central venous pressures are a more critical factor.

# History and Physical

The patient’s history and physical exam can help clinicians to differentiate between acute and chronic decompensation as well as primarily cardiac or renal causes. Examples of helpful historical information would include if the patient presents with an acute myocardial ischemic event that can be triggering for severe cardiac dysfunction, which subsequently results in renal injury or recent-onset diarrhea and vomiting, causing acute renal injury, which might lead to a sharp decline in heart function. Other historical clues, such as medication use and prior laboratory values (such as creatinine), may be helpful.

- Elevated jugular venous pressure

- Generalized swelling and edema with “third spacing” presenting as pleural effusion(s), ascites, or peripheral edema

- Crackles or rales on lung auscultation

- Patients may also demonstrate manifestations of decreased cardiac output with hypotension, fatigue, diminished peripheral pulses, and abnormal heart rates (either tachycardia or bradycardia)

Other possible signs indicating a primary renal cause of cardiorenal syndrome may include:

- Pallor from anemia

- Monitoring oliguria or anuria preceding cardiac dysfunction

# Evaluation

Initial history and physical examination tailor the provider's approach towards the appropriate investigation for determining the underlying etiology. The initial laboratory workup should include a complete blood count (CBC), complete metabolic panel (CMP), urine studies (urinalysis with microscopy, urine protein to creatinine ratio, urine sodium), brain natriuretic peptide (BNP), and troponin. The estimated glomerular filtration rate (eGFR) is calculable from the creatinine level to help determine the degree of renal impairment. In patients with possible cardiorenal syndrome type 5, further investigations including blood & urine cultures, lupus serologies (antinuclear antibody [ANA], anti-double-stranded DNA, serum complement levels [C3, C4]), and a procalcitonin may be useful. An electrocardiogram and cardiac monitoring should be included in the initial evaluation to evaluate for any underlying arrhythmias that may be contributing to or resulting from the cardiorenal syndrome. A transthoracic echocardiogram is invaluable in evaluating for wall motion abnormalities, obtaining measurements such as the left ventricular ejection fraction (LVEF), and determining whether or not there is a pericardial effusion. A renal ultrasound can help evaluate kidney size and function. Smaller kidney disease and increased renal echogenicity are consistent with chronic kidney disease.

# Treatment / Management

Although no therapies have been demonstrated to improve outcomes in patients with cardiorenal syndrome, treatment generally is directed at the underlying etiology and to improve the complications of the syndrome as most patients with cardiorenal syndrome have volume overload, the primary treatment targets typically fluid removal either with diuretics or ultrafiltration.

# Differential Diagnosis

It is difficult to determine the etiology of the cardiorenal syndrome on initial presentation in many patients as they might present without all the classic features, making the diagnosis challenging. History of a recent increase in diuretic doses, diarrhea, vomiting, skin or throat infection, heatstroke, fever, recent extensive workout, or non-steroid anti-inflammatory drug (NSAID) use can help towards a hypovolemic etiology.

# Prognosis

The overall prognosis is poor. There are multiple mortality and readmission predictor calculators available to predict the individual patient’s prognosis further. They use multiple variables to predict in-hospital mortality and readmission rate, including the blood urea nitrogen (BUN), systolic blood pressure, serum creatinine, brain natriuretic peptide, and response to diuretics.

# Complications

- Liver failure

- Respiratory failure requiring invasive and non-invasive ventilation

- Worsening renal failure requiring dialysis (either temporarily or permanently)

# Deterrence and Patient Education

Medications (diuretics) and diet compliance, tracking body weight with regular interval follow-up in heart failure clinic to optimize outpatient diuretic doses are crucial preventive factors for recurrence.

# Enhancing Healthcare Team Outcomes

Enhancing healthcare outcomes for patients with cardiorenal syndrome requires close follow-up after hospital discharge and tracking of the patient’s weight, symptoms, and laboratory data. This requires an interprofessional team of clinical providers, nurses, physician assistants, and pharmacists to achieve the best outcomes possible. The pharmacist is needed to ensure patient education on timely medication administration as well as avoiding medications that can adversely affect the disease. A key role of the pharmacists lies in communicating with the providers to ensure the patient is not started on any medications that will result in poor outcomes. The specialized nurse and PA are needed for frequent follow up with the patient to ensure his or her weight is adequately maintained and that the patient is adhering to the various diet and activity restrictions along with the medications prescribed. The primary clinical provider, along with the cardiac and nephrology specialist needs to work in conjunction to ensure optimal management of the disease and to achieve the best outcomes possible. Cardiorenal syndrome requires an interprofessional team approach, including physicians, specialists, specialty-trained nurses, physician assistants, and pharmacists, all collaborating across disciplines to achieve optimal patient results. [Level 5]