Before deciding to proceed with the diagnosis of brain death, several conditions must be evaluated and met:

- Ensure no recent neuromuscular blocking agents have been administered. There must be a waiting period of five times the drug's half-life, or drug plasma levels should be below the therapeutic range.

- Drug screen to ensure no central nervous system (CNS) depressants are present.

- Normal core temperature must be present greater than 36 C.

- Normal systolic blood pressure must be greater than 100 mmHg. Vasopressors may be administered if necessary.

- No severe electrolyte, acid-base, or endocrine disturbance must be present.

- Neurologic examination, in most US states, 1 attending physician examination is sufficient; however, some states require 2.

If the above conditions are present and there is an identified cause of coma and complete lack of brainstem reflex, you may proceed with apnea testing. Apnea testing should be reserved for last, and only once the diagnosis of brain death is reasonably determined since elevating partial pressure carbon dioxide in arterial blood (PaCO2) increases intracranial pressure (ICP) and could precipitate cerebral herniation.

Apnea testing is performed by the following procedure as recommended by the AAN.

- Vasopressors should be adjusted to maintain a systolic blood pressure ≥100 mm Hg.

- Preoxygenate is given for at least 10 minutes with a 100% fraction of inspired oxygen (FiO2) to a partial pressure of oxygen, arterial (PaO2) greater than 200 mmHg.

- Reduce ventilator frequency to 10 breaths per minute.

- Reduce positive end-expiratory pressure to 5 cm H2O.

- If the peripheral capillary oxygen saturation (SPO2) remains greater than 95%, obtain baseline blood gas.

- Disconnect the patient from the ventilator, and preserve oxygenation with oxygen delivered through insufflation tubing given at 100% FiO2 at 6 L/min near the level of the carina through the endotracheal tube.

- Look for respiratory movements for 8 to 10 minutes.

- If no respiratory drive is observed, repeat blood gas at approximately 8 minutes.

- If no respiratory movements are observed, and PaCO2 is greater than 60 mmHg or 20 mm Hg increase in PaCO2 over a baseline PaCO2 (such as in chronic obstructive pulmonary disease), the apnea test result is positive.

If the above list is completed, and coma, the absence of brainstem reflexes, and a positive apnea test are present, the diagnosis of brain death can be made. This procedure is validated and supported by several professional organizations.

The apnea test has to be aborted if:

- There is any respiratory movement (abdominal or chest excursions or brief gasp)

- Systolic blood pressure decreases to <90 mm Hg

- Oxygen saturation is less than 85% for more than 30 seconds. If so, the procedure has to be retried with T-piece, maintaining a continuous positive airway pressure (CPAP) of 10 cm water and administration of 100% oxygen at 12 L/min.

Although not required for the diagnosis of brain death, hospitals frequently have additional ancillary tests available to confirm the diagnosis of brain death. These include electroencephalogram (EEG), cerebral angiography, nuclear scan, transcranial doppler, computed tomography angiography (CTA), and magnetic resonance imaging (MRI). These tests are used when apnea testing is inconclusive, or patients are too unstable to proceed with apnea testing.

In the case of cerebral angiography, there is no intracerebral filling noticed in the carotid or vertebral arteries at the skull entry-level and maintained blood flow in the external carotid artery. In the case of EEG, there is no electrographic reactivity noticed after intense stimuli, either somatosensory or audiovisual.