Nortriptyline is an antidepressant that falls under the pharmacological category of tricyclics (secondary amine), more commonly known as TCAs.The consensus is that nortriptyline inhibits the reuptake of serotonin and norepinephrine by the presynaptic neuronal membrane, thereby increasing the concentration of those neurotransmitters in the synapse. Additionally, nortriptyline inhibits the activity of histamine, 5-hydroxytryptamine, and acetylcholine. Nortriptyline increases the pressor effect of norepinephrine but hinders the pressor response of phenethylamine. However, research has found additional receptor effects, including desensitization of adenylyl cyclase, down-regulation of beta-adrenergic receptors, and downregulation of serotonin receptors.

The proposed mechanism of nortryptyline in neuropathic pain is an increase in noradrenaline levels acting within dorsal root ganglia on β2-adrenoceptors expressed by non-neuronal satellite cells. This stimulation of β2-adrenoreceptors reduces the neuropathy-induced production of TNFα, resulting in the relief of neuropathic pain.Candida Albicans infection by inhibiting biofilm and ability to kill cells in a mature biofilm efficiently; however, more research is needed.

**Pharmacokinetics**

- **Absorption:**Peak plasma concentrations are 7 to 8.5 hours after oral administration, although antidepressant action is obtained after a few weeks.

- **Distribution:**Nortriptyline is distributed to the brain, heart, and liver. Nortriptyline and its metabolite are highly bound to plasma and tissue proteins. Nortriptyline crosses the placenta, and nortriptyline is present in breast milk.

- **Metabolism:**Nortriptyline, when administered orally, undergoes first-pass metabolism in the liver by CYP2D6.

- **Excretion:**The primary route of elimination is urinary excretion, approximately one-third of the dose as metabolites within 24 hours, but it is also excreted in feces via the bile.