The clinical history and findings of MPS depend on what variant of the syndrome is involved. However, a history of consanguinity and sibling affectation with similar phenotypic presentations are usually present. The lethal variant (lethal multiple pterygium syndrome, LMPS) presents in-utero with fetal cystic hygroma colli (FCHC) by the presence of a thin-walled, multiseptate cystic mass between the fetal head and neck diagnosed in the second trimester with ultrasonography and subsequently, can lead to fetal hydrops, intrauterine death, or stillbirth.

The first concern reported by most pregnant mothers is reduced fetal movement, which is observable on fetal ultrasonography. Other findings include pterygia of large joints, joint contractures, reduced fetal movements, hypertelorism, palpebral fissures slanting, flattened nasal bridge and underdeveloped nasal alae, micrognathia, cleft palate, and lung hypoplasia. In addition, cerebral anomalies and muscular atrophy have been recognized in several cases.

The Escobar variant usually manifests with different features, some present at birth and certain features past infancy. Clinical features consist mainly of multiple body pterygia (neck, axillae, antecubital, digital, popliteal, and intercrural regions), arthrogryposis multiplex congenita involving the spine (scoliosis, kyphosis, cervical vertebrae fusion, clefting of the vertebral bodies), pelvis (dislocation), hands (syndactyly, camptodactyly, arachnodactyly), and limb abnormalities (absent or dysplastic patella, radial head dislocation, talipes equinovarus, rocker-bottom feet, and flexion contractures).

Findings that might be present at birth are low-set ears, expressionless flat face, epicanthal folds, small mouth, high-arched palate, difficulty in mouth opening with reduced neonatal sucking after birth, lung hypoplasia with neonatal respiratory distress, chest abnormalities (hypoplastic nipples, fused ribs, long clavicles, diaphragmatic hernia, and diaphragmatic eventration).

Other findings include genitourinary abnormalities (hypospadias and cryptorchidism in males; labia majora absence and small clitoris in females), umbilical hernia, generalized amyoplasia, short stature, conductive hearing loss, and possibly intrauterine death. The median age of walking without support is at fifteen months of age, and many of the patients are ambulatory at a later life. Some clinical features might improve as the child grows, while some may worsen.