**Types of Dexamethasone Suppression Tests (DST)**

**Low-dose Dexamethasone Suppression Test (LDDST)**

LDDST helps in the initial diagnosis of Cushing syndrome as either a screening or a confirmatory test.

- Overnight, 1 mg test: The overnight test is the most commonly used screening test due to ease and convenience. Dexamethasone 1 mg is administered orally between 11 PM and midnight. Serum cortisol levels are drawn the next morning between 8 and 9 AM.

- Two-day, 2 mg test: Dexamethasone 0.5 mg is administered orally every 6 hours (9 AM, 3 PM, 9 PM, 3 AM) for two days (total dose 4 mg). Serum cortisol level is drawn 6 hours (9 AM) after the last administered dose.

**High-dose Dexamethasone Suppression Test (HDDST)**

Once the diagnosis of Cushing syndrome is confirmed, the next step is to categorize ACTH-independent vs. ACTH-dependent Cushing syndrome by checking the plasma ACTH levels. In ACTH-independent Cushing syndrome, the plasma ACTH is low or undetectable, indicating an adrenal etiology (causing pituitary suppression of ACTH). In ACTH-dependent Cushing syndrome, the plasma ACTH is inappropriately normal or high, suggesting either a pituitary or an ectopic source.

In ACTH-dependent Cushing syndrome, HDDST can help distinguish a pituitary (i.e., Cushing disease) from an ectopic source of ACTH overproduction. The principle behind the HDDST is that the overproduction of ACTH seen in Cushing disease (but not ectopic tumors) can undergo either partial or complete suppression by high doses of dexamethasone (approximately 8 mg). As in the LDDST, the HDDST utilizes oral dexamethasone as either an overnight or two-day test.

- Overnight, 8 mg test: Baseline morning serum cortisol is measured, and oral dexamethasone 8 mg is administered between 11 PM and midnight. Repeat serum cortisol is drawn the following morning (between 8 and 9 AM).

- Two-day, 8 mg test: On day 1, a baseline morning serum cortisol or 24-hour urinary free cortisol (UFC) from the day before is obtained. Dexamethasone 2 mg is administered orally every 6 hours (9 AM, 3 PM, 9 PM, 3 AM) for two days to complete a total dose of 16 mg over days 1 and 2. A urine sample for UFC is collected simultaneously with dexamethasone administration. Additionally, serum cortisol levels are checked 6 hours after the last dose of dexamethasone (9 AM of day 2).

**Intravenous Dexamethasone Suppression Test**

This test helps in the initial diagnosis of Cushing syndrome while overcoming concerns of drug compliance and malabsorption.

**Dexamethasone Suppressed Corticotropin-Releasing Hormone Test**

Based on the rationale that glucocorticoid suppression of the HPA axis can be overcome by corticotropin-releasing hormone (CRH) stimulation in Cushing disease and not in pseudo-Cushing syndrome (physiologic hypercortisolism), this test helps distinguish the two entities. Dexamethasone 0.5 mg every 6 hours (12 PM, 6 PM, 12 AM, 6 AM) is given orally for 48 hours. Two hours after the last dose of dexamethasone, an intravenous CRH dose of 1 mcg/kg is administered (8 AM), and serum cortisol is drawn 15 minutes later.