The pretest probability of a patient having CAD is dependent on age, gender, and whether the patient has typical angina, atypical angina, or nonanginal chest pain.

**High pretest probability**is defined as over 75% or over 90% pretest probability of CAD. Medical therapy for CAD should be initiated. If there is no response to therapy, lifestyle limiting symptoms, or progression to unstable angina, then coronary angiography should be performed.

**Intermediate pretest probability**is defined as between 10% and 25% to 75% and 90%, respectively, pretest probability of CAD. It must be determined if the patient has baseline EKG abnormalities, which would preclude the interpretation of the EKG and whether the patient has the capacity to exercise. If able to exercise without baseline EKG changes, then the patient can undergo treadmill exercise stress testing. If unable to exercise and baseline EKG abnormalities are present, then they should undergo pharmacological stress echocardiography. If the patient has baseline EKG changes and is able to exercise, then stress nuclear or treadmill stress echocardiography can be performed. If any test returns markedly positive, then the next step would be to perform coronary angiography.

**Low pretest probability**is defined as a lower than 25% or 10% pretest probability of CAD. No additional testing is required.

The use of perfusion imaging modalities in women is challenging and has a high rate of false-positive and false-negative results, likely due to breast attenuation and partial volume effect due to relatively smaller ventricles.