Early diagnosis and surgical intervention are crucial to avoid progressive and potentially permanent neurological sequelae. The surgical intervention of the leptomeningeal cyst involves a craniotomy, resection of the mass, repair of the dural defect with a pericranial patch, and repair with a bone graft. In one case report, fibrinogen-based collagen fleece was used as an alternative to dural repair.

Although primary closure of the dural defect is the definitive treatment, recurrence of the cyst (2%) remains possible.

The management of elevated intracranial pressure is crucial to prevent cyst recurrence. Surgically, increased intracranial pressure can be treated by resecting herniated brain matter and treating hydrocephalus. Repair should be delayed until herniated brain tissue is apparent on brain imaging. It is suggested that the repair be postponed until the edema subsides and the brain tissue retracts from the defect. However, if the herniated tissue continues despite sufficient surveillance, which is usually up to two months, excision of the nonfunctional tissue is required. After this period, it is unlikely that the cyst will regress spontaneously and generally continue to grow without surgical intervention.

Ventriculoperitoneal (VP) shunting is another method that can be utilized to treat hydrocephalus or increased intracranial pressure.

**Pivotal Aspects in the Management**

**The salient surgical steps in the management include:**

- Defining the edges of the bony defect.

- Wide craniotomy to expose the dural defect.

- Excision of the meningo-cerebral cicatrix.

- Watertight duroplasty.

- Repair of the bony defect.

Watertight closure of the dural defect and cranioplasty is the mainstay of management. The dural defects are, on average, 1.42 times larger than the bony defects.

Orbital roof repair is required for orbitofrontal variants of LMC.