Clinicians must get a thorough medical history and medication history from patients before prescribing medications such as antidepressants. Antidepressants may cause serious adverse effects when combined with other medications such as different classes of antidepressants, opioids, alcohol, herbal medication, and even psychedelics. An interaction between two different classes of antidepressants may lead to excess serotonin in the central nervous system. This effect leads to a condition known as serotonin syndrome, sometimes described as serotonin toxicity. Serotonin toxicity induces symptoms such as mental status changes, autonomic stimulation, and neuromuscular excitation. Patients experience symptoms such as agitation, confusion, vital sign changes such as tachycardia, hyperthermia, flushing, tremor, and neuromuscular changes such as rigidity, increased reflexes, and clonus.

Another contraindication to prescribing doxepin is in patients with cardiovascular disorders such as preexisting bundle branch blocks. Literature has reported cases where patients developed atrioventricular heart block, orthostatic hypotension, and abnormalities in conduction after taking doxepin.

Lastly, doxepin has a poor safety profile in postpartum lactating mothers and is contraindicated in breastfeeding due to its sedative and respiratory depressive effects.

Overdose can result in a fatality, so avoid using in patients at risk of intentional overdose or known history of suicidal attempts.

Patients with hypersensitivity to doxepin or excipients should also avoid doxepin.