A thorough history must be taken to determine the nature and type of disorder, along with its impact and functional ramifications. This will also help to delineate the diagnosis and the subsequent treatment plan.

Information gathering should focus on the patient's family and genetic history; the pre-, peri-, and post-natal course; current health, including medications; developmental history, especially communication and listening behavior; psychosocial factors; education; social behavior; and any other hearing concerns.

The history can be obtained directly from the patient, although this may be difficult in a younger patient; therefore, collateral history from the parent or family members is extremely beneficial.

A thorough neurological examination should also be conducted, as other signs may be elicited that could reveal the cause of the presenting symptoms; focal neuropathy, for example, may present if there is a space-occupying lesion.

Patients presenting with CAPD will frequently present with one or several of a set of specific behavioral characteristics. They will be uncertain about what they hear or misunderstand what has been said and have difficulty understanding or listening in loud or noisy environments with frequent requests for repetition.

CAPD symptoms will become apparent in the early school years or later during the more academic stage of patients' lives as their environments change and there is increased demand for focus and concentration. In rare cases, this presentation can manifest a neurological disorder rather than isolated CAPD.

Because individuals with CAPD have primary auditory difficulties, young patients are liable to develop associated language, reading, writing, and spelling disorders. Therefore, it is crucial to recognize that the behavioral characteristics associated with CAPD are not exclusive to this condition and that other diagnoses present similarly, such as ASD, ADHD, learning disorder, and language impairment; these characteristics are not pathognomonic of CAPD.