There is no single diagnostic test that is 100% reliable. Proper evaluation of a patient with suspected AVN of the femoral head is similar to the patient that presents with hip pain. The physical exam includes inspection of the hip, including the skin, the position of the lower extremity, and gait evaluation as well as palpation of the surrounding bony structures such as the greater trochanter. The range of motion testing includes flexion, extension, abduction, adduction, and internal and external rotation. A thorough neurovascular exam in needed to evaluate for sensory and motor function. There are helpful special hip tests including the log roll and the Stinchfield test to help determine intra-articular pathology.

Standard imaging includes radiographs of the pelvis and hip, including an anteroposterior view of the pelvis, an anteroposterior, and a frog-leg lateral view of the affected hip. The frog-leg lateral view is the radiographic test to confirm subchondral collapse and make decisions regarding patient management.

If there is a high index of suspicion for AVN of the femoral head despite negative radiographs, an MRI of the hip is indicated. MRI has been shown to be approximately 98% sensitive and specific. Findings consistent with AVN of the femoral head include a “double density” appearance which appears dark on the T1 sequence and bright on the T2 sequence. The presence of a bright signal on the T2 sequence indicates bone marrow edema and is predictive of worsening pain and progression of the disease.