Mitral valve regurgitation is defined as a holosystolic murmur heard best at the cardiac apex with radiation to the left axilla. However, it is essential to differentiate the murmur of mitral regurgitation compared to other systolic murmurs

- Mitral valve prolapse (MVP) - early systolic murmur with a mid-systolic click heard best at the cardiac apex.

- Tricuspid regurgitation (TR) - holosystolic, heard best at the lower left sternal border with radiation to the right lower sternal border. TR, compared to MR, increases on inspiration.

- Ventral septal defect (VSD) - holosystolic, the larger the VSD, the quieter the murmur.

- Aortic stenosis (AS) - mid-systolic, crescendo-decrescendo in character radiating towards the neck. Quieter with Valsalva or standing.

- Pulmonic stenosis (PS) - This condition demonstrates mid-systolic, crescendo-decrescendo murmur that increases in intensity during inspiration. In severe PS, the S2 heart sound is widely-split.

- Atrial septal defect (ASD) - mid-systolic, S2 heart sound is fixed-split and does not change with inspiration.

- Hypertrophic cardiomyopathy (HCM) - mid-systolic, also radiates and is heard best at the left sternal border and is important to distinguish from MR. The murmur of HCM is louder with Valsalva and standing.

Clinical findings related to MR can divide into two categories: those related to the MR itself and those associated with the underlying cause. It is crucial to maintain a broad differential diagnosis, but, in general, with an initially focused history and physical examination, one can establish whether the MR is acute or chronic and thus significantly narrow the possible etiologies.

**Acute Mitral Regurgitation**

The clinical assessment will elicit findings associated with a precipitous decline in cardiac output and possibly cardiogenic shock. The patient will usually complain of significant dyspnea at rest, exacerbated in the supine position, as well as cough with clear or pink, frothy sputum. They may also endorse symptoms associated with myocardial ischemia, such as chest pain radiating to the neck, jaw, shoulders, or upper extremities, nausea, and diaphoresis. Physical examination may reveal altered mental status, tachycardia (or bradycardia if there is ischemic involvement of the conduction system), hypotension, tachypnea, hypoxemia, and cyanosis.

Additionally, there may be jugular venous distension, diffuse crackles on lung auscultation, and an apical holosystolic murmur with radiation to the axilla on a precordial exam. Acute MR is typically related to either papillary muscle rupture from acute coronary syndrome or fulminant destruction of the valvular apparatus secondary to acute bacterial endocarditis. Thus, further clinical assessment should focus on confirming these potentially devastating conditions.

In the case of acute bacterial endocarditis, there will be signs and symptoms of sepsis, such as fevers and chills. A history of intravenous drug abuse is highly prevalent, and patients may also have comorbid conditions that predispose to immunocompromise such as diabetes mellitus, HIV/AIDS, and alcohol use disorder. Due to embolization of vegetative material, there may be a variety of additional clinical findings depending on the ultimate fate of the emboli - focal neurologic deficits if there is brain involvement, hematuria, or oligoanuria if there is renal involvement, and Janeway lesions or widespread petechiae if there is cutaneous involvement. In contrast to subacute bacterial endocarditis, acute infections typically occur in patients with structurally normal heart valves and, as such, rheumatic heart disease and prosthetic valves are less common in this population. Furthermore, because the route of bacterial delivery to the mitral valve passes through the right side of the heart, concomitant lesions of the tricuspid and pulmonic valves are not uncommon, and these can often be appreciated on physical examination.

**Chronic Mitral Regurgitation**

Patients often remain asymptomatic until late in the course. Clinical findings common to all etiologies include fatigue, dyspnea on exertion, orthopnea, paroxysmal nocturnal dyspnea, weight gain, widening of pulse pressure, apical holosystolic murmur with radiation to the axilla, dependent edema, displaced apical impulse, and jugular venous distension. In more advanced cases, there may also be syncope or near syncope, cyanosis, clubbing of digits, gross anasarca, hepatomegaly, evidence of ascites with a fluid wave, or shifting dullness, and evidence of pleural or pericardial effusions. These latter findings are reflective of the development of pulmonary hypertension and resultant right ventricular systolic dysfunction from chronic pressure overload. The differential diagnosis is also considerably broader, and specific clinical findings are dependent on the etiology.