Oxygen toxicity is managed by reducing the exposure to increased oxygen levels. The lowest possible concentration of oxygen that alleviates tissue hypoxia is optimal in patients with ARDS and decompensated neonates who are at particular risk for retrolental fibroplasia. Oxygen-induced seizures are self-limited and do not increase susceptibility to epilepsy. There is concern that oxygen-induced seizures could lead to damage but are felt to be benignant and similar to febrile seizures in children, where no particular treatment is available

For hyperbaric oxygen treatments, those at high risk may benefit from anti-epileptic therapy, prolonged air breaks, and limited treatment pressure. Protocols for the avoidance of hyperoxia exist in fields where oxygen is breathed at higher-than-normal partial pressures.  This comprises underwater diving using compressed breathing gases, neonatal care, hyperbaric medicine, and human spaceflight. The present protocols have diminished the incidence of seizures due to oxygen toxicity, with pulmonary and ocular damage being mainly confined to the problems of managing premature infants. Oxygen toxicity seizures during hyperbaric therapy have also been curtailed by the introduction of "air breaks" (intermittent air-breathing while in the hyperbaric environment). This intervention may lower risk by a factor of 10.

Deep divers (diving below 185 feet) require breathing mixtures that contain less than 21% oxygen to reduce toxicity risk. At these depths, the mixture is changed from nitrogen to helium as well.  Underwater seizures require immediate ascent as the risk of pulmonary barotrauma, and decompression illness is offset by the extraordinarily high risk of fatal drowning