**Initial Prenatal Screen**

Prenatal care should be established in all women, ideally by ten weeks of pregnancy. Although the initial prenatal visit includes a history, physical examination, imaging studies, and blood work, in this section, we will only discuss the components of the prenatal evaluation that pertain to the maternal blood.

The tests commonly advocated in all patients are as follows:

- Hemoglobin, hematocrit, and mean corpuscular volume (MCV): To establish a baseline and screen for anemia.

- Rhesus type and ABO antibody screen: For the detection and prevention of alloimmunization and hemolytic disease of the newborn.

- Rubella and varicella immunity

- Syphilis, Hepatitis B, and HIV test

- Quadruple screen for fetal aneuploidies: This includes measuring maternal serum alpha-fetoprotein, beta-hCG, estriol, and inhibin A.

For special at-risk patients, the following tests may be undertaken:

- Serum TSH, T3, T4: For thyroid dysfunction only if symptomatic, personal or family history of dysfunction, or an associated condition.

- Diabetes mellitus type 2: The American Diabetes Association (ADA) and the American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists (ACOG) recommend testing in early pregnancy for undiagnosed type 2 diabetes in women with risk factors.

- Toxoplasmosis serology: For at-risk patients.

- Hemoglobin electrophoresis: Undertaken for patients with a high-risk ethnic background or an MCV of less than 80 fL unrelated to iron deficiency

- Lead levels: For patients at risk based on history.