Renal function plays a crucial role in the metabolism of magnesium. Of note, only approximately 10% of filtered magnesium is absorbed in the proximal tubule, whereas most of the filtered magnesium gets passively reabsorbed in the ascending limb of the loop of Henle. This factor is essential for the pathophysiology of kidney-related hypermagnesemia as along the loop of Henle, not only the volume of the filtrate gets reduced, but also the osmolarity decreases significantly (-66%), and consequently the solutes become less concentrated. Furthermore, this explains the high resorbent capacity of the kidney, which generally maintains magnesium equilibrium until the creatinine clearance falls below 20 ml/min. Thus, an increase in plasma magnesium levels is practically impossible to achieve with diet alone in conditions of perfect renal health. However, the odds of hypermagnesemia can increase by taking mega-doses of magnesium. The pathophysiology of hypermagnesemia related to excess laxative use is different. In this case, the huge amount of magnesium given through the digestive tract can lead to overwhelming the excretory mechanism, especially in cases with underlying subclinical renal failure.

Magnesium works as a physiologic calcium blocker. Increased levels determine substantial electrophysiological and hemodynamic effects. Moreover, the potential concomitance of hyperkalemia increases the risk of cardiac arrhythmias and cardiac arrest. The neurologic manifestations are the result of the inhibition of acetylcholine release from the neuromuscular endplate due to increased extracellular magnesium levels.