History and physical exam remain the cornerstone for the initial diagnosis and management of the acute coronary syndrome. Patients will often present in the field to first responders with limited access to medical records. Rapid recognition of this syndrome is vital to good patient outcomes.

Common symptoms of Acute Coronary Syndrome are:

- **Angina**(typical)
- Constant (less than 30 min) and worsened with exertion  
- Often described as substernal, radiating to the abdomen, back, jaw, or upper extremities
- Improved with nitroglycerine 
- Worsening in quality or quantity from previous anginal episodes

- **Dyspnea**
- Often at rest or with mild exertion 
- Sudden onset or worsening over a short period

- **Diaphoresis**
- Often described as sudden onset, cold sweat

- **Other nonspecific symptoms**
- Dizziness, abdominal pain, nausea, vomiting, paresthesia, palpitations, and headache

Common signs of Acute Coronary Syndrome are:

- Tachycardia

- Bradycardia

- Hypertension

- Hypotension

- Hypoxia

- Tachypnea

- A new cardiac murmur

- Orthopnea

- Lower extremity edema

- Jugular venous distention****

Physical exam findings for ACS can vary depending on the patient's presentation on the extent and severity of the disease. In general, a complete physical exam is recommended for all patients presenting with ACS requiring catheter-based interventions, with particular attention paid towards the cardiovascular, respiratory, neurologic, and vascular systems. Due to the need for vascular access, the need for various anticoagulants and antiplatelet medications, and the use of percutaneous equipment, the risk for bleeding and mechanical complications of myocardial infarction must be ruled out before proceeding to the catheterization laboratory.

Allergies must undergo an assessment before any catheter-based intervention to treat and sedate the patient throughout the procedure. Patients often will report adverse reactions to many of the medications used for moderate conscious sedation (i.e., fentanyl) as well as to medications administered post-procedure (i.e., statins, angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitors, etc.). Additionally, many patients report adverse reactions, allergies, or anaphylaxis to the iodinated contrast used for angiography. Thus, a thorough and detailed history and physical is mandatory prior to any cardiac catheter-based procedure.