Prophylaxis against HO using indomethacin or radiation is unproven for traumatic elbow injuries and may impair fracture healing. However, indomethacin, for short periods, is commonly administered in more complex trauma. Prospective randomized studies suggest radiation therapy should not be used acutely for prophylaxis after elbow trauma because of the increased rate of fracture and/or olecranon osteotomy nonunion.

Authors have investigated the implication of surgical timing regarding operative outcomes. Anneluuk compared an early (1 to 13 days) versus delayed (3 to 13 weeks) group and found that the early group had increased flexion/extension and forearm supination functional recovery in contrast to the delayed group.

Perhaps, the aforementioned phenomenon is subsequent to changes in soft tissues. As hematomas form around the fracture, causing congestion that gradually swells, leading to cellular disruption and potential neurovascular injuries that propagate tissue ischemia and hypoxia, causing more bone and soft tissue necrosis. When the elbow is immobilized for conservative therapy, the hematoma becomes absorptive, the joint capsule contracts, and muscles become atrophic, all worsening joint function. Undergoing early surgery interrupts this chain of inflammatory reactions, leading to joint dysfunction by avoiding joint capsule contracture, muscle atrophy, and fibrous tissue formation.

The earlier the operation is performed, the cleaner soft tissue plains appear, allowing bony landmarks to be identified, easing anatomical reduction and fixation techniques. With expeditious repair, patients can begin performing functional exercises earlier and regain their pre-injury elbow strength and motion.