Prevention is the best approach and requires good communication among dentists, oral surgeons, physicians, nurse practitioners, and oncologists to develop measures to avoid the development of BRONJ.

**Recommendations Before Initiating Bisphosphonate Therapy**

Around 4 to 6 monthly doses are required to affect bone healing in jaws significantly; it is recommended to take preventive measures during this period.

- Perform prophylactic dental examination and maintenance of good oral hygiene and regular dental visits.

- Educate patients regarding home hygiene and self-maintenance.

- Educate patients regarding the risk of BRONJ with bisphosphonate therapy.

- Develop a dental treatment plan focused on correcting pathological conditions and stabilizing dentition to prevent the need for invasive procedures after the BP therapy is initiated.

- Extract unrestorable, abscessed, and periodontally compromised teeth.

- Restorative and prosthodontics procedures can be later accomplished, but dental implant placement and orthodontic treatment are not recommended. However, patients on BP for osteoporosis are currently not contraindicated for implant placement, but appropriate informed consent and documentation are recommended.

**Recommendations for Patients Receiving BP Therapy**

After 4 to 6 doses of BP, bone turnover is significantly suppressed, making bone healing unpredictable and risky for ON.

- Educate patients regarding the risk of BRONJ with bisphosphonate therapy.

- Educate patients regarding home hygiene and self-maintenance.

- Oral surgical procedures like extractions, bone contouring, grafting, periodontal, and apical surgeries should be avoided.

- If possible, endodontic treatment is preferred over extractions and periapical surgery.

- Noninvasive restorative procedures like crowns, bridges, removable partial and complete dentures are recommended to prevent future surgical procedures.

- Orthodontic procedures are not recommended.

- Elective dentoalveolar surgical procedures like asymptomatic teeth extraction, implant placement, tori reduction are not recommended.

- Unrestorable teeth preferably should be treated with root canals and crown amputation; mobile teeth are best splinted, failed root canals should be retreated.

- If tooth extraction is unavoidable, the patient should be educated regarding the risk of developing BRONJ, and informed consent should be signed before the procedure.

- It is necessary to stratify the risk for patients on BP requiring extensive invasive oral surgery and patients with accompanying multiple risk factors like steroid treatment, immunodeficiency, or diabetes mellitus.

- Drug holiday: dental practitioners should not indicate discontinuing bisphosphonate drugs since there is no evidence that the risk of BRONJ reduces when stopping the medication before dental procedures because they stay in the bone for years.