**Ultrasound-Guided Technique**

The femoral artery and vein are medial to the femoral nerve at the level of the inguinal ligament. When using ultrasound, the transducer is placed transversely at the inguinal crease, and the femoral vessels are located. If multiple arteries are present (i.e., superficial and deep femoral arteries), then slide the probe proximally until only the common femoral artery is visualized along with its associated femoral vein. Immediately lateral to the femoral vessels, the femoral nerve classically appears as a hyperechoic wedge or ovoid structure. The femoral nerve is superficial to the iliopsoas muscle group; and it is deep to the fascia lata and fascia iliaca, respectively (refer to Figure).

Once the femoral nerve and relevant neighboring structures have been identified, a lidocaine wheal is administered before the block needle insertion into the tissue, and the needle tip is advanced below the fascia iliaca towards the femoral nerve. Either an in-plane or out-of-plane approach may be used, depending on the proceduralist’s preference. Confirming negative aspiration for heme is recommended before injection to avoid intravascular injection. The ultrasound monitor will show the spreading of local injection around the nerve.

**Landmark and Nerve-Stimulation Technique**

The inguinal ligament is identified between the anterior superior iliac spine and pubic tubercle. The femoral artery can be palpated just below the femoral crease. The needle is inserted approximately 1 cm lateral to the femoral artery pulse in a cephalad direction. The expected depth of the femoral nerve is 2 to 4 cm (though may be variable depending on body habitus), and can be combined with a nerve-stimulation technique for a more precise location.

A nerve stimulator may be connected to a stimulating block needle to help identify the femoral nerve. The stimulator is set to a current density of 0.8 to 1 mA with a frequency of 2 Hz and a pulse duration of 0.1 milliseconds. The needle enters at an angle of 30 to 45 degrees to the skin in a cephalad direction. Once the expected patellar twitch is confirmed, the current is slowly decreased. If the motor response is obliterated between 0.3 to 0.5 mA, then the needle tip is likely sufficiently near the nerve without being intraneural, and the provider may inject local anesthetic after confirming negative aspiration.