Appropriate preparation and positioning of the patient are essential to successful intubation. The operator should confirm that the light source of the laryngoscope is functioning and the blade is locked in place. The laryngoscope is held in the operator’s left hand. Next, the operator slides the laryngoscope into the right side of the patient’s mouth and advances inward while applying upward pressure at a 45-degree angle against the tongue. As the laryngoscope slides towards the back of the oropharynx, the operator can use the blade to push the tongue towards the left side of the mouth to make room for the advancement of the endotracheal tube. While keeping firm upward pressure on the laryngoscope with the left hand and avoiding bending the wrist, all the structures of the oropharynx are visualized until the vocal cords are exposed.

If using a curved laryngoscope, the operator should visualize the epiglottis and place the blade tip in the vallecula. Applying firm, steady upward pressure at a 45-degree angle, the curved laryngoscope is used to lift the epiglottis and expose the vocal cords. Once the glottis is visualized, the operator will ask the respiratory assistant to place the endotracheal tube with the malleable stylet on the operator’s right hand. The operator then inserts the endotracheal tube to the right of the laryngoscope blade and visualizes the passage through the vocal cords. Some brands of endotracheal tubes have a marking proximal to the cuff that indicates the relative level of insertion through the vocal cords.

If lifting of the epiglottis does not reveal the vocal cords, the operator may use her/his right hand to manipulate the airway. This technique often helps bring the glottis into view. Once the trachea’s optimal position is achieved, the operator should request that the respiratory assistant’s hand replace her/his hand to maintain that position while the operator slides the endotracheal tube into place.

If intubating with a straight blade, the operator should insert the blade midline to reach the epiglottis. The straight blade lifts the mandible, tongue, and epiglottis as a unit. The straight blade tip goes underneath the epiglottis and is used to lift the epiglottis to expose the vocal cords. This is different from the curved blade technique in which the blade goes in the vallecula.

In anticipated difficult intubations, operators should consider performing the first attempt with a video laryngoscope. Most video laryngoscopes have a curved blade, and some may require a rigid rather than a malleable stylet. The video laryngoscopy technique is similar to that of direct laryngoscopy with the special consideration that some video laryngoscope blades may obstruct endotracheal tube passage when a Cormack Lehane grade 1 view (full visualization of the glottis) is achieved. In these cases, the Cormack Lehane grade 2 view (partial visualization of the glottis) allows for easier passage of the endotracheal tube.

If the first intubation attempt is unsuccessful, operators must be ready to change their approach and method on subsequent attempts. A tracheal tube introducer, also called bougie, can be used if the initial attempt is unsuccessful. The bougie is a flexible device with an anteriorly angulated tip that is introduced in the airway when vocal cord visualization is poor. The introduction of the bougie allows for indirect identification of the cartilaginous ridges of the anterior airway. The endotracheal tube slides over the bougie and passes the vocal cords. Tracheal tube introducers may be considered for the first attempt in patients with an anticipated difficult airway.

After the endotracheal tube is passed through the vocal cords, the cuff is inflated using a 5 cc or 10 cc syringe filled with air.  The stylet is removed, and the proximal end of the endotracheal tube is connected to the carbon dioxide monitor and the ventilation device. Traditionally, the desired depth from the incisors to the distal tip of the endotracheal tube is 21 and 23 cm in women and men, respectively. Although the preferred distance appears to correlate more with height than gender.

Confirmation of Endotracheal Tube Position

After placing the endotracheal tube, it is essential to confirm its placement in the trachea and position proximal to the carina. End-tidal carbon dioxide monitor is the gold standard to confirm tracheal intubation. To rule out esophageal or hypopharyngeal intubation, an EtCO2 monitor measures the expired carbon dioxide with respiration. Extratracheal carbon dioxide waveform will read 0 mmHg, while endotracheal intubation correlates reliably with the patient’s arterial partial pressure of CO2.