For a patient with suspected P. ovale infection, the diagnostic method of choice is blood smear microscopy. Suspected malaria should be confirmed with a parasitologic diagnosis whenever possible. Microscopy (visualization of parasites in stained blood smears) and rapid diagnostic tests (RDTs), which detect antigen or antibody, are clinical tools for parasite-based diagnosis. Detection of parasites on Giemsa-stained blood smears by light microscopy is the ideal method for laboratory confirmation of malaria.

At least two thick and thin blood smears should be prepared as soon as possible after blood collection. Delay in the preparation of smears can result in changes in parasite morphology and staining characteristics. Giemsa stain reveals Schuffner dots. Microscopy allows identification of the Plasmodium species as well as quantification of parasitemia. P. ovale infects only young erythrocytes, so parasite density for these species is typically lower. A parasitemia of greater than or equal to 5% is very unlikely with P. ovale or any other Plasmodium species except P. falciparum. The sensitivity of microscopy can be excellent, with the detection of malaria parasites at densities as low as 4 to 20 parasites per microliter of blood.

RDTs should be used if microscopy is not available. RDTs for the detection of malaria parasite antigens are used in resource-limited endemic settings due to their accuracy and ease of use. They require no electricity or laboratory infrastructure and yield results within 15 to 20 minutes. RDTs provide a qualitative result but cannot provide quantitative information regarding parasite density. RDTs that detect antibodies produced by an infected host is also available, but these are less useful for diagnosing acute infection. There are no RDTs for definitive diagnosis of P. ovale.

Polymerase chain reaction is primarily a research tool. It typically detects as low as one parasite per microliter. Polymerase chain reaction diagnosis with a negative RDT may be useful where competent malaria microscopy is not available.