**Worldwide**

WHO World Malaria Report 2019 states that an estimated 228 million cases of malaria occurred worldwide in 2018, and reports steadily decreasing the number of cases since 2010. In 2018, nineteen sub-Saharan African countries and India carried approximately 85% of the global malaria burden. The most prevalent and pathogenic malaria parasite, most commonly associated with severe illness and death, especially in the WHO African region, accounting for 99.7% malaria cases, is P. falciparum.P. falciparum is also highly prevalent in South-East Asia, Eastern Mediterranean, and Western Pacific regions. The most vulnerable groups affected by malaria in high-transmission areas are children younger than 5 years old, their deaths accounting for 67% of global malaria deaths, and primigravidae. In low transmission areas, all ages are at risk due to low immunity.

**The United States**

Most malaria cases diagnosed in the United States of America are imported from endemic countries.P. falciparum, accounting for 86.6% cases from Africa, 70.9% from Central America, 20.8% from South America, and 4.8% from Asia.

Based on present predictions for climate change, researchers predict an increase in the geographical distribution of malaria and an increasingly suitable climate for malaria transmission in tropical regions.P. falciparum, particularly prevalent in Greater Mekong Subregion (GMS), causing high failure rates of artemisinin-combination therapies.

**General Epidemiology and Risk Groups**

Severe malaria occurs in patients with no or little effective immunity. In parts of the world with the stable and intense transmission of P. falciparum, severe malaria is mostly a disease of the pediatric population younger than 5 years, as specific acquired immunity develops with age (due to repeated infections), providing increased, although incomplete, protection in older children and adults. Severe malaria can, however, occur at any age in areas with low or/and unstable transmission rates and individuals with no-immunity (e.g., travelers to the endemic areas).