Light from the environment is brought to focus on the retina by the combined optical power of the cornea and the lens.

The mechanism of accommodation reflex involves three responses:

- **The convergence**of both eyes is such that the near object is in focus, whichaids in image projection on the fovea. This action involves contraction of the medial rectus muscles of both eyes, with the relaxation of lateral recti resulting in the adduction of both the eyes.

- **Constriction**of the sphincter pupillae muscles, pupils constrict, whichimproves the depth of focus. The divergent rays from distant objects scatter off the periphery of the cornea, and hence they do not fall on the fovea.

- **Contraction**of bilateral ciliary muscles results in thickening of the lens, whichshortens the focal length, which increases its refractive power (measured in diopters).

The afferent pathway begins with the transmission of the signal from the optic nerve to the primary visual cortex. This path involves phototransduction in the retina, thalamic interneurons in the lateral geniculate nucleus, and finally arrival at the visual cortex using optic radiations. From the visual cortex, the reflex initiates, and impulses get sent to the visual association cortex that in turn has projections to the superior colliculus and pretectal areas. From here, impulses swiftly relay to the oculomotor and Edinger-Westphal nuclei of cranial nerve III. The oculomotor nucleus stimulates contraction of the medial recti bilaterally, which results in convergence. Simultaneously the Edinger-Westphal nucleus coordinates parasympathetic pupillary constriction via the ciliary ganglion. The same general pathway is responsible for lens thickening, except that instead of arriving at the pupillary sphincter muscles, the short ciliary nerves from the ciliary ganglion terminate at the ciliary muscles and are responsible for muscle contraction. As the ciliary muscles contract, the suspensory zonules of the lens relax and release the tension of the lens. Thus, somewhat paradoxically, it is the contraction of the ciliary muscles that allows the lens to form a more spherical shape that facilitates accommodation.

Accommodative convergence is the convergence induced by accommodation as part of the near reflex. For each diopter of accommodation, there is an increase in convergence, the measurement of which is in prism diopters. The normal value is 3 to 5  prism diopters. Abnormalities of this ratio play an essential role in the etiology of strabismus and binocular vision problems.