To obtain ideal images when scanning human tissue, a sonographer must understand how to optimize its resolution. The following section will focus on the properties of ultrasound to achieve such images and the common artifacts produced from imperfections in both the tissue and the ultrasound that may cause major issues in the final images.

A sound wave penetrates deeper into a particular cavity; more interference is met. As such, the reverberant sound waves become weaker as they reflect towards the transducer. To optimize image quality, one must alter the gain. Altering the gain does not affect the sound wave impulse sent from the transducer but amplifies what is echoed back and received by the PZT crystals. If the produced image is still suboptimal despite optimizing the gain, the intensity or power of the sound wave emitting can be changed.

If the image produced is too dim, then the strength of the sound waves may be changed by altering the power. The greater the power of the sound waves, the deeper the waves typically penetrate. Power is measured in decibels (dB). As described above, by increasing the frequency of PZT crystals, a louder sound wave, one with greater power, will penetrate deeper, but at the cost of more artifacts in the resulting image.

Despite proper optimization, several errors or artifacts can occur in the production of images. In a perfect world, there are some assumptions used to make these images. These assumptions are that sound waves travel in a straight line and reflect in that same line, sound travels at 1,540 m/s and that the only source of sound waves production is the transducer; with any deviation from these assumptions, artifacts are produced.

When a sound wave encounters a medium such as air, which sound waves poorly pass through compared to water-based tissue, the artifact is known as a shadow is produced. This appears as a hypoechoic or anechoic area seen distal to the area of gas or air, which obscures any views within the shadow. Besides air, a common cause of shadowing is gallstones, for which the shadow can be diagnostic in identifying gallstones within a gallbladder (Media #1).

Comet tails typically have the appearance opposite of a shadow. A comet tail has a hyperechoic, or white, presentation. Common causes of this type of artifact are two closely approximated objects, like a mechanical heart valve. With two objects close together, there is reverberation, which produces the hyperechoic streak.

The last artifact to be discussed is a mirror image. The artificial mirror image is always produced in parallel with the sound beam emitted from an ultrasound transducer. Gas or air is a common culprit in the production of various artifacts, and when a smooth and flat pocket of gas interacts with sound waves, it reflects in the same manner as a common household mirror. Sonographers can utilize the mirror artifact and reflective surfaces to obtain views to their advantage.