Cephalexin is administered orally as either 250 mg or 500 mg capsules. These capsules can be given 1 to 4 times daily, usually administered for seven days. Patients often report cephalexin capsules to have an unpleasant taste. The capsule is also notably large, which may be difficult to swallow. Cephalexin should be given on an empty stomach, as it is absorbed better in this environment.

- Adults and children 15 years and older—1000 to 4000 daily in divided doses.

- Children 1 year of age and older—Dosing is weight-based. The usual dose is 25 to 100 mg/kg daily in divided doses.

**Specific Patients Population**

- **Patient with Hepatic Impairment:**There is no dose adjustment guidance in the manufacturer label for patients with hepatic impairment.

- **Patient with Renal Impairment:**The manufacturer recommends caution during cephalexin therapy in the presence of renal impairment (creatinine clearance < 30 mL/min, with or without dialysis). A dose reduction may be needed based on clinical observation and renal function monitoring. Manufacturer recommendations are listed below.
- CrCL ≥ 60 mL/min: No need for`` dose adjustment
- CrCL 30-59 mL/min: No dose adjustment; maximum daily dose should not exceed 1 gm
- CrCL 15-29 mL/min:  250 mg every 8 hours or every 12 hours
- CrCL 5-14 mL/min not yet on dialysis*: 250 mg every 24 hours
- CrCL 1-4 mL/min not yet on dialysis*: 250 mg every 48 hours or every 60 h

- **Pregnant women:**It is considered a pregnancy category B medicine. There are no adequate and well-controlled studies performed on pregnant women. Based on animal studies conducted on mice and rats, there had been no observation of fertility impairments or fetus harm.

- **Pediatric Patients:**The safety and efficacy have been established for cephalexin in pediatric patients. Based on this, it is recommended to use a total daily dose of oral cephalexin capsules calculated based on 25 to 50 mg/kg weight for pediatric patients. It should be given for 7 to 14 days in equally divided doses. The maximum dose is 4 gm daily.

- **Breastfeeding Women:**The manufacturer recommends caution during cephalexin therapy in nursing mothers as the drug presents in breast milk.

- **Geriatric Patients:**No dose adjustment is needed based on the safety and efficacy established for geriatric patients. However, this drug is substantially excreted via the kidney, so that adjustment would be recommended for geriatric patients with impaired renal functions.