**Vasovagal syncope:**Patients can experience a hot feeling, the feeling of throwing up during the procedure, which is generally reversible after taking a short break.

**Herniation:**Although it is highly uncommon to occur, post puncture uncal herniation is an essential and dangerous complication. CT or MRI of the head is recommended before lumbar puncture to rule out obstructive hydrocephalus.

**Nerve injury:**LP can cause direct harm to the roots of the cauda equina.

**Spinal cord injury:**LP needles can damage the conus, especially in low-lying conus or achondroplasia. It is best to consult neurology, neurosurgery in these patients.

**Meningitis:**Proper techniques of disinfection avoid infection.

**Headache:**Typically, 20 or 22G needles have a reported incidence of 2.2% for FGLP while varies between 20.5 to 26.4% under blind technique.

Many patients improve without any treatment.

**Vascular injury:**A long needle can injure the posterior wall of the aorta by passing through the intervertebral disc, causing hematoma and pseudo-aneurysm. When the needle penetrates the aortic wall, fresh arterial blood spurts through the needle, the needle also pulsates along with the aortic pulsations. A lateral radiograph can confirm the retroperitoneal extent of the needle. When the arterial injury is suspected, we recommend consulting a vascular surgeon. It is essential to closely monitor the patient for hemodynamic stability. The reduction of the aortic pressure also helps to stabilize the hematoma. CT angiogram can be performed to look for active extravasation and stability of the hematoma. If the hematoma is felt to be stable, consider slowly removing the needle and then placing the patient supine for the tamponade effect on the aorta to stabilize the hematoma.

**Radiation:**The average procedure time for the FGLP ranges between 12 min (range 12-30 min, SD 6) and the average radiation dose area product DAP of 10 Gy×cm(2) (range 0.1-70, SD 11) and average effective dose estimate of 2.9 mSv (range 0.9-9.4, SD 1.9).