Nebivolol should be used cautiously with a history of severe anaphylaxis to various allergens. Repeat challenges among patients taking beta-blockers expose patients to becoming more sensitive to severe anaphylaxis. Treating anaphylaxis in patients on beta-blockers may not be effective and promote undesirable effects.

Beta-blockers are contraindicated in severe bradycardia, cardiogenic shock, decompensated heart failure, second-degree or higher heart block, and sick sinus syndrome. However, it is still useful if there is a functioning pacemaker present.

Other disease-related/age group-related relative contraindications include:

- Bronchospastic disease: Beta-blockers are not recommended in patients with bronchospastic disease.

- Diabetes: Nebivolol may enhance hypoglycemia and mask signs and symptoms (e.g., tachycardia) of hypoglycemia.

- Hepatic impairment: Nebivolol is contraindicated in patients with Child-Pugh class C hepatic impairment.

- Myasthenia gravis: Use nebivolol with caution in patients with myasthenia gravis.

- Peripheral vascular disease (PVD) and Raynaud disease: Nebivolol can precipitate the symptoms of arterial insufficiency.

- Pheochromocytoma (not on treatment): The patient should be on adequate alpha-blockers before using any beta-blockers.

- Psoriasis: Beta-blockers can induce or exacerbate psoriasis, but the cause and effect remain unestablished. The proposed mechanism indicates that beta-blockers cause intracellular changes in calcium, involving both keratinocyte and granulocyte function by reduced cyclic adenosine monophosphate (cAMP) levels

- Renal impairment: Use caution; dose adjustment is necessary with severe renal impairment (CrCl less than 30 mL/minute).

- Thyroid disease: May mask signs and symptoms of hyperthyroidism (e.g., tachycardia). If thyrotoxicosis is suspected, careful management and monitoring are required. Abrupt withdrawal may worsen symptoms of hyperthyroidism or precipitate thyroid storm.

- Pregnancy: Category C medication, unclear if nebivolol gets excreted in breast milk; however, beta-blockers can cause serious adverse reactions in nursing infants, e.g., bradycardia.

- Elderly population: Increased frequency of bradycardia in patients with age 65 or above, used in reduced doses

**Drug-drug Interactions**

The CYP 2D6 system metabolizes nebivolol; therefore, consider reducing the dose when giving nebivolol along with CYP 2D6 inhibitors. Nebivolol's potential drug-drug interactions include medication classes that are either substrate or inhibitors/inducers of CYP2D6.

- Medications that are a substrate of CYP2D6: antiarrhythmics (class 1), 5 HT3 receptor antagonists, antidepressants, analgesics (opioids), protease inhibitors (ritonavir), antipsychotics, cholinesterase inhibitors

- Medications that are inhibitors of CYP2D6: antiarrhythmics (class3), antihistamines, antipsychotics, protease inhibitors (ritonavir, tipranavir), antimalarial, H2 receptor antagonists

- Medications that are inducers of CYP2D6: antiseizure medications

- When beta-blockers are administered with non-dihydropyridine calcium channel blockers (verapamil, diltiazem), they may cause significant negative inotropic and chronotropic effects. Close monitoring of the EKG and blood pressure is recommended when these agents are administered concomitantly.

- Rivastigmine administered with beta-blockers can lead to bradycardia and possible syncope.