Yellow fever is endemic in many parts of the world. The key to this infection is prevention. While the acute infection is managed by an interprofessional group of healthcare professionals, prevention is best done by a coordinated effort of educating patients by the primary care provider, infectious disease nurse, and pharmacist. All travelers to endemic regions should be educated about the vaccine, which confers lifelong immunity. Rarely some individuals may require a booster dose after ten years before traveling to an endemic area. Further, all laboratory workers who regularly handle yellow fever containing blood samples should have their neutralizing antibody titers measured every ten years to determine if they need a booster shot. The pharmacist and nurse should also educate the traveler on wearing long-sleeved garments, sleeping under a net and using DEET containing repellant spray.

Since there is no effective treatment or vaccine, prevention is critical.  This is best accomplished by avoiding mosquito bites entirely. Even very short periods outdoors can lead to exposure to mosquito bites, so people should wear proper protective clothing. This protection includes long sleeves, long pants, socks, and closed-toe shoes. Pant legs can be tucked into socks to prevent bites to exposed ankles. Transmission is common during the warmer months, and mosquitoes may bite through very thin clothing, so treating clothing with repellents containing permethrin, DEET, oil of lemon eucalyptus, or other EPA-registered insect repellants will reduce this risk. Permethrin should not be applied directly to the skin, but when applied to clothing, it provides protection even after the clothing is washed. Transmission is most frequent when mosquitoes feed, between dawn and dusk, so outdoor activities during this period should be avoided. However, one of the mosquitos responsible for transmitting the virus, Aedes Aegypty, feeds during the daytime; so there is no safe time during the day for a traveler without repellent and wearing protective clothing. Travelers should sleep in air-conditioned spaces or use mosquito nets or screens to prevent bites during sleep. Standing water is a breeding ground for mosquitoes, so flower pots, buckets, and other containers should be drained. Children’s wading pools should be emptied and stored on their sides, and tire swings should have holes drilled into the bottom to allow trapped water to drain.

It is very unlikely that yellow fever will be eradicated anytime soon. The mosquitoes also transmit the sylvatic form via nonhuman primates. Additionally, deforestation and urbanization have reintroduced the virus into the cities. Plus, there is a limited amount of resources available.

**Outcomes**

Yellow fever can be self-limited or in some cases be life-threatening. Data indicate that about 10-25% of patients will develop severe symptoms that include jaundice, fever, renal and liver failure. The case fatality rates are slightly lower in West Africa compared to South America. However, the ultimate mortality depends on the virulence of the infecting strain and patient susceptibility. Overall, about 3-70% of patients die after contracting yellow fever; the higher mortality is usually in patients with liver and renal damage. Deaths tend to occur within the first 10 days of the toxic phase. Both infants and the elderly are more likely to die than other individuals. Individuals who are unvaccinated usually develop more severe disease than natives. Finally, there are rare cases of post-vaccination neurological deficits and viscerotropic disease leading to death.