The gold standard for measurement of insulin resistance is the hyperinsulinemic-euglycemic glucose clamp technique. This is a research technique in which a fasted, non-diabetic patient is placed on a high rate constant infusion of insulin to suppress hepatic glucose production; the blood glucose is frequently monitored while a concomitant 20% dextrose solution is given at varying rates to clamp the blood glucose in the euglycemic range. The amount of glucose required to reach a steady state reflects exogenous glucose disposal required to compensate for the hyperinsulinemia. Insulin resistance calculation is based on whole-body glucose disposal and body size.

The complexity of the glucose clamp method limits its clinical usefulness. As a result, multiple surrogate markers for insulin resistance have been developed and tested. HOMA-IR and HOMA2, based on fasting glucose and fasting insulin levels, are widely utilized measures of insulin resistance in clinical research. Other measures based on fasting insulin include the Glucose to Insulin Ratio (GIR) and the Quantitative Insulin Sensitivity Index (QUICKI). The McAuley Index utilizes fasting insulin and triglycerides. Post-glucose challenge tests, done after an overnight fast, measure insulin and glucose response to a 75 g glucose load. Methods include the Matsuda Index and Insulin Sensitivity Index (ISI).

Other surrogate markers involve triglycerides alone or in relation to HDL cholesterol. Patients with prediabetes and triglyceride greater than or equal to 150 g/dL were more likely to have insulin resistance. The triglyceride/HDL ratio is correlated with insulin resistance in Caucasian individuals. In general, a ratio greater than 3.0 is associated with IR. More specifically, a ratio greater than or equal to 3.5 in men and greater than or equal to 2.5 in women indicates insulin resistance. These correlations do not hold up in African American individuals.

Measures of insulin resistance have not been integrated into clinical guidelines. As a result, the presence of insulin resistance is generally inferred from the clinical presentation. The Metabolic Syndrome (MetS) and Insulin Resistance Syndrome (IRS) are considered clinical indicators of insulin resistance.

Multiple criteria for metabolic syndrome exist. In 2009, a joint scientific statement harmonizing criteria for MetS was released. MetS is identified by the presence of 3 or more of the following diagnostic cut points:

- A waist circumference of 32” to 40” based on gender and race

- Elevated triglycerides greater than or equal to 150 mg/dL

- Reduced HDL less than 40 mg/ dL in men, less than 50 mg/ dL in women

- Elevated blood pressure greater than or equal to 130 mmHg systolic and/or greater than or equal to 85 mmHg diastolic

- Elevated fasting glucose greater than or equal to 100 mg/ dL

The American College of Endocrinology identify specific physiologic abnormalities which increase the risk of Insulin Resistance Syndrome as follows:

- Impaired glucose tolerance or impaired fasting glucose

- Abnormal uric acid metabolism

- Dyslipidemia (increased triglycerides, decreased HDL-C, or small, dense LDL)

- Hemodynamic changes such as elevated blood pressure

- Prothrombic factors (PAI-1, fibrinogen)

- Markers of inflammation (CRP, WBC, etc.)

- Endothelial dysfunction

Other factors include the following:

- Body mass index (BMI) greater than or equal to 25 kg/m2

- Diagnosis of CVD, PCOS, NAFLD, or acanthosis nigricans

- A family history of T2DM, hypertension, or CVD

- Sedentary lifestyle

- Non-Caucasian ethnicity

- Age greater than 40 years