The modern anesthesia machine seamlessly incorporates a ventilator to allow for optimal anesthetic delivery.

There are four main functions of the modern anesthesia machine:

- Oxygenation

- The accurate mixture of anesthetic vapors

- Appropriate ventilation

- Reduce exposure of anesthetic vapors to personelle

The anesthesia machine can be divided into three basic areas: (1) a high-pressure system, (2) an intermediate pressure system, and (3) a low-pressure system. The high and intermediate pressure systems have pressure measured in pounds per square inch (psi) or kilopascals (kPa), while the low-pressure system has pressure measured in centimeters of water (cmH20). The high-pressure system receives its supply of oxygen (2200 psi), air, and nitrous oxide (745 psi) from an E-cylinder ('E' refers to the size of the cylinder) which is attached to the back of the anesthesia machine. Subsequently, a pressure regulator sets the pressure to 45 psi. The high-pressure system is primarily utilized when the pipeline supply fails or is not available for connection, such as in a remote anesthesia location. The intermediate pressure system receives its supply of gases from the hospital pipeline supply, which is set to 50 psi. In modern hospitals, anesthesia machines rely on the pipeline supply as the primary source of gas. The intermediate pressure system feeds gas into the flowmeters.  Downstream from the flowmeters, the low-pressure system exists, which provides fresh gas flow (oxygen [14 psi] and/or nitrous oxide [26 psi]) to vaporizers to allow for a source of volatile anesthetics. The patient inspires and expires in the low-pressure system of the anesthesia machine.

**Gas Flow Through the Anesthesia Machine**

The following describes the generalized flow of gas through the modern circle system anesthesia machine:

- Gas (oxygen, air, nitrous oxide) enters the anesthesia machine through a pipeline supply and cylinder gas supply.  The primary source of gas is typically the pipeline supply, which functions at 45 to 60 psi (the intermediate pressure system).  When the pipeline supply fails, the E-cylinder (high-pressure system) takes precedence.  The E-Cylinder has a much higher and variable pressure and thus requires the assistance of a pressure regulator to bring the pressure down to about 45 to 60 psi.

- Once the gas is in the intermediate pressure system, gas travels to the flowmeter, where the anesthesiologist can titrate the flow of fresh gas to the patient.  Downstream from the flowmeters, the gas enters a low-pressure system where pressures are less than 1 psi and measured in cm H20 (1 psi is about 70 cm H2O).

- Gas may subsequently interact with a variable bypass or measured flow vaporizer to attain its volatile anesthetic.

- The gas then passes a unidirectional inspiratory valve and may be inhaled by the patient via the inspiratory limb of the circle system.

- Expired gas from the patient then travels down the expiratory limb of the circuit and passes through the expiratory unidirectional valve.

- Presuming the ventilator is "switched off," or on a manual/spontaneous setting, excess pressure in the system can be released by the adjustable pressure-limiting (APL) valve (this released gas is suctioned by the scavenger system)

- Gas that remains in the circuit then travels through a carbon dioxide (CO2) absorber, where the CO2 is removed from the expired gas.

- Beyond the CO2 absorber, the expired gas is then reunited with fresh gas flow from the pipeline or E-cylinders, where it can be recycled (recycling of gas allows for low flow anesthesia and minimizes the waste of volatile anesthetic).

**Important Components of the Anesthesia Machine**

**Vaporizer**

There are essentially two broad categories of anesthesia machine vaporizers: variable bypass vaporizers and measured flow vaporizers.  Variable bypass vaporizers work by setting a "splitting ratio" on a dial controlling the vaporizer.  The splitting ratio describes the ratio of fresh gas flow that enters the vaporizing chamber compared to the fresh gas flow that bypasses the vapor chamber. The gas that enters the vapor chamber becomes saturated with anesthetic and then reunites with the fresh gas flow to deliver a carefully calculated dose of volatile anesthetic. The variable bypass vaporizer automatically compensates for a wide range of temperatures in the operating room to ensure a steady output of anesthetic at a given atmospheric pressure.  Each vaporizer is specific for a certain volatile anesthetic such as halothane, isoflurane, enflurane, and sevoflurane.

Measured flow vaporizers function differently. The most common example of a measured flow vaporized is the desflurane vaporizer. Due to desflurane's low boiling point and proclivity to volatility, it is heated to a constant temperature of 39 degrees Celsius, and the vaporizer's circuit begins in the vaporizer itself as opposed to fresh gas flowing over the volatile anesthetic. There are two independent circuits (fresh gas flow and inhalational anesthetic flow) which are arranged in parallel and do not mix until they are downstream from the vaporizer, just before entering the inspiratory limb.

**Adjustable Pressure Limiting Valve (APL Valve)**

As expired gases travel back to the anesthesia machine from the patient, the APL Valve, otherwise known as the "pop-off valve," sits between the expiratory unidirectional valve and the carbon dioxide absorber. The APL valve serves as a pressure relief valve to prevent excessive pressures in the breathing circuit when tubing may become obstructed.  Excessive pressures may result in barotrauma to the patient or damage to flowmeters or vaporizers. As the name suggests, the APL valve can be adjusted during different phases of anesthesia to best suit the patient. During spontaneous ventilation, the valve remains open to facilitate easier breathing. After induction, when positive pressure ventilation is required, the valve can be closed partially (typically to less than 20 cm H20) to allow for positive pressure ventilation by squeezing the reservoir bag. Any gas released from the APL valve to limit pressure is routed to the scavenger system to minimize operating room pollution.

**Oxygen Flush Button**

The intermediate pressure system has a button referred to as the "oxygen flush" button, which, when pressed, allows for the opening of a direct connection between the pipeline oxygen and the oxygen pressure regulator to deliver 35 to 70 liters per minute of pure oxygen at a pressure of 45 to 60 psi to the patient. Its most common use is during mask ventilation when an inadequate mask seal cannot be obtained due to various reasons such as a patient's beard, operator error, and patients with difficult airways. The anesthesia provider needs to be cognizant that while pushing the oxygen flush button, only oxygen and not any volatile anesthetic or nitrous oxide is being administered to the patient even if the volatile anesthetic or nitrous oxide is turned on. Use of the oxygen flush can result in periods of awareness during anesthesia and barotrauma to the patient's lungs due to the flow of gas at higher pressures (45 to 60 psi) than the typical low-pressure system of the anesthesia machine.

**Carbon Dioxide Absorbent**

An essential component of the circle system breathing circuit is the carbon dioxide (CO2) absorbent. CO2 absorbent contains various mixtures of calcium hydroxide, sodium hydroxide, potassium hydroxide, and barium hydroxide to prevent the introduction of carbon dioxide into the inspiratory limb of the anesthesia machine.

**Types of Anesthesia Circuits**

Different types of anesthesia circuits exist. The most commonly used system in the modern-day anesthesia machine is the circle system, but other examples of anesthesia circuits include the Mapleson A, B, C, D (and Bain modification), E, and F (Jackson-Rees) systems. There is a T piece close to the patient for Mapleson D, E, and F systems.

- The circle system: depending upon the settings of the fresh gas inflow, circle systems can be used as a closed system (fresh gas flow [FGF] = oxygen and anesthetic update), semi-closed system (high FGF, gas exits through the expiratory valve), or semi-open system. They have the benefit of conserving airway moisture and heat while limiting the leakage of anesthetic gases out of the system and into the environment. Disadvantages are discussed below (see "Issues of Concern").

- The Mapleson D (Bain) system is a modification of the Mapleson D, which has a tube supplying fresh gas to the patient inside of the corrugated expiratory tube (in a "coaxial" formation). This offers the benefit of maintaining moisture and warming the fresh gas as it flows to the patient.

- The Mapleson F (Jackson-Rees) system is a modified version of the Mapleson E. It has a reservoir bag attached to the expiratory limb and may also have an adjustable overflow bag. It has minimal dead space and imposes little resistance to spontaneous ventilation so that it may be used for pediatric patients. However, this is an inefficient system because it requires high FGF to prevent rebreathing.

For the remainder of this article, we will focus on the circle system.