**Total Serum Calcium**

Total serum calcium is the amount of calcium in the blood, including free or ionized calcium, complexed calcium (calcium bound to bicarbonate or citrate) and protein-bound calcium. Normal levels range from 8.5 to 10.2 mg/dL. This value is affected by the amount of protein, usually albumin, available for binding, and must be corrected in hypoalbuminemia. For every 1 gm decrease in serum albumin, we expect the total serum calcium to decrease by approximately 0.8 mg. The official equation is:

Corrected Calcium = [Ca + 0.02 x (40 - Albumin)]

**Ionized Serum Calcium**

Ionized calcium, or free calcium, is the biologically active form of calcium that is necessary for many functions including cell signaling, neurotransmission, and muscle contraction. Normal levels range from 4.64 to 5.28 mg/dL. Blood pH can affect ionized calcium levels, by changing the binding affinity of albumin for positively charged anions. At low pH, an abundance of hydrogen ions effectively competes with free calcium for binding sites on negatively charged albumin, thus increasing free calcium in the serum.

**Parathyroid Hormone**

PTH levels can be measured through immunoassays of blood samples. Normal levels range from 10 to 65 pg/mL.

**Parathyroid-related peptide (PTHrP)**

PTHrP is a peptide produced by nearly all tissues in the body at very low levels. The physiologic function of PTHrP is unknown, but it appears to serve mostly autocrine and paracrine functions, accounting for its low plasma level. Normal levels are expected to be below 2.0 pmol/L. PTHrP is overproduced in a wide variety of carcinomas but is most notably associated with squamous cell lung cancer, squamous cell cancers of the head and neck, and breast cancer. Levels of PTHrP greater than the reference range warrant a thorough search for related cancers.

**Sestamibi Parathyroid Scintigraphy**

A sestamibi parathyroid scan is ordered in patients who are believed to have parathyroid adenomas or hyperplasia. The radioisotope technetium-99m is injected intravenously and taken up by active oxyphil cells in the parathyroid tissue. A gamma camera is used to take images of the neck and will show the locations and sizes of the parathyroid glands. Repeat images are taken after a washout period of 2 to 4 hours, and glands that are still showing activity are considered to be hyperactive. Studies have shown a variable sensitivity of this test ranging from 39% to 90%.

**Vitamin D**

Most assays measuring vitamin D test the biologically inactive form, 25-(OH)-Vitamin D, as it is the major form of vitamin D in circulation. The active metabolite, 1,25-OH-Vitamin D, has a circulating half-life of 4 to 6 hours, making it difficult to accurately interpret. Vitamin D deficiency is defined by a 25-(OH)-Vitamin D level less than 20 ng/mL, and insufficiency as a level between 21 to 29 ng/mL. Normal vitamin D levels range from 30 to 100 ng/mL.