ACO management is mainly divided into two categories: nonpharmacological and pharmacological. Nonpharmacological measures include smoking cessation, which helps reduce the rate of  FEV1 decline.

Regarding pharmacological interventions, inhaled corticosteroids (ICS) and bronchodilators continue to be the mainstay of treatment for most patients with ACO, much like asthma and COPD. Choosing the best bronchodilator medication for these patients is still uncertain, though. In its most recent edition, the Global Initiative for Asthma (GINA) and the Global Initiative for Obstructive lung disease  (GOLD) advise starting asthma therapy after being diagnosed with ACO. This is justified by ICS's crucial role in treating patients with asthma-like symptoms. However, formal data are scarce because ACO patients have always been excluded from clinical studies of asthma and COPD drugs.

For as-needed symptom alleviation, all ACO patients should have prompt access to an inhaled bronchodilator with a quick start of action (such as a short-acting beta agonist, short-acting muscarinic antagonist, or combination). Also, avoiding treatment with Long-Acting Beta-Agonists (LABA) alone (LABA monotherapy) without ICS in patients with asthma symptoms is a crucial component of ACO management.

LABA monotherapy should be avoided in asthma, according to findings from the Salmeterol Multicenter Asthma Research Trial (SMART).

Regarding LABA/ICS, a randomized control trial which was published in 2015 showed that after four weeks of once-daily fluticasone furoate/vilanterol therapy, as opposed to a run-in phase of twice-daily fluticasone propionate-salmeterol therapy, 16 patients with ACO experienced a significant improvement in forced expiratory volume in one second (FEV1).

If the patients continue to have symptoms after starting ICS/LABA or ICS/LAMA (Long-acting muscarinic antagonists) therapy, the next step will be to start triple therapy. Adding umeclidinium (LAMA) to fluticasone furoate/vilanterol (ICS/LABA) led to a more significant improvement in FEV1 after four weeks than continuing fluticasone furoate/vilanterol without umeclidinium, according to a randomized, open-label crossover pilot study in 17 patients with ACO.

Another critical pharmacological intervention for patients with ACO is biological treatment which has been shown to reduce the exacerbations and use of oral steroids among asthma patients. In one study, the response to treatment with omalizumab was evaluated between individuals with asthma-COPD overlap and asthma patients. They discovered that individuals with severe allergic asthma and overlapping COPD experienced improved asthma control and health-related quality of life after receiving omalizumab medication.

Regarding anti-interleukin-5 therapies, phase 2 of a randomized study published recently with benralizumab showed a tendency towards exacerbation reduction in COPD patients with blood eosinophil concentrations of 200 cells per microL or higher. However, the outcomes of two subsequent phase 3 studies in COPD were unfavorable.

Dupilumab, an anti-IL-4Ra antibody that inhibits both the IL-13 and IL-4 pathways improves lung function and lessens severe asthma attacks. Patients with higher blood eosinophil levels benefit more from this treatment.

Macrolides have many applications in chronic obstructive respiratory conditions, especially with COPD patients. They have multifaceted therapeutic benefits, including antibacterial, anti-inflammatory, and immunomodulatory effects. A recent Cochrane review found inadequate evidence to support using macrolides in chronic asthma to reduce exacerbations, oral steroid usage, quality of life, or rescue medication use. However, there is relatively little data regarding their use in asthma.