# Introduction

Nociception provides a means of neural feedback that allows the central nervous system (CNS) to detect and avoid noxious and potentially damaging stimuli in both active and passive settings.

Regarding active settings, stimulated nociceptive neurons convey high-threshold noxious stimuli to the CNS. The nociceptive signal may either get redirected immediately in a spinal reflex loop, producing a rapid and reflexive withdrawal or transported to the areas of the brain responsible for integrating the information with higher-ordered sensations such as pain.

Depending on the specific monomodal sensitivity of a previously inactive nociceptor, specific noxious stimuli are detected by expressed receptors that open their cation channels in response to activation. The open cation channels on the nociceptive neurons depolarize the nociceptor, inducing vesicle fusion and cytokine release. The cytokines are pro-inflammatory, and once released, they elicit and propagate a matched release of pro-inflammatory cytokines from local epithelial, endothelial, and lymphoid cells.

The spread of nociceptor-induced inflammation occurring over an area greater than that of the original nociceptor(s) involved is referred to as neuroinflammation. The propagation from nociceptive neurons to the surrounding cells, which may in-turn sensitize nearby nociceptive neurons, is why neuroinflammation is considered to be a self-reinforcing phenomenon.

Nociceptive signals cease with the termination of the stimulus, dephosphorylation, and suppression of the receptor, or once the influx of calcium through the open membrane proteins induces the nociceptive nerve ending to collapse and become refractory to restimulation in either neuronal or secretory mechanisms.

There is also a mostly unexplored role of passive nociception. Passive nociception refers to the involvement of inactive nociceptors, by their presence and previous activations, in guiding conscious actions so that the individual performs them in a manner least likely to produce pain or injury. Inactive nociceptors may provide less-than conscious "nudges" that strongly encourage the avoidance of potentially injurious and hazardous exposures.

# Issues of Concern

Nociceptive fibers differentiated into four distinct subtypes according to their physical characteristics and potential sensory stimuli transmitted:

Aalpha-fibers: function in proprioception, no thermal sensitivity, myelinated, a diameter of 13 to 20 um, conduction speeds of 80 to 120 m/s, carry information regarding the position of limbs, muscles, and joint capsules.

Abeta-fibers: function in mechanoreception (1 to 1.5 mN force threshold), no thermal sensitivity, myelinated, a diameter of 6 to 12 um, conduction speeds of 35 to 90 m/s, carry touch and pressure information from the skin.

Adelta-fibers: function in nociception (5 mN force threshold), thermally sensitive, myelinated, a diameter of 1 to 5 um, conduction speeds of 5 to 40 m/s, carry heat, cold, and mechanothermal information from the skin, alternatively; subpopulations without thermal sensitivity instead carry information regarding touch from the skin.

C-fibers: function in nociception, thermally sensitive, unmyelinated, a diameter of 0.02 to 1.5 um, conduction speeds of 0.5 to 2 m/s, carry polymodal information regarding mechanical, thermal, and/or chemical nociception; subpopulations include C-mechanonociceptors, C-mechanoheatnociceptors, C-mechanocoldnociceptors, C-heat nociceptors, and silent fibers only become heat-sensitive following sensitization.

In summary, all A-fibers are myelinated, and all C-fibers are unmyelinated; A-fibers have faster conduction speeds and larger diameter axons as compared to C-fibers, but of the A-fibers only A-delta-fibers play a role in nociception.

Calcium ion studies have shown that the severity of the noxious stimulus, whether it is thermal energy or mechanical force, correlates to the intensity of activation of the polymodal C-fibers.

A final note is that while many electrophysiological studies have presented findings suggesting the vast majority of nociceptive fibers act in a polymodal fashion at all times, calcium ion studies have found that in vivo nociceptors often report only a single nociceptive modality, i.e., an Adelta-fiber reporting noxious heat but not noxious force.

# Cellular Level

RT-PCR has provided the means to discover and classify nociceptive neurons based on the specific receptors they possess, which are sensitive to noxious stimuli.

**Polymodal Nociceptors: Thermal, Mechanical, Chemical**

Thermal nociceptive receptors are a subdivision of the transient receptor potential cation channel (TRP) family of receptors. Of the TRP channel family, which is composed of several ligand-specific subfamilies, the vanilloid variant (TRPV) is found in thermal nociceptors and is responsible for the transduction of thermal stimuli. TRPV monomers form tetrameric structures that contain a central pore through the cell membrane, and these tetramers may be homo-tetrameric or hetero-tetrameric regarding their composition of the four TRPV subunits. TRPV1 expresses on heat-sensitive C-fibers and TRPV2 is expressed on heat-sensitive A-delta-fibers; these receptors are the primary noxious thermoreceptors, they are stimulated at 40 to 43 degrees Celsius and 52 degrees Celsius respectively.

When TRPV1 and TRPV2 detect sufficiently high temperatures, they open and allow an influx of calcium, which depolarizes the neuron. Although TRPV1 and TRPV2 channels prefer calcium, by definition, they are non-selective cation channels.

In comparison to the amount of information known about thermal nociceptors, very little is known regarding mechanical nociceptors and the transduction of noxious mechanical force. Provided mechanical nociceptors, also called mechanoreceptors, function similarly to other force-sensitive ion channels, it can be presumed that these channels are present and expressed on the free nerve endings that have penetrated the basement membrane of the epidermis – the unmyelinated nerve endings.

Chemical nociception refers to a nociceptive neuron that expresses receptors capable of detecting noxious, irritating, or harmful chemicals.

# Development

Nociceptive neurons arise from neural crest stem cells that have migrated out of the neural tube before the tube closed. More specifically, nociceptors develop from the dorsal population of neural crest stem cells within the neural crest tissue.

# Organ Systems Involved

Nociceptive neurons are a component of the peripheral nervous system (PNS). In this section, we will evaluate how a noxious stimulus detected at the periphery is transmitted to the central nervous system (CNS). It is important to note that somatic and visceral nociceptive stimuli reach the higher-ordered brain centers via different routes. As will be covered more thoroughly, the skin and organs of locomotion receive their somatic sensory fibers from the spinal and trigeminal nerves alone. In contrast to the singular route of somatic structure innervation, the majority of the viscera connect to the CNS via two distinct avenues. By using different neural pathways, the sympathetic and parasympathetic divisions of the autonomic nervous system create the two routes for a visceral nociceptive signal to reach specific destinations in the brain.

A further distinction comes from the modulation of nociceptive signals as they ascend towards the brain. While local signals may modulate somatic nociception all along the polyneuronal chain, it is the substantia gelatinosa of the spinal cord dorsal horn, the spinal nucleus of the trigeminal nerve, or several descending pathways that primarily act to facilitate or inhibit the somatic nociceptive signals.

This section will conclude with a brief but closer look at the previously mentioned polyneuronal trails that connect peripheral nociceptive nerve endings to the spinal cord, and then onwards to the brain. All primary afferent nociceptive nerve fibers project from their peripheral locations towards the spinal cord. If the primary afferent fiber is large and high-threshold, such as A-delta-fibers, it will project into the superficial dorsal horn of the spinal cord. This area is also referred to as Rexed laminae I and II.

Secondary "nociceptive specific" neurons arise from the nociceptive Adelta-fibers that synapsed in the superficial dorsal horn of the spinal cord, within laminae I and II.

The secondary projection fibers go on to ascend the spinal cord and cross through the ventrolateral tracts before finally reaching their supraspinal targets.

# Mechanism

The general mechanism by which a nociceptive neuron detects and reacts to a noxious stimulus has been a focus throughout this article. However, herein is a closer look at a model nociceptor, in this case, a thermosensitive nociceptor, with the goal being to better explain the cell-specific activities regarding detection, activation, afferent signaling, local signaling, and signal termination.

A noxious heat stimulus (if under physiologic conditions) or a sub-noxious heat stimulus (if sensitized by inflammatory markers such as prostaglandins or bradykinin) gets detected by TRPV1 (40 to 43 degrees Celsius) or TRPV2 (52 degrees Celsius) receptors.

The initial depolarization also mediates the release of many pro-inflammatory cytokines into the extracellular milieu; these cytokines include substance P and neurokinin A, which are neuropeptides, as well as the calcitonin-gene-related-peptide (CGRP).

The activated channels close once they become dephosphorylated, or the noxious stimulus ceases. Alternatively, only the overwhelming influx of calcium and sodium cations may halt the local inflammatory and nociceptive signals.

# Pathophysiology

Nociceptive neurons are dedicated to detecting noxious stimuli and alerting the brain when an injury is likely or imminent. Since pain is such an essential homeostatic mechanism for preserving health and avoiding morbidity, the person cannot easily ignore these sensations initially detected by nociceptive neurons or neural circuits. When nociceptors, or their secondary neural circuitry, are overstimulated, they are capable of producing disabling sensations of pain and damage in otherwise healthy tissues. Often, the increased activity of otherwise-unaffected nociceptors is physiologic; such is the case when an inflammatory state may sensitize thermal nociceptors and allow them to depolarize upon contact with sub-noxious temperatures.

Allodynia refers to a state where nociceptors have become indiscriminately sensitized, such that they depolarize in the presence of sub-noxious stimuli.

# Clinical Significance

Every day, patients seek medical care following injuries involving high heat, extreme cold, sizeable mechanical force, or noxious chemical exposure. Patients are only aware of their injuries because of the functional nociceptors found throughout their bodies. Nociceptors transition acute pain into inflammatory pain when the duration of stimulus persists, and nociceptors release their pro-inflammatory markers, sensitizing local, responsive cells.