Sacubitril/valsartan is available as an oral tablet in three dosage strengths containing: sacubitril (24 mg, 49 mg, or 97 mg) and valsartan (26 mg, 51 mg, or 103 mg). The valsartan component in this combination has a higher bioavailability than regular valsartan tablets; therefore, valsartan 26 mg, 51 mg, and 103 mg in the brand-name combination are equivalent to valsartan 40 mg, 80 mg, and 160 mg in other formulations, respectively.

- When prescribing this drug, the dose of both ingredients should be included, although dosing in clinical trials was based on the total amount of both components (50 mg, 100 mg, and 200 mg).

- Sacubitril/valsartan is to be taken twice a day and maybe administered without regard to meals.

- Allow at least a 36-hour washout period when switching from an ACEI before starting sacubitril/valsartan.

- Patients must be able to tolerate an ACEI or an ARB before being started on sacubitril/valsartan.

- Clinicians can replace sacubitril/valsartan oral suspension at the recommended tablet dosage in patients unable to swallow tablets. The suspension can be stored for up to 15 days. Do not refrigerate or store above 25°C (77°F). Shake the suspension before each use.

**Recommended Dosing**

- Patients on low-dose ACEI or ARB or not previously on ACEI or ARB start with sacubitril 24 mg/valsartan 26 mg twice per day. Double the dose every 2 to 4 weeks as tolerated, up to sacubitril 97 mg/valsartan 103 mg orally twice per day.

- Patients on moderate to a high dose of ACEI or ARB start with sacubitril 49 mg/valsartan 51 mg twice per day. Double the dose every 2 to 4 weeks as tolerated, up to sacubitril 97 mg/valsartan 103 mg orally twice per day.

**Specific Patient Population**

- **Patients with Renal Impairment:**Patients with eGFR less than 30 should be started with sacubitril 24 mg/valsartan 26 mg twice per day.

- **Patients with Hepatic Impairment:**Patients with moderate hepatic impairment (Child-Pugh class B) should be started with sacubitril 24 mg/valsartan 26 mg twice per day. Sacubitril/valsartan is not recommended for patients with severe hepatic impairment (Child-Pugh class C).

- **Pregnancy Considerations:**Refer to the Boxed Warning in the contraindication section.

- **Breastfeeding Considerations:**There is a lack of sufficient data regarding the concentration of sacubitril/valsartan in human milk and its effects on the breastfed infant. However, in preclinical studies, sacubitril/valsartan has been detected in rat milk. Consequently, there is a potential for serious adverse drug reactions in breastfed infants from sacubitril/valsartan. Hence, clinicians should advise nursing women that breastfeeding is not recommended during treatment and suggest alternate therapy.