Dobutamine administration can lead to possible adverse reactions, mainly due to sympathomimetic activity. The majority of patients taking this medication have experienced a rise in the systolic blood pressure of 10 to 20 mmHg and an increase of 5 to 10 beats per minute in their heart rate. There have been reports of further increases in systolic blood pressure and heart rate. In about 10% of the patients, there can be a rise of 30 beats per minute or more in the heart rate, and in about 7.5% of patients, there can be an increase of 50 mmHg or more in the systolic blood pressure. Patients with preexisting hypertension are more susceptible to the adverse effects on systolic blood pressure when using dobutamine.

Dobutamine increases the risk of rapid ventricular response in patients with preexisting atrial fibrillation. The recommendation is that these patients use a regimen of digoxin before starting dobutamine to decrease the risk of developing atrial fibrillation with a rapid ventricular response. There has been an increased risk of developing premature ventricular beats during the administration of dobutamine. About 5% of patients experience premature ventricular beats.

Other adverse effects caused by this medication include hypotension rarely. While increases in systolic blood pressure are common due to dobutamine, hypotension can occur less frequently due to the decreases in systemic vascular resistance. Recommendations include decreasing the dose or stopping the drug to reverse the hypotensive effects.

Phlebitis at the site of the intravenous administration can occur, but it an uncommon reaction. Dobutamine can rarely reduce the potassium concentrations to hypokalemic levels. Other rare adverse effects have occurred in one to three percent of the patients, including nausea, headaches, chest pain, palpitations, and shortness of breath. Dobutamine contains sulfite, which can lead to reactions in rare patients with sulfite hypersensitivity.