Acute symptomatic carotid occlusion should be treated with urgent revascularization in select cases with an immediate presentation. This can be accomplished with carotid endarterectomy (CEA) or interventional techniques, including thrombolysis. In the setting of chronic total internal carotid artery occlusion (ICA) occlusion, medical management is preferred over revascularization. However, several special clinical indications exist for procedural intervention. Ipsilateral hemodynamic symptoms in the setting of ipsilateral ICA occlusion and contralateral ICA stenosis may benefit from contralateral ICA revascularization to ameliorate hemodynamic insufficiency. Ipsilateral embolic symptoms in the setting of ipsilateral ICA occlusion and ipsilateral external carotid occlusion (ECA) stenosis may be treated with ipsilateral ECA revascularization to eliminate the source of embolization, which occurs via enlarged ECA collaterals; ligation of the ipsilateral ICA also eliminates a source for embolization. Finally, ipsilateral hemodynamic symptoms in the setting of a patent contralateral carotid system, ipsilateral ICA occlusion, and ipsilateral ECA stenosis indicate ipsilateral ECA revascularization to improve ipsilateral hemodynamic flow.

For patients with symptomatic carotid occlusion (50-99%), if carotid endarterectomy was done within two weeks of symptoms, the number needed to treat to prevent one stroke is 5. The number needed to treat increases to 125 if it has done more than two weeks of symptoms of stroke onset. CEA is beneficial if the symptoms are non-disabling, with no tandem stenoses or high-grade stenosis. CEA can be deferred if the stroke is too big; contralateral carotid occlusion, hemodynamic instability, and contralateral laryngeal palsy is a relative contraindication. There is more myocardial infarction associated with CEA.

Carotid artery stenting (CAS) is preferred in symptomatic carotid occlusion (50-99%) with multiple comorbidities, tracheostomy, patients with prior neck radiation, or dissection. Usually, there is an increased risk of stroke after the CAS. Due to the advancement of the stents and technique, CAS is comparable to CEA in most instances. Carotid revascularization for primary prevention of stroke (CREST-2) study is ongoing and will shed more light on this important area.