PTT is usually measured as part of a panel of coagulation studies including international normalizing ratio (INR) and prothrombin time (PT). INR and PT both measure the activity of the extrinsic clotting cascade. Different disorders, medications, and physiologic conditions can cause an increase in these results, guiding clinicians in diagnosis or treatment of medical conditions.

**Preoperative Testing 
**

Routinely included in preoperative laboratories, this practice is now being called into question for otherwise healthy patients undergoing low risk or elective surgery. The Choosing Wisely Campaign recommends against routine preoperative laboratories in non-cardiac surgery unless otherwise clinically indicated.

**Unfractionated Heparin Monitoring
**

PTT is a blood test used to measure a patient's response to treatment with unfractionated heparin infusion. While PTT does not measure anticoagulation directly, it measures the effect on blood clotting. Measured in seconds to clot formation, normal PTT can vary based on laboratory or institution; however, normal PTT is between 25 to 35. PTT ranges are used to classify heparin dosing schemes as low or high intensity and to ensure effective dosing. Based on the goal PTT the dose of heparin can be increased or decreased to achieve the desired effect. While protocols vary from institution to institution, the therapeutic PTT range for heparin is 60 to 100 seconds, with lower intensity dosing in the range of 60 to 80 seconds.

**Screening for Bleeding Disorders 
**

Patients with a propensity for bleeding should undergo testing to determine the presence of a clotting disorder. For patients with deficiencies or defects of the intrinsic clotting cascade, the PTT will be elevated. Disorders with an elevated PTT include:

- Hemophilia A (Factor VIII deficiency)

- Hemophilia B (Factor IX deficiency)

- Vitamin K deficiency (both PT and PTT are elevated)

- Von Willebrand's disease (PTT can be normal depending on the severity of disease)

- Disseminated intravascular coagulation (DIC) will demonstrate elevations in PT, PTT and bleeding time (BT) with a decrease in platelet count (PC)

In a patient with elevated PTT and no known reason for it, further evaluation and testing is warranted.