CIDP symptoms are insidious, step-wise, recurrent, and progressive, with a clinical course reflecting a demyelinating process that persists for over eight weeks. The relapsing-remitting course can be seen in up to a third of patients.

Extreme or atypical variants may have additional symptoms. Bulbar and autonomic symptoms may include dysarthria, dysphagia, dyspnea, dysrhythmias, hypotension or hypertension, anhidrosis or hyperhidrosis, urinary retention, impotence, and constipation. Lumbar radiculopathy and cauda equina symptoms may be present in the setting of root nerve hypertrophy. Bilateral phrenic nerve palsy has also been reported but is rare.

A good longitudinal and careful history recorded across time with serial physical examinations before and after immunomodulatory treatment can clinically help confirm the diagnosis of CIDP. A long-standing history of uncontrolled diabetes mellitus should also raise suspicion for CIDP. Ancillary testing, which will be discussed in the following section, is essential to distinguish typical from atypical variants.

**Typical Variants**

- Symmetric Sensorimotor variant (motor 94%> sensory 89% symptoms)

**Atypical Variants (Clinical)**

- Distal acquired demyelinating symmetric neuropathy variant  (DADS)- distal predominant dysesthesias, can overlap with CISP variant with sensory ataxia, motor weakness appears late in advance stages of the disease.

- Multifocal demyelinating sensory and motor neuropathy variant 6% to 15% (MADSAM or Lewis-Sumner syndrome)- Asymmetric, mixed sensorimotor clinical symptoms.

- Proximal radiculopathy variant (brachial or lumbosacral plexopathy)- Bilateral motor-sensory deficits that follow a root/plexus distribution, predominant in upper or lower extremities depending on the plexus affected

- Pure motor variant 7% to 10%- A relapsing-remitting focal or diffuse motor weakness

- Pure sensory variant- 5% to 35%- lower extremity predominant dysesthesias with or without sensory ataxia

- Chronic immune sensory polyradiculopathy (CISP) variant- Clinically similar to the pure variant except that the sensory ataxia is predominant given the disruption of dorsal column nerve conduction