The medial longitudinal arch is formed by specific structures that allow the foot to function effectively. The medial arch is composed of the first three metatarsals, three cuneiforms, navicular, talus, and calcaneus bones of the foot. The calcaneus and talus articulate at the subtalar joint to form the hindfoot. The subtalar joint has three facets on both the calcaneus and the talus. The head of the talus is covered in convex cartilage and articulates with the navicular as the talus inferiorly and medially descends. A ball and socket joint are between the navicular and talus, with the proximal portion of the navicular forming a concave shape.

Alternately, the distal part of the navicular is convex and articulates with the proximal portions of the three cuneiform bones. The cuneiform bones articulate with the first three metatarsals. The dorsal, interosseous, and plantar components of the Lisfranc ligament connect the medial (second) cuneiform to the second metatarsal, forming the Lisfranc joint, which is important for stability.

The medial longitudinal arch is formed by two pillars, the anterior and posterior pillars. The medial three metatarsal heads comprise the anterior pillar, and the posterior pillar is made up of the tuberosity of the calcaneus. The peak of the medial arch is the superior articular surface of the talus.

The medial arch garners support from the plantar calcaneonavicular ligament (spring ligament), deltoid ligament (the tibial-navicular portion, and anterior fibers), medial talocalcaneal ligament, talocalcaneal interosseous ligament, posterior tibial tendon, and plantar aponeurosis. These structures stabilize the arch and midfoot. Specifically, the spring ligament provides support for the head of the talus, and the plantar aponeurosis acts as a significant supporting structure between the two pillars of the medial arch. The spring ligament braces the joint between the talus and navicular, which is considered a weaker portion of the arch due to its exposure to overpressure. The spring ligament provides elasticity and allows the arch to retain its structure after the removal of the pressure.

The medial longitudinal arch plays a critical role in shock absorption and propulsion of the foot while walking. To comprehend the function of the medial arch, the gait cycle must be understood. There are two phases in the gait cycle, the stance phase, and the swing phase. As the heel strikes the ground, the foot is supinated, and then it enters the stance phase. During mid-stance, the medial longitudinal arch is lengthened and flattened due to protonation of the forefoot. Elastic tendons and ligaments that become stretched during this phase store mechanical energy.

Once the medial arch reaches its maximum length, it then begins to shorten until the heel leaves the ground during terminal stance. The medial arch becomes shortened and heightened just before the toes leave the ground due to the supination of the hindfoot and elastic recoil of tissue (arch recoil). During this phase, the mechanical energy that was stored is released back to the body as power for the propulsion of the foot during the gait cycle. The anterior pillar of the medial longitudinal arch (the medial three metatarsal heads) acts as a springboard during the takeoff of the foot. The Lisfrac joint also plays a role in propulsion by allowing minor plantarflexion and dorsiflexion. While the foot is in the air, it is in the swing phase.