Pudendal neuralgia due to pudendal nerve entrapment is a rare neuropathic condition. It causes a significant impairment of quality of life, and the pain can become disabling. It often is not correctly diagnosed initially, so most patients get treated for other conditions, which are usually unsuccessful. The "Nantes" diagnostic criteria were established and validated by an interprofessional team to aid in the early diagnosis and allow earlier treatment of patients with pudendal entrapment syndrome. No further investigation is usually required if the patient fulfills all the "Nantes" criteria. However, the patient should be further evaluated if any of the criteria are not present. An MRI is generally recommended to rule out other treatable causes of chronic pain. Individualized treatment is necessary. It typically requires permanent lifestyle changes and physical therapy. The primary treatment options include conservative measures, physical therapy with or without TENS, pharmacological therapy, ultrasound or CT-guided nerve blocks, nerve decompression surgery, and neuromodulation.

Pudendal nerve entrapment and neuropathy are relatively unknown and unstudied conditions. There are few good prospective studies and virtually none that are large, comparative, include a proper control group, have standardized inclusion criteria, a uniform definition of "success), and long-term follow-up. The information provided in this review is therefore based on the best available data as well as consensus opinions by experienced experts. Better prospective studies are urgently needed to determine better treatment paradigms.

A well-coordinated interprofessional healthcare team comprised of pain management physicians, surgeons, anesthesiologists, nurses, radiologists, psychologists, gynecologists, urologists, and physiotherapists to help in physical rehabilitation is necessary to optimally treat this challenging neuropathic syndrome. These disciplines must collaborate across interprofessional boundaries to optimize care and outcomes. [Level 5]