Rarely, as a postoperative complication after a cesarean section or a vaginal delivery, there might be a trigger of an inflammatory response due to a leak of amniotic fluid into the peritoneal cavity leading to a condition called vernix caseosa peritonitis (VCP). The clinical presentation commonly presents as a history of recent parturition (increased in cesarean sections) with admission as an acute abdomen. The diagnosis is made after a laparotomy showing no uterine scars or rupture, with the cheesy biofilm over the viscera and taking a biopsy to the laboratory. The histopathological study shows acute fibrinous serositis with an increased neutrophilic infiltration and anucleate, fetal squamous cells confirming a diagnosis of VCP. The pathophysiology is multifactorial (e.g., immunological hypersensitivity, the premature rupture of the amniotic sac, etc.). The treatment is mainly by performing a peritoneal lavage and then starting a course of antibiotics until the patient shows no signs or symptoms of acute peritonitis.

Nonetheless, uterine rupture cases, post-cesarean might present with different signs and symptoms (e.g., cessation of labor, fetal distress, vaginal bleeding, abdominal pain, etc.). However, a new sign might present called vernixuria (vernix caseosa in urine), as tears might extend till the bladder setting a pathway for urine and the vernix to mix.

There are cases of neonatal respiratory distress syndrome due to vernix caseosa aspiration which must be transferred to secondary/tertiary healthcare facilities for the administration of inhaled nitric oxide and extracorporeal membrane oxygenation, as it could be fatal moreover, it could be complicated with persistent hypertension of the newborn (PPHN) which increases the mortality rate, exponentially.

The research on producing a vernix caseosa biomimetic is still primitive but promising for barrier-deficient fetal skin. Although the biomimetic has a decreased viscosity and elasticity, it has demonstrated comparable benefits similar to the natural biofilm.