The atrioventricular node (AV) measures approximately 1 by 3 by 5  millimeters and sits within an anatomic region bordered anteriorly by septal tricuspid valve annulus, superiorly by the tendon of Todaro and posteriorly by the coronary sinus ostium. This anatomic region is also commonly referred to as the triangle of Koch. The AV node is a subendocardial structure located in the inferior-posterior right atrium. The blood supply to the AV node is from the AV nodal branch of the right coronary artery  (90%) or the left circumflex artery (10%) depending on right or left dominant blood supply to the heart. The first septal perforator of the left anterior descending artery also supplies blood to the AV node.

Paroxysmal supraventricular tachycardia (PSVT) accounts for intermittent episodes of supraventricular tachycardia with sudden onset and termination. PSVT is part of the narrow QRS complex tachycardias with a regular ventricular response in contrast to multifocal atrial tachycardia, atrial fibrillation, and atrial flutter. SVTs are classified based on the origin of the rhythm and whether the rhythm is regular or irregular.

**Atrial in Origin and Regular Rhythm**

- Sinus tachycardia

- Inappropriate sinus tachycardia

- Sinoatrial nodal reentrant tachycardia

- Atrial flutter

- Atrial fibrillation

**Atrial in Origin and Irregular Rhythm**

- Multifocal atrial tachycardia

- Atrial flutter with variable block

- Atrial fibrillation

**AV Node in Origin and Regular Rhythm**

- Junctional tachycardia

- Atrioventricular nodal reentrant tachycardia

- Atrioventricular reentrant tachycardia

**AV Node in Origin and Irregular Rhythm**

- None

SVT is known to occur in individuals of all ages, but treatment is often difficult. The clinical presentation of SVT is variable- ranging from asymptomatic to severe palpitation. Electrophysiologic studies are usually necessary to determine the pathophysiology of impulse formation and pathways of conduction.