Interaction with the patient and healthcare personnel involved in clinical care is essential for a correct diagnosis and follow-up. Clinicians should inform patients about the diagnosis and expectations of treatment success. Depending on the final diagnosis, the treatment may require time and can be frustrating if it requires multiple months and repetitive follow-up reviews in the clinic. The clinician is encouraged to use a stepwise approach to hyperkeratosis.

The initial evaluation must be very accurate, and a skin biopsy should be performed in the correct setting, and treatment can be started as soon as the diagnosis is clear to avoid mistreatment and disease exacerbation. Initial treatment usually consists of emollients, topical keratolytics, and re-evaluation. If there is no response to a topical trial, the clinical setting should be re-evaluated, and the patient must always be informed about other treatment options. Depending on the diagnosis, therapy can include corticosteroids, retinoids, topical anti-inflammatories, vitamin-D derivatives, phototherapy, and laser treatment. It is important to always consider the possibility of a dermatology referral for those that do not respond to treatment.

The nursing personnel has a significant role in counseling and monitoring patient progression. Pharmacists are frequently involved in patient care being sometimes the first to evaluate the lesion before medical referral. During follow-up, the pharmacist can be a helpful reference for the patient and may be asked for counseling or for administration instructions. An interprofessional team approach is encouraged for optimal patient results.