The DSCT transmits proprioception information from Golgi tendon organs and muscle spindles of the trunk and lower limb. Information is relayed from the ipsilateral lower limb and trunk. Each muscle spindle consists of a primary ending and a secondary ending in the middle of the spindle. While the primary endings respond to both velocity and muscle length, the secondary endings can only respond to muscle length. All of the sensory information from the periphery is transmitted to the pseudounipolar neurons in the dorsal root ganglion. The first-order neuron for the dorsal spinocerebellar tract transmits impulses to a specific location in the posterior gray horn known as Clarke’s nucleus. This set of nuclei range from the C8-L3 portions of the spinal cord, collectively referred to as Clarke’s column. The DSCT ascends on the ipsilateral side, enters the cerebellum via the inferior peduncle, and terminates as mossy fibers in the cerebellar cortex. Specifically, the information transmits to the vermis and paravermis in the anterior lobe of the cerebellum. The cerebellum then uses the proprioceptive information to construct and coordinate voluntary movement by knowing the position sense of the lower limbs and the trunk.

The DSCT has a tract that runs parallel with it: the ventral spinocerebellar tract (VSCT). Instead of relaying proprioceptive information, the VSCT relays motor information. Even though both VSCT and DSCT relay information ipsilaterally, the DSCT stays ipsilateral throughout the entire tract, while the VSCT decussates twice. The VSCT decussates first at the level of Clarke’s nucleus and rises contralaterally from the input to the brain. The tract enters through the contralateral superior cerebellar peduncle, where it will decussate back to the ipsilateral side of the input within the cerebellum.