Conditions to consider in the differential diagnosis of essential tremor include the following:

- Physiologic tremor: Predominantly bilateral, symmetrical action tremor. High frequency (10 to 12 Hz), the presence of known cause (e.g., medications, hyperthyroidism, hypoglycemia)

- Parkinson Disease Tremor: Predominantly at rest, asymmetrical.  Usually does not produce head tremor. Frequency 4 to 6 Hz.

- Orthostatic tremor: Postural tremor in the torso and lower limbs while standing; may also occur in the upper limbs. Suppressed by walking. Tremor is high frequency (14 to 20 Hz) and synchronous among ipsilateral and contralateral muscles.

- Cerebellar tremor: Postural, intention, or action tremor. Relatively low frequency (3 to 4 Hz). Associated with ataxia and dysmetria.

- Writing tremor (task-specific): Not evident in other tasks requiring coordination, only during writing. It is considered a variant of focal hand dystonia (writer’s cramp).

- Psychogenic tremor: It is not an exclusion diagnosis. Symptoms vary in severity, depending on the subject’s emotional state associated with stressful life events. Several clues are helpful to differentiate the psychogenic nature and include sudden onset and spontaneous remission, larger variations of amplitude and frequency, and less severity. The tremors disappear with distractions such as alternate finger tapping, mental concentration on serial 7s, or the healthcare professional applying a vibrating tuning fork to a patient’s forehead and informing the patient (wrongly) that this can stop the tremor and entrainment. Entrainment is a change in frequency of the tremor in adaptation to voluntary movements, such as a regular movement in the contralateral limb.