Digoxin immune fab comes as a lyophilized powder for solution. Each vial is for single use only and contains 40 mg of digoxin immune Fab protein. It must be mixed with 4mL of sterile water (reconstitution/dilution) to produce a solution containing 10 mg/mL of DIF protein. If the solution is not used immediately, it can be refrigerated (2 to 8 degrees Celcius) for no more than 4 hours after its dilution. The diluted digoxin immune fab is added to 0.9% NaCl for use as an intravenous injection. The administration of the infusion should be for at least over thirty minutes. If infusion rate-related reactions occur, then infusion should be stopped and readministered at a slower rate. Bolus injections should be a consideration for patients with imminent cardiac arrest. Patients with chronic toxicity, with no immediate life-threatening presentations, initially receive an infusion of half the original dose, which prevents the unmasking of underlying comorbidities requiring digoxin administration.

**Pharmacokinetics of Digoxin Immune Fab**

Multiple types of formulations are readily available for therapy. Using randomized control studies, researchers compared the pharmacokinetic properties of various anti-digoxin antibodies. Consistent across all, an equal decrease in serum-free digoxin levels was noted.

**Dosage Considerations**

As a rule of thumb, each vial is known to bind 0.5 mg of digoxin. The dose of digoxin immune fab needs to be adjusted depending on the amount of digoxin that requires neutralization. It is important to note that there is not much of a correlation between digoxin concentration and symptoms.

- If the patient does not respond to treatment, the diagnosis of digoxin toxicity may be inaccurate and may indicate other clinical problems.

- The volume of distribution (Vd) varies in a given population. The dosage calculation takes into account the volume of distribution for digoxin (5 L/Kg).

- Digoxin assay kits only measure concentrations <5 ng/mL. This can lead to an inaccurate estimation of the amount of digitalis ingested.

- More accurate assessments of digoxin (>5 ng/mL) are achievable via sample dilution.

- Re-administration due to retoxification requires measurement of unbound serum digoxin concentration.

- If the administered dose does not reverse toxicity, additional dose administration should be guided by clinical judgment.

**Dosage Calculation Formulas**

- Formula 1: Dose (no. of vials)= total digoxin body load(mg) / 0.5 mg of digoxin bound per vial.

- Formula 2: Dose= (serum digoxin concentration in ng/mL) x (weight in Kg)/100.

- Formula 3: Dose (in mg)= (40 mg/vial) x ( (serum digoxin concentration in ng/mL) x (weight in Kg)/100).

- Formula 4: Dose (no. of vials)= (serum digitoxin concentration in ng/mL) x (weight in kg)/1000.

**The number of vials required must be rounded off to the nearest whole number.**

**Dosage and Treatment Based On Clinical Scenarios**

- **For ingestion of known amount of digoxin:**Following an acute overdose, if the amount of ingested digoxin is known and not the concentration, the number of vials needed can be calculated based on total body digoxin load (TBL). First, calculate the total body load by multiplying the dose of digoxin ingested (in mg) by 0.8 (bioavailability of digoxin). Next, using formula 1, calculate the number of vials required by dividing the total body load of digoxin by the amount of digoxin neutralized or bound per vial (0.5 mg per vial).

- **Known steady-state digoxin concentration:**In such scenarios, the calculation is based on formula 2. The product of the patients' drug concentration and weight in kilograms is divided by 100. This formula is known to provide a quick estimate for the amount of antidote needed for treatment.

- **Serum digoxin level and ingested amount, both unknown:**This situation should have treatment empirically with ten vials of fab fragments. The ten vials can be repeated in the event of an inadequate clinical response being achieved. Small children can be treated empirically with five vials of fab fragments; the clinician can further add depending on the type of clinical response obtained. When treating small children (<20 Kg), volume overload should also merit consideration.

- **Cardiac glycoside poisoning other than digoxin/digitoxin:**In other cardiac glycoside poisonings, it is crucial to understand that the quantitative serum levels can not be correlated and, therefore, used to calculate the dosage. Such cases need to be treated empirically with ten vials initially and added further depending on the clinical response achieved in 30 minutes.

- **Cardiac arrest:**Via rapid intravenous injections, first administer ten vials. Monitor and repeat in 15 minutes PRN.

- **Chronic intoxication due to therapy in adults (weight>20kg):**Adults in acute distress or with unknown serum digoxin levels, 240 mg (6 vials) should correct toxicity. The dose can also be calculated using formula 2 (see above).

- **Chronic intoxication in children (weight<20kg):**For small children weighing less than 20 kilograms, administration of a single vial (40mg IV) should suffice. The dosage in such cases can be calculated using formula 3. For infants or children, who require lower dosing, reconstitute the vial similarly and administer an undiluted solution. Very small doses can be achieved by further diluting the reconstituted vial with 36 mL of isotonic saline.