If an individual presents with urinary tract symptoms consistent with a UTI or if a patient presents with severe sepsis of unknown origin, then a UTI must be considered as part of the differential diagnosis. The urinalysis (UA) and urine culture are the most important laboratory findings used to determine if an individual has a UTI or not.  First, a UA must be evaluated to determine if the urinary white blood cells (WBC) and leukocyte esterase (LE) values are abnormally high, indicating pyuria and possible infection. Other abnormalities may be observed from a UA of an individual with a UTI, including a positive nitrite value.

If the UA is considered significant for a UTI in a symptomatic patient without other reasons for the abnormal findings (e.g., the asymptomatic individual with chronic urinary catheter placement), then empiric antibiotic treatment should be started. Empirically treating a negative UA can be appropriate if the patient is neutropenic and determined to have a UTI based on other factors, including a significant number of organisms in the urine culture with signs and symptoms of an infection. When a UA is collected via a voided specimen, it is considered to be contaminated if there are more than 20 squamous cells under a microscopic high-power field, and the sample should be recollected before antibiotic initiation to determine if empiric therapy is truly indicated. If the UA finds elevated WBCs (more than 10) and LE (positive value), but the individual has a chronic indwelling catheter, additional consideration should be placed on ensuring the patient has clinical symptoms of a UTI before starting treatment. A chronic indwelling urinary catheter with bacteriuria may irritate the bladder wall resulting in pyuria without an actual infection.

Once the urine culture results are available, it should be determined if the colony-forming unit (CFU) per milliliter (mL) is considered significant for UTI versus possible contamination. In specimens collected from a voided specimen, greater than or equal to 100,000 CFU/mL is considered diagnostic for an individual who has a positive UA. There is more controversy with the CFU/mL cut-off in specimens collected from a urinary catheter, so signs and symptoms should be an even more important factor in the diagnostic evaluation. Technically, individuals with greater than or equal to 1000 CFU/mL from a catheter specimen can have a UTI. Since urine collected correctly from a catheter should contain fresh, uncontaminated urine, a lower threshold for CFU/mL is justified compared with voided specimens. If 3 or more organisms are identified in the cultured urine, this suggests that the specimen is contaminated.

Imaging studies are not routinely indicated in cystitis or acute uncomplicated pyelonephritis but can be helpful in certain scenarios. Individuals with persistent symptoms after 48 to 72 hours of appropriate antibiotic therapy should undergo evaluation of the upper urinary tract, as well as those pyelonephritis patients who appear severely ill. Computed tomography (CT) scanning without contrast is usually the imaging study of choice, but contrast is needed when renal perfusion studies are required. Since there are no clinical signs that can reliably differentiate simple acute pyelonephritis from a dangerous, obstructed pyonephrosis that requires urgent surgery, consider an imaging study if there is a history of kidney stones or clinical suspicion of a stone.