Heme synthesis is a biochemical pathway which requires a number of steps, substrates, and enzymes. A deficiency in an enzyme or substrate leads to accumulation of intermediates of heme synthesis in blood, tissues, and urine leading to a clinically significant outcome of a group of disorders called porphyrias. Porphyrias are hepatic or erythropoietic. They can be acute or chronic, lead to neurologic dysfunction, mental disturbance or photosensitivity. Defects of heme synthesis after formation of hydroxymethylbilane leads to photosensitivity of patients. Other symptoms include a change in urine color, abdominal pain, abdominal colic, highly agitated state, tachycardia, respiratory problems, nausea, confusion, weakness of lower extremities.

Porphyrias are acute intermittent, congenital erythropoietic porphyria, porphyria cutanea tarda, hereditary coproporphyria.

**Acute intermittent porphyria:**This occurs due to a mutation in hydroxymethylbilane synthase, which leads to an accumulation of ALA and porphobilinogen.  It does not affect erythroblasts. The disease presents as severe abdominal pain, vomiting, constipation, abdominal distention, and behavioral changes (irritability, insomnia, emotional lability),**not**photosensitive.

**Porphyria cutanea tarda:**This variant is the most common type of porphyria. It is due to a deficiency or decreased activity in uroporphyrinogen decarboxylase (UROD). It can be acquired or hereditary (autosomal dominant). Uroporphyrin accumulates in the urine. Symptoms include photosensitivity leading to blisters developing in sun-exposed areas and hyperpigmentation, and hepatic injury. Treatment includes avoidance of sunlight, hydroxychloroquine, and phlebotomy.

**Erythropoietic porphyria:**This occurs due to a deficiency in ferrochelatase, the enzyme responsible for the final formation of heme in the biosynthesis pathway by combining protoporphyrin IX and ferrous iron. Deficiency leads to an accumulation of protoporphyrin IX in erythrocytes. Symptoms include painful photosensitivity- swelling burning and itching in sun-exposed areas; sometimes hepatic dysfunction.

**Lead Poisoning**: Lead interacts with zinc cofactors for ALA dehydratase and ferrochelatase leading to inhibition of these two enzymes in the biochemical biosynthetic pathway of heme. This inhibition leads to mostly ALA and some protoporphyrin IX accumulating in urine. Symptoms include abdominal pain, vomiting, fatigue irritability and developmental disability in children.