There are a number of challenges that patients, families, and operating room staff have to deal with every day. The preoperative experience can be stressful, and children can be disproportionately vulnerable to it. A basic recognition and understanding of this fact to help clinicians develop mitigating strategies. Managing children in the preoperative area requires patience, empathy, knowledge, skill, and common sense. Patients and their families require personalized attention, a comprehensive care plan provided by the medical care team, as well as judicious use of pharmacologic agents. Poor anesthetic management of even common indications for pediatric surgery, including inguinal hernia, can place both patients and their parents at risk for significant post-traumatic stress. The degree of preoperative distress can place some patients at risk for emergence delirium (ED), a complex neuropsychiatric phenomenon characterized by psychomotor agitation, disturbance of awareness to the child's environment, disorientation, and hyperactive behavior with a risk of self-harm. ED occurs in up to 50% of preschool-aged children in the early postanesthetic period and can delay hospital discharge. Of note, this complication also places patients at risk for the subsequent development of postoperative maladaptive behaviors.

A number of non-pharmacologic interventions have proven useful, and this includes the use of an induction room where young patients retain their own clothing, the availability of parents and clinical staff to provide emotional support, and enhanced communication between parents and anesthesia and surgical staff.

Nonetheless, existing data demonstrate that the application of existing supportive interventions is not uniformly effective in reducing anxiety, distress, and the subsequent development of ED.