There is no doubt that the complexity of heart disease is on the rise. An aging population means an increased chance of second intervention with the increased use of percutaneous approaches. This is associated with a higher rate of comorbidities at the time of presentation. The introduction of heart teams is a recent approach in cardiac surgery; however, it has proven crucial in patients' outcomes, especially in complex cases.

Although not extensively studied, the utilization of heart teams for patient selection for randomization in some RCTs showed the benefit of this approach.

The level of evidence when it comes to heart team involvement remains expert opinion (Level 5) due to the lack of large RCTs to compare results with and without the involvement of heart teams; however, the recommendation is Class 1 in consecutive guidelines since 2010.

The benefit of a heart team is more pronounced in redo CABG, which is a major encounter for both the patient and the team involved. Decisions about the best timing and method of intervention are usually discussed in an MDT meeting to involve cardiologists, cardiac surgeons, anesthetists, perfusionists as well as nursing staff. The presence of a cardiothoracic radiologist is very important due to the complexity of the anatomical relationships in redo cases.

Preoperative assessment is crucial, which is usually done either in outpatient or inpatient settings by dedicated staff. This extends beyond the medical review to the patient's social circumstances and needs. Early involvement of physiotherapy and family liaison services ensure a plan is in place for when patients are out of the hospital. The decision of surgery is usually communicated to the patient by the surgical team after the MDT results. The consenting process requires great interpersonal skills, and the involvement of the patient's family is of great help.

Discussion between the surgeon, anesthesiologist, and perfusionist usually takes place prior to the procedure to determine the best cardiac protective strategies for the patient and bail out options in case of complications.

Postoperative care requires plans to be put in anticipation by the treating team, which involves surgeons, anesthesiologists, pharmacists, physiotherapists, and microbiologists.

Involving other specialties is needed in some cases, such as nephrology, neurology, and hematology, with various complications arising postoperatively.

Teamwork in cardiac surgery is fundamental to achieve the desired outcome for each surgical procedure.