cAMP is generated by a complex, second messenger signal transduction system. An extracellular chemical signal such as a hormone or neurotransmitter binds to their receptors known as the G protein-coupled receptors (GPCR). ****

GPCRs are unique seven transmembrane receptors characterized by an extracellular ligand-binding domain, seven transmembrane alpha helices, and an intracellular domain. The intracellular domain interacts with specialized trimeric proteins, that contain α, β, γ subunits attached to the cell membrane. The of the G-proteins bind to guanine triphosphate (GTP) in the active state and to guanosine diphosphate (GDP) in an inactive state. Activation by a ligand such as a hormone or a neurotransmitter causes a change in the conformation of GPCR and causes the GDP to be switched with GTP. The GTP-bound α-subunit then dissociates leaving behind a βγ dimer, activating the neighboring membrane-bound adenylyl cyclase. Adenylyl cyclase then generated the second messenger, 3’, 5’-Adenosine monophosphate (cyclic AMP or cAMP), by ATP cyclization. Once cAMP is generated, it then signals activation of PKA, EPAC, or other cAMP-activated proteins to stimulate physiological responses. The α-subunit has GTPase activity that and hydrolyzes GTP to GDP, that results in inactivation and dissociation of α-subunit from the adenylyl cyclase and reassociating with the βγ dimer. Certain bacteria such as Vibrio cholerae (Cholera) and Bordetella pertussis (whooping cough or pertussis) produce toxins that cause continual activation of adenylyl cyclase in the intestinal cells and tracheal epithelial cells, thereby resulting in diarrhea and whooping cough.****