Fluid overload states and alternative treatments of hypertension can be treated effectively with loop diuretic use. However, healthcare workers should be wary of their intended uses, side effect profiles, and contraindications. Caution is necessary when regulating which loop diuretic and the dosage chosen for the desired diuresis effect. Aggressive over diuresis can lead to dehydration, electrolyte imbalances, hypotension, and sudden cardiac arrhythmias in more severe cases. Clinicians should include periodic monitoring of blood pressures, fluid status (including weight), serum electrolytes, and renal function in continued diuretic treatments. Goals for diuresis should consist of dosage adjustments as patients progress with their response to the diuretics.

Pharmacists should always verify the dosing of these and all drugs and perform medication reconciliation for drug-drug interactions. Healthcare workers are responsible for keeping up with current loop diuretic recommendations and providing safe practice to their patients. Nursing can monitor treatment compliance and verify therapy effectiveness as well as monitor for adverse drug reactions. Nursing and pharmacy will report all concerns to the physician and the rest of the interprofessional team, operating collaboratively to achieve optimal therapeutic results. Clinicians, pharmacists, and nurses all need to function as a cohesive interprofessional team when patients receive loop diuretics so therapeutic outcomes can be maximized while limiting or eliminating interactions and adverse effects. [Level 5]