The technique for UAE is described in brief below:

- Access the common femoral artery and insert a 5 or 6 French sheath.

- Obtain an arteriogram to demonstrate the arterial anatomy and find the UA origins.

- Place a catheter with a selective tip shape into the IIA anterior division.

- Advance a smaller catheter (a microcatheter) coaxially through the selective tip catheter and then into the UA horizontal segment beyond any cervicovaginal branch(es).

- Obtain another arteriogram through the microcatheter to identify any collateral branch(es) to the ovaries/bladder/vagina that might affect specific choices made in particle delivery.

- Perform embolization.

- Obtain final images showing the state of intra-arterial contrast flow to the uterus.

- Repeat the procedure on the contralateral side.

- Obtain hemostasis at the site(s) of the arterial puncture(s).

Variables are many and include:

- Bilateral femoral artery punctures (to decrease procedure time) vs. single femoral artery puncture (to decrease the likelihood of artery access site complication)

- Initial or final overview arteriogram from the aorta (to identify an OA contribution/variant anatomy) versus only selective common iliac arteriograms (to reduce contrast load)

- Delivery of medications during the procedure (such as nitroglycerin to prevent/treat arterial spasm, lidocaine intra-arterially or ketorolac intravenously to reduce post-procedure pain)

- Embolization endpoint (contrast stasis in the UA for 5 to 10 heartbeats, versus visualization of contrast reflux toward the UA origin, versus subjectively achieving a UA "pruned" appearance)