**CT Guided Percutaneous Lung Biopsy**: Preferably, under moderate sedation, images via CT or CT fluoroscopy are taken, and the route of access is planned. At times a coaxial technique may be used to minimize the number of pleural punctures. After confirmation of position with CT images, either FNA or core biopsy is taken, and the sample is immediately handed over to either a cytopathologist or cytotechnician.

**Transbronchial Biopsy:**Bronchoscopy remains pivotal for the diagnosis of central airway lesions. The sequence of events for carrying out a transbronchial biopsy are as follows:

- After local anesthesia, a flexible bronchoscope is navigated via the transoral or transnasal route.

- A thorough inspection of all segments of the lungs bilaterally is carried out.

- The area to be biopsied is identified, and the flexible bronchoscope is wedged in the segmental bronchus.

- A biopsy forceps is passed through the working channel of the flexible bronchoscope towards the periphery of the lesion until resistance is encountered, following which the forceps is slightly withdrawn and the jaws are opened. The jaws are advanced to the earlier area of resistance and closed.

- The biopsy forceps are firmly retracted with or without twisting movements, and the sample obtained is placed in formalin for histopathologic examination.

- Typically, four to six TBLB samples are obtained from areas of the lung that appear to be involved in imaging. If the lungs are uniformly affected, both upper and lower lobes are biopsied. One of the limitations of TBLB is that the small size of tissue samples that are prone to crush artifact.

**Cryo-TBB:**Transbronchial cryobiopsy (cryo-TBB) is performed under moderate sedation using a specialized, flexible probe that uses nitrous oxide to cool the tip -89 degrees C rapidly, thus freezing adjacent tissue that is then removed attached to the tip of the probe.

**VATS:**Anesthesia is administered to the patient in a supine position before the procedure, and a double-lumen tube (DLT) is inserted, which is usually the airway of choice. Three incisions are made in the anterior approach, and classically three ports are created, including the camera and operating ports, which are checked with the video thoracoscope. Further steps are guided depending on the specific procedure to be performed. Appropriate pain control, respiratory and chest tube care must be provided post-operatively.

**Open Lung Biopsy:**Under general anesthesia with the patient in the supine position, an incision is made 2-3cm lateral to the nipple line. The pleura is entered between the fifth and sixth rib, and blunt dissection is carried out to bring the lung tissue in the operating field. Diagnostic wedge resection is done using a line stapler. Biopsy samples are sent to the histopathologist for processing in formalin.