For tactile receptors used for touch, there is precise coding of mechanical information. Mechanoreceptors will respond to vibrations, indentations of the skin, or movement of hair follicles.

When tactical mechanoreceptors activate, there is an elevated frequency of action potential propagation, but after repeated stimulation, the cell will adapt to baseline electrical propagation. A-beta mechanoreceptors subclassify into two groups based on this phenomenon: rapidly adapting (RA) or slowly adapting (SA). Meissner's corpuscles and Pacinian corpuscles are rapidly adapting mechanoreceptors, while Merkel cells and Ruffini corpuscles are the SA mechanoreceptors. We can further divide RA and SA into subgroups. RA type 1 (RA 1) has smaller, more defined receptive fields and responds to the lower frequencies of vibration. RA 2 is the opposite, with larger receptive fields and responds to higher frequencies. SA 1 demonstrates a continual response to static stimulation along with small receptive fields. While SA 2 also produces consistent responses to the static stimulation and has larger receptive fields. SA 1 receptors are Merkel disks, SA 2 receptors are Ruffini corpuscles, RA 1 involves multiple Meissner corpuscles, and RA 2 receptors are Pacinian corpuscles.

Baroreceptors are known as stretch mechanoreceptors. When pressure is low, baroreceptors are inactive, but when blood pressure increases, the aortic and carotid sinuses stretch further, leading to the activation of baroreceptors. More significant stretches lead to rapidly fired action potentials in baroreceptors. Baroreceptor action potentials travel to the solitary nucleus (SN), embedded within the medulla oblongata. The frequency of action potentials serves as a measure of blood pressure. Increased activation of the SN causes inhibition of the vasomotor center and stimulates vagal nuclei, which ultimately results in the inhibition of the sympathetic nervous system and the activation of the parasympathetic system.