Given the non-invasive or minimally invasive intragastric balloon procedure, it has gained popularity as a weight-loss procedure. However, adverse events do occur. Patients were analyzed for adverse events in a retrospective analysis that included over 1000 procedures between 2016 and 2017. Approximately 7.2% of these patients had required treatment for dehydration, 2% required readmission, 1.1% needed re-operation, and 6.2% necessitated intervention within the first 30 days. A study of over 145,000 patients found that intragastric balloon therapy had a higher adverse event rate than laparoscopic bariatric surgery. Specifically, this was due to a significantly higher non-operative re-intervention rate in the intragastric balloon group versus the laparoscopic bariatric surgery group.

Gastrointestinal symptoms including nausea, abdominal pain, vomiting, dyspepsia, constipation, acid reflux, and burping are typical symptoms from intragastric balloon therapy. Gastric accommodation to the intragastric balloon is why gastrointestinal symptoms occur. Up to approximately 91% of patients will have some form of the symptoms.

Patients have prescribed medications to aid in controlling these symptoms. A proton pump inhibitor is started before balloon insertion. An anti-emetic medication like ondansetron or aprepitant is often prescribed for as-needed use. During the first week of intragastric balloon therapy, an anticholinergic medication such as scopolamine can be used. Prospective studies have demonstrated that a serotonin receptor antagonist may be effective when combined with midazolam. If a patient experiences persistent symptomatology, the balloon may be removed out of necessity.

The safety profile of intragastric balloons is of importance. Serious adverse events from the balloon, including gastric perforation, balloon migration, and mortality, are rare. A meta-analysis of intragastric balloon risks determined that gastric perforation rate is approximately 0.1%, balloon migration 1.4%, and mortality 0.08%.

Adverse events can be associated with the procedure or the balloon itself. Regarding balloon-related adverse events, serious events include gastric or esophageal perforation, gastric ulceration, and balloon migration can occur. These adverse events are primarily unique to the saline, liquid-filled balloons.

A safety precaution to detect rupture is by dyeing the saline balloons with a blue dye. The patient may notice their urine turning blue or green as the ruptured dye is absorbed and then excreted renally. The dye serves as a warning mechanism so that the patient is aware of a rupture and can help retrieve it before the balloon migrates and causes a subsequent small bowel obstruction. A multi-balloon therapy can be advantageous over one with a single balloon. If one balloon ruptures, the second balloon may prevent the migration or subsequent obstruction.

Another adverse event of concern includes spontaneous hyperinflation. The FDA has received approximately 200 reports worldwide since 2015.

Another area of concern is that of acute pancreatitis. Acute pancreatitis can develop secondary to any type of intragastric balloon but has clinically been observed mainly with liquid-filled balloons. The FDA has received almost 30 adverse reports worldwide since 2015, with approximately 2/3 of these events involving the Orbera balloon system.

The mechanism for acute pancreatitis can be secondary to either direct injury from the balloon or the distended stomach, which exerts pressure on the pancreatic parenchyma. Acute pancreatitis can also develop via an indirect mechanism where a pancreatic injury is secondary through a duodenal obstruction. Compression of the balloon onto the stomach may compromise blood flow to that region, leading to localized ischemia, ulceration, and eventual perforation. An aid to diagnose this condition or for clinical recognition of the complication, a provider should look for the recent placement of a gastric balloon, symptoms consistent with the diagnosis of pancreatitis, and either biochemical or radiological evidence supporting pancreatitis. Laboratory work can consist of a lipase level, amylase, complete blood count, renal function test, and liver function tests. An abdominal CT or ultrasound can be used for radiological diagnosis.

Adverse events can be secondary to the procedure itself, which primarily occur during balloon removal. Adverse effects include gastrointestinal bleeding, esophageal tears, esophageal perforation, and pneumonia. Most balloons discussed require endoscopic retrieval and a needle to deflate the ballooning mechanism, sturdy grasper, or snare to remove the balloon.

In terms of mortality, the FDA has received reports of 18 deaths worldwide from 2016 to the present in patients with a liquid-filled balloon system used to treat obesity.

To accurately determine mortality, better studies are needed. These 18 deaths reported since 2016 are noted, but the incidence rate of death in those who underwent intragastric balloon therapy is unknown. A systematic review published in 2016 did demonstrate a mortality rate of 0.05%.