Intracardiac shunts are anatomic defects that occur from derangements in the embryologic development of the heart, mainly in the first trimester of pregnancy. Fetal heart development occurs from the mesoderm. It is a complex process where a single heart tube is initially formed, which later develops into four chambers with separate inflow and outflow tracts by processes like cell migration and looping of the structures.

Small defects can close by themselves with time; however, larger defects can require surgical intervention at times. Left to right shunts are often asymptomatic in childhood; however, symptoms can appear by adolescent and adult age. Presentation often includes shortness of breath, exercise intolerance, and easy fatigability. In these defects, the right side of the heart receives more blood, which causes pulmonary hypertension over time in some patients. A rare complication of these shunts is Eisenmenger syndrome, in which shunt reversal occurs due to severe pulmonary hypertension to the point that right-sided pressures exceed left-sided pressures. This syndrome causes cyanosis and carries a high mortality.****

The other group of intracardiac shunts is called cyanotic shunts. In these disorders, there are anatomic defects that impede the flow of deoxygenated blood to the lungs. Oxygenation is impaired in these disorders, and partial pressure of oxygen in arterial circulation is low. Tissues do not get enough oxygen supply, and characteristic bluish discoloration of the skin called cyanosis is seen. Cyanotic lesions are associated with significant morbidity and mortality and typically present early after the birth; however, small lesions could be minimally acyanotic or even completely asymptomatic at first. Symptoms include cyanosis, clubbing of fingers and toenails, dyspnea, poor weight gain, hemoptysis, and recurrent infections.