Medications are routinely added to the list and can be moved from one category to another as our knowledge and understanding of the medications advances. The DEA maintains a current list on its website under the diversion control division heading. Prescribers may prescribe, as allowed by their DEA and state controlled-substance or medical license, Schedule II through V medications. Not all prescribers are licensed to prescribe all levels of controlled substances as their individual state or DEA licenses limit some, and some are under limitations by their professions, such as advanced practice providers in many states. It is the responsibility of the provider and the dispensing pharmacist to be aware of each medication's category and ensure that only properly licensed individuals are prescribing the medications. It is essential to understand the DEA controlled-substance scheduling both to ensure adequate caution when prescribing medications with high abuse potential and also to ensure against prescribing outside of one's authority.

The Controlled Substances Act has great potential to improve patient safety by providing federal oversight for drugs with a high potential for abuse. Providers of scheduled substances (physicians, dentists, podiatrists, advanced practitioners) may have links to the distribution of these substances. They are required to have a DEA license and record prescription of scheduled drugs. This licensing prevents overprescribing and obligates providers to be wary of potential drug-seeking patients. The dispenser must also be aware of a patient's medication history and be mindful of the potential for polypharmacy if a patient seeks multiple providers. The current opioid epidemic is a time where federal oversight and interdisciplinary coordination have the potential to reduce harm to patients prescribed scheduled drugs drastically. It will, however, take further time and evaluation to know if drug scheduling actually reduces abuse, addiction, and overdose.