The patient should be educated regarding how to get seated on the instrument. An attendee can help the patient in the wheelchair. Before performing the investigation, the patient should be explained the procedure and the importance of autorefractometry.

The patient should be described as an automated computerized machine that measures the baseline refraction and gives an indication of where to start the spectacle prescription. The patient should be told to remove glasses or contact lenses before performing the investigation.

The patients with contact lenses will require two screenings, one with contact lenses and one without. The patient should be explained the alignment to get familiar with the instrument. There can be coarse alignment and fine alignment. The patient should be seated close to the instrument, and then only the adjustments should be performed. Each eye should be examined separately.

The patient should be explained to keep the arms on the table, chin on the chinrest, and head should rest against the forehead rest. Then the chin adjustment should be made to align the visual axis. The height can be moved up and down with a height adjustment knob. Each step should be explained to the patient while operating the autorefractor.

The patient should be told that they will observe a hot air balloon in a starburst pattern, and that image will come in and out of sight. Blink and relax maneuvers should be explained to the patient. The fine horizontal alignment is performed by moving the joystick right and left and vertical up and down to get a proper focus.

The joystick should be moved to bring the patient's eye in front of the monitor. The autorefractor depicts which eye is being examined. The joystick should be moved horizontally or vertically to set the patient's target, described as a bulls-eye appearance inside the pupil. The patient should be told to relax once they see the target.

The optometrist or the technician should explain all the steps to the patient and what is going on during the investigation. After completing the investigation, the patient should be complemented for good cooperation and told to take another seat and relax. The readings from the autorefractor can be automatically transferred to the computer or can be printed and stuck to the patient's case sheet. The investigation results should be explained to the patient by the doctor and not the technician or optometrist to avoid any discrepancy in counseling.