The principal pathology of stunned myocardium is coronary hypoperfusion leading to hypoperfused myocardium. Generally, transient coronary hypoperfusion due to overactive sympathetic response, overproduction of catecholamine and endothelin, and cardiac inflammation can individually or collectively lead to stunning of the myocardium.

At a cellular level, abnormal energy utilization, production of oxygen free radicals, and abnormal calcium reflux seem to play a role in the development of stunned myocardium.

1. Abnormal energy utilization: Animal studies have revealed a prolonged hypoperfusion state of about 15 minutes, followed by vascular reperfusion leading to a disturbance in energy utilization in the hypoperfused organ. This disruption in the myocardium can potentially lead to a decreased utilization of creatinine kinase (CK), an enzyme involved in the energy generation required for cardiac contractility.

2. Production of oxygen-derived free radicals and abnormal calcium flux: During the first few minutes of myocardial reperfusion, free radicals are generated that lead to reperfusion injury.

Similarly, there is some auto-regulatory phenomenon that plays a role in the development of a stunned myocardium as well. Perfusion-contraction mismatch that occurs in hypoperfused myocardium reduces the contractile function of the myocardial fibers. Injured myocardium that undergoes reperfusion can present transiently as segmental wall motion abnormalities with ventricular dysfunction.

Further, neurologic events such as hemorrhages, strokes, and seizures can cause myocardial injury leading to neurogenic stunned myocardium with features including elevated troponin, EKG changes, and left ventricular dysfunction. The pathophysiology behind stunned myocardium in these conditions is presumed to be sympathetic surge and autonomic dysregulation.