Not all eyes with NTG will progress to clinically significant vision loss. In the Collaborative Normal-Tension Glaucoma Study (CNTGS), 65% of eyes without treatment showed no progression over five years.

IOP lowering treatment should be instituted if there are confirmed progressive changes of the optic disc or visual field, and such progression is likely to lead to visual morbidity in their lifetime. Optic disc hemorrhages are also often interpreted as a marker of disease progression.

Treatment at diagnosis may also be recommended in eyes with moderate or advanced disease, paracentral visual field defects that threaten fixation, and those with multiple risk factors for blindness. Once progression has been demonstrated, CNTGS showed aggressive IOP lowering of 30%, which led to a slower rate of visual field loss. However, 12% of the treated group still progressed despite aggressive treatment.

IOP lowering is the only known modifiable risk factor that can alter disease progression in POAG and NTG. Strategies include topical IOP lowering medications, laser treatments such as selective laser trabeculoplasty (SLT) or cyclodiode laser, and drainage surgery. The role of micro-invasive glaucoma surgeries (MIGS) remains controversial. Prostaglandin analogs are a common first-line therapy. A comparison of topical brimonidine and timolol showed similar IOP lowering but less progression with brimonidine.

It is hypothesized that brimonidine may have an additional neuroprotective effect. Studies have shown SLT can still have a pressure-lowering effect in the normal range. In eyes with continued progression, or very low pressure (less than 12mmHg) requiring treatment, surgical management with augmented trabeculectomy is likely required to achieve optimal IOP lowering. In the latter case, postoperative IOP below 10mmHg has been shown to eliminate VF progression.

No IOP independent treatments have been proven to alter disease progression; however, non-IOP risk factors are being investigated to understand better their role in the pathogenesis of NTG and feasibility as interventions. In patients with these risk factors or progressive disease despite IOP treatment, treatment could be considered. These risk factors include:

- Nocturnal hypotension – It is hypothesized that this causes reduced perfusion pressure at the optic nerve head. A 24-hour blood pressure analysis and avoiding nighttime dosing of systemic anti-hypertensives can be considered.

- Diet and nutritional supplementation – Nicotinamide (vitamin B3) and ginkgo biloba are under investigation.

- Obstructive sleep apnoea – This is hypothesized to alter optic nerve perfusion pressure. Screening questions for this disease can be asked to identify patients at risk.

- Exercise – Regular exercise is associated with lower IOP afterward, but a positive or negative effect on the pathogenesis of NTG is unknown.

- Meditation – A randomized-controlled trial showed mindfulness meditation could lower IOP, reduce IOP fluctuation, and positively affect neuroprotective markers.

- Cannabinoids – These have been shown to reduce IOP, but not in a clinically meaningful way.**.**

- Smoking – Smoking may be associated with both raised IOP and glaucoma.