The standard staging system for mycosis fungoides was the TNMB system, which was the strongest prognostic indicator for mycosis fungoides. Olsen et al. (2007) published the staging norms of mycosis fungoides and SS as a result of the ISCL-EORTC discussions, and modified the existing TNMB staging system in view of advances in cellular and molecular biology in diagnostic methods, as given below.

**Skin**

- T1: Limited patches, papules, and/or plaques****covering less than 10% of the skin surface. May further stratify into T1a (patch only) vs. T1b (plaque +/- patch).

- T2: Patches, papules or plaques covering 10% or more of the skin surface. May further stratify into T2a (patch only) vs. T2b (plaque +/- patch).

- T3: One or more tumors****(1 cm or more in diameter)

- T4: Confluence of erythema covering 80% or more of body surface area

**Lymph Nodes**

N0: No clinically abnormal peripheral lymph nodes; biopsy not required

N1: Clinically abnormal peripheral lymph nodes; histopathology Dutch grade 1 or NCI LN0-2

- N1a: Clone negative (A T-cell clone is defined by PCR or Southern blot analysis of the T-cell receptor gene)

- N1b: Clone positive

N2: Clinically abnormal peripheral lymph nodes; histopathology Dutch grade 2 or NCI LN3

- N2a: Clone negative

- N2b: Clone positive

N3: Clinically abnormal peripheral lymph nodes; histopathology Dutch grades 3 to 4 or NCI LN4; clone positive or negative

Nx: Clinically abnormal peripheral lymph nodes; no histologic confirmation

**Visceral**

M0: No visceral organ involvement

M1: Visceral involvement (must have pathology confirmation and organ involved should be specified)

**Blood**

B0: Absence of significant blood involvement: 5% or less of peripheral blood lymphocytes are atypical (Sezary) cells

- B0a: Clone negative

- B0b: Clone positive

B1: Low blood tumor burden: more than 5% of peripheral blood lymphocytes are atypical (Sezary) cells but does not meet the criteria of B2

- B1a: Clone negative

- B1b: Clone positive

B2: High blood tumor burden: 1000/microL or more Sezary cells with positive clone