**Imaging of Dry ARMD**

**Fundus fluorescein angiography (FFA)**: Drusen constituents can be hydrophobic or hydrophilic. Fluorescein dye being hydrophilic stains the hydrophilic drusen. Hyperfluorescence is noted in the late stage of angiography. Geographic atrophy is seen as well defined hyperfluorescent area due to window defect. The underlying choroidal fluorescence is seen due to the absence of RPE.

**Indocyanine green angiography (ICGA)**: The hard drusen become hyperfluorescent 2 to 3 minutes after dye administration, and this persists through the middle and late phases. Soft drusen are either hypofluorescent throughout the angiogram with a thin hyperfluorescent rim, or they remain isofluorescent.

**Autofluorescence:**This provides an evaluation of RPE activity. It helps define the area of geographic atrophy. The area of atrophy shows hypofluorescence due to the loss of RPE, whereas the border is slightly hyperfluorescent. Fluorescence at the border of the atrophy is a marker for the progression of geographic atrophy. Autofluorescence is more sensitive in picking up progression in comparison to clinical examination.

**Optical coherence tomography (OCT):**Drusen are seen as a nodular elevation of RPE. Drusen area and volume can be measured on optical coherence tomography (OCT) and used as a prognostic marker. Area of geographic atrophy is seen as a patch with the absent external limiting membrane, inner/outer segment junctions of photoreceptor, and the RPE and Bruch's membrane complex. Choroidal signal enhancement or choroidal hyperreflectivity is noted in the area of geographic atrophy.

**Imaging of neovascular ARMD**

**Fundus Fluorescein Angiography (FFA)**

Fluorescein angiography is useful in identifying the type of PED. On fluorescein angiography, serous PED shows uniform filling with bright fluorescence that persists till the late phase. The lesion shows well-demarcated borders with no leakage. The intense hyperfluorescence is thought to be due to the rapid diffusion of the fluorescein molecules across the permeable Bruch's membrane and pooling in the sub-RPE space.

Fibrovascular PED on FFA reveals an area of stippled or granular hyperfluorescence, which is seen as early as within 1-2 minutes of fluorescein injection. These areas intensify or reveal leakage or staining in the later phases. Leakage is because of fluid accumulation in the subretinal space overlying the PED, and staining is due to entrapment of dye within the fibrous tissue.

Drusenoid PED has scalloped borders and an irregular surface. FFA shows gradual staining of the sub-RPE with no leakage. Pigment deposits, when present, are seen as hypofluorescent foci.

A hemorrhagic detachment of the RPE on FFA will block the choroidal fluorescence because of the mound-like collection of blood beneath the RPE. Hence it appears hypofluorescent.

Choroidal neovascular membranes have been defined on angiography as classic and occult. Earlier the inclusion criteria of various treatment trials required the knowledge of the composition of the CNVM. However, with the advent of intravitreal injections and spectral-domain OCT, indications for baseline FFA have reduced significantly.

Classic CNVM is identified as lesions that hyperfluoresce in the early phase with an increase in intensity and leakage beyond the boundaries of the hyperfluorescent area through mid and late phase frames. Subretinal fluid, when present, can be seen as the pooling of fluorescein dye overlying the CNVM.

Occult CNV refers to two hyperfluorescent patterns on fluorescein angiography: fibrovascular pigment epithelial detachment
(FVPED), and late leakage of an undetermined source
(LLUS). Fibrovascular pigment epithelium detachment appears as an irregular elevation of the RPE with stippled hyperfluorescent dots overlying it. The boundaries may or may not show leakage in the late-phase frames depending on whether the fluorescein stains the fibrous tissue or pools in the subretinal space overlying the FVPED. The second pattern, late leakage of an undetermined source, is defined as leakage in the late phase with no identifiable CNV in the early or mid-phase of the angiogram to account for the area of leakage in the late phase.

**Indocyanine green angiography (ICGA)**

It is known for better visualization of the choroidal vessels. It is a more sensitive tool in comparison to FFA for identifying underlying CNVM associated with serous, drusenoid, or hemorrhagic PED. Serous PED on ICGA is a hypofluorescent lesion that remains hypofluorescent in all phases of the angiography. Hyperfluorescent spot in the hypoflourescent lesion, usually seen in the area of notching, is due to an underlying CNVM. Drusenoid PED is hypofluorescent to isofluorescent on ICGA, and CNVM, if present, is seen as hyperfluorescent component.

**Optical coherence tomography (OCT):**It is useful in defining the type of choroidal neovascular membrane (hyperreflective lesion) based on its location beneath the RPE (type 1) or above the RPE (type 2). It enables follow up of patients on intravitreal therapy as it helps monitor the activity of CNVM by accounting for the resolution or recurrence of intraretinal or subretinal fluid and change in the height of the PED. The fluid is hyporeflective on OCT.

The four variants of PED can be differentiated on OCT. Serous PED is seen as a dome-shaped elevation of hyperreflective RPE over hyperreflective Bruch's membrane. The PED lumen is hyporefflective because of its serous content. In contrast, fibrovascular PED lumen has both hyperreflective and hyporeflective component due to the presence of a fibrovascular component beneath the RPE. Similarly, drusenoid PED is hyperreflective because of drusen. Hemorrhagic PED shows hyperreflectivity just beneath the RPE with backshadowing such that the Bruch's membrane or the choroidal vessels underlying the PED is not visible. This is because of the presence of blood, which prevents the rays from traveling further.

Various prognostic markers have been identified on OCT like outer retinal tubulations (ORT) and hyperreflective dots.