Many diseases that present similarly with bleeding episodes should be excluded and put into consideration. These include:

- **Other coagulation factor defects:**Hemophilia A (factor VIII) and hemophilia C (factor XI) are differentiated through coagulation factor assay study and genetic testing, while hemophilia A and B are X-linked recessive. Hemophilia C is an autosomal recessive inheritance.

- **Von Willebrand factor deficiency:**This is the most common internal bleeding deficiency, with a defect in platelet plug formation. The patient has an increase in bleeding time, normal/increase PTT, and normal platelets. It has an autosomal dominant inheritance.

- **Platelet dysfunctions (quantitative or qualitative):**bleeding is usually mucocutaneous, unlike hemophilia. Usually, these disorders are diagnosed by platelet aggregation studies or platelet electron microscopy. Typically there is increase bleeding time and a decrease in platelet count. E.g., immune thrombocytopenia, thrombotic thrombocytopenia, hemolytic uremic syndrome.

- **Disseminated intravascular coagulation:**usually, there is a precipitating event (sepsis, trauma, obstetric complications, acute pancreatitis, acute promylogenous leukemia, and transfusion). Diagnosis is usually carried out by blood tests that show decreased platelet count, increase PT and PTT, increase fibrin degradation (D-dimer), and decreased fibrinogen levels.

- **Vitamin K deficiency**occurs in neonates and patients with prolonged antibiotic use. It presents with increased PT and PTT, decreased factor II, VII, IX, X, protein C, and S, with normal platelet counts.

- **Scurvy:**There is a deficiency of vitamin C. It presents with swollen gums, perifollicular and subperiosteal hemorrhage, hemarthrosis, and poor wound healing.

- **Ehlers-Danlos syndrome:**occurs due to defect in collagen synthesis, and mainly presents with mucosal bleeding with hyperextensible skin and hypermobile joints.

- **Fabry disease:**Patients may have angiokeratomas with other organs being affected, including kidneys and heart.

- **Child abuse:**It can sometimes be misidentified and confused with hemophilia. It needs a high index of suspicion, and it is essential to find the inconsistencies in the history of how trauma has occurred. Other signs of abuse include different stages of wound healing, malnourishment, subdural hematoma, retinal hemorrhage, and signs of sexual abuse like STIs and UTIs.