Cool Cap trial enrolled and randomly assigned 234 term neonates with moderate or severe HIE and abnormal amplitude-integrated EEG to either head cooling (n=116) or conventional management (n=118). The primary outcome measured was death or severe disability at 18 months. Death or disability occurred in 66 % conventional care and 55 % cooled group (OR 0.61; 95% CI 0.34-1.09, p=0.1).The frequency of clinically important complications was not different. Subgroup analysis revealed that head cooling did not significantly affect neonates with the worse changes in amplitude-integrated EEG (p=0.51) but beneficial in infants with mild changes in amplitude-integrated EEG changes (p=0.009). The study suggests that head cooling could safely improve survival without severe neurodevelopmental disability in neonates with less severe amplitude-integrated EEG changes.

The Total Body Hypothermia (TOBY) trial enrolled and randomly assigned 325 neonates with moderate or severe encephalopathy and abnormal aEEG to whole-body hypothermia or conventional care. The primary outcome measured was death or severe neurodevelopmental disability at 18 months. Death or severe disability occurred in 53 % of conventional care and 45 % of the cooling group (relative risk 0.86 (0.68 - 1.07) P=0.17). Infants in the hypothermia group had an increased rate of survival without neurologic deficit ( P=0.003). The TOBY trial suggested that induction of therapeutic hypothermia in infants with perinatal asphyxia did not significantly reduce the combined rate of mortality or severe disability but improved neurologic outcomes among survivors.

The NICHD Neonatal Research Network (NRN) trial randomly assigned term infants (n=208) with moderate or severe encephalopathy to WBC to an esophageal temperature of 33.5° for 72 hours or usual care. The primary outcome measured was death or disability at 18 months. Whole-body hypothermia decreases mortality or disability in infants with moderate or severe HIE compared to conservative care (RR 0.72; CI 0.54-0.95; P=0.01).

Infant Cooling Evaluation (ICE) trial (n=221) is the most recent randomized control trial published. The mortality or significant disability at two years of age occurred in 51% of the cooling group and 66 % of control groups (Relative risk 0.77, Confidence interval 0.62 to 0.98). The mortality rate was significantly low, and survival free of disability was higher in the cooling group than the control group.

A systematic review of 11 randomized controlled trials (N=1505) on cooling for newborns with HIE suggested that therapeutic hypothermia is beneficial in neonates with moderate to severe HIE. Therapeutic hypothermia decreases mortality without increasing significant disability among survivors. The benefits of survival and neurodevelopmental outcomes outweigh the short-term adverse effects.