The most critical aspect of the management of Jessner lymphocytic infiltration of the skin (JLIS) involves its diagnosis and treatment. JLIS is a rare disorder, and while it is a benign condition with a good prognosis, once a lesion is identified, other more emergent conditions such as lymphoma must be excluded.

Holistic care involves close collaboration between the patient, caretakers, and a team of medical professionals. The team may include a rheumatologist if an autoimmune component is present, and if multiple family members are affected, it would be best to counsel the family as a unit about the likelihood of a genetic component to the disease.

Once the diagnosis of JLIS is confirmed, it becomes essential to educate the patient about treatment options, based on the presence of risk factors such as photosensitivity, and empower them to lead the team in developing a treatment plan that best suits his/her needs. It is also possible that treatment may not be useful for every patient, and they must be aware of this.

Depending on the patient's treatment plan, a plastic surgeon may be involved as well. Effective management of this disease requires excellent communication between the interprofessional team. If the patient chooses medical therapy, they should be monitored closely for side effects. Regardless, once diagnosed with JLIS, patients should have regular skin examinations coordinated between the patient, caretakers, primary care providers, dermatologists, and any other medical personnel involved in the patient's care. Close attention should be paid to periorbital lesions as these can develop into ectropion.