Measles-containing vaccines are indicated for the routine immunization of children and adolescents who have not been immunized on a regular schedule. Indications for this vaccine include adults born after 1970 who have not received immunization. Adults before 1970 can be assumed to have a natural immunity to measles. However, susceptible patients, such as health care workers, military personnel, and travelers outside of North America, should receive the MMR vaccine.

It is also important to vaccinate women before or during their reproductive years, as rubella can cause congenital malformations in the fetus. Recommendations are that non-immunized female patients who wish to become pregnant are vaccinated with the MMR vaccine no less than one month before becoming pregnant. If the patient is pregnant, the MMR vaccine is contraindicated, as it is a live attenuated vaccine, and therefore, there is a theoretical risk to the fetus. However, suppose a woman is given the MMR during pregnancy. The pregnancy should NOT be terminated based on teratogenic risk, as no evidence demonstrates a teratogenic risk from the MMR or MMRV vaccine.

The administration of the MMR vaccine is appropriate for specific patient populations as post-exposure prophylaxis (PEP). Patient populations that can be given the MMR vaccine as PEP include patients between 6 and 12 months old who are immunocompetent and have had an exposure in the last 72 hours and non-pregnant patients 12 months or older who are immunocompetent with exposure in the previous six days.