Laminectomy is among the most common procedures spinal surgeons perform to decompress the spinal canal in various conditions. Preoperative and postoperative patient care is crucial to improving outcomes of laminectomy. General practitioners, nurses, and pharmacists should advise the patient to change lifestyle, such as weight control and stop smoking. Making referrals to other professionals is essential when concomitant and associated pathologies could be present. All involved members of the interprofessional team need to communicate across interprofessional lines to achieve optimal outcomes. [Level 5]

Complete comprehensive preoperative planning requires assessment. It is essential to carefully document neurological status before surgery and develop correct and complete operative consent describing the magnitude, scope, and detailed complications of the surgery, as well as detailed alternatives considering nonoperative management. The nurse plays a role during the preoperative preparation of patients undergoing spine surgery. The nurse assists the clinician during the procedure and helps with the proper positioning of the patient. The nurse monitors the patient's vital signs before, during, and after the procedure. If there are any untoward changes in the patient's observations, the nurse should immediately alert the clinician and document the findings in the patient's medical records. The nurse should counsel patients appropriately about their care plans and ensure that the patient understands all components of valid consent. The best possible outcome for patients undergoing laminectomy could only be fostered through clear and efficient communication and collaboration among the interprofessional team members. [Level 5]

Relief of symptoms by bending forward is a reliable clinical variable in canal stenosis.

Multivariate analysis showed medical comorbidities, previous laminectomy, and accidental durotomy increased the risk of surgical complications.

Multi-national Scandinavia study showed similar indications for decompression surgery but significant differences in advocating arthrodesis. Fusion did not improve effectiveness.

**Outpatient Versus Inpatient Surgery**

Outpatient surgery is comparable to inpatient surgery. Risk variables such as BMI >30 kg/m^2, age ≥55 years, functional dependency, medical comorbidities, and operative time >90 minutes have been linked to increased risk of complications in cohorts undergoing outpatient surgery.