Cbl is bound to the dietary proteins, upon food preparation and because of the heat effect, Cbl is liberated partially from food. When exposed to light, all forms of free Cbl undergo conversion to be OH-Cbl. Another source of Cbl is that bound to HC available within the bile and delivered to the GI tract via the enterohepatic circulation.

**Intra-gastric events:**

Within the stomach, the proteolytic effect of pepsin and the low pH liberate the remaining Cbl and Cbl analogs encapsulated in the food. In some food sources including liver, Cbl readily released even when the stomach has natural pH.

Substances that stimulate the release of acids contribute to intrinsic factor release; these include gastrin, histamine, and insulin in addition to the vagal stimulation. The stomach secretes intrinsic factor more than the required for Cbl absorption. Thus only the considerable loss in intrinsic factor secretion capacity results in Cbl deficiency.

Deity Cbl binds salivary HC with affinities of 50- and 3-fold that of intrinsic factor in pH 2 and pH 8, respectively.

**Intra-duodenal events:**

By entering the small intestine, Cbl remains bound to HC even at the relatively neutral environment of the digest. HC is sensitive to pancreatic proteases trypsin and chymotrypsin, which will degrade HC moiety. Subsequently, intrinsic factor will exclusively bind the free Cbl. Intrinsic factor binds only active Cbl received from diet and bile, ensuring that inactive analogs get excreted.

**Ileal events:**

At the terminal ileum, the receptor complex cubam (an abbreviation for its two subunits) located at the ileal apical membrane. Cubam is present in the small intestine and the proximal tubules of the kidney, which mediates the IF-Cbl complex and filtered protein endocytosis, respectively. Cubilin (CUBL) is the ligand-binding subunit which recognizes IF-Cbl complex and amnionless (AMN) subunit for membrane anchorage plus endocytic capacitation.

Cubilin is multiligand peripheral membrane protein interacts directly with IF-Cbl complex, consists of short N-terminus without membrane-spanning motif, eight epidermal growth factor (EGF) repeats, and a cluster of 27 CUB domains.

Amnionless is an integral membrane protein binds the N-terminal residues of cubilin to assist its fixation to the cell membrane.

After its recognition by cubilin, IF-Cbl complex gets endocytosed into the enterocyte bound to cubam complex. Inside the endosome, the IF-Cbl complex gets liberated and cubam gets recycled to the apical membrane. Within the lysosome, Cbl is released from IF by the action of lysosomal cathepsin L.

**Enterohepatic circulation (EHC):**

Most of the Cbl transported in the bloodstream in the form of HC-Cbl, which is taken by the liver via ASGR1 receptor to be stored. EHC is useful in retaining the Cbl but will lead to major storage depletion in the conditions of suboptimal absorption of Cbl.