There are many proposed mechanisms regarding the pathogenesis of euthyroid sick syndrome. One cause suggested is when the presence of thyroid-binding hormone inhibitors in the serum and different body tissues inhibits the binding of the thyroid hormone to the thyroid-binding protein. The euthyroid sick syndrome is also caused by cytokines such as interleukin 1, interleukin 6, tumor necrosis factor-alpha, and interferon-beta affecting the hypothalamus and pituitary glands, thus inhibiting TSH, thyroid-releasing hormone (TRH), thyroglobulin (TG), T3, and the thyroid-binding globulins (TBG) production. Cytokines were also thought to reduce the activity of type 1 deiodinase and decrease the binding capacity of the T3 nuclear receptors.

The peripheral deiodinase activity type 1 is downregulated, and the central type 2 and type 3 deiodinase activities are up-regulated in critically ill patients. Several other mechanisms can contribute to the inhibition of 5'-monodeiodination, causing a decrease in the concentration of serum total T3 levels in patients with a nonthyroidal illness, such as high serum cortisol and the use of exogenous corticosteroid therapy, as well as other medications like amiodarone and propranolol.

Serum albumin binds to fatty acids, which displaces thyroid hormones from the thyroid-binding globulin. The fall in serum albumin level in euthyroid sick syndrome enhances the activity of different competitors of T4 on thyroid-binding globulin. Aspirin and heparin drugs impair the protein binding of the thyroid hormones, causing the reduction of total T3 and T4 levels and, subsequently, temporary elevation of free T3 and T4 levels.