Management of ASMI is no different than any MI/acute coronary syndrome in general. The goals of treatment in MI are immediate relief of ischemia, prevention of MI progression, and death. The focus involves early diagnosis, pain relief, initiation of antiplatelet therapy, and intravenous anticoagulation along with restoring early reperfusion.  In the case of STEMI, early reperfusion is the key to prevent tissue death, life-threatening arrhythmias and improve prognosis and long-term mortality.

Supplemental oxygen administration is necessary for patients with ASMI with arterial oxygen saturation less than 90%, high-risk features of hypoxemia, and the presence of increased work of breathing or clinical respiratory distress. In patients with ongoing ischemic chest pain should, sublingual nitroglycerin (0.3 mg to 0.4 mg) should be administered every 5 minutes for up to 3 doses. After that, the use of intravenous nitroglycerin may be a consideration in the absence of any contraindication. Patients may be****administered intravenous morphine sulfate if there are continued ischemic pain symptoms despite treatment with maximally tolerated nitrate therapy. Oral beta-blocker therapy should be given within the first 24 hours in all patients without any contraindication to their use such as low-output state, presence of cardiogenic shock, decompensated heart failure, or presence of an active heart block. In patients with contraindication to beta-blocker use and ongoing or recurrent ischemic discomfort, the use of a non-dihydropyridine calcium channel blocker such as diltiazem may be an option as initial therapy. All patients should receive high-intensity statin therapy. Intra-aortic balloon pump counterpulsation therapy may be used in patients with severe persistent or recurrent ischemia despite intensive medical therapy, while they are awaiting invasive angiography and revascularization. In the absence of a specific contraindication, ACE inhibitors should be started in all patients with LV systolic function less than 40% and in those with the presence of diabetes mellitus, hypertension, or stable chronic kidney disease. Aldosterone receptor blockers can be used instead of ACE inhibitors, in patients who are ACE-inhibitor intolerant. In patients with ASMI and LVEF less than 40% with or without HF,  selective aldosterone blockers such as eplerenone as an adjunct to ACE inhibitors and beta-blockers offer a long-term mortality benefit.

Prompt initiation of antiplatelet therapy is beneficial in patients with acute ASMI. Non–enteric-coated aspirin (162 mg to 325 mg) should be administered in all patients with acute coronary syndrome as early as possible after initial presentation. A maintenance dose of aspirin (81 mg/day to 325 mg/day) will then continue indefinitely. A P2Yinhibitor such as clopidogrel or ticagrelor or prasugrel should be given in addition to aspirin usually for up to 1 year to all patients after the MI. Contraindications to prasugrel include patients with prior stroke. In patients requiring an early invasive strategy with intermediate to high-risk features (such as positive cardiac biomarkers), the addition of GP IIb/IIIa inhibitor (such as eptifibatide or tirofiban) in addition to dual antiplatelet therapy may be considered as part of an initial antiplatelet regimen.

Anticoagulation is the recommendation for all patients irrespective of the treatment strategy. Treatment options for anticoagulation include enoxaparin, unfractionated intravenous heparin, fondaparinux, or bivalirudin. Argatroban is a direct thrombin inhibitor that can be used in patients with a history of heparin-induced thrombocytopenia for either prophylaxis or the treatment of thrombosis, including those requiring PCI.

Enoxaparin is given as an initial intravenous dose of 30 mg in all patients followed by 1 mg/kg subcutaneously every 12 hours dosing (can be used as 1 mg/kg SC once daily dose if creatinine clearance is less than 30 mL/min). It is given for the duration of hospitalization or until PCI is completed. Unfractionated heparin is dosed at an initial loading dose of 60 IU/kg (maximum 4000 IU) followed by infusion of 12 IU/kg per hour (maximum 1000 IU/h) with close monitoring of the activated partial thromboplastin time, continued for 48 hours or until PCI is performed. Fondaparinux administration is a 2.5 mg SQ daily dose that is usually maintained for the duration of hospitalization or until PCI. Fondaparinux should always be used in addition to another anticoagulant such as intravenous heparin or bivalirudin to reduce the risk of catheter thrombosis. Bivalirudin is administered as 0.10 mg/kg initial loading dose, followed by 0.25 mg/kg per hour (only to be used in patients managed with an early invasive strategy) and is continued until diagnostic angiography or PCI. The anticoagulant effect of bivalirudin is monitored by measuring the activated clotting time.

Eventually, the focus is to restore myocardial perfusion by revascularization. An urgent invasive strategy (coronary angiography with revascularization intent based on coronary anatomy within 24 hrs) is indicated in all patients with acute coronary syndrome who have refractory angina or electrical or hemodynamic instability or in patients with increased risk for hard clinical events.  A delayed invasive approach (within 24 to 72 hrs) is reasonable for patients with low to intermediate clinical risk. The ischemia-guided strategy aims to avoid the routine use of early invasive procedures. Ischemia-guided therapy focuses on the optimization of medical therapy and treats based on risk stratification or ischemic burden as defined by the use of initial non-invasive strategies such as myocardial perfusion imaging. Ischemia-guided therapy is reasonable for low-risk patients such as those with a low-risk score ( TIMI score of 0 or 1, GRACE score<109) and low-risk Troponin-negative female patients.

The goals of therapy after MI are to restore the patient to normal activities with a focus on aggressive lifestyle and risk factor modification. The goal for long-term medical therapy relates to the potential prognostic benefits that studies have shown related to the use of antiplatelet agents, beta-blockers, statins, and renin-angiotensin-aldosterone system inhibitors, especially for patients with LVEF under 40%. Treatment of major risk factors such as smoking, hypertension, diabetes mellitus, hyperlipidemia, obesity, and lack of physical activity. Patients should also undergo a cardiac rehabilitation program after their discharge.

In summary:

- Early diagnosis - history, EKG, cardiac troponins

- Pain relief - nitroglycerin

- Hemodynamic stability - airway, breathing, circulation

- Reperfusion- PCI vs. fibrinolysis

- Prevention of rethrombosis: aspirin plus P2Y12 inhibitor - clopidogrel vs. ticagrelor depending upon the choice of reperfusion

- Preventing life-threatening arrhythmias - beta-blocker therapy

- Improve prognosis and long term mortality - statins, aspirin, clopidogrel, beta-blockers, ACE inhibitors, revascularization, cardiac rehabilitation and aggressive lifestyle/behavioral modification