Unfortunately, many patients with advanced heart failure who meet the indications for a heart transplant may not be able to get it as they have one of the following contraindications:

- Active infection: Acute infections should be treated first prior to consideration. Patients with well-controlled chronic infections like HIV, hepatitis C, and B with undetectable titers and no end-organ damage can be considered for a transplant.

- Chronic liver disease (cirrhosis)

- Advanced kidney disease (glomerular filtration rate of less than 30 ml/min/1.73m^2).

- Recent stroke or symptomatic, untreated peripheral vascular disease.

- Uncontrolled diabetes mellitus with end-organ damage.

- Active malignancy, in which case the discussion should involve oncologists in shared-decision, making to decide if a transplant is feasible or not.

- Severe lung disease with a forced expiratory volume (FEV1) and forced vital capacity (FVC) less than 50% predicted or evidence of parenchymal lung disease.

- Recent pulmonary embolism requiring anticoagulation (within the last 3 to 6 months).

- Severe pulmonary hypertension (PH) with pulmonary artery systolic pressure greater than 60 mmHg and pulmonary vascular resistance greater than 5 Wood units (if PH is refractory to medical therapy, then it is an absolute contraindication to heart transplant).

- Psychosocial factors including lack of social support, disabling psychiatric illness, non-compliance with previous medical management, active smoking or drug use, and not willing to quit.

- Morbid obesity (body mass index greater than 35 kg/m^2).

- Multisystem disease requiring other transplant procedures (like renal, hepatic, or lung transplant).