Pulmonary circulation is essential for the body to ensure a continuous supply of oxygenated blood. Any compromise can have grave consequences and lead to tissue dysfunction secondary to hypoxia.

Some of the common pathologies of the pulmonary circuit include but are not limited to the following:

Pulmonary edema: Any disturbance in the starling forces (see below, pathophysiology) operating in the pulmonary circulation can lead to an accumulation of fluid in the alveoli, impairing gas exchange, and causing respiratory distress. Pulmonary edema can either be cardiogenic or non-cardiogenic. Causes include elevated hydrostatic pressure (i.e heart failure), decreased serum oncotic pressure (i.e. low albumin), decreased lymphatic clearance (i.e. lymphedema), increased vessel permeability (i.e. inflammation), and decreased surfactant (i.e. prematurity).

Pulmonary embolism: A dislodged clot from a distant source (most commonly a deep venous thrombus) can embolize to the pulmonary circuit and lead to ischemia and, if prolonged, infarction of the lung parenchyma as well as severely impaired gaseous exchange. It is important to note that the peripheral parenchyma is more prone to infarcation as it is purely reliant on the pulmonary circulation for oxygenation (see below, function).

Pulmonary hypertension: An increase in the mean pulmonary artery pressure beyond 25 mmHg is known as pulmonary arterial hypertension. It leads to impaired gas exchange and commonly manifests as exertional dyspnea. If prolonged, it can lead to right ventricular stain and right heart failure, a phenomenon known as cor-pulmonale.

Pleural effusion: A disturbance in the starling forces (see below, pathophysiology) of the pleural circulation can lead to accumulation of fluid in the pleural space, a phenomenon known as pleural effusion. This manifests as pleuritic chest pain and respiratory distress.