COVID-19 can be regarded as a systemic viral illness based on its involvement in multiple major organ systems.

- Patients with advanced age and comorbid conditions such as obesity, diabetes mellitus, chronic lung disease, cardiovascular disease, chronic kidney disease, chronic liver disease, and neoplastic conditions are at risk of developing severe COVID-19 and its associated complications. The most common complication of severe COVID-19 illness is progressive or sudden clinical deterioration leading to acute respiratory failure and ARDS and/or multiorgan failure leading to death.

- Patients with COVID-19 illness are also at increased risk of developing prothrombotic complications such as PE, DVT, MI, ischemic strokes, and arterial thrombosis.

- Cardiovascular system involvement results in malignant arrhythmias, cardiomyopathy, and cardiogenic shock.

- GI complications such as bowel ischemia, transaminitis, gastrointestinal bleeding, pancreatitis, Ogilvie syndrome, mesenteric ischemia, and severe ileus are often noted in critically ill patients with COVID-19

- Acute renal failure is the most common extrapulmonary manifestation of COVID-19 and is associated with an increased risk of mortality.

- A meta-analysis study of 14 studies evaluating the prevalence of disseminated intravascular coagulation (DIC) in hospitalized patients with COVID-19 reported that DIC was observed in 3% (95%: 1%-5%, P < 0.001) of the included patients. Additionally, DIC was noted to be associated with severe illness and was a poor prognostic indicator.

- More recent data have emerged regarding prolonged symptoms in patients who have recovered from COVID-19 infection, termed "post-acute COVID-19 syndrome." A large cohort study of 1773 patients performed 6 months after hospitalization with COVID-19 revealed that most exhibited at least one persistent symptom: fatigue, muscle weakness, sleep difficulties, or anxiety. Patients with severe illness also had an increased risk of chronic lung issues.

- A retrospective cohort study that included 236,379 patients reported substantial neurological (intracranial hemorrhage, ischemic stroke) and psychiatric morbidity (anxiety disorder, psychotic disorder) 6 months after being diagnosed with COVID-19.

- Secondary invasive fungal infections such as COVID-19 associated pulmonary aspergillosis and rhino-cerebro-orbital mucormycosis have increasingly been reported as a complication in patients recovering from COVID-19. Risk factors for the development of secondary fungal infection include comorbid conditions such as uncontrolled diabetes, associated lymphopenia, excessive use of corticosteroids.