Inverted urothelial papilloma is seen most frequently in the bladder. They are usually incidentally discovered on imaging studies or cystoscopy during the evaluation of other conditions like benign prostatic hyperplasia, hemturia or prostate cancer. Although ultrasonography of the bladder may detect a bladder mass, cystoscopy remains the diagnostic procedure of choice.

Cystoscopy: On cystoscopy, inverted urothelial papilloma of the bladder appears as:

- A pedunculated or sessile mass with a relatively obvious smooth surface, or as a polypoid/papillary tumor with a smooth surface

- The diameter of the mass is less than 3 cm in most cases but can sometimes be much larger, with a diameter of up to 8 cm.

- Generally, it is a single lesion, but can rarely be multiple.

Magnetic resonance imaging: Inverted urothelial papilloma of the bladder is iso-intense on T1-weighted images and either iso-intense or slightly higher in intensity than the wall of the bladder on T2-weighted images.

Urine cytology: Urine cytology is not useful in the diagnosis of inverted urothelial papilloma of the bladder since normal urothelium covers it.[

Immunohistochemistry, genetics, and molecular studies may be necessary to differentiate inverted urothelial papilloma from urothelial cancer in some cases.

Photodynamic diagnosis of superficial bladder cancer using 5-aminolevulinic acid (5-ALA) is becoming increasingly useful in the detection and diagnosis of urothelial neoplasms. Recent reports indicate that inverted urothelial papillomas will fluoresce after 5-ALA administration. This indicates that photodynamic means cannot distinguish between a superficial bladder cancer and inverted urothelial papillomas.