**Traumatic Dental Emergencies**

**Tooth Fractures**

The outcome of a given dental fracture depends on the fracture category, the quality of the treatment received, and whether there was a delay in treatment. The prognosis is favorable for minor fractures involving only the enamel. The prognosis worsens for fractures left untreated or involving deeper structures of the tooth and surrounding tissues; these dental fractures also have a higher likelihood of developing infections.

**Tooth Luxations**

Tooth subluxations generally have a good prognosis with patients with minimal symptoms, a positive response to pulp sensitivity testing, and immature teeth having the best outcomes.

Extrusive luxations, intrusive luxations, and lateral luxations are prone to worse outcomes in comparison to tooth subluxations. The best outcomes are seen in patients with minimal symptoms, a positive response to pulp sensitivity testing, no marginal bone loss, signs of healing periodontium on radiographs, and skeletally immature teeth. Very symptomatic cases that develop pulp necrosis and experience breakdown of marginal bone or bony resorption have a worse prognosis and often require root canal therapy or endodontic evaluation.

**Tooth Avulsions**

The prognosis for replanted tooth avulsions depends on several items, particularly the extra-alveolar period. While replantation should be attempted for all avulsed teeth, the outcomes are best for those cases in which replantation occurs within 30 minutes, the tooth was stored in an appropriate storage medium, and there are minimal concomitant dentoalveolar injuries. The success of replanted teeth markedly decreases once the tooth exceeds 60 minutes of extra-alveolar time.

**Infectious Dental Emergencies**

While dental infections historically carried a high rate of mortality over a century ago, when recognized and treated early, uncomplicated dental infections carry a good prognosis. However, if left untreated, dental infections can spread both contiguously and hematogenously, with the potential to cause numerous complications. The sequela of resultant severe sepsis, septic shock, bacteremia, osteomyelitis, deep neck space infections, mediastinitis, endocarditis, and/or meningitis carries significant morbidity and mortality.

Additionally, studies have shown that teeth and periodontal tissue that experience repeated infections or have preexisting periodontal disease carry a worse prognosis.

**Post-procedural Dental Emergencies**

**Post-operative Bleeding**

In most cases, patients experiencing post-extraction and post-operative bleeding do well with local interventions. Patients with congenital coagulopathies tend to have a fair prognosis with local interventions when they are pre-operatively treated with factor replacement therapies. However, some individuals in this population will still experience secondary bleeding and require systemic treatment despite early clotting factor replacement.

While discontinuing anticoagulant therapy remains controversial, several studies suggest that it is safest for patients to continue their anticoagulation therapy for procedures with a moderate risk of bleeding, given the efficacy and availability of hemostatic agents.

**Alveolar Osteitis**

Alveolar osteitis is self-limiting, is not known to cause long-term morbidity, and typically resolves within a few days after initiating treatment. The prognosis without treatment is also excellent as the symptoms still resolve in the absence of treatment in a relatively short duration of time.