The convenience and cost-effectiveness of a urine dipstick test make it a common diagnostic tool. It is an appropriate alternative to urinalysis and urine microscopy to diagnose acute uncomplicated cystitis. Nitrite and leukocyte esterase are the most accurate indicators of acute uncomplicated cystitis in symptomatic women. Pyuria, bacteriuria, and even positive cultures of >100,000 CFU/mL do not necessarily constitute a diagnosis of a UTI unless there are also urinary or systemic symptoms such as pain, bladder spasms, fever, hematuria, leakage, etc. This is often the case in patients with chronic indwelling catheters.

**Urinalysis with microscopy**is the gold standard for urinalyses. Ideally, a mid-stream urine catch or a catheterized sample is preferred to avoid possible contamination. However, at least two studies have shown no significant difference in the incidence of contaminated or unreliable results in specimens collected with or without preliminary cleansing.

**Nitrites**on the urinary dipstick are the most reliable non-microscopic test for urinary tract infections. Bacteria, usually gram-negative organisms, reduce nitrate to nitrite in the urine, which takes six hours.Enterococcus, Pseudomonas, and Acinetobacter.

**Leukocyte esterase**can detect the presence of intact or broken down neutrophils on a urinary dipstick. False negatives can result in early infection, excess vitamin C, overly concentrated urine, ketonuria, and proteinuria. False positives can be caused by contamination of the urine by skin flora. Its overall sensitivity is 62% to 98%, and specificity is 55% to 96%. Overall, a useful indicator but not quite as reliable as nitrites.

Consider treating patients with UTI symptoms empirically if nitrites are positive, but evaluate alternative diagnoses if the leukocyte esterase is negative.

**Pyuria**is defined as more than ten white blood cells (WBC) per HPF. It has a reported sensitivity of 90% to 96% and specificity of 47% to 50%. To some degree, it depends on the quality of the collection, promptness of the examination, and quality of the laboratory technician performing the test, as yeast can sometimes be mistaken for white blood cells.

**White blood cell casts**consist of a coagulum of Tamm Horsfall mucoprotein and leukocytes from the renal tubular lumen, which is considered an indicator of pyelonephritis. It may also be associated with glomerulonephritis and interstitial nephritis.

**Bacteriuria**is usually defined as a colony count of more than 100,000 CFU/mL for a single organism from a clean-catch urine sample. However, 20% to 40% of women presenting with cystitis will only have 100-10,000 CFU/mL. If associated with symptoms, the positive predictive value for a UTI is >90%.

**Urine cultures**are not absolutely required in simple cystitis but highly recommended for bacterial identification and antibiotic selection in case of treatment failure, resistance, or persistent symptoms. Absolute indications for a urine culture include complicated urinary infections, pyelonephritis, and prior antimicrobial treatment. Cultures help differentiate relapsing from recurrent UTIs as well as assist in making proper adjustments to antibiotic selection, duration, and dosage.

Urine cultures do not affect treatment in the emergency department, so they are sometimes omitted but are strongly recommended as treatment failures and increasing antibiotic resistance can make follow-up treatment problematic if the initial therapy is unsuccessful.

**Imaging**is generally not needed in routine cases of simple, uncomplicated cystitis. In complicated cases, ultrasound can evaluate for hydronephrosis or abscess, and CT can help evaluate for kidney stones, hydronephrosis, emphysematous changes, and abscesses.

**Cystoscopy**is not needed or necessary in routine cases of simple cystitis.