# Continuing Education Activity

Cardiac pheochromocytoma is a rare type of primary cardiac tumor. It is a catecholamine-secreting tumor that can cause serious morbidity and mortality if not promptly diagnosed and treated. This activity outlines the clinical presentation, pathophysiology, histopathology, evaluation, treatment, and prognosis of cardiac pheochromocytoma. It highlights the role of the interprofessional team in evaluating and treating patients with this condition.

**Objectives:**
- Identify the etiology of cardiac pheochromocytomas.
- Describe the most common presentations of cardiac pheochromocytomas.
- Outline the management options available for cardiac pheochromocytomas.
- Summarize interprofessional team strategies for improving care coordination and communication to advance and improve the outcomes of cardiac pheochromocytomas.

# Introduction

Cardiac pheochromocytomas (CPs) are very rare primary neuroendocrine catecholamine-secreting tumors that arise from the sympathetic paraganglia, which is made up of chromaffin cells. Paraganglia are non-neuronal cells that originate from the neural crest. The incidence of primary cardiac tumors ranges from 0.01 to 0.3% by autopsy.

# Etiology

Although there is no clear data available, recent reports showed that genetic mutations and familial etiology contribute up to 25% to 50% of pheochromocytomas.

# Epidemiology

Cardiac pheochromocytomas (CPs) represent the rarest form of primary cardiac tumors. The incidence of primary cardiac tumors ranges from 0.01 to 0.3% by autopsy.

# Pathophysiology

Cardiac pheochromocytomas are catecholamine secreting tumors that arise from chromaffin cells of the sympathetic paraganglia in the heart. They are often characterized by excessive, episodic catecholamine production and/or secretion (like epinephrine, dopamine, and norepinephrine) that can lead to different signs and symptoms including hypertension, sweating, headache, dizziness, perspiration, palpitations, and tachycardia.

# Histopathology

Macroscopically, CP are highly vascular tumors with well-defined hemorrhagic cut surfaces and rarely have an obvious pedicle.

Histologically, like most of the paragangliomas, this tumor is mainly composed of chief cells grouped in clusters or organoid (“Zellbellen”) fashion with surrounding capillary networks. Pigmented CPs were also reported in a few patients.

Malignancy diagnosis is mainly based on metastasis rather than histologic features.

# History and Physical

The most common presentation of cardiac pheochromocytomas is with catecholamine-related signs and symptoms

# Evaluation

Once there is a suspicion of a pheochromocytoma, one should keep in mind that 98% of these tumors are intra-abdominal (90% in the adrenal medulla), and less than 2% are found in the chest. Of these in the chest, CP is the rarest one.

**Biochemical Testing**

- Cardiac pheochromocytoma can be confirmed or excluded with biochemical testing by using serum and urine metanephrines.

- Once pheochromocytoma is diagnosed with chemical testing, then the tumor has to be localized. Since the abdomen, especially the adrenal gland, is the most common site, intra-abdominal imaging should be done to rule out intra-abdominal pheochromocytoma.

**Tumor Localization**

The most difficult part of this tumor is not diagnosing it, but localizing it. There is a number of imaging studies (including but not limited to CT or enhanced CT, PET scan, MRI, echocardiogram, labeled metaiodobenzylguanidine (MIBG), or Tc labeled octreotide) that can be used. The most important of those studies will be reviewed below.

- **Iodine labeled metaiodobenzylguanidine (MIBG)**is the most effective method to screen for cardiac pheochromocytomas. It is very useful to identify the tumor and also detect the presence of metastasis.

- **Echocardiogram:**transthoracic echocardiogram (TTE) is less sensitive than transesophageal echocardiogram (TEE) as tumors are often retro-pericardiac. When the tumor is firmly and extensively adherent to the pericardium, both of them are less sensitive.

- **Magnetic Resonance Imaging (MRI):**cardiac MRI is very sensitive compared to CT scan and echocardiogram for localization. It can also identify the relation of the tumor to the surrounding structures.

- **Cardiac angiogram (cardiac catheterization):**This is indispensable pre-operative imaging of CP. It can localize both the tumor and the feeding vessels.

In summary: MIBG, MRI, and coronary angiogram are necessary imaging modalities for tumor localization after laboratory confirmation and they should be pursued before patient is scheduled for surgical intervention.

# Treatment / Management

The most effective treatment for cardiac pheochromocytomas is surgical resection.

# Differential Diagnosis

In general, differential diagnosis of pheochromocytomas is broad, and may include but not be limited to adrenal pheochromocytomas, hyperthyroidism, thyroid storm, cardiac arrhythmias, carcinoid tumor, migraine, stroke, medullary thyroid carcinoma, mastocytosis, etc.

In patients with a confirmed cardiac mass, the differential diagnosis may include pericardial mass, abscess, or metastasis.

# Surgical Oncology

The most effective treatment of cardiac pheochromocytomas is surgical resection

# Prognosis

The one- year and 5- year survival rate in a report of 91 patients who had benign CP were 98.2% and 78.8%, respectively.

# Complications

Complications can be related to either the disease itself or the procedure. Since it is a catecholamine-secreting tumor, if not treated, it can cause ischemic heart disease, myocardial infarction, cardiac arrhythmias, cardiomyopathy, pulmonary edema, stroke, and hypertensive crisis. The procedure is high risk. CP is a highly vascular tumor. In a report of 100 patients, 5 died due to massive intraoperative bleeding.

# Consultations

A collaboration between Cardiology and Endocrinology would establish the initial diagnosis while Cardiothorasic Surgery would complete the surgical treatment. Other specialties should be involved in the overall patient care including Electrophysiology and Oncology specialists as needed.

# Enhancing Healthcare Team Outcomes

An interprofessional approach including a cardiologist, a cardiothoracic surgeon, an endocrinologist, an oncologist, an electrophysiologist, an intensivist, an internist, and the nurse may be required for proper care and management of patients with CP. The overall prognosis is quite good after total resection.