The first therapy to work against HIV was the nucleoside reverse transcriptase inhibitor zidovudine. The FDA approved this in 1987. By 1996, research showed the advantages of combining medicines to treat HIV. Using HIV medicines for treatment is called antiretroviral therapy (ART). This form of therapy is recommended for all patients with HIV by the Department of Health and Human Services (DHHS) and the World Health Organization (WHO). This daily treatment of multiple HIV medications is an HIV regimen. A typical initial HIV regimen includes three HIV medications from a minimum of two drug classes. Although this treatment is not curative, it can provide longer lives for patients and reduce HIV transmission.

This reduction of transmission has become a widespread use of antiretroviral therapy for HIV-positive individuals who are with an HIV-negative partner. The successes of antiretroviral therapy have reduced HIV to a chronic condition in many parts of the world as progression to AIDS has become rare. Studies have found that 3-drug therapy has led to a 60% to 80% decline in the rates of AIDs, hospitalization, and death. By 2030 the CDC plans to implement a 90-90-90 plan (90% HIV diagnosed, 90% on therapy, and 90% suppressed).

The goal of HIV medicines is to prevent HIV from multiplying. There are six classes of drugs used in antiretroviral therapy. These drugs generally fall into classes according to the phase of the HIV life cycle inhibited by them. More common combinations include two nucleoside reverse transcriptase inhibitors (NRTIs) and one non-nucleoside reverse transcriptase inhibitor (NNRTI), a protease inhibitor (PI), or integrase inhibitor (II). The drugs are listed below according to their class and generic names.

People exposed to HIV-positive infectious bodily fluids either by skin puncture, damaged skin, or direct mucous membrane contact are at risk for transmission. They should start antiretroviral therapy as soon as possible. The United States Public Health Service guidelines recommend starting prophylactics up to 72 hours post-exposure. The recommended regimen is emtricitabine plus tenofovir plus raltegravir for four weeks. Those exposed to HIV should have follow-up HIV testing at 6, 12, and 24 weeks. If the test results are negative at 24 weeks, they are considered uninfectious.

A Recent HIV infection is considered the phase of ≤6 months after infection.

Pregnant patients should begin treatment immediately to prevent mother-to-child transmission of HIV and protect the woman's health.

The following includes all FDA-approved HIV medications:

- NRTIs: Abacavir, emtricitabine, lamivudine; Tenofovir disoproxil fumarate, zidovudine

- NNRTIs: Efavirenz, etravirine, nevirapine, rilpivirine

- Fusion inhibitors (FIs): Enfuvirtide

- Protease inhibitors (PIs): Atazanavir, darunavir, fosamprenavir, ritonavir, saquinavir, tipranavir

- CCR5 Antagonist: Maraviroc

- IIs: Dolutegavir, raltegravir, elvitegravir, bictegravir

- Post-Attachment Inhibitors: Ibalizumab

- Pharmacokinetic Enhancers: Cobicistat

The following includes all FDA-approved HIV combination medicines:

- Abacavir and lamivudine

- Abacavir, dolutegravir, and lamivudine

- Abacavir, lamivudine, and zidovudine

- Atazanavir and cobicistat

- Bictegravir, emtricitabine, and tenofovir alafenamide

- Darunavir and cobicistat

- Dolutegravir and rilpivirine

- Efavirenz, emtricitabine, and tenofovir disoproxil fumarate

- Efavirenz, lamivudine, and tenofovir disoproxil fumarate

- Efavirenz, lamivudine, and tenofovir disoproxil fumarate

- Elvitegravir, cobicistat, emtricitabine, and tenofovir alafenamide fumarate

- Elvitegravir, cobicistat, emtricitabine, and tenofovir disoproxil fumarate

- Emtricitabine, rilpivirine, and tenofovir alafenamide

- Emtricitabine, rilpivirine, and tenofovir disoproxil fumarate

- Emtricitabine and tenofovir alafenamide

- Emtricitabine and tenofovir disoproxil fumarate

- Lamivudine and tenofovir disoproxil fumarate

- Lamivudine and zidovudine

- Lopinavir and ritonavir

The FDA does not approve investigational HIV drugs. Investigational drugs include those used to treat or prevent HIV and vaccines to treat or prevent HIV. These drugs are only available in clinical trials. No vaccines exist yet; however, researchers are studying this possibility.

The following are recommended starting regimens for the majority of patients with HIV-1(treatment-naive patients.)

- Bictegravir/tenofovir alafenamide(TAF)/emtricitabine

- Dolutegravir + (emtricitabine or lamivudine) + (tenofovir alafenamide [TAF] or tenofovir disoproxil fumarate [TDF])