The extrapyramidal system, which is also known as the basal ganglia, comprises the following

1) Substantia nigra

2) Striatum (caudate and putamen)

3) Globus pallidus

4) Subthalamic nucleus

5) Thalamus

**Parkinson Disease**

A decrease in the levels of dopamine that occurs relative to a degeneration of the substantia nigra results in decreased levels reaching the caudate and putamen; this leads to denervation hypersensitivity of dopamine receptors in those targets, especially of D1 and D2 receptors, within the nigrostriatal pathway. This yields increased inhibition in the thalamus, which subsequently causes a decrease in excitatory input to the motor cortex, which eventually manifests as bradykinesia and rigidity, seen in parkinsonism presenting in PD.

**Normal-pressure Hydrocephalus**

The proposed mechanisms for the development of parkinsonism in NPH include increased resistance to the outflow of cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) resulting in enlargement of the ventricles, abnormal cerebral blood flow, the pressure exerted by the brain parenchyma, and a rise in water content in the periventricular region. There is also a report of parkinsonism has also been reported in a patient with obstructive hydrocephalus caused as a result of shunt dysfunction. The study revealed fluorodopa PET showing decreased uptake in the caudate and putamen.

A study conducted by Sypert et al. reported that manifestations of parkinsonism seen in NPH occur due to mechanical disruption of the basal ganglia, which results in inadequate blood flow to the nigrostriatal pathway.

**Vascular Parkinsonism**

Vascular parkinsonism results from an underlying vascular condition resulting in the progression of symptoms.

Various studies have reported that a history of ischemic cerebrovascular disease is responsible for the development of parkinsonism and occurred more often due to the presence of lacunar infarcts as compared to cortical infarcts. Strategic infarcts result in parkinsonism by destroying the putaminal-pallido and pallido-thalamic pathway.

Studies have also found that silent infarcts which are majorly present in the basal ganglia to be the causative factor for VP.

Thus, there are various coexisting clinical and physiological factors in patients with basal ganglionic infarcts that play a significant role in the manifestation of parkinsonism.

**Drug-induced Parkinsonism**

In DIP, the dopamine D2 receptor which is present in the striatum is structurally or functionally blocked by the dopamine D2 receptor antagonists, causing a decrease in the dopamine levels, which results in similar dysfunction as seen in PD

**Drugs Commonly Involved**

- First-generation antipsychotics:  The phenomenon of drug-induced parkinsonism has been predominantly observed with first-generation antipsychotics such as high-potency drugs like fluphenazine, haloperidol, trifluoperazine. The low-potency drugs chlorpromazine and thioridazine, are lesser-known causes of drug-induced parkinsonism. Out of the total number of individuals taking typical antipsychotics, 80% of them have extrapyramidal symptoms (EPS).

- Second-generation antipsychotics: These are also known as atypical antipsychotics. Overall, these medications have a lower risk as compared to first-generation antipsychotics since they have a lesser affinity for D2 receptors. Risperidone, ziprasidone, and olanzapine are more prone to cause drug-induced parkinsonism as compared to quetiapine and clozapine.

- Antiemetic agents and prokinetic medications: Various drugs like metoclopramide, domperidone, levosulpiride, and prochlorperazine mediate their prokinetic action by blocking the enteric D2 receptors. At the same time, these drugs block the D2 receptors in the area postrema present in the medulla oblongata, thus bringing about the antiemetic action. The side effects of hyperprolactinemia and EPS occur when the central D2 receptors are blocked as well. Metoclopramide is most frequently associated with medication-induced movement disorders.

- Dopamine-depleting drugs: Vesicular monoamine transporters type 2 (VMAT2) receptor inhibitors like tetrabenazine, a reversible inhibitor, and reserpine, an irreversible inhibitor, resulted in decreased uptake of dopamine into the presynaptic vesicles. This activity leads to a reduction in dopamine levels. Reserpine has 10-20 times more potency as compared to tetrabenazine.

- Other drugs: Reports exist of valproic acid-induced parkinsonism. The proposed hypothesis is that there is gamma-aminobutyric acid (GABA)-induced suppression of the dopamine transported to the basal ganglia.

**Toxin-induced Parkinsonism**

- Manganese: Manganism occurs when there is prolonged exposure to manganese, as seen in miners. When low amounts of manganese are exposed, reversible behavioral changes may present like aggressiveness, irritability, and hallucinations. When manganese exposure is for an extended time, neurological damage occurs. Extrapyramidal symptoms present, which are responsive to levodopa. The presence of more diffuse damage to the brain that is not responsive to levodopa results in dyskinesia. The predominant sites involved include the globus pallidus and the substantia nigra pars reticulata.

- Iron: There is literature to prove the actual mechanism of increased iron in the substantia nigra; the proposed hypothesis includes changes involved with the homeostasis of iron rather than exposure to iron.

**Chronic Traumatic Encephalopathy**

It results due to neuronal loss, the presence of senile plaques, brain tissue scarring, and diffuse axonal injury, all of which are due to repeated head injury. It usually presents in individuals who are involved in contact sports such as wrestling, rugby, and most commonly boxing. A significant risk factor is a high concussion and sub-concussive blow exposure.

**Brain Tumors**

Basal ganglionic and supratentorial tumors have been described to cause parkinsonism. Meningioma present at the sphenoid ridge is most commonly known to cause these symptoms. The mechanism by which brain tumors lead to the development of parkinsonian features includes compression of the basal ganglia and substania nigra leading to the destruction of the pathway, edema of the brain by the tumor causing decreased perfusion and infiltration by the tumor.

**Juvenile Parkinsonism**

Familial history plays a significant role in the development of JP. Patients with a family history of Huntington's disease and spinocerebellar ataxia are more likely to develop JP. A genetic mutation in any of the three genes; parkin, PTEN-induced putative kinase 1, and PARK7 can result in autosomal recessive parkinsonism.