**Management of Dermal Manifestations**

There is no substitute for lifelong sun protection in albinism, and the importance cannot be overestimated. Subjects should be educated on avoidance of prolonged UV light exposure (sun, tanning beds) and avoidance of medications that increase photosensitivity. Any outdoor activities, no matter how brief, should be preceded by the application of sunscreen (SPF 30+) with liberal and frequent reapplication (every 2 hours) when in the sun. No good studies support the use of high SPF, but some resources recommend SPF 50 or higher. Additional protection can be enlisted with the use of protective clothing and eyewear (hats, UPF-labeled clothing, long-sleeves, long pants, collared shirts, socks, UV protective sunglasses). Photophobia can be managed with dark lensed glasses, but because of the resultant vision reduction, some patients opt for brimmed hats. Self-examination and self-education on melanoma ABCDE criteria, prompt referral to dermatology for any suspicious or changing lesions, such as (1) new lesions in sun-exposed areas, (2) painful, itching, bleeding, nonhealing, changing lesions, or (3) asymmetrical, irregularly bordered, variably colored, diameter greater than 6 mm, evolving lesions. Lifelong, periodic skin examinations (once to twice per year) with dermatology for early detection and treatment of skin cancers. Referrals to pediatric dermatology should be early to illuminate the benefit and decode the terminology of sun-protective options. Surveillance should start at adolescence, as skin cancer may appear as early as the teenage years. Special attention from providers to changes in pink and red lesion, since most melanoma in OCA is amelanotic melanoma.

**Management of Eye Abnormalities**

Nystagmus naturally decreases over time. Additionally, individuals enact learn to adjust head posture to time the gaze position the yields the lowest nystagmic amplitude. This position is called the nystagmus null point. Eye muscle surgery can improve ocular alignment, improve head posture, and improve vision only in severe cases, but surgery may need to be repeated several times. Unless strabismus is severe, it is usually not necessary unless it is pursued for cosmetic reasons. Ophthalmic evaluation for optical correction 2 to 4 times per year (age 1 and 2), 1 to 3 times per year (age 3 to 6), annually (age 5 to 18), then every 2 to 3 years (adults). Refractive errors require treatment with corrective lenses, preferably by 4 to 6 months of age with frequent changes in prescriptions in the first years of life. Even with refractive correction, vision may never fully normalize because of irreversible foveal hypoplasia. Lenses that darken in sunlight help with photophobia but decrease vision. Lenses should have UV protection. Bifocals and low-vision aids may also be considered in older children and adults. Teaching aids and special classroom considerations (high contrast reading material, large print texts and worksheets, close-to-board seating, magnification settings on computers, among others) can help overcome the educational delays associated with visual deficits.

**Management of the Inheritable Nature of the Condition**

Genetics consultation before childbearing years is beneficial to parents of albino children considering future offspring, the patient with albinism and their siblings. Albinism is an obligate homozygote condition with a 100% chance of passing on their defective gene. Coordinated genetic testing of the nonaffected partner is possible if the pathogenic variant is known. This will confirm the offspring have the potential to inherit the condition, if the partner is a carrier of the same pathogenic variant, or just be obligate carriers if the partner has only wild-type genes. A couple who has already had an albino child has a 25% chance of having another child with albinism, a 50% chance of producing carrier offspring, and 25% of producing non-carrier offspring. This is assuming that one of the parents is not albino, in which case the chance of producing a second albino offspring is 50% after a confirmed albino offspring. The fact than non-albino siblings have a 67% chance of being carriers is important to convey before they consider childbearing. Of note, if two parents carry genes for different types of albinism (for example, a patient with OCA2 and a carrier for OCA1), no children will be born with albinism, but the children are at risk for being heterozygous for both mutant alleles.

**Direct Therapeutic Modalities**

Nitisinone triggers tyrosine accumulation in blood and mouse models have suggested that it could improve pigmentation in OCA1B subjects, but a clinical trial is currently underway. Aminoglycosides are a potential and unconfirmed therapy. Despite anecdotal reports, L-DOPA did not result in any improvement in visual acuity in a study of 45 patients. Adeno-associated viruses (AAV) vectors is a potential gene therapy introducing a functional copy of the tyrosinase gene in OCA1 and OA1 patients.