Identification of a hypoglycemic patient is critical due to potential adverse effects including coma and/or death. Severe hypoglycemia can be treated with intravenous (IV) dextrose followed by infusion of glucose. For conscious patients able to take oral (PO) medications, readily absorbable carbohydrate sources (such as fruit juice) should be given. For patients unable to take oral agents, a 1-mg intramuscular (IM) injection of glucagon can be administered. Once the patient is more awake, a complex carbohydrate food source should be given to the patient to achieve sustained euglycemia. More frequent blood glucose monitoring should occur to rule out further drops in blood sugar.

Nonpharmacological management of recurrent hypoglycemia involves patient education and lifestyle changes. Some patients are unaware of the serious ramifications of persistent hypoglycemia. As such, patients should be educated on the importance of routine blood glucose monitoring as well as on the identification of the individual's symptoms of hypoglycemia.  If lifestyle changes are not effective in preventing further episodes, then pharmacologic intervention should be modified. Patients should be advised to wear a medical alert bracelet and to carry a glucose source like gel, candy or tablets on their person in case symptoms arise. In the outpatient setting, reviewing blood sugar logs as well as food logs may be helpful in identifying problem areas for the patient.

Glycemic control has been an important aspect of medical management due to the association between glycated hemoglobin levels and cardiovascular events in diabetes mellitus type 2 patients. In the 2008 ACCORD trial, it was determined that intensive therapy (defined as a goal hemoglobin A1C less than 6.0%) did not significantly reduce major cardiovascular events and was associated with increased mortality and risk for hypoglycemia.

The 2009 VADT study additionally studied the effect of intensive blood glucose control in a sample of 1791 veterans with poorly controlled diabetes mellitus type 2. More rigid glycemic control did not appear to have a significant effect on cardiovascular outcomes, although it did improve microalbuminuria compared to the standard therapy arm.

Regarding endogenous sources of insulin, insulinomas are often managed surgically. Evidence of an insulinoma should prompt workup or investigative effort into potential multiple endocrine neoplasia (MEN) disorders.