CTEPH is a difficult diagnosis, and the management is not straight forward; delays in treatment correlate with high mortality rates, and thus, management is best with an interprofessional team.

Given high morbidity and mortality and is a potentially curable condition, there should be a low threshold for suspicion of chronic pulmonary thromboembolism for patients presenting with pulmonary hypertension. As there are improved outcomes with surgical treatments, all the patients who are potential surgical candidates should undergo evaluation for surgical thromboendarterectomy. Also, physicians should be more aware of management options for patients who are not surgical candidates. Options include pulmonary balloon angioplasty, and PAH targeted medical therapy along with lifelong anticoagulation.

The primary care clinicians and nurses should educate patients before discharge on medication adherence and follow up. In patients with multiple comorbidities, close follow up is very crucial as management of the concurrent medical conditions helps significantly improve the functional capacity of these patients. If choosing pharmacotherapy, a board-certified pharmacotherapy specialty pharmacist should assist with the dosing and selection of drugs, especially the more novel agents. Clinicians and/or nurses should assess patients who are about to travel by flight for possible need of oxygen requirement in-flight journey.

In the general population, measures are necessary against acute PE. Patients who have a prolonged hospital stay should be given appropriate anticoagulation during their visit. At the same time, they can also have inflatable compression devices or compression stockings for the prevention of clot formation. Individuals who travel frequently and have longer airplane time should make sure that they walk about every one to two hours or changing their seating positions regularly. Close communication between the team members is vital to ensure that the patient is receiving the current standard of care. The interprofessional team, including clinicians, specialists, nursing, and pharmacists, all need to collaborate to implement these measures and advance positive outcomes in treating CTEPH. [Level V]