The pathophysiology of intestinal trauma is multifaceted including mechanical, ischemia/reperfusion, and signaling mediated mechanisms.

Mechanical injury can be direct or indirect. Penetrating trauma causes trauma to the intestines by direct laceration of the tissue from the penetrating object. The severity of injury depends on the penetrating object, its velocity, and the site and trajectory of the path. Penetrating trauma invariably also results in other associated injuries of the abdomen.

Blunt intestinal injury is usually caused by the intestine being crushed between external objects (e.g., car door, handlebars, etc.) and internal structures (e.g., vertebrae, pelvis, etc.). Indirect injuries in blunt trauma can also occur from acceleration/deceleration injuries when one part of the bowel is tethered in place and the other part is mobile. The duodenum-jejunum junction is a common site for this type of shear injury due to the stabilization of the duodenum by the ligament of Treitz. In patients with prior abdominal surgery, acceleration/deceleration injuries can be precipitated by underlying adhesions leading to an unpredictable pattern of traction injuries. Blunt injury can ultimately lead to devascularization of the affected segment of bowel, leading to intestinal necrosis.

Another mechanism for indirect intestinal injury involves a low perfusion state and global hypotension from hemorrhagic shock or direct vascular trauma. de Haan et al. found elevated circulating intestinal fatty acid binding protein (I-FABP) released as a result of intestinal injury in trauma patients which correlated well with triage scoring systems for trauma including the shock index, Abbreviated Injury Score (AIS), as well as the overall Injury Severity Score (ISS).

Acute phase reactants activated as a result of bowel injury leads to an increase in the permeability of the capillaries.