Anything that decreases the bile secretion or hinders the bile flow causes pathology. Cholestasis can be due to impaired secretion of bile from the hepatocytes (potentially due to some drugs or hormonal imbalance) or any obstruction of the biliary outflow either due to the intrinsic pathology of the biliary tract or external compression of the biliary tract by possibly a mass/tumor of the bile duct and/or pancreas. Biliary tract pathology may cause diseases such as primary sclerosing cholangitis, primary biliary cirrhosis, biliary atresia, etc. The most common reason for bile duct obstruction is gallstones, which eventually cause gallbladder inflammation (acute or chronic cholecystitis). An extensive but non-exhaustive list of biliary tract pathology is listed below.

**Biliary Tract Disorders**

- Biliary Colic:

- Gallstone becomes intermittently lodged in the biliary tree's cystic or common bile duct.

- Acute Cholecystitis

- Chronic Cholecystitis

- Biliary Obstruction:

- Blockage of the bile duct system leads to impaired bile flow from the liver into the intestinal tract.

- Primary Biliary Cholangitis

-  An autoimmune disorder leading to the gradual destruction of intrahepatic bile ducts resulting in periportal inflammation and cholestasis.

- Primary Sclerosing Cholangitis

- A chronically progressive cholestatic liver disorder of unknown etiology characterized by inflammation, fibrosis, and structures of the intrahepatic and/or extrahepatic biliary ducts.

- Porcelain gallbladder

- Calcification of the gallbladder wall.

- Biliary Tract Cholangiocarcinoma

- Rare malignancy of the epithelial cells from various areas of the biliary tree, including intrahepatic, extrahepatic, and perihilar bile ducts.

- Sphincter of Oddi dysfunction

- Spasms, strictures, or inappropriate relaxation of the sphincter of Oddi.

- Biliary parasites (e.g., Clonorchis sinensis)

- Gallbladder polyps

- Cholangitis/Ascending Cholangitis

- Inflammation of the biliary tract system most commonly caused by an ascending bacterial infection of the biliary tree.

- Recurrent Pyogenic cholangitis

- Hyperplastic Cholecystoses (Adenomyomatosis and Cholesterolosis)

- Two conditions characterized by the accumulation of cholesterol within the wall of the gallbladder.

- Choledochal (biliary) cyst
- Cystic dilation of the intrahepatic bile ducts, extrahepatic bile ducts, or both.

- Caroli disease (AKA congenital communicating cavernous ectasia of the biliary tree)
- A rare inherited disorder characterized by segmental dilation of the large intrahepatic bile ducts.

- Mirizzi Syndrome
- External compression of the CBD or CHD from impacted gallstones leading to obstruction of these ducts.

- Biliary atresia
- Progressive fibrosing obstructive cholangiopathy of the intrahepatic and extrahepatic biliary system, leading to obstruction of bile flow and neonatal jaundice.

- Choledocholithiasis
- The presence of gallstones within the CBD

- Cholelithiasis
- Cholesterol stones (80%)

- Composed of cholesterol and calcium carbonate


- Pigment stones

- Black pigment stones (10%)

- Composed of calcium bilirubinate
- Associated with hemolytic diseases such as sickle cell anemia, hereditary spherocytosis


- Mixed (Brown pigment) stones (10%)

- Associated with infection
- Arise in inflamed portions of the biliary tract (e.g., due to bacterial or parasitic infections)

**Bile Disorders**

- Primary bile acid malabsorption (PBAM)
- An idiopathic intestinal disorder associated with congenital diarrhea, steatorrhea, interruption of the enterohepatic circulation, and reduced plasma cholesterol levels.

- Gilbert syndrome
- An autosomal recessive disorder of reduced glucuronidation of bilirubin within the liver, leading to unconjugated hyperbilirubinemia and recurrent episodes of jaundice.

- Dubin-Johnson syndrome
- An autosomal recessive disorder of impaired excretion of conjugated from hepatocytes into the bile canaliculi due to a defective multidrug resistance-associated protein 2 (MPR2).

- Crigler-Najjar syndrome
- An autosomal recessive disorder characterized by a decrease or absence of UDP-glucuronosyltransferase required for glucuronidation of unconjugated bilirubin in the liver, leading to an increase in unconjugated (indirect) bilirubin.

- Intrahepatic cholestasis of pregnancy
- Liver disease of pregnancy appearing in the second and third trimesters of pregnancy. It is characterized by pruritus and elevated serum bile acid levels (> 10 mcmol/L).

- Neonatal jaundice
- Elevated total serum bilirubin manifests as yellow discoloration of the skin, sclera, and mucous membranes.