# Continuing Education Activity

Octreotide is a medication used in the management and treatment of acromegaly and thyrotrophinomas. It is in the somatostatin analog class of drugs. This activity describes the indications, action, and contraindications for octreotide as a valuable agent in the management of acromegaly and thyrotrophinomas, as well as carcinoid syndrome. This activity also highlights the mechanism of action, adverse event profile, and other key factors (e.g., off-label uses, dosing, pharmacodynamics, pharmacokinetics, monitoring, relevant interactions) pertinent for members of the interprofessional team in the management of patients with endocrinopathies and related conditions.

**Objectives:**
- Identify the most common adverse events associated with octreotide therapy.
- Review the contraindication of octreotide therapy.
- Explain the importance of monitoring for patients on octreotide therapy.
- Summarize the importance of improving care coordination among the interprofessional team to enhance care delivery for patients on octreotide therapy.

# Indications

The primary FDA-approved indications of octreotide, seen by clinical studies, are for the treatment of acromegaly and thyrotrophinomas. In patients with acromegaly, octreotide has been documented to be clinically more effective than bromocriptine through multiple clinical trials comparing both drugs. In the management of carcinoid syndrome, octreotide has been found to be more beneficial over the current treatment options, especially in cases of carcinoid crises, where it has shown to provide improved clinical outcomes. Additionally, in patients with tumors producing increased vasoactive intestinal peptide, such as VIPoma, especially those tumors that have already metastasized and have become refractory to traditional symptomatic therapy, octreotide could be the drug of choice, as evidenced by few clinical trials. Despite limited research, octreotide has proven to be first-line therapy for stool or fistula output reduction in patients with high-output secretory diarrhea, such as those caused by cryptosporidium, especially in patients with AIDS and those with small intestinal fistulas. Initial studies regarding the use of octreotide have provided positive outcomes in various conditions such as hyperinsulinemia induced neonatal hypoglycemia, insulin-dependent diabetes mellitus, reactive pancreatitis, dumping syndrome, and postprandial hypotension; however,  further studies are required to identify and document the utility of octreotide in the above diseases, before being incorporated in treatment guidelines.

Octreotide also has off-label use, not approved by FDA, in refractory or persistent diarrhea associated with chemotherapy, graft-versus-host disease, and AIDS-associated diarrhea caused by cryptosporidiosis.

**Use of Octreotide in Pregnant and Lactating Patients**

Octreotide is a category B medication, as per FDA, which indicates that no documentation exists of identifiable fetal risk in animal reproduction studies, and studies involving pregnant women are inadequate and ill-defined presently.

Although studies regarding octreotide use during breastfeeding are few, in various case reports with patients receiving the subcutaneous form octreotide, there was a significant level of the drug found in breast milk, almost at similar concentrations in serum.

**Use of Octreotide in the Pediatric Population**

In pediatric patients, especially those under the age of 6 years, evaluation of the efficacy and safety of octreotide remains undetermined due to a lack of well-documented randomized controlled clinical trials. In multiple clinical trials and reports regarding octreotide use in the pediatric age group, especially in children less than two years of age, serious adverse events, including and not limited to hypoxia, necrotizing enterocolitis, and fatal outcomes, have been documented. No well-established relationship between the adverse events and octreotide exists, as most of the patients in the pediatric age group had clinically significant comorbid conditions.

**Use of Octreotide in the Geriatric Population**

Clinical studies involving octreotide have not included sufficient numbers of subjects aged 65 and older; hence, it has been challenging to establish the response of the geriatric population to octreotide compared to younger adults. However, extreme caution needs to be exercised during dose selection for the geriatric population, with initial lower doses and careful titration after that, considering the higher frequency of decreased cardiac, hepatic, and renal function, and of other comorbid diseases or other drug therapies.

# Mechanism of Action

Octreotide is an analog of the polypeptide hormone somatostatin.

# Administration

There are no oral formulations available for octreotide. Octreotide administration may be through a subcutaneous or intravenous route. Drug administration is usually as octreotide acetate injection, either as a subcutaneous or a long-acting release form. Compared to subcutaneous octreotide, the bioavailability of the long-acting release form is relatively low at about 60%. The subcutaneous form is available either as sterile 1-mL ampules in three strengths; 50 mg, 100 mg a, d  500 mg, or a  sterile 5-mL multidose vials in two strengths; 200 mg/mL and 1000 mg/mL. They are usually dosed three-times-daily, whereas the long-acting release form is a depot formulation containing a 10 to 30 mg dose of octreotide and is available in three strengths; 10 mg per 6 mL, 20 mg per 6 mL, and 30 mg per 6 mL, usually administered intramuscularly every 28 days.

# Adverse Effects

- Gastrointestinal abnormalities (34% to 61%) are transient and usually mild to moderate. They include diarrhea, nausea, abdominal discomfort, gallbladder abnormalities, such as cholelithiasis and microlithiasis, biliary sediment and sludge due to alteration of fat absorption, and possibly by decreasing motility of the gallbladder.

- Bradycardia occurs in 25% of patients with acromegaly, conduction abnormalities (10%), and arrhythmias (9%).

- Hypoglycemia (3%) and hyperglycemia (16%) occur due to alteration in glucose metabolism, usually mild in severity.

- Hypothyroidism: In patients with acromegaly, subclinical hypothyroidism occurred in 12%, and goiter occurred in 6% during treatment with octreotide acetate. In patients without acromegaly, isolated cases of hypothyroidism have been reported. However, there was no incidence of goiter in this subset of patients.

- Dermatologic: Itching (18%).

- Pain at the injection site (7.7%).

- Headache and dizziness (6%).

- Other side effects, documented in less than 4% of patients on octreotide, include cold and flu symptoms, weakness, fatigue, depression, blurred vision, pruritus, hair loss, vision disturbance, flushing of the skin, arthralgia, lower back pain, increased urinary frequency especially during waking hours, and urinary tract infection, edema, bruising and hematoma formation at the injection site, and malabsorption of fat and other nutrients.

# Contraindications

Hypersensitivity reaction on administration, due to octreotide or any of its components, is the main contraindication to its future use. Octreotide should also be used very cautiously in patients with insulinoma and type 2 diabetes mellitus who require intensive blood glucose monitoring and control because it can lower glucose levels dramatically and reduce the insulin requirements in these patients by up to 50%. Therefore, serum glucose concentrations should be monitored carefully during octreotide therapy. Octreotide also increases the bioavailability of bromocriptine by up to 40%, which is a matter of concern because octreotide and bromocriptine are both used to treat acromegaly. Octreotide may also lead to bradycardia, arrhythmias, or conduction defects and, therefore, should be used with caution in the at-risk groups of patients.

# Monitoring

Octreotide, being a somatostatin analog, requires close monitoring because of the numerous physiological actions of somatostatin in the body. Additionally, various markers are specific indicators of the therapeutic effect of octreotide and the body's response to drug therapy.

In the treatment of acromegaly, serum growth hormone (GH) and insulin-like growth factor (IGF) require monitoring. However, the frequency of monitoring differs by the formulation of octreotide administered. Use of the short-acting formulation requires measurement of serum IGF-1 only once, around 14 days after initiating octreotide therapy or after any change in dose, or a GH assay after every 1 to 4 hours for 8 to 12 hours after administration of every dose. The use of octreotide’s newer long-acting formulation needs less intensive monitoring in the form of a serum GH assay and a serum IGF-1assay around three months before administering the subsequent dose. The maintenance phase in the treatment of acromegaly also requires monitoring to detect delayed adverse effects. Hence, serum GH and serum IGF-1 levels should be obtained every 3 to 6 months.

During the management of carcinoid syndrome, the measurement of 5-hydroxyindole-acetic acid, serotonin, and substance P levels are necessary.

Octreotide treatment for VIPomas requires periodic measurement of the vasoactive intestinal peptide to monitor tumor burden and risk of relapse.

In addition to the above, patients on long-term octreotide therapy require monitoring of various clinical parameters, both at baseline and periodically, for prevention and early detection of adverse effects. These effects include blood glucose levels, including monitoring of glycemic control in patients with type 2 diabetes mellitus, cardiac function with periodic electrocardiograms, thyroid function tests, plasma vitamin B and zinc, especially in patients receiving total parenteral nutrition who are at risk of excessive fluid loss, and an abdominal ultrasound to look for abnormalities of the gall bladder in the presence of clinical findings.

# Toxicity

Limited studies have assessed octreotide toxicity. However, isolated studies have shown a mild degree of bone marrow suppression and impairment in spermatogenesis due to inhibition of serum inhibin B and concomitant increase in FSH in supratherapeutic doses. There is a need to conduct significantly larger studies and trials to define and establish the therapeutic index of octreotide and identify its toxic effects and its management.

# Enhancing Healthcare Team Outcomes

Although it has been a few decades since the synthesis of octreotide, its use has limitations to a few indications.

Octreotide therapy requires an interprofessional team approach, including clinicians, specialists, specialty-trained nurses, and pharmacists, all collaborating across disciplines to achieve optimal patient results while minimizing adverse events. [Level 5]