The head and neck region contains five important fascial layers, with which any surgeon working in the area must be very familiar. From superficial to deep, these are the skin, the subcutaneous tissue/superficial areolar tissue, the superficial fascia, the loose areolar tissue, and the deep fascia. At the level of the midface, the superficial fascia is termed the superficial musculoaponeurotic system, or SMAS. The third layer’s nomenclature differs depending on the area; it is the frontalis muscle in the forehead, the temporoparietal fascia in the temporal region, the SMAS in the midface, and the platysma in the neck. The deep fascial layers also have different nomenclature depending where in the face and neck they are identified. These are the deep temporal fascia or temporalis muscle fascia, the parotidomasseteric fascia, the periosteum under the scalp, and the deep cervical investing fascia in the neck.

The SMAS varies in thickness depending on the region of the face, with denser tissue in the lateral face and thinner tissue medially. The SMAS also typically has tighter adhesions to the skin, and looser adhesions to the fifth layer, allowing for sub-SMAS blunt dissection. Fibrous connections, referred to as the facial or retaining ligaments, are important because they give support and stability to the surrounding layers. There are two types, the osseocutaneous ligaments and ligaments that connect between the third and fifth layers. These ligaments are surgically released during tissue dissection in a facelift to permit mobilization of flaps, and their function is then restored with sutures. The most important ligaments in the face include the temporal ligamentous adhesion, the lateral orbital thickening, the zygomatic ligament, the masseteric ligaments, and the mandibular ligament.

The modiolar peninsula is the perioral area in the face above the mandibular ligament and below the zygomatic ligament. This area is never dissected during the extended SMAS technique. It sometimes serves as an anchoring site for sutures to bring this tissue cephalad.

Superficial fat in the midface is termed "malar fat." This fat gives the face volume and a youthful appearance. One of the benefits of the extended SMAS technique is that this volume is returned to the midface and the malar prominence is enhanced.

Branches of the facial nerve have different courses after traversing the parotid gland. After exiting the anterior border of the parotid, these branches travel just superficial to the masseteric fascia. The facial nerve branches generally then travel along the deep surfaces of the facial muscles to provide innervation; the exceptions are the mentalis, levator anguli oris, and buccinator muscles, which are innervated from their superficial surfaces because they are located deeper within the face. This arrangment is important to keep in mind to avoid injury to nerves during dissection. It is also important to be cognizant of each branch’s trajectory through the face. More commonly injured than the facial nerve's branches, however, is the great auricular nerve, which exits the posterior aspect of the sternocleidomastoid muscle and travels superiorly roughly mid-way between the mastoid tip and the angle of the mandible, 1-2 cm posterior to the external jugular vein.