**Importance of Ovarian Assessment by Ultrasound**

- Role of AFC: Evaluation of AFC has similar accuracy as Anti-Mullerian Hormone levels in predicting the ovarian reserve and the response to ovarian stimulation to gonadotropins and pregnancy success rates with IVF.

- Follicle assessment

- Gonadotropin stimulated cycles - The use of gonadotropins leads to the recruitment of multiple follicles compared with the typical single follicle in a natural, unstimulated cycle. Ultrasonographic assessment of follicular growth is an important step for clinical decision-making and early detection of complications such as ovarian hyperstimulation.
- Oral ovulation-inducing medications- Follicular assessment using ultrasound in this population is controversial as there is less chance of ovarian hyperstimulation and multiple births. Additionally, the increase of cycle monitoring with ultrasound may be cost-prohibitive for many patients without providing a significant difference in pregnancy rates. Although ultrasound is not routinely used in all patients, it is utilized in patients using an Hcg trigger for ovulation to time intercourse or IUI and also when there is difficulty predicting ovulation with ovulation predictor kits. In addition, a recent retrospective study including approximately 50,000 IUI cycles showed a higher risk of multifetal pregnancy in patients less than 40 years of age and with >2 mature ovarian follicles. Hence, it may be beneficial to monitor follicular growth in patients using oral ovulation induction medications to reduce multifetal gestations.

- Diagnosis of Polycystic ovarian syndrome: PCOS contributes to female infertility secondary to anovulation. The ultrasound criteria to diagnose PCOS include assessing follicle number per ovary (FNPO) and ovarian volume. (Figure 10). An ovarian volume of greater than 10 ml and an AFC of greater than 12 per ovary on ultrasound is consistent with PCOS based on the Rotterdam Consensus conference.  However,  greater than 60% of women aged 25 to 30 were found to have ovaries with PCOS based on this criteria. Therefore, this criteria is being changed to FNPO greater than 20 and/ or ovarian volume greater than 10 ml without corpus luteum or other dominant follicles or cysts.

- Diagnosis of other ovarian cysts like cystic teratomas (Figure 11), borderline or malignant ovarian tumors, and endometriomas (Figure 12). Cystic teratomas have hyperechoic areas, sometimes with calcifications. Endometriomas are notable for homogeneous low-level internal echoes or ground glass appearance.

**Importance of Endometrial Assessment by Ultrasound**

Ultrasound plays a key role in identifying different endometrial and uterine factors that affect embryo implantation.

- Exponential endometrial growth is observed in women undergoing gonadotropin stimulated cycles, whereas reduction in the endometrial lining was noted with increasing age and use of clomiphene citrate (CC).

- Higher clinical pregnancy rates are noted when grade 3 endometrial vascularity was observed on color flow power doppler.

- Despite other confounding factors affecting successful implantation, a few studies noted a positive correlation between higher clinical pregnancy rates and both triple-layer endometrium and endometrial thickness of 7 mm or higher.

- The presence of polyps, endometrial fluid, adenomyosis, and leiomyomas is associated with abnormal endometrial molecular expressions, in turn altering endometrial receptivity and negatively impacting implantation and early embryo development.

- Endometrial polyps are either sessile or pedunculated localized tumors with endometrial glands, stroma, and blood vessels. Polyps are seen on ultrasound as hyperechoic masses with a feeding vessel on color flow Doppler (Figure 14). Endometrial polyps have a prevalence of 32% and are common in patients with infertility.
- The most common causes for endometrial fluid in reproductive age women include intrauterine adhesions (Asherman’s syndrome), hydrosalpinx, cesarean scar niche, and subclinical intrauterine infection. Ultrasound features of intrauterine adhesions include disruption to the endometrial- myometrial junction, hypoechoic bands traversing the endometrial cavity, presence of skip lesions, and areas of normal functional endometrium (Figure 15).

**Importance of Uterine Assessment by Ultrasound**

- Submucosal fibroids: On ultrasound, submucosal fibroids appear as hypoechoic structures in the endometrium with a circular pattern on color flow doppler. Submucosal fibroids can reduce implantation, live birth rates, and their surgical resection has improved clinical pregnancy rates, live birth rates in some studies.

- Adenomyosis -ultrasound features of adenomyosis include globular uterine enlargement without any leiomyomas, cystic anechoic spaces in the myometrium, asymmetric uterine wall thickening, subendometrial echogenic linear striations, heterogeneous echotexture of myometrium, obscure endometrial/ myometrial border, thickening of the transition zone.

- Congenital anomalies of the uterus or Mullerian duct anomalies significantly affect preterm delivery, pregnancy losses, malpresentation, and possibly infertility. While there are many different variants of Mullerian anomalies, septate, arcuate, and bicornuate uteri are the most common types seen in clinical practice. (Figure 18) Bicornuate uterus increases the risk for preterm birth and malpresentation at delivery, whereas septate uterus increases the risk for early miscarriage.

**Importance of tubal Assessment**

- The presence of hydrosalpinges reduced live birth rates by 30% due to the reflux of toxic fluid into the endometrium.

- Evaluation of tubal patency plays a key role in counseling infertility patients considering IUI or IVF therapies.  Sonohysterosalpingogram (HycoSY) is a quick, simple technique to confirm tubal patency rapidly. A combined SIS with 2D or 3D ultrasound can be performed around day 5 through 9 as a “one-stop-shop” infertility evaluation.

**Role of Ultrasound in Embryo Transfer**

Transabdominal ultrasound is usually used to guide the embryo transfer catheter during embryo transfer. An increase in pregnancy rate from 30.1% to 36.8% was noted when embryo transfer was performed using ultrasound versus clinical touch method.