A patient with a negative Meckel's scan but with a high clinical suspicion of Meckel's diverticulum can have a repeat of Meckel's scan to confirm the diagnosis.

- False Positives results are caused by ectopic gastric mucosa on an enteric duplication cyst, or other bowel diseases like intussusception, and small bowel obstruction. Bowel cleansing with enema or laxative can cause bowel inflammation, which can accumulate the tracer. Peptic ulcer and vascular lesions with increased blood pool like arteriovenous malformations and hemangiomas can also collect the tracer longer than a healthy tissue giving a false-positive impression.

- Focal pooling of the tracer in the genitourinary tract like uterine blush, hydronephrosis, ectopic kidney, extrarenal pelvis, hydroureter, vesicourethral reflux, and bladder diverticulum can result in a false positive study.

- False-negatives are most likely caused by gastrointestinal bleeding during the circulation of the tracer, tracer activity obscured by the urinary bladder, or dilated ureter activity that normally appears in studies. Post-voiding images are essential for the distinction of a Meckel's diverticula activity from a normal urinary system excretion. Also, small foci of ectopic mucosa less than 1.8 cm^2 with motion artifact in the study can result in a false-negative. Prior barium fluoroscopy examination or perchlorate administration and presence of other ectopic tissue instead of ectopic gastric tissue can result in a false-negative result.