# Introduction

Otitis media is a very common condition in the pediatric population. This diagnosis can include effusion, depending on the patient. Otitis media is a primary problem of the Eustachian tube. Control of the Eustachian tube’s dilation is by the tensor veli palatini (TVP) and the levator veli palatini (LVP).

# Structure and Function

The tensor veli palatini originates from the inferior surface of the cartilage of the Eustachian tube, the scaphoid fossa, and the sphenoid bone’s spine. The muscle then wraps around the pterygoid hamulus, becoming tendinous, becoming a fan-like aponeurosis attaching to the palatine aponeurosis and horizontal aspect of the palatine bone.

The tensor veli palatini is also a component of the soft palate at its midline.

# Embryology

The tensor veli palatini begins to develop as early as 6 weeks into gestation. It originates from the first pharyngeal arch’s mesenchyme, specifically from the medial blastema.

# Blood Supply and Lymphatics

The tensor veli palatini receives its blood supply from the maxillary artery, a branch of the external carotid artery, just below the mastoid bone. The lesser palatine branch of the maxillary artery enters through the maxillary tubercle and emerges through a foramen in the lesser palatine.  In some patients, the lesser palatine branch anastomoses with the greater palatine branch.

# Nerves

This muscle's innervation is by the motor part of the mandibular nerve. The mandibular nerve is CNV3 of the trigeminal nerve.

# Muscles

The muscle is at the base of the skull, in the shape of an inverse triangle. The motion of the muscle is activated when a patient swallows or yawns.

# Physiologic Variants

There is controversy over the tensor veli palatini’s association to the hamulus. Some studies have shown bursa involvement, others have shown attachments, and some even argue that there may be ethnic properties involved. When considering cleft palate patients, the fanned aponeurosis only reaches the hard palate and fails to hit the soft palate.

# Surgical Considerations

Some surgeons, when performing palatoplasties, actually cut the tendinous portion of the tensor veli palatini. Palatoplasties are done to surgically correct cleft palates. Interestingly enough, in this patient population, the TVP is anatomically altered.

# Clinical Significance

Middle ear disease, like otitis media, have various probable mechanisms; one mechanism, in particular, involves the tensor veli palatini. Because the TVP is effective in opening the nasopharyngeal orifice, it can cause Eustachian tube dysfunction via obstruction if the muscle loses its function.

Because of TVP’s minor role in the palatal function, the TVP is theorized to be dysfunctional in a patient with cleft palates. A recent study found that in these patients with cleft palates, the TVP is positioned more medially, as well as have a decrease in the volume of the muscle and the length.

# Other Issues

Of other clinical importance is the ability to use electromyography on the tensor veli palatini muscle. There would be a decrease in activity in the TVP’s electromyography results if the ear were subject to a current bout of otitis media.