The management and treatment of accidental hypothermia revolves around prevention of further heat loss and initiation or rewarming but also requires evaluation and support/intervention of airway, breathing, and circulation.  This may involve patent rescue with the first priority being rescuer safety.  Wet clothing should be removed and replaced with dry clothing or insulation as soon as possible to prevent further heat loss.

Once able one should then attempt to determine the degree of hypothermia based on history, mental status, exam, and temperature if able/appropriate to help guide treatment. If there is suspicion for moderate or severe hypothermia, especially in those with decreased level of consciousness or in those have an irregular or faint pulse, extra care should be taken to not move or jostle to patient too much as his may precipitate cardiac collapse into a fatal arrhythmia due to increased cardiac irritability. Considerations and appropriate treatment must also be given to comorbid medical conditions and trauma that may have occurred.

Rewarming of hypothermic patients involve passive external rewarming, active external rewarming, active internal rewarming, or a combination of these techniques. The treatment of choice for mild hypothermia is passive external rewarming. After wet clothing is removed, additional layers of insulation are placed on/over the patient with the goal to prevent heat loss and promote retention of heat produced by patient.  Success of this method requires adequate glucose/glycogen stores so that a patient can produce heat, given that at this point many will have depleted energy reserves (more so in elderly, young, and malnournished) it is appropriate to supply glucose to these individuals, orally when possible.  In individuals with mild hypothermia it is recommended to warm them at 0.5-2C per hour.  If the patient fails to respond to passive techniques it is appropriate to progress to active external rewarming techniques.

Active external rewarming is indicated for moderate to severe hypothermia and in some cases of mild hypothermia not responding to standard measures or when there is worry patient is at risk for decompensation.

involving addition of more insulating layers, application of heat to the axillae, chest, back (in that order) using heat pads/blankets, Bair hugger (forced warm air), blankets and garments with circulating warm fluids.  Wet clothing should be removed prior to this.  Warm water bottles and heat packs may also be used but one should avoid placing heat source directly on skin due to decreased peripheral sensation raising the risk of iatrogenic burns.  Heated humidified oxygen may also be used. Immersion of extremities in warm water (44-45C) may be undertaken with great care and attention as efforts to rewarm patients may precipitate increases CV load and collapse as peripheral vasodilation this may lead to an after-drop cooling of core temperature from sudden return of cold blood from the extremities.  Due to the amount of energy expended by the body trying to maintain adequate temperature it is also appropriate to administer calories to patients in either IV or oral form. Even mildly hypothermic individuals can have significant hypovolemia from effect of cold diuresis and benefit from IV Fluids.  If