Treatment aims to improve hand function and cosmesis.

Some authors recommend that preaxial polydactyly be surgically managed in patients between 7 and 12 months old.

The Bilhaut-Cloquet procedure involves zig-zag incisions on the volar and dorsal surfaces of the bifid thumb portions. Then a resection of the central portions of the two thumbs via osteotomy is performed. The remaining osseous structures are encircled with K wires allowing the healing of the bone and soft tissues. This technique allows the creation of a typically more normal-sized and functional thumb. The On-top plasty is reserved for triphalangeal thumbs. In this procedure, the most functional distal thumb portion is transferred to the most suitable metacarpal of the thumbs available.

Postaxial polydactyly is usually managed with surgical excision or suture ligation when no bony structures exist. If bony structures are present, surgical management with similar goals to preaxial polydactyly is important. The creation of a structurally sound and functional digit is key to good outcomes. Typically the more ulnar and less developed digit is removed. When partial duplication exists, it is important to transfer tendinous and ligamentous structures to the remaining digit for good function.

Central polydactyly is often treated between 6-12 months of age. Again, the focus is on aesthetics and function. Surgical options most often used include excision or ligation of the more rudimentary digits. One guiding principle advocated by small studies of surgical outcomes for central polydactyly is to create an opposable thumb and 3 functional digits over creating a 5 fingered hand.

Treatment of polydactyly of the foot again focuses on function and cosmetic outcome. Guiding principles for surgical treatment include recreating a normal foot contour, maintaining physeal alignment, and keeping proper soft tissue tension around the joints of the toes.