Treatment options include conservative management, cervical orthosis, halo-vest orthosis, and surgical procedures.

**External Fixation**

A rigid cervical collar represents the immediate first treatment. Nonunion may occur as frequently as 50% of odontoid fractures, but nonunion is rare in hangman’s fractures, with approximately 90% healing with immobilization alone. Level III evidence shows that a hangman’s fracture may be initially managed with immobilization with a halo-vest or collar alone. This produces a reduction rate of 97% to 100% and a fusion rate of 93% to 100%. External orthosis should be maintained for 8 to 14 weeks. It is important to remember that halo-vest orthosis is not very well tolerated in the elderly population, and therefore collar is recommended as first-line management.

Non-operative treatment is advocated for extension type Levine-Edwards type I and type II hangman's fracture whereas flexion type Levine type IIa and type III  fractures invariably require surgical intervention.

A systematic review has shown that conservative treatment failed sequentially for Levine-Edward's type I (fusion rate of almost 100%) to III fractures (fusion rate of only 30%).

**Internal Fixation**

Surgical fixation may be considered in the following scenarios:

- Severe angulation of C2 on C3 (Francis II and IV, Levine II).

- Disruption of the C2 to C3 disc space (Francis V, Levine II).

- Anterior displacement of C2 greater than 50% on C3.

- Inability to establish or maintain alignment with external immobilization.

- Nonunion after the use of external immobilization.

The main mandate of surgical intervention is to achieve early anatomical stability while preserving the maximum range of neck movements.

Abnormal angulations and incomplete reduction impair biomechanical loading thereby leading to a heightened risk for persistent neck pain, nonunion, and implant failure.

The different patterns of surgical strategies include:

- Halo traction.

- Anterior stand-alone fusion.

- Posterior stand-alone fusion, and

- Global (anterior-posterior) fusion.

Internal fixation can be achieved via anterior fixation or by a variety of posterior constructs.

**Anterior**

C2 to C3 anterior cervical discectomy and fusion may be used with anterior plating to stabilize the C2 to C3 vertebral bodies. The main benefit of the anterior approach is preserving the C1 motion, which drastically decreases the morbidity compared to posterior fixation.

**Posterior**

- C1 to C2 transarticular screws

- C1 lateral mass and C2 pedicle screws

- C1 lateral mass and C2 pars interarticularis screws

- C1 to C2 wiring (also as an adjunct technique)

- Extension to C3 lateral mass if there is a disruption of the C2 to C3 intervertebral disc or facet joint capsules.

Posterior fixation technique selection requires significant review by a neurosurgeon or orthopedic spine surgeon. It considers a variety of factors, including surgeon experience, fracture location, vertebral artery location, biomechanical suitability, and anatomical variations. Vascular imaging is mandatory to illustrate the location of the vertebral artery in the V2 and V3 segments. The patient’s overall functional status, medical optimization, and bone health must be evaluated in the operative decision-making.

Flexion injury damaging the posterior ligamentous complex requires C1–2 posterior fixation per the tension band law. The extension injury needs either anterior or posterior C2–3 fixations.

Hangman's fractures most often show excellent clinical outcomes.