Ixekizumab is FDA-indicated for the adult treatment of moderate to severe plaque psoriasis, active psoriatic arthritis, active ankylosing spondylitis, and active non-radiographic axial spondyloarthritis with objective signs of inflammation.

Ixekizumab should be used cautiously during breastfeeding, especially with newborns and preterm infants.

Ixekizumab is safe and effective in treating axial spondylarthritis.

Hawkes J. et al. used multiple dynamic visualization techniques in several clinical trials, demonstrating that ixekizumab has a rapid reduction in disease severity and sustained efficacy in treating skin and nail psoriasis.

Landewé R. et al. are conducting a phase III clinical trial (COAST-Y) to examine continuing or withdrawing ixekizumab therapy in axial spondyloarthritis patients who have attained disease remission.

Coates L. et al. conducted a clinical trial on psoriatic arthritis patients receiving ixekizumab therapy.

Next, a brief discussion of psoriasis will follow to understand better the mechanism of action of ixekizumab and its therapeutic use.

Psoriasis is a common skin disease that affects about 2% of the US population. The most common form is plaque-type. Examples of types of psoriasis are inverse, guttate, and pustular. Plaque-type psoriasis is a chronic inflammatory skin disease with the following clinical characteristics: erythematous plaques with mica-like scales, sharply demarcated, predominately affecting the elbows, knees, gluteal cleft, and scalp. The skin plaques can be pruritic, slowly enlarge, and last long periods. Approximately 30% of psoriasis patients have psoriatic arthritis in five subtypes: arthritis mutilans, asymmetric, distal interphalangeal predominant, spondylitis, and symmetric.

Arthritis mutilans, which account for less than 5% of psoriatic arthritis cases, is severe and can deform the small joints of the hands and feet. Asymmetric arthritis can affect any joint and may appear as sausage digits or dactylitis. Distal interphalangeal predominant can involve the fingers and toes, occurring in about 5% of psoriatic arthritis cases. Spondylitis or spondyloarthritis can affect the spine or pelvis, accounting for about 5% of psoriatic arthritis cases. Symmetric arthritis can present as a milder form of rheumatoid arthritis. The pathophysiology of psoriasis is not well understood.

There is a genetic aspect to the disease, with about 50% of the patients having a family history. Activated T cells appear to produce cytokines, which lead to hyperproliferation of keratinocytes and endothelial cells. Interleukin 17A (IL-17A) is an example of a cytokine that ixekizumab selectively inhibits. This hyperproliferation of keratinocytes and endothelial cells causes the erythematous plaques with mica-like scales to form on the elbows, knees, or scalp. Interleukin 17 is a crucial mediator in the mammalian immune system. It has six subtypes: IL-17A, IL-17B, IL-17C, IL-17D, IL-17E, and IL-17F. Drugs that inhibit T cell activation, clonal expansion, or release (or activity) of proinflammatory cytokines can effectively treat psoriasis.