Treatment of paraproteinemic keratopathy consists of first addressing the underlying cause of the systemic monoclonal gammopathy. Immediate referral to a hematologist or oncologist upon discovery of the disease is essential. Systemic treatments may include plasma exchange, rituximab, chemotherapy (alkylating agents, purine analogs, bortezomib, and thalidomide), and stem cell transplantation. The resolution of the underlying disease may stop the progression of the disease. Some studies have shown regression in ocular symptoms after chemotherapy, while others report continued progression of the disease despite the resolution of the systemic process.

In some systemic processes, such as MGUS, systemic treatment is not always indicated. In these cases, close cooperation between hematology/oncology and ophthalmology is necessary for the determination of appropriate treatment. Findings of ocular dysfunction may be an indication for the initiation of systemic therapy.

After managing the systemic disease, the treatment of paraproteinemic keratopathy is only necessary when vision is significantly impaired. Patients with minimal visual impairment do not need additional treatment, although they should be monitored for the progression of the disease. Where visual acuity is significantly affected, there is no consensus on the appropriate course of treatment. Surgical correction of the affected corneas may resolve visual impairment; however, there may be a high risk of recurrence, depending on the procedure being used.

- Phototherapeutic keratectomy (PTK) may be useful in treating loss of visual acuity due to deposits in the anterior cornea. Because PTK only treats the anterior layers of the cornea, it is only useful for superficial treatments of the disease. It is unlikely to be a definitive treatment, as deposition of Ig will continue as long as systemic levels remain elevated; however, it may allow systemic treatment to be delayed where chemotherapy is not otherwise indicated (ex. MGUS).

- For severe cases, penetrating keratoplasty (PK) or Deep Anterior Lamellar Keratoplasty (DALK) may restore visual acuity; however, there is a high likelihood of rapid recurrence if serum Ig levels remain elevated. These recurrences occur rapidly, usually between one month and three years after PK. Treatment of the systemic disease is aimed at reducing Ig levels and may reduce the likelihood of recurrence.

- Primary keratoprosthesis implantation may be used as a second-line therapy if penetrating keratoplasty fails. This procedure remains the second line to PK due to the limited data on risks vs. benefits in the general population; however, one study suggests that it may have better long-term outcomes in patients with PPK.

- Topical steroids have not shown any measurable benefit in treating or slowing the progression of deposits in MGUS keratopathy.