Although surgical intervention is commonly indicated in patients with bilateral vocal cord paralysis, medical management of inflammatory and infectious conditions such as syphilis, tuberculosis, gout, and relapsing polychondritis is essential. Corticosteroids are effective in conditions such as sarcoidosis, polychondritis, and Wegener’s granulomatosis. Glucose management is imperative to aid neuropathy in patients with diabetes mellitus. Management of reflux is often recommended during the recovery period in an effort to minimize untoward stimulation of the larynx. Greater than 50% of children will undergo spontaneous symptom resolution in the first 12 months of life, though the prognosis is much more guarded for bilateral vocal cord paralysis when compared to unilateral.

**Tracheostomy**

In the past, tracheostomy was the most common procedure performed in patients with bilateral vocal cord to establish a secure airway. It provides the greatest airway diameter and maintains the laryngeal structure, so it is potentially reversible without long-term sequelae. Although tracheostomy remains the standard in settings of glottic obstruction, it is associated with significant chronic care burden, cost, psychosocial impairment, and increased mortality. Patients experienced a reduced quality of life and must undergo continuous management of their tracheostomies, which can be particularly undesirable in children.

**Botulinum toxin:**

Produced by Clostridium botulinum, botulinum toxin is a neurotoxin that prevents the release of acetylcholine from pre-synaptic axon terminals, leading to flaccid paralysis of the target muscle. For patients with vocal cord paralysis, toxin injection is utilized to block aberrant reinnervation of adductor muscles by inspiratory motor neurons. This enables abductor inspiratory motor neurons to become more effective and enable glottic opening.

**Arytenoidectomy**

Arytenoidectomy is an irreversible procedure referring to the endoscopic removal of the arytenoid cartilage (sometimes only the prolapsed cuneiform cartilages are removed) to expand the glottic inlet transversely, creating a greater diameter airway for inspiration.

**Cordotomy**

Cordotomy is another endoscopic surgical procedure to enlarge the glottic airway. A cordotomy is accomplished via an incision of the vocal fold, ligament, and the thyroarytenoid muscle posteriorly at the attachment to the arytenoid. Cordotomy, like arytenoidectomy, is susceptible to granuloma and scar formation. Revision cordotomy can be required in up to 30% of patients secondary to reduced glottic diameter from scarring or granulation tissue formation.

**Reinnervation**

The goal of reinnervation is to establish vocal cord abduction through the restoration of the activity of the posterior cricoarytenoid (PCA) muscle. While this procedure enables the return of spontaneous vocal cord abduction, it does not affect adduction. The anastomosis of the RLN is a complicated procedure due to the variability and complexity of its supply.

**Gene Therapy**

This remains in the pre-clinical phases but holds several promising avenues for treatment in the future. With this technique, gene delivery to injured or denervated muscles enhances the growth of damaged neurons to aid in rejuvenating damaged laryngeal muscles. These genes encode neurotrophic or growth factors that aid in the stimulation of muscle differentiation and proliferation.