The initial presentation for catatonia can vary greatly due to the different subtypes that this syndrome can present. A lot of causes for catatonia can also make a typical presentation difficult to describe. As most patients with catatonia have a psychiatric illness primarily causing catatonia, a progression of psychiatric illness will be the most likely history.

A patient will often present with worsening depression, mania, or psychosis antecedent to catatonia symptoms beginning. These symptoms can present as excited, withdrawn, or a mixture. A patient presenting with excited catatonia will often have odd mannerisms such as performing actions without purpose or at inappropriate times (e.g., saluting). They may be agitated, hold odd positions against gravity, or have stereotypic and repetitive movements such as picking at their clothes or making odd gestures repeatedly. Their speech may be repetitive or mimic the interviewer’s speech or actions. A patient with withdrawn catatonia will likely be stuporous, hold an odd position, have no response or opposition to outside stimuli, and have very little speech. These symptoms may be present at some times and not at others, may be present in a combination, and vary in intensity throughout the hospital course. If these symptoms begin because of a secondary medical illness that illness may also cause other psychiatric symptoms such as mania or psychosis.

The physical exam for a patient with suspected catatonia can help to diagnose and differentiate it between other conditions such as neuroleptic malignant syndrome. Passive movement of limbs and the type of resistance encountered can reveal what the underlying condition is. If the patient has waxy flexibility and catalepsy (holds a posture against gravity when passively moved into a posture,) catatonia is high on the differential. If there is lead-pipe rigidity, neuroleptic malignant syndrome should be suspected. Spastic rigidity would indicate potential serotonin syndrome. Cogwheel rigidity is more concerning for extrapyramidal symptoms from neuroleptics.

A specific examination for catatonia using the Bush Francis Catatonia Rating Scale consists of:

- Observe the patient during normal conversation.

- Scratch the head in an exaggerated manner while speaking with the patient to see if they will copy the movement.

- Passively move the patient’s arm to examine for cogwheeling, varying the amount of force provided while telling the patient to keep their arm loose.

- Have the patient extend their arm and with one finger apply light pressure on their index finger while telling the patient, “Do not let me raise your arm.”

- Extend your hand for a handshake while telling the patient, “Do not shake my hand.”

- Reach into your pocket and state, “Stick out your tongue; I want to stick a pin in it.”

- Check for grasp reflex.

- Check oral intakes, vital signs, and any instances of agitation.

- Each day, observe the patient indirectly for other symptoms of catatonia, including their activity level, abnormal movements and speech, echopraxia and echolalia, rigidity, negativism, waxy flexibility, gegenhalten (resistance equal to the amount of pressure applied), mitgehen (the patient raising their hand to the light pressure), ambitendency, automatic obedience, and grasp reflexes.