In 1999, preliminary yet frequently used criteria were proposed to be used in the diagnosis of undifferentiated connective tissue disease. These criteria significantly depend on the absence of any other defined or major connective tissue disease.

In detail, these criteria include the following: (1) clinical presentation suggestive of a defined connective tissue disease, but not meeting its criteria, (2) positive serological markers on two separate occasions including positive antinuclear antibody marker, and (3) the duration of symptoms to be at least three years.

As mentioned earlier, the symptoms can suggest any other connective tissue disease so that the presentation can vary widely among patients.

However, some symptoms can be very common in the majority of patients. For instance, arthralgia can be present in up to 86% of patients; various skin lesions, including livedo, purpura, acrocyanosis, telangiectasias, and urticaria, can also be common (37%). Other common symptoms include the Raynaud phenomenon (33%), sicca symptoms (30%), mucocutaneous symptoms, such as oral ulcers (23%), and arthritis (22%), fever (15%), and thyroid disease (7%).

Undifferentiated connective tissue disease appears to have a mild clinical course. It is marked by the absence of severe organ damage or involvement, especially in the renal and neurological systems.

Other minor symptoms include dry eyes or mouth, hair loss, and sun-sensitive rash.

Additional signs include leukopenia, anemia, pleuritis, pericarditis, thrombocytopenia, abnormal nerve sensations in limbs, and interstitial pneumonia.

Constitutional symptoms, such as fever, feeling unwell, and fatigue, can be the initial presentation for some patients.

With this disease, the physical findings can be localized or diffuse, and it is best illustrated by organ systems, as the following:

- Skin - Sclerodactyly, calcinosis, discoid rash, erythema nodosum, periungual erythema, heliotrope rash, dilated or irregular nail fold capillaries, or subcutaneous nodules.

- Eyes – Iritis, uveitis, scleral-episcleral disease, or conjunctivitis.

- Lungs - Rales, pleural effusion, wheezing, or pleural rub.

- Heart - Cardiomegaly, heart murmur, pericardial rub, irregular heartbeat, dependent edema, or irregular P2 heart sound.

- Gastrointestinal – Splenomegaly, abdominal tenderness, or hepatomegaly.

- Genitalia – Rashes, abnormal discharge, or ulcerations.

- Muscles – Proximal muscle weakness, muscle tenderness, tendon friction rubs, or muscle atrophy.