**Symptoms:**Patients with Valsalva retinopathy often present with sudden onset of painless unilateral (rarely bilateral) loss of vision preceded by a history of Valsalva-like maneuvers (e.g., coughing, vomiting, violent sneezing, weight lifting, blowing musical instruments, end-stage labor). Patients describe the symptoms as seeing a black spot (scotoma) in front of the eye, floaters, reddish hue of vision, blurring of vision to loss of vision depending on the severity and location of the bleed.

**Signs:**The typical clinical appearance of Valsalva retinopathy includes

- Well-circumscribed

- Round, oval, or dumb-bell shaped

- Usually more than one disc area

- Pre-retinal hemorrhage

- At or around the fovea; either sub ILM (internal limiting membrane) or subhyaloid space

- Sub-ILM bleed usually appears as a smooth mound with some glistening at the surface.

- There may be some ILM striae over the hemorrhage.

- In the acute stage, the pre-retinal blood is bright red and elevated with a convex surface towards the vitreous with some movement if the eye moves. There may be a fluid level with gravitated red blood corpuscles inferiorly with a horizontal upper level.

If blood gets trapped in both sub-ILM and subhyaloid spaces, it presents with a ‘double ring sign’; the outer ring represents sub hyaloid, and the inner ring represents sub-ILM hemorrhage.

Sometimes, the pre-retinal hemorrhage may be less than one disc area in size with a strawberry-like appearance due to yellowish-white spots.

Other ocular signs include subconjunctival hemorrhages, petechial hemorrhages of eyelids, superficial intraretinal hemorrhages, subretinal hemorrhages at the fovea due to the dissection of blood beneath the retina, retinal transudation, and breakthrough vitreous hemorrhage. Moderate myopes may rarely have choroidal hemorrhage after excessive vomiting.

Once the hemorrhage clears, the only sign seen in old or resolved Valsalva retinopathy includes cavity formation at the level of the bleed such as a sub-ILM cavity or serous detachment of the ILM. This appearance can be clinically confused as a neurosensory detachment.

With time the sub-ILM hemorrhage may dehemoglobinize giving a yellow and later white color to the hemorrhage.