The etiology of focal nodular hyperplasia has not been definitively established. However, it is thought to be caused by arterial malformations within the liver. These malformations, coupled with changes in perfusion, cause a regenerative, hyperplastic response of the normal hepatocyte. Interestingly, hepatocytes may respond with hyperplasia after both hypoperfusion and hyperperfusion.

Therefore, any comorbid condition that causes a predisposition to the development of arterial malformations may increase the risk of developing focal nodular hyperplasia. Hereditary hemorrhagic telangiectasia also known as Osler-Weber-Rendu syndrome can cause an increased incidence of focal nodular hyperplasia. The incidence of focal nodular hyperplasia also increases in the presence of hemangiomas.

Further complicating the delineation of any exact cause is the fact that focal nodular hyperplasia may develop without comorbid vascular malformation. The research does not reveal a clear reason why this is the case. This may be due to an inadequate biopsy or structural malformations confounding histological examination and imaging.  Other leading researchers in gastroenterology believe intermittent disruptions of blood flow within the hepatic lobule lead to the characteristic cellular response.

Arguably, the cornerstone distinction that differentiates focal nodular hyperplasia from other hepatic masses is its origin. A series of studies showed that the majority of hepatocytes within a focal nodular hyperplasia nodule stem from a polyclonal origin.