**Opioids**

One of the main issues of concern regarding opioid use for pain treatment is the potential of drug abuse and addiction. This mainly occurs through damage in the glutaminergic and dopaminergic pathways in the brain.

Furthermore, there are several other adverse effects of opioid use, including immunosuppression, obesity, respiratory depression, constipation, and miosis, to name a few.

There is a strong association between addiction and withdrawal, and subsequently, its consequent physical and psychological effects. In some cases, it can become difficult to identify actual chronic pain due to other causes and pain due to withdrawal in an addict. However, symptoms including yawning, sweating, lacrimation, and piloerection are strongly associated with drug withdrawal than with pain due to other conditions. Opioid withdrawal also causes an increase in baseline pain caused by other disorders. Withdrawal from short-acting opioids is mainly brief due to which physical symptoms reach their maximum intensity over a period of 36 to 72 hours and subsequently start reducing in intensity.

**Cannabinoids**

Cannabis has been mostly restricted due to its psychotropic effect for pleasure-seeking and the stigma associated with it, thus causing it to be illegal in many countries along with its Schedule I status in the USA. Furthermore, the cultivation and production of cannabis have been banned for almost three-quarters of a century, thus impeding research and its use in medicine.

A psychoactive constituent of cannabis, 9-tetrahydrocannabinol or THC, is associated with cardiovascular disease, acute pancreatitis, cannabinoid hyperemesis syndrome, and when smoked, leads to lung disease.