Meningococcal infection is a devastating, contagious disease that can progress rapidly. Recognizing the illness is perhaps the most challenging part of assessing and treating patients. It requires an interprofessional team consisting of physicians, infectious disease specialists, ICU nurses, pharmacy, proper isolation protocols, and the local health department to treat infected patients. Meningococcal is a reportable disease, and the local health department can assist in identifying those at risk and in managing outbreaks.

Clinicians who initiate treatment would do well to enlist the assistance of an infectious disease board-certified pharmacist, who can verify agent selection with the latest antibiogram data, as well as verifying dosing and checking for drug interactions that may compromise therapy. Nursing will usually administer these agents and need to understand appropriate isolation protocol and monitor for therapeutic effectiveness and adverse reaction, informing the team promptly of any issues. The interprofessional team approach is the best means by which to optimize therapeutic results while minimizing infection spread and adverse reactions [Level 5]

The top goals in meningococcal infection are prevention and early recognition. The infectious disease nurse should educate patients about vaccination. Vaccination is the best strategy in preventing disease, especially in at-risk populations. Due to new vaccinations recently introduced worldwide, the overall burden of meningococcal infection has diminished. Those at risk should be vaccinated and include college students, military recruits, immunocompromised patients, including those with HIV/AIDS, complement deficiency, and those with asplenia.

Those that also travel to work with N. meningitidis in laboratories and travelers to endemic areas such as the "meningitis belt" should also be vaccinated. There are several vaccinations available and should be administered based on local epidemiology. MenACWY quadrivalent capsular polysaccharide-protein conjugate vaccine, available as Menactra and Menveo, protects against serogroups A, C, W, and Y. There is a bivalent capsular polysaccharide vaccine for serogroup C and Y, MenCY. The MenB recombinant protein vaccine protects against serogroup B, and MenC vaccine protects against serotype C.