Varicella or chickenpox is a common and highly contagious exanthematic disease caused by the varicella-zoster virus (VZV) that during primary infection can establish latency. VZV reactivation, even decades after primary infection, causes herpes zoster. Varicella still represents the most widespread vaccine-preventable childhood infectious disease in industrialized countries; due to its relevant burden on healthcare resources, several countries have introduced varicella vaccination into the recommended routine childhood national immunization schedule.

Varicella-zoster virus (chickenpox)  was very common in children in the United States before the universal vaccination program came into existence.

The first dose is given to children between 12 to 15 months of age, and the administration of the second dose is for children between 4 to 6 years old.

The varicella vaccine is now FDA approved to give for post-exposure use and outbreak control. The vaccine should be given as soon as possible after exposure, but it has shown effectiveness in preventing or modifying disease when given within three to five days post-exposure.

You can demonstrate evidence of immunity to varicella by showing documentation. The following documentation will prove age-appropriate vaccination with varicella vaccine:

- Preschool-age children (older than 12 months): one dose

- School-age children, adolescents, and adults: two doses

- Laboratory evidence or confirmation of the disease

- Birth in the United States before 1980; unless one is immunocompromised, a pregnant woman, or a health care worker (born before 1980 does not count as evidence of immunity in this population)

- Diagnosis or verification of a history of varicella disease by a healthcare provider

- Diagnosis or verification of a history of herpes zoster by a healthcare provider