**Patient Positioning**

VATS requires most patients to be in a lateral decubitus position. This is accompanied by arching the table which helps to separate the ribs for better surgical access. This also helps by to relieve any pressure on the intercostal nerves. The lateral decubitus position provides adequate access to most thoracic structures which include the lungs, pleura, esophagus, pericardium amongst other mediastinal structures. Care must be taken at all times to avoid nerve injury by adequately padding pressure points.

The lateral decubitus position, general anesthesia, mechanical ventilation, neuromuscular blockade, and surgical retraction alter the physiology of the lungs under anesthesia as compared to the awake position. Oxygenation will mostly depend on the blood flow directed to the non-ventilated lung (intrapulmonary shunt). Hypoxic pulmonary vasoconstriction which reduces perfusion to the non-ventilated lung reduces the shunt fraction. Any hypoxemia that may develop during the surgery may be managed by increasing FiO2 to 100%. The anesthesiologist may revert to 2 lung ventilation if a rise in FiO2 is unable to correct hypoxemia. Positive end-expiratory pressure (PEEP) of 5-10 cmH2O may be used on the side of the ventilated lung to increase oxygenation. Small increases in PEEP is recommended to select the minimum effective PEEP as high airway pressures may decrease perfusion to ventilated areas increasing shunted blood to non-ventilated ones. Continuous positive airway pressure (CPAP) must be avoided as far as possible as this makes surgery difficult on the operative side.

**One-Lung Ventilation**

VATS is performed under general anesthesia, usually with OLV. Neuromuscular blockade and controlled ventilation are mandatory during OLV with the goal of maintaining adequate oxygenation and a CO2 partial pressure similar to double lung ventilation. Minute ventilation is ideally maintained with lower tidal volumes (5-7 ml/kg) and higher respiratory rates

The use of DLTs provides the ability to ventilate either lung independently or simultaneously. DLT placement requires a special technique, and its position is best confirmed with a fiberoptic bronchoscope. Tube position must be reconfirmed after final positioning of the patient for the procedure as they are prone to malpositioning and displacement.

SLTs with bronchial blockers may be used in place of DLTs. Bronchial blockers have a high-volume/low-pressure cuff. The major advantage of the use of an SLT with a bronchial blocker is that it does not need to be replaced post-procedure in case the patient needs to remain intubated. Bronchial blocker placement is done under fiberoptic visualization. As stated previously with DLTs, bronchial blockers also require reconfirmation of positioning after placing the patient in the lateral decubitus position.

Alternatively, apneic oxygenation or high-frequency positive pressure ventilation may be used for thoracic surgeries. These techniques are limited in their usage due to progressive respiratory acidosis and interference with surgery due to mediastinal bounce.

The most common reason for hypoxemia in OLV is shunting. Its incidence has been reported to be up to 5%.

**Surgical Technique**

The standard VATS procedure involves using 3 to 4 incisions made in a triangular configuration for scope and instrument insertion.

- The patient is administered anesthesia in the supine position. A DLT is the airway device of choice for most procedures.

- After DLT placement, the position of the tube is confirmed with a fiberoptic bronchoscope via the lumen of the DLT. Care is taken to ensure adequate positioning of the cuff.

- After confirming adequate tube and cuff placement, the patient is positioned in the lateral decubitus position with the arm over the head. Arching of the table is done to allow adequate surgical exposure. The position of the DLT is then rechecked after final positioning for the procedure.

- Three incisions are made for the anterior approach. Together they form a triangular configuration with the utility incision at the apex of the triangle.

- The camera is inserted through this incision for the creation of other entry ports safely.

- A port is created to accommodate the camera in the auscultatory triangle.

- A third port is created in the mid-axillary line. This is created at the level of the utility port incision.

- After the creation of the 3 ports, assessment is done using the video thoracoscope.

- Further steps of the surgery are usually guided by the specific procedure to be performed.

- Depending on the surgery performed, 1 or 2 pleural drains, connected to an underwater seal drain are usually placed at the end of surgery.

**Post-Operative Care**

Post-operative care in VATS is centered on the pillars of pain control, respiratory care, and chest tube management. Restrictive fluid therapy is also a crucial strategy for improving outcomes after surgery.

Pain control is at the apex of post-operative care as adequate analgesia has been shown to hasten recovery and avoid respiratory complications. Thoracotomy has been described as one of the most painful of all operative procedures. Pain control begins intraoperatively and continues into the postoperative period. Pain control is chiefly achieved by a combination of intravenous and regional techniques. Intravenous analgesia in the form of systemic opioids and patient controlled analgesia (PCA) is the mainstay of post-thoracotomy analgesic techniques. NSAIDs have opioid sparing benefits and have an added advantage of not producing respiratory depression. Epidural analgesia and intercostal nerve blocks can also supplement the analgesic regimen. Improved analgesia correlates into better respiratory function in the post-operative period as well.