**Symptoms of Hypothyroidism**

Generalized decreased basal metabolic rate can present as apathy, slowed cognition, skin dryness, alopecia, increased low-density lipoproteins, and increased triglycerides. Hypothyroidism must be ruled out in psychiatry patients presenting with apathy and slowed cognition. Hypothyroidism can decrease sympathetic activity leading to decreased sweating, bradycardia, and constipation. Patients can present with myopathy and decreased cardiac output because of decreased transcription of sarcolemmal genes.

Hyperprolactinemia can be caused by hypothyroidism. Thyrotropin-releasing hormone (TRH) from the hypothalamus stimulates prolactin and TSH release. Prolactin release can suppress testosterone, LH, FSH, and GnRH release. Prolactin can also cause breast tissue growth.

Patients with hypothyroidism may present with myxedema caused by decreased clearance of complex glycosaminoglycans and hyaluronic acids from the reticular layer of the dermis. Initially, the nonpitting edema is pretibial. As the state of hypothyroidism continues, patients can develop generalized edema.

Symptoms related to decreased metabolic rate:

- Bradycardia

- Fatigue

- Cold intolerance

- Weight gain

- Poor appetite

- Hair loss

- Cold and dry skin

- Constipation

- Myopathy, stiffness, cramps, entrapment syndromes

- Delayed deep tendon reflex relaxation

Symptoms from generalized myxedema:

- Myxedematous heart disease

- Puffy appearance with doughy skin texture

- Hoarse voice with difficulty articulate words

- Pretibial and periorbital edema

Symptoms of hyperprolactinemia:

- Amenorrhea or menorrhagia

- Galactorrhea

- Erectile dysfunction, infertility in men

- Decreased libido

Other symptoms:

- Depression

- Impaired concentration and memory

- Goiter

- Hypertension

Congenital hypothyroidism:

- Umbilical hernia

- Hypotonia

- Prolonged neonatal jaundice

- Poor feeding, absence of thirst (adipsia)

- Decreased activity

- Pot-belly, puffy-face, protuberant tongue

- Poor brain development

**Symptoms of Hyperthyroidism**

Generalized hypermetabolism from hyperthyroidism causes increased Na+/K+-ATPase to promote thermogenesis. There is increased catecholamine secretion and, beta-adrenergic receptors are also upregulated in various tissues. As a result of the hyperadrenergic state, peripheral vascular resistance is decreased. In the heart, hyperthyroidism causes a decreased amount of phospholamban, a protein that normally decreases the affinity of calcium-ATPase for calcium in the sarcoplasmic reticulum. As a result of decreased phospholamban, there is increased Ca+ movement between the sarcoplasmic reticulum and cytosol, leading to increased contractility. Increased beta-receptors on the heart also lead to increased cardiac output.

General

- Heat intolerance

- Weight loss

- Increased appetite

- Increased sweating from cutaneous blood flow increase

- Weakness

- Fatigue

- Onycholysis (separation of nails from nail beds)

- Pretibial myxedema

Eyes

- Lid lag (when looking down, sclera visible above cornea)

- Lid retraction (when looking straight, sclera visible above the cornea)

- Graves ophthalmopathy

Goiter

- Diffuse, smooth, non-tender goiter

- The audible bruit can be heard at the superior poles

Cardiovascular

- Tachycardia (can be masked by patients taking beta-blockers)

- Palpitations

- An irregular pulse from atrial fibrillation

- Hypertension

- Widened pulse pressure because systolic pressure increases and diastolic pressure decreases

- Heart failure (elderly patients)

- Chest pain

- Abnormal heart rhythms

Musculoskeletal

- Fine tremors of the outstretched fingers. Face, tongue, and head can also be involved. Tremors respond well to treatment with beta-blockers.

- Myopathy affecting proximal muscles. Serum creatine kinase levels can be normal.

- Osteoporosis, caused by the direct effects of T3. Elderly patients can present with fractures.

Neuropsychiatric system

- Restlessness

- Anxiety

- Depression

- Emotional instability

- Insomnia

- Tremoulousness

- Hyperreflexia

**Conditions associated with hypothyroidism**

- Iodine deficiency

- Cretinism

- Wolff-Chaikoff effect

- Subacute thyroiditis

- Postpartum thyroiditis

- Riedel thyroiditis

- Hashimoto thyroiditis

- Drug-induced

**Conditions associated with hyperthyroidism**

- Graves disease

- Iodine excess

- Struma ovarii

- Thyrotropic pituitary adenoma

- Jod-Basedow phenomenon

- Drug-induced: amiodarone, lithium

- Thyrotoxicosis and thyroid storm

- Toxic multinodular goiter

- Thyroid adenoma

**Antithyroid drugs that work in the thyroid gland**

- Perchlorate – inhibits Na+/I- symporter – blocks iodide uptake

- Thionamides – inhibits TPO – block thyroid hormone synthesis

- Iodide > 5mg – inhibits Na+/I- symporter and TPO – blocks iodide uptake and thyroid hormone synthesis

- Lithium – inhibits thyroid hormone release (off-label use for thyroid storm)

**Antithyroid drugs that work in peripheral tissue**– all these drugs inhibit the deiodinase enzymes. Deiodinase enzymes normally convert T4 into the active form T3. These drugs inhibit the conversion of T4 to T3 and reduce its activity.

- Propylthiouracil (thionamide)

- Dexamethasone

- Amiodarone

- Propranolol