Below decribes a three wall decompression with lateral oribital rim advancement.

General endotracheal anesthesia is administered. A mixture of 2% lidocaine with 1:100,000 epinephrine and .75% Marcaine in a 1:1 is injected into the caruncle and inferior conjunctiva via a transconjunctival approach. The patient is then prepped and draped in a standard sterile fashion suitable for oculofacial surgery.

Place a corneal shield. A lid splitting incision starting at the lateral canthus is performed with a No. 15 Bard-Parker blade. Cutting electrocautery is used to incise the periosteum of the lateral orbital rim. A Freer elevator is used to free the periosteum from the underlying bone of the external lateral orbital rim. The temporalis muscle and fascia are separated from the lateral orbital rim with a No. 9 elevator. A similar maneuver is performed to free the periorbita from the intra-orbital lateral orbital rim.

Attention is then placed the orbital floor where a Desmarres retractor is used to retract the lower lid while a Jaeger lid plate is used to protect the globe. Cutting electrocautery was used to dissect through the conjunctiva, lid retractors, and inferior orbital rim periosteum. A Freer elevator was used to free the orbital floor periosteum from the underlying orbital floor. Attention is then placed on the medial wall via a trans-caruncular approach. Westcott scissors are used to create a surgical plane between the caruncle and plica semilunaris. Blunt dissection with Steven scissors is directed to the posterior lacrimal crest, and a Freer elevator is used to open the medial periosteum. A Freer elevator is then used to free the periosteum from the underlying medial wall. A malleable retractor is used to retract the orbital contents and expose the subperiosteal plane. The subperiosteal dissection is continued until the lamina papyracea of the medial wall is visualized, and the appropriate amount of medial wall is exposed. Once exposure of the medial wall and the orbital floor is complete, attention is placed back to the lateral wall.

An oscillating saw is used to create an osteotomy at the superior and inferior lateral wall margins. Kocher clamps are used to remove the lateral orbital wall carefully, and cutting electrocautery is used to separate this wall from the underlying temporalis muscle and fascia. Kerrison rongeurs and a burr (piezoelectric bone saw/burr) are used to remove bone from the deep lateral wall. Care is taken to avoid any CSF leak. Bone wax is used for hemostasis. Attention is placed back to the orbital floor.

An osteotome and mallet are used to create a bone window through the posterior medial orbital floor. The bone of the orbital floor is removed with a pituitary forceps and up biting Kerrison rongeurs. Care is taken to avoid the infraorbital nerve bundle and orbital strut. Once an adequate orbital floor decompression is performed, oxymetazoline is irrigated through the area for hemostasis. Attention is then placed on the medial wall.

A Freer elevator is used to fracture the medial orbital wall. The bone of the medial orbital is removed with a (pituitary/Takahashi) forceps. Underlying ethmoid air cells and mucosa are also removed. Once adequate medial bony decompression is performed, the area is irrigated with oxymetazoline for hemostasis.

A No. 12 Bard-Parker blade is used to incise the periorbita allowing orbital fat to prolapse forward. A malleable retractor is placed as counter-traction in the subperiosteal plane while gentle pressure is placed on the globe allowing orbital contents to prolapse into the decompressed medial orbit.

Attention is placed back to the lateral orbit where the periorbita is incised inferior to the lateral rectus to allow orbital fat to spill forward. The bone flap is thinned with a burr and then replaced with a 4-0 prolene suture through predrilled holes or a low profile curvilinear plate with screws. The bone can be replaced further anterior if the surgeon desires to advance the lateral canthal angle.

The trans-caruncular incision is closed with 6-0 plain gut suture in a buried interrupted fashion. The transconjunctival incision is not closed to prevent postoperative lid retraction. The lateral lower lid is secured to the common canthus and lateral orbital rim with 5-0 vicryl suture. The deep subcutaneous tissue of our lid splitting incision is closed with 5-0 vicryl suture in a buried interrupted fashion. The skin is closed with 6-0 plain sutures in a running fashion.

An ophthalmic antibiotic ointment is placed on the ocular surface after the corneal eye shield is removed. The patient is extubated and taken to the recovery area in stable condition.