It is crucial for clinicians to provide patients with expectations for treatment success. Patients need to understand that treatment is difficult but should receive reassurance that keratosis pilaris usually improves gradually as the patient ages. Clinicians should use a stepwise approach when treating this condition. Initial treatment options consist of emollients and topical keratolytics. If the patient shows no response to a trial of treatment, physicians should inform patients of other treatment options. Therapy can escalate to retinoids, topical anti-inflammatories, and Vitamin D3 derivatives. Phototherapy and multiple laser treatment modalities are also possible therapeutic options. Consider a dermatology referral for patients with keratosis pilaris that does not respond to treatment. Nursing can assist the clinicians by providing a significant role in patient counseling and monitoring treatment progression, informing the physician of any possible issues. As treatment ramps up to higher levels, the pharmacist becomes more involved, both in verifying the agents and administration instructions but also assuming a counseling role for administration and ensuring that there are no interactions in the patient's regimen, particularly with retinoid therapy. Even though the disease is relatively benign and self-limiting, it does not obviate the need for an interprofessional team approach, which will direct management for optimal patient results. [Level 5]

Finally, thorough education of the patient is vital; even though many treatments are available, none works well or is consistently effective; since the condition is not life-threatening, patients need to understand that some treatments are more likely to cause harm than good. [Level 5]