**Lab Tests**

- Complete blood count and differential looking for anemia, leukopenia, and thrombocytopenia, liver function tests, blood urea nitrogen, creatinine, glucose, electrolytes, serum calcium looking for hypercalcemia. ESR and C-reactive protein are nonspecific tests, often elevated.

- Elevated serum alkaline phosphatase concentration suggests diffuse granulomatous hepatic involvement.

- Serologic tests including serum angiotensin-converting enzyme (ACE), adenosine deaminase, serum amyloid A, and soluble interleukin-2 receptor can be considered.

- Kveim test is similar to tuberculin skin test and evokes a sarcoid granulomatous response. It is of limited significance.

**Radiographic Tests**

- Lungs are the main site of involvement; imaging tests include chest radiograph, CT of the chest, fluorine-18-fluorodeoxyglucose-positron emission tomography (FDG-PET), gallium-67, thallium-201, technetium sestamibi (MIBI-Tc), and single-photon emission computed tomography (SPECT).

- Cardiac or CNS-affected sarcoidosis is better diagnosed with the help of an MRI or PET scan.

- Pulmonary function tests may reveal a decrease in DLCO, and a restrictive pattern is seen in advanced cases. About 10% of patients will have an obstructive pattern. Patients with DLCO less than 60% predicted combined with oxygen saturation of less than 90 on the walk test need to be evaluated for pulmonary hypertension.

**Radiographic Stages**

- Stage I: Presence of bilateral hilar adenopathy

- Stage II: Bilateral hilar adenopathy and reticular opacities

- Stage III: Reticular opacities with shrinking hilar nodes (mainly infiltrates)

- Stage IV: Reticular opacities with fibrosis

In the case of a clear chest X-ray in a patient with unexplained dyspnea or cough, (HRCT) of the chest should be considered.

**Histopathology**

Sarcoidosis characteristically has noncaseating granulomas, with aggregates of epithelioid histiocytes, giant cells, and mature macrophages.

In order to rule out systemic disease, pulmonary function testing, electrocardiogram, echocardiography, urinalysis, and tuberculin skin testing should be considered.

Follow-up of the pulmonary disease can be done with pulmonary function tests and a carbon monoxide diffusion capacity test of the lungs for carbon monoxide (DLCO).

A biopsy is often required to confirm the diagnosis. Transbronchial biopsy has a high yield. If that fails, then a mediastinoscopy to perform a lymph node biopsy is required. The key feature is noncaseating granulomas in the absence of mycobacteria and fungi.