**Germ-cell Tumors**

GCTs are benign tumors. Testis-sparing surgery is feasible if significant normal testis tissue remains, although some recommend orchiectomy. No adjuvant therapy is recommended for stage I. Regional lymph node metastasis responds completely to induction cisplatin-based chemotherapy, just like GCTs.

**Sertoli Cell Tumors**

**Radical orchiectomy**is standard. Metastatic evaluation & metastasectomy required with adjuvant therapy.

**Leydig Cell Tumors**

**Orchiectomy/testis-sparing surgery (TSS)**alone is curative.

In comparison with GCTs, assessment of malignant behavior is difficult for SCSTs. 5-year occult metastasis disease-free survivals were 98% in less than 2 risk factors, in comparison to 45% in more than 2 factors. Factors being size greater than 5 cm, more than 3 mitoses/high-power field, positive margin, rete testes, lymphovascular invasion, cellular atypia, and necrosis.

If a patient has a higher chance of occult disease, extensive imaging should be done for defining early metastasis & early RPLND or metastasectomy may also be considered. Metastasectomy can be done in cases of limited spread, also in view of poor response with chemo & radiotherapy. Chemotherapy and/or radiotherapy is reserved for palliation in widespread unresectable disease. BEP (bleomycin, etoposide, cisplatin) or VIP (vinblastine, ifosfamide, cisplatin) regimes used in GCTs are not effective. With new drugs like taxane, gemcitabine, anti-angiogenic agents, tyrosine kinase inhibitors, and immunotherapy like programmed cell death 1 (PD-1) pathway inhibitors, the improvement is unknown. Tumor genetic profile may lead to the discovery of novel experimental drugs. LCTs & adrenocortical cancers show common histology & biochemistry. Case reports of palliation with mitotane, used in adrenocortical cancer, are there.

**Recommendation**

- A testicular mass that has likely chances to be a tumor must undergo radical inguinal orchiectomy. This helps in making the histologic diagnosis as well as decreasing the local tumor load. (grade 1C)

- SCSTs call for CT-guided assessment of metastasis for the staging of disease. Serial assessments of the pituitary/gonadal axis via serum androgen, estrogen & progesterone should be done (grade 2C)

- In the case of metastasis, surgical resection of all possible sites of disease should be done (grade 2C)

- Systemic therapy has not shown any promising effects, and non-resectable metastatic disease necessitates inclusion into trials whenever possible

- 1 or 0 high-risk factors can be safely observed without RPLND. However, long follow-ups are required. Early RPLND may be useful in 2 or more risk factors or stage IIA disease.