The temporal bone is composed of four major subdivisions; the tympanic, squamous, petrous, mastoid, and styloid bones - it is the tympanic region where we find the external, middle, and inner ear. Working from the outside in, a surgeon would first find an external ear consisting of the pinnae, the external auditory canal, and the tympanic membrane. Beyond the tympanic membrane exists the middle ear space, which is defined as the air-containing space medial to the tympanic membrane and lateral to the promontory. It is in this space where most of the work of a stapedectomy will be performed and where we will be focusing most of our discussion. The oval window, on which the footplate of the stapes sits, is the tenuous boundary from which the inner ear begins. Encased in dense bone, the inner ear contains the membranous labyrinth of structures known as the cochlea, vestibule, saccule, utricle, and the three semicircular canals.

The middle ear space is sagittally oriented and traversed by the ossicular chain, which consists of the malleus, incus, and stapes. This space is lined by respiratory epithelium (cuboidal and goblet cells) as it is pneumatized by the eustachian tube and has been further subdivided into the mesotympanum, epitympanum, and the hypotympanum. Within the mesotympanum of a healthy ear, the surgeon will find the manubrium of the malleus, the stapes, the chorda tympani nerve, the long process of the incus, the pyramidal eminence giving rise to the stapes tendon, a suprapyramidal recess known as the facial recess and an infrapyramidal recess known as the sinus tympani, and the ponticulus running between the pyramidal eminence and the promontory.

Above the mesotympanum is the epitympanum. The two are divided by a horizontal line drawn from the scutum to the tympanic segment of the facial nerve canal. The epitympanum is further divided into an anterior and posterior segment by a vertical crest of bone on its medial wall that extends from the tegmen to the cochleariform process. This piece of vertical bone is known as the “cog” and serves as a marker for identifying the facial nerve during surgery. The posterior partition contains the head of the malleus and the body of the incus.

Below, the mesotympanum is the hypotympanum. The two are divided by the inferior wall of the external auditory canal. It is essential to keep the varying size of this space in mind as it may rarely contain a dehiscent jugular bulb or an aberrant carotid artery.

The ossicular chain within the mesotympanum of a healthy individual serves to mechanically convey sound pressure from the tympanic membrane to the cochlea. The malleus lies most lateral of the ossicles, followed next by the largest ossicle -- the incus, and lastly by the stapes, which is the smallest of the ossicles and composed of a capitulum (head), anterior and posterior crura (the latter being where the stapedius tendon stretches from the pyramidal eminence to attach), and footplate. The footplate is the portion of the stapes that sits atop the oval window through the means of an annular ligament, which serves to create a joint between the two. It is the ossification of this ligament that results in otosclerosis.