Patients should be taught that adverse events with anti-seizure medications, according to the AAN, may range from 7% to 31%, but are mostly mild and reversible. In general, it is important to review the specific medication insert for a complete list of adverse events.

Of the more mild and common side effects, patients should be advised to monitor for headaches, fatigue, dizziness, blurry vision, nausea, weight gain or loss, mood disorders, and neurocognitive problems. The potential for allergic reactions is present amongst all medications and should be monitored upon initiation.

With chronic use, many AEDs carry a side effect of osteoporosis, and general recommendations are to supplement diets with calcium and vitamin D, while encouraging routine exercise habits.

Of the more serious side effects, Stevens-Johnson syndrome, agranulocytosis, aplastic anemia, hepatic failure, pancytopenia, multiorgan hypersensitivity, psychosis, and lupus syndrome have all been reported. Although the risk for suicidality is low, the FDA has required all AEDs to carry a suicide warning.

Also of concern are drug-drug interactions, which occur most commonly with the older generation of AEDs, as they can affect hepatic enzymes (e.g., the cytochrome P450 system). If these hepatic enzymes are induced, it can lead to the rapid metabolism of other medications, potentially leading to their subtherapeutic levels in the body. If, on the other hand, hepatic enzymes are inhibited, toxic levels of medications can be reached due to impaired breakdown through the liver. For example, carbamazepine, phenytoin, and phenobarbital are liver enzyme inducers and can increase the metabolism of concomitantly prescribed drugs like warfarin. In contrast, valproate is a liver enzyme inhibitor.

Both inducing and inhibiting medications can raise significant concern when managing certain comorbid conditions where therapeutic doses of medications are of the utmost importance, including HIV, cancer, endocrine disorders, and cardiovascular disease.