The brachial plexus supplies all the nerves in the upper extremity. It is formed by the anterior rami of spinal nerve levels C5 through T1. The brachial plexus is dividing into five subdivisions: the roots, trunks, divisions, cords, and branches. The roots, as stated earlier, are C5 through T1. There are three trunks: the superior (C5 and C6), middle (C7), and inferior (C8 and T1). Each cord divides anteriorly or posteriorly, thus creating the anterior and posterior division of each. These combine to form the cords. The posterior divisions of the three trunks combine to form the posterior cord. The anterior divisions of the superior and middle trunk combine to form the lateral cord, and the anterior division of the inferior trunk continues as the medial cord. The five major branches of the plexus are the musculocutaneous, axillary, median, radial, and ulnar nerve. The lateral cord splits to give half of the median nerve and continues as the musculocutaneous nerve. The medial cord also splits, giving off the other half of the median nerve, as it continues as the ulnar nerve. The posterior cord splits to form the axillary and radial nerve. The brachial plexus also supplies other nerves, besides the five major branches. The dorsal scapular nerve arises from the C5 nerve root, and the long thoracic nerve is made up of the C5 to C7 roots. The superior trunk gives off the suprascapular nerve and nerve to subclavius. The lateral pectoral nerve branches from the lateral cord, while the medial pectoral nerve, as well as the medial cutaneous nerve of the arm and forearm, come from the medial cord. The posterior cord also has 3 nerves that originate from it: the upper and lower subscapular and the thoracodorsal nerve. Clinical issues with the brachial plexus sometimes are seen in childbirth. Erb palsy is caused by traction/tear of the upper trunk, resulting in damage to the C5 and C6 nerve roots, and is commonly associated with infant neck traction during delivery. Also seen in delivery, is Klumpke palsy, in which traction on the upper extremity results in tearing of the C8 and T1 roots, usually with an upward pull of the infant's arm on the way out of the birth canal.

Nerve roots C5 to C7 supplies the musculocutaneous nerve. As it moves distally down the upper arm, it pierces the coracobrachialis from deep to superior. It courses between the biceps brachii and brachialis muscle, eventually turning into the lateral cutaneous nerve as it passes lateral to the biceps tendon. In total, it provides motor innervation to the three muscles of the anterior arm, the biceps brachii, brachialis, and coracobrachialis, as well as sensory innervation to the radial side of the forearm. Although lesions of this nerve are rare in clinical practice, they would they would theoretically result in weakened flexion and supination at the elbow joint, although it would not be absent due to the actions of the brachioradialis and supinator muscles. There would also be a sensory loss over the radial side of the forearm.

Nerve roots of C5 and C6 supply the axillary nerve. As it courses through the axilla, it transverses between the axillary artery posteriorly and the subscapularis muscles anteriorly. It then exits posteriorly through the quadrangular space, accompanied by the posterior circumflex humeral artery. The axillary nerve supplies the deltoid muscle, as well as one of the four rotator cuff muscles, the teres minor. It also provides sensory innervation via the upper lateral cutaneous nerve of the arm. The axillary nerve is commonly damaged via trauma to the shoulder or dislocation of the humerus. Injury results in failure of abduction of the arm as well as atrophy of the deltoid and loss of sensation in the upper lateral arm.

The median nerve is derived from nerve roots C6 through TI. It innervates the flexor muscles of the anterior forearm. A major exception to this rule is the flexor digitorum profundus, which is the only muscle in the anterior compartment innervated by the ulnar nerve The median nerve courses from the axilla down the anterior arm, lateral to the brachial artery. Midway down the arm, it crosses the artery anteriorly, entering the anterior forearm through the cubital fossa. In the forearm, the nerve course between the flexor digitorum superficialis and profundus muscles, giving rise to two branches: the anterior interosseous nerve, which supplies the deep compartment of the anterior forearm, and the palmar cutaneous nerve, which innervates the skin over the radial surface of the palm. It then continues distally through the carpal tunnel where it splits into two more branches: the recurrent branch, which supplies the thenar muscles, and the palmar digital branch, which supplies sensory innervation to the radial 3.5 digits and the palmar surface as well as motor innervation to the two radial lumbricals. Compression of the median nerve at the site of the carpal tunnel by the flexor retinaculum causes carpal tunnel syndrome. This pathology results in tingling, pain, and numbness in the distribution of the median nerve distally to the wrist. This can be treated, conservatively in most cases, with splinting of the wrist. Corticosteroid injections can also manage it. Refractory cases may need to be managed by surgical decompression via flexor retinaculum release by an experienced orthopedic surgeon. The nerve is also commonly damaged via trauma to the elbow and lacerations at the wrist.

The radial nerve has supply from every root of the brachial plexus, C5 through TI. It arises from the axillary region and courses with the axillary artery, exiting posteriorly. It travels down the posterior surface of the humerus in the radial groove. It then wraps laterally around the arm where it meets and courses near the brachial artery. It then courses over the lateral epicondyle where it splits into the deep and superficial branch. The deep branch supplies motor innervation to most of the muscles in the posterior compartment of the forearm, which the superficial branch supplies sensory innervation to the posterior surface of the hand and fingers. In the course of the radial nerve down the arm, it also supplies cutaneous innervation via the lower lateral cutaneous nerve of the arm, the posterior cutaneous nerve of the arm, and the posterior cutaneous nerve of the forearm, besides the superficial branch. The radial nerve is commonly injured in midshaft fractures of the humerus, which results in motor deficits to the triceps and extensor muscles of the forearm and wrist-drop.

The ulnar nerve contains fibers from spinal roots C8 and T1. It courses down the humerus and over the medial epicondyle. It then pierces the flexor carpi ulnaris and gives way to three branches in the forearm, the muscular branch and the palmar and dorsal cutaneous branches. As it courses down the forearm, it innervates the ulnar half of the flexor digitorum profundus muscle and the flexor carpi ulnaris. As it transverses the wrist, it travels superficial to the flexor retinaculum, into the hand, where it innervates the hypothenar muscles, the ulnar two lumbricals, and the interossei muscle. The cutaneous branches given off also supply the sensation to the ulnar 1/5 fingers. The ulnar nerve is most commonly damaged at the elbow although damage can also result from lacerations to the wrist. It is also a common nerve palsy seen in bike riders because the ulnar nerve is compressed as it travels through the Guyon canal. There are various presentations of ulnar nerve injury, depending on the location of the injury.