The FDA-approved primary indication for ephedrine is the treatment of clinically significant hypotension perioperatively. Induction of general and ongoing anesthesia during operative cases results in vasodilatation and hypotension, requiring treatment with vasopressors.

It is also frequently the agent of choice for hypotension induced by spinal or epidural anesthesia. In obstetrics, sympathectomy during spinal anesthetics results in hypotension in 80% of patients.

It is sometimes given intramuscularly to achieve a longer-lasting effect.

Since ephedrine results in both alpha and beta-adrenoreceptor stimulation, it is most beneficial in the setting of hypotension along with bradycardia or a low-normal heart rate, and caution is necessary for patients with hypotension and coexisting tachycardia. Most vasopressors used during anesthesia should be viewed as a temporizing measure while determining and addressing the source of hypotension.

Another notable indication of ephedrine is for allergy relief. Due to the constriction of smooth muscle via alpha receptor binding and bronchi dilation due to beta-2 receptor agonism, most sympathomimetics, including ephedrine, work effectively to decrease allergic symptoms.

Oral formulations of ephedrine have been used historically to treat asthma via pulmonary vasoconstriction and reduction in airway edema along with beta-induced bronchodilation, but it is rarely used for this purpose in modern medicine due to unwanted cardiac effects and availability of more selective beta-agonists such as albuterol. Ephedrine is also available in a fixed-dose combination with guaifenesin to temporarily relieve mild asthma symptoms with an expectorant.

Other off-label indications include bronchoconstriction, myasthenia gravis, and weight loss(in the past). In the early 2000s, the drug became very popular among over-the-counter supplements because it was found to work synergistically with caffeine to promote weight loss by stimulating metabolism.

Patients with myasthenia gravis may also benefit from treatment with ephedrine; however, evidence for its specific mechanism of action and benefit in this disease has not come from randomized controlled trials, and only observational and non-randomized trials are currently available.