# Continuing Education Activity

Infectious endocarditis can be challenging to treat and often causes significant sequelae. Antimicrobial prophylaxis is given in certain situations before dental and oral surgery to avoid infective endocarditis. However, unnecessary antimicrobial administration can cause adverse events and contribute to antimicrobial resistance. This activity will explore the indications for antimicrobial prophylaxis in the context of dental and oral surgery, the microbiology of the oral cavity, and recommended antimicrobials and their administration. It will further delve into the data informing current recommendations on antimicrobial prophylaxis. It will conclude by exploring the topic of dental antimicrobial stewardship and the consequences of unneeded antimicrobial use in the field.

**Objectives:**
- Explain the rationale for antimicrobial prophylaxis in dental and oral surgery.
- Identify the indications for antimicrobial prophylaxis in dental and oral surgery.
- Review the microbiology of the oral cavity.
- Outline recommended regimens for antimicrobial prophylaxis and their administration.

# Introduction

The disruption of the dental mucosa can lead to transient bacteremia.

In 1935, one study isolated S. viridans in blood cultures in 61% of patients with dental sepsis.

# Function

The microbiology of the oral cavity varies with the position in the mouth and with different systemic conditions. Nonmutans streptococcal species and organisms in the S. mitis group predominate near the root and in the teeth' cracks and fissures.Porphyromonas, Provotella, and Capnocytophaga.Aggregatibacter is associated with aggressive periodontitis.

Organisms involved in periodontal disease organize into complexes in conjunction with certain other species. Fusobacterium species belong to a complex that may herald early periodontal disease.Lactobacillus, and Actinomyces, predominate in biofilms associated with carious teeth.

Organisms implicated in infective endocarditis that may be of oral origin include oral streptococci in 7 to 18%, enterococci in 5 to 10%, and organisms in the HACEK group that include oral anaerobes such as Eikinella corrodens and Aggrigatibacter in 1 to 2%.

Most prosthetic joint infections involve Staphylococcus aureus and coagulase-negative Staphylococcus, which are generally considered rare in the human oral cavity.

# Issues of Concern

Current guidelines regarding antibiotic prophylaxis before dental procedures have been influenced by two main issues: transient bacteremia's nature and the efficacy of antibiotics in reducing bacteremia and infective endocarditis.

**Transient Bacteremia**

Bacteremia refers to the presence of bacteria in the bloodstream.

As transient bacteremia occurs for many due to normal activities of daily living, this argues against the widespread use of antimicrobial prophylaxis in the general population. Furthermore, despite transient bacteremia, endocarditis remains a relatively rare diagnosis and has an incidence of 3 to 10 per 100,000 people.

Advancements in cardiology have paved the way for prosthetic and bioprosthetic cardiac valves and other prosthetics, allowing for the correction of valvulopathy and congenital heart disease. Increased rates of endocarditis have also been noted in this population.

**Efficacy of Antimicrobial Prophylaxis in the Prevention of Bacteremia**

Antimicrobial prophylaxis before dental procedures is not 100% effective at preventing transient bacteremia. A systemic review of twelve studies revealed that antimicrobial prophylaxis before tooth extraction reduced the risk of bacteremia by 50%.

**Efficacy of Antimicrobial Prophylaxis in the Prevention of Infective Endocarditis**

Infective endocarditis is the infection of the innermost layer of the heart, known as the endocardium. It typically affects the cardiac or prosthetic valves and cardiac devices.

To date, there has not been a randomized-controlled trial regarding antimicrobial prophylaxis before dental procedures to inform clinical decision-making. However, several studies have evaluated the incidence of infective endocarditis before and after changes in treatment guidelines from prominent medical organizations. In other words, much of the data informing on this topic are epidemiological studies before and after changes in recommendations.

Many epidemiological studies before and after the publication of antimicrobial prophylaxis recommendations have shown no change. A study in Olmstead County, Minnesota, in 2007 evaluated the incidence of infective endocarditis caused by viridans group streptococci before and after the change in the joint American Heart Association/American Dental Association guidelines (AHA/ADA), which narrowed recommendations for antimicrobial prophylaxis before dental procedures and did not reveal any change in the incidence of infective endocarditis.

However, some studies did reveal increased rates of endocarditis after the publication of guideline changes. Another US study revealed that the rate of streptococcal infective endocarditis has increased since the 2007 joint AHA/ADA guidelines but did not note an increase in valvular replacement.

A study conducted on the incidence of infective endocarditis in Englandrevealedl an increase in the incidence of infective endocarditis after the guidelines in 2008 by the National Institute of Health and Clinical Excellence that did not recommend antimicrobial prophylaxis in any population.

These guidelines were updated in 2016 to indicate that the organization does not generally recommend antimicrobial prophylaxis before dental procedures.

# Clinical Significance

**Indications for Antimicrobial Prophylaxis in Healthy Patients**

Antimicrobial prophylaxis is not routinely indicated in healthy patients undergoing dental or oral surgery procedures. However, there are some exceptions when prophylaxis is recommended, as it reduces the risk of postoperative complications, including implant failure, local infection, or sinusitis.

**Indications for Antimicrobial Prophylaxis in Healthy patients: Dental Implants**

Antimicrobial prophylaxis is recommended before dental implants are placed immediately after dental extraction, with or without clinical signs of infection. These recommendations stem from concerns regarding the placement of implants into a potentially infected wound bed, which may affect osseointegration.

In penicillin-allergic patients, alternatives include azithromycin or clarithromycin 500 mg one hour before the procedure followed by 250 mg daily for 5 to 7 days, or metronidazole 1 g one hour before the procedure followed by 500 mg every six hours for five to seven days.

Antimicrobial prophylaxis during the second phase, or prosthetic phase, of dental implants is not justified.

For dental implant placements done concurrently with sinus lift procedures, amoxicillin/clavulanate 875/125 mg every twelve hours started one day before the procedure and continued for seven days is recommended. Antimicrobial prophylaxis in this situation is to prevent sinusitis in case of perforation of Schneider's membrane, resulting in communication between the oral cavity and the maxillary sinus.

Antimicrobial prophylaxis before routine dental implants remains controversial. They have been recommended to reduce the risk of osseointegration failure caused by a microorganism affecting the wound healing process.

On the other hand, a meta-analysis including three studies found that the number needed to treat to prevent one implant failure was thirty-three.

Infected bone grafts are a considerable problem as they often lead to total or partial graft loss.

Clindamycin should not be used to prevent dental implant-related infections as worse outcomes, including infection and osseointegration failure, are noted compared to when amoxicillin is used.

**Indications for Antimicrobial Prophylaxis in Healthy patients: Facial Fractures**

Infection rates of mandibular fractures range from 3.3% to 43.9%, while infections involving fractures of the upper facial, third, and mid-face occur in 0% to 12.5%.

**Antimicrobial Prophylaxis in Special Populations**

Severely immunocompromised patients, such as those on chemotherapy, should avoid invasive dental procedures whenever possible.

There is a lack of evidence regarding patients with severe neutropenia, high doses of immunosuppressants, or patients with immunodeficiencies.

Previous guidelines have recommended antimicrobial prophylaxis be provided to patients with diabetes mellitus.

There is no consensus regarding the need for antimicrobial prophylaxis before dental procedures in patients that have received a splenectomy.

The American Dental Association does not routinely recommend antimicrobial prophylaxis in patients with implanted prosthetic joints before dental procedures.

**Indications for Antimicrobial Prophylaxis in Patients With Cardiac Risk Factors**

Due to the increased risk for infective endocarditis in patients with certain cardiac risk factors, The American Heart Association recommends antimicrobial prophylaxis before specific dental procedures if patients meet one of the below criteria.

- A prosthetic valve or implanted prosthetic cardiac material is present. Materials include prosthetic valves in place, prosthetic material from a prior cardiac valve repair, or other prosthetic material in situ, including a transvenous aortic valve replacement. It also includes patients with a left ventricular assist device (LVAD) or artificial heart.

- A previous episode of infective endocarditis has occurred.

- Certain patients with congenital heart disease meeting specific conditions: those with unrepaired cyanotic congenital heart defects, repaired congenital defects with prosthetic material within six months of repair, repaired congenital heart disease with a retained prosthetic device and residual defect, and patients with a pulmonary artery valve or conduit in place.

- Cardiac transplant patients with valvulopathy.

In patients not meeting the above conditions, the American Heart Association does not recommend antimicrobial prophylaxis for infective endocarditis before dental procedures.

- Patients using pacemakers or automatic cardioverter-defibrillators

- Patients having undergone prior septal defect closure with success

- Patients with peripheral vascular grafts (such as those used for hemodialysis access) or vascular stents

- Patients with ventriculoatrial shunts

- Patients with vena cava filters

- Patients with pledgets

Procedures that carry sufficient risk to justify antimicrobial prophylaxis in the groups outlined above involve gingival or periapical manipulation and cases that require perforation of the oral mucosa.

**Recommended Regimens for Patients with Cardiac Risk Factors**

Antimicrobials should be administered as a single dose thirty to sixty minutes before the procedure.

Alternative regimens include cephalexin 2 g, azithromycin 500 mg, clarithromycin 500 mg, or doxycycline 100 mg for those with penicillin allergy.

In patients with type I hypersensitivity to penicillins, including reactions of anaphylaxis, angioedema, or urticaria, cephalexin should not be administered.

Clindamycin is not recommended for antibiotic prophylaxis before dental procedures and oral surgery due to the high incidence of adverse events, such as C. difficile colitis.

# Other Issues

**Antimicrobial Stewardship in Dentistry and Oral Surgery**

Dentists prescribe 10% of all outpatient antibiotic prescriptions and prescribe the most antibiotics as a specialty in the United States.

Clostridioides difficile colitis occurred in 0.007 per 1000 patient days, and anaphylaxis occurred in 0.003 per 1000 person days.

Unneeded antimicrobials contribute to antimicrobial resistance, a growing threat in the community. In the United States alone, antibiotic-resistant bacteria result in the deaths of 23,000 people per year.

Dentists working in academic hospitals or university settings were found more likely to prescribe antibiotic prophylaxis correctly when compared to dentists practicing elsewhere.

Increased education regarding the dangers of antibiotic-related events, including Clostridiodes difficile colitis and antimicrobial resistance, could make a difference. A small prospective cohort study involving infectious diseases antimicrobial stewardship personnel outreach to private practice dentists showed an increase in appropriate antibiotic prescribing from 19% pre-education to 87.9% post-education.

# Enhancing Healthcare Team Outcomes

Appropriate antimicrobial administration involves the entire healthcare team: dentists, oral surgeons, orthopedic surgeons, infectious diseases specialists, cardiologists, primary care physicians, and pharmacists. Dentists play a crucial role in the prescribing of antimicrobial prophylaxis. A panel of experts formed the American Dental Association's guidelines on antibiotic prophylaxis before dental procedures to prevent prosthetic joint infection in 2014.

However, impediments to guideline-adherent prescribing include a lack of information regarding the complete cardiac histories of patients presenting for dental procedures, pressure from other physicians and the patients themselves to prescribe antimicrobial prophylaxis, and lack of education regarding the most up-to-date guidelines. The current infective endocarditis prophylaxis guidelines from the American Heart Society were developed after an exhaustive review of all available data.

Cardiologists are crucial in advising patients and dentists about when patients do and do not require antimicrobial prophylaxis before dental procedures and oral surgery. Orthopedic surgeons also play a role when advising patients with implanted prosthetic joints. Primary care providers also contribute, as patients commonly ask whether antimicrobial prophylaxis is necessary before patients present to their dentists for dental work.

Infectious disease physicians have a critical role in advising their patients and other physicians and have also played a significant role in education and outreach. Pharmacists also have a considerable role to play in helping with antimicrobial selection in more challenging situations, such as antibiotic allergy, and especially antimicrobial stewardship pharmacists significantly contribute via outreach and education. Many physicians, surgeons, and pharmacists contribute to the breadth of knowledge regarding this subject with significant research contributions.

As multiple physicians are often involved in these situations, in addition to the dentist or oral surgeon, all members of the patient's healthcare team must provide consistent messaging and education to the patient to avoid antibiotic overprescribing that leads to increased antimicrobial resistance and unnecessary adverse events in situations where antimicrobial prophylaxis does not have benefit.