A typical soft tissue or plastic surgery pan, and additional materials should include:

- Marking pen

- paper ruler

- No. 15 blade

- Small straight sharp scissors (e.g., Iris)

- Tendon passer

- Forceps

- Suture materials (4-0 Chromic or Vicryl)

Though there have been many implant materials used, currently there exist several types of implants that may be safely used, depending on the preference of the surgeon and/or the patient.

**Autogenous Implants**

- Fat - usually harvested via concomitant face, neck, or body liposuction, the surgeon typically places the fat via injection or cannula technique, similar to augmentation with fillers. NOTE: fat augmentation may result in prolonged swelling, asymmetry, or a nodular appearance given due to its unpredictable absorption/survival rate (especially in mobile areas such as the lips).

- Superficial musculoaponeurotic system (SMAS) – harvested during a concomitant facelift

- Postauricular fascia – temporalis muscle fascia

- Scar tissue (if available, usually from previous facelift/neck lift scars)

**Alloplastic Implants**

- Extended polytetrafluoroethylene

- Silicone – commercially marketed and available in 3 diameters (3, 4, and 5 mm) and three lengths (55, 60, and 65 mm). The standard size most routinely used in practice is the 4-mm-wide prosthesis.

To improve aesthetic outcomes and lessen complications, the surgeon must be prudent in choosing the correct implant size. First, use a conformable ruler (e.g., paper ruler) to measure the distance of the wet-dry lip from commissure to commissure, with the lips slightly parted. NOTE: do not measure the patient's lips with the mouth open. The optimal prosthesis length should be several millimeters less than the commissure-commissure distance. Because of the curved shape of the upper lip compared to the lower lip, it is not uncommon for implant sizes of the upper and lower lip to differ.