There are six different levels in Allen’s model of cognitive levels. Each Allen Cognitive Level (ACL) provides a description of the patient’s level of occupational functioning and his/her ability to perform familiar activities, as well as to learn new ones. Each proceeding cognitive level in Allen’s model is cumulative. For example, a patient with the cognitive ability to perform at Level 3 would also is assumed to have the abilities required for Levels 1 and 2.

Level 1 describes automatic actions (e.g., swallowing, diverting attention towards stimuli). In other words, Level 1 describes the patient’s arousal to external cues. This cognitive level is largely instinctual behavior, and patients require total assistance with activities. A patient who is below cognitive level 1 would be in a coma.

Level 2 describes postural actions (e.g., gross movement in response to proprioceptive cues). The driver for the patient’s actions is primarily comfort or discomfort, remaining mostly unaware of the effects of their actions on their surroundings. Aimless pacing and/or wandering are observable in patients functioning at this cognitive level. Patients at Level 2 require maximum assistance.

Level 3 describes manual actions (e.g., grasping at and using objects). What distinguishes Level 3 from Level 2 is the increased ability to discriminate the external from the self. The patient’s global cognition remains impaired at this level, but long-term repetitive training can allow these patients to acquire new behaviors by better noting their effects on objects, sustaining their actions, and utilizing materials for ADLs. Despite their ability to sustain actions, patients at Level 3 still lack long-term concentration and may need frequent re-direction to complete tasks appropriately; moderate assistance is a recommendation for Level 3. 24-hour supervision should be in place for patients at Levels 1, 2, or 3.

Level 4 describes goal-directed actions (e.g., preparing a snack, following a route around a familiar neighborhood). At this level, the patients can recognize and understand the effect their actions have on their surroundings. Relying on visible cues, they can learn and carry out activities specific to particular goals. However, patients functioning at Level 4 still have trouble recognizing finer details and learning independently. Hence, they often lack the cognitive skills to identify and fix errors, and supervision in the form of minimum assistance is the recommendation for these patients.

Level 5 describes exploratory actions (e.g., problem-solving through trial-and-error). Patients at Level 5 of the ACLs can learn by emulation of actions shown to them. They are also able to apply what they learn to other activities and situations. Still, these patients have limited ability to organize, anticipate, and plan. This limitation can lead to poor judgment and higher impulsivity, especially in situations that require more deductive reasoning. External cues via supervision can help patients at this cognitive level plan. Patients at Level 5 should receive standby assistance.

Level 6 describes planned actions (e.g., anticipation and prevention of errors). There is no global cognitive impairment at this level, and the patient at this ACL is considered to be a normally functioning adult. It is important to note that because the ACLs describe cognitive levels, the patient may still have physical limitations. There is no supervision required at Level 6.