The prescription of hydromorphone requires an interprofessional team that consists of the primary physician (e.g., oncologist), a pain specialist, the nurses involved in the care of the patient, and a pharmacist. All parties must agree on the prescription and dosage of the medication as well as recognize the potential harms of this medication. At any moment, team members must be able to identify signs of hydromorphone toxicity and administer treatment promptly. In the event of medication dependance event when no longer indicated, a psychologist must be consulted as hydromorphone addiction is serious and may lead to overdoses and potentially death.

Hydromorphone overdose will require a toxicologist and nephrologist on board as the need for treatment strategies additional to naloxone may be needed, depending on serum and urine drug levels as well as symptomatic presentation. The intensive care unit should also have involvement, as toxicity management is also necessary to ensure hemodynamic stability and adequate respiratory response.

Nursing will have the best opportunity to monitor for adverse effects and toxicity, which with a powerful opioid such as hydromorphone is crucial, and any concerns must be reported to the physician promptly. Pharmacy needs to be involved from start to finish in all aspects of hydromorphone therapy, regardless of the mode of administration, to verify dosing, perform medication reconciliation to prevent drug-drug interactions, and assist the physician with switching to another agent or weaning the patient off. Given the current opioid crisis, pharmacist involvement is more important than ever, working closely with nursing and physicians. Opioid pain control requires the full collaboration of the entire interprofessional healthcare team to ensure adequate pain control and patient safety. [Level 5]