Several key patient parameters require monitoring when using anesthetic gases to induce and maintain general anesthesia during the perioperative period. First: the patient’s vital signs due to the suppressive effects on the CNS and sympathetic nervous system that these agents exhibit. Heart rate (HR) and blood pressure (BP) specifically are monitored by the minute to detect tachyarrhythmias or sudden hypertension/hypotension.

- Cerebral effects: nitrous oxide can increase cerebral blood flow and cause increased intracranial pressure, whereas volatile anesthetics can decrease cerebral metabolic rate, decreasing cerebral blood flow to a point until reaching 1.5 MAC, and resulting vasodilation can occur, increasing the intracranial pressure. Both situations ameliorate with the use of IV anesthetics and/or hyperventilation, which reduces cerebral blood flow and decreases intracranial pressure.

- Cardiovascular effects: all anesthetic gases have shown a depression of cardiac contractility; halothane reduces arterial pressure, and the other volatile gases decrease vascular resistance due to vasodilatation resulting in preserved cardiac output. These effects can cause sympathetic activation and reflex tachycardia, especially with the use of isoflurane and desflurane, which cause less baroreceptor reflex depression than the others. Volatile gases can also sensitize the myocardium to catecholamines, potentially increasing the risk of ventricular dysrhythmias if patients were given sympathomimetic drugs perioperatively. These effects can be balanced with BP (hydralazine, labetalol, verapamil, etc.) and HR control (metoprolol, amiodarone, etc.).

- Pulmonary effects: besides N2O, all anesthetic gases cause a dose-dependent decrease in tidal volume and an increase in respiratory rate resulting in a shallow breathing pattern. All gases are respiratory depressants, as the reduction of ventilatory response to increasing blood CO2 occurs. Mechanical ventilation is required to compensate for this response.

Bispectral index (BIS) is commonly applied with the use of anesthetic gases for general anesthesia to determine the level of sedation achieved. This monitoring technique detects brain activity, similarly to EEG monitoring, and gives an average value on a numerical scale (0 to 100), with values below 60 determined as the level of minimal sedation and below 40 as the level of deep sedation. Though still used commonly in clinical practice, future use of BIS for this type of monitoring is in question because of the lack of studies and no proven gold standard for comparison.