Structure and Function:

The complexity of its neuroanatomy matches the size of the CN V. The trigeminal nerve fibers arise from the trigeminal nerve nucleus, which extends from the midbrain to the upper cervical spinal cord. The trigeminal nerve nucleus is the largest of all cranial nerve nuclei. It divides into three main portions: (1) the mesencephalic trigeminal nucleus, which receives mechanoreceptor fibers and proprioceptive information from the mandibles and teeth, (2) the main trigeminal nucleus, which receives the majority of the touch and position fibers, and the (3) spinal trigeminal nucleus which primarily receives temperature and pain stimuli.

The sensory nuclei merge at the level of the pons to form a sensory root. The motor nuclei continue inferiorly to the sensory nuclei to form a motor root. The sensory root then expands into the trigeminal ganglion at the level of the middle cranial fossa or Meckel’s cave. It is within this fossa that the nerves combine to form the semilunar ganglion. The position of the superior petrosal sinus is located medially to these structures. The basilar venous plexus and ventral aspects of the pons and brainstem are medial to the Meckel’s cave.

Upon exiting the trigeminal ganglion, the fibers of CNV take a superomedial route toward the pons. At this point, both divisions of CN V pierce the lateral surface of the pons. Within the pons, the sensory fibers divide equally into ascending and descending divisions. Ascending fibers take a superior course towards the mesencephalic nucleus while the descending fibers will take a route toward the spinal trigeminal nucleus. Remaining sensory fibers follow a dorsomedial course toward the main sensory nucleus. Simultaneous to the dorsomedial travel of the sensory fibers toward the sensory nucleus, the remaining motor fibers will follow a similar path toward their respective motor nuclei.

The bilateral pair of the mesencephalic nucleus consists of a collection of unipolar neurons extending from the main sensory nucleus within the pons. It is primarily involved in processing information related to proprioception. Myelinated axons exit the mesencephalic tract and divide into central and peripheral divisions. Central branches conduct impulses from the neuromuscular spindles of the bite-force reflex arcs within the muscles of mastication toward the motor neuron of CN V. Several other central branch axons integrate with the sensory aspect of CN V via the reticular formation or migrate toward the cerebellum via the superior cerebellar peduncle. The extensive networking of the trigeminal nerve motor and sensory divisions contribute to the regulation of the masticatory stretch muscles and the process of deglutition. The mesencephalic nucleus peripheral branches travel as fibers via the maxillary branch of the CN V in the upper jaw and the mandibular branch of the CN V in the lower jaw.

Lateral to the motor nucleus of CN V lies the main sensory nucleus inside of the dorsal portion of the pontine tegmentum. Fibers derived from the mesencephalic nucleus and afferent spinal axons feed proprioceptive impulses toward the main sensory nucleus. Various larger fibers also convey discriminative touch and light touch impulses toward the main sensory nucleus. Neurons within the main sensory nucleus from the trigeminal nuclei and the pontine coalesce as the ventral trigeminothalamic tract. Other fibers within the main nucleus travel toward the thalamus forming the dorsal trigeminothalamic tract. The ventral and dorsal tracts coalesce in the area of the pons adjacent to the midbrain and are collectively known as the trigeminal lemniscus tract. Fibers within this tract access the ventral posterior medial aspect of the thalamus and ascend into an internal capsule toward the postcentral gyrus in which sensory information gets processed.

The CN V motor nucleus is a conglomerate of multipolar neurons medially situated to the pontine trigeminal nucleus. The tracts of the motor nucleus innervate certain muscles within the first pharyngeal arch, including the pterygoid muscles, the masseter, and temporalis muscles. The motor nucleus is deep to the lateral rhomboid fossa in the upper division of the pontine tegmentum. The motor axons eventually merge with the mandibular V3 division of CN V. The motor nucleus is regulated through sensory input from the cerebral cortices bilaterally, as well as via the afferent fibers of the mesencephalic nuclei.

Spanning the full length of the medulla oblongata to the proximal spinal cord at the level of the second or third cervical segment is the spinal nucleus of CN V. The spinal trigeminal nucleus divides into three smaller nuclei based on location. Most proximal to caudal, these are the pars oralis, pars interpolaris, and pars caudalis. The spinal trigeminal tract feeds afferent fibers, while non-myelinated central processes from the ganglion feed into the spinal nucleus. These fibers descend by way of the superior pontine sulcus after passing through the pons and carry sensory information from the three CN V divisions. The fibers of the trigeminal tract have a specific somatotopic organization in which fibers of the CN V2 run centrally and are flanked ventrolaterally and dorsomedially by the ophthalmic and mandibular divisions respectively. These tracts also contain general somatic afferent fibers arising from other cranial nerves like the vagus (CNX), glossopharyngeal (CN IX), and facial (CN VII) nerves.