# Continuing Education Activity

Poroma is a benign glandular adnexal tumor. Initially, It was thought of as a pure eccrine tumor, but now it is clear that it has both eccrine and apocrine origin. This activity reviews the clinical presentation, evaluation, and treatment of poroma and highlights the role of the interprofessional team in the care of this condition, especially when transformed into a malignant form.

**Objectives:**
- Describe the etiology of poroma.
- Review the appropriate history and physical findings of poroma.
- Identify the treatment options for poroma.
- Explain the importance of improving care coordination amongst the interprofessional team to enhance the delivery of care for patients presenting with poroma.

# Introduction

Poroma (poroid tumor) is a benign adnexal tumor that usually originates from the terminal duct of the sweat gland.

# Etiology

The exact etiology of poroma is unknown. Unlike other adnexal follicular lineage neoplasms, family predilection has not been identified for the development of poromas. Long-term radiation exposure has been suggested to trigger the development of poroma and porocarcinomas.

Porocarcinoma is known to result from a possible malignant progression of a benign poroma. Its pathogenesis is still not clear, and there is not a definite timeline in which a poroma advances and becomes a porocarcinoma.

Occasionally, poroma has been reported with other conditions, including Bowen’s disease and hypohidrotic ectodermal dysplasia.

# Epidemiology

In primary skin lesions, sweat gland tumors account for approximately 1% of cases. Eccrine and apocrine poromas are believed to account for approximately 10% of these.

The incidence of eccrine porocarcinoma is lower than poroma, representing only 0.005% of epithelial cutaneous neoplasms, and it is more common in elderly patients.

# Pathophysiology

Poroma is a benign adnexal tumor that occurs on the skin and does not affect any other tissue. It shows differentiation toward glandular ductal cells. Its malignant counterpart is known as porocarcinoma, which also shows clear poroid differentiation. It only occurs in the skin and is not known to affect any other body organ.

# Histopathology

Poroma is a very well-circumscribed tumor.

Poroid cells are cuboidal keratinocytes, and the pattern is non-palisading and monomor­phous ovoid nuclei with discrete nucleoli. The cytoplasm is usually eosinophilic and stains positively with periodic acid–Schiff (PAS). Interestingly, some atypical features of malignant tumors can be observed in poroma, including a variable number of mitosis, highly vascularized stroma, and foci of necrosis.

The degree of ductal differentiation varies greatly between poromas. Dermatopathologists can be aided by carcinoembryonic antigen immunostaining, which is a tool to confirm the presence of ductal differentiation. This staining labels the luminal surface of both apocrine and eccrine ducts.

- Presence of elongated tubules lined by columnar cuticular or polygonal cells that usually exhibit hints of apocrine secretion along the luminal border and also contain an amorphous, eosinophilic material in their lumina

- The connection of aggregates of neoplastic cells to preexisting infundibula seem like connections between excretory ducts of apocrine glands

- Presence of follicular differentiation in the form of epithelial lobules similar to the tumor of follicular infundibulum or trichoblastoma

- Presence of isolated sebocytes and their small clusters in neoplastic cells

Porocarcinoma is composed of anaplastic cells that contain large irregular and hyperchromatic nuclei and are glycogen-rich.

# History and Physical

Poroma typically presents as an asymptomatic mild solitary slow-growing papule, nodule, or plaque with colors varying from skin color to red to brown or bluish.

Although it is extremely rare, poroma arising within nevus sebaceous was also reported.

Multiple poromas are known as “poromatosis,” which can occur following chemo­therapy and/or radiotherapy.

# Evaluation

A biopsy is the only way to make the diagnosis of poroma. If the diagnosis of poroma is considered, one must be attentive to the risk of malignancy in the future. For porocarcinoma, the evaluation of sentinel lymph node biopsy has been used as a staging tool. Screening for distant metastases is also indicated.

# Treatment / Management

Treatment for poroma is optional but curative as it is a benign adnexal neoplasm. Deeper lesions may be cured with simple excision, but electrosurgical destruc­tion may be the cure for superficial lesions.

Treatment modalities for porocarcinoma have included Mohs micrographic surgery, standard surgical excision with broad tumor margins, radiation therapy, and chemotherapy. The Mohs micrographic surgery affords, for some authors, the greatest likelihood of cure in the absence of regional and distant metastases and clear margins.

# Differential Diagnosis

Poromas are often misdiagnosed as other skin neoplasms because their clinical presentations are nonspecific and variable. In the study of Chen et al., the preoperative diagnoses of eccrine poroma were: pyogenic granuloma (five cases), soft fibroma (four cases), verruca vulgaris (three cases), hemangioma (two cases), pigmented nevus (one case), and basal cell carcinoma (one case). Other differentials may include squamous cell carcinoma, seborrheic keratosis, hidradenomas, trichilemmoma, and other adnexal tumors.

The long-standing or chronic tumors of the limbs and head, namely squamous cell carcinoma, Paget’s disease, basal cell carcinoma, hidradenocarcinoma melanoma, can mimic inflamed poroma and metastatic cancer porocarcinoma.

Histologically, recognizing apocrine poroma may be sometimes difficult as it manifests a mixture of apocrine, sebaceous, and follicular differentiation in otherwise typical poroid tumors. A typical case of apocrine poroma was reported by Kamiya et al. and discussed the coexistence of basal-cell epithelioma and apocrine poroma, eccrine poroma, in association with trichoblastoma and also basal-cell epithelioma having sweat gland differentiation.

# Prognosis

The prognosis of poromas is good as the lesions have minimal clinical significance. Poroma clinically presents as a solitary nodule or papule. The lesions are typically asymptomatic, and few lesions have mild tenderness. The patient sometimes develops multiple poromas at the same time, a phenomenon called porokeratosis. Poromatosis is of cosmetic concern for the patient.

The malignant transformation risk of poroma is very minimal, and it transforms into porocarcinoma. In the study of Salih et al., metastasis of porocarcinoma was detected at a presentation in 31% of cases. The most common sites in the body for the metastases of porocarcinoma were the neighboring lymph nodes (57.7%) followed by respiratory tract/lungs (12.8%),brain (9%), liver (9%), skin (5.8%), bone (3.2%), stomach (0.6%) and breast (0.6%). Metastasis was disseminated in 1.3% of cases.

# Complications

As it is a benign disease, no specific complication is associated with poroma itself. Some common complications may arise after a surgical procedure, including infection and hemorrhage.

# Consultations

Poromas are benign tumors not clinically distinctive are difficult to diagnose clinically. However, an experienced clinical dermatologist can often identify poromas, in particular, one with a vascular appearance on a volar surface.

# Deterrence and Patient Education

Poroma is a benign tumor, mostly asymptomatic, and the prognosis is usually good. Patient education regarding malignant transformation, i.e., porocarcinoma is not necessary because its risk is similar to normal skin. Poromatosis can be the cause of cosmetic disfigurement, and when involving soles, it can cause some disability.

# Enhancing Healthcare Team Outcomes

Poroma is a benign tumor with mild clinical symptoms, and rarely it can progress to porocarcinoma. An interprofessional team approach is important. Proper collaboration and communication between dermatologists, histopathologists, and surgical specialists are very important. Skin biopsy for histopathology is indicated in all cases with suspected poroma, in order to eliminate the diagnosis of its malignant variant. Porocarcinoma is a rare malignancy but is curable if accurately diagnosed and properly treated.