Once the patient is deemed a candidate for an alloplastic implant, and the type and size of the implant are selected, the decision must be made whether to perform the procedure via an intraoral or submental approach. In short, the transoral approach has the benefit of no external scarring; however, the procedure is technically more difficult and is associated with increased risk of infection given the communication with the oral cavity. The submental approach, on the other hand, may be preferred for several reasons: it offers better exposure for placement, as well as access to the neck for any additional procedures to be performed (e.g., concomitant facelift, neck lift, platysmaplasty, liposuction). It also avoids potential contamination of the implant by oral secretions.

**Submental Transcutaneous Approach**

- An approximately 2 cm midline incision is placed just posterior to the existing submental crease. NOTE: Do not place the incision in the submental crease because chin augmentation will cause anterior skin movement, and thus a scar positioned anterior to the native crease.

- Sharp dissection is then performed (with a scalpel or electrosurgical knife) through the skin and underlying soft tissues, through the mentalis muscle, and down to the mandibular periosteum.

- Two vertical incisions are made in the periosteum 1 to 2 cm lateral to the midline in order in preparation for the subperiosteal dissection. NOTE: Leaving the center portion of the implant in a supra-periosteal plane may decrease bony mentum resorption and create a more defined subperiosteal tunnel bilaterally.

- Subperiosteal dissection using a periosteal elevator such as a Freer, Joseph, or #9, is then carried out laterally along the inferior border of the mandible (no more than 10% the size of the implant) for the length of the implant wings (approximately 5 cm in most implants) with care taken not to extend the pocket more than 1 cm superiorly. This maintains a tight pocket and avoids damage to the mental nerve, as well as minimizing the risk of implant migration to an undesired, superior position.

- The implant is then inset first on one side and then folded on itself, allowing the other side limb to be placed. NOTE: Minimal manipulation of the implant should occur once removed from its sterile packaging to mitigate the risk of infection or fracture/damage to the implant itself. In addition, the implant can be dipped or soaked in an antibiotic solution while awaiting implantation.

- The implant is secured by suture to the periosteum in the midline inferiorly.

- The mentalis muscle is reapproximated.

- The wound is closed in layers using absorbable sutures for the subcutaneous tissue and deep dermis, and non-absorbable everting sutures to approximate the skin.

- A splint-like dressing is applied using an antibiotic ointment, non-adhesive gauze, and adhesive tape

**Intraoral Approach**

- If performing an intraoral approach, a 2 to 3 cm gingivolabial incision can be made with similar subsequent dissection through the mentalis muscle down to the periosteum with the placement of the implant in a supra-periosteal plane centrally and the lateral wings placed sub-periosteally. Once again, maintaining a dissection plane along the inferior aspect of the mandible will decrease the risk of mental nerve injury. The wound is copiously irrigated with antibiotic solution, and the wound closed in layers (using absorbable suture) with care to approximate the mentalis and to create a water-tight seal.

NOTE: While not part of this discussion, it would be prudent for those who routinely encounter patients with microgenia or retrognathia and who perform chin augmentation to have a sound understanding of the anatomy and principles relevant to sliding genioplasty as well.