**Caffeine**

A double-blinded, randomized, and placebo-controlled trial in 13 academic hospitals in four countries showed that caffeine did not affect general intelligence, attention, and behavior and was safe for use.

As a treatment for acute primary headaches, patients may develop several side effects:

- Nervousness

- Nausea

- Abdominal pain/discomfort

- Dizziness

Nervousness was the most frequently reported side effect.

Although caffeine is an acute treatment for migraine pain, it is a known trigger for migraines. One clinical study on mice showed that acute and chronic effects of caffeine could potentially be an underlying reason for the aura of a migraine, and another study showed that patients who take aspirin and caffeine experience headaches more than patients who take aspirin only.

Studies showed that caffeine use has a neutral effect on hypertension and heart failure, but further studies are needed to determine the association with arrhythmias.

**Sleep and Habitual Use**

Habitual daily use of caffeine may cause other side effects such as the following:

- Daytime sleepiness and worsening the sleep quality

- Osteopenia in infants may lead to spontaneous rib fracture and increased risk of fracture in women

- Increasing the risk of low birth weight and pre-term labor when used in pregnant women

- Worsening the symptoms of restless leg syndrome and physiological tremor

- Physical and emotional dependence, which may cause a withdrawal syndrome (flu-like symptoms, low alertness, mood distributions, reduced motivation to work, nausea, and headache); in one study, withdrawal syndrome caused reversible cerebral vasoconstriction syndrome (presented with thunderclap-headache).

**Acetaminophen**

- A medication-overuse headache: Incapacitating headache from the chronic, daily treatment with acetaminophen increases the excitability of the neurons of the amygdala and may cause anxiety along with a headache, although it may result from the overuse of other migraine treatments and may be associated with insomnia, non-restorative sleep, and psychological distress.

- Nephropathy: It may cause allergic tubular interstitial nephritis, and an association with chronic kidney disease is suspected.

- A study showed that prolonged use might correlate with metabolic acidosis with an increased anion gap.

- When used at high doses, it appears to change semen quality (morphology) by suppressing testosterone synthesis and provoking apoptosis of spermatocytes.

- Acetaminophen is regarded as safe to use in pregnancy, although some studies showed an association with ADHD with long-term use even after adjusting the other risk factors.

- Reduction of primordial follicles, irregular menstrual cycle, the premature absence of corpus luteum, and reduced fertility in female offspring to acetaminophen-exposed mothers

- Liver damage

- Renal damage

**Acetylsalicylic Acid/Aspirin**

Aspirin is associated with Reye syndrome when used in children younger than the age of 12. The syndrome presents with different degrees of encephalopathy with severe brain edema, hyperammonemia, and hypoglycemia.

The most well-known side effects after using high-dose aspirin are abdominal pain and peptic ulcers, whereas low-dose aspirin may be associated with dyspeptic symptoms and gastrointestinal (GI) bleeding. Studies showed that the effect on the GI system is dose-dependent.

Other side effects are:

- Bloating

- Hepatotoxicity with high doses

- Acute kidney injury with high doses

- Metabolic acidosis and metabolic encephalopathy after long-term use

- Iron deficiency with chronic consumption (undetermined association)

- Some patients may experience aspirin resistance, especially when using aspirin for its anti-platelet effects

A review suggests that exposure to aspirin during the first trimester of pregnancy may be associated with an increased risk of gastroschisis. Acetaminophen can also increase the risk of gastroschisis.

Some experiments suggest that the combination of aspirin with ascorbic acid makes the COX-2 inhibition more sensitive. This may achieve anti-inflammatory purposes with lower doses and avoid the side effects of high-dose aspirin treatment.

Patients with gout may experience recurrent gout attacks with aspirin use. Therefore, urate-lowering therapy in these patients needs to be adjusted.