**Erythromelalgia in thrombocythemia**occurs in association with essential thrombocytosis and polycythemia vera.

**Primary erythromelalgia**may be idiopathic or inherited. The inherited form of erythromelalgia is an autosomal dominant neuropathy caused by a gain-of-function mutation in theSCN9A, SCN10A, and SCN11A gene, which encodes the alpha subunit of the voltage-gated NaV 1.7, NaV 1.8, and NaV 1.9 sodium channel, respectively. This peripheral channel is expressed within the dorsal root ganglion of the sympathetic ganglion neurons. This mutation leads to hyperexcitability of the nociceptive fibers causing them to fire at subthreshold stimuli. This, in turn, leads to a previously nonpainful stimulus eliciting a painful response.

**Secondary erythromelalgia**has been attributed to a number of different medical conditions. The most prevalent being myeloproliferative disorders, including essential thrombocytosis, polycythemia vera, and myelofibrosis. Other underlying causes include infectious agents (HIV, influenza, syphilis, and poxvirus), autoimmune diseases (systemic lupus erythematosus and rheumatoid arthritis), diabetes mellitus type 1 and 2, solid tumors (astrocytoma, colon, and breast cancer), medications (bromocriptine, nifedipine, verapamil, topical isopropanol, pergolide, simvastatin), gout, multiple sclerosis, hypertension, venous insufficiency, pernicious anemia, thrombotic thrombocytopenic purpura, mushroom intoxication, and mercury poisoning. The symptoms of patients with secondary erythromelalgia are often milder and are relieved after the treatment of the underlying disease.