Gabapentin is highly lipophilic but not bound to plasma proteins, showing linear pharmacokinetics and not demonstrating any significant protein binding or liver metabolization. It has an oral bioavailability of greater than 90%, independent of dose. Generally, patients achieve steady-state plasma levels within 24 to 48 hours. There is no clinically significant effect in administration with food nor on the extent of absorption or elimination. The elimination half-life of the drug is approximately 6.5 hours. Gabapentin readily crosses the blood-brain barrier. It is primarily excreted renally, with no active metabolites. Dosage adjustment is necessary for patients with renal impairment. Pregabalin does not induce or inhibit CYP enzymes. Also, none of the CYP enzyme inhibitors alter its pharmacokinetics as a consequence.

- Initial treatment with gabapentin is usually started with one dose of 300 mg per day and later increases the frequency to 3 times a day and dosage up to 4800 mg per day. The recommendation is to start the first dose in the evening and then take the drug three times a day.

- Usually, the effects are apparent in the first week of treatment but sometimes take about a month for significant improvement.

- Taper the dose over more than seven days to discontinue the medication.

**For Partial Seizure**

- 300 to 1200 mg 3 times per day by mouth

- Max: 3600 mg per day****

**For Post-Herpetic Neuralgia**

- 300 to 600 mg 3 times per day by mouth

- Max: 1800 mg per day

**For Neuropathic Pain**

- 300 to 1200 mg 3 times per day by mouth

- Max: 3600 mg per day

**For Fibromyalgia**

- 400 to 800 mg 3 times per day by mouth

- Max: 2400 mg per day

**Renal Dosing**

Adjust the dose amount and frequency.

- Creatinine clearance of 30 to 60: 200 to 700 mg twice per day

- Creatinine clearance of 16 to 29: 200 to 700 mg once daily

- Creatinine clearance of 15: 100 to 300 mg once daily

- Creatinine clearance of less than 15: 125 to 350 mg as a supplement