**Anatomy of the Skin**

The skin is composed of two distinct layers, the epidermis, which provides a permeable barrier to the outside world, and the dermis, which supports the overlying epidermis. The epidermis consists of five layers, from superficial to deep: the stratum corneum, the stratum lucidum (which is only present in the palms and soles of the hands and feet), the stratum granulosum, the stratum spinosum, and the stratum basale. The underlying dermis consists of two layers, the papillary dermis, which interdigitates with the epidermis, and the deeper reticular dermis, whose collagen and elastin provide the skin its strength and elasticity as well as housing the pilosebaceous units.

**Biomechanical Properties of the Skin**

In addition to the histological and vascular anatomy of the skin, it is important to understand its biomechanical properties when planning local flap surgery, such as Z-plasty flap transposition. There is a well-defined orientation to the direction in which skin stretches best in order to facilitate the closure of defects, and this is determined by the orientation of dermal collagen fibers. First described in 1861, the predominantly parallel lines that best hide incisional scars are known as Langer lines.

Perpendicular to the RSTLs is the lines of maximum extensibility, which determine the vectors along which skin is most easily advanced to close a defect. When skin is advanced, two additional concepts come into play: mechanical creep and stress relaxation. Mechanical creep is the ability of the skin to stretch under constant tension due to displacement of interstitial fluid, while stress relaxation is the phenomenon in which less tension is required over time to maintain skin in a constant stretched position.

When attempting to minimize standing cutaneous deformities at the pivot points, transposition of Z-plasty flaps requires wide undermining of surrounding tissue in order to distribute both tension and compression forces and facilitate closure. Doing so will also help to avoid closing under tension, which is important because of the deleterious effect tension produces on perfusion of the tips of the flaps and the wound edges; the use of creep and stress relaxation permit closure of defects with local flaps that would otherwise require recruitment of distant tissue for reconstruction. The surgeon should also realize that the rotations of the Z-plasty flaps during transposition result in the loss of a small amount of flap length, which makes the classic Z-plasty planning table slightly imprecise because it is based solely on geometry; fortunately, creep and stress relaxation generally offset this shortcoming of the Z-plasty technique.