The anatomy of the inguinal canal is of paramount importance for the surgical management of inguinal hernias. As a natural canal with orifices, widening can develop to let other structures from the abdominal cavity pass through to the extra-abdominal space. Chronic increase in abdominal pressure is known to be the main cause of this type of hernias. Inguinal hernias are a common surgical problem that often necessitates surgical repair. A clear understanding of the anatomy of the area is crucial to do a proper surgical repair of the inguinal hernias.

The inguinal canal is made of a floor, anterior wall, posterior wall, and a roof. The floor of the canal that is made of the inguinal ligament. The inguinal ligament is a thickened inferior portion of the external oblique aponeurosis. The anterior wall is made of the external oblique aponeurosis. The posterior wall is made of the transversalis muscle. The more complex part - the roof - is made of the combined fibers of the internal oblique and transversus abdominis muscle and aponeurosis including the conjoint tendon. The conjoint tendon constitutes the main part of the medial portion of the posterior wall. Understanding the inguinal anatomy well is essential to understand the various hernias in the region and to perform the different types of surgical repair. It is important for surgeons to note that the mid-inguinal point marks the area between the anterior superior iliac spine and the pubic symphysis. Deep in this location, the femoral artery in the pelvic cavity enters the lower limb. The femoral artery can only be palpated below the inguinal ligament.