For a laser of any wavelength to induce a change in a tissue, it must be absorbed by a cellular target, called a chromophore. One principle to consider when selecting a laser for medical therapy is that a laser’s depth of penetration is inversely proportionate to the wavelength – the shorter the wavelength, the farther it can travel. Regardless, a maximally effective laser will not affect all of the tissue in its path. Instead, an efficient laser will only effect change in its target tissue, also known as a chromophore.

A chromophore is a cellular element that can selectively absorb a specific wavelength and was described by Anderson and Parrish in the 1980s as part of the “selective photothermolysis” principle. Primarily, when a chromophore absorbs energy from a laser, heat is generated and causes desired destruction of the target tissue, but without damage to tissues surrounding the target. Examples of chromophores include water, hemoglobin, melanin, and deoxyhemoglobin. These chromophores differ in that each has a unique wavelength. However, hemoglobin, melanin, and deoxyhemoglobin share the similarity of being visibly pigmented, although their respective colors vary.

When lasers induce thermal effects, the chromophore within the target tissue heats to the point of protein denaturation, bond breakage, or boiling of intracellular water, depending on the temperature reached and the duration of exposure to increased heat. In considering how aggressively to treat a lesion, the target tissue’s thermal relaxation time, which is defined as the time required for the tissue to cool to half the peak temperature reached, must be taken into account. It is essential to understand that thermal relaxation time is proportionate to the size of the targeted object. For example, capillaries will take longer to cool than melanosomes.

Laser-induced photomechanical effects are also related to heat, but indirectly.  When the duration of laser exposure is shorter than a tissue’s thermal relaxation time, such as in cases when a pulsed laser is being used, a thermoelastic expansion ensues, sending a shockwave through tissues. This shockwave induces mechanical destruction of the target. Keeping in mind that thermal relaxation time still applies, it would follow that a rapidly pulsing laser would be useful in targeting chromophores that are small, or that are located in smaller structures (e.g., capillaries vs. veins).

One of the critical components of selective photothermolysis is the concept that an effective laser must create a maximal effect on the chromophore and the tissues immediately surrounding it, and minimal impact on the outlying tissues. In other words, inflammation and subsequent repair of the targeted area should occur without collateral damage. It is, therefore, crucial to understand how laser energy is measured and described. A working knowledge of laser measurements and terminology will help to avoid not only unnecessary and ineffective laser treatments, but also overly aggressive treatments, which could lead to iatrogenic injury. The measures to be familiar with are joules, power, watts, fluence, and irradiance.

Joules – Joules are the measure of energy. They are used to describe the energy delivered by pulsed lasers.

Power – Power is equivalent to the rate of energy, or “energy per second.”

Watts – Watts is the measure of power. They are used to describe the energy/ power delivered by continuous lasers.

Joules, power, and watts all measure the amount of energy emanating from a laser. They do not take into account the intensity of the laser energy’s effect on the skin or mucosa. To quantify this effect, the measurements of fluence and irradiance are necessary.

Fluence – Fluence is used to measure the delivery of pulsed lasers, and equals joules per squared centimeter. It is another word for energy density and considers the area of skin or mucosa over which joules are delivered. In other words, it takes into account the size of the laser beam. Consider if the same number of joules is produced by a 0.5 cm laser beam vs. a laser beam with a circumference of 1 cm. The 0.5cm beam will deliver denser energy.

Irradiance – Irradiance is measured in watts per squared centimeter. It is used to measure the energy delivered to the skin or mucosa by continuous laser beams.