**Pulse**

The most common place to evaluate a patient’s pulse is the radial artery at the wrist. Due to its superficial course near the lateral wrist, the radial artery is easily palpable. The ulnar artery is also palpable at the medial aspect of the wrist. Both arteries can be occluded with manual compression, which is done in the Allen test. The Allen test assesses the collateral circulation of the hand prior to performing any procedures that could involve the forearm arteries.

**Arterial Lines**

The radial artery is the primary site for the placement of arterial lines used for blood pressure monitoring. It is also the most common artery punctured to procure a sample for arterial blood gas analysis. When arterial catheters are left in for several days, complications such as infection, spasm, and occlusion can occur.

**Radial Artery Access**

The radial artery is commonly used as an access site for endovascular procedures. This is becoming more common as evidence suggests that there are fewer vascular access complications when using the radial artery compared to the femoral artery, without any negative effects on the success of the procedure.

**Dialysis Fistulas**

The most common arteriovenous fistula used for hemodialysis is a radiocephalic fistula, between the radial artery and the cephalic vein.

**Coronary Artery Bypass Grafting**

The radial artery can be harvested for use in coronary artery bypass grafting. Ischemia of the hand is prevented in most cases due to the extensive collateral circulation from the ulnar and interosseous arteries. Evidence suggests that radial artery grafting is superior to saphenous vein grafting, as data shows a lower incidence of occlusion and adverse cardiac events when using a radial artery graft.

**Forearm Flap Surgery**

Another area of clinical significance for the arteries of the forearm is in reconstructive surgery using forearm flaps. In these surgeries, tissue from the forearm is harvested along with its blood supply and then attached to the area of the body in need of the flap. Keeping the blood supply together with the tissue allows for healing in a damaged area that cannot supply blood to a skin graft. The most common forearm flaps are the radial forearm free flap and ulnar forearm free flap.