Osteoarthritis is a chronic progressive disorder that affects millions of people with advancing age. The condition has no cure and is managed by a team of healthcare professionals that include an internist, radiologist, endocrinologist, orthopedic surgeon, and rheumatologist. The nurse, pharmacist, and physical therapist are also integral members of the interprofessional healthcare team. Only through cohesive activity and communication involving all healthcare disciplines are optimal results achievable. [Level 5]

Patients with osteoarthritis require education on the natural history of the disease and understand their treatment options. Obese patients need a dietary consult and enroll in an exercise program. Evidence shows that water-based activities can help relieve symptoms and improve joint function; hence consultation with a physical therapist is recommended. Further, many of these patients may benefit from a walking aid. Patients with pain should become familiar with the types of drugs and supplements available and their potential adverse effects. Only through the education of the patient can the morbidity of this disorder be decreased.

**Evidence-Based Outcomes**

The prognosis for osteoarthritis patients depends on the joint involved, how many joints are involved, and the severity. There is no cure for osteoarthritis, and all the currently available treatments are directed towards reducing symptoms. Factors associated with the rapid progression of the disease include obesity, advanced age, multiple joint involvement, and the presence of varus deformity. Patients who undergo joint replacement tend to have a good prognosis with success rates of over 80%. However, most prosthetic joints wear out in 10 to 15 years, and repeat surgery is required. Also important is that patients must undergo preoperative workup as the post-surgical complications can be serious and disabling.