**MP Joint Arthritis**

MP joint arthritis is a frequent topic in the literature discussing various conditions that ultimately result in mild to end-stage degenerative changes and deformity that can significantly impact a patient's ability to perform essential daily functions.  In milder forms of acquired (e.g., post-traumatic) or degenerative arthritis and deformity, nonoperative measures are the standard, first-line treatment options:

- Rest, activity modification

- Oral or topic anti-inflammatory medications

- Cortisone injections

- Splinting

Additionally, the healthcare provider should consider the underlying etiology as this may indicate additional management options.  For example, patients with underlying rheumatoid arthritis should obtain a referral to a rheumatologist for specialized medical management to consider starting the patient on disease-modifying antirheumatic drugs (DMARDs).

Persistent symptoms, synovitis, or swelling despite a 3- to 6-month course of nonoperative interventions warrants consultation with a hand specialist for possible surgical considerations.

**Metacarpophalangeal Joint Arthroscopy**

Metacarpophalangeal joint arthroscopy was first described in 1979,

**Metacarpophalangeal Joint Arthroplasty**

The primary indication for MP joint arthroplasty is severe degenerative arthritis, but the technique also can be used to treat joint deformations from multiple dislocations, subluxations, or cartilage damage.

MP joint arthroplasty remains a relatively reliable procedure in terms of its ability to restore function, reduce pain, and improve both function and range of motion

The extensor tendons are retracted to expose the joint capsule. The sagittal band and collateral ligaments are released followed by the joint capsule. The metacarpal head is resected and prepared for implantation of the prosthesis. Following insertion, the joint capsule is closed. The patient then is advised to remain in a splint for 12 weeks and start physical therapy at week 6 post-op.

**Metacarpophalangeal Joint Arthrodesis**

Metacarpophalangeal joint arthrodesis, also known as “MP joint fusion,” is commonly used to correct MP joint arthritis in the thumb.  This surgical technique usually involves a dorsal incision. The extensor interval is incised longitudinally, and the dorsal capsule is split to expose the joint. Following denuding of the diseased cartilage, fixation is possible through a variety of means, including screws, plates, and wires. Adjuvant allograft or autograft bone grafting is usable in cases of severe bone loss or deformity. The patient requires immobilization for 4 to 6 weeks or until radiographic union occurs.