Patients demonstrate phenotypic and genotypic variability. Research has revealed that partial deletion of the short arm of chromosome 5 to be the cause of the characteristic phenotype. The phenotype being identifiable despite the fact that variations in deletion size have led to a theory that a critical region is responsible for the characteristic feature in hemizygosity. The region identified is 5p15.2, and individuals with a deletion of chromosome 5 that does not include this region do not show a typical phenotype and, in some cases, are even normal.

Cytogenetic studies have helped identify two regions, 5p15.3, which is responsible for the characteristic cry, and 5p15.2, which is responsible for the other significant clinical findings. Similarly, other areas have been identified for additional features such as speech retardation and dysmorphism. Therefore, clinical manifestations depend on the deletion of the critical area. Another crucial factor in the manifestation is the size as well as the type of deletion and whether it is interstitial or terminal.

The most characteristic feature of this disease is high-pitched crying, and the pathogenesis is attributable to the anatomical alteration of the laryngeal morphology, which may be a result of:

- A small, floppy epiglottis

- Hypoplasia of the larynx

- A narrow or diamond-shaped larynx

- Abnormal airspace in the posterior area during phonation

However, not all patients with abnormal crying have the above features. Therefore, there may be neurological changes as well.