Evaluation of neck injuries warrants notification of a trauma team or surgeon if either is available. Since physical examination may not be reliable in ruling out injuries in patients with neck trauma, one should consider a low threshold for obtaining additional imaging studies and/or surgical consultation. Periodic examination is required to identify deterioration in clinical status as well as any ongoing. The value of a thorough secondary survey to evaluate for additional injuries cannot be over-emphasized in such patients. Diagnostic testing is performed for stable patients manifesting soft signs of injury and, sometimes even for those who are asymptomatic at initial presentation.

**Chest Radiography**

Obtain anterior and lateral neck and chest radiographs in any patient presenting with significant neck trauma and look for hemothorax, pneumothorax, or pneumomediastinum. These should be obtained especially for patients with zone 1.

**CT Angiography**

Angiography is the initial study to evaluate for vascular injury. This may provide information about injuries to additional structures and may delineate the path of the projectile. Since it is less invasive, it is more commonly used to define vascular neck injury.

**Conventional Angiography**

A four-vessel angiography with venous-phase imaging has a sensitivity of greater than 99%. This is the “gold standard” for evaluating vascular injury. If performed, should include the carotid and vertebral vessels, the intracranial portion of the carotid artery in zone 3 injuries, and the aortic arch with its branches in zone 1 injuries.

**Duplex Ultrasonography**

Duplex ultrasonography can be obtained in stable patients. It is non-invasive and relatively inexpensive, but it is operator-dependent.  In addition, non-occlusive injuries may be missed if the flow is preserved, such as with intimal flaps and pseudoaneurysms. Its role in zone III evaluation is also limited.

**Esophagography**

Esophagography should be performed if an esophageal perforation is suspected.