While tonsillitis is typically symptomatically managed with good clinical outcomes, complications do occur. Although rare, abscesses, rheumatic fever, scarlet fever, and acute glomerulonephritis are known complications.

Peritonsillar abscesses are a collection of pus between the pharyngeal constrictor muscle and tonsillar capsule, and tonsillitis symptoms often precede their appearance. It is worth noting that this symptom development does not prove causation. While the two diagnoses are clinically distinct, antibiotic treatment for tonsillitis reduces abscess development risk.

Acute tonsillitis caused by group A beta-hemolytic streptococci, in rare cases, causes rheumatic fever and rheumatic heart disease. Rheumatic fever is an inflammatory, immunological disease that occurs following infection with group A Streptococcus. It most commonly presents in patients between 5 to 18 years old. While rare in the developed world, in developing nations, the incidence is as high as 24 per 1000. The disease affects multiple organ systems, most commonly causing arthritis, which presents in the large joints as migratory, asymmetrical, and painful. Carditis affects nearly 50% of patients and often causes valvular pathology, with the mitral valve being the most commonly affected. Sydenham chorea is a classic delayed presentation of involuntary movements of the limbs and facial muscles with associated speech and gait abnormalities. Patients may present with a rash known as erythema marginatum and subcutaneous nodules.

Post-streptococcal glomerulonephritis is an immune-mediated disorder following infection with Group A streptococcus. Patients present with edema, hypertension, abnormalities on urine sediment, hypoproteinemia, elevated inflammatory markers, and low complement levels. It affects approximately 470000 individuals globally, with an estimated 5000 deaths. Children in developing nations are most commonly affected; however, any individuals with crowded living situations are at increased risk. It generally occurs in outbreaks of disease due to nephritogenic strains of Group A Streptococcus. The majority of patients will have spontaneous resolution of the illness and return to normal renal function though the prognosis is worse in older patients. Antibiotics do not actually alter the course of the disease but help to decrease disease transmission.

Lemierre disease is a rare complication of oropharyngeal infections. It commonly presents as sepsis following a sore throat with associated thrombosis of the internal jugular vein and septic emboli. It is most commonly associated with Fusobacterium necrophorum, though it has also occurred with Staphylococcal and Streptococcal infections. In the era of modern antibiotics, mortality is low though complications can include ARDS, osteomyelitis, and meningitis.