Histopathological implications of strangulation injuries are as diverse as the pathophysiology that underlies each specific type and the conditions present at the time of injury. Typical findings of anoxic brain injury can be expected. Cell damage can appear in as little as four hours and is dependent on the extent and duration of anoxia/hypoxia. Ischemic cell damage may result in primary necrosis of neurological structures, or a delayed fashion via apoptosis if the patient survives the initial insult. A "cloudy swelling" pattern of nuclear regions and a reduction in basophilic character to the nucleus have been described. Cytoplasmic shrinking and pyknotic nuclei are also potential injury patterns. At the 8-12-hour mark classic “red neurons” begin to appear.

Higher metabolic rate and oxygen demand underscore the areas of the brain that are most easily affected by strangulation injuries. Watershed regions are at a particular risk as well. CA1 pyramidal neurons within the hippocampus are implicated in memory deficits seen in patients who survive. Within the cerebellum, the Purkinje cells are at higher risk of anoxic injury, which explains gait abnormalities sometimes seen in survivors. Arterial border zones in various areas of the brain may demonstrate “wedge-shaped” lesions, which may be seen on detailed neuroimaging as well.

There are multiple forensic pathology considerations in this patient population as well. Excoriation marks on the face and various body surfaces may signal struggle either by the patient to remove a ligature or other object causing strangulation. They may also signify injury caused by a potential assailant. Burns and musculoskeletal trauma may be present on autopsy as well depending on the circumstances. The cause of death can be difficult to assess due to the multiple pathways that lead to the common pathophysiology of death in strangulation. For example, homicide victims who suffer strangulation injuries that were also found submerged in bodies of water might have signs of both strangulation and submersion injury. Both lead to hypoxia and eventually death, and thus determining a sequence of events might be difficult.