# Continuing Education Activity

Os peroneum is one of several accessory ossicles of the foot and ankle, located lateral to the cuboid within the distal peroneus longus tendon. Painful os peroneum syndrome is a general term referring to conditions presenting as lateral midfoot pain associated with the os peroneum, such as acute fracture, stress fracture associated with chronic repetitive trauma, contusion, avascular necrosis, or tendinosis, tenosynovitis, tendon tears, and subluxation involving the peroneal tendons. Abnormalities in the morphology and location of the os peroneum can easily be identified on radiographs, specifically the oblique view, thereby elevating clinical suspicion for a peroneus longus tendon injury. This activity reviews the cause and pathophysiology of os peroneum and highlights the role of the interprofessional team in its management.

**Objectives:**
- Review the cause of os peroneum.
- Describe the presentation of a patient with os peroneum.
- Summarize the treatment options for os peroneum.
- Outline the importance of improving care coordination among interprofessional team members to improve outcomes for patients affected by os peroneum.

# Introduction

Os peroneum is one of several accessory ossicles of the foot and ankle, located lateral to the cuboid within the distal peroneus longus tendon.

Routine foot radiographs are a common first step in assessing lateral midfoot pain. Abnormalities in the morphology and location of the os peroneum can easily be identified on radiographs, specifically the oblique view, thereby elevating clinical suspicion for a peroneus longus tendon injury.

# Etiology

Accessory ossicles are common, generally asymptomatic, normal variants seen throughout the musculoskeletal system, with several examples within the foot and ankle. Awareness of their presence and location is essential to limit the misdiagnosis of these normal variants for pathology. The origin of many of these ossicles is debated in the literature. One proposed mechanism is from the non-union of secondary ossification centers.

Ossicles and sesamoids are known to be associated with painful symptoms such as the os navicular, os trigonum, and hallux sesamoids.

# Epidemiology

Among the numerous foot and ankle ossicles, os peroneum is relatively common, with prevalence figures ranging from 5% to 30%.

Inversion injuries to the foot and ankle are a common cause of patient presentation to the emergency department. The ankle joint is the most commonly injured joint in the extremities, and lateral ankle sprains are the most common traumatic joint disorder.

# History and Physical

Os peroneum is typically asymptomatic but can be fractured or displaced in the setting of a peroneus longus tendon tear, either from direct injury or indirectly from abrupt foot dorsiflexion or inversion.

Physical examination findings related to a peroneus longus tear include edema, tenderness, and weakness in eversion and plantar flexion.

# Evaluation

Os peroneum is identified radiographically as an oval or round well-corticated accessory ossicle adjacent to the cuboid, near the calcaneocuboid joint, and is best seen on oblique views of the foot.

Distinguishing between a bipartite or multipartite os peroneum and a fracture can be difficult on radiographs, specifically in the absence of a prior comparison study. Since the os peroneum is commonly bilateral, radiographs of the contralateral foot can sometimes be enlightening. In challenging cases, CT can provide a more detailed evaluation of osseous margins allowing for the distinction between a non-displaced fracture versus a bipartite or multipartite os peroneum.

On ultrasound, the os peroneum, if present, may be seen as a hyperechoic structure with posterior shadowing, with only its outer cortex visible; it is best evaluated by following the peroneus longus tendon distal to the peroneal tubercle of the calcaneus.

Magnetic resonance imaging of the os peroneus will demonstrate marrow characteristics similar to the cuboid, with a hyperintense signal on T1-weighted and a hypointense signal on T2-weighted fat-suppressed sequences.

A classification scheme has been developed to describe peroneus longus tendon injuries and helps describe/explain the radiographic appearance of the os peroneum. The tears have been divided into three subtypes: proximal to the os peroneum (type 1), at the level of the os peroneum (type 2), or distal to the os peroneum (type 3). Isolated tears of the peroneus longus tendon proximal to the os peroneum generally present as an os peroneum with normal morphology and position. Type 2 tears occurring at the os peroneum are normally associated with fractures or distraction of bi- or multipartite fragments. Distraction of the os peroneum fragments greater than 6 mm is highly suspicious for complete disruption of the peroneus longus tendon. If comparison radiographs are available, the new or increasing distraction of the fragments is concerning for tendon injury (partial or complete depending on the extent of distraction). When the tendon injury is distal to the os peroneum, it can be displaced proximally. The ossicle is rarely displaced proximally to the peroneus tubercle (< 2 cm) along the lateral margin of the calcaneus unless there is a strong contraction force of the tendon. It should be noted that in the acute setting, the os peroneum may not be displaced or only minimally displaced; however, short interval follow-up may show new or increasing displacement as the torn tendon continues to retract.

# Treatment / Management

Treatment options are focused on the pathology of the peroneus longus tendon, which is typically managed conservatively via immobilization, oral anti-inflammatories (NSAIDs), and/or steroid injections and may be followed with a course of physical therapy.

The type of surgical intervention will depend on the location and extent of the tendon injury.

# Differential Diagnosis

A presenting symptom of lateral foot pain and/or ankle instability elicits a broad range of possible etiologies, including peroneal tendinopathy or subluxation, lateral ankle ligamentous injury (including the anterior and posterior talofibular and the calcaneofibular ligaments), sinus tarsi syndrome, cuboid syndrome, osseous fractures, and peroneal neuropathy, among numerous other considerations.

As previously explained, an os peroneum fracture may be confused with a bipartite/multipartite os peroneum.

# Prognosis

Insufficient high-quality evidence exists for determining the efficacy of conservative and surgical therapies for peroneal tendon injuries. However, select studies of post-surgical outcomes showed figures such as 87% of patients returning to sporting activities within 3.5 months of surgery and 91% achieving normal/moderate peroneal strength.

# Complications

Patients with suspected or diagnosed peroneal tendon injuries may experience chronic lateral foot/ankle pain and instability with a lack of treatment or after the failure of conservative therapies. Delays in diagnosis are not uncommon, with one study reporting the duration of symptoms persisting from 7 to 48 months before the correct diagnosis was made.

An untreated os peroneus fracture can result in degeneration and tearing of the peroneus longus tendon related to chronic frictional forces.

Intraoperative findings during repair of a primary peroneus longus tendon injury and associated os peroneum abnormality often include the discovery of additional tendinous and/or osseous pathologies, such as peroneus brevis tear, hypertrophied peroneal tubercle of the calcaneus, and subluxation or dislocating peroneal tendons.

Insufficient data exist regarding the efficacy of surgical treatments. However, reported postoperative complications of repair of peroneal tendon rupture include superficial wound infection, wound dehiscence, repair failure, sural neuritis, adhesive tendinitis, and chronic regional pain syndrome.

# Consultations

- Podiatrists

- Orthopedic surgeons

- Physical therapists

- Pedorthists

- Sports medicine clinicians

# Deterrence and Patient Education

Os peroneum is an accessory ossicle bone, or “extra bone,” in the foot. It is found next to the cuboid bone and within the peroneus longus tendon in the lateral region of the foot. While they are generally painless, pathological conditions such as fractures, tendonitis, or tendon tears of the peroneus longus related to this accessory ossicle are generally referred to as os peroneum syndrome. A radiograph of the affected foot and possibly an ultrasound or MRI are often necessary to determine the extent of bone and soft tissue involvement. Symptoms of os peroneum syndrome include swelling, tenderness, and instability to the outside of the foot with weakness in eversion and plantarflexion of the foot.

Conservative treatment is usually attempted first, focusing on the peroneus longus tendon pathology, with immobilization, oral anti-inflammatories, steroid injections, and physical therapy. Surgical management is considered in severe pain, debilitation, or failed conservative therapy. Surgical options include primary tendon repair or grafting, excision of the fractured os peroneum if present with tendon repair or tenodesis, internal fixation of the fractured os peroneum, or tendon debridement/tenosynovectomy.

Patients can benefit from a directed home exercise program and, in some cases, wearing orthotics; this can prevent exacerbation of existing cases and occasionally help mitigate symptoms. If os peroneum is found incidentally, these measures can help patients prevent it from becoming symptomatic.

# Pearls and Other Issues

- Evaluation of foot radiographs in patients with lateral foot and/or ankle pain should include an assessment of the presence and morphology of an os peroneum, particularly on oblique views.

- Correlation with past imaging and with radiographs of the contralateral side can be useful in assessing for ossicle migration, asymmetry in the setting of chronic stress injury, or whether a fragmented appearance represents a bipartite/multipartite os peroneum versus an acutely fractured ossicle.

- Abnormalities in the os peroneum are suggestive of associated peroneal tendon injury.

- There are numerous causes of lateral foot pain, with delays in diagnosis not uncommon.

# Enhancing Healthcare Team Outcomes

Clinical or radiologic suspicion for a peroneal tendon injury with or without an os peroneus fracture may warrant consultation with a podiatrist or orthopedic surgeon and/or advanced imaging (MRI or ultrasound), specifically in the setting of patients that failed conservative therapy. Nurses and physical therapists are also valuable assets in caring for these patients. These healthcare professionals need to function as a cohesive interprofessional team. Operative outcomes are based on level-IV and level-V studies. Thus, an interprofessional approach individualized to the patient’s case and involving a primary care provider, an orthopedic surgeon, a radiologist, and a physical therapist will provide the most optimal course of treatment.