If an emergent airway is necessary, an incision is placed through the cricothyroid ligament during a cricothyrotomy. Clinically, the cricoid cartilage serves as a palpable landmark to signify the inferior most portion of the larynx, where the trachea begins; this is vitally important in the circumstance of an emergent airway, in which cricothyroid ligament is incised at the midline between the thyroid and cricoid cartilages.

Under the circumstance of chronic cough in the absence of classical causes, such as chronic bronchitis, there have been suggestions that sensory disturbances of the vagus nerve may be responsible

The 3:3:2 rule can be useful for elective endotracheal intubation where the first "3" is: a measurement of 3 fingers between the upper and lower teeth of the open mouth of a patient indicates the ease of access to the airway through the oral opening. The second "3" is: a measurement of three fingers from the anterior tip of the mandible to the anterior neck provides an estimate of the volume of the submandibular space. The "2" is: a measurement of 2 fingers between the floor of the mandible to the thyroid notch on the anterior neck identifies the location of the larynx relative to the base of the tongue. If its less than two fingers that means the larynx is anteriorly located and in these cases direct laryngoscopy (DL) will be difficult for endotracheal intubation, instead of direct visualization with a bronchoscope or fiberoptics should be attempted.

Cricoarytenoid arthritis (CA) is a feature of rheumatoid arthritis.  Symptoms of CA include pharyngeal fullness when swallowing and speaking, hoarseness, and dyspnonea. It can be a cause of recurrent upper airway obstruction in rheumatoid arthritis. On endolaryngoscopy adducted vocal cords are a significant finding. The cricoarytenoid joint can also be affected in dermatomyositis