The onset of Harlequin syndrome is typically acute, often precipitated by intense emotions, heat, or exercise. The affected side looks pale, anhidrotic, and cold to the touch. There is compensatory flushing, hyperemia, and sweating on the contralateral side. These two sides of the face are sharply demarcated at midline like the Italian theatre character “Harlequin,” as shown below (figure-1).

The typical facial presentation may last just for a few seconds to minutes or sometimes for hours before it normalizes completely. There may be such spells of color change spaced sporadically over time secondary to the trigger. This demarcation may extend into the arms and chest depending on the extension of the fibers blocked. The discoloration can also involve the entire half of the body, especially in neonates with immature hypothalamus.

Other symptoms associated with Harlequin syndrome include cluster headaches, forehead sweating, and nasal discharge. There may be tearing of the eyes, pupillary constriction, or drooping of the upper eyelid. There are no sensory or motor deficit associated with Harlequin syndrome.  Sometimes it may just present as a difference in the temperature over the two halves of the faces without facial flushing, referred to as subclinical Harlequin syndrome.

Patients manifesting as Harlequin face with the underlying disease may have additional features of the primary disease. The hemifacial discoloration in these cases may last longer and may even be permanent, which gets more prominent with the stress. A thorough physical, ocular and neurological examination helps determine the underlying cause.