When there is a malfunction of the urethral sphincters, it can lead to disorders of the lower urinary tract. Urinary incontinence can occur in both men and women at all ages but is significantly more common in females. The urethral sphincter may be damaged during childbirth due to stretching of the ligaments and dysfunction of the pelvic floor muscles. The pudendal nerve may be injured during vaginal birth as it travels between the sacrotuberous and sacrospinous ligaments. Stress incontinence accounts for nearly 90% of patients with incontinence. This occurs because there is a problem with the closing mechanism at the urinary tract outlet. Stress incontinence is characterized by loss of urine during sneezing, coughing, or intense physical activity. Urge incontinence is associated with the sudden need to urinate that leads to loss of urine that is more commonly associated with detrusor overactivity. Overflow incontinence is frequent dribbling of urine because the bladder can not empty completely that is usually due to detrusor underactivity or bladder outlet obstruction.  Functional incontinence is the inability to get to the restroom due to mental or physical issues. Mixed incontinence is a mixture any of the types of incontinence. A bladder stress test can be used in patients suspected of having stress incontinence. To do the test in women, an examiner will visualize the urethra by separating the labia and have a patient cough or Valsalva. If there is leakage of urine from the urethra, then she is confirmed to have stress incontinence. The treatment for urinary incontinence varies depending on the cause. However, initial treatment for most types of urinary incontinence includes lifestyle modifications and pelvic floor muscle exercises. Lifestyle modifications include: weight loss, dietary changes, minimize constipation, and smoking cessation. Pelvic floor or Kegel exercises are very effective in treating stress incontinence. If these initial conservative measures fail to work, the patient may opt for support devices, pharmacotherapy, or surgery.