Diagnosis of echinococcosis starts from a thorough history, including a history of exposure or immigration from endemic areas, followed by a combination of serology and imaging.

Liver function tests are unreliable in detecting the severity of disease and are abnormal in only about 40% of patients. Alkaline phosphatase is the one typically elevated, while AST, ALT, and bilirubin levels typically remain within normal range. The complete blood count may show eosinophilia.

Serological testing for Echinoccocus antibodies is a common method for diagnosis. ELISA tests are usually used to screen. A confirmatory immunoblot assay for echinococcal antigens is carried out following a positive result. However, a significant number of echinococcosis patients do not elicit an immune response.

Imaging is extremely useful in detecting and monitoring hydatidosis cases, especially those that are seronegative. Ultrasonography is the preferred modality for liver and intraabdominal hydatidosis, but its accuracy remains operator dependent. It remains the modality of choice for screening due to its accessibility and portability. It's also helpful in post-treatment monitoring of the disease.

For hepatic echinococcosis, the World Health Organization Informal Working Group (WHO-IWGE) developed an ultrasound classification to stage the disease

- CE 1: unilocular fluid collection/simple cyst with double line sign.

- CE 2: multivesicular/multiseptated cyst. "honeycomb" or "rosette-like".

- CE 3A: a fluid collection with a detached membrane (water lily sign).

- CE 3B: the presence of daughter cysts in a solid matrix.

- CE 4: cysts with a heterogeneous hypoechoic/hyperechoic matrix without daughter cysts.

- CE 5: solid cystic wall.

Stages CE1 and CE2 indicate active disease; stage CE3 indicates a transitional stage where the cyst has suffered a compromise, whereas CE4 & CE5 indicate inactive disease.

Radiography can be used to detect calcifications in up to 30% of cases. The calcifications are typically ring-like and can progress throughout all stages of the disease.

CT imaging is highly sensitive and serves a vital role in cases where ultrasonography is difficult (e.g., obese patients). It's also crucial in the perioperative period, as it's excellent at detecting complications including cyst rupture, underlying infection, and biliary or vascular involvement.

Other modalities used for diagnosis include ultrasound-guided fine needle aspiration (in seronegative cases with inconclusive imaging) and endoscopic retrograde cholangiopancreatography (both diagnostic and therapeutic for cases affecting the biliary tree).