Before starting the procedure, ensure proper patient and site. Hang an isotonic crystalloid solution with tubing to connect it to a 3-way connector. Connect an empty glass syringe and the 16-gauge Tuohy needle to the remaining 2 ports on the 3-way connector. Ensure that the tubing, needle, 3-way connector, and glass syringe have all been filled with the crystalloid solution prior to moving onto the next step (refer to image below for an example of this setup).

Advance the Tuohy needle (A) over the rib and into the intended intercostal space after the procedure site has been anesthetized. Advancement of the needle is performed during expiration to reduce the risk of visceral pleura puncture. Ensure that the 3-way connector is closed to the bag of crystalloid solution (B), but open to allow for continuity between the Tuohy needle and the glass syringe. Using continuous pressure on the loss-of-resistance syringe (C), slowly advance the needle until the parietal pleura has been punctured, which can be confirmed by a loss of resistance on the glass syringe.

Once the intrapleural space has been entered, the provider may proceed in one of two ways: placement of a continuous catheter or administration of a single injection. A continuous catheter is often selected to provide prolonged pain relief through intermittent dosing. Whereas the single injection technique offers short-term pain relief that is limited by uptake of the medication after injection.

If proceeding with the placement of a continuous catheter, after the loss of resistance has been confirmed, the 3-way connector should be open to three ports to allow the crystalloid solution to flow freely while the syringe is completely depressed. Observing the flow of crystalloid in the tubing chamber ensures that fluid is flowing through the Tuohy needle. This provides further confirmation that the Tuohy needle tip is in the pleural cavity.

Alternatively, if only a single injection is intended, after confirming a loss of resistance and closing the 3-way connector to the provider, the saline syringe may be replaced by a syringe containing injectate (usually local anesthetic). Once the medication is injected, the entire system may be removed. Again, it is important to maintain a closed system once the Tuohy needle has entered the intrapleural space to avoid the entrainment of air.