Megestrol is a synthetic form of progesterone. The mechanism of action has not been fully elucidated in terms of distinguishing its various functions, such as appetite stimulant and antineoplastic agent. It functions as an agonist with a higher affinity to the progesterone receptor than progesterone. There is also a suggestion that megestrol is a glucocorticoid agonist.

Megestrol also possesses anti-gonadotropic activity as a downstream effect activating the progesterone receptor by reducing overall natural steroid synthesis. This action includes inducing suppression of luteinizing hormone and estrogen release from the anterior pituitary gland and has thus linked to megestrol’s application against breast and endometrial cancer. A proposed theory about the management of prostate cancer suggests megestrol blocks gonadotropins by inhibiting 5-alpha reductase and thus reducing dihydrotestosterone levels. Overall, megestrol likely suppresses the hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal axis and the hypothalamic-pituitary-gonadal axis.

Another hypothesis about appetite stimulation and increased body mass is an increase in Neuropeptide Y levels and inhibition of tumor necrosis factor- α, interleukin-1, and interleukin-6. Preclinical studies have shown that the food and water intake significantly improved in megestrol-treated rats compared to the untreated group. In addition, the synthesis, transport, and release of Neuropeptide Y in the lateral hypothalamus increased, indicating that Neuropeptide Y may be responsible for the appetite-stimulating effect. These studies suggest that megestrol acetate can be orexigenic in cancer/AIDS-induced cachectic patients. In addition, it causes down-regulation of pro-inflammatory molecules such as  IL-6, TNF alpha, interleukin-1, and interleukin-6, and up-regulation of the Neuropeptide Y level. Consequently, there is an increased appetite and body mass and decreased muscle protein degradation.

**Pharmacokinetics**

Absorption: Megestrol is well absorbed. Time to peak concentrations is from 1 to 3 hours for megestrol acetate tablets. The onset of the action takes 3 to 4 weeks for weight gain.

Metabolism: Megestrol is metabolized by  UDP-glucuronosyltransferases (UGTs) and CYP3A4.

Excretion: Urinary excretion is the major route; urinary excretion varies between 56.5% to 78.4%(mean 66.4%). Fecal excretion varies from 7.7% to 30.3% (mean 19.8%).