Immunohistochemistry (IHC) can be performed on sebaceous neoplasms to identify defects in the mismatch repair genes commonly implicated in Muir-Torre syndrome, and current recommendations advocate this test. This method, however, is not diagnostic of Muir-Torre syndrome as there have been reports of mismatch repair gene mutations in sebaceous neoplasms in patients who did not have the defect in other cells elsewhere in the body. This finding suggests that the gene defects were somatic rather than germline mutations. In these patients, a higher risk of visceral malignancy is not seen. Due to the diagnostic limitations of IHC for Muir-Torre syndrome, several authors advocate IHC testing on sebaceous neoplasms for mismatch repair genes in conjunction with obtaining thorough personal and family histories. If the IHC result reveals mismatch repair gene mutations, genetic testing is then warranted before further workup such as screening tests for malignancy are performed. Once the diagnosis of Muir-Torre syndrome is confirmed with genetic testing, annual evaluations for malignancy should be performed. A lower threshold for biopsy of clinically apparent sebaceous tumors should be adopted in patients with Muir-Torre syndrome because sebaceous carcinomas often initially present similarly to their benign counterparts, and this often leads to a delay in diagnosis. A lower threshold is particularly relevant for periocular lesions as this is the most common location for sebaceous carcinoma; however, sebaceous carcinomas can arise from any sebaceous gland.