The primary influences on temperature changes include physical properties of the gas, human metabolism as it relates to temperature, and the acid-base buffering system. The Henry law demonstrates that as temperature increases, gas becomes less soluble in solution. The Clark and Severinghaus electrodes both determine gaseous concentrations of oxygen and carbon dioxide, respectively. Therefore, as temperature increases, the gases detected by the electrodes become less soluble with higher partial pressures.

- Henry Law: Xgas = S * Pgas

Xgas is the gas concentration within the liquid (mM/L), S is the gas's liquid coefficient of solubility, and Pgas is the partial pressure of the gas (torr)

As the liquid coefficient of solubility decreases with increased temperature, a decreasing gas concentration within the solution and increased partial pressure of the gas will result.

In regards to metabolism, carbon dioxide (CO2) is found mostly as bicarbonate, dissolved in the blood, and bonded to nitrogenous bases. During the heating of blood, imidazole loses protons that bind to bicarbonate and result in an increase of CO2 through buffering. As demonstrated by the Henderson-Hasselbach equation, the pH will decrease as the CO2 increases. The inverse relationship remains true as the temperature of the blood decreases.

- Henderson-Hasselback Equation: pH = pKa + log10 (A-/HA-)

Oxygen blood gas readings also increase following the Henry law. Additionally, the patient's hematocrit influences the readings. The partial pressure of oxygen may vary upon the temperature dependency of hemoglobin, which is the influence that temperature has on altering the P50 of hemoglobin. In humans, as blood temperature increases, the P50 increases, and more oxygen is released to exit the solution and be detected by the electrode. Considering the effect of hematocrit, a severely anemic patient may not have as robust of an increase in PO2 upon heating, as expected, or predicted by certain algorithms. This should be acknowledged when interpreting corrected blood gas values.

The Bohr effect of increasing P50 as environmental pH decreases, and the Haldane effect of increased oxygen affinity with decreasing hemoglobin-bound CO2 are interrelated to temperature effects on blood gases but have a modest influence on values.