The diagnosis of angular cheilitis (AC) is often purely clinical. Therefore, laboratory investigation is usually only performed after treatment failure. However, because an infection is the most common cause, testing for Candida or bacterial culture can be performed at diagnosis.

Investigation of underlying medical conditions that may contribute (nutritional deficiencies, immunocompromised states, systemic diseases) is at the discretion of the medical provider. If first-line antifungal/antibiotic combination yields no clinical improvement in 2 to 3 weeks, testing should include Hgb level with MCV, iron profile with ferritin, folate, and vitamin B2/B6/B12 levels, and fasting blood glucose.

**Candidal AC Suspected**

- Light microscopy: For confirmation, lesion scrapings can be taken and stained with periodic acid Schiff (PAS) technique. Positive results show red/purple hyphae (indicative of infection) or yeast (which can be simple colonization). Gram stain shows these bodies are dark blue.  Hyphae and yeast are also visible on KOH slides.

- Germ tube test (Reynolds-Braude phenomenon) in sheep/human serum at 37 C for 2 to 4 hours

- Chlamydospore formation in CMA or rice starch agar incubated at 25 C for 2 to 3 days

- Sugar assimilation assay: Test for fermentation of glucose and maltose (but not sucrose or lactose), yielding pale pink coloration in the presence of tetrazolium reduction medium

- Fungal culture: Sabouraud dextrose agar and antibiotics, cornmeal agar, or CHROM agar

- Candida strain typing: Serotyping, isoenzyme profiles, morphotyping, resistance pattern

- Immunodiagnosis: ELISA, RIA, CIE, PHA, and LPA

**Bacterial AC Suspected**

- Bacterial culture with sensitivities

**Oral Candidiasis Confirmed**

- HIV testing

- Diabetes testing (random blood glucose, fasting blood glucose, glucose tolerance test, or HgbA1c testing)

**Nutritional Deficiency AC Suspected**

- Folic acid: Serum level

- Vitamin B12: Serum level; serum homocysteine and serum or urinary methylmalonic acid levels are more reliable indicators of deficiency than vitamin B12 serum levels

- Vitamin B2: Urinary riboflavin excretion or erythrocyte glutathione reductase activity assay

- Iron: Serum iron profile (iron level, iron saturation, ferritin level, TIBC

- Zinc: Serum zinc level

**Allergic or Irritant Contact AC Suspected**

- Patch testing to distinguish allergic contact dermatitis

**Malignancy Suspected**

- Biopsy