A myofibroblastoma is composed of oppositional spindle-shaped cells that are present in short traversing fascicles with a background of keloidal-like eosinophilic collagen bands. It is well-demarcated from normal breast parenchyma by a pseudo-capsule.

The histological variants include epithelioid, deciduous, collagenous, fibrous, lipomatous, cellular, myxoid, or infiltrative types. Duct or lobule involvement is characteristically absent. Macroscopically, myofibroblastoma demonstrates a well-demarcated pale pink or tan round mass-like appearance.

On immunohistochemistry, myofibroblastoma is positive for CD34, vimentin, CD10, CD99, estrogen receptors, progesterone receptors, BCL-2 protein, and variably positive for SMA, desmin, androgen receptors, and h-Caldesmon. It is negative for CD117 (C-kit), EMA, pan-cytokeratin, HMB-45, and S100. These results are aligned with the fibroblastic or myofibroblastic nature of the neoplastic cells.

Immunohistochemically, myofibroblastoma is negative for nuclear staining of Rb in over 90% of the cases.

When the diagnosis of myofibroblastoma is suspected with microscopic examination, an immunohistochemical investigation needs to be conducted with antibody panels to aid differentiation from other lesions.

The importance lies in differentiating the myofibroblastoma from other benign or malignant soft tissue neoplasms of the breast. It is most often confused with spindle cell lipoma. These two benign entities are composed of spindle cells positive for CD34 staining on immunohistochemistry and are admixed with mature adipocytes. Both spindle cell lipoma and myofibroblastoma are associated with the loss of chromosome 13q14.

However, one of the differentiating features between these two entities is the finding of a less prominent adipose tissue component in spindle cell lipoma. In myofibroblastoma, the stroma is very prominent and is also hyalinized. Additionally, spindle cell lipomas do not stain positive for desmin, whereas myofibroblastoma is always positive.