The patient should always be re-examined immediately prior to surgery. It is also important to make eyelid markings with the patient sitting up so that the appropriate position of the brows may be determined and compensated for as needed. The patient's natural skin crease is marked. When a blepharoplasty is performed with or without concurrent ptosis repair, the relative amount of skin to be removed is marked with a lateral rise to the upper eyelid skin crease marking.

Once in the operating room, the patient is sedated; however, general anesthesia is avoided since the patient's cooperation is needed to set the eyelid height. A combination of Xylocaine, marcaine and hyaluronidase with epinephrine is used in the block, and about 2 mL are injected subcutaneously anterior to orbital septum. The patient's entire face is then prepped and draped in the usual fashion. The incision is made with a 15 blade along the entire length of the upper eyelid and hemostasis is obtained. Dissection is taken down through orbicularis muscle until the orbital septum is located. A variable amount of orbicularis oculi muscle may need to be removed, depending upon the patient's age, the degree of orbicularis hypertrophy or laxity. Slight pressure on the globe will cause the preaponeurotic fat to prolapse and be visible just deep to the orbital septum. The septum is incised with a Westcott scissor and opened along the entire length of the upper eyelid keeping the fat pads in front of the levator. The fat pads are then gently dissected off underlying levator aponeurosis. Dissection is then taken inferiorly to expose the tarsal plate by dissecting pre tarsal orbicularis off of the tarsal plate. Everting the eyelid can help identify the tarsus. Once the tarsus is exposed, a double-armed 6-0 non-absorbable monofilament surgical suture is placed in the tarsus centrally 2 mm below the superior edge. The needle should only go halfway through the tarsus, and the tarsus is picked up off the globe to avoid placing the needle through the cornea. Once in position, the eyelid is everted, and the posterior of the lid is observed to ensure the suture does not go all the way through the tarsal plate. Doing so would cause severe abrasions of the cornea. The 2 ends of the suture are then placed through the levator in a horizontal mattress fashion and tied with a single throw. The patient then sits up and is asked to open the eyes, and the lid height and contour are evaluated. Depending on height and contour, additional levator advancement may be needed, and additional stitches may be needed medial or lateral to the initial suture to obtain optimal height and contour. Once the lid height is satisfactory, the patient is placed back down, and the sutures are tied and trimmed. At this point, the patient's co-operation is not necessary, so if there is any discomfort the level of anesthesia can be deepened. Excess preaponeurotic fat is now excised taking care not to remove the lacrimal gland which is in the far lateral orbit and appears paler (and sometimes pink) than the preaponeurotic fat pads. The fat pads are excised by clamping them with a hemostat and excising with scissors although many surgeons excize the fat using an open-sky approach without clamping the fat in hemostats . The edge of the fat still in the clamp is cauterized with bipolar cautery. The edge of the fat is grasped with a forceps, and the clamp is removed. The edge of the cauterized fat is inspected for bleeding. If the lacrimal gland is prolapsed, it can be sutured back into the superior temporal orbit with a 5-0 resorbable suture. Excess skin is now pulled down over the wound and marked with a sterile marking pen and excised with Westcott scissors. Excess preseptal orbicularis is excised, and hemostasis is obtained. The wound is closed with interrupted 6-0 mild chromic sutures, and topical steroid/antibiotic ointment is placed over the wound. The eye is patched overnight and ice packs applied to the eye.