The Detailed First-Trimester Anatomy Ultrasound Examination is a relatively new recommendation by the AIUM-ACR-ACOG-SMFM-SRU practice parameter that has yet to be adopted as the standard of care in those who meet indications. Techniques and imaging parameters will be discussed in this section. A combined transabdominal and transvaginal approach may be needed to visualize all structures fully.

**Fetal Biometry**

The techniques for assessing fetal biometry via crown-rump length or biparietal diameter (BPD) and head circumference (HC) are standard and are unchanged from AIUM-ACR-ACOG-SMFM practice parameters.

**Fetal Head**

Sagittal and axial planes are used for the evaluation of the fetal head structures. The skull should be oval with calvarial ossification and no bulges. The choroid plexus should be visible on each side of the falx cerebri in the transventricular plane. In the transthalamic plane, the thalami, cerebral peduncles, third ventricle, and aqueduct of Sylvius are visualized. Angling toward the posterior fossa in the axial plane allows for visualization of the fourth ventricle. The thalami, midbrain, brain stem, fourth ventricle, and future cisterna magna should also be visualized in this plane.

Potential abnormalities: Within the midsagittal view, signs of early spina bifida are seen if the future cisterna magna appears abnormal or the fourth ventricle is absent or compressed. Posterior displacement of the aqueduct of Sylvius is also a marker for spina bifida. Enlargement of the fourth ventricle can be associated with the Dandy-Walker continuum. Anencephaly-acrania sequence, alobar holoprosencephaly, and large cephaloceles can also be detected during this period.

Limitations: The cavum septum pellucidum and corpus callosum are not visible in the late first trimester.

**Face and Profile**

The forehead, nasal bridge, nasal bone, maxilla, and mandible should be seen in the midsagittal and views. The forehead should not be protruding or flattened, and there should be a contiguous nose to upper lip contour without maxillary protuberance or gap. The nasal bones, premaxillary processes, primary palate, and mandible can be identified by the retronasal triangle. The coronal plane is used to visualize the orbits, lenses, and upper lip integrity.

Potential abnormalities: A maxillary gap is suspicious for a cleft palate. The absence of the mandibular gap is suspicious for micrognathia.

**Neck**

In an axial or coronal view, the neck should be evaluated for abnormal fluid collections, cystic hygroma, or dilated jugular lymphatic sacs. The midsagittal plane is used to evaluate the nuchal translucency. Precise measurement is only required if the nuchal translucency (NT) appears enlarged or is a part of a screening for aneuploidy. There are established guidelines for the measurement of nuchal translucency to reduce false-negative and false-positive values. Guidelines for NT measurement are outlined by the AIUM-ACR-ACOG-SMFM-SRU Practice Parameter.

**Thorax and Heart**

The required structures in the axial view are cardiac position and axis, 4-chamber view without and with color Doppler, 3-vessel and trachea view with color Doppler, symmetric lungs, and diaphragm demarcation. In the coronal and sagittal view, diaphragm demarcation should also be visualized. Though color Doppler should be limited during the first trimester, color flow is essential for the visualization of the heart structures at this gestation age. Output display standard should be monitored to keep the thermal index for bone <0.7.

In the axial view, the lungs should be symmetric, and the ribs should appear of normal ossification and length. The heart should be one-third the size of the chest. The four-chamber view with color Doppler should show equal-sized ventricles, with defined ventricular septum, atria, and demonstration of mitral and tricuspid flow. The three-vessel and trachea view with color Doppler should show transverse aortic arch/isthmus merging with the pulmonary trunk/ductus arteriosus. There should be antegrade flow to the left side of the trachea. In patients with suspected cardiac abnormalities, longitudinal aortic and ductal arches with pulsed wave Doppler flow may be performed.

**Abdomen and Pelvis**

The axial plane at the levels of the stomach, kidneys, and bladder are evaluated. The orientation of the abdomen should contain the stomach on the left and the liver on the right side, with the portal vein going away from the stomach. The umbilical cord insertion into the anterior abdominal wall is evaluated. It is important to note that physiologic herniation of the bowel into the umbilical cord base is seen before 13 weeks and is not associated with anomalies. The bladder should contain fluid. If the kidneys are not visualized in the coronal view, renal artery power or color Doppler imaging is recommended.

Potential Abnormalities: Cystic collections within the abdomen or enlarged bladder >7 mm could indicate aneuploidy or urinary tract obstruction.

**Spine and Extremities**

Three long bones should be identified in each extremity. Feet and hands should be documented. Detailed assessment of fingers/toes is required if an abnormality is suspected. The spine is evaluated in the longitudinal and axial planes with attention to scoliosis or irregularity. If skeletal dysplasia is suspected, calvarial shape, thorax, ribs, the scapula should be evaluated.

Limitation: The distal spine is not completely ossified at this gestational period.

**Placenta, Uterus, and Adnexa**

The placental position relative to the lower uterine segment, umbilical cord insertion, and echotexture must be evaluated. If there is suspicion for PAS, a transvaginal approach with a partially full bladder should be performed with color Doppler and myometrial thinning, bladder wall interface; uterine vesicular vascularity abnormalities should be documented. Leiomyomata size, location, and number should be documented. Ovaries, adnexa, and the cul-de-sac should be visualized. Any Mullerian duct anomalies should be documented.

The components of a Standard Second-Trimester Anatomy Examination and Detailed Second Trimester Anatomy Examination are summarized in the tables at the end of this article. A detailed, comprehensive anatomy scan includes all of the components of the standard anatomy scan with additional specific components guided by the initial indication for the scan. Also, specific ultrasound findings during the standard anatomy scan can direct additional detailed anatomic evaluation as determined by the reading physician. Therefore, not all of the components listed in the detailed description may be indicated in every detailed anatomic scan. Clinical judgment is warranted.