**Interpreting the TST**

As per the CDC, at least 5 mm of induration constitutes a positive test in high-risk persons:

- HIV infection, close contact with an active TB patient, abnormal chest radiograph with fibrotic changes, organ transplant recipient, and another form of immunosuppression (taking the equivalent of > 15 mg/day of prednisone, TNF antagonists, other biologics)

Induration of 10 mm or greater indicates positivity in persons with above baseline risk of reactivation:

- Chronic kidney disease on dialysis, silicosis, diabetes mellitus, malignancy, underweight status, jejunoileal bypass, gastrectomy, injection drug abuse, age less than 4-years old, foreign-born from countries with high incidence of TB who immigrated within the past 5 years, and residents or workers in prisons, jails, healthcare facilities, and homeless or refugee shelters.

Finally, induration of 15 mm or greater is deemed positive in low-risk patients:

- Age 4-years and older with the low likelihood of TB infection.

If  TST  is positive:

- If there is a high risk of infection and progression, the test should not be repeated.

- A chest radiograph and clinical evaluation should follow.

- If there is no evidence of active disease is noted by history, physical or radiograph, the patient is deemed to have LTBI and should be treated.

- If the chest radiograph or clinical evaluation are suggestive of tuberculosis, then active infection needs to be excluded with further testing.

If  TST is negative:

- Repeat testing with another TST or an IGRA can be performed if the patient is at high risk of infection progression or active disease to rule out the possibility of a false negative test. (See below.) Not all of these cases would be amenable to repeat testing, however, and decisions to retest should be made on a case by case basis.

Drawing attention to two situations in which repeat testing may be most important:

- TST can be negative in cases where testing occurs within the first 8 weeks of exposure when the immune response has not developed yet, or in cases with remote TB exposure where the tuberculin reaction might have waned. In the latter group, consisting primarily of the elderly where a response may have waned, a second TST (“booster”) applied a couple of weeks later often will be positive.

- A repeat positive second test increases the sensitivity for detecting TB, although in immunocompromised patients a repeated negative test can be a result of lack of immune reaction rather than an exclusion of the tuberculosis diagnosis. High suspicion of the disease has to be used in this setting to decide whether or not to treat, always considering risk and benefits of therapy. Again, a case by case evaluation is key.

On the flip side, a false positive should be suspected in patients who are at a low risk for infection and progression.

In the case of foreign-born adults who have been vaccinated with BCG and have a positive PPD reaction, the positive reaction is more likely due to TB exposure than the remote vaccination, and the immunization history should be disregarded when interpreting test results and deciding upon treatment.

If concern persists about the induration being due to childhood immunization, an IGRA test may be considered, since these would never be positive due to a prior BCG vaccine.

In the case of healthcare workers, and occupational exposure risk, LTBI screening should be repeated yearly for the purposes infection prevention and healthcare epidemiology. More importantly, because those with LTBI infection are most likely to progress to active infection within the first 2 years of infection, such screening optimises the impact of LTBI treatment.

**Interpreting IGRA**

Results are reported as positive, negative and indeterminate. Indeterminate tests can occur in cases of anergic response, immunosuppression, high initial levels of interferon gamma, active infection, extremes of age, and improper handling of the samples.