The physiology and treatment of diabetes are complex and require a multitude of interventions for successful disease management. Diabetic education and patient engagement are critical in management. Patients have better outcomes if they can manage their diet (carbohydrate and overall caloric restriction), exercise regularly (more than 150 minutes weekly), and independently monitor glucose.

Since T1DM is a disease primarily due to the absence of insulin, insulin administration through daily injections, or an insulin pump, is the mainstay of treatment. In T2DM, diet and exercise may be adequate treatments, especially initially. Other therapies may target insulin sensitivity or increase insulin secretion by the pancreas. The specific subclasses for drugs include biguanides (metformin), sulfonylureas, meglitinides, alpha-glucosidase inhibitors, thiazolidinediones, glucagonlike-peptide-1 agonist, dipeptidyl peptidase IV inhibitors (DPP-4), selective, amylinomimetics, and sodium-glucose transporter-2 (SGLT-2) inhibitors. Metformin is the first line of the prescribed diabetic medications and works by lowering basal and postprandial plasma glucose. Insulin administration may also be necessary for T2DM patients, especially those with inadequate glucose management in the advanced stages of the disease. In morbidly obese patients, bariatric surgery is a possible means to normalize glucose levels. It is recommended for individuals who have been unresponsive to other treatments and who have significant comorbidities.

Regular screenings are necessary since microvascular complications are a feared complication of diabetes. Regular diabetic retinal exams should be performed by qualified medical personnel to assess for diabetic retinopathy. Neurologic examination with monofilament testing can identify patients with neuropathy at risk for amputation. Clinicians can also recommend patients perform daily foot inspections to identify foot lesions that may go unnoticed due to neuropathy. Low-dose tricyclic antidepressants, duloxetine, anticonvulsants, topical capsaicin, and pain medications may be necessary to manage neuropathic pain in diabetes. Urine microalbumin testing can also assess for early renal changes from diabetes with albuminuria greater than 30mg/g creatinine along with the estimated GFR. The antiproteinuric effect of the angiotensin-converting enzyme (ACE) inhibitors and the angiotensin receptor blockers (ARBs) makes them the preferred agents to delay the progression from microalbuminuria to macroalbuminuria in patients with both Type 1 or Type 2 diabetes mellitus.

The FDA has approved pregabalin and duloxetine for the treatment of diabetic peripheral neuropathy. Tricyclic antidepressants and anticonvulsants have also seen use in the management of the pain of diabetic neuropathy with variable success.

The ADA also recommends regular blood pressure screening for diabetics, with the goal being 130 mmHg systolic blood pressure and 85 mmHg diastolic blood pressure.