**Tubuloglomerular Feedback Mechanism in the Kidney**

Afferent and efferent arterioles transport blood in and out of the glomerulus, respectively. Hypovolemia-induced reduction in glomerular filtration leads to decreased flow of NaCl to specialized epithelial cells (macula densa). This, in turn, sends signals to the adjacent afferent arteriole to vasodilate and increase glomerular filtration. Furthermore, the decreased delivery of NaCl also stimulates the renin secretion from specialized cells located in the wall of the afferent arteriole.

**Hypoxic Vasoconstriction in the Pulmonary Circulation**

Pulmonary circulation is a low-pressure and high-compliance circuit where arterioles respond differently to hypoxia. Systemic arterioles dilate in response to hypoxia, whereas arterioles in the lungs constrict in hypoxia. This hypoxic pulmonary vasoconstriction is essential in directing blood away from under-ventilated parts of the lungs towards better-ventilated parts of the lungs.

**Coronary Circulation**

Blood flow in the coronary circulation is not continuous as in other parts of the body. Vascular resistance in the transmural portion of the coronary circulation is significantly higher during ventricular contraction resulting in decreased flow during systole. And regulation of coronary microvascular resistance varies across different segments of the vasculature. Arterioles with less than 100 microns in diameter respond differently than larger arterioles at the level of autoregulation, myogenic control, and control by metabolic factors.

**Cerebral Circulation**

Cerebral blood flow is mostly regulated by the arterial partial pressure of CO2 (pC02). As long as arterial pO2 is normal or above normal, cerebral blood flow is proportional to arterial pCO2. High pCO2 induces cerebral arteriolar vasodilation, thus increasing cerebral blood flow. This unique characteristic of cerebral arterioles allows therapeutic hyperventilation for lowering intracranial pressure (ICP) when indicated. Furthermore, the final step of blood flow regulation by the arterioles matches the focal demand of nearby tissue, which is mediated by microvascular pericytes.

**Skin**

Arterioles most commonly branch into capillaries and are subsequently collected into small venules. In contrast, terminal arterioles of the skin are directly connected to the venue, bypassing the capillary bed. This bypassing or arteriovenous (A-V) shunt is particularly useful in body temperature regulation. Cutaneous A-V shunts receive sympathetic innervation. Sympathetic stimulation induces the constriction of arterioles resulting in a decrease in blood volume in the skin, thereby preventing heat loss. On the contrary, high skin temperature directly causes vasodilation, which increases heat loss.

The function and structure of arterioles can be affected by several disease conditions, such as inflammation, atherosclerosis, and hypertensive vascular disease. Clinical manifestations depend on the involved organs that predominantly result from ischemia due to arterial insufficiency.

**Vasculitis**

Vasculitis refers to inflammation of the vessel wall, which may affect large vessels (elastic arteries), medium-sized (muscular arteries), or small (arterioles, venules, capillaries) combinations of these vessel types. Disease manifestations include nonspecific systemic symptoms of inflammation (e.g., fever, fatigue, weight loss, and myalgias) or organ-specific symptoms from ischemia due to luminal narrowing or thrombosis of the inflamed vessel. Vasculitis affecting arterioles solely or in combination with other vessels includes granulomatosis with polyangiitis, Churg-Strauss syndrome, microscopic polyangiitis, Henoch-Schönlein purpura, and cryoglobulinemic vasculitis.

**Arteriolosclerosis**

Arteriosclerosis is a pathologic process involving the arteriole, eventually causing occlusion. Hyaline arteriolosclerosis and hyperplastic arteriolosclerosis are the two varieties of arteriolosclerosis. In hyaline arteriolosclerosis, increased protein deposition within the vascular wall occludes the arteriole lumen. Uncontrolled diabetes and hypertension are the two most common causes of this form of arteriosclerosis. Poorly controlled diabetes causes non-enzymatic glycosylation of the basement membrane that allows plasma proteins to leak into the vessel wall. In hypertensive patients, high luminal pressure pushes plasma proteins into the vessel wall.

**The Arteriolar Disease of Cerebral Circulation**

The small cerebral penetrating arterioles are affected by diseases such as micro-atherosclerosis, lipohyalinosis, and microaneurysm (aka Charcot–Bouchard aneurysm). Atherothrombotic occlusion of the small, penetrating arterioles results in lacunar stroke, a subtype of ischemic stroke. In contrast, rupture of microaneurysm is the culprit of parenchymal hemorrhage or hemorrhagic stroke.

**Diabetic Microangiopathy**

This small-vessel disease commonly affects the arterioles, capillaries, and venules of diabetic patients. Diabetic microangiopathy is the main pathogenic contributor to diabetic complications of the eye (diabetic retinopathy), kidney (arteriolar nephrosclerosis), and lower extremities (gangrene). The structural hallmark of this disease is the thickening of the basement membrane, which leads to lumen occlusion, thus, tissue hypoxia and damage.