Providers treat many patients daily and as a result, may encounter cases where ethical and legal concerns may arise. Some important things to keep in mind that may help assess the risk are to review patient’s past medical records, obtain collateral information if possible, evaluate for a history of violence, and get a second opinion. There are several ways to approach a patient who verbalizes threats such as increasing frequency of appointments, having patient’s firearms/weapons removed from their home, increasing/starting a medication, hospitalization or partial hospitalization programs, or involving third parties/family into the treatment.

Discussing the limits of confidentiality and mandatory reporting in certain situations with patients at the time of the visit is also imperative.Lamb warning to the individuals they are evaluating, notifying them that the communication between the individual and the professional is not confidential.

Ultimately, if uncertainty remains, the clinician may consult a colleague, supervisor, or an attorney, especially in the states with permissive duty to warn or states with limited legal guidance on the matter.

The cornerstone lies in the fact that the role of a doctor is not limited merely within the fiduciary confinement of 'autonomy' and thereby privileged communications, but he also should strive for ascertaining his moral ethics under 'beneficence' and 'nonmaleficence.'

One author has nicely summarised the conditions for excepting the duty of confidentiality as '5 C's'. These are, namely

- **C**onsent- from the patient, legalized next to the kin or advance medical directive.

- **C**ontinued treatment- as privileged health pieces of information. Also valid in genetic disorders and hereditary cancers.

- **C**ourt order

- **C**omply with the law- in cases of child abuse, an outbreak of communicable diseases.

- **C**ommunicate a threat- in cases of a foreseeable act of perils.

The author also suggested 'DEAL' algorithm to counteract the potential confidential issues through careful analysis of

- **D**uty- privilege obligations vs. moral bounds

- **E**xceptions- the above mentioned  5 C's

- **A**sk for help

- **L**egal status pertaining to the same