Per the CDC, isolation precautions and contact prophylaxis are not indicated for psittacosis, as person-to-person transmission is exceedingly rare. However, most states classify psittacosis as a reportable condition in the United States. A timely diagnosis aims to control the spread of this disease.

Patients and the public, in general, should be educated on the purchase, handling, and cleaning of birds and birdcages to control the acquisition and spread of this disease. Psittacosis is quite common in birds, and human infection is likely much higher than currently suspected. Birds suspected as a source of infection should be referred to veterinarians and health department personnel as soon as possible. Proper care handling of pet birds and protocols to protect workers in the poultry industry can significantly decrease the morbidity associated with this disease.

In 2017, the National Association of State Public Health Veterinarians compiled a compendium on measures to control C. psittaci infection with recommendations assigned a level of evidence using the United States Preventive Services Task Force (USPSTF) framework.

- Persons at risk, as well as healthcare providers, be educated on the signs, symptoms, and appropriate workup of the disease. (Level B)

- Public education outlining proper bird handling, use of protective clothing, and use of a disposable particulate respirator when applicable should be provided. (Level B)

- A combined public health department and healthcare personnel coordinated effort should be undertaken to educate the public and the industry on maintaining accurate records of all bird-related transactions to help identify sources of infection. (Level B)

- Quarantine of exposed birds and isolation of ill birds with signs of psittacosis. (Level A)

- Use of appropriate disinfection measures on all exposed surfaces. (Level A)