Once the clinician has made a diagnosis of delusions of parasitosis, the primary consideration in treatment is to build a strong rapport with the patient and maintain a good relationship.  Patients can feel frustrated and disrespected and untrusting of practitioners who do not take the time to listen to their complaints or symptoms, which can lead to noncompliance with follow up care and visiting alternative practitioners for second opinions.  Practitioners should focus on being objective and acknowledging the patient's symptoms, not dismissing their symptoms or feelings, and understanding the effect this can have on their daily life.  Agreeing or disagreeing with the patient overtly in the office about their symptoms can be a difficult decision to make.  The most accepted approach involves taking a neutral approach by stating that there are no organisms visible to the practitioner at this time but that they may have been present before.

Rejecting a psychiatric origin of symptoms is common in patients.  Patients are often reluctant to take medications for the management of symptoms.  Recommendations are that practitioners tell the patient that symptoms are secondary to altered chemicals in the brain in the hope that they are more likely to comply with the use of medications.  Patients will often need reassurance that antipsychotic drugs are not being used for the treatment of schizophrenia or other psychotic conditions, as this can be a turn-off for patients.  Patients need education regarding alternative uses of antipsychotic medications through an explanation of the mechanism of action of the medication.  Also indicating to patients that studies have shown that patients have had success with the proposed treatment can improve compliance.

First generation antipsychotics (FGA), such as pimozide were widely used in the treatment of delusions of parasitosis in the past but are no longer recommended as a first-line treatment due to adverse side effects.

First line treatment for delusions of parasitosis consists of antipsychotics at lower doses that minimize side effects. If patients have a relapse of symptoms after discontinuation of antipsychotic medication, they should restart the therapy.