# Introduction

The middle meningeal artery is a vital artery that plays an important clinical role. The middle meningeal artery (MMA) normally branches off the maxillary artery, which is an extension of the external carotid artery. The artery will then travel through the foramen spinosum, which is posterolateral from the foramen ovale, to supply blood to the dura mater. The middle meningeal artery arises from a complex embryological origin, which gives rise to many anatomic variations of the artery. Awareness of these anatomic variations becomes important for surgeons to reduce the risk of complications during surgical repair.

The middle meningeal artery has a number of clinical implications. Rupture of the artery, which most commonly occurs at the pterion, typically leads to an epidural hematoma. The resulting hematoma is described as a “lens-shaped” mass on a computed tomogram (CT) scan. Damage to the middle meningeal artery may also result in an aneurysm or arteriovenous fistulas. Due to the middle meningeal artery's attachment to the pain-sensitive dura mater, the artery also plays a role in migraine headaches.

# Structure and Function

The middle meningeal artery most often branches off the maxillary artery and courses into the middle cranial fossa via the foramen spinosum. The middle meningeal artery provides blood to the dura mater through and through its branching arteries also supplies the periosteum of the inner aspects of the cranial bones.

# Embryology

The development of the middle meningeal artery, similarly to other blood vessels, occurs via angiogenesis and receives guidance from vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF) and other growth factors. During development, a series of aortic arches arise, arranged from cranial to caudal. From these arches, the third arch gives rise to the stapedial artery. The stapedial artery arises from the internal carotid artery and is later incorporated by the external carotid artery. The stapedial artery will then divide, giving rise to the middle meningeal artery. By the 10th week of development, the stapedial artery will normally degenerate. Due to the complex nature of middle meningeal artery development, many anatomic variations and anastomoses may be seen.

# Physiologic Variants

While the middle meningeal artery primarily is derived as a branch from the maxillary artery and then passes through the foramen spinosum into the middle cranial fossa, rare anatomical variations have been observed. It is important to be aware of the possible variations of the middle meningeal artery, to reduce the risk of thromboembolism during the operative treatment of a lesion in the area. In cases where the foramen spinosum has been absent, the middle meningeal artery enters the cranial fossa through the foramen ovale alongside the mandibular nerve. The middle meningeal artery may also originate from the lateral aspect of the internal carotid artery. In this case, it will travel in the carotid canal, along with the internal carotid artery, and enter the skull through the foramen lacerum where it will then take a normal path and divide into anterior and posterior branches. The middle meningeal artery has also rarely originated from the posterior cerebellar artery, basilar artery, ascending pharyngeal artery, or ophthalmic artery.

# Surgical Considerations

Tears of the middle meningeal artery resulting in a significant epidural hematoma are often treated surgically with overwhelming success in non-comatose patients.

# Clinical Significance

**Epidural Hematoma**

The meningeal vessels closely adhere to the internal aspect of the boney vault of the skull. As a result, injury to the boney vault of the skull can result in the rupture of the artery. Injury to the lateral aspect of the skull, via trauma to the pterion, may result in rupture of the vessel. Most commonly (85%), this type of injury to the middle meningeal artery will result in an epidural hematoma.

**Arteriovenous Fistula**

Arteriovenous fistulas (AVFs) are another clinical complication of the middle meningeal artery. Anatomically, the middle meningeal artery runs along with paired veins, and a traumatic tear in the skull wall may result in a traumatic AVF.

**Aneurysm**

Uncommonly, aneurysms of the middle meningeal artery may be seen. Both true aneurysms and pseudoaneurysms may be observed in the middle meningeal artery, occurring under different conditions. Pseudoaneurysms are most commonly associated with trauma to the skull and are responsible for the lucid interval before a delayed bleed.

**Migraine**

The middle meningeal artery also plays a role in the onset of migraine headaches. The dura mater that the middle meningeal artery burrows into is a pain-sensitive structure. Dilation of the middle meningeal artery, which is associated with substance P and neurokinin A, results in headaches. Even though dilation of the middle meningeal artery has been shown to cause pain consistent with migraines, it has been difficult to observe middle meningeal artery dilation during the event of a spontaneous migraine.

**Chronic Subdural Hematoma**

Middle meningeal artery embolization is being proposed as a minimally invasive treatment option for the management of chronic subdural hematomas, especially the recurrent ones.