There are three stages involved in fat grafting.

- Fat harvesting

- Fat processing

- Fat transfer

**Fat Harvesting**

Fat is initially retrieved from the donor sites selected because of the presence of rich fat reservoirs. The most common donor sites are the abdomen, periumbilical area, buttocks, medial, lateral, and anterior thigh. Occasionally, if neck or submental liposuction is performed in conjunction with a facelift and autologous fat grafting is planned, the fat harvested from the neck may be used, although the other donor sites tend to provide higher quality fat that is more likely to survive and produce the desired outcome.

The first step in harvesting fat is to use a wetting or tumescent solution for adipose tissue suspension. The composition of the wetting solution for facial rejuvenation cases, which are often more limited in scope than other fat grafting cases (e.g., breast reconstruction) and may be performed under local anesthesia, may resemble the following: 500 mL normal saline, 25 mL of 2% lidocaine, 0.5 mL epinephrine (1:100,000). The solution is infiltrated into the area from which the fat will be retrieved, usually in a 1:1 ratio to the amount of fat planned to be harvested (i.e., if 50 mL of fat is to be harvested, then 50 mL of the wetting solution should be injected).

After 15 minutes of allowing the anesthetic to take effect, a stab incision is made with a scalpel. A blunt fat harvesting cannula attached either to a Luer lock syringe or a closed suction machine with low negative pressure is inserted into the donor site, and the fat is removed by a gentle back-and-forth movement. Appropriate care should be taken to adjust the technique so that minimal bleeding is produced during this process, as blood may negatively affect the fat's viability. The plunger should be drawn back just 1-2 mL to create adequate negative pressure. If a suction machine is used, it should be set at the lowest tension to lessen the shear stress on the adipocytes and thus promote viability. The repetitive movement of the harvesting cannula back and forth through the stab incision may cause abrasion or burning of the skin edges, and excising the skin edges prior to closure will often improve the appearance of the final scar.

**Fat Processing**

Following harvest, several additional components like oil, dead adipocytes, blood, and local anesthetic are also present in the fat solution. The presence of any of these may compromise graft uptake by promoting necrosis, inflammation, and vasoconstriction. To improve the viability of the transferred fat, processing or refining can be carried out by any of the following three methods:

- Sedimentation - Syringes are placed upright for 45 minutes to permit gravity to separate the different components. This is the most cost-effective and causes minimal damage to the adipocytes, but it is time-consuming. Typically, another procedure is performed while waiting for sedimentation to complete.

- Centrifugation - Condensed fat can be obtained using 1 to 3 minutes of centrifugation at 3,000 rpm, as recommended by Coleman. This is a quick and reliable method of separating the elements, although overly aggressive centrifuge settings may decrease graft viability.

- Washing and filtering - Fat may be cleaned and refined using a strainer or gauze. The harvested fat is placed into a strainer or non-adherent gauze, and saline is used to rinse it. This process is inexpensive and relatively quick, and the adipocyte damage is minimal; once the extra material is removed, the fat is ready to be placed into syringes for transfer.

Sedimentation and centrifugation lead to the formation of three layers. The middle layer contains graftable fat. The uppermost layer contains oil and destroyed fat cells, which can be removed with absorbent material (e.g., gauze). The lowermost layer will have water, blood, lidocaine, and epinephrine, which should also be discarded, typically by draining the syringe containing the fat.

**Fat Transfer**

The processed middle layer is transferred to multiple 1 mL syringes, and the fat is then injected into the recipient sites. To avoid damaging the adipocytes, it is preferable to remove the plungers from the 1 mL syringes and fill the syringes from the open back rather than aspirating the fat up through the Luer-lock end of the syringe by withdrawing the plunger. A stab incision is then made to provide access to the recipient area, usually with an 18 ga needle. Stab incision location selection is focused on providing access to as many recipient sites as possible rather than hiding the incision in facial subunit borders because the puncture sites typically heal without any noticeable scarring. Once the cannula has been introduced into the target area, multiple passes of 0.1 mL are used to deliver the fat parcels. The fat should be delivered with withdrawing movements to deposit the fat with minimal resistance and prevent intravascular injection. The passes are also performed "3-dimensionally" along different vectors and at different levels, as placement in different tissue planes leads to better aesthetic outcomes. Most fat will be injected deep to the superficial musculoaponeurotic system (or temporoparietal fascia) but superficial to the periosteum.

Overcorrection is a very common practice to take into account future resorption (up to 80%) of the fat, but the evidence regarding definitive survival rates is conflicting. In general, slight overcorrection (approximately 20%) is acceptable, although it is important to realize that while 80% of patients will keep 80% of the fat injected, the remaining 20% of patients will resorb all or nearly all of the fat. Patients who do resorb most or all of their fat will likely do so again, and are, therefore, poor candidates for repeat injection, whereas patients who only resorb up to 20% are good candidates for "top-up" injections in the future if necessary. To avoid stress on the grafts, compression garments should be worn for 2 to 3 days after the procedure, though some patients may achieve better outcomes if compression garments are worn for longer periods.

The use of platelet-rich plasma (PRP) and platelet-rich fibrin (PRF) is an emerging technique in which the processed blood of the patient may be injected along with the fat to improve the chances of graft survival.

**Consideration of Facial Aesthetic Units**

The amount of fat injected and into which facial subunits it is injected is determined by the patient's goals and the injector's experience. The approach and technique for injections of each facial subunit are particular to the subunit, with nuanced differences in techniques and instrument use. Below are a few general points for the more commonly injected areas of the face:

- Forehead, brow, and temple: These injections are subcutaneous, intramuscular, or submuscular, usually accessed via stab incisions in the hairline or lateral brow. Any ridging encountered after injection should be massaged until smooth. Severely hollow temples may require 8 to 15 mL of fat.

- Glabella/nose: The most common features to be addressed in this region include the glabellar vertical rhytids ("frown lines" or "number 11s") or a deep radix in order to camouflage a dorsal hump. However, any contour irregularity of the nose may be addressed. The cannula entry point can be in the forehead, medial eyebrow, cheek, alar base, nasal tip, or upper cutaneous lip. Various cannulas may be employed, although the 19 ga Coleman type 3 cannula is commonly used to layer the fat from the periosteum to the intradermal layers. Fat can be injected posterior to the nasal cartilage for expansion of the internal valve, to fill concavities in the radix or within a saddle deformity, or to smooth contour irregularities after rhinoplasty or trauma.

- Periorbital region: This area is technically challenging, so a conservative approach is warranted for novice fat grafters. One should take care not to place too many fat parcels at a time; proceeding slowly by injecting small aliquots of fat is critical. Initial infiltration should be deep along the orbital rim, followed by another layer placed just superficial to it. To avoid palpable or visible nodules, injections should be performed deep to the orbicularis oculi muscle because the skin of the eyelid is very thin.

- Lips: Fat injected here should be placed very superficially (just beneath the mucosa) to avoid injuring the orbicularis oris muscle and labial arteries (branches of the facial artery). Cannula choice depends on injector preference; however, smaller cannulas (e.g., 22 ga Coleman cannula) are preferred to inject into the lips.

- Cheek: Placement of fat in the malar, zygomatic, and infraorbital regions superior to a ptotic cheek can help to lift the soft tissue back into a more youthful position. Two stab incisions are often required, including one lateral to the mid-nasolabial fold and another lateral to the zygomatic arch. The location of the infraorbital nerve should be marked in order to avoid nerve injury, approximately 1 cm below the orbital rim in the mid-pupillary line. Consider filling the area anterior to the auricle (lateral cheek compartment) to avoid the face appearing too full due to injections placed more medially.

- Nasolabial fold: This area is accessed via stab incisions in the lateral chin or near the oral commissures. Grafting can be performed both deep (periosteal) and superficial (subcutaneous). Still, it should remain medial to the nasolabial fold to avoid trauma to the facial artery or deepening of the nasolabial fold.

- Mandible and chin: Fat grafting to this region can be used to address a retruded chin, jowls, or poor jawline definition. To gain access to this area, stab incisions can be made along the margin of the mandible, submental area, and pre-jowl sulcus. The fat is placed by fanning the injections laterally and inferiorly, taking care to avoid damage to the facial artery where it crosses over the mandible at the gonial notch, anterior to the masseter.