Management of CAP involves initial risk stratification of the patient and to decide whether to manage the patient on an outpatient basis, in a general medicine ward, or in an intensive care unit (ICU) setting. The "CURB-65" scale has been used extensively for this purpose. The components of this scale include confusion, uremia (BUN greater than 20 mg/dl), a respiratory rate greater than 30 per minute, blood pressure less than 90 mm Hg systolic or less than 60 mm Hg diastolic, and age greater than 65. One point is awarded for every positive criterion that the patient meets. Patient disposition is decided as follows.

- A score of 0 to 1: Outpatient management. These patients are treated empirically using Fluoroquinolones or Beta-lactams+ Macrolides if adverse comorbidities are present and with Macrolides or Doxycycline if no comorbidities are present.

- A score of 2 to 3 indicates admission and management in a general medicine ward. The first line of treatment is a choice between fluoroquinolones or macrolides plus beta-lactams.

- A score of 4 or more warrants management in an ICU. The empiric regimen, in this case, is a choice between a combination of a beta-lactam plus fluoroquinolones or beta-lactams plus macrolides.

Management of VAP and HaP is in accordance with the ATS/IDSA guidelines. It is much more prolonged, complicated, and involves the use of broad-spectrum antibiotics as compared to the management of CAP. It involves early identification of signs of pneumonia and thorough evaluation as discussed above, before starting empiric therapy. Empiric therapy is guided by resistance patterns prevalent in that region as well as patient risk factors for multi-drug resistant organisms. Generally, regimes coving S. aureus, Pseudomonas, and gram-negative bacilli are designed for patients of HAP and VAP. For patients without MDR risk factors, the regimen generally followed is piperacillin/tazobactam plus cefepime plus levofloxacin. For patients with MDR risk factors, the preferred regime involves a combination of an Aminoglycoside along with one of imipenem, meropenem, aztreonam, piperacillin/tazobactam, ceftazidime, or cefepime.