Laminectomy is one of the most common procedures performed among spinal surgeons to treat spinal stenosis. This technique, correctly performed, correlates with symptomatic improvement and early recovery with relatively low complication rates. Even when the benefits of surgical versus nonsurgical treatment in lumbar stenosis have not been proven. [Level 1] Laminectomy remains an effective surgical technique for various conditions affecting the spinal canal, such as tumors, epidural abscess, and spondylotic myelopathy.

**Results of the Procedure**

- The success rate of 90% with a patient satisfaction rate of above 75%

- Pain and weakness resolve early, whereas dysesthesias may take up to two years

- Reoperation Rate-18% within five years

**Causes of Failure**

- Adjacent segment stenosis

- Disc herniation

- Spondylolisthesis

- Re-stenosis

**Variants of Classical Laminectomy**(high-risk factors precluding true decompression)

- Bilateral laminotomies

- Skip laminectomy

- Split spinous process decompression

- Bilateral decompression from a unilateral approach

**Different Surgical Modalities**

- Decompression with conventional laminectomy

- Bilateral decompression via the unilateral approach

- Decompression with fusion: Fusion has increased risks of blood loss, infection, longer hospital stays, and higher costs.

- Augmentation laminoplasty causes less surgical trauma.

- Endoscopic decompression: low risk of recurrence, preserve stability, minimal blood loss and complications

- Interspinous process devices: high dislocation, fracture of the spinous process, and low cost-effectiveness.

- Decompression with Interlaminar stabilization

- Decompression with lumbar spinal process-splitting laminectomy: less postoperative pain.

- Minimally invasive tubular decompression: reduced trauma, rapid recovery, shorter operating time and lesser intraoperative blood loss, and a better satisfaction rate.

- Microscopic decompression.

- Robot-assisted.

**Helpful Armamentarium**

- Machine learning and Artificial Intelligence.

- Surgical simulations.

- Intraoperative sonography to confirm restoration of the subarachnoid space.

- Intraoperative neuromonitoring has not been found to be reliable at predicting new neurologic deficits but is a useful adjunct to ease the surgeon when no intraoperative abnormalities are detected.

- Anti-fibrotic agents may prevent epidural fibrosis and adhesions.

- The 3D-printed artificial lamina may help in facilitating stability.