Acute toxicity with glycopyrrolate is secondary to an extension of the pharmacologic effects on the muscarinic cholinergic receptors. Muscarinic receptor sites are located in the brain's cerebral cortex, thalamus, hippocampus, and reticular activating system. They are also present in the postganglionic parasympathetic nervous system and other sites like sweat glands. Anticholinergic agents block the effects of acetylcholine by competitively binding and blocking muscarinic receptors.

**Central Nervous System Toxicity**

CNS toxicity is also called a central anticholinergic syndrome, as central nervous system toxicity can be an undesirable side effect of any anticholinergic medication. It manifests as delirium or prolonged somnolence after anesthesia. While this is more likely to occur with scopolamine than atropine, the incidence should be low with the administration of proper dosages. However, elderly patients may be uniquely susceptible. Glycopyrrolate is less likely to cause this condition than other anticholinergic medications because it does not cross the blood-brain barrier.

**Tachycardia**

The most likely response after intramuscular administration of atropine, glycopyrrolate, or scopolamine for premedication is an increase in heart rate, indicating a weak cholinergic antagonist effect of these drugs.

**Treatment**

According to product labeling, a quaternary ammonium anticholinesterase such as neostigmine (which does not cross the blood-brain barrier) can be given to combat peripheral anticholinergic effects parenterally in increments of 0.25 mg in adults. It may be repeated every five to ten minutes until anticholinergic overactivity is reversed or up to a maximum of 2.5 mg. If CNS symptoms (e.g., restlessness, excitement, psychotic behavior, convulsions) are present, physostigmine (which does cross the blood-brain barrier) should be administered. Physostigmine 0.5 to 2 mg can be administered intravenously and repeated up to 5 mg in adults. To combat hypotension, administer IV fluids and pressor agents and supportive care.