Translabial ultrasound is a relatively inexpensive way of evaluating pelvic prolapse and is widely available. Besides, the ultrasound does not produce ionizing radiation and allows dynamic evaluation of the pelvic floor. However, the diagnostic quality of the ultrasound exam depends on the sonographer’s skill level and interpreting radiologist familiarity with the examination. The examination also requires bowel preparation before the start of the exam due to fecal content in the rectum impairing the diagnostic accuracy. Furthermore, the translabial ultrasound is considered a sensitive exam involving genitalia and rectum. Despite the limitations of the exam, the translabial ultrasound is a widely available, safe, and inexpensive way of evaluating pelvic prolapse.

The patient is in the dorsal lithotomy position (hip flexed and abducted). The bladder must be empty before the examination. Using a curved 4 to 8 Mhz transducer, mid-sagittal images of the pelvis are obtained in both resting and with the Valsalva maneuver. Mid-sagittal images of the pelvic organ clearly demonstrate relations of the pelvic organs (bladder, vagina, uterus, and rectum) with the pelvic floor at the level of the pubic symphysis. The examiner can visualize and measure the degree of pelvic prolapse in real-time at rest and with the Valsalva maneuver. Furthermore, the bladder neck undergoes subjective and objective evaluation for hypermobility. Levator ani hiatal area is also calculated with the normal area being less than 25 mm^2. The degree of pelvic prolapse can be quantified based on the levator ani hiatal area as mild (25.0 to 29.9 mm^2), moderate (30.0 to 34.9 mm^2), marked (35.0 to 39.9 mm^2), or severe (greater than or equal to 40 mm^2).