Diagnosis of protein-losing enteropathy should be suspected in patients with hypoproteinemia once the other common causes like severe malnutrition, nephrotic syndrome, or chronic liver diseases have been ruled out. Since the protein loss in PLE occurs independent of their molecular weight, these patients have low albumin and low globulins in their serum. If there are isolated low serum albumin and normal serum globulins, then alternative causes should be considered.

Alpha 1 antitrypsin (A1AT) intestinal clearance is the primary and most common test performed to diagnose PLE. This protein has high molecular weight, is minimally degraded in the gut and is excreted intact. Its clearance is calculated by 24 hr stool collection and measuring A1AT in serum and stool.

Alpha 1-antitrypsin clearance = (stool volume) x (stool alpha 1-antitrypsin)/ (serum alpha-1 antitrypsin).

The normal clearance of A1AT is under 13ml/24 hours. Clearance greater than 27 ml/ day indicates increased gastrointestinal protein loss and points towards the diagnosis of PLE. Clearance is affected by diarrhea. Any condition causing diarrhea leads to increased clearance of A1AT, so the higher threshold of more than 56ml/24 hr should be used in these conditions. Increased stomach acidity and decreased ph lead to increased degradation of A1AT, so the performance of this test should be while the patient is on antacids especially if there is suspicion of hypersecretory state causing increased protein loss. Gastrointestinal bleeding can also cause increased clearance of A1AT.

Other tests like 51Cr-labeled albumin clearance(considered gold standard), technetium 99 labeled serum albumin scintigraphy can also be performed if there is high clinical suspicion of PLE with negative A1AT clearance test. These tests have high sensitivity, but they are very cumbersome, expensive and not readily available so not routinely performed.

Once the diagnosis of PLE is established with increased A1AT clearance, further workup is needed to find the underlying etiology and to guide treatment. Important consideration should be given to the history and physical examination of the patient. Detailed history helps in narrowing down the list of conditions causing hypoproteinemia and PLE and guides the approach towards further work up. Basic labs like complete blood count with differential, liver function tests, renal function tests should be performed in all patients. In cases where symptoms suggest gastrointestinal causes of protein loss, tests for celiac disease, infectious work for chronic intestinal infections, appropriate imaging of abdomen and pelvis, upper and lower gastrointestinal endoscopies with biopsies, capsule endoscopies (if upper and lower endoscopies are unremarkable) should be performed. Autoimmune workup should be ordered if SLE or RA is suspected. Echocardiogram and workup on the lines of heart failure should be done if cardiac causes of PLE is suspected. Fontan procedure in patients with congenital heart disease is a well-known cause of PLE and has been extensively studied