The recommended nitric oxide dosage is 20 ppm(parts per million). It is suggested to maintain treatment for up to fourteen days or until the underlying oxygen desaturation has resolved. After that, the neonate is ready to be weaned off from nitric oxide therapy. Doses higher than 20 ppm are not suggested. It is important to note that nitric oxide must be administered using precisely calibrated delivery and validated ventilator systems. To wean iNO, down titration of dose in multiple steps is required, pausing several hours at each step to monitor for hypoxemia.

**Specific Patient Population**

**Patients with Hepatic Impairment:**The dose adjustment of iNO in patients with hepatic impairment is not provided in the manufacturer's product labeling.

**Patients with Renal Impairment:**The dose adjustment of iNO in patients with renal impairment is not provided in the manufacturer's product labeling.

**Pregnancy Considerations:**Nitric oxide is a maternal and fetal homeostasis regulator during pregnancy, facilitating maternal cardio-vascular changes, fetal development, and growth and adaptation to extrauterine life. Dysfunction of the NO system during pregnancy is associated with placental and vascular-related diseases such as hypertensive disorders of pregnancy and intrauterine growth restriction (IUGR). It is safe to use nitric oxide during pregnancy.

**Breastfeeding Considerations:**Nitric oxide has a very short half-life, so exogenously administered iNO does not reach the breast milk. Although maternal nitrate serum levels may be increased during iNO administration, it does not increase breast milk nitrate levels. Both nitric oxide and nitrate are normal components of human milk, and iNO is administered to newborns by inhalation to manage respiratory failure. Consequently, breastfeeding during maternal nitric oxide inhalation therapy is acceptable.