A thorough understanding of normal and abnormal anatomic conditions in both males and females can improve urinary catheterization success. The male and female urethra consists of four layers. From the inside out, they are:

- Mucosa (inner epithelial lining)

- Spongy submucosa (rich with vasculature)

- Smooth muscle layer

- Outer fibroelastic connective tissue layer

**The Female Urethra**

The female urethra is usually about 5 cm in length and does not normally have any natural curvature, as does the male urethra.

Urethral and vaginal tissue will increase blood flow and tissue elasticity when stimulated by estrogen.

In women, obesity presents an additional challenge to directly visualizing the urethra for catheterization. To ensure adequate exposure of the urethral meatus in obese women, additional support to retract the abdominal pannus and additional lighting may be necessary.

**Prolapse**

Prolapse of the pelvic organs or urethra can create difficulty during urinary catheterization procedures. Pelvic organ prolapse, more common in multiparous white and Hispanic women over 50, occurs when the fascial and muscular attachments to the bladder, urethra, rectum, vaginal vault, or uterus become grossly and microscopically weakened by trauma to the neuromuscular structures, hormonal changes, obesity, smoking, connective tissue disorders, and other undetermined environmental and genetic factors. The prolapse of any of these organs can obscure the view of the urethra meatus, compress the urethra leading to retention, and can change the location and look of the expected anatomy.

**The Male Urethra**

The male urethra is a fibromuscular tube roughly 20 cm long with a 22-24 French meatus.

Areas of narrowing in the male urethra most often occur in the following locations: the fossa navicularis, as a result of strictures caused by instrumentation, infection, or irritation; the bulbar urethra, as a result of urethral strictures caused by trauma, instrumentation, infection, or unknown causes; and the bladder neck, most commonly caused by radiation or prior instrumentation or surgical procedures. Benign prostatic hyperplasia can cause impingement on the prostatic urethra. Hypospadias, duplicated urethras, urethral diverticula, and dorsal pits are other anatomical variations that can lead to difficult catheterization. Urethral duplications exist in several configurations within a sagittal plane and can be complete or incomplete. In a patient with duplicated urethras, the ventral meatus most commonly communicates with the urinary bladder and should be catheterized when necessary.

Hypospadias is the most frequent anatomical variant of the penis and occurs during development when hormonal triggers malfunction and the urethra does not properly tubularize. The urethral meatus can be found anywhere along the glans, penile shaft, scrotum, or perineum, leading to a difficult catheterization. Dorsal pits or neuroectodermal dimples are false urethras that commonly occur in conjunction with urethral duplication and hypospadias. They can appear to be an obstructed urethra upon catheterization when actually they are a blind-ending epithelial-lined false urethra.

When approaching the prostate, the urethra takes a 30-degree ventral turn toward the bladder. This J configuration leaves this portion of the urethra even more susceptible to iatrogenic injury from instruments or surgery, leading to strictures, bleeding, and stenosis. False passages are most commonly created in this location due to forcibly passing a catheter without regard to the changing angle of the urethra. When excessive force is used to place a catheter or introduce instruments, the transition points can be damaged, and the first several layers of the urethra can be perforated. If the catheter or instrument continues to be advanced, a flap of urothelium can be extended, and a false passage is created. Nurses and physicians should take detailed information about prior catheterization attempts; specifically, the type and size of the catheter(s) used, depth of insertion before resistance was encountered, evidence of trauma (e.g., blood on the catheter or at the meatus), and if the catheter balloon may have been inflated in a portion of the urethra versus the urinary bladder at any point.

**Physiology of Difficult****Catheterizations of Males**

**Phimosis**

Phimosis occurs in uncircumcised boys and men when the foreskin is too tight to be retracted below the glans penis. Phimosis can be pathological, characterized by scarring of the preputial tissue due to chronic inflammation generally seen in diabetic men, or it can be physiologic, which is more common in young boys and characterized by healthy tissue underlying a tight foreskin.

**Buried Penis**

It can be challenging to find the meatus in patients with a buried penis, especially if they also have phimosis. The buried penis only needs to be managed sufficiently to expose enough of the glans to visualize the urethral meatus which can often be accomplished by firm pressure around the base of the penis. Further details of dealing with a buried penis are described below under "Technique".

**Meatal Stenosis and Fossa Navicularis Strictures**

From the tip of the penis, one can begin to encounter anatomy that makes catheterization difficult. Examples include stenosis, strictures, phimosis, hypospadias, and dorsal pits. In recent reviews, the most common cause of obstruction of the distal urethra was lichen sclerosis. This disease's etiology is still under debate, but studies note autoimmune, skin injury, viral infections, and inflammation in Littre's glands as possible causes.

**Strictures**

Strictures are the most common cause of difficult catheterization. They create narrowing in the lumen, leading to resistance during catheterization that can be anxiety-provoking to both the health care provider and the patient. This resistance can be overcome with various instruments and techniques outlined in the following sections. Urethral strictures are caused by infection, inflammation, trauma, and instrumentation. When the urethral lumen is injured, regardless of whether the etiology is inflammation, trauma, or surgery, the epithelial layers are disrupted, and inflammatory changes transform tissue planes. In doing so, the urothelial layer's integrity is broken, and the new cells may be less durable than the original urothelium. Once the urothelium is compromised, urine can extravasate into the spongy tissue surrounding the urethra. The spongy tissue's reaction to inflammation is spongiofibrosis, leading to fibrotic plaques that coalesce over time to form strictures.

- **The Penile (Pendulous) Urethra**makes up the majority of the urethral length. It can become difficult to traverse with a catheter due to strictures and false passages. Strictures of the penile urethra are most often caused by overly aggressive instrumentation and inflammation. They can be seen in men with a history of surgeries, injuries, sexually transmitted diseases, urological instrumentation, and urinary infections.

- **The Bulbar Urethra**is the most common site of strictures, generally due primarily to iatrogenic causes like catheterization and trauma such as saddle injuries which crush the urethra between the pelvic bones. Iatrogenic causes occur due to the anatomy at this location. The J configuration of the deep bulbous urethra just distal to the external male sphincter makes it very easy for the unguided insertion of instruments or catheters to proceed straight at that point which would damage or even pierce the posterior wall lumen of the urethra, creating a false passage. This injury then follows the pathway to fibrosis outlined for the strictures discussed above.

- **The Membranous Urethra**represents the external sphincter. Overly aggressive treatment of strictures in this location can easily result in incontinence that can be difficult to treat. Causes include trauma, pelvic radiation therapy, and instrumentation such as transurethral resection of the prostate.

**The Prostatic Urethra**

The prostatic urethra is surrounded by the prostate's lobes, which are prone to hyperplasia, especially in older men. Roughly half of men ages 50 to 60 experience some degree of prostatic hyperplasia, where the median lobe eventually compresses the urethra and causes narrowing and resistance during catheterization. The prostatic urethra is also injured during lithotripsy, cystoscopy, and other urologic procedures when the instrument is passed back and forth over this portion of the urethra multiple times, microvascular injuries that lead to fibrosis and strictures.

**The Bladder Neck**

After prostate surgery or radiation, bladder neck contractures are the most common iatrogenic cause of difficult Foley catheterization in the proximal urethra.

**Physiology of Difficult****Catheterization of the Female**

Though the female urethra is short and pathological strictures are less common, anatomic variations and physiologic changes that occur with menopause and pelvic organ prolapse can make urethral catheterization difficult. In females, lichen sclerosis, atrophy, prolapse, and body habitus contribute to difficult catheterizations.

**Menopause and Atrophy of the Anterior Urethra**

The female vulvovaginal tissue contains estrogen receptors activated to lubricate and maintain the tissue's architecture. Although the mechanisms are not entirely understood, atrophy occurs during menopause as estrogen levels decline. With decreased estrogenization, the elastic, collagen, and smooth muscle tissues lose fullness, elasticity, and support. The urethral meatus is commonly retracted superiorly and inwards, making direct visualization and catheterization more difficult.