**As of January 24, 2022, the United States Food and Drug Associated (FDA) fact-sheet for the drug etesevimab states that "due to the high frequency of the Omicron variant, bamlanivimab and etesevimab, administered together, are not currently authorized for use in any U.S. region because of markedly reduced activity against the Omicron variant. These drugs may not be administered for treatment or post-exposure prevention of COVID-19 under the Emergency Use Authorization until further notice by the Agency." This article is for historical purposes only to review the indications, mechanism, and administration of this therapy when it was first developed.**

Several neutralizing monoclonal antibodies to SARS-CoV-2 (severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2) are under clinical trials. Neutralizing monoclonal antibodies are recombinant proteins derived from the B cells of convalescent patients or humanized mice. Before SARS-CoV-2, monoclonal antibodies were developed to treat several viral infections, such as Ebola, Rabies, and Middle Eastern Respiratory Syndrome Coronavirus (MERS-CoV).

Neutralizing monoclonal antibodies against SARS-CoV2 are available as two combination products.

- Etesevimab and bamlanivimab

- Imdevimab and casirivimab.

The FDA (Food and Drug Administration) has approved both combination products through EUA (Emergency Use Authorizations), which can be used for mild to moderate SARS-CoV-2 in non-hospitalized patients at high risk for progressing to severe disease. FDA has revoked the use of bamlanivimab alone for SARS-COV-2 because of a high number of resistant SARS-CoV-2 strains. The combination product (etesevimab and bamlanivimab) can be used in adults and pediatrics if they are at least 12 years of age and weigh 40 kg or more with mild to moderate SARS CoV-2. The patients are considered high risk of progressing to severe COVID-19 or hospitalization if they satisfy one of the criteria below:

- Body mass index (BMI) 35 and above

- Age above 65 years

- Chronic Renal disease

- Pregnancy

- Diabetes Mellitus

- Immunosuppressive disease or immunosuppressive treatment

- Cardiovascular disease, including congenital heart disease

- Hypertension

- Chronic respiratory disorders, e.g., COPD (chronic obstructive pulmonary disease), Moderate to severe asthma, ILD (interstitial lung disease), and pulmonary hypertension

- Sickle cell disease

- Neurodevelopmental disorders, e.g., cerebral palsy

- Individuals who are medical-related technology-dependent (not related to COVID-19) such as tracheostomy, gastrostomy, or PPV (positive pressure ventilation)

The combination product (bamlanivimab and etesevimab) needs to be given as soon as possible after a positive test result and within ten days of symptom onset. The combination product (etesevimab and bamlanivimab) is not authorized for hospitalized patients with SARS CoV-2 or those patients requiring oxygen therapy.