Treatment decisions are based on the extent of pars plana infiltration, the extent of vasculitis, and coexisting macular edema.

Original Kaplan's four-step ladder approach

- Regional corticosteroid injections followed by oral prednisolone if the regional/periocular steroid is not effective

- Cryotherapy or laser photocoagulation of peripheral retina.

- Pars plana vitrectomy (PPV)

- If all 3 previous options fail, immunosuppressive steroid-sparing agents were considered.

However, in current practice, most of the uveitis-specialists use periocular (subtenon)/intraocular and/or oral steroids for pars planitis. Subtenon triamcinolone or intravitreal triamcinolone or other steroid implants (Ozurdex) are usually considered in asymmetrically severe intermediate uveitis with cystoid macular edema. In bilateral cases, one eye may be followed by another periocular or intravitreal steroid which avoids the systemic side effects of steroids. The risk of glaucoma and cataract must be explained to the patient before any intervention with periocular or intraocular steroid.  Topical steroid drop is started only if there are significant anterior chamber cells,

In bilateral cases, unilateral cases not responding to periocular or intraocular steroid, and severe pars planitis, oral prednisolone is started in a dose of 1-1.5mg/kg/day.

Immunomodulatory therapy should be considered as a second step in patients who need longer immunosuppression. Commonly used steroid-sparing immunomodulatory agents include methotrexate, mycophenolate mofetil (MMF), azathioprine, and cyclosporine.

Anti-tumor necrosis factor agents or biologicals are used as the third step in patients nor responding to conventional immunomodulatory therapy. Adalimumab is the biologic response modifier a tumor necrosis factor (TNF) inhibitor which has been approved for the treatment of noninfectious uveitis. Anti-TNF agents may predispose to demyelination and patients with pars planitis may be at a higher risk of developing multiple sclerosis irrespective of therapy. Thus extreme caution should be used and risk-benefit ratio evaluated before starting a pars planitis patient on an anti-TNF agent. Interferon has also been used successfully in pars planitis, but adverse drug effects include depression and suicidal tendencies.

PPV comprises the 4th step

Peripheral scatter laser photocoagulation is effective in the treatment of peripheral neovascularization associated with pars planitis. Cryotherapy is another option for peripheral neovascularization, but is painful and may predispose to the development of retinal detachment.

Cataract surgery: Cataract formation is one of the most common complications of pars planitis. Cataract extraction is safe if the intraocular inflammation is controlled with corticosteroids or immunosuppressives for a minimum of three months before surgery.