**Relevant Definitions**

In any academic conversation, it is critical to ensure that all participants understand the shared lexicon. This is even more important concerning the topic of competency and capacity - an ethically and legally charged subject, that if not understood or executed properly can contribute to patient harm and legal action against medical providers.

Capacity is defined as "a functional determination that an individual is or is not capable of making a medical decision within a given situation"

Competency is defined as “the ability of an individual to participate in legal proceedings”. Legal competence is presumed - to disprove an individual's competence requires a hearing and presentation of evidence. Competence is determined by a judge

A Tort is defined as "an act, or omission of an act, that results in injury or harm to an individual. This is a volitional act done with intent to cause harm or suffering"

Informed Consent is defined as "the systematic approach to patient education and medical decision-making regarding a particular treatment or procedure"

A Medical Provider is, in the context of this article, limited to licensed physicians (MD, DO), physician assistants, and advanced degree nurse practitioners. This term is herein limited because these are the medical professionals who are legally permitted to assess and document mental capacity for medical decision-making.

**Ethical Principles Involved**

When graduating from medical school, all new physicians recite the Hippocratic Oath. The Oath, regarded as one of the earliest expressions of medical ethics in the Western World, instructs physicians 1) to use medical education for the benefit of all, 2) to abstain from intentional wrongdoing or harm to patients, and 3) to hold secret the information learned about patients. Over the years, these instructions have been reduced to the common aphorism of "first do no harm".

The Belmont Report of 1976 builds from this principle of “first do no harm” and gives physicians an ethical basis from which to build their clinical practice. Spurred by incidents of unethical medical practice (e.g. The Tuskegee Syphilis Study), the Belmont Report explains and extends three fundamental ethical principles that the practitioner must use as a guide to the ethical practice of medical practice

1. Respect for Persons: The root ethical principle here counsels the practitioner to uphold and allow for patient autonomy. This includes allowing all appropriate patients the opportunity for informed consent before receiving medical treatment or undergoing procedures.

2. Beneficence: This term is the modern equivalent for Hippocrates'  concept of "do no harm". In practice, the ethical issue addressed examines the risk/benefit ratio of the proposed medical treatment, while simultaneously 1) maximizing patient benefit and 2) minimizing harm or discomfort. This involves both making decisions to benefit the patient, as well as taking affirmative steps to prevent or remove harm from the patient. What is beneficial for the patient is highly personal and multi-faceted, and involves consideration of the patient's medical prognosis as well as multiple subjective factors, such as goals of care, quality of life, financial considerations, family input, etc. 3. Justice: The overarching philosophy of this principle instructs the practitioner to ensure fair end equitable distribution of medical resources regardless of demographics, insurance status, socioeconomic status, mental disability, etc. Keep in mind that "physician paternalism" (here defined as "the policy of restricting the freedom and responsibility of patients against their will, and defended by a claim that the person interfered with will be better off or protected from harm") is not in service of these ethical principles. Coercion into the course of action that the provider thinks is best neither respects patient autonomy nor upholds the principle of beneficence. Truly bringing these principles into daily practice involves taking the time to communicate your findings and recommendations to the patient, actively listening to their questions and concerns, and making a shared decision. Ultimately, this decision may not agree with what the provider thinks is best. Supporting that decision, if appropriate, is part of practicing respect for patient autonomy.