Craniofacial osteogenesis can be divided into four phases:

**Initial Osteotomy/Distractor Placement:**Surgery is required to create an osteotomy in the desired bone and to place the distractor devices. Occasionally an osteotomy does not need to be made as an existing suture line can be used (cranial vault distraction, rapid palate expansion). Distraction will occur in a plane perpendicular to that of the osteotomy. Once the osteotomy has been performed, the device is attached and tested under direct visualization to ensure unrestricted movement of the bony segments. Distractors can be either internal or external, depending on the anatomic site and goals of surgery, as discussed above.

**Latency Phase:**After osteotomy and device placement, the device is not activated for a period of 24 hours to five days, depending on the site of the desired distraction. This latency period allows for bone healing to begin by way of the formation of a soft callus.

**Active Distraction Phase:**Over a period of days to weeks, the distraction device is slowly activated, usually once or twice daily. This process provides incremental traction on the bony callus, leading to osteogenesis. This phase is continued until the desired lengthening is achieved, often with a degree of overcorrection to account for some relapse.

**Consolidation Phase**: The distractor is left in place for several weeks following a distraction. During this time period, the immature primary bone created will mineralize, and eventually resemble mature secondary bone. The immobile distractor provides rigid fixation of the bony segments, allowing bony remodeling to continue and maturation into the ossified bone. After the consolidation phase, the device is removed.

**Mandibular Distraction:**The most common indication for mandibular distraction is lengthening of the mandibular body in neonates and children with airway compromise due to severe micrognathia or retrognathia. For this indication, the osteotomy should be placed at the junction of the mandibular body and angle to avoid injury to tooth buds. The lateral, superior, and inferior cortices of the mandible are cut (both traditional saws and piezo-electric/ultrasonic cutters can be used), and a bone spreader is used to fracture and release the posterior cortex. This is to avoid injury to the inferior alveolar neurovascular bundle in its canal. The osteotomy can be made via and intra-oral, extra-oral, or combined approach. The desired device is then affixed to the bone segments proximally and distally and tested to ensure free mobility across the osteotomy.

Preoperative assessment of the relationship of the maxillary and mandibular alveolar arches allows measurement of the discrepancy; when calculating the distance to be distracted, plan for significant overcorrection. The goal should be at least end-to-end occlusion of the arches, though outright over projection of the mandibular alveolar arch is desirable, as significant relapse occurs after mandibular distraction in this vector. The latency phase for neonatal mandibular distraction is 24 hours, and the neonatal mandible can be distracted at a rate of 1 to 2 mm/day. It is practically very difficult to distract more than 20 mm in a neonatal mandible due to soft-tissue constraints. The consolidation phase lasts 4-6 weeks, and then the devices are removed.

**Midfacial Distraction:**Distraction osteogenesis can be used for LeFort advancements as well as monobloc advancements, and both internal and external devices exist. For LeFort 1 advancements, intraoral incisions are planned via a midfacial degloving approach. The osteotomies are made horizontally across the inferior face of the maxilla, taking care not to injure the tooth roots. The maxillary crest is separated from the inferior nasal septum, and the pterygoid plates are separated from the maxilla with an osteotome. Preoperative cephalometry calculations determine the degree of advancement required (virtual surgical planning can also be used). The distractor is then affixed and tested to ensure the unimpinged motion of the maxilla. The consolidation period is five days, and the rate of distraction is 1 mm/day. Internal devices are used for LeFort 1 advancement almost exclusively, and the consolidation phase lasts eight weeks, at which point the devices can be removed.

LeFort 3 and monobloc advancements require a bicoronal incision, which is then extended down over the nasofrontal suture, superior and lateral orbital rims, and zygomatic arches. For LeFort 3 advancement, osteotomies include an osteotomy at the nasofrontal suture extended laterally and inferiorly along the medial and inferior orbital walls. This is extended through the lateral orbital rim. An osteotomy is then made through the zygomatic arch. An osteotomy must then be made through the pterygoid plates intraorally, as in a LeFort 1, and an osteotomy is made through the nasal septum. This mobilizes the entire midface, separating it from the anterior skull base. Internal and external devices are both routinely used. Internal devices are affixed to the zygomatic arch/orbital rim junction on the midface and the temporal bone.

External devices use brackets or circum-zygomatic wires that are brought out percutaneously through the anterior cheek skin. These are joined to an external halo device, which is firmly anchored percutaneously to the temporoparietal skull. With the devices attached, a test should be performed to ensure no impingement is present, and the mobile midface does indeed move. The consolidation period is five days, and the rate of distraction is 1 mm/day. Internal devices are used for LeFort 1 advancement almost exclusively, and the consolidation phase lasts eight weeks, at which point the devices can be removed.

**Cranial Vault Distraction:**Distraction osteogenesis can be utilized to expand the cranial vault in patients with craniosynostosis. It is most useful in patients with single or dual suture synostosis, while multi-suture or pan-suture synostosis will typically require formal total cranial vault remodeling. Additionally, distraction is not often used for metopic synostosis as significant re-shaping of the frontal bones, and orbital advancement is often required concurrently. The incision will depend on the suture involved, though a bicoronal incision is standard unless a minimally-invasive approach is used for a strip craniectomy. Once the synostotic suture is exposed, burr holes are made, and the dura released from the intracranial surface with gentle dissection with Woodson elevators. The osteotomy is then made across the synostotic suture. Internal distraction devices are used almost universally for cranial vault distraction. The device is applied and tested to ensure mobility. The latency period ranges from five days in young children (under two years old) to 10 days (16 years and older). The rate of distraction is 1 mm/day in young children and 0.5 mm/day in teens/adults, and the consolidation phase is eight weeks.

A more common, and more involved, variant is posterior cranial vault distraction. This is employed in craniosynostosis or other conditions that increase intracranial pressure, but where frontocranial distraction is not possible or has failed. Such anterior distraction is inherently limited by the position of the eyes. Posterior cranial vault distraction creates osteotomies that do not correspond exactly to an anatomic suture. It is a coronal osteotomy beginning in the posterior aspect of the parietal bone, extending from the sagittal suture to the anion, then directed infero-posteriorly to the inion. This releases the posterior skull, and multiple distractor devices are then placed (usually two or three devices are used) as described above. The parameters of distraction are the same as above. Utilizing this technique, the intracranial volume can be expanded by as much as 35%.