The pathophysiology of lymphocytosis varies by etiology. Increased lymphocyte production may be either due to a clonal process or a reactive process. Also, redistribution of lymphoid cells may be the primary etiology in some patients presenting with lymphocytosis. The mechanism of some of the most common causes follows:

- EBV: During the early stages of IM, EBV infects resting B-cells, and a large number of infected B cells circulate the blood. The atypical lymphocytes, however, are activated cytotoxic CD8+ cells that appear 1 to 3 weeks after onset of symptoms. In the patients infected with EBV, memory B-cells are latently infected and lead to chronic infection with possible reactivation and predisposition to lymphoproliferative disorders.

- Pertussis: the mechanism of lymphocytosis in pertussis may be due to decreased extravasation of lymphocytes from peripheral blood to lymphoid organs and/or expansion of morphologically normal CD4+ T cells.

- Congenital B-cell lymphocytosis: as discussed above, this is related to mutations in CARD11, a scaffolding protein required for nuclear factor Kappa B (NF-KB) in both B and T lymphocytes.

- CLL: several genetic and chromosomal lesions paly a role in the malignant development of CLL B lymphocytes, in addition to antigens that could play a role in malignant cell selection. Examples of genetic mutations include NOTCH1, a regulator of hematopoietic progenitor cells differentiation, and TP53, a tumor suppressor gene. A full appraisal of the pathogenesis of this disorder is beyond the scope of this review.

- NHL: several chromosomal abnormalities are present, depending on the type of lymphoma. Classic examples include t(11,14) in MCL and associated overexpression of cyclin D1, a cell cycle regulator, and t(14,18) in FL, leading to overexpression of BCL2, an anti-apoptotic protein.