The equipment required for the closure of lacerations can vary depending on the location and characteristics of the wound. Necessary supplies required for any laceration repair include but are not limited to the local anesthetic drawn up with a small gauge needle (greater than 27 gauge), needle holders, forceps, scissors, gauze, and the appropriate closure device (suture, staple, glue) for the wound.

The selection of local anesthetic is dependent on patient allergies, accessibility, and location of the injury. True allergies to anesthetics are rare. If there is a concern for amide allergies, the use of ester anesthetics or preservative-free amides should be options as reactivity is thought to be due to the preservatives. The use of epinephrine with local anesthetic was previously cautioned in fingers, toes, nose, penis, and ears. However, current research shows the concerns of local ischemia to be unsupported.

The selection of repair material varies based on the location, depth, length, and width of the laceration. The decision between absorbable and nonabsorbable sutures will depend on the depth and method planned for closure. Current studies have shown that the selection of absorbable gut vs. nonabsorbable suture materials in the external closure of lacerations produces similar infection rates and aesthetic outcomes over the long term.

The use of staples for the closure of scalp lacerations is a quick and secure method of care.

The use of staples for the closure of scalp lacerations is a quick and secure method of care. Due to the higher risk of scarring, staples should only be used on thicker skin and when appropriate, follow up can be obtained for their removal.

Also of note, the use of sterile vs. nonsterile gloves has been examined by many studies, and found that due to the contaminated nature of lacerations at presentation, there is no statistical difference in infection with the use of nonsterile gloves.