Postpartum depression presents as one of the most common complications after childbirth and can be a significant cause of suffering for the mother, infant, siblings, and family.

Several studies have demonstrated the peripartum fluctuations in reproductive hormones; most importantly, allopregnanolone (the primary progesterone metabolite) play a pivotal role in the etiology of postpartum depression.

Since allopregnanolone has poor aqueous solubility, oral bioavailability, and rapidly metabolized, an aqueous intravenous formulation, brexanolone, a proprietary of allopregnanolone, has been in development for the treatment of postpartum depression. To this date, one phase 2 and two phase 3 randomized, double-blind placebo-controlled trials have been conducted, showing promising results of brexanolone in the treatment of postpartum depression. All clinical trials showed a substantial reduction in the Hamilton Rating Scale for Depression [HAM-D] at 60 hours compared with the placebo; there was a rapid onset of action and sustained response during the treatment period with brexanolone.

The most common adverse effects in phase 3 trials were headache, dizziness, and somnolence; therefore, close monitoring is required during infusion treatment with brexanolone. Although the incidence of dizziness and somnolence were higher in the brexanolone treatment group, the events were typically mild and did not require discontinuation of treatment.

Although these trials showed promising results, there are few limitations. The generalizability of brexanolone to the wider population is yet to be determined as the trials have focused on women with moderate to severe postpartum depression. No data exists on the effects of brexanolone after the completion of a 30-day follow-up period.

Despite these limitations, brexanolone is the first therapeutic drug to be approved by the FDA, specifically for the treatment of postpartum depression. More large-scale clinical trials are needed to determine the long-term safety and efficacy of brexanolone in the treatment of postpartum depression.

Administration of brexanolone requires the effort of an interprofessional team consisting of physicians, specialists, specialty-trained nurses, and pharmacists, communicating and collaborating to bring about the optimal therapeutic results in these cases. Pharmacy needs to verify the dosing and administration schedule and check for potential drug-drug interactions and let nursing know if any red flags are present. Nursing will administer the medication and must watch for signs of intolerance or adverse reactions as the dose titrates upward, and inform the ordering clinician if they notice any issues so that therapy can be discontinued or modified. Only through this type of interprofessional teamwork can brexanolone be effective in treating postpartum depression. [Level 5]