Improving overall outcomes and achieving high-quality results requires joint efforts and full participation from patients and healthcare teams. Health care professionals must exercise concerted efforts in early detection of symptoms, triaging, and providing an expedited workup for patients with suspected spinal cord injuries. Proper and effective communication must take place between the interprofessional team, including emergency physicians, neurologists, neuroradiologists, neurosurgeons, other specialists, physiatrists, and specialized nursing staff to achieve higher quality care. Nurses who manage patients with spinal cord infarction should be aware of the potential complications like urinary retention, pressure sores, DVT, and contractures. The dietitian should be involved in the management of nutrition.

Pharmacist involvement comes with the initiation of antiplatelet or anticoagulation therapy. The pharmacist can verify dosing, check for drug interactions, and help change agents where any contraindications exist. They can also assist nursing in the monitoring of pharmaceutical therapy. These activities will be reported to the managing physician, especially in the event of any issues encountered.

The rehabilitation phase involves direct medical care from physiatrists and nursing staff. The nursing staff has a crucial role in monitoring ventilation and lung function, monitor cardiovascular function, stable blood pressure, and prevent infections and other complications from occurring. The patients’ effort during the rehabilitation period has a considerable impact on the recovery process. Only through such an interprofessional team approach can the morbidity of spinal cord infarction be lowered and patient outcomes optimized. [Level 5]