Nerve compression of the hand is a relatively common occurrence in the general population, especially with carpal tunnel syndrome. Because of the varied presentation and difficult diagnosis, the syndromes are best managed by an interprofessional team. Clinicians need to diagnose these conditions carefully with the patient’s history and physical examination. The importance of a physical exam cannot be stressed enough as the compressive syndromes of the hand need to be distinguished from other compressive syndromes that occur more proximally in the upper extremity or the cervical spine; this will help guide the clinician to the appropriate level of compression. Additional factors that merit consideration include external sources of compression, anatomic abnormalities, and the presence of systemic disease.

Management of nerve compression syndromes typically begins with non-operative management. These modalities include rest, activity modification, use of non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs), splinting, and physical therapy. Corticosteroid injections are another option that can be offered to patients to help improve symptoms. The majority of cases will respond well with these conservative treatments, but these compressive syndromes can be progressive and may eventually require surgical intervention. Patients need to understand that symptom reversal is gradual after treatment. Physical therapy is a useful treatment approach in many patients, but requires patience as symptom reversal and restoration of function is time-dependent. Patients with pain may need to be managed by a pain specialist and a pharmacist; the key is to avoid opioids, so the pharmacist should work collaboratively with the clinician to determine the best medication regimen for pain relief while minimizing adverse events. Nursing can monitor progress along with the clinician, provide patient counseling, and check for adverse events; in the event any red flags present, the nurse should report to the clinician and/or pharmacist as appropriate. They can also serve as a bridge or contact point to the managing clinician for any other therapists (e.g., PT, OT) on the case. This type of interprofessional team approach will provide optimal patient results while minimizing morbidity and adverse outcomes. [Level V]

There is moderate evidence to support the effectiveness of surgical intervention in specific instances. However, in some cases, recurrence may be an issue if there is no lifestyle alteration.