The anatomy of the forearm can be broken down into osteology, musculature, and neurovascular structures.

The osteology of the forearm is composed of the radius and ulna. The radius is a cylindrical long bone which has a bow within the shaft, whereas the ulna is purely a straight bone with a triangular cross-section. This bow in the radius allows for rotation of the radius around a stationary ulna bone thus allowing for pronation and supination of the forearm.

The musculature of the forearm can be broken down into the anterior and posterior compartment. The anterior compartment is composed of the flexor muscles. The superficial flexors include the pronator teres, flexor carpi radialis, palmaris longus, flexor digitorum superficialis and flexor carpi ulnaris. The deep flexors include the flexor digitorum profundus, flexor pollicis longus and pronator quadratus. The posterior compartment is composed of the extensor muscles. The superficial extensors include the anconeus, extensor digitorum communis, extensor digit minimi and extensor carpi ulnaris. There is a subdivision within the superficial extensors called the "mobile wad" which is composed of the brachioradialis, extensor carpi radialis longus and extensor carpi radialis brevis. The deep extensors include supinator, abductor pollicis longus, extensor pollicis brevis, extensor pollicis longus and extensor indicis proprius.

The nervous structures located within the forearm include the median, radial, ulnar and musculocutaneous nerves. The median nerve comes from the medial and lateral cords of the brachial plexus and provides an only motor function in the forearm. The anterior interosseous nerve is a continuation of the median nerve and provides a motor function in the forearm and volar wrist capsule sensation. The radial nerve comes from the posterior cord of the brachial plexus and provides motor function and sensation to the posterior forearm via the posterior cutaneous nerve of the forearm. The posterior interosseous nerve is a continuation of the radial nerve and provides motor function and dorsal wrist capsular sensation.  The ulnar nerve comes from the medial cord of the brachial plexus and provides purely motor function in the forearm. The musculocutaneous nerve comes from the lateral cord of the brachial plexus and provides the only sensation to the radial aspect of the forearm via the lateral antebrachial cutaneous nerve.

The vascular structures in the forearm include the radial and ulnar arteries, which are a continuation of the brachial artery. Both the radial and ulnar artery continue throughout the forearm and ultimately form the deep and superficial palmar arch, respectively, in the hand.