Irinotecan is a DNA topoisomerase I inhibitor that received approval for use in the United States in 1996.Camptotheca acuminate, and is used as a chemotherapy agent against various solid tumors, such as colorectal, pancreatic, ovarian, and lung cancers.

**FDA-approved Uses**

**Colorectal Cancer**

Colorectal cancer is the third most common cause of cancer mortality in the United States. It constitutes about 10% of worldwide cancer deaths.

Capecitabine, the pro-drug of 5-FU, is also combined with irinotecan for a treatment regimen known as XELIRI. There is insufficient supporting evidence to state whether FOLFIRI or XELIRI works better against colorectal cancer.

Cetuximab, a monoclonal antibody against epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR), is combined with irinotecan for patients with wild-type K-Ras colorectal tumors.

**Pancreatic Cancer**

Pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma has a poor prognosis due to its late stage of presentation, increased susceptibility to metastasizing, and resistance to treatments. Nanoliposomal irinotecan, combined with 5-FU/leucovorin, was approved for the treatment of pancreatic cancer in October 2015. Nanoliposomal irinotecan allows for better pharmacokinetics and biodistribution due to the drug's encapsulation within liposome-based nanoparticles. Because of how aggressive pancreatic cancer is and how recently the approval of this regimen is, there is no set sequencing of therapy to be considered superior. It is up to the provider and the patient's age and status.

**Non-FDA-approved Uses**

**Ovarian Cancer**

Ovarian cancer is the second most common gynecologic malignancy in the United States. To treat ovarian cancer, irinotecan is combined with cisplatin, a platinum analog that cross-links DNA. It is still undergoing clinical trials, but early phase I and phase II trials show response rates of 20% to 25% in patients with recurrent or refractory disease.

**Lung Cancer**

The current chemotherapy regimen for small-cell lung cancer is etoposide and cisplatin. Recent studies have been demonstrating the efficacy of irinotecan with cisplatin. Myelosuppression is the most common side effect with either regimen researchers note it to be worse in patients receiving etoposide and cisplatin. Using irinotecan in place of etoposide, a topoisomerase II inhibitor could allow patients to tolerate the regimen longer and thus improve outcomes.