Atherosclerosis is one of the major causes of coronary heart disease. According to the 2016 CDC data, heart disease is the leading cause of death in the United States. Dietary modifications, weight reduction, and exercise are the first line of defense. Patients at an increased risk of cardiovascular events (cardiovascular death, nonfatal MI, nonfatal stroke, coronary revascularization, or unstable angina) benefit from lipid-lowering medications. It is essential to understand that these drugs are useful in combination with lifestyle modification. These medications can be used for primary or secondary prevention of cardiovascular events. Primary prevention includes patients without prior events but with risk factors such as diabetes mellitus and hypertension. Secondary prevention includes patients with a history of cardiovascular events. The 2018 ACC/AHA guideline emphasizes reducing the risk of ASCVD (atherosclerotic cardiovascular disease) through lipid management.

**Statins:**They are the first line of lipid-lowering drugs, while others, discussed subsequently, are added to increase the efficiency of statins or in cases of statin intolerance or cases of severe hypertriglyceridemia. Statins can lower low-density lipoprotein (LDL) and triglyceride concentrations (at higher doses) while increasing high-density lipoprotein (HDL) concentrations.

**Ezetimibe:**Ezetimibe impairs cholesterol absorption and lowers LDL-C, apolipoprotein B (apo B), and non-HDL in patients with primary hyperlipidemia, mixed hyperlipidemia, and familial hypercholesterolemia (FH).

**Fibrates:**Fibrates are known to decrease triglycerides by as much as 50 percent and also raise HDL by 5 to 20 percent.

**Nicotinic Acid:**Nicotinic acid (niacin) raises high-density lipoprotein cholesterol (HDL-C) significantly, but this has not been shown to improve patient outcomes in patients on statins.

**Bile Acid Sequestrants(BAS):**Bile acid sequestrants include cholestyramine, colestipol, and colesevelam. Bile acids sequestrants are indicated for primary hypercholesterolemia, usually in combination with statins or nicotinic acid. Cholestyramine has been shown to decrease cardiovascular mortality and morbidity by 19% compared to placebo in patients and benefit patients with Type 2 DM by decreasing blood sugar levels.

**PCSK9 Inhibitors:**Proprotein convertase subtilisin/kexin type 9(PCSK9) inhibitors are a new group of drugs approved to lower LDL and have been shown to lower LDL by as much as 60 percent in patients taking statins. FDA has approved alirocumab and evolocumab for adult patients with heterozygous familial hypercholesterolemia or clinical ASCVD who require further lowering of LDL-cholesterol in addition to diet modification and maximally tolerated statin therapy. FDA has also approved evolocumab for adult patients with homozygous familial hypercholesterolemia who require further lowering of LDL-C in addition to other LDL-lowering therapies like statins or ezetimibe.