It is vitally important to keep in mind the unique anatomy of the atlas-axis complex when treating their associated injuries. Unlike the subaxial cervical spine, the C1 to C2 complex does not contain an intervertebral disc; there are unique ligaments that allow for support of the cranium and provide the majority of cervical rotation. There is also a close relationship between the transverse foramen, which carries the vertebral artery through the cervical spine, with the C2 pedicle/pars interarticularis, which may slightly weaken this area allowing for a fracture to occur.

Two hypotheses have been presented for the pathogenesis of Hangman’s fracture:

- **Internal gear hypothesis:**The presence of a trabeculae void and acute transition from the bi-columnar to tri-columnar unit  places the isthmus of the Axis at  increased risk of injury

- **Leaf spring hypothesis:**C2 pedicle is like the shackle in the assembly and therefore the weak link within the same.

The extension compression subtype of Hangman's fracture results from pincer-like compression of the C2 pedicle between adjoining articular processes of C1 and C3. The flexion subtype of Hangman's fracture results following the bending failure of the pedicle over the fulcrum formed by the superior facet of C3.

Multiple grading systems for hangman’s fractures exist; however, the Levine and Edwards classifications are the most widely used.

**Levine and Edwards Classification**

**Specifics**

Angulation in this system is measured as the angle between the inferior endplate of C2 and C3. Anterior subluxation of C2 on C3 greater than 3 mm is a marker for C2 to C3 intervertebral disc disruption. It is important to recognize that this grading system does not apply to the pediatric population.

**Grading**

- Type 1: Less than 3 mm subluxation of C2 on C3, due to axial loading, stable, rigid cervical collar treatment

- Type 2: Disruption of the C2 to C3 disc, posterior longitudinal ligament, greater than 4 mm subluxation, greater than 11 degrees angulation, less than 5 mm requires a reduction in axial traction and halo fixation for 6 to 12 weeks while that greater than 5 mm can require surgery

- Type 2a: Less displacement more angular deformity, flexion injury, unstable, not suitable for axial traction, treatment in halo

- Type 3: C2 to C3 facet capsule disrupted, anterior longitudinal ligament disruption, unstable, may have a deficit, surgical candidates

**Francis Grading System**

**Specifics**

Two factors are considered for the Francis Grading system: angulation and displacement. Angulation is measured by the degree of anterior angulation off the posterior vertebral line drawn straight from the C3 vertebral body. The magnitude of anterolisthesis that measures displacement is graded as either greater than or less than 3.5 mm.

**Grading**

- Type 1: Less than 11 degrees of angulation and less than 3.5 mm of displacement

- Type 2: Greater than 11 degrees of angulation and less than 3.5 mm of displacement

- Type 3: Less than 11 degrees of angulation and greater than 3.5 mm displacement

- Type 4: Greater than 11 degrees of angulation and greater than 3.5 mm of displacement

- Type 5: Complete disc disruption

**Typical versus Atypical Fractures**

It is important to recognize that not all C2, hangman’s type fractures can be described using these classification systems. A typical hangman’s fracture allows for the separation of the anterior elements from the posterior elements of the C2 vertebrae, therefore increasing the available space for the spinal cord. However, in the case of an atypical hangman’s fracture, the posterior aspect of the C2 vertebral body, not the bilateral pars, is involved. This leads to a higher risk of neurologic injury as the space remaining for the spinal cord does not increase secondary to the fracture.

Typical "Hangman's fractures" lead to the separation of the neural arch from C2 bilaterally.

Atypical Hangman's fractures include:

- Coronal vertical fractures involving the posterior aspect of the C2 body.

- Isolated C2-C3 facet dislocation.

- C2-C3 spondylolisthesis following injury to the capsular ligament of the facet joint and posterior spinous ligamentous complex.

- Fractures involving the pedicles.