# Introduction

Standardized or simulated patients (SPs) have become an essential aspect of medical education. They date back to the 1960s when Dr. Howard Barrows of the University of Southern California first utilized them to simulate multiple sclerosis patients and trained them to evaluate learners as well.

# Curriculum Development

The methodology of SP training has been described since 1964, but only recently has there been interest in studying and standardizing the methodology of training.

Role portrayal seeks to ensure that performance between SPs is both consistent and accurate. Clinician involvement is required to review case content, but SPs are also called upon to display both physical and emotional vulnerability. Ensuring a safe psychological environment is a crucial component of training in accurate role portrayal.

Educators often receive training in providing feedback, but SPs fill a unique role. Being able to give feedback on emotional connection, trust, and communication, SPs offer a rare perspective to trainees before their clinical exposure. SP educators may provide specific models of feedback used by institutions or use scripting of oral or written feedback.

SPs may offer formative or summative assessments and are expected to use assessment tools, rubrics, and narrative feedback. Trainees and SPs should have transparency regarding the assessment tools used and should be encouraged to reflect on the process to improve the training for both groups.

Safety and Ethics of Standardized Patient Deployment

The safety and consent of all participants is the first concern in any standardized patient deployment. SPs should be counseled on the expectations of their role and allowed to ask questions and explore the problem space on their own terms. They must have the opportunity to refuse participation or disengage at any time; this is essential even for casual SPs, such as students and residents in "role-playing" scenarios.

Additional considerations abound for children, who are uniquely appealing when they can portray rare pathologies but are uniquely vulnerable. Some have suggested that very young children should not be used at all, though the exact age cutoff is debatable.

# Clinical Significance

SPs have become an integral aspect of healthcare education, and in fact, are a required part of licensure in the United States. Step 2 CS, half of the second licensing exam, is a summative assessment, with medical students performing histories and physicals on multiple SPs. These SPs grade the learners on their interpersonal skills and appropriate questioning and physical examination.

Studies have demonstrated that OSCEs are more reliable in regards to assessing learners than traditional multiple-choice question tests.

# Enhancing Healthcare Team Outcomes

**Patient Communication**

Certain communication domains are either too logistically challenging or emotionally fraught to execute in situ. Most prominently, practicing the disclosure of medical errors and bad news is uniquely accessible to the SP approach. To our knowledge, however, it has not been described outside of a controlled environment, reflecting the complicated psychological challenges associated with “surprise” deployments.

A common theme that arises from exploring these reports is the multimodal integration of SPs with traditional didactic methods rather than the strict replacement of the former for the latter. For instance, one should strongly consider a classroom teaching session on communication best practices before having students engage with simulations. Asynchronous study before the scheduled session is also expected to have comparable benefits. Within the SP segment itself, feedback can be obtained from the SP themself, an independent observer, or participant self-reflection, often with similar accuracy objectively while providing valuable variance in subjective perspectives.

**Clinical**

Perhaps the most ambitious but irreplaceable application of standardized patients is the announced simulated patient, where an SP arrives in a clinic under the full pretense of a routine visit. In such cases, there is no pre-brief or other announcement that the encounter is an educational or assessment tool. The benefit is that the entire medical staff is no longer subject to the Hawthorne effect -- the changes in behavior thought to arise from knowing one is being observed.performance during overt assessments differs substantially from true competence, a term which refers to actual clinical practice.In situ, unannounced SPs are perhaps the only means by which a health system can accurately assess the latter on an individual basis.

Incognito SPs (ISPs), as they are sometimes called, have proven remarkably effective for identifying deficits in care across numerous types of providers and expansive geographic ranges. An assessment of the literature yields examples of ISPs in Western nations, Kenya, India, and China, to name a few, consistently demonstrating discrepancies between physician behavior and national guidelines or specialty best-practices, as well as shortcomings in physical exam skills.

Special logistical considerations apply to the use of unannounced SPs. Health care personnel should be informed ahead of time that such patients will be deployed. This step is as much to ensure buy-in with the educational goals as it is about providing informed consent. People are unlikely to respond to feedback well if completely unaware of the project.

The adoption of a rigorous SP program requires substantial resources, both upfront and on an ongoing basis. This likely explains why they are prevalent in the literature in small studies, but it is exceedingly difficult to find descriptions of sustained projects within a health system. This fact may relate to the absence of evidence demonstrating long-term benefits in outcome-oriented or financial metrics. However, this calculus may change as reimbursement increasingly ties to guideline adherence and patient satisfaction, not to mention the fact that patient satisfaction and doctor-patient communication are the key elements in preventing lawsuits. One must wonder how much more evidence is necessary to warrant programs that are known to identify shortcomings in all these domains, especially as large health systems become the norm in the medical landscape and have both the resources and institutional motivation for ongoing quality checks.