Alogliptin is available as a 6.25 mg, 12.5 mg, and 25 mg oral tablet taken once daily without regard to food.

The standard dosing for patients with type 2 diabetes mellitus is 25 mg by mouth daily. A reduced dose of insulin or the secretagogue may be necessary for patients who are also taking insulin and/or secretagogues (i.e., sulfonylureas, meglitinides).

No dosage adjustment is necessary for patients with mild renal impairment (creatinine clearance [CrCl] greater than 60 mL/min); however, the total daily dose should be reduced to 12.5 mg once daily if CrCl is between 30 to 60 mL/min, and further reduced to 6.25 mg once daily if CrCl is between 15 to 30 mL/min. For patients with CrCl less than 15 mL/min or patients requiring hemodialysis, the dose should be reduced to 6.25 mg daily, and administration can be without regard to the timing of hemodialysis. There are no recommendations for adjusting the dose in patients with hepatic impairment.

In patients with hepatic impairment, dosing for Child-Pugh Class A or B requires no dose adjustment; dosing for Child-Pugh Class C is undefined.

As mentioned above, there are also formulations of alogliptin in combination with metformin and pioglitazone. Alogliptin-metformin is available in strengths of 12.5-500 mg and 12.5-1000 mg, and dosing is twice daily. Alogliptin-pioglitazone is available in strengths of 12.5-15 mg, 12.5-30 mg, 12.5-45 mg, 25-15 mg, 25-30 mg, and 25-45 mg and is taken once daily.

Alogliptin is not currently approved for use in pediatric patients.