In children, a history will need to be elicited from a parent or primary caregiver. For example, OSA questions will be addressed to the adult accompanying the child and focus on inquiries involving a history of snoring with apneic episodes and either tiredness or hyperactivity the following day. Children with OSA due to adenotonsillar hypertrophy are described as ‘mouth-breathers’ by parents. As previously mentioned, children can have various symptoms suggestive of OSA, such as hyperactivity and enuresis.

For adults with OSA, history can be slightly different. These patients complain of frequently waking at night and feeling unrefreshed the next day despite having spent the full night in bed. They often have a high BMI and complain of hypersomnolence. Their cohabitants will often complain that they snore.

It is crucial to identify a patient with acute upper airway obstruction.  Respiratory distress can quickly lead to respiratory failure without appropriate management.  An urgent and comprehensive assessment of ABC’s (airway, breathing, and circulation) must be performed while also ensuring the patient is in a safe environment. Approaches differ depending on the patient's presentation.

Every effort should be made to complete an efficient ENT examination in patients at risk of upper airway obstruction, where safe and possible. Often, history and examination can take place simultaneously.

**General Inspection**

As with all patients, a general examination of body habitus, facial features (paying close attention to any syndromic features), and respiratory effort should take place as part of the comprehensive exam. Mental status should be noted. Any signs of tobacco use or signs of drug or alcohol intoxication or dependence should be assessed.

**Children**

Children in respiratory distress may show increased work of breathing via the use of accessory muscles. They also can present with nasal flaring, tracheal tug, intercostal and subcostal recession, and grunting.

**Adults**

Tachypnea and a feeling of shortness of breath, including failure to complete sentences, can signal respiratory distress in adults. In recurrent respiratory papillomatosis, an adult may present with chronic dysphonia and shortness of breath, which may progress to stridor. They may present with acute respiratory distress; however, in this scenario, they will have acute on chronic symptoms.

**Anterior Rhinoscopy**

It is important to assess for septal deviation, hypertrophy of the nasal turbinates, or nasal polyposis during anterior rhinoscopy. A quick test to prove choanal patency can be performed by asking the patient to exhale nasally onto a cold metal spatula (‘nasal misting test’).

**Oral Cavity**

The oral cavity should also be thoroughly examined, paying close attention to any signs of micrognathia, edema of the lips, trismus, floor of mouth or tongue edema, tumor or palatal fullness with uvular deviation, as in the case of a peri-tonsillar abscess.

**Additional Examination**

A cardiorespiratory examination should take place when appropriate. Basic vital signs, i.e., pulse, respiratory rate, blood pressure, and O2 saturation, should occur initially as part of the ABCs of assessment. Any noisy breathing and quality of the breathing, including dysphonia, should be noted.