Beta-1 blockade toxicity typically presents with the triad of bradycardia, hypotension, and altered mental status. These signs are sometimes accompanied by a state of hypoglycemia and hyperkalemia, though not always. Clinicians and other caregivers must remember that in an overdose, beta-1 blockers can lose their selectivity; this means bronchopulmonary symptoms may be present. Additionally, neurologic functioning can be impaired, resulting in altered mental status in toxicity with highly lipophilic beta-1 blockers like propranolol, acebutolol, and oxprenolol. Suspected cardio-selective beta-1-blocker toxicity needs to be verified with a meticulous history, and physical examination focused on identifying specific medications ingested and any co-ingestions that could affect patient treatment.

Immediate monitoring of blood pressure with a blood pressure cuff and cardiac electrical activity with an EKG is necessary. Acquiring blood glucose levels, a basic metabolic panel, and acetaminophen and salicylate levels help identify sequelae of beta-1-blocker overdose and toxicity, as well as identifying any medications that may have been co-ingested. In severely hypotensive patients, one should consider obtaining a lactate level due to the possibility of mesenteric ischemia. Patients being treated within 1 to 2 hours of ingestion may benefit from activated charcoal, or gastric lavage may be necessary for patients who present immediately after large ingestions or with severe adverse symptoms.

Intravenous fluid administration for treatment of hypotension and intravenous glucagon to antagonize beta-1-blocker effects are the initial reversal agents of choice for beta-1-blocker toxicity. Following the administration of glucagon and crystalloid fluids, the patient may require calcium and sodium bicarbonate which is indicated for QRS widening and magnesium sulfate for QTc prolongation.

Glucagon reverses the actions of beta-blockade. Its actions increase contractility, heart rate, and conduction through the atrioventricular node. It works by binding the G-protein coupled receptor (Gαs-coupled proteins). This increases cAMP levels through adenylate cyclase, which in turn stimulates activation of protein kinase A (PKA).

Propranolol overdoses are especially life-threatening. Sotalol overdoses require prolonged monitoring due to the possibility of QT interval prolongation and the potential for torsades de pointes. Patients suspected of overdosing with either of these cardio-selective beta-blockers should be treated more aggressively. Patient monitoring is recommended for at least 6 hours in asymptomatic, unintentional beta-1-blocker overdose cases. In cases of overdose with propranolol, monitoring is advised for at least 12 hours. In circumstances of sotalol overdose, monitoring for 24 hours is preferable due to the potential late-onset cardiac effects.