Autonomic dysreflexia is a condition that emerges soon after a spinal cord injury, usually when the damage has occurred at or above the T6 level. It is generally defined as a syndrome in susceptible spinal cord injured patients that incorporates a sudden, exaggerated reflexive increase in blood pressure in response to a stimulus, usually bladder or bowel distension, originating below the level of the neurological injury. It is usually accompanied by a severe headache, bradycardia, and facial flushing, along with pallor, cold skin, and sweating in the lower part of the body. It is significant because it is a potentially lethal disorder that occurs in about half or more of the potentially susceptible individuals but can usually be easily alleviated by prompt recognition and relatively simple corrective procedures by caregivers.

The higher the level of the spinal cord injury and the more complete, the greater the risk of developing autonomic dysreflexia. Up to 90% of patients with cervical spinal or high-thoracic spinal cord injury are susceptible to the disorder. Dysregulation of the autonomic nervous system leads to an uncoordinated autonomic response that may result in a potentially life-threatening hypertensive episode when there is a noxious stimulus below the level of the spinal cord injury. In about 85% of cases, this stimulus is from a urological source such as a urinary tract infection (UTI), a distended bladder, or a clogged Foley catheter. There is a significantly increased risk of stroke by 300% to 400%. Autonomic dysreflexia can occur in susceptible individuals up to 40 times per day. Patients with traumatic spinal injuries with autonomic dysreflexia have a significantly higher death rate than similarly injured individuals without the disorder.

The initial presenting complaint is usually a severe headache, typically described as throbbing. Susceptible individuals, usually with spinal cord lesions at or above T6, who complain of a severe headache should immediately have their blood pressure checked. If elevated, a presumptive diagnosis of autonomic dysreflexia can be made.

Fortunately, most episodes are relatively mild and can be managed at home by the patient and their usual caregivers without acute medical intervention. Severe, life-threatening episodes are rarely encountered by most medical personnel except those who work in specialized tertiary care centers. This means that many medical professionals, even emergency personnel, may rarely see this condition acutely in its most severe form and may therefore not be familiar with its early recognition or immediate treatment protocol.