The history given by the patient may vary from being asymptomatic to having unilateral ocular pain or discomfort and dimness of vision. If symptomatic, recurrent episodes may be experienced. Haloes that may be seen around a light reflect the presence of corneal epithelial edema, which can be associated with a severe increase in intraocular pressure (IOP). It is usual for the patient to have repeated episodes in the same eye, but bilateral presentations have also been reported.

An ocular examination is critical to making the diagnosis of PSS. Findings during an attack vary considerably. In some cases, vision may be normal, whereas extreme poor vision to counting finger or light perception may be the presentation if IOP significantly increases with corneal epithelial edema. The IOP will be elevated to as high as 40 mm of Hg or above during an attack.

Peripheral anterior synechiae are not seen despite the intraocular inflammation. There are reports of angle abnormalities such as anteriorly displaced Schwalbe's line and prominent iris process.****PSS has been reported in a 20-year-old patient with Axenfeld anomaly.

Evidence of intraocular inflammation usually appears after the IOP has been elevated for days to weeks. If examined using a slit-lamp biomicroscope, one will notice anterior chamber reaction with the occurrence of fine, non-granulomatous keratic precipitates (KPs). In cases with CMV infection, there could be associated endotheliitis. Endotheliitis is seen as a coin-like opacity appreciated on the cornea.

Optic disc findings are significant in PSS. In several cases, the optic disc appears normal during an acute attack. Also, the optic disc may show decreased perfusion during the episode of elevated intraocular pressure.****Over an extended period and with the protracted rise in IOP, permanent glaucomatous damage may occur. In some cases, open-angle glaucoma eventually ensues. Another clinical sign observed after recurrent or prolonged episodes of PSS is iris atrophy.****Posterior synechiae are, however, not a clinical feature of PSS. A uveitic cataract may occur after prolonged intraocular inflammation.