The patient is taken to the operating room. All preoperative lines are placed ( Cordis, Swan Ganz, A-line). A midline sternotomy is performed with the division of the thymus and opening of the pericardium. Heparin can then be given, and the level is confirmed by an activated clotting time. The ascending aorta is then visualized, and a place for cannulation is decided. Aortic cannulation is then carried out with the placement of venous bi-caval cannulation. A vent catheter can then be placed. The cooling of the patient then ensues. Once the patient reaches the desired temperature, the aorta can be cross-clamped, and the cardioplegia can be given.

Aortotomy for AVR is oblique, extending into the non-coronary sinus. The aortotomy can be further elongated to the annulus but not through it because widening the apex with pericardium permits the insertion of a rather larger valve. Further extension of the incision beyond the aortic annulus onto the anterior mitral leaflet can lead to a larger valve to be inserted. Once across the annulus, the incision is directed posteriorly towards the center of the anterior leaflet of the mitral valve. A teardrop-shaped patch of the autologous or bovine pericardium is sutured to the base of the incision with a 4-0 polypropylene suture, with the broader end of the patch at the apex.

After completion of the suture line above the level of the divided annulus, the valve prosthesis is sutured in situ in a supra-annular position with 2-0 pledged mattress separate sutures. Sutures of the valve are passed full-thickness from outside the patch to inside. The outstanding part of the patch is then accustomed to facilitate closure of the aortotomy. Possible restriction of leaflet motion may be expected when a bileaflet mechanical prosthesis is inserted with this technique; therefore, leaflet mobility must be thoroughly inspected. It may be needed to rotate the prosthesis to reach optimal valve closure.