Lumbar disc herniations (LDH) are a relatively common and early manifestation of degeneration of the lumbar spine. The reported incidence of LDH is 2% ~3% and the prevalence is around 12%.

The most common site of LDH is at L4–L5 and/or L5–S1.

Surgery for LDH accounts for the most common indication for performing spinal surgery.

Relevant pathophysiology involves extrusion of the central nucleus pulposus through the compromised outer annulus fibrosus. Symptoms are thought to result from a multifactorial mechanism with components of noxious stimuli to the disc material itself, an inflammatory cascade impacting local nerve roots, and direct compression of nerve roots by extruded disc material. Treatment options include conservative treatment, the mainstays of which are oral medication and physical therapy. The potential efficacy of these modalities is well established.

**Different surgical strategies for LDH:**

- Open.

- Minimally Invasive Open Lumbar Discectomy (MIOLD).

- Microlumbar discectomy (MLD).

- Micro-endoscopic discectomy (MED).

- Fully endoscopic (FE).

The core principle of the surgery in eliminating the nerve impingement remains the same, the dictum of the newer surgical strategies only focuses on reducing assess trauma to the multifidus and improving surgical vision.

**History of discectomy**

Mixter and Barr first described laminectomy for LDH in 1934 through L3 to sacrum approach. Hemi-laminectomy came into practice in the 1970s.

Caspar and Williams described microdiscectomy via a 3 cm incision in 1977.

Wiltse and Spencer described the paraspinal approach for managing extra-foraminal discs in 1988.****In the same year, Kambin and Sampson described a fully endoscopic approach [FE]) for an extra-foraminal approach

In 1993, Mayer and Brock reported the use of tubular retractors. Foley and Smith performed a video-assisted technique using a tubular work canal (Micro-endoscopic discectomy: MED) via a 2-cm incision adopting a trans-muscular approach without multifidus release from its insertion in 1997.