In neurapraxia, compression/entrapment results in a temporary interruption of nerve conduction. Increased venous pressure with endoneurial edema is the result of prolonged exposure to compression with resultant Schwann cell fragmentation. There is no involvement of the axons during this process.

In states of axonotmesis and neurotmesis, stretching can result in patchy ischemia with decreased vasa nervorum flow. As stretching progresses, necrosis, intraneural connective tissue destruction, and hemorrhage are likely. Disruption of trophic factor transportation, increased intracellular calcium, and degradation of cytoskeletal elements proceeds. The Schwann cell phenotype switches to a phagocytic state with the recruitment of macrophages. Once myelin is cleared by phagocytosis, Schwann cells encompass the endoneurium to create the nerve conduit known as bands of Büngner.

Wallerian degeneration is generally the fate of the distal end of the damaged nerve when over 90% of the axons are injured. During Wallerian degeneration, both injured ends retract with the proximal end, generally proceeding with degeneration to the closest node of Ravier. However, the distal end degenerates completely. Following the degeneration of the proximal stump, the Schwann cell converts to a regenerative phenotype and releases growth factors. An axonal growth cone with filopodia begins to develop at the distal end of the proximal stump and is guided by actin and myosin distally. The optimal outcome is to make contact with the endoneurial conduit of the degenerated distal nerve segment and grow along the original trajectory to re-innervate the end organs. The growth of a proximally damaged nerve is 2-3mm/day and 1-2mm/day for distal segments.

Regarding the end organs, the remaining motor units on muscles increase in size with hypertrophy of the innervated muscle fibers. A pruning process later takes place when axons receiving inadequate neurotrophic factors diminish. This process begins within 4 days following the insult with healing requiring 3 to 6 months.

Pre-ganglionic avulsion injuries with the discontinuity of the spinal roots to the central cord lack regenerative neurons, unlike in postganglionic injuries distal to the proximal stump.