Treatment of short-term insomnia divides into two sections: nonpharmacologic and pharmacologic. Nonpharmacologic treatment is the first line as it is more cost-effective with a less side effect profile. Studies have shown nonpharmacologic therapy to be as effective as pharmacologic treatments. In more complicated patients with long histories of insomnia, it is permissible to combine pharmacologic and nonpharmacologic therapies.

Nonpharmacologic methods include cognitive therapies, sleep restriction, stimulus control, and sleep hygiene education.

- Cognitive therapies help patients link their ideas/attitudes, such as excessive worrying, emotional distress, and dysfunctional thoughts as the cause for short-term insomnia. It helps exchange beliefs such as overestimating needed hours of sleep to feel rested, being anxious about missing sleep time and worrying about the effects of insomnia on daytime functioning with more reassuring beliefs and attitudes.

- Sleep restriction therapy is exactly as it sounds. The simple objective of this therapy is to limit the amount of bedtime to the actual total sleep time (derived from sleep logs/diaries), which is usually less than that to which the patient has become accustomed. This approach helps increase the drive to sleep and creates sleep inertia aiding with sleep efficiency, decreasing early-morning awakenings, and decreasing sleep onset latency. Of note, sleep restriction should not be less than 5 to 6 hours per day.

- Stimulus control therapy is where the patient tries to associate the bed with sleep. The time spent in bed should only be for sleeping and sexual activity. To implement this therapy, patients should to only go to bed when sleepy, not to stay in bed for more than 15 minutes before falling asleep, and to have rigid wake and sleep times.

- Sleep hygiene education supports the patient in understanding certain behaviors that are causing issues with sleep. These factors include limiting caffeine use during the daytime, decreasing daytime napping, and avoiding eating, vigorous exercise, alcohol, and smoking near bedtime.

There is an abundance of pharmacologic therapies that exist for treating insomnia. These consist of herbs and over the counter melatonin pills and prescription drugs. Melatonin is an endogenous hormone produced by our pineal gland when stimulated by the suprachiasmatic nuclei in response to light, or lack thereof. The response of melatonin on our body is complex, but in essence, it regulates the circadian rhythm and aids in sleep onset. Over the counter, melatonin tablets are available in 1 mg to 10 mg dosages and have demonstrated modest effects on sleep onset.

Herbs have been used for centuries to induce sleep and aid in relaxation. Some of the popular herbs used include valerian root, kava-kava, chamomile, and lavender. Valerian root is a well-known herb that works on the GABA-A receptor to help with insomnia. Kava-kava is an extract from the herb Piper methysticum used in the South Pacific for insomnia and anxiety. It also works on the GABA receptor.

Regarding prescribed drugs, although there are no agreed-upon guidelines for prescribing, the American Academy for Sleep Medicine (AASM) assigned a task force of four experts in sleep medicine. It published a practice guideline for chronic insomnia in 2017. This guideline gives recommendations for each of the prescription drugs. Below is a concise list of medications along with their starting doses used in insomnia disorders. If one medication does not work or has a side effect profile not conducive to a patient’s lifestyle or physiology, clinicians can always switch to other medications. Clinicians are also encouraged to look up the side effect profile of each drug and its interactions. It is also important to note that all prescription drugs have adverse effects including but not limited to addiction, withdrawal, and tolerance, and should be used for a short duration if not effective.

- Benzodiazepine receptor agonist drugs (not to be used more than 2 to 4 weeks)

- 
              
- GABA-A receptor- temazepam (7.5 mg), triazolam (0.125 mg)
              
              
- GABA-A alpha1 receptor- zolpidem (5 mg), zaleplon (5 mg), eszopiclone (2 mg)

- Antihistamine drugs- diphenhydramine (25 mg)

- Tricyclic antidepressant (TCA) drug- doxepin (3 mg), amitriptyline (10 mg)

- Melatonin receptor agonist- ramelteon (8 mg)

- Sedating antipsychotics- quetiapine (25 mg)

- Anticonvulsants- gabapentin (100 mg)

- Antidepressants- trazodone (25 mg)

- Orexin (hypocretin)-antagonist- suvorexant (10 mg)

In the elderly, it becomes important to consider the Beers criteria for proper prescribing. Drugs to be avoided include benzodiazepines, antihistamine drugs, TCAs, among other drugs.