**Groups to consider for BCG vaccination include**

**Children: Newborns and infants have the greatest benefit from BCG vaccination**

- Infants and children ≤five years with a high risk of exposure to active pulmonary TB.

- Healthy neonates

- School-age children (aged 7 to 14) not previously vaccinated.

**Developed Countries: Consider BCG vaccination in infants and children ≤5 years in the following conditions**

- Prolonged exposure to a patient with untreated, inadequately treated, or isoniazid and rifampin-resistant M. tuberculosis if separation from such exposure is not possible.

**Exposure to MDR-TB**

- Consider vaccination in travelers, health care workers, and individuals in the community with exposure to multidrug-resistant (MDR-) tuberculosis.

- Administer to unvaccinated, tuberculin-negative individuals.

**Health Care Workers**

Routine vaccination of health care workers is not recommended in the United States since infection with tuberculosis is low. BCG vaccine also interferes with the result of a tuberculin skin test that is used to detect Mycobacterium tuberculosis infection. In health care workers, the efficacy of BCG vaccination is not definite.

- Consider BCG vaccination in healthcare workers in regions with high TB transmission

- Consider vaccination in health care workers from low-risk countries taking care of patients or refugees in TB-endemic countries

BCG immunization guidelines depend on the prevalence of tuberculosis infection.

BCG vaccination policy is determined by the regional prevalence of tuberculosis infection.  Routine neonatal vaccination is recommended by the WHO in countries with moderate to severe prevalence of tuberculosis.  Close contacts of patients with TB infection and healthcare workers exposed to patients' multidrug-resistant tuberculosis infections with negative tuberculin tests should receive BCG vaccination.  Routine BCG vaccination is not recommended in countries with a low prevalence of tuberculosis.  Routine BCG vaccination has never been recommended in the United States given the low prevalence of tuberculosis infection.  Routine BCG vaccination of children at age 13 and all neonates in high-risk groups was implemented between 1953 and 2005 in the United Kingdom.  Routine vaccination was later discontinued in 2005 due to a decreased incidence of tuberculosis infection.

**Treatment of Bladder Cancer**

A single dose of M. bovis bacillus Calmette-Guérin immunotherapy has a great therapeutic benefit in the treatment of non-invasive forms of bladder cancer. It is administered intravesically and proven benefits include the delay and prevent the progression of the malignancy.