The exact pathogenesis of their neurotropism is debatable.

- Acquiring new surface markers to “home” inside the CNS, and

- Getting transformed during their intravascular transit to the CNS.

Systemic lymphoma spreads to the CNS via hematogenous dissemination.

The most commonly involved sites of primary central nervous system lymphoma are the frontal lobe and basal ganglia, with the brainstem, cerebellum, and spinal cord less commonly affected. Up to 25% of patients with primary central nervous system lymphoma develop intraocular lymphoma, and primary intraocular lymphoma ultimately disseminates to the CNS more than 80% of the time. Concurrent involvement of cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) and orbit occur in up to 20% of cases respectively.

The hallmark gene “signatures” of PCNSL comprise:

- Germinal center B-cell

- Activated B-cell, and

- Type 3 large B-cell.****

They mirror the post-germinal center or an activated B-cell (ABC) immuno-phenotype (CD10–, BCL-6+, MUM1/IRF4+).

Several mutations in tumor suppressor and proto-oncogenes involved in B cell activation, differentiation, and apoptosis are believed to contribute to the development of primary CNS lymphoma. Somatic hypermutations in proto-oncogenes such as MYC, PAX5, Rho/TTF, and PIM1 as well as the tumor suppressor genes such as PRDM1 have been demonstrated in primary CNS lymphoma cases. NF-KB signaling is believed to play a role in disease pathogenesis. The up-regulation of activators within the NF-KB pathway such as MYD88, CADR11, and CD79 as well as suppression of NF-KB inhibitors such as TNFAIP3 have presented in individuals with primary CNS lymphoma.

**The salient phenotypical alterations**occurring in CNS lymphomas can be summarized as:

- Interleukin-4 (IL-4) signaling pathways with mediators such as X-box binding protein 1 (XBP-1) and signal transducer and activator of transcription 6 (STAT6) ****

- NFκB mutations in MYD88 and CD79B.

- Programmed death ligand 1/programmed death ligand 2 locus suggests the role of immune evasion.

- Alterations in copy number and translocations in 9p24.1.

- Up-regulation of the programmed cell death 1 receptor (PD-1) ligand.

- Loss of human leukocyte (HLA) class I or II surface antigens.

- Differential expression of MUM1.