Treatment goals include surgical eyelid repair for normal visual development and improved cosmesis, alleviating neck strain from chin-up posture, and addressing primary ovarian insufficiency and infertility in females with BPES type I. Management begins with a pediatric ophthalmologist's determination of amblyopia, strabismus, and refractive error. Referral to an oculoplastic surgeon should be made to evaluate the degree of ptosis, blepharophimosis, and epicanthus inversus.

Historically, correcting eyelids was performed as a 2-stage surgery at 3 to 5 years old. A medial canthoplasty via the Mustarde technique or double-opposing z-plasty to repair epicanthus inversus and telecanthus, followed by frontalis suspension for ptosis repair six to twelve months later. If ptosis and medial canthoplasty were performed simultaneously, the tightened vertical and horizontal tissues would pull against each other in opposite directions, limiting their effect versus if performed separately.

Some surgeons argue medial canthus reconstruction can worsen ptosis and should be addressed first. Other surgeons suggest repair of ptosis first due to the high incidence of amblyopia and medial canthus repair at a later age when the face has grown. Recent reports have described successful outcomes with single-stage surgery combining medial canthoplasty and ptosis repair for a select group of individuals. Additional studies are needed to assess the outcomes of single-staged versus staged repair.

In general, the following surgical recommendations are:

- If the central visual axis is unobstructed, surgical repair can wait until 3 to 5 years of age.

- If the central visual axis is obscured, but the vertical interpalpebral fissure height is more than 2 mm, either single-stage or two-stage repair is associated with satisfactory outcomes.

- If the central visual axis is obscured, and the vertical interpalpebral fissure height is less than 2 mm, two-stage repair should be pursued as early as possible. Ptosis repair first to prevent amblyopia, followed by medial canthoplasty.

Females who inherit BPES through their father are more likely to have type I and should be referred to a clinical geneticist to discuss the nature of the disease, mode of inheritance, and fertility implications of the genetic disorder. Women should be informed of the risk of POF and be referred to a pediatric or reproductive endocrinologist and gynecologist to monitor ovarian status. The American Society for Reproductive Medicine and the International Menopause Society recommend estrogen replacement therapy for women with primary ovarian insufficiency.

No randomized controlled trials are studying the use of hormone replacement therapy in women with BPES type I. However, hormone replacement therapy under the guidance of an endocrinologist and gynecologist is reasonable to maintain normal bone mineral density. The options for women who wish to pursue parenthood include adoption, foster parenthood, embryo donation, egg donation, and cryopreservation.