After its introduction in the 1980s, the Mallampati scoring system quickly became a routine preoperative physical exam to predict the difficult airway. Early studies concluded that Class III and IV could predict difficult intubation based on the laryngeal views as described in the original study.

One group argued that many of the views deemed ‘difficult’ by Mallampati could now be considered good based on this grading system. When placed in this context, they argue the positive predictive value is only 33.3% making the Mallampati scoring a poor predictor of difficult intubation.

A 2016 Cochrane meta-analysis found the sensitivity and specificity of the modified Mallampati test in predicting difficult tracheal intubation to be 0.51 and 0.87. Therefore, the Mallampati test is a poor independent screening tool as it misses nearly half of all difficult airways but is fairly specific for ruling out a difficult airway.

There are several other known risk factors associated with difficult endotracheal intubation, including a thick neck (>40 cm), limited neck mobility, small mouth opening (<3 finger breadths), short TMD (<6 cm), limited mandibular protrusion, and a history of a difficult airway. The proceduralist should consider all these factors when planning to intubate a patient. A routine preoperative exam includes assessment and documentation of many of these risk factors to help stratify patients to predict the difficult airway.

Mask ventilation is also a key element of airway management. The inability to ventilate a patient can lead to profound negative patient outcomes and mask ventilation is a significant branch point in the difficult airway algorithm between the emergent and non-emergent pathways. Therefore, the ability to predict and prepare for a patient who may be challenging to mask ventilate is important.

Several risk factors have been studied to predict difficult mask ventilation. Some of these include advanced age (>55 years), obesity (BMI >30kg/m^2), presence of a beard, lack of teeth, history of obstructive sleep apnea (OSA)/snoring, male sex, limited mandibular protrusion, short thyromental distance (TMD <6 cm), and Mallampati class 3 or 4. A large meta-analysis found that the Mallampati score had very low sensitivity in predicting difficult mask ventilation, to be 0.17.

Of note, it has been observed that the Mallampati score can change during pregnancy. One study found that among a cohort of 242 pregnant patients, there was a 34% increase in the number of Mallampati grade IV cases at 38 weeks gestation compared to the same patients at 12 weeks gestation. The common belief behind this increase is that edema and fluid retention during pregnancy leads to higher scores.

Obstructive sleep apnea (OSA) has also been correlated with Mallampati scores.  OSA is the most common sleep-related breathing disorder. Relaxation of upper airway structures during sleep leads to upper airway occlusion. The Mallampati score has been proven to be an independent risk factor in predicting the presence and severity of OSA. For every one-point increase in the Mallampati score, there is a two-fold increase in the odds of having OSA. For every one-point increase in the Mallampati score, the apnea-hypopnea index increases on average by more than five events per hour.

Overall, several methods, including the Mallampati scoring system, have been proposed to predict whether a patient will have a difficult airway or will be difficult to mask ventilate. Through this literature review, the Mallampati score by itself is not sensitive in predicting difficult mask ventilation or intubation. Therefore, it is not recommended to be used on its own to help the proceduralist predict difficult airway management but rather as one of many clinical signs to aid in airway management decisions. The ability to predict the difficult airway continues to be challenging. One recent study found that 93% of difficult intubations were unanticipated, and 94% of difficult mask ventilation were unanticipated.