Glottic insufficiency produces a variety of symptoms. From the start of the consultation, the clinician should begin to assess the patient’s voice informally during the initial conversation. The patient's voice may sound weak, and they may complain of a weak voice, of effortful or painful phonation (odynophonia), and may have shortness of breath while talking and have a weak cough (the so-called bovine cough, resulting from the inability to fully adduct the vocal folds).  There may be a history of dysphagia or coughing/choking with swallowing, particularly with thin liquids, or of recurrent chest infections due to aspiration. It is important to seek out “red-flag” symptoms such as unilateral throat pain, referred otalgia, dysphagia, weight loss, or neck mass, which may suggest a neoplastic etiology.

Further history to be elicited from the patient should ascertain whether there has been any recent surgery, in particular, cervical, thyroid or thoracic surgery, or prolonged intubation for any cause. Any history of cervical or whiplash trauma should be elicited. The patient’s vocal needs, whether socially or professionally, e.g., a professional singer or other voice-user such as a teacher or preacher, should be established as this may help determine the most suitable intervention. Patients with even minor dysphonic symptoms can be disproportionally affected if they use their voice for a living. A detailed neurologic and cardiovascular history should be sought, as stroke, seizure disorders, multiple sclerosis, or numerous other neurologic conditions may affect the voice and cranial nerve functions.

The GRBAS (grade, roughness, breathiness, asthenia, and strain) scale is a widely used metric for evaluating vocal health and can be used in the clinic setting to rate the patient’s voice.

Prior to a focused examination of the phonatory apparatus, a general ear, nose, and throat examination is required, including flexible laryngoscopy to evaluate the larynx for anatomic abnormalities. This may reveal causes of dysphonia extrinsic to the phonatory apparatus such as neck masses, nasal polyps, enlarged tonsils which can contribute to changes in voice quality, as well as intrinsic laryngeal pathology that can be directly or indirectly related to phonatory symptoms such as chronic laryngitis or singer's nodules. Palatal paralysis associated with an ipsilateral vocal fold paralysis is suggestive of a high vagal lesion. A full cranial nerve examination should also be performed to assess the involvement of other cranial nerves to rule out a high lesion.

Palpation of the larynx to assess for tenderness, suppleness or excessive tension may help in ruling out muscle tension dysphonia as a cause of the patient’s dysphonia. The patient can be asked to carry out the “ee-sniff” maneuver while the examiner slips their fingers behind the thyroid alar to directly palpate the cricoarytenoid joint. Vocal fold paralysis will result in no movement on the ipsilateral side, and a gentle tap felt on the examiner’s finger on the contralateral side.