**Anatomy of the Pancreas**

The pancreas is an oblong glandular abdominal organ that has both endocrine and exocrine functions. The organ lies in the retroperitoneum while crossing the body of L1 and L2 along the posterior aspect of the abdominal wall. The pancreas lies in a transverse plane between the C loop of the duodenum while the tail of the pancreas touches the hilum of the spleen. The pancreas is divided into five regions, which consist of a head, uncinate process, neck, body, and tail. The head of the pancreas is the widest part of the organ, while the uncinate lies underneath the body of the pancreas, coming off the posteromedial area of the pancreatic head and curving just posterior to the superior mesenteric artery and vein. The head of the pancreas lies just to the right of the superior mesenteric vessels, and it is attached to the second and third portions of the duodenum. The uncinate process lies adjacent to the third and fourth portions of the duodenum. The uncinate is absent in some people, can vary in size and thickness, and has also been noted to encircle the superior mesenteric vessels in others.

The neck begins at the passage of the superior mesenteric vessels and spleno-portal vein confluence posterior to the gland. The neck is the thinnest portion of the pancreas and can be crushed in blunt trauma by being compressed against the second lumbar vertebrae, which sit just posterior to the neck. The gastroduodenal artery runs in a superior to inferior fashion just to the right of the neck of the pancreas. The body of the pancreas is covered anteriorly by the omental bursa, which separates the stomach from the pancreas. The body lies just to the left of the aorta. The tail of the pancreas is the most mobile aspect of the gland. The tail usually rests in the hilum of the spleen or just below in the majority of people.

**Anatomy of the Pancreatic Ductal System and Embryology**

Beginning as an outpouching from the primitive endoderm foregut, the pancreas is formed by the fusion of ventral and dorsal pancreatic buds. The inferior portion of the pancreatic head and the uncinate process develop from the ventral bud while the body and tail arise from the dorsal bud. This bud fusion allows the two ductal systems also to fuse together. The main pancreatic duct of Wirsung arises from the ventral bud, while the dorsal duct gives rise to the accessory duct of Santorini. The fusion of the two ducts occurs in the head of the gland.

The majority of pancreatic enzymes are drained through the main pancreatic duct, which then drains out the common channel, which is formed after the meeting of the common bile duct and main pancreatic duct. The common channel length is variable in many patients. The superior and anterior portions of the pancreatic head are drained by the accessory duct of Santorini, with the remaining portions of the pancreas being drained by the main pancreatic duct of Wirsung. After the main pancreatic duct and common bile duct join, they enter into the 2nd portion of the duodenum and drain through the ampulla of Vater. The ampulla is surrounded by a muscular ring called the sphincter of Oddi, which controls the flow of bile and pancreatic fluid into the duodenum. This sphincter is under strict neural and hormonal control. It is very sensitive to cholecystokinin, which is produced in the duodenum and causes relaxation of the sphincter. There is often a second duct that drains into the duodenum, called to the minor papilla. The minor papilla is actually located superior to the Ampulla of Vater in the wall of the duodenum. There are multiple congenital variations in the bile and pancreatic ductal systems; these are discussed elsewhere.

**Arterial, Venous, and Lymphatic supply of the Pancreas**

**Arterial Supply of the Pancreas**

- The vascular supply of the pancreas is very complex and is derived from both the celiac artery and the superior mesenteric artery. The common hepatic artery and splenic artery both arise from the celiac trunk. The common hepatic artery gives rise to the gastroduodenal artery (GDA); the GDA then gives rise to the right gastroepiploic artery after which it continues inferiorly becoming the anterior and posterior superior pancreaticoduodenal arteries. The superior mesenteric artery supplies both the inferior anterior and posterior pancreaticoduodenal arteries. These two superior and inferior pancreaticoduodenal arteries supply the pancreatic head, 2nd, and 3rd portions of the duodenum. The rich blood supply to this area is what allows duodenal sparing pancreatic surgery to be performed. The remaining portions of the pancreas are supplied by the splenic artery and superior mesenteric artery. The splenic artery runs along the superior aspect of the pancreas and gives off many branches. Three named arteries arise from the splenic artery, which runs perpendicular across the pancreatic body and tail. These arteries are named from medial to lateral- the dorsal, great, and caudal pancreatic arteries. These three arteries help form collateralization between the splenic artery and the inferior pancreaticoduodenal arteries. Overall, the pancreas has a rich blood supply, which must be taken into account when planning any surgical procedure involving this gland. High-quality CT imaging is a must, not only to view the pathological disease process (i.e., cancer or lesion) but to have an excellent visualization of the vessels during surgical planning. This could make the cancerous lesion unresectable. While there can be some disagreement regarding the exact definition of a borderline resectable lesion, in general, these all involve vascular determination, including- abutment of the superior mesenteric artery, celiac artery, or hepatic artery, all less than 180 degrees or have very small areas that are occluded along the portal vein, the superior mesenteric vein that may possibly have the need for reconstruction. Tumors that circumferentially encase the celiac artery, hepatic artery, or the superior mesenteric artery greater than 180 degrees or have complete occlusion of the superior mesenteric vein or portal vein with no possibility of reconstruction are considered locally advanced and surgically unresectable.

**Venous, Lymphatics, and Innervation of the Pancreas**

- Venous drainage of the pancreas usually mirrors the arterial supply of the gland. The veins are usually located anteriorly to the arteries, while the pancreatic ducts are anterior to both arteries and veins. The venous drainage goes into the superior mesenteric vein, inferior mesenteric vein, splenic vein, or portal vein. Like the arterial system to the body and tail, three major veins drain these areas. The inferior pancreatic, caudal, and great pancreatic veins all drain directly into the splenic vein. These veins are of great importance when a spleen preserving distal pancreatectomy is performed as all these branches must be divided and ligated. 
- Lymphatic drainage of the pancreas aligns with the vessels supplying the gland. Metastatic disease from the pancreas is present in up to 70% of patients in their lymph nodes. The pancreas' lymphatic system consists of five main groups referred to as the anterior, posterior, superior, inferior, and splenic lymph nodes. The superior half of the pancreatic head drains into the superior lymph nodes while the inferior portion of the pancreatic head drains into the inferior lymph nodes. The pancreatic head also drains to a portion of nodes located at the right side of the celiac and superior mesenteric arteries. The pancreatic body is divided into a superior and inferior portion for lymph drainage; the superior aspect drains into the superior nodes while the inferior portion drains into inferior pancreatic, superior mesenteric, and also para-aortic lymph nodes. The tail of the pancreas drains directly into the splenic lymph nodes.
- Both sympathetic and parasympathetic nerves innervate the pancreas. The nerves follow the pathway of the vessels that supply the pancreas. The vagus nerve is the parasympathetic innervation which comes from the celiac plexus. The vagus nerve is mainly a sensory nerve in its function. The sympathetic innervation begins in the thoracic spinal cord then runs through the greater and lesser splanchnic nerves. Pancreatic pain is mainly transmitted through the celiac plexus; this is why a celiac nerve block can be used as a treatment for chronic pain in the setting of locally advanced cancer.

**Physiology**

The pancreas performs both endocrine and exocrine functions. The endocrine portion only contributes 1% to 2% of the gland's function, while the majority of the pancreas is used for exocrine function.

The islets of Langerhans perform the pancreatic endocrine function. There are nearly one million islets in the normal functioning adult pancreas. These islets consist of 5 cell types- alpha cells that secrete glucagon, beta cells that secrete insulin, delta cells that secrete somatostatin, epsilon cells that secrete ghrelin, and F or PP cells that secrete pancreatic polypeptide.

The majority of the endocrine cells are located in the islet cell periphery, while the beta cells are located in the center and comprise 70% of the islet mass. Alpha cells are predominantly seen in the islet cells in the superior aspect of the pancreatic head, body, and tail; it accounts for 10% of the islet mass. Delta cells are like beta cells, which are present in all islets throughout the pancreas. Delta cells make up only 5% of the islet cell mass. PP cells are mostly seen in the islets in the pancreas' head and account for 15% of the islet mass. Endocrine and exocrine functions are extremely complex, so surgical planning for the patient must take into account the physiological function of the pancreas that will remain. Some patients may require exogenous administration of pancreatic digestive enzymes after surgery or insulin administration with frequent glucose monitoring. Roughly 20 % of the pancreas volume is needed in the remnant to avoid endocrine or exocrine insufficiency. This may not be the case for a more diseased or older fat replaced pancreas.