Physical therapy is considered the first line of treatment.

Another option for treating a cervicogenic headache is interventional therapy, which will differ depending on the cause of the headache. For example, a lateral atlantoaxial joint intra-articular injection can be useful to diagnose and treat the condition when it has an osteoarthritic or post-traumatic cause. Another cause of a cervicogenic headache is arthritis of the C2-3 facet joint, which is innervated by a superficial branch of the C3 nerve called the third occipital nerve. This is seen after a whiplash injury from a motor accident. Injection into the facet joint will reduce pain. The third occipital nerve block will provide temporary cervicogenic headache pain relief, while radiofrequency ablation can be used for long-term pain relief. Surgery is performed only as a **last resort**.

There is some evidence that cervical epidural steroid injection has some benefits in treating pain in a cervicogenic headache. Steroids can work in this setting due to the theory that the pain continues sensitizing the cervical nerve roots and initiates a pain-producing loop involving nerve root and microvascular inflammation as well as mechanically-induced micro-injury.

Cervical epidural steroid injections with an interlaminar needle approach at C7-T1 or C6-7 epidural space are relatively safe compared to other interventional cervical procedures. According to a study, steroids injection reduced the daily NSAID usage at 3 and 6 months.

Pharmacological therapy, including pregabalin, duloxetine, and gabapentin, has variable responses.

Therapies like coblation and neuromodulation require further studies for validation.