Fluoroscopy involves the use of ionizing radiation having the same risk profile as x-ray procedures.  A dreaded complication of fluoroscopy is radiation burns which are very rare given the low doses needed for fluoroscopy. Two types of radiation risk are involved with the use of fluoroscopy: Deterministic and Stochastic. Deterministic risks are dose-related and occur at a certain threshold dose. In other words, at a certain level of does, a deterministic side effect is possible in a cause-and-effect relationship. Stochastic risks are directly proportional to the dosage.  This includes cancer resulting from radiation exposure.  The ALARA principle (as low as reasonably possible) is always adopted for procedures requiring the use of radiation. This safety initiative acknowledges radiation exposure as an accepted, integral part of the procedure while minimizing the radiation exposure needed to accomplish the goal.

The advantage of fluoroscopy is that the clinician can advance the tube while visualizing it in real time.  However, there is never a guarantee of proper placement, which may result from human error. In addition, many complications can occur.  Perforation can result at any point along the course of insertion, from the nose to the stomach, which can ultimately result in uncontrolled hemorrhage or infection.

Less likely a possibility when using fluoroscopy, the tube can be placed in the respiratory tree, resulting in aspiration pneumonia or pneumothorax. Though if the tube is not properly secured, this can become a more common possibility if dislodged.  Other complications with the tube landing in the respiratory tract include bronchopleural fistula, respiratory failure, and even death.

Additional complications resulting after the proper placement are pressure necrosis of the cartilaginous tip of the nose, rhinitis, conjunctivitis, esophageal varices, and the rare complication of vocal cord injury and paralysis. Vocal cord injury or paralysis occurs due to direct pressure or trauma to the tissue or damage to the recurrent laryngeal nerve. Supraglottic edema can result. This phenomenon is known as nasogastric tube syndrome.

Nasogastric tube feeding should not be used for more than 4 to 6 weeks because of complications or poor adherence to treatment.