PSGN is a self-limiting condition in most cases, and thus only symptomatic treatment is needed. Supportive treatment aims at controlling the complications of volume overload such as hypertension and edema, which are prominent during the acute phase of the disease.

**Pharmacological Therapy**

****Antimicrobials:****Patients with evidence of a streptococcal infection should receive a course of antibiotic therapy, and they may not prevent the development of PSGN.

**Diuretics:**Loop diuretics (furosemide) are preferred over thiazides (hydrochlorothiazide or chlorthalidone). The efficacy of thiazide diuretics is very minimal when GFR < 30 ml/min.

**Antihypertensive medications:**Blood pressure can be managed by restricting salt and fluid intake along with diuretics are needed. In cases with uncontrolled blood pressure, the use of calcium channel blockers is recommended. The use of angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitors (ACEI), angiotensin receptor blockers (ARBs) is recommended in patients with stable GFR and with near-normal potassium levels.

**Immunosuppressive therapy:**There’s no evidence that immune suppression is useful in patients with PSGN.

**Dialysis**

Dialysis is only performed to manage the acid-base balance, electrolyte abnormalities (especially hyperkalemia), and fluid management

**General measures**

- Salt and water restriction to treat the edema.

- Bed rest and immobilization are recommendations in the first few days of the disease.

- Throat cultures on the patient and family members are important.

- All affected members need to be treated with penicillin or erythromycin.