Human parainfluenza virus is associated with upper and lower respiratory tract illnesses in all age groups, including:

- The common cold

- Croup

- Tracheobronchitis

- Bronchiolitis

- Pneumonia

Exacerbations of underlying diseases are also frequent including:

- Asthma

- Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease

- Congestive heart failure

These infections can be mild in healthy individuals, but they may lead to more serious respiratory illnesses in young age children and immunocompromised adults.

Clinical presentation can differ by type; HPIV-1 and HPIV-2 are associated with croup and cold-like symptoms, while HPIV-3 often causes bronchiolitis and pneumonia. HPIV-4 is less well-characterized but has been suggested to have symptoms similar to HPIV-3.

- Croup: Most children present with fever, inspiratory stridor, a hoarse barking cough, as well as laryngeal obstruction. Some of the lower airway signs, such as wheezing and air trapping, also occur.

- Bronchiolitis: Due to the infant's terminal airways being so small, bronchiolitis is observed only in infants and young children.

- Pneumonia:****Pneumonia is one of the main causes of hospitalization among US adults.

- Tracheobronchitis: Lower respiratory tract signs and symptoms that do not fit with the croup, bronchiolitis, or pneumonia often receive a diagnosis of tracheobronchitis.

Although HPIVs primary infection location is the respiratory tract, dissemination of the infection has been described, affecting other organ systems, including neurologic, renal, rheumatologic, and gastrointestinal tract.