The unique clinical profile of systemic mastocytosis combined with diagnostic and pharmacological advancements poses a challenge for many clinicians; thus, an interprofessional approach is necessary.

Primary care clinicians should obtain a detailed history as well as a physical evaluation of the patient with recurrent allergies. If systemic mastocytosis is suspected, referral to an immunologist, and hematologist is recommended.

Close coordination of care amongst allergists, immunologists as well as hematologists is crucial to prevent any delay in diagnosis and management.

Clinicians, including nursing staff and pharmacists, play an essential role in identifying symptoms of anaphylaxis and the immediate administration of epinephrine. The pharmacist should educate the patient about the importance of epinephrine. Pharmacists also need to reconcile medications for possible drug interactions, as well as verifying dosing, and report any concerns to nursing or the managing clinician. Nursing can monitor medication compliance, and also report any potential adverse effects to the physician or the pharmacist. This collaborative approach between members of the interprofessional healthcare team is essential for optimal patient outcomes. [Level 5]

The patient should be told to wear an ID bracelet, which reveals his or her medical condition. They should be educated about avoidance of triggers such as exposure to heat or cold, medications such as aspirin, strenuous activity, alcohol, spicy foods, anesthesia, surgery, or endoscopy.

Patients with systemic mastocytosis should undergo next-generation sequencing (NGS) to identify potential genetic carriers, which might predispose them to a poor prognosis. NGS is very new and is underutilized. Patients with uncontrolled symptoms, diagnostic difficulties, and advanced disease should obtain a referral to centers that specialize in mast cell disorders in the advent of multiple clinical trials. [Level 5]

**Outcomes**

The outcomes of patients with systemic mastocytosis are guarded, and the quality of life is poor. The symptoms can come on at any time and lead to severe distress; hence, most patients have a restricted lifestyle. For those with more severe disease, the outcomes are the worst.