A careful history and physical examination should be done. With initial infection by Wuchereria bancrofti often at a young age, and hydrocele development later in life, it is critical to ask about the region a patient lived in and any relevant travel history. History often reveals staggering effects on a patient’s life, including poor sexual function, physical disability, the effect on the ability to work, causing economic loss, and even depression.

Filarial hydroceles can be either acute or chronic. Acute hydroceles present with painful nodules in the scrotal region with or without palpable enlargement of the scrotal sac due to fluid. These are thought to be caused by the death of adult worms and may or may not be related only to treatment.

Usually, the only indication of a chronic hydrocele is a painless swelling on one or both sides of the scrotal sac. The size of the hydrocele can vary from barely detectable to very large. Patients may report discomfort from the heaviness due to the swollen scrotum. Careful questioning will elicit a history of filariasis years ago and a few previous episodes of painful nodules in the scrotal area that resolved within a week.

Pain may be present if inflammatory lymphangitis is severe. On examination, the genitals may reveal variably sized hydrocele, some may be quite large and disfiguring at diagnosis. Patients may have thickened spermatic cord and may have numerous firm nodules in the epididymis. In long-standing hydroceles, calcification may develop, which may be palpated or visualized by imaging studies.