The administration of FDG is via IV injection 30 to 60 minutes before imaging. FDG is a radioactive tracer. The unit of radioactivity is the curie (Ci) (SI unit is becquerel – Bq). The radioactive decay factor is the fraction of the radioactive drug remaining after the end of synthesis (EOS). It calculates the final dose of the medicine required for optimal PET imaging. The decay factor after 110 minutes of EOS is 0.5 because the half-life of fluorine-18 is 110 minutes. Hence, a patient weighing 70 kg undergoing PET imaging needs between 5 to 10 mCi (185 to 370 MBq). Hence, in oncology, cardiology, and neurology settings, the recommended dose for adults is 5 – 10 mCi (185 – 370 MBq) as an intravenous injection. The dose for pediatric patients is 2.6 mCi (96.2 MBq) for PET imaging. The optimal dose for pediatric patients is not determined based on body size and weight. In oncology, cardiology, and neurology settings, the recommended dose for adults is 5 – 10 mCi (185 – 370 MBq) as an intravenous injection.

**Patient Preparation**

Patient preparation plays a vital role in obtaining good-quality images. The patient needs to be fasting for 4 to 6 hours before administration. Clinicians should ensure that glucose is under control through laboratory testing, medical therapy, and for at least two days before the injection of FDG. If blood glucose is not well controlled, it will result in suboptimal imaging. For cardiology use, 50 to 75 g of glucose-containing food or liquid 1 to 2 hours before FDG injection can facilitate the localization of myocardial ischemia. Insulin causes the heart to increase GLUT4 receptors and promotes glucose uptake. Insulin released by glucose load allows visualization of surrounding, healthy myocardium, resulting in superior quality images and less regional variation in FDG uptake.

**Special Population**

**Patients with Hepatic Impairment:**The pharmacokinetics of FDG have not been studied for patients with hepatic impairment.

**Patients with Renal Impairment:**Imaging with FDG in patients with renal failure is not contraindicated. These patients have decreased FDG accumulation in the brain and increased FDG in the blood pool. However, the image quality might be suboptimal and prone to misinterpretation.

**Pregnancy Considerations:**Using FDG-PET for diagnosis in a pregnant patient is a clinical decision based on benefits and possible harm.

**Breastfeeding Considerations:**Women who are breastfeeding do not have to stop the feedings because very little FDG is excreted in the milk. However, limiting contact between the mother and the child for 12 hours after receiving an FDG injection is recommended to lower the infant's risk of external exposure from the mother.

**Diabetes:**Diabetes mellitus patients should have normal blood glucose for at least two days before administration. Imaging for malignancies generally requires patients to reschedule imaging if their blood glucose is > 120 at the time of imaging. For tumor imaging, glucose competes with FDG for uptake and can result in false-negative results.

**COVID-19 Vaccination:**Transient FDG uptake in axillary, supraclavicular, and cervical lymph nodes is noted after ipsilateral deltoid vaccination, which may confound interpretation in patients with cancer FDG PET/CT.****