# Continuing Education Activity

Blood is mandatory to maintain adequate circulation within the cardiovascular system and perfuse body tissues. Hemorrhage is the loss of blood components from the vascular system and can lead to inadequate tissue oxygenation. Hemorrhagic shock occurs when this blood loss leads to inadequate tissue oxygenation. Hemorrhage secondary to traumatic injury is the leading cause of death of Americans from one to 46 years of age. The stop the bleed campaign was first launched in 2013. This educational program aims to reduce the morbidity and mortality associated with hemorrhage secondary to traumatic injury. This activity will discuss the common types of bleeding, their causes, and ways to treat hemorrhage and highlight the interprofessional team's role in managing the hemorrhaging patient.

**Objectives:**
- Describe the types of bleeding and the most common initial actions to treat them.
- Review the trauma classification system for hypovolemic shock and the incorporation of the base deficit as a factor.
- Identify the surgical and pharmacologic treatments available to treat hemorrhage and the indications for each of them.
- Explain the importance of collaboration and communication among the interprofessional team to ensure that medical advancements in hemorrhage control are incorporated into civilian systems which utilize laypeople, EMS, and in-hospital teams.

# Introduction

Blood is mandatory to maintain adequate circulation, provide nutrients, and remove waste from the brain, vital organs, and tissues.

Significant improvements in clinical outcomes can be made by transferring knowledge from the military to civilian medicine. This article reviews some of the latest science and lessons learned to improve the care of a hemorrhaging patient.

# Etiology

In 2000, the World health organization (WHO) estimated that injury resulted in 9% of the global mortality and 12% of the worldwide disease burden.

Up to half of the deaths resulting from hemorrhage occur before reaching definitive care. Violence is the leading cause of these injuries, and traffic collisions are second. In 2015, the national trauma institute estimated that in the civilian arena, "severe bleeding accounts for greater than 35% of pre-hospital deaths and nearly 40% of deaths within the first 24 hours of injury."

# Epidemiology

Ninety percent of the mortality caused by these injuries occurs in low and middle-income countries.

# History and Physical

There are three main categories of bleeding. Lacerations, punctures, and amputations can result in arterial bleeding, which is characterized by spurting or pulsatile, bright red blood.

A weak or absent radial pulse and a systolic blood pressure below 90 mm Hg are two indicators of shock in a hemorrhagic patient.

They define class I shock as losing less than 15% of total blood volume and including mostly normal vital signs. Class II includes a blood loss of 15% to 30% and shows a slight deviation from normal vital signs. The vital sign deviation from normal increases in class III, where blood loss is between 31% and 40%. Finally, class IV includes patients with losses of greater than 40% of total blood volume, which can lead to altered mental status, hypotension, tachycardia, and tachypnea. In recent years several studies questioned the consistency of this classification system. These studies found base deficit (BD) to be a consistent measurement that could aid in classifying hemorrhage. ATLS was updated to include base deficit (BD) as a parameter of the existing hemorrhage classification system.

- Class I: 0 to -2

- Class II: -2 to -6

- Class III: -6 to -10

- Class IV: -10 or less

# Evaluation

The physical exam often provides the most valuable information regarding blood loss; however, many lab tests can assess the hemorrhaging patient. The lethal triad is comprised of coagulopathy, hypothermia, and acidosis.

Similar to TEG and ROTEM, prothrombin time (PT), international standardized ratio (INR), activated partial thromboplastin time (PTT), fibrinogen, and platelets can be used to detect coagulopathy. Furthermore, serum lactate and base deficit can be used to monitor the extent of tissue hypoperfusion. Single hematocrit measurements are not recommended for monitoring acute blood loss.

# Treatment / Management

Regarding hemorrhage control, the location of the bleeding is critically important. There are two major categories to consider: compressible and non-compressible. Any obvious bleeding in a compressible area should first be treated with direct digital pressure.

Once a scene has been secured, the CoTCCC recommends a new tourniquet be placed directly on the skin, two to three inches proximal to the wound, and the more proximal tourniquet loosened. If bleeding in any extremity continues after placing one tourniquet, a second should be placed side-by-side with the first.

Non-compressible hemorrhage often takes the form of truncal (thoraco-abdominopelvic) or junctional wounds. These wounds account for 21% of recent combat deaths.

One recent study demonstrates their ease of deployment but shows the need for improvement when transporting patients who have a junctional tourniquet applied. Further research shows that a knee with significant force applied just superior to the umbilicus or just inferior and lateral to it may stop or slow hemorrhage from the aorta, iliac, or femoral arteries while these devices are applied.

In the early 2000s, hemostatic agents were being pressed into development. A chitosan-based dressing and a zeolite mineral powder were the first approved by the US military.

One product, made of smectite minerals, was developed to both concentrate clotting elements by desiccation and activate the intrinsic coagulation pathway. While the products made of smectite minerals proved to be highly effective at hemostasis, studies showed that it caused thrombi to form that could migrate throughout the circulatory system, resulting in devastating complications. A surgical gauze impregnated with kaolin and aluminum silicate also proved to be effective at activating the intrinsic pathway and facilitating hemostasis without known side effects. Following these studies, the CoTCCC decided in 2015 to recommend surgical gauze impregnated with kaolin and aluminum silicate as the "hemostatic agent of choice."

All three gauze-type hemostatic agents recommended by CoTCCC should be placed on or packed into wounds and followed by at least three minutes of direct pressure. During this time, junctional tourniquets should be applied to sites amenable to their use. The CoTCCC also recommends that limb and junctional tourniquets be converted to a hemostatic or pressure dressing if all three of the following criteria are met: "the casualty is not in shock; it is possible to monitor the wound closely for bleeding, and the tourniquet is not being used to control bleeding from an amputated extremity." This should be completed within two hours of tourniquet placement whenever possible. Furthermore, the CoTCCC recommends that tourniquets in place for more than six hours not be removed unless the patient is under close monitoring with lab capabilities.

Several other physical actions can be performed to save a patient's life from hemorrhaging from a non-compressible area. Bleeding control of the abdomen can be accomplished by packing, including hemostatic agents, but it requires surgical capabilities.

Patients can be given several medications to promote and enhance their ability to form clots. Tranexamic acid (TXA) is a lysine derivative that blocks the activation of plasmin.

While it has shown decreased mortality in the short term, the 30-day mortality was not significantly different, and more studies have been encouraged. Recombinant factor VIIa is another possible treatment for severe bleeding; however, it is not considered a first-line treatment.

# Differential Diagnosis

In patients presenting with hemorrhage from any site, the following differentials should be considered:

- Blunt trauma

- Penetrating trauma

- Coagulation disorders

- Platelet disorders

- Anticoagulant medications

- Antiplatelet medications

- Malignancies

- Liver disease

- Vitamin deficiency

In patients presenting with hemorrhage from the gastrointestinal tract, the following differentials should be considered:

- Blunt or penetrating trauma of the head, neck, chest, abdomen, and pelvis

- Mucosal tears

- Varices

- Ulcers

- Esophagitis, gastritis, duodenitis

- Aortic dissection

- GI neoplasms and malignancies

- Angiodysplasias

- Diverticula

- Hemorrhoids

# Prognosis

Mortality ranged from 13% for Mallory-Weiss tear to 34% for gastritis & duodenitis, 38–41% for duodenal ulcer, gastric ulcer, and oesophagitis, 52% for varices, and 95% for upper GI malignancy. Mortality was also higher for bleeds that occurred as inpatients (54%) than for bleeds presenting at admission (36%). In the case of traumatic hemorrhage, prognosis depends on whether the hemorrhagic site is compressible or non-compressible, the time to medical treatment, and whether a tourniquet is applied or not.

# Complications

Uncontrolled hemorrhage is detrimental and can cause death. Additional complications can include:

- Ischemia from hemorrhagic shock

- Coagulopathies

- Multiorgan failure

- Sepsis

# Deterrence and Patient Education

Following the success of the surviving sepsis campaign, the Stop The Bleeding Campaign was launched in Europe in 2013.

# Enhancing Healthcare Team Outcomes

Improving outcomes in patients with hemorrhage starts the moment the patient is injured. Stop the bleeding campaigns, layperson aid, proper dispatch, and timely response followed by rapid treatment and transport by EMS with early notification to the receiving hospital are paramount.

ATLS training and adherence to its recommendations and checklists have also led to decreased mortality in trauma patients.