While overall safe drugs, RTIs have a variety of side effects that should be kept in mind when prescribing them. The majority of the adverse effects are seen in chronic uses situations rather than sudden onset and associated with each subcategory of the drug.

**NRTI**

The most common and the most significant adverse effect associated with the use of NRTIs is mitochondrial toxicity. While newer NRTIs have less occurrence of mitochondrial toxicity, they still carry some risk of causing it. Mitochondrial Toxicity due to the use of NRTIs can manifest as one of the following: myopathy, lipoatrophy, neuropathy, and lactic acidosis with or without hepatic steatosis.

Myopathy is most commonly associated with zidovudine and can manifest as proximal muscle tenderness and myalgias.

Lipoatrophy (also known as lipodystrophy) is the loss of body fat from the face and extremities. The loss of the fat from areas of the cheek, temples, and periorbital regions gives patients an emaciated appearance. While this effect strongly correlates with the use of protease inhibitors in HAART, it can also appear in association with stavudine use.

NRTI-associated peripheral neuropathy is most common with chronic use of zalcitabine, didanosine, and lamivudine.

Lactic acidosis most commonly occurs with the use of zidovudine, lamivudine, stavudine, and didanosine. Hepatic steatosis often occurs accompanying lactic acidosis due to decreased mitochondrial beta-oxidation of fatty acids resulting in esterified triglycerides that accumulate in the liver.

**NNRTI**

When compared to NRTIs, NNRTIs have correlated with fewer adverse effects. As a group, all NNRTIs are known to cause rashes. The most severe of these rashes are Stevens-Johnson syndrome as well as toxic epidermal necrolysis.

In addition to dermatitis complications through the use of NNRTIs, certain NNRTIs are known to cause other adverse effects. Nevirapine, in comparison, has been shown to cause significant transaminitis.