**X-rays of the cervical spine**constitute lateral, anterior-posterior (AP), and open-mouth views. Although radiographs yield lower sensitivity and specificity rates when compared to computed tomogram (CT) scans, experienced clinicians and practitioners can still appreciate suspected injury without CT utilization. In addition, flexion-extension radiographs should be obtained in the setting of suspected occipitocervical instability (useful in type I odontoid fractures or the setting of os odontoideum). Initial stability on upright radiographs is associated with stability on follow-up.

**Computerized tomography (CT) spine**- provides the best resolution of the bony elements allowing for the identification and characterization of an odontoid fracture. This also allows recognition of anatomic anomalies, such as the defect of the posterior arch of C1, that can help plan the management strategies.

**Magnetic resonance imaging**- to assess the integrity of the transverse ligament well as the cord among patients presenting with neurological deficits.

**Classification of Odontoid Fractures**

- Type I- involves the apex of the dens and is mostly stable. If instability due to the avulsion of the alar ligament is suspected, dynamic radio imaging is advocated.

- Type II- involves the neck of the odontoid process. They are categorized depending on the pattern of the fracture line into anterior oblique, posterior oblique, and horizontal variants.

**Grauer Classification**

- Type IIA- non-displaced and no comminution

- Type IIB- fracture line running anterosuperior to the posteroinferior direction

- Type IIC- Fracture line running anteroinferior to posterosuperior direction, or with significant comminution.

****3. Type III- fracture extends into the body of C2.