The fundamental diagnostic procedure in the assessment of acute posterior vitreous detachment is binocular indirect ophthalmoscopy and three-mirror contact lens biomicroscopy. Imaging-based diagnosis of a PVD traditionally has relied on dynamic B-scan ultrasonography. More recently, optical coherence tomography (OCT) has been added as an attempt to establish the diagnosis of posterior vitreous detachment.

**Slit-lamp Biomicroscopy**

Before going for a slit lamp biomicroscopy, the pupils of the patient are fully dilated using mydriatic agents. It aids in obtaining a wide illumination angle for various segments of the vitreous. Posterior vitreous detachment has been categorized as:

- Complete (C-PVD) or

- Partial (P-PVD)

In complete PVD, there is no attachment of the separated posterior vitreous cortex at or beyond the globe equator. It can be easily outlined up to the vitreous base. C-PVD can be:

- Collapsed or

- Without a collapse

In complete PVD with collapse, the posterior hyaloid membrane is loose, highly detached, and easily detectable. In this case, a peripapillary glial band is seen on slit-lamp biomicroscopy. However, in the case of complete PVD without collapse, the posterior hyaloid membrane is detached slightly and can only be traced in front of the retina.

In partial PVD, some vitreoretinal adherence can be identified at or posterior to the globe equator. The P-PVD is associated with

- The shrinkage of the posterior hyaloid membrane in some cases and

- Without shrinkage of the posterior hyaloid membrane in others

The vitreous gel is seen adherent to the macula by a pre-macular opening in the posterior hyaloid membrane in few cases of partial PVD without shrinkage.

**B-Scan Ultrasonography**

Ultrasonography (US) has been used traditionally to find out the condition of the vitreous gel. It also helps to check the presence and extent of the posterior vitreous detachment. The principle of the B-scan US is that strong echoes are generated by acoustic interfaces present at the junctions of media. These echoes are of different sound velocities and density. The greater the difference in the density between the two media, the more noticeable is the echo.

**Optical Coherence Tomography (OCT)**

Optical coherence tomography (OCT), a non-invasive ocular imaging tool, appeared in 1991.

OCT categorizes PVD into five stages:

Stage 0: is characterized by the nonexistence of PVD.

Stage 1: is characterized by focal perifoveal PVD in three or less than three quadrants. In this stage, there is a persistent attachment of the vitreous cortex at the fovea, optic nerve head, and mid-peripheral retina.

Stage 2: is the same as stage 1 but with perifoveal PVD in all four quadrants of the retina.

Stage 3: in this stage, the vitreous cortex is not attached to the level of the fovea. However, adherence to the optic nerve head and mid-peripheral retina persist.

Stage 4: is characterized by complete PVD along with a prominent Weiss ring on slit-lamp biomicroscopy.

OCT showing an oblique foveal vitreoretinal attachment without abnormality in the foveal contour is expressed by a term, stage 0 macular hole (vitreomacular adhesion).