Hemodialysis (HD) apparatus includes:

- Blood circuit

- Dialysis solution circuit

A dialyzer bridges these circuits. Side ports attached to the bloodlines are used for saline or heparin infusion, air entry detection, and pressure measurements. The dialysate is pumped through the dialysate compartment, separated from the blood compartment by the dialyzer's semi-permeable membrane. Regenerated cellulose, with its strongly hydrophilic nature, enables miniaturization of the dialyzer with lower membrane thickness.

**Blood Circuit**

A spring-loaded roller pump moves blood through the dialyzer. Internal filtration (IF) enhanced hemodialysis requires no additional equipment like a roller pump and is more convenient than hemodiafiltration. The inflow bloodline or pre-pump segment connects the vascular access to the blood pump. It contains a saline infusion line, a sampling port, and a "pre-pump" pressure monitor. The sampling port is helpful for the collection of predialysis and post-dialysis blood. A "T" line primes the dialyzer circuit and rinses the blood compartment toward the end of the dialysis session. There is a post-pump pressure monitor as well, and a sudden rise in it indicates impending clotting of the bloodline or dialyzer. The heparin line delivers heparin at a constant rate throughout dialysis. A venous pressure alarm is attached to the venous line; however, it may not be reliably alert to an accidental venous line detachment. Therefore a sensor is used to detect a potential line separation in those with an increased likelihood of line separation (agitated/uncooperative patients with cognitive defects). The venous air trap chamber contains any air in the bloodline, which cuts off the power supply to the pump and stops dialysis, thus ensuring patient safety. A clamp below the drip chamber along the tubing returning blood to the patient is activated by the air present in it and snaps shut, stopping the blood pump.

The dialysis fluid circuit includes:

- A water purification system

- A proportionating system that mixes the water and concentrates and feeds it to the dialyzer

- Monitors, alarms, and ultrafiltration control with advanced control options

The standards for water purity in dialysis are defined by the Advancement of Medical Instrumentation (AAMI). The delivery system can be:

- Central: A single apparatus combines with purified water to provide the dialysis solutions for the unit, supplied to each machine through pipes. This has the advantage of being more economical regarding the initial equipment and labor costs. However, it does not allow for individualization of dialysate composition and risks exposing many patients to complications arising from an error in the system.

- Individual: Each machine proportions its dialysate concentrate and purified water.

Before the delivery of the dialysate to the dialyzer, correction for temperature by heating to 35–38 C followed by exposure to negative pressure for degassing is performed. Special attention must be paid to the osmolality of the dialysis solution, as a severely hyperosmolar solution can cause hypernatremia and other electrolyte disturbances. At the same time, a hypoosmolar solution can lead to rapid hemolysis, severe hyponatremia, and hyperkalemia. An alarm indicates any disturbance in the conductivity of the dialysate beyond 12 to 16 mS/cm and diverts the dialysate to the drain. Cold dialysate (less than 35 C) can cause hypothermia in an unconscious patient, while shivering occurs in a conscious patient. Dialysate temperature of more than 42°C causes blood protein denaturation and hemolysis.

The dialysis circuit has a temperature sensor that can bypass dialysate outside the set temperature range. Machines using the three-stream method- water, acid concentrate, and bicarbonate concentrate allow variation in the bicarbonate concentrate useful in acidotic patients, those with frank metabolic alkalosis, or patients at risk of developing respiratory alkalosis. The 'dry weight' probing approach helps evaluate dialysis adequacy and is associated with cardiovascular benefits. Aggressive fluid removal during intermittent dialysis causes cardiovascular stress and organ damage. Patients tend to tolerate higher UF rates earlier than later in a dialysis treatment, which is a better approach than a constant rate of fluid removal. Alternative fluid status assessment and non-invasive monitoring tools (e.g., ultrasound, blood volume monitoring, bioimpedance), clinical examination, and cardiac biomarkers (e.g., natriuretic peptides) are required to improve cardiovascular outcomes in high-risk patients. Homeostasis is maintained by adjusting the rate of salt and fluid removal during dialysis (ultrafiltration, dialysate sodium) and limiting salt intake and fluid gain in the interdialytic period. More precise and personalized handling of sodium and water can be done using feedback control tools and biosensors on the dialysis machine.

Bicarbonate-buffered dialysate is preferred over acetate dialysate, which may lead to peripheral vasodilation and myocardial depression. However, bicarbonate-buffered dialysate still contains 3 to 5 mmol/l of acetate, which may be associated with increased academia, hypotension, and arrhythmia, particularly in critically ill patients. Online blood temperature and volume monitoring automatically adjust parameters using a biofeedback system. An adjustment follows a fall in circulating blood volume in ultrafiltration rate and dialysate [Na+], and blood temperature is maintained at a target value by thermal transfer control to and from the dialysate to prevent vasodilation and a drop in vascular resistance. High-dialysate calcium (1.75 mmol/l) contributed to greater hemodynamic stability in ESRD patients with cardiomyopathy undergoing intermittent hemodialysis. However, its use in the ICU setting is limited by the occurrence of hypercalcemia. Slower fluid and solute removal in lower efficiency modalities of acute RRT have improved hemodynamic stability with better blood pressure maintenance and reduced vasopressor requirements in patients undergoing continuous rather than intermittent hemodialysis. Further improvements in the design of dialyzers with a sharp cut-off membrane between low-molecular-weight proteins (LMWPs) and albumin, in addition to an adsorptive property for some LMWPs, need to be made. In addition, biocompatible membranes with lower complement cascade activation are necessary.

Wearable and implantable artificial kidneys are the future of hemodialysis, with lower operational costs helping overcome the infrastructural barriers to providing self-care treatment for renal failure. They employ a sorbent-based dialysis regenerative system called recirculating dialysate (REDY) in which the solute wastes from the spent dialysate pass-through columns containing urease. Urea gets hydrolyzed into ammonia and carbon dioxide. Hydration with water molecules produces ammonium and bicarbonate ions. Ammonium serves as a dietary acid remover and binds nitrogen from the dialysate. The dialysate then passes sequentially over the cation and anion exchange columns, during which cations like potassium, calcium, and magnesium, as well as organic toxins like phosphates and sulfates, are removed. Finally, the dialysate is recharged with calcium and magnesium and returned to flow through the dialyzer again. These battery-operated devices use sorbent cartridges and can be worn like a purse, belt, or vest.

An implantable artificial kidney employs silicon nanotechnology and tissue engineering to produce a surgically implanted device that mimics a native kidney. It includes a high-efficiency filter, the hemocartridge made of microchips, and a bioreactor of cultured epithelial cells of the renal tubule harvested from the cadaveric kidney, the biocartridge. The ultrafiltrate produced closely resembles urine. It prevents electrical pumps as the patient's blood pressure drives the device. No dialysate is needed since salt and water reabsorption by the bio cartridge helps maintain a neutral fluid balance while eliminating concentrated wastes. These devices provide gradual, continuous ultrafiltration therapy, which will reduce intradialytic hypotension and cardiac disease of dialysis.