Patients with plica syndrome will experience pain on the anterior aspect of the knee associated with clicking or popping. The anterior knee pain is a hallmark of plica syndrome. Pain can be brought on by rising from a chair, squatting, stairs, or other activities that load the patellofemoral joint. The history may include a twisting injury or blunt trauma, or there could be no history of injury or trauma. There are secondary causes of plica that should be considered when obtaining a history. These include hemarthrosis secondary to hemophilia, intra-articular lesions, loose foreign bodies, and rheumatoid arthritis.

On physical exam, a taut band may be palpable under the skin which may be tender to palpation. If this is the case, the contralateral knee should be examined to see if there is a plica causing tenderness to palpation on that knee as well. Other findings on physical exam may include an effusion, tight hamstrings, and tight quadriceps.

Two physical exam techniques can suggest plica syndrome. These tests are the Stutter test and the Hughston test. When both tests are positive, the diagnosis of plica syndrome should be suspected. If only 1 of the 2 is positive, plica syndrome is less suspicious, but should still be considered. The Stutter test is performed by having the patient sit upright with the legs dangling off the edge of the exam table at a 90-degree angle. The examiner places his or her index and middle fingers on the center of the patella of the affected leg. The patient then extends the affected leg while the examiner feels for a stutter of the patella. Feeling a stutter is a positive test. In the Hughston test, the patient lies supine with the knee extended. The examiner stands on the side of the affected knee with one hand around the plantar aspect of the patient's heel and the other palm covering the patient's patella. The examiner then pushes the patella medially and internally rotates the tibia while taking the patient's knee through flexion and extension. A positive Hughston's test is when the patient experiences pain or the practitioner appreciates popping during the range of motion.