Factor V Leiden is not a common disorder, but because there is a potential risk of developing VTE, healthcare professionals should be aware of this disorder. Patients may present with either venous or arterial thrombotic events, both of which are associated with high morbidity and mortality. The condition is best managed by an interprofessional team that includes a hematologist, internist, pharmacist, obstetrician, nurses, and primary care provider. The key reason for such a team is that even when a diagnosis is made, many patients with only a laboratory finding of the defect may not require therapy. Only patients with VTE require treatment. Therefore, all interprofessional team members need to familiarize themselves with the condition and be able to offer patient counsel and watch for signs of VTE. This will require interprofessional care coordination and open communication between team members.

The other difficulty in managing these patients is the duration of therapy. At the moment, data indicate that VTE in factor V Leiden should be managed in the same manner as the normal population, but those with recurrent VTE or thrombosis of vessels in unusual locations may require long-term therapy. The outcomes in most patients with factor V Leiden are good, but the outcomes in pregnant women with the disorder are serious because of morbidity associated with VTE development and VTE-associated complications in pregnancy.

To decrease the morbidity and mortality associated with VTE and post-thrombotic syndrome and complications in pregnant women with VTE, anticoagulation recommendations are put forward by the American Society of Hematology (ASH) and the American College of obstetricians and gynecologists (ACOG).

Pregnancy being a prothrombotic condition, specific guidelines in managing thrombosis in pregnancy and inherited thrombophilias like factor V Leiden and compound thrombophilias put forward by ASH are summarised in the following table.

**Anticoagulation postpartum**

**Choice of anticoagulant**

***Do not use DOACs during pregnancy**

***Warfarin is not recommended during pregnancy due to teratogenicity**

Anticoagulation with LMWH is recommended postpartum.

If not breastfeeding, then DOACs can be used.

LMWH in the postpartum period is recommended.

If not breastfeeding, then DOACs can be used

Postpartum anticoagulation prophylaxis is needed.

If not breastfeeding, then DOACs can be used

No prophylaxis needed



LMW heparin throughout pregnancy and six weeks postpartum

Recommend against thrombolysis

LMWH

Routine anti-Xa monitoring is not necessary

DOACs: Direct oral anticoagulants (examples include rivaroxaban, apixaban, dabigatran, or edoxaban); LMWH: Low molecular weight heparin; DVT: Deep venous thrombosis; PE: Pulmonary embolism