Glutamate holds salience in several pathophysiological disease processes. Excitotoxicity induced by the sequential process of increased cytosolic Ca (calcium), subsequent activation of cytochrome c, and eventual apoptosis can be both acutely traumatic and chronically contributive to neurodegenerative diseases. Excitotoxicity not only incurs damages upon neurons but equally affects glial cells, as well. Furthermore, damage incurred by each glial cell type manifests distinctly. Oligodendrocytes, which are very sensitive to excess glutamate, undergo apoptosis via an AMPA receptor-mediated process similar to that of neurons. Astrocytic injury potentiates glutamate dysregulation, and microglial injury can further impair neuronal glutamate uptake and receptor expression. Precipitant disease processes manifesting from aberrant glutamatergic excitotoxicity include Alzheimer’s, multiple sclerosis, amyotrophic lateral sclerosis, and more.

Dysfunction of NMDA receptors and resultant glutamate dysregulation also has implications in the pathophysiology of schizophrenia, but the body of research regarding this topic is less robust. Although sparse in its application, NMDA-receptor antagonists have been administered as adjuncts in the treatment of schizophrenic patients.

The pathophysiology of addiction also involves glutamate, whose homeostatic cycling becomes dysregulated with chronic drug use. Eventually, this leads to a breakdown of communication between the pre-frontal cortex and the nucleus accumbens and reinforces patterns of drug-seeking.

Outside the nervous system, glutamate may play a role in osmotic signaling that controls whole-body protein metabolism, which has important implications for skeletal muscle maintenance and cardiac function.