Signs and symptoms of bleeding require vigilant monitoring upon initiation of warfarin since this is the most common adverse effect. Rare yet severe adverse effects include tissue necrosis, calciphylaxis, systemic atheroemboli, and cholesterol microemboli. Tissue necrosis usually begins within days of starting warfarin and has been associated with patients having deficiencies of proteins C or S. Warfarin reduces the synthesis of both of these naturally occurring anticoagulant proteins, which leads to a prothrombotic state. Concomitant administration of heparin for 5 to 7 days may minimize the incidence of necrosis when initiating warfarin. Calciphylaxis or calcium uremic arteriolopathy in patients with or without end-stage renal disease on warfarin can result in vascular calcification and cutaneous necrosis.

There are multiple medications and herbal products that can potentiate or inhibit the effects of warfarin. Any drug that affects the ability to clot, such as other anticoagulants, antiplatelets, nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory agents (NSAIDs), and selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors (SSRIs), will increase the risk of bleeding even if the INR does not increase.

Antimicrobial agents are one of the most common medication classes that can interact with warfarin. There are multiple proposed theories, including the eradication of gut bacteria that produce vitamin K2, which would result in less antagonism of warfarin.

With any increase in thyroid function, there is potential for an increase in the INR of a patient taking warfarin due to increased catabolism of vitamin K-dependent clotting factors.

Although the mechanism is not fully understood, fibric acid derivatives have correlations with potentiating the effects of warfarin.

Since there is limited standardization of herbal products, it is difficult to demonstrate when clinically significant drug-herbal interactions exist with warfarin.