**X-ray System Components**- X-ray currents are measured in milliamperes(mA) while x-ray voltages are measured in kilovolt peak (kVp).

**Timing Circuits**- The different types of timing circuits include synchronous timers, electronic timers, mAs timers, and automatic exposure control (AEC).

**Power for Production**-  Power is provided by the high-voltage generator, which allows for increasing an output voltage to a kVp needed for x-ray production. A technologist needs to be aware that variation in supply voltage in clinics and hospitals result in a large variation in the production of an x-ray beam, which in turn affects image quality and patient exposure.

**Ceiling Support and the Vacuum Tube**- The ceiling support system helps provide the primary support for an x-ray tube and serves as a protective apparatus. Among its many functions, the primary one is to avoid leakage and help in the dissipation of heat. The vacuum tube is composed of an anode and cathode within an enclosure. The cathode, which contains a tungsten filament, serves as the electron source, while a rotating anode, composed of a tungsten disc, serves as the electron target.

**X-ray Production**- The primary result from electron acceleration from the cathode to the anode includes heat production, bremsstrahlung x-rays, and characteristic x-ray production. Characteristic x-rays are produced as a process of ionization by inner electron-shell emission and subsequent filling of the orbital void. Bremsstrahlung x-rays are produced by electron deceleration secondary to atomic field effects with the production of diagnostic range x-rays from this loss of energy.

**X-ray Interactions**- Interactions between x-rays and matter are characterized into coherent, Compton, and photoelectric effect interactions.

**Image Quality**- Image quality is determined by several factors but best characterized by high signal to noise ratio (low noise) and good spatial resolution. Additional factors include factors relating to film processing, factors relating to geometric characteristics (such as magnification), and factors relating to the patient. The technologist has an important role in maintaining good image quality. For example, preventing patient movement helps reduce motion blur.

**Important Elements of Image Acquisition**- Screen film X-ray images are produced when an image receptor cassette is exposed to an existing x-ray beam.

**Digital Radiography**- The computed radiographic image receptor, an elementary form of a digital detector, is similar yet different from screen-film imaging in a few ways. One similarity is their mutual use of X-ray-sensitive plates. Computed radiography using storage phosphors, however, uses trapped electrons in metastable states to produce an image instead of a scintillator used in screen-film radiography. Metastable electrons are released with a stimulating laser beam, with the emission of light on the return of these electrons to a ground state.

**Minimizing X-ray Exposure**- The mantra of decreasing radiation exposure is "time, distance, and shielding." Decreasing the time a patient or technician is exposed will not surprisingly decrease the dose. For a patient, decreasing the distance between the patient and the receiver and decreasing SID will decrease the dose. However, decreasing SID will result in increased magnification. For the technician, increasing the distance from the patient and x-ray beam will decrease the dose by decreasing exposure to scattered radiation. Radiation exposure is also minimized by the use of filtration, collimation, and lead aprons (shielding). Filters such as those made out of aluminum positioned within the x-ray tube housing absorb low energy x-rays of little diagnostic use while collimation restricts the x-ray beam itself. Lead aprons and protective barriers also shield operators and the patient during image acquisition.

**Competencies**- The 2015 American Registry of Radiologic Technologists (ARRT) task inventory delineates approximately 131 responsibilities and fields of competency for a staff radiographer (x-ray technician). Notable responsibilities relevant to this article include:

- Restricting beam to the anatomical area of interest

- Advocating radiation safety

- Selecting radiographic exposure factors

- Operating fluoroscopic unit and accessories

- Operating electronic imaging and record-keeping devices

- Modifying technical factors to correct for noise in a digital image

- Perform post-processing preparation

- Position patient to demonstrate the desired anatomy using anatomical landmarks

- Modify exposure factors as appropriate for an individual examination

- Evaluate images for diagnostic quality

- Determine corrective measures to ensure diagnostic quality

- Correction of image artifacts

- Perform routine maintenance on digital equipment

- Positioning patients, x-ray tubes, and image receptors to perform close to 52 unique examinations

**Technical Elements of Images Acquisition -**Technical acquisition of radiographs depend on the anatomic body part being imaged. Radiology studies are generally comprised of three or more views; however a detailed description of patient positioning and required views for specific radiographic studies is beyond the scope of this article. In general musculoskeletal examinations will be comprised of anteroposterior, lateral, and oblique views with additional unique views for various body parts such as the Grashey and axillary views of the shoulder or the Judet view of the pelvis. The following represent basic instructions for classic anteroposterior (AP) views of common anatomic studies obtained in radiology with collimation values adapted from the 14th edition of Merril’s atlas of radiographic positions and radiologic procedures:

**Hand Radiograph (AP)**

- The patient is seated.

- Forearm rests on the table.

- The palm is placed against the receptor.

- Digits are slightly spread.

- The central ray is angled perpendicular to the third MCP joint.

**Wrist Radiography (AP)**

- The patient is seated.

- Forearm rests on the table.

- The wrist is centered at the level of the receptor.

- The central ray is angled perpendicular to the midcarpal region.

**Elbow Radiograph (AP)**

- The patient is seated with the arm placed on the table.

- Elbow is extended with the hand supinated.

- The elbow joint is centered at the receptor.

- The central ray is angled perpendicular to the elbow joint.

**Shoulder Joint (AP)**

- The patient is standing upright or recumbent.

- The glenohumeral joint is centered at the receptor.

- The arm is abducted slightly.

- The palm is placed on the abdomen.

- The central ray is angled perpendicular to the receptor.

- Collimation is adjusted to approximately 24 x 30 cm.

**Foot (AP view)**

- The patient is positioned in a supine or seated position.

- Knees are flexed with feet separated.

- The plantar surface of the foot is centered at the receptor.

- The central ray is angled 10 degrees posteriorly towards the heel to the 3rd metatarsal base (or perpendicularly).

- Collimate to 2.5 cm on sides and 2.5 cm beyond calcaneus and toes.

**Ankle (AP view)**

- The patient is supine or seated on the table.

- The leg is extended.

- The ankle is centered at the level of the receptor.

- Toes point vertically.

- The central ray is angled perpendicular to the ankle joint (between the malleoli).

- Collimate 2.5 cm on ankle sides and 18 cm along the length.

**Knee (AP, Non-weight Bearing)**

- The patient is supine with the leg in the extended position.

- The pelvis should not be rotated.

- Center knee to the receptor approximately 1.5 cm below the patella apex.

- Collimate 18 x 24 cm; 2.5 cm beyond sides.

**Hip (AP)**

- The patient is positioned supine.

- Rotate hip 15-20 degrees medially.

- Center hip at the level of the receptor.

- Collimate 24 x 30 cm.

**Chest (posteroanterior)**

- The patient is standing or seated upright position.

- The back of the hand is placed on the hips.

- Chin is extended.

- Place the top of the receptor 4 to 5 cm above the shoulders.

- The patient should flex arms with the back of their hands on their hips.

- Ensure full inspiration.

- The central ray is perpendicular to the center of the receptor.

- Collimate 35 x 43 cm.

**Abdomen (AP, Supine)**

- The patient is placed supine.

- Center receptor at the iliac crests.

- Pubic symphysis should be included.

- The central ray is angled perpendicular to the receptor at the iliac crests.

- Collimate 35 x 43 cm.