The treatment and management of sepsis have evolved consistently since it has been recognized as a disease entity. These advances can be credited for the mortality improvement in septic patients that have been seen over the last 2 decades. However, with mortality from sepsis still approaching 20% to 25%, there are improvements still needed to treat and manage these complex patients. Therapies are directed at the basic elements of sepsis as a syndrome of infection, the host response, and organ dysfunction. The initial management of infection requires forming a probable diagnosis, obtaining cultures, and initiating appropriate and timely empirical anti-microbial therapy and source control. Attenuating the host response and accompanying organ dysfunction are both parts of ongoing cardiopulmonary resuscitation.

The initial resuscitation period was previously goal-directed, bundled care, something which the Surviving Sepsis Campaign guidelines promote. Three large trials subsequently have shown no mortality benefit over usual care, which likely reflects the improvement of care, in general, with more of a trend toward early goal-directed therapies.

**Components of Acute Sepsis Bundle**

**Three-Hour Bundle
**

- Obtain appropriate cultures before administration of antibiotics

- Obtain plasma lactate level

- Administer appropriate broad-spectrum antibiotics

- Begin administration of crystalloid at 30 ml/kg for hypotension or lactate level greater than or equal to 4 mmol/L within the first 3 hours

**Six-Hour Bundle
**

- Start vasopressors if the patient is hypotensive during or after fluid resuscitation to maintain a mean arterial pressure level greater than or equal to 65 mmHg

- In the event of persistent hypotension after initial fluid administration, or if initial lactate is greater than 4 mmol/L, reassess volume status and tissue perfusion and document findings

- Re-measure lactate if initial lactate was elevated

**Components of the Sepsis Management Bundle**(to be completed in the next 24 hours)

- Administer low-dose steroid if indicated: Hydrocortisone at a dose of 200 mg per day

- Maintain blood glucose levels less than 180 mg/dL

- Maintain plateau airway pressure at less than 30 cm H2O in ventilator-dependent patients: Employ a lung-protective ventilator strategy

- Reassess antibiotic therapy daily for de-escalation when appropriate

- Early Initiation of enteral feeding rather than complete fast or parenteral nutrition

- Perform source control, where indicated, within 12 hours of identification

- Administer prophylaxis for deep vein thrombosis

- Administer stress-ulcer prophylaxis to prevent upper gastrointestinal (GI) bleeding

Antimicrobial therapy is strongly recommended to be started as soon as possible after the diagnosis of severe sepsis or septic shock has been made.  Delays in initiating antibiotic therapy have been associated with increased mortality. Recommendations have been made for initiating therapy within 1 hour of diagnosis; however, there appears to be some dispute about the importance of this timing.

Obtaining appropriate cultures is intended to influence care after this acute resuscitation phase has already passed.  Lots of emphasis has been placed in the past on the timing and technique by which to obtain a blood culture with the greatest likelihood of returning a true positive result.  There has been no correlation between the timing of a blood culture draw and detecting significant bacteremia.  Recommendations from the Infectious Disease Society of America (IDSA) emphasize drawing them in a sterile manner from at least two different locations, with the volume of the blood cultured being emphasized rather than timing.

Volume Resuscitation, in the acute phase, is recommended as being 30 ml/kg of crystalloid fluids. This fixed number was taken as the average volume of fluid given to patients in the PROCESS

Vasopressors are indicated in septic shock if the condition fails to respond to the intravenous fluid bolus as recommended above.  Vasopressors provide additional vascular contraction to assist in maintaining beneficial blood pressure, with a target MAP of greater than 65 mm Hg.

Re-evaluation is critically important to guide the management of these patients after the initial resuscitation period. This typically includes a thorough clinical examination and the concurrent variables of heart rate, blood pressure, urine output, and respiratory rate, among others. There have been multiple attempts at clearly defining these goals for acute resuscitation, and have included, at different times, measuring central venous pressure (CVP), mixed venous oxygen saturation (SvO2), trending lactic acid, stroke volume measurements, mean arterial pressure (MAP), and urine output. CVP measurements have been fraught with imprecision and not found to be useful in predicting whether or not a patient will respond to additional intravenous fluid administration. Mean arterial pressure is the force behind perfusion in the peripheral organs and tissues and should be the goal for both fluid and vasopressor administration. An elevated lactic acid, while not directly a result of tissue perfusion, especially in sepsis, has been directly related to increased mortality. Lactate clearance has also been suggested as a goal for early resuscitation, as a decrease of only 10% in the first 6 hours corresponded to an 11% decrease in the likelihood of mortality, as compared to patients who were unable to achieve this.

The widely held belief that in sepsis tissue, hypoxia was the problem led to liberal transfusions of packed red blood cells to increase oxygen delivery in the early years of sepsis management. This, however, has since been disproven with the transfusion requirements in septic shock trials addressing mortality with a lower threshold transfusion of 7 g/dL versus a 9 g/dL. Targeting a lower transfusion threshold of 7 g/dL in septic patients is the current recommendation unless there are signs of critical coronary disease, myocardial ischemia, or acute hemorrhage.

Corticosteroids have 2 important implications in severe sepsis and septic shock, namely that they have anti-inflammatory activity and that they magnify the vaso-constricting response to catecholamines. The conflicting support for the routine use of steroids in severe sepsis and septic shock has led to inconsistent recommendations for its use, despite more than 50 years of trials looking at its benefit in septic shock. Recently the CORTICUS and ADRENAL trials focusing on this point have failed to show a direct mortality benefit. However, there was a decreased length of ICU stay and days on vasopressors in survivors.

Mechanical ventilation is an important component of management as the respiratory system, predominantly the lungs, is the most commonly affected organ in severe sepsis and septic shock. In the event, the patient experiences acute lung injury that progresses to ARDS requiring mechanical ventilation, a lung-protective strategy is needed. In the landmark ARDSNet trial, patients who were receiving mechanical ventilation and had developed ARDS had lower mortality and decreased ventilator-dependent days with a lung-protective strategy. This strategy employed a lower tidal volume strategy of 6 ml/kg of predicted body weight and kept plateau pressures under 30 cm H2O.

Targeted treatments at different intersections in the newer models of sepsis have been continually developed and usually have been unsuccessful at providing any mortality benefit routinely. Drotrecogin alfa, which is recombinant human-activated protein C, was approved by the FDA in 2001 and was thought to promote fibrinolysis and inhibit thrombosis, which would have a significant impact on the pro-inflammatory state and complications involved in sepsis and septic shock. This was not the case, as it was withdrawn from the market after further studies were published showing no benefit and potentially worse outcomes. Further efforts were made to look at the administration of monoclonal antibodies against TNF, blocking IL-1 activity, granulocyte colony-stimulating factor (filgrastim), NO inhibitors, anti-thrombin, N-acetylcysteine, and using antibodies to endotoxin; however, these too failed to demonstrate efficacy.  Despite these failures, further development of other immunomodulating agents and the proposed "metabolic cocktail" continue to be pursued, as mortality, even with newer therapies, remains unacceptably high.