Acrokeratoelastoidosis of Costa is a type of marginal keratoderma that typically affects the borders of palms and soles and frequently involves the dorsum of hands and feet.

In most cases, it is of familial origin with an autosomal-dominant mode of inheritance (although rarely it may be autosomal recessive). However sporadic occurrence is well known.

Clusters of skin-colored to yellowish-brown keratotic papules appear along the borders of hands and feet, typically during the 2nd and 3rd decade of life. The papules often have an umbilicated or crateriform appearance.

Chronic trauma and excessive sun exposure have been proposed as possible exacerbating factors.

Despite the condition's rarity, detections is straightforward based on clinical features alone. However, diagnostic confirmation warrants histopathology. Elastorrhexis, i.e., fragmented elastic fibers in the dermis constitutes the pathological diagnostic hallmark, better appreciated on slides specially stained to highlight elastin such as VVG or Orcein.

Treatment is required only for cosmetic reasons. Attempts with topical corticosteroids, salicylic acid, urea, coal tar, oral acitretin, and surgical techniques including liquid nitrogen cryotherapy, and erbium: yttrium-aluminum-garnet (Er: YAG) laser ablation have all shown only a modest and temporary improvement.

Oral retinoids provide the best improvement, but relapse following cessation of therapy and the potential adverse effects of the systemic therapy for an otherwise benign condition do not support their liberal use.

The most important part of management is patient and family counseling about the benign nature and good prognosis of the condition.