Baseline investigational tools may include erythrocyte sedimentation rate, C-reactive protein, complete blood count with differential especially for the eosinophil count, comprehensive metabolic panel, prothrombin time/international normalized ratio, blood cultures, urine or sputum analysis/culture, stool studies for ova and parasites, TB skin test or interferon-gamma release assay, serology for antimitochondrial antibodies, angiotensin-converting enzyme levels, immunoglobulins, viral serology, or histoplasmosis antibodies or coccidioidomycosis antibodies. Transaminases are usually not greater than two times the upper limit of normal.

Imaging such as CT, MRI, or ultrasonography is sensitive in the visualization of liver lesions. A chest radiograph may aid in finding causation such as bilateral perihilar lymphadenopathy in sarcoidosis or nodular ground-glass opacities in miliary tuberculosis, or well-defined nodules as in histoplasmosis. Recently, the use of positron emission tomography (PET) imaging has been growing but requires further development.

Fine-needle liver biopsy is a paramount diagnostic tool in the diagnosis of granulomatous hepatitis, although it may be difficult to distinguish between different etiologies. The probability of finding a granuloma is proportional to the density of the granulomas in the liver and might be missed on biopsy. Evaluation for fungi, spirochete, acid-fast bacilli, ova, foreign bodies, fibrin, and lipid vacuoles is important.

Sarcoidosis is an inflammatory, multisystem granulomatous disease that is commonly seen in younger patients (20-40 years of age) with a second peak around age 60. Granulomas are common in the lung (95% of patients), liver, skin, lymph nodes, and eyes. It is one of the most common causes of granulomatous hepatitis in the US. It is common in those of Scandanavian descent and African-Americans. Women have been found to have a higher prevalence than men. Systemic sarcoidosis is associated with hepatosplenic involvement in about 50% to 70% of cases. Elevated alkaline phosphatase is the most common abnormality, consistent with a cholestatic pattern. Elevated transaminases may also be present. However, hyperbilirubinemia indicates more advanced disease. On imaging, the most common finding is hepatomegaly (5%-15%) and hepatic nodules in about 5%.

A classic feature of sarcoidosis is non-caseating epithelioid granulomas. Of note, the frequency of hepatic granulomas is not affected by the clinical activity of sarcoidosis or the degree of pulmonary involvement. Sarcoidosis is also associated with elevated angiotensin-converting enzyme levels (especially >2 times upper limit of normal) and hypercalcemia (due to production of 1,25-dihydroxy vitamin D by the granuloma), resulting in increased absorption of intestinal calcium with a low parathyroid hormone (PTH) level. Interestingly, there have been some studies that suggest an association between sarcoidosis and a mycobacterium. The majority of patients with hepatic involvement tend to be asymptomatic; however, they may develop ascites or esophageal varices due to extensive intrahepatic cholestasis leading to portal hypertension.

Primary biliary cholangitis, formerly known as primary biliary cirrhosis, is another common cause of granulomatous hepatitis in the US. It is an autoimmune chronic liver disease, commonly seen in middle-aged women, characterized by the destruction of the intrahepatic biliary ducts. Granulomas in PBC are present in 25% to 50% of patients and are found surrounding the damaged bile ducts. Anti-mitochondrial antibodies (AMA) are highly specific in the diagnosis of PBC and are present in about 95% of patients. On biopsy, it has a similar appearance to vanishing bile duct syndrome. Interestingly, sarcoidosis has been found to be associated with vanishing bile duct syndrome.

Granulomas in pulmonary TB are called a Ghon focus. Mycobacterium tuberculosis can also cause hepatic granulomas with 25% in pulmonary TB and up to 90% in miliary tuberculosis. These hepatic granulomas may or may not have caseation. In hepatic granulomas associated with miliary tuberculosis, hypoalbuminemia and hyponatremia have been found in 88% and 65% of patients, respectively. The presence of acid-fast bacilli or fungus in Ziehl-Neelsen stain has historically been used in the diagnosis of Mycobacterium tuberculosis and Histoplasma, respectively. Polymerase chain reaction (PCR) has a sensitivity of 88% and a specificity of 100% in detecting M. tuberculosis. It is important to note that Histoplasmosis may be confused with Leishmania on histology. Fungal culture, methenamine silver staining of the tissue, or complement fixation tests help in differentiating and aid in diagnosis.

Intravesical Bacille Calmette-Guerin (BCG), a strain of Mycobacterium bovis, has also been associated with granulomatous hepatitis. Administration of the live-attenuated BCG vaccine, especially in immunocompromised patients, may result in multiple hepatic granulomas. It causes nonspecific stimulation of the reticuloendothelial cells and so has been used historically in the treatment of certain malignancies, most commonly in the treatment of superficial bladder cancer. BCG therapy is also used in the therapy for melanoma, papillary carcinomas, and carcinomas in situ. Granulomatous hepatitis can be a rare but fatal complication of BCG therapy due to the widespread dissemination of BCG. The mycobacterium is only recovered on Ziehl-Neelsen stain in about 10% of all cases involving the liver. PCR is often negative as well.

Mycobacterium avium complex (MAC) is a common opportunistic infection found on liver biopsy in those with HIV. The biopsy usually shows granulomatous inflammation consisting of foamy macrophages, especially in the portal tracts and parenchyma. Hepatomegaly, fevers, and a cholestatic liver profile are common.

Drug-induced granulomatous hepatitis is a diagnosis of exclusion. Some histological clues that may point to drug-induced pathology may include the presence of tissue eosinophilia, vasculitis, or unicellular hepatocytic degeneration and necrosis.