There are varying degrees of comprehension deficit resulting in different types of alexia, including occipital or posterior alexia, central or parietal-temporal alexia, and frontal or anterior alexia.

The first presentation is known as alexia without agraphia, pure alexia, posterior alexia, or occipital alexia and is associated with damage to the occipital region. The visual word form area is affected, and visual input cannot be relayed to the language comprehension areas of the brain. The communicating area between the auditory centers and the language centers is maintained, resulting in the retained ability to interpret words spelled out to or by the individual.

- Associated with infarction to the left posterior cerebral artery and or hemorrhage in the occipital territory, usually affecting the splenium of the corpus callosum, which helps the visual cortex communicate with the language centers of the brain.

- Often associated with a contralesional visual field defect resulting in hemianopia (loss of sight to half the visual field), most commonly right visual field defect.

- Individuals lose the ability to comprehend written language but maintain the ability to spell and write.

- The area of auditory input is unaffected, and the individual is able to interpret words spelled out to them or by them.

The second presentation, known as central or parietal-temporal alexia, is associated with damage to the angular gyrus. Central alexia involves damage to the pathways connecting the visual word form area and the auditory area to the language centers of the brain, resulting in word blindness as well as the inability to spell out or recognize spelled out words.

- Associated with infarction to the left posterior cerebral artery, middle cerebral artery, and or hemorrhage to the angular gyrus.

- Associated with aphasia and agraphia. The individual will have difficulty with speech production and comprehension.

- Associated with right visual field defect and often times contralateral hemisensory neglect or loss.

- Complete loss of interpretation of written speech, inability to distinguish individual letters, inability to interpret words spelled out to them, or spell out words themselves.

The third presentation, known as frontal or anterior alexia, is associated with an anterior lesion to the left hemisphere. The visual word form area is spared, resulting in the ability to interpret written language through verbal working memory. The individual is able to recover word identity by recognition of common or content words.

- Associated with infarction, hemorrhage, injury, or trauma to the anterior part of the left hemisphere.

- Decreased reading comprehension with recognition of content words and short words but complete or partial letter blindness.

- Associated with agraphia as well as the inability to comprehend spelled out words and inability to spell words out themselves.

- Associated with non-fluent aphasia.

- Associated with right visual field defect and often times contralateral hemisensory neglect or loss.