- Measure the best-corrected visual acuity and any improvement with the pinhole. For EL cases, cycloplegic refraction may be performed.

- Facial symmetry and head posture

- Binocular alignment: The eyes with advanced cataracts and poor vision can have sensory exotropia. The presence of a comitant squint since childhood suggests poor visual prognosis in unilateral EL cases.

**Clinical Examination**

- Ocular adnexa: Possible swelling and redness of the eyelids

- Conjunctiva: Congestion and chemosis

- Sclera: Dilated episcleral vessels

- Cornea: The raised IOP causes stromal edema, sub-epithelial bullae, and Descemet membrane folds. PAG and PLG cases show fresh keratitic precipitates on the posterior surface of the cornea. Lens proteins deposit on the posterior surface of the cornea in LPIG.

- Anterior chamber (AC): AC depth decreases in PMG and PBG. The aqueous humor shows lens particles in LPIG. PAG and PLG show AC reaction due to the presence of inflammatory cells and AC flare due to leakage of inflammatory proteins. PLG shows hyper-refringent particles composed of calcium oxalate or cholesterol crystals.

- Iris: PBG and PMG show anterior bowing of the iris. Prolonged inflammation in PAG or PLG may present with posterior synechiae and peripheral anterior synechiae (PAS). Inflammatory pseudo-hypopyon is rarely seen in PAG.

- Pupil: The cases with a prolonged rise of IOP have a vertically oval pupil due to ischemia of the sphincter pupillae muscle. PBG has a classical mid-dilated pupil. Chronic PAG and PLG cases can exhibit a festooned pupil. A brisk consensual light reflex in the contralateral eye suggests an excellent visual prognosis.

- Lens: PMG shows an intumescent mature senile cataract (MSC). In LPIG, a rupture of the lens capsule with a cataractous lens may be visible. PLG shows MSC or HMSC. PAG can have a ruptured lens capsule or an anterior capsulorhexis with residual lens matter. PBG due to EL demonstrates an anteriorly positioned lens.

- Posterior segment: Cases of total cataracts obstruct the view of the fundus.

**Investigations**

- Applanation tonometry (AT): Goldmann AT is the gold standard for IOP measurement.

- Gonioscopy: Angle examination is mandatory in cases with a clear cornea. PMG shows a closed or an occludable angle in the involved eye, with a narrow or open-angle in the contralateral eye depending on the stage of cataract in that eye. An occludable angle in the contralateral eye suggests a PBG mechanism. LPIG shows open-angle with lens particle deposition. Chronic PLG and PAG may have synechial angle closure with PAS formation. EL often has a 'volcano configuration' of the iris, with the pupil forming the central crater.

- Ocular ultrasonography: It provides an image of the posterior segment in cases with no view of the fundus.

- Anterior segment ocular coherence tomography (AS-OCT): A reduced AC depth and angle opening distance, increased lens vault, and the axial length correlate with the occurrence of PMG.

- Aqueous humor cytology is rarely required to help elucidate the pathology in uveitis of unknown etiology. It helps differentiate PAG or PLG from infective conditions.