Many preoperative, intraoperative, and postoperative interventions and management strategies are available and continue to evolve for reducing and managing postoperative pain. The ASA published a practice guideline for acute pain management in the perioperative setting in 2012, which was reviewed and approved by the American Society of Regional Anesthesia and Pain Medicine.

Below is a list of treatments utilized for the multimodal treatment of pain in postsurgical patients:

- Systemic pharmacologic therapy

- Local, Intra-articular, or topical techniques

- Regional anesthetic techniques

- Neuraxial anesthetic techniques

- Nonpharmacologic therapies- ex, cognitive modalities, physical therapy, transcutaneous electrical nerve stimulation (TENS)

**Systemic Pharmacologic Therapy:**Commonly used medications for postop pain control include opioids, NSAIDs and/or acetaminophen, steroids, gabapentin or pregabalin, IV ketamine, and IV lidocaine. Oral administration of opioid medication is preferable over the intravenous route. Intramuscular medications are discouraged. However, during circumstances in which parenteral route of medication administration is needed (ex, risk of aspiration, ileus), intravenous patient-controlled analgesia (PCA) is recommended. With PCA analgesia, avoid a basal infusion of opioid medication in opioid-naïve patients. The addition of acetaminophen or NSAIDs is associated with reduced opioid consumption and better pain control than using opioids alone. Gabapentin or pregabalin are recommended for administration preoperatively, especially in opioid-tolerant patients, as they have been shown to reduce opioid requirements. Due to its extensive side effect profile, ketamine is only for major surgeries, in highly opioid-tolerant patients, or opioid intolerant patients. Intraoperative IV lidocaine infusions have associations with a shorter duration of ileus and better analgesic control compared to placebo.

**Local, Intra-articular, or Topical Techniques:**Peripheral nerve blocks, intra-articular anesthetic injections, anesthetic wound infiltration, and topic anesthetics can be used to help with site-specific pain control. These methods are not in routine use. Their administration should be considered based on beneficial evidence.

**Regional anesthetic techniques:**A local anesthetic with or without the addition of IV opioid medication is an option for fascial plane block, site-specific regional anesthetic injections, or in some cases epidural injections depending on the type of procedure performed. An anesthesiologist typically performs these techniques under ultrasound guidance. The use of continuous IV medication (in drip form) is preferable to single-injection techniques in cases where the duration of postoperative pain is prolonged. Intrapleural analgesia is not recommended for pain control as there is little evidence to suggest benefit, and high systemic absorption within the pleural space increases the risk of drug toxicity.

**Neuraxial anesthetic techniques:**Typically involves an epidural injection with local anesthetic with or without the addition of IV opioid medication. May also include the intrathecal (spinal) injection of opioid medicines. Epidural analgesia may be given as a continuous infusion or as patient-controlled analgesia. These techniques are for routine use in major thoracic and abdominal procedures, cesarean sections, and hip or lower extremity surgeries. They are especially beneficial in patients at risk for cardiac or pulmonary complications, or prolonged ileus.

**Nonpharmacologic therapies:**Examples of nonpharmacologic therapies used in pain control include cognitive modalities or mechanical modalities such as transcutaneous electrical nerve stimulation (TENS).

Evaluation of adequate pain control:

The assessment of pain severity is generally accomplished using a pain scale. Acute pain, such as that experienced in the postoperative period, is most commonly measured using unidimensional pain scales. While there are many different pain scales available, the Visual Analogue Scale (VAS) is the most frequently used scale to evaluate postoperative pain. This scale involves the use of a metered line marked from 0 to 10 with word descriptions of pain at either extreme of the scale, where 0 represents “no pain” and 10 represents the “worst possible pain.”