There are three (3) routes of entry for hydrofluoric acid into the human body - skin / eye exposure, inhalation and ingestion.   Cutaneous exposure, with skin intact or damaged, is the most frequent pathway for entry with regards to aqueous solutions.  Inhalation can arise from the exposure of the hydrogen fluoride gas as well as from the vapors eminating from the hydrogen fluoride liquid.

Hydrofluoric acid is highly lipophilic acid and readily penetrates through the skin into the deeper tissues.

- At high concentrations (> 50%), the hydrofluoric acid acts as a strong acid which causes corrosive burns with immediate contact to the skin, eyes, respiratory and gastrointestional mucous membrane.  The resulting corrosive burns occur immediately with visible tissue destruction, areas of ulceration and necrosis followed by intense pain from activiation of underlying pain receptors

- With lower contractions of hydrofluoric acid, the small fluoride ion is able to penetrate the dermal layer.   The fluoride ion differs from other forms of acid that releases hydrogen cations causing coagulative necorsis in that the fluoride ion continues dissolves through the skin causing further tissue destruction of nerves, blood vessles, underlying soft tissue via liquefaction necrosis and cellular death

- Fluoride ion absorption into the bloodstream when in the presence of other cations (specifically calcium and magnesium) forms insoluble chelate salt via hydrofluoric fixation.   The binding of the fluoride ion to the calcium and magnesium will produce hypocalcemia and hypomagnesemia as well as the destruction of the underlying tissue.  The depletion of calcium causes inhibition of the Sodium-Potassium ATPase Pump resulting cellular membrane permeability of potassium leading to hyperkalemia.  The electrolyte imbalance will lead to cardiac arrhythmias including prolonged QTc (from hypocalcemia), polymorphic ventricular tachycardia (from hypomagnesemia) and T wave elevation and QRS widening (from hyperkalemia)