Hepatobiliary scintigraphy evaluates the function of hepatocyte secretion, patency, and integrity of the biliary ducts, dynamic gallbladder bile clearance, and sphincter of Oddi functionality. The following conditions can be evaluated using a HIDA scan:

- Acute cholecystitis

- Chronic cholecystitis

- Sphincter of Oddi dysfunction

- Biliary atresia

- Biliary leak

- Biliary stent patency

Acute cholecystitis is among the most common clinical indications for HIDA scans. Acute calculous cholecystitis results from gallstone biliary obstruction and causes more than 90 percent of all acute cholecystitis cases. The remaining 10 percent of these cases are due to biliary stasis leading to acute acalculous cholecystitis which affects the very old, the very young, the critically ill (trauma, burn, and immunocompromised patients), and patients on total parenteral nutrition.

Biliary atresia is a rare but serious cause of neonatal jaundice which can cause irreversible liver damage if not surgically shunted within the first 2 to 3 months of life. This surgery is a stop-gap measure allowing the infant to grow and ultimately receive liver transplantation. Excretion of the radiotracer into the duodenum at 24 hours effectively rules out biliary atresia. However, the absence of excretion does not confirm the diagnosis of biliary atresia since biliary edema from neonatal hepatitis causes a similar presentation.

A biliary leak is diagnosable by visualization of radiotracer outside the biliary pathway following surgery, trauma, or liver transplantation.

HIDA can evaluate a functional biliary stent by the identification of radiotracer signal within the duodenum.