In 2001, the Institute of Medicine published Crossing the Quality Chasm, which highlighted the importance of moving basic science research findings into patient care practice.

In 2000, Balas et al. published a report stating that, on average, it takes “seventeen years for research evidence to reach clinical practice.” In addition, “only 14% of new scientific discoveries ever enter day-to-day practice.”

Other times, when knowledge is disseminated, it may be difficult to change human behavior or to get individuals to remember to implement new guidelines into daily practice. For instance, newly implemented guidelines that are developed in an academic center may not reach clinicians working in a rural hospital, or they may not have the resources to utilize the data in practice.

This situation can occur due to the strict inclusion and exclusion criteria used in the study. When this happens, the study data applies only to the population used in the study and not necessarily to the general population. Moreover, funding sources have not historically supported the resources needed for dissemination and implementation of new research findings to be shared widely.

The Institute of Medicine Crossing the Quality Chasm report helped pave the way for additional infrastructure and funding for translational work. Examples include the National Institutes of Health Clinical and Translational Science Awards that began in 2005 and the development of the National Center for Advancing Translational Science (NCATS).

The NCATS defines translational science as “the process of turning observations in the lab, clinic, and community into interventions that improve the health of individuals and the public.”

Engaging in translational science is not a linear process, but rather, it requires a line of thinking that includes considering the upstream and downstream effects of the knowledge or research generated. This is exemplified in the most recent NCATS translational science model, which positions patients in the center and the translational phases in a circle around the patient (National Center for Advancing Translational Sciences, 2020). This new model shows how each stage is built upon and informed by all other stages. It is best to think of it as an iterative process where the starting point can be at any phase and move in any direction among various stakeholders.