Dermatochalasis refers to the excess of the skin of the lower or upper eyelids. Many patients will seek blepharoplasty for cosmetic concerns related to the amount of dermatochalasis of either the upper or lower lids. However, a large amount of excess skin can contribute to physiologic pathology. Specifically, significant dermatochalasis of the upper lids may contribute to lateral hooding and visual obstruction, while that of the lower lid may contribute to ectropion. Steatoblepharon refers to the fat protrusion in the upper and lower eyelids, which may also cause a cosmetic concern to patients. Significant steatoblepharon or dermatochalasis is an indication for upper or lower lid blepharoplasty. Cosmetically, the goal for the upper lid is resection of skin and fat to allow a mild hollow and shadow related to the superior orbital rim and eliminate lateral hooding. Care must be taken not to remove an excessive amount of skin or fat, as either may cause a severely hollowed appearance of the upper lid or postoperative lagophthalmos. The goal remains the same for the lower eyelid, though lower lid procedures also focus on alleviating the sagging of the lower lid and treating the lid-cheek junction.

A pathologic concern specific to the upper eyelid is ptosis. While a full review of ptosis is outside of the scope of this chapter, it is worth mentioning that many patients presenting for blepharoplasty will suffer from senile ptosis or the disinsertion of the levator apparatus from the tarsus. Patients affected by this pathology will show the variable overlap of the upper lid over the pupil. Although there are various ways described to assess the degree of ptosis, the most reliable way is to measure the distance from the mid pupil to the lid margin. Classically, this distance has been described by the margin reflex distance 1 (MRD1). This refers to the distance between the light reflected off of the center of the pupil in primary position and the margin of the upper eyelid. To properly assess ptosis utilizing the MRD1, light must be reflected off of the center point of the pupil. The normal MRD1 is 4 mm. It is important to note that ptosis is specific to each eyelid, and the position of the lid on the oculus dexter (OD, right eye) and oculus sinister (OS, left eye) may differ. Patients with significant ptosis, often described as an MRD1 of 1 to 2 mm, are often considered candidates for levator advancement procedures.

A common indication applicable to the lower eyelid is lower lid ectropion or turning out of the lid exposing the conjunctiva. Though the causes of ectropion are vast and again outside of the scope of this text, the presence of ectropion may indicate a decrease in the elasticity and increase in the laxity of the lower lid. This feature can be assessed using the lower lid snap-back test, in which the lower lid is pulled away from the sclera and allowed to retract. The lower lid may be slow to retract or will not retract at all, indicating that a lateral canthopexy or canthoplasty may be necessary.