TCH is often associated with a potentially fatal etiology, such as subarachnoid hemorrhage (SAH), and is considered a medical emergency. Therefore, a rapid, focused history and physical examination are essential for evaluating a patient presenting with TCH. Patients may describe their pain as “the worst headache ever” or “worst headache of my life.”

A focused history and neurologic examination will help differentiate TCH from other headache types, narrow the secondary TCH differential diagnoses, and guide the initial testing phase. What differentiates thunderclap headaches from other types of headaches is how rapidly they reach their peak intensity, not the headache intensity itself.

Remember that the 2 most common causes of TCH are SAH and RCVS, which can be difficult to distinguish by history and physical alone when the patient presents with an isolated TCH. Asking the patient about common RCVS precipitants may be helpful. RSVS precipitants include vasoactive substances such as cannabis, cocaine, amphetamines, triptans, noradrenergic and selective serotonergic antidepressants, and nasal decongestants; eclampsia and postpartum; binge alcohol consumption; surgical manipulation causing direct vessel injury; and strenuous physical exertion, sexual activity, and Valsalva maneuvers.

Multiple (2-10) excruciating, short-lived thunderclap headaches over a few days to weeks are highly suggestive of RCVS.

SAH usually occurs during routine activity, including rest or sleep, but can occur during physical activity. Accompanying symptoms may include neck pain or stiffness, photophobia, vomiting, altered mental status, and loss of consciousness. Some patients report a sentinel headache, occurring days or weeks before presentation.

The neurological examination can be categorized using the Hunt Hess scale or the World Federation of Neurological Surgeons scale.

The following are signs and symptoms associated with other secondary TCH causes:

- Intracerebral hemorrhage - seizure, focal neurological deficits, altered level of consciousness

- Cervical artery dissection - neck pain, Horner syndrome, altered level of consciousness

- Cerebral venous thrombosis (CVT) - seizure, focal neurological deficits, the patient avoids lying flat

- Spontaneous intracranial hypotension (SIH) - patient avoids sitting up or standing up

- Meningitis - fever and neck stiffness

- Complicated sinusitis - fever, sinus pressure, the patient avoids lying flat

- Third ventricle colloid cyst - confusion, seizure, loss of consciousness

- Pituitary apoplexy - confusion, vision loss, diplopia, ophthalmoplegia, nausea, vomiting

- Posterior reversible encephalopathy syndrome (PRES) - seizure, focal neurological deficits, hypertension