**The Normal Function of the Testes**

There are two main functions of the testes. These are the endocrine production of androgens and exocrine production of spermatozoa.

The endocrine function of the testis is under neuroendocrine control. The production of gonadotrophin-releasing hormone (GnRH) by the anterior hypothalamus stimulates the production of luteinizing hormone (LH) and follicle-stimulating hormone (FSH) in the anterior pituitary.

**Endocrine Function**

GnRH is released in repeated pulses in response to excitatory neurotransmitters such as glutamate and kisspeptin.

Luteinizing hormone stimulates the production of androgens in Leydig cells by binding to a GPCR.

Leydig cell androgen production is dependent on the activity of four enzymes. These are cytochrome P450 17a-hydroxylase (P450 17a),  P450 side-chain cleavage enzyme (P450scc), 17b-hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase (17b HSD) and 3b-hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase (3b-HSD).

**Exocrine Function**

Spermatozoa are produced from spermatogonia through a stepwise process. The spermatogonia are at the basement membrane of the seminiferous tubules. The spermatogonia can be either stem cells (type A spermatogonia) or differentiated spermatogonia (Type B spermatogonia). Type A spermatogonia either produce more type A spermatogonia or type B spermatogonia.

After completing the prophase of meiosis 1, the spermatocytes rapidly complete meiosis 1. This process results in the formation of haploid secondary spermatocytes. The secondary spermatocytes complete meiosis 2, leading to the production of four haploid spermatids from one primary spermatocyte.

**Functional Significance of Testicular Descent**

According to the ‘temperature-dependent hypothesis,’ testicular descent is necessary because a low-temperature environment is needed to produce viable sperm. Normal spermatogenesis and storage in the epididymis require temperatures below that of the core body temperature.

A testicular temperature of 2 to 7 degrees C below core body temperature is a requirement for effective spermatogenesis.