All DNA is packaged as structures called nucleosomes which are the basic unit of chromatin.

Further DNA binding proteins, known as non-histone proteins, are a large group of heterogeneous proteins that play a role in the organization and compaction of the chromosome into higher-order structures. The H1 protein is essential in these higher-order structures.

From the solenoid size, chromatin is further packaged and condensed into chromosomes. These regions can be visualized microscopically through various stains applied to chromosomes during mitosis that are best seen during metaphase.

In addition to the need for systematic compaction of DNA for replication and cell division, it is important for the interphase cell to have its DNA organized within the nucleus. This organization helps to section the DNA into different areas of cell expression, among other functions. The nucleus consists of a nuclear double-layered membrane matrix compiled of different types of proteins that ensure nuclear stability and facilitate nuclear organization. This organization is by no means static, and a plethora of complicated mechanisms will change DNA expression temporally and geographically within the body. The nuclear lamina is under the inner membrane of the nucleus, where scaffolding proteins and matrix attachment proteins are present. Eukaryotic DNA is organized into loops, which can vary from 25 to 200 base pairs long. Within the actual genetic code of DNA, specific sequences allow for the attachment of matrix attachment regions (MARs) and scaffold attachment regions (SARs) along the nuclear lamina.