Symptoms of E. granulosus infection depend on two factors: the size and the site of the cysts. While the small and/or calcified cysts tend to remain asymptomatic indefinitely, larger ones can produce pressure or mass effects on the surrounding structures or can rupture, leading to anaphylaxis or acquire a secondary bacterial infection.

The clinical picture of liver cysts ranges from asymptomatic to hepatomegaly associated with right upper quadrant (RUQ) pain, nausea, vomiting, biliary colic, obstructive jaundice, and pancreatitis (when a cyst ruptures into the biliary tree). Pressure effects can lead to hepatic veins, portal veins, and IVC obstruction, leading to venous obstruction, portal hypertension, and Budd Chiari syndrome. Peritonitis can also occur if the cyst ruptures into the peritoneum.

The involvement of the lungs can give rise to cough, chest pain, dyspnea, hemoptysis, and less frequently nausea, vomiting, and malaise.

Other organs involved include the heart (pericardial tamponade), the brain (seizures and signs of raised ICP), the spinal cord (spinal cord compression), the kidneys (flank pain and hematuria), and the bones (pathologic fractures).

E. multilocularis infection clinical features tend to be nonspecific. The most common complaints include malaise, weight loss, RUQ pain owing to hepatomegaly, and obstructive jaundice. It may also mimic hepatocellular carcinoma.

When obtaining medical history, risk factors of echinococcosis, especially contact with canines and cattle, should be assessed.