**Current Management Options for Anorectal Fistula**

**Treatment Options for Anorectal Fistula**

The treatment for a fistula depends on etiology. Still, in general, an exam under anesthesia is typically indicated to identify the fistulous tract using a lacrimal probe and methylene blue or hydrogen peroxide. When the fistulous tract is detected if the cause is known to be an abscess or otherwise, there have been excellent results with a fistulotomy on the initial operation, which is shown to decrease the need for additional procedures.

**Fistulotomy Versus Fistulectomy**

A fistulotomy is the gold standard for an acute anal fistula and entails first identifying the tract of the fistula using a probe. The patient is placed in a lithotomy or prone jackknife position. Deep sedation or general anesthesia is used. The anus and perianal area are prepped with betadine. A local anesthetic is injected at the start of the procedure, which helps decrease postoperative pain and may help separate tissue planes. A digital rectal exam is performed. A Lonestar retractor or a Park's retractor is placed. The fistula tract is identified by probing the external opening using a lacrimal probe. Then an injection of methylene blue and or hydrogen peroxide into the external opening using a small angio-catheter will reveal the internal opening and if there are multiple internal openings. Keeping the probe through the external and internal openings, the sphincters are carefully identified, and their involvement is assessed. If the external sphincter is not involved, a fistulotomy is performed. Division of the external sphincter should be avoided at best to preserve continence; however, if a necessary division of the lower segment is associated with acceptable postoperative continence rates.

Being careful to avoid the external sphincter and simply splaying open the fistulous tract using a Bovie cautery or sharply. Electrocautery is then used to obliterate the epithelialized tract as much as possible, and the wound is left open to heal. Fistulotomy healing rates have been reported as high as 94% in some series.

A newer procedure that is utilized for high transphincteric or supra-sphincteric fistula is fistulectomy with sphincter reconstruction. In this procedure, the sphincter is divided where the fistula tract is, and after excision of the fistula tract, the sphincter is re-approximated with absorbable sutures. Recent studies have shown promising results with this technique for high and complex fistulas with healing rates approaching 90% and incontinence of 2%.

When compared to other operations, fistulotomy is associated with higher healing rates and less need for additional surgeries. Fistolotomy has been historically known as the gold standard as therapy for a fistula; however, its utilization varies. It has excellent first time healing rates.

A meta-analysis of six randomized controlled trials comparing the two showed no significant difference in healing rates or postoperative complications.

**Seton-Primary Drainage of the Fistula**

Seton placement works by the simple concept of allowing a fistula to adequately drain so that healing by secondary intention, from internal to external, may occur. A seton may be placed in the operating room once both the internal and external openings of a fistulous tract are known, and the tract is probed with a lacrimal probe. By allowing the tract to drain and having the seton in place continuously, the tract will slowly migrate from a deeper or higher space to a more superficial location. There are various kinds of setons, mainly simple setons, which may be a small vessel loop that is placed loosely. Setons may be used as the primary treatment for a fistula or as a staged procedure, and the patient return to the operating room for a fistulotomy after their high fistula has converted to a low fistula.

For a cutting seton, a suture is placed and is tied snugly to encourage the migration of the tract. As the wound migrates, the seton becomes loose, and it is then tied again more snugly in the office at intervals. A loose seton, typically a vessel loop, the patient may regularly turn to assist the healing, and these are effectively similar to cutting setons.

In an extensive study of 372 patients in Saudi Arabia with high anal fistula, the combination of cutting seton, an 0-silk suture-0, placed after a partial fistulotomy had exceptional healing rates of 97% with no fecal incontinence and a low recurrence 2.4%.

Some disadvantages of setons are that they require frequent follow-up, are cumbersome for the patient, might be uncomfortable for patients, and have long healing times, which can be up to 6 months or, in some cases, longer. In a study of 55 patients who failed seton therapy for their fistula, an endorectal advancement flap had superior short term results than a LIFT.

**Ligation of Intersphincteric Fistula Tract**(**LIFT)**

**Description:**

The LIFT procedure was first described by Rojanasakul & colleagues in 2007, in which 18 patients with intersphincteric fistulas were successfully treated using this novel technique. The method involves identifying the intersphincteric groove (ISG), identifying the internal and external openings of the fistula, followed by careful dissection of the portion of the fistula tract within the intersphincteric groove. The dissection can be carried out using cautery and or small scissors. Once the tract is dissected and is clamped with a right angle clamp, it can be safely suture ligated within the ISG close to the internal sphincter while preserving the integrity of both the internal and external sphincter musculature. It is then ligated with an absorbable suture. Distal to its ligation the tract is sharply divided, and this is confirmed with an injection of saline or hydrogen peroxide through the external opening. Any remnant of the intersphincteric tract is carefully removed, and finally, a small incision on the external opening is made to facilitate drainage. The wound over the ISG is precisely approximated with a few simple absorbable sutures.

This technique is specific for trans-sphincteric fistula tracts. Still, it can also be utilized for other complex fistulas that have a tract through the ISG, such as horseshoe or supra-sphincteric fistulas.

LIFT is an effective surgical modality for high and complex anal fistulas with healing rates ranging from 40-100%  and very low or absent sphincter dysfunction with larger cohorts demonstrating first time healing around 75% of the time.

Some cons of the LIFT is the potentially high recurrence rates reported in studies approaching 40%.

Benefits of the LIFT procedure are the ability to operate on patients with previous fistula surgeries, preservation of continence, small incision, and scar, and the method is compatible with re-operation if needed. Patients with a history of multiple fistula surgeries, a longer fistula tract, smokers, or those with obesity are at higher risk for failure of the operation.

**Advancement Flap for Anal Fistula**

Advancement flap for anal fistula is one of the earlier techniques for treating complex anal sphincters that has remained an important surgical option through the years despite many variations in technique and combinations of this technique with others. Rectal advancement flap or mucosal advancement flap, this procedure is commonly performed using rectal mucosa coverage of the internal opening of the fistula after coring out of the fistula tract. Usually, the external opening is left open to drain. It has been shown to have acceptable healing rates with low recurrence in <10% of patients and is a viable option for patients who have had prior fistula surgeries.

Despite usually high rates of fistula recurrence in Crohn disease patients, RAF is another treatment option for these patients, provided there is adequate drainage before the flap procedure.

**Anal Fistula Plug:**

An anal fistula plug is another sphincter sparing procedure which can be utilized in patients with a high risk of incontinence or complex fistulas. Plugs can be made of fibrin, porcine, or other biologic absorbable materials. Adequate drainage of the fistula must take place before placing any foreign body to minimize the risk of anal sepsis. For the fistula plug surgery, the internal and external opening of the fistula is first identified, and a probe is placed through them. This is sometimes followed by a mini-debridement of the track using a "fistula brush" or curette. A suture is easily pulled through the track, and the plug threaded through it.

The plug is sutured in place in the internal opening to the mucosa and the internal anal sphincter such that mucosa covers it entirely. In contrast, the external fistula opening is left open to drain. Anal fistula plugs have been widely controversial, with studies being inconsistent in outcomes. A large randomized control trial of fistula plug versus surgeon preference for transphincteric fistula in the United Kingdom found similar healing rates but with higher cost in the anal plug group, with no difference in the fecal incontinence, quality of life scores between the two groups.

**Video-Assisted Anal Fistula Treatment (VAAFT)**

Video-Assisted Anal Fistula Treatment of VAAFT is an emerging modality for the treatment of anal fistulas. It involves placing a tiny endoscope, a "fistuloscope," through the external opening of the fistula tract and the tract is explored for its internal opening. Any contiguous tracts or abscesses are identified. Diathermy is used to obliterate the tract under direct visualization, and, similar to plug therapy, the tract is debrided with a brush. The internal opening, once localized, and after debridement, is closed with sutures. In one study of 73 patients treated for complex cryptoglandular fistulas, VAAFT was associated with decreased pain, length of stay, and wound secretion and was able to be repeated safely for patients who failed initial VAAFT.

**Anal Fistula in Crohn Disease**

Fistulizing disease in Crohn patients is a severe disease to treat, but early recognition and diagnosis are critical to effective therapy. These patients should be referred to a gastroenterologist and receive anti-TNF alpha therapy as their primary treatment for fistula disease. After medical treatment, if the fistula persists, setons are the most commonly used primary surgical option in these patients with reasonable healing rates after anti-TNF alpha therapy.

The International Organisation for Inflammatory Bowel Diseases (IOIBD) global consensus guidelines emphasize the importance of evaluation of the rectum in these patients as their disease may often affect the rectal mucosa and anorectal area simultaneously. In a study of 36 pediatric and adult patients with fistulizing Crohn disease, a cutoff of 2.5 cm seen on MRI predicted patients who responded to infliximab therapy and those with the persistence of illness.