# Continuing Education Activity

Approximately one-third of patients initially diagnosed with a stroke are ultimately diagnosed with a non-ischemic stroke mimic. This activity reviews the features that assist in making this distinction and describes the evaluation and management of stroke-like conditions. It also highlights the role of the interprofessional team in caring for patients with stroke-like conditions.

**Objectives:**
- Describe the epidemiology of strokes and stroke mimics. 
- Identify the physical examination features to distinguish stroke mimics from true cerebrovascular events. 
- Summarize the differential diagnosis for a patient presenting with acute neurological symptoms. 
- Outline care coordination strategies to improve resource utilization by the interprofessional team in patients with stroke mimics.

# Introduction

Cerebrovascular accidents (CVA) consistently rank within the top five causes of death worldwide and are the number one cause of disability in the United States.stroke mimics, can present with similar symptoms, presenting a diagnostic conundrum. The diagnosis of CVA and its differentiation from potential stroke mimics is extremely time-sensitive: the two available treatments in ischemic CVA, pharmacologic thrombolysis and endovascular thrombectomy, are limited by strict timing criteria and contraindications, and the benefit of both these treatments decreases with delays in treatment initiation

# Etiology

Several conditions can present with acute focal neurological deficits, which may be misdiagnosed as an acute stroke presentation. This rate of misdiagnosis is augmented by the similarity of some stoke mimics to true CVA on imaging, including MRI.

# Epidemiology

Estimates of misdiagnosis of CVA range from 5% to 31%.

# History and Physical

Like CVAs, stroke mimics may present with negative neurological symptoms, including speech difficulties, weakness or numbness of the extremities, and facial asymmetry. Stroke mimics may also present with positive neurological symptoms, such as aura, hallucinations, or delusions. The presence of positive neurological symptoms may help distinguish stroke mimics from CVAs.

# Evaluation

Patients who present with sudden onset focal neurological deficits should immediately have a blood glucose level checked. Hypoglycemia may mimic the focal symptoms of an ischemic CVA and may also exacerbate symptoms of prior CVAs. Ancillary laboratory testing includes a basic metabolic panel, complete blood count, troponin, coagulation studies, and an electrocardiogram. Non-contrast computed tomography (CT) is the first-line imaging of choice due to its non-invasive and rapid nature, as well as its widespread availability. CT is, however, not sensitive for the presence of acute CVA, especially in the first 48 hours, with estimates of sensitivity as low as 12%

# Treatment / Management

Two treatment pathways exist for patients presenting with symptoms consistent with CVA that meet strict timing criteria and lack contraindications: thrombolysis or endovascular reperfusion therapy. Studies show that an estimated 4% of patients who receive thrombolytics for a presentation of acute neurological symptoms later receive a diagnosis of a stroke mimic.

# Differential Diagnosis

There is no specific historical detail or physical examination finding that differentiates strokes from stroke mimics, which include metabolic disturbances, intracranial lesions, seizures, and psychiatric disorders. Stroke mimics may present with neurological deficits in a vascular territory or symptoms may span multiple vascular territories or follow no vascular pattern. The mapping of symptoms to a vascular territory may help differentiate true CVAs from stroke mimics, though it is important to remember that stroke mimics may follow a vascular territory as well. Gradual onset is suggestive of a stroke mimic rather than a CVA, since CVAs, with the exception of some vertebrobasilar strokes, typically present with acute onset of symptoms. The presence of positive neurological symptoms, such as hemiballismus or hallucinations, suggests a stroke mimic rather than a CVA, which typically present with only negative neurological symptoms such as loss of sensation or paralysis.

# Prognosis

The prognosis of stroke mimics largely depends on the underlying etiology, as stroke mimics can result from a broad spectrum of diseases. Patients with transient neurological symptoms from conditions such as complex migraines or metabolic derangements have a better prognosis than those with neurological symptoms from conditions such as multiple sclerosis, sepsis, and decompensated cirrhosis.

# Complications

The relatively favorable safety profile of thrombolytic use in stroke mimics has been well-established.

# Consultations

The frequency of stroke mimics being misdiagnosed as true CVAs is lower in hospitals with higher neurological expertise and those with designated stroke units.

# Deterrence and Patient Education

Several campaigns targeting early stroke symptom recognition exist for the education of the lay public.

# Enhancing Healthcare Team Outcomes

Stroke mimics are projected to increase substantially in the coming years, leading to an increase in resource consumption in an already-taxed healthcare system.

Interprofessional collaboration and communication are of utmost importance in the treatment of strokes and stroke mimics. Timely communication between emergency medicine physicians, nurse practitioners, neurologists, and emergency and neurology specialty-trained nursing staff decreases delays to the initiation of thrombolysis if appropriate, which leads to increased efficacy of treatment. This early communication between members of the healthcare team may likewise lead to earlier identification of stroke mimics, helping to mitigate their burden on the healthcare system, including the increased cost to the patient and healthcare system, unnecessary use of stroke facilities, and inappropriate and unnecessary treatment.