Pudendal neuralgia is the neuropathic pain component of the syndrome caused by pudendal nerve entrapment and neuropathy. It is commonly a bilateral process with a characteristic perineal pain aggravated by sitting, which is present in over 50% of affected patients.****The condition is frequently misdiagnosed initially and is often refractory to treatment but can still cause intense, chronic, debilitating pain.****

The pudendal nerve is a mixed nerve having sensory, motor, and autonomic functions. As a result, inflammation or injury to the nerve can cause bladder, bowel, sexual and autonomic dysfunctions, and perineal pain. Pelvic and perineal sensation is more severely affected by injuries than motor or autonomic nerve functions.

The diagnosis is usually made only after many years of painful symptoms, during which time patients have undergone multiple evaluations, medication trials, procedures, interventions, and even surgeries. Symptoms are often treated by end-organ specialists, including gynecologists, colorectal surgeons, pain specialists, and urologists. The condition is significantly underdiagnosed and frequently inadequately or improperly treated, often with a dramatic negative impact on quality of life.

Pudendal neuralgia and pudendal nerve entrapment are largely unknown and unstudied conditions. There is a general lack of quality research or studies on the condition. The information presented here is based on the best available peer-reviewed medical literature and consensus expert opinions.