The side effects of cyclosporine and tacrolimus are very similar. Side effects of the two drugs include nephrotoxicity that manifests as an acute increase in the plasma creatinine and is reversible by dose reduction. It occasionally progresses to chronic kidney disease with permanent kidney damage, which can be irreversible despite stopping the drug.

- Hypertension is another significant side effect. It is caused by renal vasoconstriction and sodium retention and requires either dose reduction or the use of antihypertensives to reduce blood pressures.

- Neurotoxicity is manifested as tremors, headaches, seizures, and rarely encephalopathy, in addition to CNI pain syndrome.

- Metabolic abnormalities include hyperlipidemia, hyperkalemia, hyperuricemia, gout, hypomagnesemia, and glucose intolerance.

- Hepatotoxicity is caused by the two drugs but could be avoided by quercetin.

- Life-threatening bacterial, viral, and fungal infections resulting from immune system suppression are also reported.

- Malignancies include squamous cell cancers and benign and malignant lymphoproliferative disorders.

- Hirsutism (cyclosporine only), gum hyperplasia (cyclosporine only), and gastrointestinal disturbances of anorexia, nausea, vomiting, diarrhea, and abdominal discomfort are reported.

Pimecrolimus causes adverse effects like erythema, irritation, burning and stinging at the site of application, headache, fever, influenza-like illness, infections, respiratory symptoms including sinusitis, tonsillitis, nasopharyngitis, cough, bronchitis, and upper respiratory tract infections, acne, folliculitis, gastrointestinal symptoms of gastroenteritis, diarrhea, abdominal pain, vomiting, nausea, and constipation, arthralgia, infections in the ear and conjunctiva, allergy and anaphylaxis, epistaxis, asthma exacerbation, lymphadenopathy, and malignancies including squamous/basal cell carcinomas, malignant melanoma, and lymphoma.

Voclosporin has been reported to cause hypertension, headache, dizziness, hypoesthesia, migraine, paresthesia, seizure, alopecia, hypertrichosis, acute kidney injury, anemia, tremors, gastrointestinal tract disturbances including diarrhea, abdominal pain, decreased appetite, dyspepsia, gingivitis, and upper abdominal pain, cough, urinary tract infection, malignancies including lymphomas and skin cancer, infections, and chorioretinitis.

**Drug-drug Interactions**

Cyclosporine, tacrolimus, and voclosporin are extensively metabolized by CYP3A4 and have numerous drug interactions with other medicines which are metabolized via the same pathway. CYP3A4 inhibitors like azole antifungals, macrolides, diltiazem, verapamil, amiodarone, colchicine, and oral contraceptives can increase the plasma concentration of these medicines. CYP3A4 inducers like phenytoin, carbamazepine, and orlistat can result in a subtherapeutic level of CNIs and may decrease its effectiveness. Concomitant use of cyclosporine with NSAIDs, azole antifungals, ciprofloxacin, gentamycin, vancomycin, and drugs having renal toxicity, may exhibit synergistic or additive renal impairment potential. Therefore, close monitoring of renal function (particularly serum creatinine) should be performed while using these medicines.

**US Box warning**

**Cyclosporine**

- Only clinicians experienced in the immunosuppressive treatment and managing organ transplant patients should prescribe cyclosporine non-modified capsules. Patients receiving immunosuppressive drugs should be managed in clinics staffed and equipped with adequate laboratory and supportive medical resources. The physician taking responsibility for maintenance therapy should have thorough information required for the follow-up of the patients.

- Cyclosporine non-modified capsules should be administered with adrenal corticosteroids but not in combination with additional immunosuppressive agents. There is an increased risk of infection and lymphoma resulting from immunosuppression.

- Since modified and non-modified formulations are not bioequivalent, they can’t be interchanged without clinician supervision.

- When non-modified capsules are administered chronically, the absorption was found to be variable. Therefore, clinicians should monitor patients taking non-modified capsules over at regular intervals for cyclosporine blood concentrations, and subsequent dose titrations should be made to avoid toxicity resulting from high blood concentrations or possible organ rejection resulting from low absorption cyclosporine, especially in patients with liver transplants.

**Tacrolimus**

- Malignancies and serious infection: There is an increased risk of developing serious infections and malignancies with tacrolimus or other immunosuppressants, leading to hospitalization or death.

- Mortality in patients with liver transplantation: There is increased mortality in female patients taking Astagraf XL. Astagraf XL is not FDA-approved for use in liver transplantation.

**Pimecrolimus**

- The long-term safety of topical calcineurin inhibitor formulations has not been established. Therefore, continuous and long-term topical use of calcineurin inhibitors, including pimecrolimus, should be avoided, and if needed, the application should be limited to areas of involvement with atopic dermatitis.

- Malignancy: There is no causal relationship, but rare reports of malignancy (e.g., lymphoma, skin malignancy) are documented in patients using pimecrolimus topical formulation.

- Pediatric Patients: Pimecrolimus is not FDA-approved for use in children younger than two years.

**Voclosporin**

- Malignancies and serious infections: There is an increased risk for developing malignancies and serious infections with voclosporin or other immunosuppressant use, leading to hospitalization or death.