# Introduction

The periaqueductal gray (PAG) is a key structure in the propagation and modulation of pain, sympathetic responses as well as the learning and action of defensive and aversive behaviors. Most notably, the PAG is largely responsible for descending modulation of pain perception, both in inhibition and facilitation, as pain does not depend on peripheral stimulation alone.

The PAG also participates in risk assessment, and responses to threats, aiding in defensive behaviors. These pathways give rise to learned aversive behaviors by the involvement of sympathetic responses, motor responses, emotional reactions, and elevating levels of awareness. Mice and rat models demonstrating aversive memory formation to pain related to the PAG highlights the important implications of this structure in our interactions with the environment. Further, this highlights the integral effects the PAG can have not only on the modulation of pain but the subsequent long-term impact in behavioral and memory responses to painful stimuli.

The role of the PAG with autonomic excitability not only contributes to defensive behaviors but also disease states that are affected by this activation, including panic attacks and anxiety.

# Structure and Function

The periaqueductal gray is aptly named as the gray matter structure surrounding the aqueduct of Sylvius in the midbrain. Along the caudal-rostral axis, the PAG extends from the level of the posterior commissure down to the level of the locus coeruleus. Internally, the PAG is delineated by columnal based boundaries: the dorsal PAG (dPAG), dorsolateral PAG (dlPAG), the lateral PAG (lPAG) and the ventrolateral PAG (vlPAG).

Several neurotransmitters are involved in the transmission of signals to and from the PAG. Inhibitory serotonergic projections are considered the key component of descending pain pathways. However, norepinephrine, dopamine, enkephalin, glutamate, mu-opioid receptors, and GABAergic neurons contribute in this sense as well.

PAIN CONTROL

The PAG plays a major role in the modulation and perception of pain. Initial recognition of this structure stemmed from the observation that stimulation of the PAG before surgery resulted in decreased anesthetic requirements.

The PAG has two major descending pathways involving the rostral ventromedial medulla (RVMM) and the locus coeruleus (LC). The PAG -LC pathway propagates by norepinephrine (NE), exerting an antinociceptive effect in the dorsal horn via the presynaptic alpha-2 receptor.

Though the serotonergic pathway is the major influencer of pain, other key neurotransmitters have demonstrated involvement in these pathways. Glutamate, when applied to the central amygdala and PAG of rats in experimental settings, demonstrated analgesic properties via higher thresholds for paw withdrawal to pain. However, complexity in this system requires emphasis as activation of the “ON-cells” in the PAG has also shown pro-nociceptive effects.

DEFENSIVE BEHAVIOR

The PAG is a key component in defensive and aversive behavior, mediated by emotional and autonomic arousal. The PAG is the source of unpleasant sensations, including fear, anxiety, and danger.

Overall, defensive behavior can subdivide into immediate and long-term responses. Stimulation of the dorsolateral and lateral PAG demonstrates short-term fight or flight with increases in heart rate and blood pressure, increased alertness, and transmission of non-opioid antinociceptive signals.

MIGRAINES

The PAG has been studied for even more specific functions, such as its role in migraines. Interestingly, the PAG has been implicated in the pathophysiology of migraines, possibly being the “generator” sites for migraine attacks. Increased non-heme iron deposition in the PAG for those with current migraines compared to those without a migraine relate to this evidence, although it is not clear if this is cause or consequence of the attacks.

# Embryology

The development of the PAG and the midbrain happens quite early in gestation, beginning with the ectoderm, one of the three main germinal layers. The neural ectoderm begins to develop by the third week, giving rise to the neural ectoderm and notochord by the mid-fourth week of development. The notochord, responsible for the longitudinal axis of the brain, gives rise to the three main layers of the primitive brain, including the mesencephalon, which is the embryologic source of the midbrain.

# Blood Supply and Lymphatics

The development of the PAG and the midbrain happens quite early in gestation, beginning with the ectoderm, one of the three main germinal layers. The neural ectoderm begins to develop by the 3rd week, giving rise to the neural ectoderm and notochord by the mid-fourth week of development. The notochord, responsible for the longitudinal axis of the brain, gives rise to the three main layers of the primitive brain, including the mesencephalon, which is the embryologic source of the midbrain.

# Clinical Significance

The primary clinical focus concerning the PAG involves its antinociceptive endogenous opioid and non-opioid mediated pain control.  This concept has support from studies demonstrating both lower activation of the PAG in chronic pain states, such as lower back pain and complex regional pain syndrome, as well as distractions from pain with upregulation of the PAG.

Through its role in arousal and pain, the PAG has a major involvement in disease states, including anxiety, panic disorders, and depression. Chronic stress states have shown links to despair and depression-like behaviors in mice, for example. Tail suspension tests or forced swim tests in mice led to suppressed glutamate in vlPAG leading to maladaptive and depression-like behaviors.