Gross features consist of polypoid, tan-white and friable lesions. They range from 0.7 to 9 cm with a median size of 1.5 cm. These lesions protrude into airway lumens. Distal and sometimes proximal airways may be bronchiectatic. The distal lung may show secondary obstructive changes. Most of the lesions are histologically benign epithelial proliferations that develop at junctions of ciliated and squamous epithelium.

Microscopic findings vary according to the papilloma's subtype:

- Squamous cell papillomas feature arborizing loose fibrovascular cores covered by stratified squamous epithelium. Exophytic tumors have orderly epithelial maturation and often keratinized cells. Acanthosis, parakeratosis are common. A degeneration into a squamous cell carcinoma is very rare but can occur in association with TP53 mutations. Less than 25% of solitary papillomas present typical features of HPV infection including binucleate forms, wrinkled nuclei, and perinuclear haloes. Occasional dyskeratotic cells, large atypical cells and mitotic figures above the basal layer can be seen. Dysplasia is graded according to the current World Health Organization  (WHO) classification into discrete, mild and severe dysplasia. Parenchymal involvement can feature either solid intra-alveolar nests of cytologically bland non-keratinizing cells or large cysts lined by similar cells.

- Glandular papillomas are characterized by a fibrovascular core covered by a pseudostratified or stratified columnar epithelium. The latter can form micro-papillary tufts. Uniform columnar cells have eosinophilic cytoplasm and round regular nuclei. The cytoplasm can be clear but nuclear atypia, necrosis and abnormal mitoses are absent.

- Mixed squamous cell and glandular papilloma is characterized by a mix of both features with a majority of glandular epithelium and interspersed squamous islands.