The disease affecting the dorsal column is typically degenerative in nature.

**Bedside examination test**– This test, called the Romberg test, can help to identify the location of the lesion. The patient is made to stand barefoot, with their feet together and eyes open. Then the patient is asked to close his/her eyes. If the patient sways to one side, it suggests a lesion in the dorsal column medial lemniscus. Care is necessary as the test can cause the patient potentially to fall.

**Localization**- Research has established that the dorsal column medial lemniscus pathway decussates in the closed dorsal medulla and starts as the medial lemniscus from that side. If the patient presents with sensation loss contralaterally, that is, on one side of the face and the other side of the body, we can localize the lesion to the brainstem. Further, if the patient presents with just the sensation loss in the legs and the trunk, this suggests that the lesion is either below the T6 vertebra or is specifically targeting the gracile nucleus medially.

Certain diseases and conditions disrupt the dorsal column medial lemniscus pathway, all-cause loss of vibration, conscious proprioception, 2- point discrimination, and fine touch. It is difficult to have an isolated lesion of the gracile nucleus and the fasciculus. Any condition that involves the gracile nucleus usually involves the other tracts of the dorsal column medial lemniscus pathway as well.

- **Medial Medullary Syndrome**- The result of occlusion of the paramedian branches of the anterior spinal artery. It presents with different features on the type of tract that is involved.

- **Tabes Dorsalis**- This is a manifestation of tertiary syphilis. It involves the dorsal column and the dorsal roots.

- **Posterior Cord Syndrome**- This is a very rare condition that results from the involvement of the posterior spinal artery; this is the only condition that involves the dorsal part of the spinal cord as the posterior spinal artery supplies it. The anterior spinal artery supplies the ventral portion of the spinal cord.

- **Vitamin B12 deficiency**- A deficiency of vitamin B12 causes deficits in the spinocerebellar, the corticospinal, and the dorsal column pathway.

- **Paramedian artery occlusion**- This rare condition can result from the occlusion of the paramedian arteries which supply the medial basal pons, the pontine nuclei, corticospinal fibers, and the medial lemniscus as they ascend through the brainstem. Any lesion here will cause a disturbance in these structures.

- **Raymond Cestan Syndrome**- This condition is also known as an upper dorsal pontine syndrome. It is the result of occlusion of the long circumferential branches of the basilar artery.

- **Dorsal Midbrain Syndrome**- Can be the result of occlusion of the paramedian branches of the basilar artery. It can involve the medial lemniscus if the occlusion has a lateral extension.

- **Thalamic Strokes**- The thalamus contains the third-order neurons of the dorsal column medial lemniscus pathway, and any lesion to the posterior cerebral artery can cause a problem with the thalamus.