Patients presenting with alcohol intoxication or with symptoms of alcohol withdrawal should be given supportive treatment. This may include but is not limited to intravenous hydration, electrolytes replacement, vitamin replacement (especially thiamine and B-complex), and suppression of withdrawal signs and symptoms using clinical institute withdrawal assessment for alcohol (CIWA) protocol.

Patients presenting to the emergency department with sustained tachyarrythmias should be observed using continuous telemetry monitoring. In most cases, observation and monitoring are sufficient.

If there are signs of clinical instability due to sustained tachyarrhythmias, synchronized cardioversion should be considered. These clinical signs include hypotension, altered mental status, clinical signs of shock, ischemic chest discomfort, or acute heart failure. Moderate sedation should be provided before performing synchronized cardioversion.

In stable patients with diagnosed atrial fibrillation, treatment is focused on symptom control either by rate control strategy or rhythm control strategy and systemic thromboembolism prophylaxis.

Therefore if not clinically unstable, the atrial fibrillation treatment strategy should be focused on achieving adequate rate control without causing hypotension. While there is no definitive consensus on the optimal heart rate to target, setting a goal based on symptoms is deemed appropriate. For example, in a symptomatic patient, a heart rate of less than 85 beats per minute may be considered reasonable, whereas a more flexible heart rate target may be appropriate for an asymptomatic patient.

Atrioventricular (AV) nodal blocking agents like cardioselective beta-blockers (carvedilol, metoprolol, bisoprolol) and non-dihydropyridine calcium channel blockers (CCBs) can be used. Digoxin is a third-line option and is rarely used.

Long-term anticoagulation is indicated in atrial fibrillation for thromboembolism prophylaxis. It is important to exercise caution regarding anticoagulation use in alcoholic patients as they may have nutritional anemia or thrombocytopenia. They may also have acute or chronic trauma on presentation. Unless the patient has high-risk features like a prior stroke or any other indication for systemic anticoagulation, it may be appropriate to defer anticoagulation therapy until the patient has recovered from the acute presentation.

Though it is believed that alcohol alcohol-induced atrial fibrillation self-terminates, it is also seen that approximately 20% to 30% will recur within 12 months.