When the signs of uncal herniation are present, the physician must act rapidly to reduce intracranial pressure by adjusting the volume of one component of the intracranial compartment, either brain, blood, or cerebrospinal fluid.

- Elevating the head of the bed thirty degrees

- Keeping the head midline

- Hyperventilation

- Hyperosmolar therapy with either mannitol or hypertonic saline

Hyperventilation works to reduce the intracranial pressure by decreasing arterial carbon dioxide levels which will induce vasoconstriction to reduce the cerebral blood volume; this is achievable by increasing tidal volume or respiratory rate with a target PaCO2 of 30-35 mmHg. Hyperventilation is typically reserved for situations where there is life-threatening intracranial hypertension, such as in uncal herniation.

Hyperosmolar therapy with mannitol or 3% hypertonic saline is administered to patients with intracranial pressure elevations above 20 mmHg or when there is suspected brain herniation. Mannitol is given as a bolus dose of 0.5-1 g/kg and can be administered every four hours as needed for intracranial pressures above 20 mmHg, maintaining the osmolar gap less than 20 mOsm. 3% hypertonic saline is given as a bolus dose of 5-10 mL/kg in patients with acute elevations of intracranial pressure or with signs of brain herniation. Hypertonic saline can be administered as a continuous infusion at 0.5-1.5 mL/kg/hr.

The next step for the management of uncal herniation if clinical signs do not resolve with interventions to reduce intracranial pressure is to consider decompressive surgical options.

- Placement of a ventricular drain

- Evacuation of an extra-axial lesion such as epidural hematoma

- Resection of an intracerebral lesion

- Removal of brain parenchyma

- Uni- or bilateral craniectomies