The clinical presentation of spinal tuberculosis is variable. The manifestations depend upon the duration of illness, severity of the disease, site of the lesion, and presence of associated complications including deformity and neurological deficit.

**Cold Abscess**

These abscesses typically lack all the inflammatory signs obvious in abscesses; and hence the name. In the cervical spine, they can present in the retropharyngeal space, anterior or posterior triangles of the neck or axilla. In the thoracic spine, they may present as pre- or paravertebral abscesses; or over the chest wall. In the lumbar spine, they may track down along the psoas muscle, Petit's triangle, Scarpa's triangle, or the gluteal region.

**Deformity**

The clinical appearance of kyphotic deformity has been classified as knuckle (one vertebral involvement), gibbus (two vertebrae) and rounded kyphus (more than three vertebrae). Owing to the greater involvement of the anterior spinal column in TB, the spinal column progressively develops a kyphotic orientation; especially in the thoracic and thoracolumbar spine. Rajasekaran et al. purported a formula to predict the final kyphosis in adult population afflicted with spinal TB: y = a + bx, where y is the final kyphosis, a and b are constants equal to 5.5 and 30.5, respectively, and x is the initial loss of vertebral body height.

**Neurological Deficit**

A neurological deficit can occur either at the active stage of the disease (secondary to compression from an abscess, inflammatory tissue, sequestrum or spinal instability) or during the healed stage (usually secondary to mechanical traction over the internal gibbus or spinal instability).

The initial compression in TB is secondary to vertebral body collapse, leading to anterior spinal tract involvement (exaggerated deep tendon reflexes and Babinski sign, further progression on to UMN-type motor deficit). Further on, the lateral spinal tracts are progressively involved (with loss of crude touch, pain, and temperature); followed by posterior column deficit (sphincter disturbances and complete sensory loss). The Frankel and ASIA scores, which were initially developed to classify neurological deficits in acute spinal injury may also be employed to classify the neuro deficiency in spinal tuberculosis.

- Stage 1: Deficit only evident, based on the clinical examination by the clinician (ankle clonus, exaggerated deep tendon reflexes and Babinski or plantar extensor)

- Stage 2: Patient has UMN-type of a motor deficit with spasticity, however, is still ambulatory. The anticipated motor score in tetraparesis is 60 to 100 and in paraparesis is between 80 and 100; sensory deficit involves the lateral column

- Stage 3: The patient is bedridden and spastic. The anticipated motor score in tetraparesis is 0 to 30, and in paraparesis is between 50 and 80; sensory deficit involves the lateral column

- Stage 4: The patient is bedridden with severe sensory loss/ pressure sores. The Anticipated motor score in tetraplegia is 0, and in paraplegia is between 50; sensory deficit involves posterior and lateral columns

- Stage 5: Similar to stage 4 +/- bladder/bowel involvement +/- flexor spasms/ flaccid tetraplegia/ paraplegia

Although most of the neuro deficit would fit into this classification, neuro deficits in intraspinal granulomas, cauda equina, or conus medullaris syndromes or TB of other atypical locations may not correspond to any of the stages mentioned above.

**Pediatric Spinal TB**

Owing to the immaturity and increased flexibility of the spine in children, they are particularly prone to developing severe deformity progression. Such worsening of deformity in children can also occur after the disease has completely healed, and therefore the need to follow-up this patient population until skeletal maturity cannot be understated. Rajasekaran et al. described 4 signs of "spine at risk" in children, which include:

- Retropulsion of the posterior aspect of the involved vertebra

- Facetal subluxation (separation of facets on lateral radiographs)

- Lateral translation of vertebrae (as observed on anteroposterior radiographs)

- The toppling of one vertebra over the other (defined by a line along the anterior surface of caudal normal vertebra crossing the mid-point of the anterior surface of the cranial normal vertebral bone)

He proposed that children with two or more of these signs had posterior facet disruption and required surgical intervention. He also proposed a classification system for the progression of the deformity in children:

- Type 1 curves where curvature increases until growth cessation or skeletal maturity and surgical intervention was required

- Type 2 curves where the deformity decreased with growth progression

- Type 3 curves where there was minimal change in the deformity either during the active or healed phases of the disease

**Atypical Presentations**

Some of the atypical clinical presentations may include intervertebral disc prolapse, isolated abscess without skeletal involvement, and pure intraspinal granulomas. Similarly, atypical radiological presentations may include skip lesions, concentric vertebral collapse, circumferential vertebral involvement, isolated posterior arch involvement, ivory vertebra, isolated meningeal, neural or perineural involvement without any vertebral destruction and multifocal osseous lesions.