The pathophysiology of Eales disease involves retinal periphlebitis, retinal ischemia, and neovascularization.

Vitreous hemorrhages generally resolve in 3 to 6 months. If they happen to persist beyond this duration, the probability of membrane formation in the vitreous increases with increased chances of tractional retinal detachment. Eales disease follows a very variable course of progression. Some patients may show spontaneous regression of new blood vessels, and others may have relentless vitreous hemorrhages.

Eales disease was classified by Charmis into the following stages:

- Stage I: This stage has mild periphlebitis. It is detected by ophthalmoscopy, and peripheral small retinal capillaries are affected.

- Stage II: Large veins are affected, and perivasculitis is present in large parts of the retina.

- Stage III: Neovascularisation with abundant vitreous and retinal hemorrhages.

- Stage IV: This stage is characterized by repeated vitreous hemorrhages and is the end-stage disease. Tractional retinal detachment may be present with vitreous hemorrhage.

The above-mentioned classification is no longer popular and is seldom used now.Recently, a new classification has been suggested by Saxena and Kumar.

- Stage 1: superficial retinal hemorrhages with inflammation (periphlebitis) of small (1a) and large (1b) caliber vessels

- Stage 2a: capillary non-perfusion, 2b: neovascularization of disc/elsewhere

- Stage 3a: fibrovascular proliferation, 3b: vitreous hemorrhage;

- Stage 4a: tractional/combined rhegmatogenous retinal detachment and 4b: neovascularization of iris, neovascular glaucoma, complicated cataract, and optic atrophy.''

So far, no classification system has been adopted as standard and accepted universally.