# Continuing Education Activity

The field of molecular genetic and genomic testing is undergoing rapid change due to improvements in our understanding of the molecular causes of both uncommon and common illnesses, as well as in DNA analysis technologies. Molecular diagnostics (MDx) deals with human, viral, and microbial genomes as well as the products they encode. Molecular genetics utilizes the laboratory tools of molecular biology to relate changes in the structure and sequence of human genes to functional changes in protein function and, ultimately, to health and disease. This activity reviews various methods for molecular diagnosis, specimen collection, procedures, Indications, potential diagnosis, normal and critical findings, interfering factors, and complications.

**Objectives:**
- Describe the types of genetic molecular testing.
- Explain the procedures and indications of genetic molecular testing.
- Review the normal and critical findings of genetic molecular testing.
- Summarize the interfering factors and complications of genetic molecular testing.

# Introduction

Genetic molecular testing has become a fundamental method for evaluating a growing number of inherited disorders, somatic or acquired diseases with genetic associations, and pharmacogenetic responses. Genotyping can provide valuable disease diagnosis, prognosis, and progression indicators, guide treatment selection, and response, and interrogate targets for gene-specific therapies.

DNA in human cells is wrapped around histone proteins and packaged into nucleosome units, which are compacted further to form chromosomes.

The completion of the full human genome sequence, the identification, and cloning of numerous genes associated with inherited and acquired conditions and diseases, plus the advent of powerful methods for molecular analysis of these genes in clinical specimens, have revolutionized the practice of molecular genetics and molecular pathology. Molecular genetic, nucleic acid-based techniques are often the only approaches available for these applications. As such, they offer a powerful tool for diagnosis, genetic consultation, and prevention of heritable diseases.

Many types of genetic tests are available to analyze changes in genes, chromosomes, or proteins. A healthcare provider will consider several factors when selecting the appropriate test, including what condition or conditions are suspected and the genetic variations typically associated with those conditions.

Molecular tests look for changes in one or more genes. These types of tests determine the order of DNA, building blocks (nucleotides) in an individual's genetic code, and a process called DNA sequencing. These tests can vary in scope.

Whole exome sequencing/whole genome sequencing tests analyze the bulk of an individual's DNA to find genetic variations. This test is typically used when a single gene or panel testing has not provided a diagnosis or when the suspected condition or genetic cause is unclear.

Gene expression tests look at which genes are turned on or off (expressed) in different types of cells. When a gene is turned on (active), the cell produces a molecule called mRNA from the instructions in the genes, and the mRNA molecule is used as a blueprint to make proteins.

Mutations associated with heritable disorders are detectable in all nucleated cells and thus are considered germline or constitutional genetic changes. Somatic genetic changes are characteristic of acquired or sporadic diseases, such as cancer.

Fluorescent in situ hybridization (FISH), chromosomal microarray analysis (CMA), and cytogenetic analysis (karyotyping) can be used to detect gross mutations like whole and large-scale gene deletions, duplications or rearrangements. Conventional karyotyping is limited to detecting rearrangements involving more than 5 Mb of DNA.

# Specimen Collection

The specimen required for the FISH, MLPA, DHPLC, and sequencing is peripheral blood; cells from amniotic fluid and, more recently, cell-free fetal DNA have been used as the sample for non-invasive prenatal testing.

# Procedures

FISH is a technique where the fixed genetic material of cells on interphase or metaphase hybridizes with a fluorescent DNA probe designed to target several specific sequences of the gene of interest; probes against sequences of housekeeping genes always serve as positive internal controls.

The probe can be tagged directly with fluorophores or with targets for fluorescently labeled antibodies or other substrates. Different types of tags can be used; therefore, different targets can be detected in the same sample simultaneously (multi-color FISH). Tagging can be done in various ways, such as nick translation or PCR using tagged nucleotides. Probes can vary in length from 20 to 30 nucleotides to much longer sequences. Locus-specific probes target a specific gene sequence of interest.

Break-apart probes target two areas of a specific gene sequence. Usually, a green fluorescent label is used on one end of a gene sequence, and a red fluorescent label is used on the other end of the gene sequence. When the gene sequences are intact, the green and red signals will usually fluoresce as a yellow signal, known as a fusion signal. Whole chromosome probes are collections of smaller probes, each of which binds to a different sequence along the length of a given chromosome.

The chromosomal microarray (CMA) is like a grid covered with thousands of tiny probes consisting of small pieces of DNA from known locations on each of the 46 chromosomes. CMA looks for imbalances of chromosomal material between DNA from the control and the patient’s DNA.

Denaturing high-performance liquid chromatography (DHPLC) is based on differential chromatography retention of DNA heteroduplexes after denaturation and renaturation; the migration of DNA heteroduplexes is determined not only by the length of the molecule but also by its melting temperature, which is a crucial point for the sensitivity of the test.

In the presence of a mismatch, not only the original homoduplexes, formed upon reannealing of the perfectly matching sense and antisense strands (25% each) are produced again but, simultaneously, two heteroduplexes form upon reannealing of the sense strand of either homoduplex with the antisense strand of the other homoduplex (also 25% each). As the heteroduplexes denature more extensively than the homoduplexes, they elute earlier than the homoduplexes that undergo less denaturation.

The sample for MLPA is genomic DNA; specific MLPA probes become hybridized with denatured genomic DNA; MLPA probes are designed with two peculiarities; the first one is that each pair of probes can hybridize next to each other on the target DNA region where they are ligated; the second peculiarity of the probes is that their design confers a unique length to each pair of amplified MLPA probe; thus they are detectable and quantifiable by capillary electrophoresis.

NGS amplifies DNA with random priming generating millions of reads and a genome-wide view of the genetic background of the patients. The first step for NGS is the generation of a library of fragments that are representative of the entire genome or transcriptome of the individual; the library generation starts with the fragmentation of the nucleic acid; in the modality of whole-exome sequencing, the fragments come from cDNA, while the whole-genome modality includes the complete genomic DNA.

Sanger sequencing is a multistep process that begins with PCR-based amplification of target DNA, followed by the removal of excess deoxynucleotide triphosphates (dNTPs) and PCR primers.

In manual Sanger sequencing, the user reads all four lanes of the gel at once, moving from bottom to top, using the lane to determine the identity of the terminal ddNTP for each band.

# Indications

Molecular genetic testing has a unique range of indications, most of which are quite different from the uses of traditional clinical laboratory testing and even molecular biologic testing in other disease classes (e.g., infectious disease, cancer).

FISH is indicated in patients with a family history of disease with a known deletion and has recently been used to detect deletions in single blastomeres on a preimplantation genetic diagnosis.

MLPA has a variety of applications, including the detection of mutations and single nucleotide polymorphisms analysis of DNA methylation, relative mRNA quantification, chromosomal characterization of cell lines and tissue samples, detection of gene copy number, detection of duplications and deletions in human cancer predisposition genes such as BRCA1, BRCA2, hMLH1, and hMSH2 and aneuploidy determination.

NGS has been used for rapidly sequencing whole genomes, deeply sequencing target regions, utilizing RNA sequencing (RNA-Seq) to discover novel RNA variants and splice sites, quantifying mRNAs for gene expression analysis, analyzing epigenetic factors such as genome-wide DNA methylation and DNA-protein interactions, Sequence cancer samples to study rare somatic variants, tumor subclones and Identify novel pathogens.

# Potential Diagnosis

FISH provides a swift means to diagnose common fetal aneuploidies; its diagnostic scope has reduced sensitivity compared with conventional cytogenetic analysis; this technique will not identify cases with cytogenetic abnormalities other than the most frequent ones (e.g., translocations, inversions, markers).de Novo mutations.

Chromosomal microarrays are considered a first-tier test for individuals with developmental delays, intellectual disabilities, autism spectrum disorders, or multiple congenital disabilities and are recommended in lieu of a karyotype.

Detection of abnormalities by multiplex ligation-dependent probe amplification analysis is dependent on the probes employed, which are typically designed to identify specific small gene deletions (e.g., MEN1 partial or complete deletion).

NGS generates millions of sequences that are processed, analyzed, and interpreted to identify the variants.

# Normal and Critical Findings

In fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH), when a probe binds to a chromosome, its fluorescent tag provides information on chromosomal abnormalities.

- **Positive (Pathogenic and likely pathogenic):**A positive result indicates that a gene deletion or duplication has been associated with the disease phenotype under study.

- **Negative:**A negative result indicates that no disease-causing deletions or duplications are identified in the test performed. It does not guarantee that the person will be healthy or free from other genetic disorders or medical conditions. Additionally, a negative result does not rule out a genetic cause of the disease nor eliminates the risk for future offspring. However, if a negative test result is obtained and the variant in question is known to be present in affected family members, this then rules out a diagnosis of that genetic disorder in the proband. Several causes may explain a negative result, including limited genetic knowledge and limitations associated with the methodology.

The presence of heteroduplexes on a DHPLC indicates the presence of a mutation relative to the reference genome used in the same sample.

# Interfering Factors

The specificity of the probe used in FISH is critical to avoid its hybridization with genes other than the target. Some FISH preparations have autofluorescence; thus, an adequate wash of cells to remove any fluorescent buffer or medium is recommended to eliminate the chances of background fluorescence.

MPLA has some general limitations. The mutations to be detected have to be known to include them in the design of the probes, and gene rearrangements like inversions and translocations are not detectable by the method. The samples have to be free of impurities. The presence of some contaminants in the sample, like phenol, can interfere with the ligation step. False positive or negative results may occur due to rare sequence variants in target regions detected by MLPA probes.

Melting temperature is critical for the sensitivity of DHPLC. Computational algorithms can predict this temperature, and usually, the experimental procedure is made with at least two different melting temperatures to increase the sensitivity of the test.

NGS technologies remain evolving to circumvent every challenge; large insertions, duplications, and deletions are detected only by some massive sequencers that can support long reads. Long homopolymers are also problematic regions for sequencing.

Despite automation, Sanger-based sequencing is still relatively labor-intensive, time-consuming, expensive, and requires specialized equipment.

# Complications

The complications during the peripheral blood collection by venipuncture are infrequent and of low risk; some patients can present hematomas, pain, and, especially in children, fear is common; other procedures like amniocentesis are more invasive and harbor more serious complications like infection, preterm delivery, respiratory distress, trauma, alloimmunization, among others though they are infrequent.

# Patient Safety and Education

Besides the potential complications mentioned before about the sampling procedure, other legal, medical, psychological, and ethical issues are associated with molecular testing.

Genetic counseling is a service that involves a multidisciplinary team headed by the genetic counselor and several other professionals. As the first step, clinical identification of a suspected disease is necessary to narrow and direct molecular testing. Information about the potential disease, the procedure of the molecular testing, and its potential results require explanation to the patient. Legal issues such as informed consent, especially in children that cannot give it, must be covered.

Finally, NGS technologies are applied to genetic counseling. The results' complexity is higher than those obtained with traditional genetic tests. Considerable information is generated and available for sharing, and ethical issues are implied in divulging it. All these aspects must be considered, informed, and explained to every patient subjected to genetic testing.

# Clinical Significance

Any permanent difference in the nucleotide sequence of a gene concerning a reference genome merits consideration as a genetic change or mutation. All changes identified following the tiered protocol must be confirmed by sequencing, and their pathogenic role in disease has to be determined.

The American College of Medical Genetics and Genomics recommends following this nomenclature and classification for the findings of genetics tests, including genotyping, single genes, panels, exomes, and genomes. The application of NGS has enhanced our comprehension of genetic diseases but also has driven the simultaneous identification of numerous genetic variants whose role in disease needs to be carefully studied.

Molecular genetic testing had accelerated progress with the incorporation of PCR on it, and this was followed by a giant step when next-generation sequencing allowed the generation of genome-wide data.