Treatment of cystitis cystica can be challenging due to the difficulty of identifying the exact cause. After confirming the diagnosis, the treatment mainly depends on removing the aggravating factor, antibiotics and chemoprophylaxis, symptomatic treatment, and surgical intervention if the previous methods fail.

**Medical Treatment**

Treating any active UTI with antibiotics followed by long-term low-dose prophylaxis is considered the first-line treatment option. Many antimicrobial drugs can be used according to the severity of the case. Oral trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole, fosfomycin, and nitrofurantoin are considered first-line agents for the initial treatment of UTIs.

Local antibiotic administration in the form of regular, intermittent intravesical instillations can also improve outcomes.

After treating the current UTI episode, subsequent long-standing prophylaxis is crucial for reducing the incidence of recurrent UTIs and for improving the mucosal inflammatory changes of the bladder. Regression of cystitis cystica changes is achievable by compliance with a suitable pharmacotherapy regimen and proper follow-up.

D-Mannose is an inert monosaccharide dietary supplement that is used as a nonantibiotic prophylactic agent for cases of recurrent UTIs.

Patients with cystitis cystica and recurrent urinary infections did appear to benefit from daily d-mannose therapy with a significant reduction in UTIs. However, further studies are needed to recommend this treatment routinely.

Symptomatic treatment includes physical therapy, pelvic floor exercises with bladder training techniques, non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs), and anticholinergic medications which help reduce the irritative symptoms and improve the patient’s urinary control.

Corticosteroids such as prednisolone can be used in otherwise intractable or severe cases. They appear to have a good success rate in confirmed, symptomatic cases not-responding to alternative treatments but typically require six months of therapy.

Oral cyclooxygenase-2 (COX2) inhibitor therapy caused the complete disappearance of gross papillary type cystitis glandularis previously treated with transurethral resection, which recurred.

Intravesical sodium hyaluronate improves the mucosal layer integrity and inhibits the inflammation and proliferation of cystitis cystica changes leading to symptomatic improvement.

Sodium hyaluronate is a smaller molecule than hyaluronic acid and penetrates tissues more deeply. Sodium hyaluronate is a glycosaminoglycan that forms a viscoelastic solution in water. This acts as protection of the underlying urothelium from irritating urinary chemicals.

It also helps transport peptide-based growth factors and structural proteins to the injury site. Sodium hyaluronate further reduces bladder inflammation by inhibiting mast cell activation and reducing the secretion of inflammatory chemicals like interleukin (IL)-6 and histamine.

As it is enzymatically degraded, sodium hyaluronate releases proteins that promote tissue repair. The usual dose is 40 mg in 50 mL with weekly intravesical treatments until symptomatic control is achieved.

**Surgical Treatment**

Surgical intervention is beneficial for cases with unsuccessful medical treatment or if the patient is presenting with a mass or obstructing symptoms.

- Transurethral resection (TUR) of the lesion is the most commonly performed procedure. An excisional biopsy should be examined histologically to confirm the diagnosis and exclude other potentially serious disorders.

- Neodymium-YAG laser can be used in more severe cases not responding to conservative therapy and transurethral resection.

- Diathermy of the mucosal cystic changes can be performed in patients with recurrent UTIs, although this treatment requires more data and study.

- Extracorporeal shockwave therapy has been used for painful bladder syndrome, but its specific use in cystitis cystica and similar conditions is not well established.

Treating nephrogenic adenoma is either transurethral resection of the lesion or transurethral fulguration, but recurrence is common, especially in children.

Intravesical hyaluronate therapy has also been used successfully for nephrogenic adenoma treatment but only anecdotally.

**Summary of Treatments**

- Most cases will need a bladder biopsy when transurethral resection can be performed.

- Patients with recurrent urinary tract infections should have long-term low-dose prophylaxis with trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole or nitrofurantoin.

- Intravesical gentamicin or D-mannose therapy can be considered in selected cases of recurrent urinary tract infections.

- Any urinary calculi that could be a focus of infection should be removed.

- Initial treatment for symptomatic cases includes pelvic floor exercises, bladder training, NSAIDs, and/or overactive bladder medications.

- Patients who remain symptomatic may benefit from six months of oral corticosteroids or a COX2 inhibitor.

- Intravesical sodium hyaluronate appears to be an effective therapy in otherwise intractable cases. Prophylactic therapy can be continued as monthly maintenance after the initial weekly induction period.

- Surgical therapy typically involves transurethral resection.

- Long-term UTI prophylaxis and NSAIDs should be considered in recurrent, symptomatic, or severe cases and after surgical therapy.

- Other surgical treatments include laser ablation, diathermy, and extracorporeal shockwave therapy but efficacy data on such modalities is limited.