The backbone of the body is the vertebral column which houses the extension of the human brain, known as the spinal cord. These 2 components have distinctive functions.

The brain houses the cortexes, frontal, parietal, temporal, and occipital. These work to control the different functions of the body by signaling. Signaling requires an axonal cell body that produces neurotransmitters and receives these signals by their dendritic processes. There are two broad categories of neurotransmitters, excitatory and inhibitory. Glutamate is an example of one of the most common excitatory neurotransmitters while GABA and glycine are examples of inhibitory neurotransmitters. These are the primary signal transducers that mediate commands.

The vertebral column is made up of bony segments separated by the nucleus pulposus. This is a remnant of the notochord in early embryology. It comprises of a jelly-like material that consists mainly of water, a loose network of collagen fibers. Its main function is to allow the vertebral disc to withstand forces of compression, such as shock and torsion. Several muscles originate and attach to the bony framework of the vertebral columns. These help the body move in different positions, such as, leaning forward and flexing side to side. The vertebral column is the foundation upon which the body relies on to complete its proper posture and physical activities.

Within the vertebral column, lies the spinal cord. It is a complex structure comprising neuronal cell bodies and tracts which exit through the intervertebral foramina. This is analogous to a railroad system exiting through tunnel systems to their target destination. The most important function of the spinal cord is to relay messages between the brain and the body. This is the medium through which it converts electrical signals into physical commands. After exiting, each nerve travels to its respective dermatome and innervates the muscles of that region. The spinal cord also uses the same neurotransmitters as in the brain.