The endothelial barrier and pumps are essential in maintaining corneal deturgescence and transparency. Endothelial cell dysfunction plays a significant role in the pathogenesis of FED.

The endothelial layer of the cornea is composed of a monolayer of hexagonal cells that acts as a regulator of water flow, balancing inflow and outflow to prevent corneal swelling. Embryologically, the endothelial cells are derived from neural crest cells and therefore rest in the G1 phase of the cell cycle. The functional endothelium contains around 400 to 500 cells per square millimeter. The aqueous humor provides the cornea with solutes and nutrients, which diffuse through the barrier of endothelial cells via intraocular pressure gradients.

Tight junctions between endothelial cells limit water diffusion paracellularly; therefore, sodium-potassium ATPase pumps are the primary driver for fluid movement out of the cornea and into the aqueous humor. The sodium-potassium pump is generally considered the endothelial pump; however, it works along with aquaporins, and the SLC4A11 encoded sodium-borate cotransporter. Due to a large number of active transporters, the endothelial cells are extremely metabolically demanding and dependent on ATP, chloride ions, bicarbonate ions, and carbonic anhydrase. For the cornea to remain transparent, the corneal stroma must have less than 3.5 mg of water per mg of dry tissue. Therefore, if the corneal endothelium becomes disrupted, such as if the number of endothelial pumps significantly decreases, the cornea absorbs an uncontrolled amount of water and swells, which results in hazy vision and decreases visual acuity.

The pathophysiology of FED involves several proposed mechanisms involving channelopathies, oxidative stress, apoptosis, and the epithelial-mesenchymal transition. Although several proposals for several mechanisms exist, the underlying pathophysiology remains unknown. One of the primary causes of the development of FED is channelopathies in the corneal endothelium, characterized by malfunctions due to mutations in the genes of ion channels, like mutations in SLC4A11, for example.

There is also a possibility that FED is associated with the unfolded protein response (UPR) of the endoplasmic reticulum (ER), in which after unfolded, abnormal proteins accumulate in the ER, a pathway of cellular mechanisms are activated to halt translation, degrading misfolded proteins, and ultimately trigger apoptosis. Few studies have demonstrated that the ER enlarges and several markers of the UPR are overactivated in FED.

In FED, degenerating endothelial cells produce a pathologic secretion product called hyaline excrescences. These excrescences are called “guttata” and can be seen on Descemet’s membrane, both histologically and clinically.