Characteristic lesions of BHDS are described as multiple, two to four millimeters, waxy, white, dome-shaped papules that are most frequently found on the nose and cheeks. They also may be present on the ears, neck, and trunk. Expression ranges from a few localized lesions to several hundred. Histopathologically, they are benign hair follicle tumors known as trichodiscomas or fibrofolliculomas. For many years, experts have argued that fibrofolliculomas, trichodiscomas, and acrochordons in patients with BHDS may be variations of the same lesion. Trichodiscomas and fibrofolliculomas are indistinguishable on clinical examination. Some authors have shown that deeper histopathologic sections reviewed on lesions, initially called trichodiscomas, showed characteristics of fibrofolliculomas only. Furthermore, some experts argue that the proliferative epithelial components that are specific to fibrofolliculomas may only be observed in horizontal sectioning. Acrochordons, known as skin tags, are common in the general population. In BHDS, acrochordons might represent a phenotypic variant of fibrofolliculomas. Although it remains controversial, these three tumors often are considered to be part of a morphological spectrum.

Other cutaneous manifestations of BHDS include soft papules of the lips, gingiva, and buccal mucosa, connective tissue nevi, lipomas, angiolipomas, acrochordons, and facial angiofibromas. Patients with BHDS also have been found with other systemic manifestations such as medullary thyroid cancer, thyroid adenomas, parotid oncocytomas, basal lung cysts, and parathyroid adenomas. It was once thought that BHDS confers an increased development of colonic polyps and other tumors. However, studies have shown that there is no association. Given the varied expression of the syndrome, patients often may be undiagnosed. They may present with renal cancer or a spontaneous pneumothorax, both of which often occur sporadically and may not prompt physicians to look for an underlying genetic defect.