The cervical spine is composed of seven vertebrae. Cervical vertebrae C1 and C2 are known as "atypical" vertebrae due to the presence of unique bony structures designed to support and move the skull. While the cervical spine can undergo flexion, extension, rotation, and side-bending, each individual cervical joint has a primary motion.

C1, the atlas, has no spinous process and articulates with the occipital condyles of the occiput bone of the skull, forming the occipital-atlanto (OA) joint. The OA joint connects the skull to the neck, providing attachment points for some neck muscles. It also functions to bear the weight of the skull, providing support. The primary motions of the OA joint are flexion and extension.

C2, the axis, articulates superiorly with C1 via a unique bony structure called the dens or odontoid process. The dens projects up from the vertebral body and articulates with the atlas. The dens permits pivoting motion and allows a greater range of motion in rotating the head laterally.

Vertebrae C3 through C7 are known as "typical" cervical vertebrae. The primary motion of the upper portion of the lower cervical unit (C2-C4) is rotation. The primary motion of the lower portion of the lower cervical unit is side-bending. The description of all spinal and vertebral movements is relative to motions of their anterior and superior surfaces.

- **Cervical flexion:**bending the head forward towards the chest.

- **Cervical extension:**bending the head backward with the face towards the sky.

- **Cervical rotation:**turning the head to the left or the right.

- **Cervical side-bending:**tipping the head to the side or touching an ear to the ipsilateral shoulder.

The function of the cervical spine is to stabilize and maintain the head in a position that allows our eyes to be parallel to the ground.