Facial injuries may be distracting to both the patient and the examiner. Eye-catching injuries to the face mustn't delay or prevent the consideration and evaluation of other severe and life-threatening conditions. Recall that there is a significant amount of force required to fracture a child's facial structures, and concomitant injuries are common.

The evaluation of a patient with a traumatic facial injury should follow advanced trauma life support (ATLS) concepts, particularly noting the effect of facial injury on the potential for airway compromise, spinal or neck injuries, or other head trauma, including traumatic brain injuries. Once life-threatening and other severe conditions are accounted for and stabilized, you may return for a more detailed facial structure evaluation.

**History**

An accurate account of the events in a traumatic injury, including changes in mental status, sensory and motor function, range of motion, vision, and associated symptoms, is critical in evaluating trauma. Considering the child's age, supporting history from parents, coaches, and first responders are likely needed. Children rarely have underlying medical conditions that contribute to a traumatic presentation or offer complications such as the use of anticoagulation; nonetheless, these routine historical questions should still be pursued as they may change management, along with reports of allergies, vaccinations (particularly tetanus), and last meal.

Patients might report swelling or stiffness in the head, neck, jaw, eyes, or nose. Feeling that teeth are loose, or the presence of or history of epistaxis does not change the likelihood of facial fractures. Sensations that something is stuck or catching, persistent diplopia, subjective malocclusion, or paresthesias of the face should raise concern for fractures.

**Physical Exam**

A careful physical exam is critical in children. Depending on age, they may not communicate a complete history of the traumatic event or relay all of their symptoms.

A calm, relaxed patient will be more accommodating to an extensive and careful examination. Examination success can be improved by being held by a parent and consideration of pain control, distraction, and anxiolysis.

A facial examination should be systematic. The exact approach is not as important as long as all aspects are examined. One method is to attempt the exam in 3 dimensions: superior to inferior, lateral to medial, then superficial to deep.

**Musculoskeletal and Skin**

For wound evaluations, determine the depth and explore any damage to muscles, tendons, vessels, nerves, and ducts. Facial nerve palsy after blunt trauma is suspicious for fracture of the temporal bone.

**Eyes**

If direct eye trauma has occurred, an examination of the eye should occur early as periorbital swelling can develop and hinder a later exam. An extraocular range of motion impairment suggests entrapment, possibly in a fracture of the orbital rim. Telecanthus concerns for a nasoorbitoethmoid fracture. The remaining ocular exam maneuvers evaluate for non-fracture related injuries and are discussed in other StatPearls articles.

**Mouth and Intraoral Examination**

The examination of the mouth for fractures focuses on the upper and lower jaws, teeth, and temporomandibular joint (TMJ). In addition to bony tenderness, particularly trismus, malocclusion, or dental laxity with palpation, gingival ecchymosis, or lacerations may be signs of fractures in the mandible or maxilla.