Clinical history and physical exam combined with neuroimaging and standardized developmental assessments are useful in making a diagnosis of cerebral palsy. Brain MRI is the preferred imaging modality for evaluating the cause of cerebral palsy. MRI has a higher diagnostic yield than CT and provides better detail of the brain’s anatomy. MRI has an 86% to 89% sensitivity for detecting abnormal neuroanatomy in the motor areas of the brain.

For early detection of cerebral palsy standardized developmental assessments along with neuroimaging should be used. The General Movements Assessment (GM) is a standardized motor assessment used in children under age five months corrected age.

An EEG is necessary for patients suspected of having seizures. Patients with stroke as a cause of their cerebral palsy should undergo thrombophilia screening. Pro-thrombotic coagulation abnormalities are present in 50% to 60% of patients with a history of stroke.

The clinical signs and symptoms of cerebral palsy can occur in many other conditions. Slowly progressive disorders can be mistaken for cerebral palsy, and sometimes these disorders have a specific treatment that halts the progression, prevents complications, or treats the primary underlying pathophysiology of the condition. Therefore, it is essential to screen for disorders that mimic cerebral palsy when the clinical history, physical exam, and neuroimaging are atypical for cerebral palsy. The following historical features are concerning for an alternative diagnosis: family history of cerebral palsy or other neurologic disorders, no known risk factor for cerebral palsy, developmental regression, hypotonia associated with weakness, the rapid loss of neurologic skills, worsening during fasting or illness, oculomotor abnormalities, or sensory loss.