The pathological changes in the brain of patients with different types of dementia can be varied. However, there is often overlap and mixed presentations and findings.

Neurodegeneration and vascular changes are seen in the brains of patients with vascular dementia. The findings can vary and are related to the underlying etiology of vascular compromise, including lacunar infarcts, hemorrhagic lesions, and microvascular disease.

There is considerable overlap of neuropathological findings between dementia with Lewy body and Parkinson disease, and some overlap with Alzheimer disease. Lewy body dementia and Parkinson disease are characterized by the presence of Lewy bodies throughout the neocortex, brainstem, and limbic regions of the brain. Lewy bodies are intracellular aggregates of proteins, predominantly composed of alpha-synuclein proteins, which can be highlighted by various stains depending on location within the brain.  There is also a loss of midbrain dopaminergic neurons and a loss of cholinergic neurons in ventral forebrain nuclei. Additionally, there are neuritic plaques made up of amyloid and neurofibrillary tangles, which can overlap findings in AD.

Alzheimer disease is characterized by neuritic plaques composed of extracellular amyloid beta protein deposition and neurofibrillary tangles composed of hyperphosphorylated tau proteins. It is also common to see signs of vascular ischemic damage and hippocampal sclerosis.

Frontotemporal dementia is characterized by atrophy in the frontal and or temporal lobes. There is neuronal loss, microvacuolation, and loss of myelin. Degeneration is found in the cortical and basal ganglia. There are four different pathological subtypes named after the proteins that make up inclusions found in the brain tissue. FTLD-tau and FTLD-TDP are the most common. FTLD-FET is less common, and FTD-UPS is quite rare.

Cruetzfield Jakob disease often does not need an autopsy for diagnosis; however, it will show loss of neurons, spongiform degeneration (vacuoles in the intraneuronal space), or plaques positive for PrPSc.