Coronary artery anomalies are hemodynamically significant if they either transiently or permanently adversely alter the blood flow to the subtended myocardium.

An anomalous coronary artery may arise from the systemic arterial circulation, but the contralateral or incorrect coronary sinus or cusp. This includes the right coronary artery (RCA) arising from the left coronary sinus, the left coronary artery arising from the right coronary sinus, and the left circumflex artery (LCX) arising from the right coronary sinus. The origin of the right coronary artery from the left sinus is three times more common than the origin of the left coronary artery from the right cusp but is less often clinically significant by a factor of 3:1.

The hemodynamic significance of these particular anomalies depends not only upon the course the anomalous artery takes before it reaches the myocardium but also upon the effect of the abnormal course on the shape of the artery and its ostium.

Not all inter-arterial anomalies are hemodynamically significant. If an inter-arterial anomalous coronary artery travels inferior or caudal to the level of the pulmonary valve, known as a transseptal course, then, similar to pre-pulmonic or retro-aortic anomalies, arterial compromise does not occur, and the anomaly is considered hemodynamically non-significant.

Coronary artery fistulas are rare congenital anomalies. They include abnormal communication between a coronary artery and a venous structure (coronary-venous fistula) or abnormal communication between a coronary artery and a cardiac chamber (coronary-cameral fistula) without the presence of an intervening capillary bed.

Intrinsic coronary artery anomalies include an intramyocardial course, subendocardial course, and coronary artery ectasia or aneurysms. Coronary artery aneurysms are uncommon, usually incidental, and are associated with atherosclerotic disease 50% of the time.