The diagnosis of Coats disease is clinical. Ancillary investigations are done when the diagnosis is in doubt, particularly with bullous retinal detachment with exudation and dilated vessels.

**Fundus Fluorescein Angiography (FFA)**

The typical fluorescein angiographic features are telangiectasia, aneurysms, beading of vessel walls, and peripheral retinal nonperfusion.

**Optical Coherence Tomography (OCT)**

OCT is helpful in monitoring for macular involvement. It helps in documenting cystoid macular edema, epiretinal membrane, subretinal/intraretinal fluid, subfoveal lipids, central macular thickness, and subfoveal choroidal thickness.

**OCT Angiography (OCTA)**

OCTA may be used to monitor the disease and response to therapy non-invasively.

**Ocular Ultrasonography (USG)**

It depicts the extent of retinal detachment. It characterizes the subretinal space, which is usually acoustically clear, but sometimes hyperechogenicity can be seen due to the presence of cholesterol deposits. Calcification can occur in advanced Coats disease along the retinal pigmentary epithelium. It is seen as a curvilinear pattern in contrast to retinoblastoma, where it is randomly distributed.

The analysis of subretinal fluid sometimes helps in diagnosis by demonstrating lipid-laden macrophages and cholesterol crystals.

**Computed Tomography (CT)**

CT is useful to rule out retinoblastoma. The presence of a solid mass with calcification is present in retinoblastoma. This is better delineated in the CT scan. In Coats disease, the scan would be clear of these lesions.

**Magnetic Resonance Imaging (MRI)**

MRI may be useful in diagnosing advanced Coats disease and ruling out retinoblastoma. The exudate in Coats disease is hyperintense on both T1-weighted and T2-weighted MRI images, whereas in retinoblastoma, the T1-weighted image will show a hyperintense mass, but the T2-weighted image shows a hypointense mass.