The treating provider must assess the patient by conducting a thorough history and physical. This includes asking about the onset, timing, and severity of the patient's abdominal pain, in addition to any previous occurrences of similar pain. The pain is colicky, located in the right upper quadrant of the abdomen, and moderate in severity. The pain is intermittent and recurrent. Often, patients will endorse a history of episodes of epigastric, right upper quadrant pain, or epigastric pain. A thorough review of systems will reveal that the patient may have noticed a yellowing of his eyes or skin, experienced pruritus, and possibly nausea or vomiting. Jaundice occurs when the stones obstruct the CBD, and conjugated bilirubin enters the bloodstream. A history including, clay-colored stools and urine turning tea-colored is found in such patients. Jaundice can occur in episodes. A patient with cholangitis also may have a fever, chills, and possibly altered mental status (Charcot triad or Reynolds pentad). Gallstones are responsible for approximately half of all cases of pancreatitis. Pancreatitis is precipitated when CBD obstruction is at the level of the ampulla of Vater. Pancreatic pain is located in the epigastric and midabdominal areas, and is continuous (as compared to colicky in choledocholithiasis), and radiates to the back. Nausea and vomiting are also present. Some patients have intermittent pain, which results due to transient blockage within the common bile duct. Transient blockage occurs when due to floating stones or debris within the bile duct.

The provider should examine the patient with particular attention to the general appearance, skin, vital signs, and abdomen. Tenderness is noted in the right upper quadrant of the abdomen. Systemic signs such as fever, hypotension, and flushed skin, if present is indicative of infection, or sepsis. Courvoisier sign is the presence of palpable gallbladder on the exam and is seen when gallbladder dilation develops due to the obstruction of the common bile duct. Note should be made for any hyperthermia, diaphoresis, jaundice, scleral icterus, tachycardia, hypotension, tachypnea, or right upper quadrant abdominal tenderness.