Differential diagnosis of guttate leukoderma is broad. Similar lesions may be seen in the setting of various generalized dyschromatoses. It is crucial to distinguish IGH lesions from vitiligo early in the disease course because, in contrast to vitiligo, lesions of IGH do not progress. Other common dermatologic conditions in the differential diagnosis include pityriasis versicolor, pityriasis alba, café au lait macules, lichen sclerosis, guttate morphea, and simple post-inflammatory hypopigmentation. Each of which has a distinct typical distribution and associated findings, which are fairly characteristic. Some of the less commonly thought of lesions which are important to distinguish include achromic verruca plana, pityriasis lichenoides chronica, disseminated hypopigmented keratoses that follow psoralen and ultraviolet A (PUVA) therapy, clear cell papulosis, and atrophie blanche.

Achromic verruca plana lesions will be more susceptible to koebnerization, and histologically would expect to see koilocytes. Clinically, lesions of pityriasis lichenoides chronica are more widespread with overlying scale. Disseminated hypopigmented keratoses occur following PUVA therapy with well-demarcated, small, hypopigmented, flat-topped papules occurring on the trunk and extremities in a uniform distribution. Histologically note variable acanthosis, hyperorthokeratosis or parakeratosis, and papillomatosis, and a normal amount of melanin and melanocytes. Clear cell papulosis is a rare condition that occurs in young children more typically on face and trunk, at times noted to occur along "milk lines." Lesions present as multiple hypopigmented, barely elevated, small flat-topped papules and macules. Histologically, these lesions are characterized by large clear cells in the basal layer that have a pattern of immunohistochemical staining similar to Toker's clear cells of the nipple and extramammary Paget disease. Both IGH and atrophie blanch favor the distal dorsal extremities, such as dorsal shins. However, lesions of atrophie blanche tend to occur in the site of a previous ulcer with more angulated margins and tend to be more porcelain white, depressed atrophic scars with a surrounding rim of telangiectasia.