Several temporomandibular disorders symptoms (approximately 85-90%) are treated with non-invasive, non-surgical approaches. Non-invasive approaches include manual physiotherapy and osteopathy, patient education, medication, and splint therapy.

AN issue generating much debate is the relationship between TMJ function and anatomy and posture. The difficulty in positively affirming the existence of a relationship between posture and TMJ is a function of the anatomical complexity of the same joint (capsule, muscles, ligaments, nerves, disk) and the comparison with all that is the body. Not only. Research is not yet able to find the correct unit of measurement or the ideal tool for measuring the relationship between TMJ and posture. It is necessary to consider the patient's historical variables and how long the patient has articulation dysfunctions.

There is a relationship between TMJ function and the cervical-hyoid-scapula tract.

Degenerative diseases of this joint represent the second major musculoskeletal problem (pain and reduced movement). Aging is one of the most important causes of diseases related to TMJ dysfunction. According to the geroscience hypothesis, trying to delay changes related to aging (delaying the cellular senescence of muscle-joint tissues and the secretion of cytokines) would be possible to delay or prevent the onset of TMJ dysfunctions. According to some authors, the intake of substances such as quercetin (antioxidant) and dasatinib (anticancer drug) could slow down the degeneration of TMJ.

According to a recent study, in patients suffering from temporomandibular joint dysfunction, chewing muscles have greater electrical activity than subjects without TMJ disorders.