Care is necessary across the interprofessional spectrum to ensure proper medication safety, efficacy, and adherence. The prescribing clinician should continually monitor and educate the patient on the risks and benefits of pimavanserin; it may be beneficial to consult with a geriatric or psychiatric Board of Pharmacy specialty pharmacist. All pharmacists involved in patient care need to be alert for changes in the patient's medications that may lead to drug interactions with pimavanserin and be prepared to make recommendations to change the patient's drug regimen if necessary.

In long-term care, nursing home, or home care settings, nursing staff can continually monitor patients for the common and life-threatening adverse effects of pimavanserin and either consult with the pharmacist or report their observations to the prescribing clinician immediately. Nursing staff can also monitor patient compliance and provide educational support to patients. As pimavanserin is a newer medication, other specialists working with the patient can familiarize themselves with the side effects and drug interactions of pimavanserin.

Lastly, pimavanserin is expensive. In patients that would benefit from pimavanserin, the prescribing clinician, social workers, insurance companies, and other staff members can work together to make pimavanserin accessible, as affordability is a concern that must be addressed, even if pimavanserin is the optimal therapeutic agent for a particular patient case. These types of interprofessional team interactions are but a few examples of how the interprofessional team model should work, which can lead to more successful outcomes with pimavanserin. [Level 5]