Adrenocortical carcinoma can present classically in three different ways. About one-third of patients present with symptoms of hormonal excess, another third present with non-specific symptoms and the last third are diagnosed coincidentally when imaging studies are done for other medical conditions.

Hormonal excess could be due to hypercortisolism, hyperandrogenism or both. Hypercortisolism (Cushing syndrome) can present as a plethora (rounded face), diabetes mellitus, osteoporosis, purple striae on the abdominal wall, muscle weakness, truncal obesity, and muscle atrophy. Glucocorticoid excess can present with hypokalemia and hypertension. Malignant adrenal tumors usually present with a clinical presentation of hypercortisolism, rapidly progressing muscle weakness and pronounced muscle weakness. Hyperandrogenism can present with male pattern baldness, virilization, hirsutism, and menstrual abnormalities. About 1 to 3% of patients have excess estrogen production. When estrogen overproduction occurs in males, a syndrome of feminization is seen, resulting in impotence, decreased libido, testicular atrophy, and gynecomastia. About half of the patients that present with hormonal excess have concurrent hypercortisolism and hyperandrogenism. Isolated hyperandrogenism in males is often underdiagnosed.

Autonomous aldosterone secretion can present as hypertension and hyperkalemia. Adrenocortical carcinomas are more often functional in children (90% of cases) compared to adults. Most of these tumors produce androgens, leading to precocious puberty and virilization.

Testicular pain and varicocele may also signal the presence of an adrenal mass.

Although paraneoplastic symptoms are rare, tumor-related, IGF-2 mediated hypoglycemia called Anderson syndrome is a common observation. Tumor chemokines can also cause leukocytosis, polycythemia, and hyperreninemic hyperaldosteronism.

Nonspecific symptoms include local tumor growth, abdominal or flank pain, early satiety, and abdominal fullness. The average size of the tumor at the time of diagnosis is approximately 10 to 13 cm. A minority of patients present with tumors less under 6 cm.

Nonfunctional tumors are typically larger at presentation than functional tumors, and a significant number are discovered incidentally during abdominal or thoracic imaging for other reasons. Some patients with nonfunctional tumors will remain asymptomatic until they present with signs or symptoms of metastatic disease (e.g., jaundice, bone pain). The most common metastases sites are lung (40% to 80%), liver (40% to 90%), and bone (5% to 20%).