Ovarian cancer remains one of the lethal malignancies in women despite the leading ongoing clinical trials and the introduction of new treatment lines in the past few decades. The poor clinical outcome is majorly due to the failure of effective strategies for the early detection of ovarian cancer.

With the goal of ovarian cancer to be diagnosed at an earlier and more curable stage, we are still in need of the development of effective strategies. The volume of residual disease post cytoreduction surgery is one of the powerful determinants of patients' survival. Hence it should be done only by an experienced gynecologic oncologist who sees a high number of cases at a large busy hospital (>20 cases/year).

Shared decision-making in terms of management of patients regarding newly available treatment strategies or clinical trials by going through benefits, safety profile, symptom control, and a discussion about the prognosis is one of the key elements. A close interprofessional team play with major roles played by medical oncologists and surgical oncologists helps in the smooth and effective management of the patients. Involvement of palliative care early helps fully optimize the treatment course and improve the quality of life.

Patients in clinical remission should be offered affordable yet effective strategies for close surveillance follow-ups where patients should also be educated about the symptoms indicating recurrence of the disease and should be encouraged for genetic risk counseling if not done previously in the early disease course.