Insulin is known to play an essential role in thymic growth. Insulin, growth hormone, and insulin-like growth factor increase the development of lymphocytes, and insulin can be found in the medulla of the thymus. Type 1 diabetes adversely affects the thymus; these patients will have a decreased immune system in addition to their diabetes and other related complications. The supplementation with insulin can be protective of their thymic function and preserve their immune system maturation.

Thymus hyperactivity secondary to hyperplasia of the organ is common in myasthenia gravis. However, thymus tumors, lymphomas, systemic lupus, or hyperthyroidism can also cause this clinical finding. Patients with thymus hyperactivity will have pallor, lymphadenopathy, rhinorrhea, and tonsillitis. This condition's treatment includes vitamins A and D, calcium, and iodine. Thalassotherapy, thymus radiotherapy, and heliotherapy may also be treatments.

Myasthenia gravis (MG) is an autoimmune pathology resulting in muscle weakness. The thymus produces antibodies that interrupt the signaling of acetylcholine at the motor endplate. The patient’s muscle strength worsened with continued contractions and this is a clinical finding that differentiates MG from Lambert-Eaton syndrome. Thymic hypertrophy in MG is so common that it is considered a diagnostic criterion; along with the antibodies found in the blood to the acetylcholine receptors and anti-muscarinic antibodies. Physicians may use an MRI or CT scan to evaluate the size of the thymus. MG is treated depending on the severity of the disease. Treatments range from immunosuppression and corticosteroids to surgical thymectomy. In some patients, only pyridostigmine bromide, a medication that slows the breakdown of acetylcholine, is necessary for symptom control. In patients with this condition, it is essential to keep in mind the potential drug exacerbations of disease when treating acute illness or comorbidities.

In contrast, atrophy of the thymus is present in several congenital conditions. DiGeorge syndrome is when the thymus fails to form in utero. This agenesis results in an immature immune system and recurrent infections. Severe combined immunodeficiency (SCID) is a genetic disorder where the thymus disappears early in childhood, and the patient lacks T and B cells. These children are also at significant risk for severe, recurrent infections.