In most cases, the etiology of macrocytosis may be related to abnormal RBC development, abnormal RBC membrane composition, increased reticulocyte count, or a combination of these three factors.

Abnormal RBC development may occur in settings such as vitamin B12 or folate deficiency. Vitamin B12 deficiency may be related to prolonged, strictly vegan diets. B12 is dependent on normal gastric and small intestine function. Its absorption needs intrinsic factor from the stomach and normal small bowel absorption. Immune interference with the intrinsic factor results in no B12 absorption. Impaired vitamin B12 absorption may occur due to gastrointestinal abnormalities including pernicious anemia, gastritis, celiac disease, inflammatory bowel disease (IBD), as a late complication of gastrointestinal surgeries such as gastrectomy, gastric bypass, and ileal resection, as an adverse reaction to medications such as proton pump inhibitors and metformin, or as an adverse effect of nitrous oxide abuse. Folate deficiency may be dietary, especially in cases involving alcoholic or elderly patients. Folic acid absorption also depends on health good GI small bowel absorption.

Folic acid stores may be affected by alcohol as well. Impaired folate absorption may be related to a similar range of intestinal abnormalities, including celiac disease, IBD, and small bowel resection. Folate metabolism may be impaired by medications such as methotrexate, phenytoin, and trimethoprim. In addition to its association with poor nutritional intake, ethanol also impairs folate absorption and metabolism, as well as inducing changes in the RBC membrane via its metabolite, acetaldehyde.

Increased reticulocyte count directly increases the MCV as these immature RBCs are, on average, significantly larger. Reticulocytosis may occur as a response to hemolytic or blood loss anemia. A low reticulocyte count is expected in anemic states caused by impaired RBC production. However, transient reticulocytosis may occur during recovery from these states once the factors causing the anemia are corrected (e.g., iron store repletion, hematopoietic cell transplant, or spontaneous recovery from parvovirus).

Additional etiologies of macrocytosis which are not completely understood but are presumed to be multifactorial include the following: hypothyroidism, pregnancy, liver disease, Down syndrome, HIV, myelodysplastic syndrome (MDS), multiple myeloma, and hereditary stomatocytosis. Common medications not already mentioned that may induce macrocytosis include the following: valproic acid, hydroxyurea, allopurinol, and reverse-transcriptase inhibitors such as zidovudine, stavudine, and lamivudine.

Artificial changes in MCV may be reflected in laboratory tests for various reasons. Cold agglutinins are associated with MCV clumping, which may result in the interpretation of an elevated MCV. Clumping may also occur to an extent due to inflammatory or neoplastic conditions. Severe leukocytosis or hyperglycemia may also result in MCV overestimation.