# Definition/Introduction

The Koebner phenomenon (KP), first described in 1876 by Heinrich Koebner, is the appearance of new skin lesions on previously unaffected skin secondary to trauma.

The Koebner phenomenon is not to be confused with pathergy, which is a term utilized to describe when minor trauma (including blunt trauma such as bumps and bruises) can induce skin lesions.

The Koebner phenomenon requires differentiation from the reverse Koebner phenomenon, which is the disappearance of skin lesions following trauma over the existing lesions.

One should also differentiate the true Koebner phenomenon from Wolf’s isotopic response. Wolf’s isotopic response is a similar phenomenon that occurs when trauma induces new skin lesions to appear on previously unaffected skin. However, unlike the Koebner phenomenon, the lesions in Wolf’s precede the appearance of generalized skin disease.

# Issues of Concern

**Underlying Pathophysiology**

The underlying pathophysiology of this phenomenon remains unclear.

**Classification and Subtypes of the Koebner Phenomenon**

Boyd and Nelder classified clinical entities with reported Koebnerization into four categories: true Koebnerization, pseudo-Koebnerization, occasional traumatic localization of lesions, and poor or questionable trauma-induced processes.

The**first group [category I]**referred to astrue koebnerization, includes psoriasis, lichen planus, and vitiligo. In these three conditions, the Koebner phenomenon is reproducible in all patients by a variety of insults. Boyd and Nelder argued that the term Koebner phenomenon should be typically reserved for this group of diseases.

The **second group [category II]**, referred to aspseudo-koebnerization, includes diseases such as molluscum contagiosum and verruca vulgaris, whereby the Koebner phenomenon gets produced by the seeding of infectious agents along with sites subjected to trauma, usually from scratching.

The **third group [category IIII]**,occasional lesions, includes Darier disease and erythema multiforme, which meet some criteria for the Koebner phenomenon but not all. Finally, the fourth group [category IV], questionable trauma-induced process, includes all disorders with a dubious association with trauma, such as pemphigus vulgaris and lupus erythematosus.

Since this publication in 1990, other conditions have demonstrated the Koebner phenomenon, such as leukocytoclastic vasculitis, mycosis fungoides, and eruptive xanthomas, among others mentioned in this article.

**Type and Severity of Trauma Inducing Koebner Phenomenon**

Different types of cutaneous injury may trigger this phenomenon, including excoriations, tattoos, friction, trauma, surgical instrumentation, burns, and ultraviolet or irradiation.

Time from skin insult to the appearance of new skin lesions varies. In psoriasis, new lesions typically arise within 10 to 20 days after a skin injury; however, this ranges from 3 days to 20 years.

# Clinical Significance

The Koebner phenomenon is typically associated with preexisting skin disease. Clinical entities that commonly display the Koebner phenomenon include psoriasis, vitiligo, lichen planus.

Koebnerization may significantly impact patients with psoriasis, as any insult to their skin, including tattoos and injections, can cause their disease to flare.

# Nursing, Allied Health, and Interprofessional Team Interventions

The Koebner phenomenon is something that dermatologists will often test for as part of a complete physical exam. However, by the time a patient reaches a dermatologist, it is almost certain that they received a referral from other providers because they have an underlying cutaneous disease. As a result, awareness of the Koebner phenomenon by other health professionals is likely to help patients in faster time to diagnosis and referral.

Primary care providers and emergency medicine physicians may often be the first group of health care professionals to encounter a patient with cutaneous disease. It may be helpful for these specialties to incorporate testing for Koebnerization (with a scratch test) into their physical exam to aid in building their differential diagnosis. Additionally, nurses may be the first to notice when minimal trauma induces a cutaneous response in a patient (i.e., a patient develops psoriasiform plaques along venipuncture sites or tape lines). Nurses may thus help the interprofessional team by reporting such findings. [Level 5]