All facilities or sites in the US that conduct diagnostic testing or medical treatment using human specimens are subject to regulation under the Clinical Laboratory Improvement Amendments of 1988 (CLIA 88).

The successful development of effective quality control for laboratory testing requires using verified controls to ensure that a POCT is functioning as expected and will yield accurate results.

Patient testing must be associated with the specific lot numbers for all products used for POCT, including the device, reagents, and sample collection materials. Many POCTs contain electronic records of such information, though historically, this information has been recorded in a logbook. Significant variables to ensure ongoing quality assurance include expiration dates for reagents, controls, and sample collection materials, proper storage and management of all materials involved in POCT, and proper establishment of acceptable ranges for test values.

Due to the decentralized nature of POCT, effective personnel management on an individual level is critical. Ideally, every person that runs POCT would be competent with the safe and accurate operation of each POCT. Many larger institutions implement electronic training modules and regularly track individual competency for POCT, in line with the requirements set by accreditation bodies such as CLIA.  Accreditation bodies, including CLIA, require 6 main competency elements: 1) direct observation of test operation, 2) monitoring of both recording and reporting of test results, 3) review of intermediate steps of POCT (test results, QC records), 4) direct observation of preventative maintenance and function check performance, 5) assessment of test performance using specimens previously analyzed, and 6) assessment of personnel problem-solving skills.

**Lab Safety**

Lab safety is a critical component of effective POCT for the patient, the sample collector, and the person that runs the POCT. One unique aspect of POCT is that the same person often carries the collection and test execution. Because of this, care must be taken so that task overload and errors in collection, transport, and analysis do not occur. Contamination of a POCT can impact multiple patients and operators, especially if the POCT in question is frequently used. The proper use of personal protective equipment (PPE) and corresponding protocols are critical for the protection of personnel and the accuracy of testing.

The rules of universal precaution should be applied to POCT, and protective measures such as splash shields and biosafety cabinets should be employed based on manufacturer and government agency guidelines. Recommendations for competency elements in POCT vary depending on the type of test and the samples collected. For example, POC molecular testing for nasal swabs, such as in the case of COVID-19 testing, generally requires specific personal protective equipment (PPE) to prevent exposure to airborne pathogens during testing.

Lab safety also applies to adequately disposing of samples and waste after completing POCT.

Proper disposal of POCT swabs depends on local and facility waste disposal procedures. However, a general guideline is that swabs used for POCT that remove the sample from the swab (for example, POCT that wash or require swirling of the swab in fluid) do not require disposal in a designated biohazard receptacle.