The differential diagnosis of PPSM, and the primary methods of differentiating it from these conditions, are listed below:

**Age-Related Macular Degeneration**

PPSM and AMD are both characterized by patients with similar demographics and pigmentary macular changes, which can progress to geographic atrophy. The two entities can be differentiated via multi-modal imaging and identification of the typical pattern of PPSM.

Specifically, hyperpigmented macular spots with yellow-orange deposits, which are at the level of the RPE and not below, along with dense packing of hyper-and hypo-autofluorescent spots on FAF, especially with a peripapillary autofluorescent halo, best describe PPSM. On the other hand, AMD can be identified by drusen, which is below the RPE. In one study comparing these diagnoses, no macular drusen were found in eyes that were diagnosed with PPSM, whereas RPE pigmentary clumps were more frequently found in AMD eyes of patients with prior PPS exposure.

**Pattern Dystrophy**

When differentiating PPSM from other pattern dystrophies, the same framework from above is used; however, special attention is paid to three features in patients with borderline imaging.

Inquiring about the family history or performing genetic testing can be useful in cases that are not elucidated by these three findings.

**Mitochondrial Dystrophy**

Additionally, there is a phenotypic overlap between PPSM and mitochondrial retinopathies, including reticulated-appearing fundus, peripapillary atrophy, and nyctalopia. One difference that may be seen between these diseases is that PPSM does not necessarily spare the fovea early in the disease, whereas mitochondrial illnesses will. Further, mitochondrial illnesses will often have systemic manifestations which are not seen in PPSM, such as muscle weakness (e.g., cardiomyopathy).