A detailed history of the origin, duration, and progress of the condition should be thoroughly investigated. Any associated history of traumatic injury, road traffic accident, physical assault, chest compression should be inquired.

Thorough systemic history regarding diabetes, hypertension, increased intracranial tension, metabolic disorders, bleeding and coagulation disorders, kidney and cardiac disorders should be inquired.

History of any medication intake should be inquired.

In patients of macular hemorrhage, additional findings like central scotoma, metamorphosis, micropsia, loss of color, and contrast sensitivity merit inquiry.

A thorough slit-lamp examination should be done to know the size, extent, location, and severity of the bleed, associated complications with it.

Hyphema can be classified into four grades depending on its height from the inferior limbus on slit-lamp examination.

- Grade 0-microhyphema (RBCs scattered in the anterior chamber)

- Grade I- hyphema involving less than 1/3rd of the anterior chamber

- Grade II-hyphema involving 1/3 to 1/2 of the anterior chamber

- Grade III-hyphema involving more than 1/2 but less than the total of the anterior chamber

- Grade IV- a total anterior chamber filled with fresh blood is considered as total hyphema.

Intraocular pressure should be repeatedly monitored.

Gonioscopy should be performed in hyphema, iris, and angle neovascularization patients and in patients of traumatic ocular injury to rule out angle recession.

Pupillary reflexes should be assessed by dilating the pupil.

Dilated fundus examination should be done to rule out the presence of vitreous hemorrhage and for detailed retinal examination to find out the cause of bleeding.

In conditions where visibility is hampered, B scan ultrasonography should be performed to rule out additional findings like a dislocated lens or intraocular lens, presence of the foreign body, vitreous hemorrhage, retinal detachment, optic nerve avulsion, choroidal detachment, and suprachoroidal hemorrhage.

In cases of traumatic injuries, a CT scan of the orbit should be advised to rule out any orbital fractures, presence of the intraocular foreign body, and rule out any associated brain injuries.

Ocular investigations include OCT(optical coherence tomography), OCT-A (optical coherence tomography angiography), FFA (fundus fluorescein angiography), ICG (indocyanine green angiography). Fundus photography should be done to locate the cause of vitreous hemorrhage, retinal hemorrhages, and macular hemorrhage.

In patients of macular hemorrhage, additional findings like scotoma, metamorphosis, micropsia should be inquired.

Gonioscopy should be performed in hyphema, iris, and angle neovascularization patients and in patients of trauma to rule out angle recession.

Suprachoroidal hemorrhage: It occurs mostly intraoperatively or postoperatively.

- In cataract surgery, it mostly occurs intraoperatively.

- In glaucoma surgery, it mostly occurs postoperatively.

- Symptoms of suprachoroidal hemorrhage include the following:

- Severe pain
- Nausea and vomiting
- Diminution of vision postoperatively.

- Signs suggestive of suprachoroidal hemorrhage include the following:

- Loss of the red reflex
- A sudden increase in intraocular pressure
- Anterior chamber swallowing 
- Bulging posterior capsule
- Expulsion of intraocular content
- Iris prolapse from the wound along with other intraocular content
- Anterior expulsion of iris, lens, retina, choroid
- Choroidal elevation