The thyroid gland has an extremely rich blood supply and is estimated to be six times as vascular as the kidney and relatively three to four times more vascular than the brain. It receives blood from the superior and inferior thyroid arteries. These paired vessels supply the superior and inferior aspect of the gland. The superior thyroid artery is the first branch of the external carotid artery as it arises near the level of the superior horn of the thyroid cartilage. The superior thyroid artery then moves anterior, inferior, and towards the midline behind the sternothyroid muscle to the superior pole of the lobe of the thyroid gland. From this point, the superior thyroid artery branches off. One branching point runs down the dorsal aspect of the thyroid gland. The other superficial branch runs along the sternothyroid muscle and thyrohyoid muscles, supplying branches to these muscles as well as the sternohyoid. The superficial branch continues downward to further give off the cricothyroid branch and to supply the isthmus, inner sides of the lateral lobes, and when present, the pyramidal lobe.

The thyrocervical trunk arises from the anterosuperior surface of the subclavian artery and gives rise to three branches, one being the inferior thyroid artery. The inferior thyroid artery branches from the thyrocervical trunk at the inner border of the anterior scalene muscle and advances medially to the thyroid gland. The artery reaches the posterior surface of the lateral lobe of the thyroid gland at the level of the junction of the upper two thirds and lower third of the outer border. The largest branch of the inferior thyroid artery is the ascending cervical branch, and it is important not to mistake this branch for the inferior thyroid artery itself.  [4]

In 10% of the population, there is an additional artery known as the thyroid ima artery. This artery has a variable origin including the brachiocephalic trunk, aortic arch, the right common carotid, the subclavian, the pericardiacophrenic artery, the thyrocervical trunk, transverse scapular, or internal thoracic artery. The thyroid ima most commonly originates from the brachiocephalic trunk and supplies the isthmus and anterior thyroid gland.

The thyroid gland is drained via the superior, middle, and inferior thyroid veins. The middle and superior thyroid veins follow a tortuous route and eventually drain into the internal jugular vein on either side of the neck. The drainage of the inferior thyroid vein may enter either the subclavian or brachiocephalic veins, located just posterior to the manubrium.

Lymphatic drainage of the thyroid gland involves the lower deep cervical, prelaryngeal, pretracheal, and paratracheal nodes. The paratracheal and lower deep cervical nodes, specifically, receive lymphatic drainage from the isthmus and the inferior lateral lobes. The superior portions of the thyroid gland drain into the superior pretracheal and cervical nodes.