The notochord is a structure that all vertebrates have during their embryonic development which helps to orient the entire axial skeleton. In addition, the notochord helps to form the vertebral bodies of the spine and the intervertebral discs.

The development of the intervertebral disc (IVD) begins around the 3rd week of embryonic development. During this week gastrulation occurs allowing cells to shape the three germ layers (the ectoderm, mesoderm, and endoderm). Also, the mesoderm subdivides into axial mesoderm (notochord), paraxial mesoderm (the somites), and intermediate and lateral plate mesoderm.

During the 4th week of embryogenesis, the notochord induces the somites to travel either peripherally or towards the notochord. The somites that travel peripherally later become the dermatomyotome and somites that migrate toward the notochord will become the sclerotome. During weeks 5 and 6 of development, the somites continue to either condense more around the notochord or travel further away from the midline. By the end of the 7th week, the sclerotomal cells show distinct segmentation with interspersed looser areas. By week 10, the looser areas of cells around the notochord push the notochord from the center and will eventually turn into the vertebral bodies. The distinctly segmented areas become the annulus fibrosis.

At birth, the cells of the NP are still like the cells of the notochord. Shortly after birth, these notochordal-like cells begin to disappear, and smaller non-vacuolated cells form in the NP which is thought to be due to the unique environment within the fully formed nucleus pulposus causing the newer cells to develop from the older notochordal cells.