Given the significant motor and sensory functions of the tibial nerve, its correct identification and protection in any surgical procedure are of paramount importance. Proximally, the tibial nerve is the most superficial structure within the popliteal fossa. This relatively posterior position protects the nerve in most surgical approaches involving the knee. For instance, the anterior midline incision most commonly used for total knee replacement involves an anterior dissection and arthrotomy thus leaving the tibial nerve safely out of the surgical field.

In certain clinical cases (i.e., tibial plateau fractures and posterior cruciate ligament injuries), a posterior approach to the knee may be indicated. The posteromedial approach to the knee is performed by making an incision along the medial gastrocnemius and then curved laterally along the flexion crease of the knee. The dissection is carried until the fascia overlying the medial gastrocnemius is encountered and then divided. The medial head of the gastrocnemius along with the tibial nerve and other neurovascular structures are then safely retracted laterally.

In the posterior approach to the knee, a similar curvilinear incision is made centered on the back of the knee. The medial sural cutaneous nerve can then be identified and traced back to the tibial nerve. This helps to ensure proper identification and protection of the neurovascular structures. Depending on the clinical situation, the medial gastrocnemius may be detached and reflected laterally to protect the neurovascular structures, or the structures may be dissected individually to access the posterior aspect of the knee capsule.

Distally, the tibial nerve lies posterior to the medial malleolus and can be safely retracted and protected posteriorly in most cases. In cases of ankle arthroscopy, use of the posteromedial and posterolateral ankle portals may theoretically pose a risk to the tibial nerve however cadaver studies have demonstrated that accurate placement of the portals leaves the tibial nerve a safe distance from the surgical instruments.