**Acute MEBT Management******

Treatment of MEBT varies along a spectrum, from trigger management and enhanced equalization education to medical and/or surgical interventions. Most commonly, MEBT is managed by the hyperbaric team, emergency physician, or general practitioner. It is often treated conservatively and resolved without medical interventions. In dealing with MEBT due to ambient pressure changes, one needs to decide if the cause of the dysfunction is primary or secondary. Is the change in ambient pressure alone the cause of the dysfunction (primary ETD), or alternatively, does the patient have some underlying secondary issue or medical condition (secondary ETD)? This is important regarding the approach to treating the patient’s pathology and preventing further BT.

If MEBT occurs during pressurization, then further pressurization should be stopped in order to allow the ET and middle ear space to clear. Decompressing a few feet and reinforced equalization techniques may be beneficial to allow for equalization. In the event of underlying ETD, physician-prescribed medical therapy such as oral decongestants may be beneficial. Exposure to a hyperbaric environment should be aborted if equalization remains unsuccessful, with potential referral to otolaryngology for assessment and further management.

If a patient cannot equalize during an urgent clinical hyperbaric treatment, an emergency needle myringotomy and/or urgent placement of tympanostomy ventilation tubes may be necessary. The procedure is classically performed in the anterior and inferior portion of the TM to avoid potential damage to middle ear structures, especially when performed emergently in extreme cases. This surgically created connection through the TM makes the need for equalization of middle ear pressure unnecessary and passive. Known complications associated with this procedure include infection, bleeding, migration of the tubes into the middle ear space, hearing loss, and chronic perforation requiring surgical repair.

Antibiotics are typically not indicated, unless signs or symptoms of infection develop, or in the case of exposure to contaminated water. It is important to avoid ototoxic antibiotics if concomitant TM perforation exists.

**Acute IEBT Management**

Any patient suspected of IEBT should be assessed and managed by an otolaryngologist. While a small TM perforation may be managed by the team, a large TM perforation, a perforation that is not resolving, or a perforation associated with IEBT symptoms should be referred to otolaryngology as these cases may require advanced surgical correction. Continued middle-ear space bleeding, which is unusual, or middle ear space bleed that is not resolving should also be managed by otolaryngology. Conservative therapy may include bed rest and avoiding maneuvers that increase pressure transmission (coughing, straining with bowel movement, further changes in ambient pressure, Valsalva, loud noises, etc.) Steroids may be considered, although its effectiveness remains unclear in the literature. Surgical exploration and/or repair may be required if significant symptomatology exists, or if deterioration occurs despite conservative therapy.

**Predicting Otic BT**

ETD and Otic BT cannot be 100% successfully predicted or prevented in any individual unless an anatomical connection between the external ear canal and middle ear space exists (such as myringotomy or ventilation tubes). The reason for interpersonal variation in their ability to equalize middle ear pressures during ambient pressure changes is unknown. Anatomic or physiologic differences have not explained the susceptibility of certain individuals to extreme ambient pressure changes and barotrauma.

Direct visualization of the TM to determine its mobility during equalization type maneuvers may play a role in the identification of individuals at risk for hyperbaric-associated ETD and MEBT, however, it does not successfully predict who will or will not have difficulty equalizing middle ear pressure during ambient pressure changes. While an abnormal nine-step ET function test may assist in identifying those at risk of otic BT, due to its low sensitivity it does not rule out the development of otic barotrauma in those with a normal test result.  One study reports a positive predictive value of 86% with respect to predicting ETD if both the nine-step test and degree of mastoid pneumatization as identified by radiography is used, however, this is not practical as a screening tool.

**Prevention of further MEBT**

There are no significant RCTs to evaluate ETD or MEBT prevention during clinical hyperbaric exposures. Further MEBT secondary to primary ETD may be prevented via increased patient education emphasizing equalization maneuvers and slowing the compression rate. There are multiple equalization techniques, such as Valsalva, béance tubaire volontaire (BTV), Toynbee, Frenzel, Edmonds, and Lowry. Equalizing early and often, and utilizing multiple techniques may assist patients having difficulties. A newer ear pressure release device, known as the Ear Popper, has been recently investigated. This device delivers a continuous flow of air into the nasal cavity based on the Politzer maneuver, which is delivered through the ET when swallowing occurs. The device has been used successfully inside a multiplace hyperbaric environment. In the literature, it has been documented as decreasing the need for myringotomy tubes in the pediatric population with chronic otitis media. At times, patients with primary ETD alone might require surgically placed myringotomy tubes to complete clinical hyperbaric treatment. When dealing with divers, the ability to equalize the middle ear space is optimized in the head-up position.

Alternately, if the patient has a secondary cause of ETD, that specific etiology needs to be treated. For example, if the patient is suffering from a URI with nasal and pharyngeal congestion, the congestion must be treated, and the patient should refrain from significant changes in ambient pressure until they can successfully equalize their ears. Radiation-induced damage causing ETD due to fibrosis and scarring may require medical therapy or myringotomy tubes. Endotracheal intubation may also serve as an obstruction to auto inflation of the ET that may require surgical myringotomy. Chronic otitis media is a chronic infectious and/or inflammatory condition that is not specific to the ET, but may prevent auto-inflation of the middle ear space via the ET. It is characterized more as an exudate than the transudate seen with ETD, and may be associated with a middle ear effusion.

Medical prophylaxis is controversial. Pre-treatment with pseudoephedrine may decrease the risk of barotrauma during air travel in adults, however, its efficacy in children remains unclear. The effectiveness of topical decongestants to reduce barotrauma remains unclear. There is significant variation in the use of topical decongestants, oral decongestants, topical nasal steroids, and oral antihistamines to prevent barotrauma in hyperbaric centers. Clinical hyperbaric patients may have multiple medical/surgical health issues controlled with polypharmacy regimens, and may be more prone to contraindications to decongestant use. Pre-treatment with pseudoephedrine prior to diving may decrease the incidence and severity of middle ear barotrauma in divers. However, the use of medication prior to diving remains controversial due to concerns regarding side effects, and the potential for the medication to wear off prior to the end of diving.

**Compression Rates and Slope and Their Influence on ETD and MEBT**

Attempts of preventing or decreasing episodic ETD or MEBT have been attempted by altering the compression rate (time) and slope (linear versus non-linear) during hyperbaric chamber compression. A slower rate of compression has been shown to reduce the incidence of MEBT during hyperbaric treatments, however many of the studies were underpowered and did not always reach statistical significance.  A more recent prospective study by Varughese et al.

**Surgical Intervention**

ETD preventing equalization and/or MEBT may require elective myringotomy with placement of tympanostomy ventilation tubes. Myringotomy in any form is not an acceptable option for those taking part in wet diving activities with the risk of water entry into the middle ear space and its potential complications. Myringotomy can be considered in those taking part in dry hyperbaric activities such as HBOT, tunneling work, and flying in a pressurized aircraft. Myringotomy should not be considered or used routinely as a prophylactic modality in asymptomatic adult patients. Some hospitals may utilize prophylactic myringotomy in infants and intubated patients, however, this is not standard treatment

Regardless of the underlying cause, a patient having experienced otic barotrauma should not be exposed to a hyperbaric environment until symptoms have resolved and otoscopic exam has normalized.