Acute bronchitis is self-limiting and treatment is typically symptomatic and supportive therapy. For cough relief, nonpharmacological and pharmacological therapy should be offered. Nonpharmacological therapy includes hot tea, honey, ginger, throat lozenges, etc. No clinical trials evaluated the efficacy of these interventions. Antitussive agents like dextromethorphan and codeine are frequently used in clinical practice to suppress cough based on their effectiveness in chronic bronchitis and studies on cough in the common cold. No randomized trials exist to evaluate their effectiveness in acute bronchitis. Codeine should be avoided due to its addictive potential. Data on the use of a mucolytic agent is conflicting.

Beta-agonists are routinely used in acute bronchitis patients with wheezing. Small randomized control trials on beta-agonists for cough in acute bronchitis had mixed results. A Cochrane review of five trials demonstrated no significant benefit of beta-agonists on daily cough except for a small benefit in a subgroup of patients with wheezing and airflow obstruction at baseline.

Analgesic and antipyretic agents may be used to treat associated malaise, myalgia, and fever. Prednisone or other steroids can be given to help with the inflammation as well. Although there is not enough evidence showing their benefit, they are useful in patients with underlying chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) or asthma. Typically the steroid is used as short-term burst therapy. Sometimes a longer tapering dose of steroids might be warranted, especially in patients with underlying asthma or COPD.

ACCP guidelines recommend against antibiotic use in simple acute bronchitis in otherwise healthy adults. A Cochrane review of nine randomized, controlled trials of antibiotic agents showed a minor reduction in the total duration of cough (0.6 days). The decrease in the number of days of illness was not significant per this review.

Procalcitonin might be useful in deciding on antibiotic use when the diagnosis of acute bronchitis is uncertain. A meta-analysis demonstrated procalcitonin-guided antibiotic therapy reduced antibiotic exposure and improved survival.

Lifestyle modification like smoking cessation and the avoidance of allergens and pollutants play an important role in the avoidance of recurrence and complications. Flu vaccine and pneumonia vaccine are especially recommended in special groups including adults older than 65, children younger than two years (older than six months), pregnant women, and residents of nursing homes and long-term care facilities. People with asthma, COPD, and other immunocompromised adults are also at higher risk of developing complications. Recurrence is seen in up to a third of the cases of acute bronchitis.

In summary, the data for the use of beta-agonists, steroids, and mucolytic agents, especially in patients with no underlying COPD and asthma, is lacking. Treatment should be guided by the individual response to them and reported benefit, as well as, weighing risk and benefit in each case.