There are several other syndromes and conditions in the differential diagnosis for xeroderma pigmentosum. Along with XP, these syndromes have revealed information about the various proteins and genes involved in nucleotide excision repair.

Cockayne syndrome is due to a mutation in either CSA or CSB genes, which results in defects in nucleotide excision repair. Patients with Cockayne syndrome present with microcephaly, retinal degeneration, deep-set eyes, prominent ears, sensorineural hearing loss, kyphoscoliosis, and gait abnormalities. Patients with Cockayne syndrome also have photosensitivity but are not at increased risk of developing skin cancers or pigmentary changes, as seen in XP.

There is a Cockayne-XP overlap syndrome (CS-XP), which has features of both Cockayne syndrome and xeroderma pigmentosum. This condition results in multi-system degeneration and is characterized by photosensitivity, degenerative neurologic manifestations, joint contractures, and short stature. Patients with CS-XP develop the same cutaneous manifestations as patients with xeroderma pigmentosum. After achieving some initial developmental milestones, these patients reach a plateau in their development and eventually reach a period of decline. Cockayne-XP overlap syndrome is extremely rare, with only 43 cases reported in the literature.

Another condition to consider in the differential diagnosis of XP is trichothiodystrophy (TTD). Trichothiodystrophy has a characteristic presentation of photosensitivity, brittle hair, ichthyosis, short stature, low fertility, and developmental delay. Despite patients with TTD having photosensitivity, these patients do not carry the same increased risk of skin malignancies and pigmentary changes as patients with xeroderma pigmentosum. There have been some cases of a trichothiodystrophy-xeroderma pigmentosum overlap syndrome (TTD-XP) reported.

Cerebro-oculofacial-skeletal syndrome (COFS) is another condition that has overlapping features with xeroderma pigmentosum. Patients with COFS present with characteristic facial dysmorphic features, including a prominent nasal root and an upper lip, which hangs over the lower lip. COFS patients also present with photosensitivity, microcephaly, developmental delay, congenital cataracts, and joint contractures.