The vermiform appendix is a small, tubular, blind-ended hollow outpouching attached to the posteromedial wall of the cecum, typically 1.7 cm below the ileocecal valve. The base of the appendix arises from the convergence of the taeniae coli, making this point of convergence a useful surgical landmark. The human appendix is typically 8 to 10 cm long in adults and is considered a vestigial organ.

The appendix is anterior to the lumbar plexus and iliopsoas muscle and posterior to the greater omentum. It is attached to the terminal ileum by the mesoappendix, a triangular fold of mesentery that is also connected to the cecum. The shorter length of the mesoappendix than the appendix gives the appendix its distinct curled, twisted appearance.

Typically, the appendix is located in the right lower quadrant of the abdomen. However, it may also be found in the left upper quadrant, left anterior para-midline, and lower midline. It may also be positioned in several other orientations, such as the pelvic, where it points towards the psoas muscle and hangs over the pelvic brim; sub-cecal, where it is in the iliac fossa and inferior to the cecum; retro-ileal, where it lies posterior to the ileum; and pre-ileal, where it is anterior to the ileum.

The appendix is supplied by the appendicular artery, which arises from the ileocolic artery in 35% of patients. However, the origin of the appendiceal artery is anomalous, and it may arise from the posterior cecal (13%), anterior cecal (4.25%), medial branch of the ileocolic (8.25%), or ileal artery (4.25%).