The diagnosis of blepharospasm is mainly based on clinical assessment.

**Clinical Assessment**

A clinical history determining the nature of the eyelid spasm is highly important. Patients suffering from blepharospasm will complain of bilateral, synchronous, stereotyped spasm of the orbicularis oculi muscle. These spasms may present with brief and repetitive blinking or persistent closure of the eyes leading to functional impairment. There is a diagnostic algorithm that is based on the presence of bilateral, synchronous, and stereotyped movements of the orbicularis oculi muscle, the presence of a sensory trick, or increased blinking. This diagnostic algorithm has been shown to have a sensitivity of 93% and a specificity of 90% in differentiating BEB from other similar conditions.

Furthermore, as mentioned before, patients suffering from blepharospasm may also suffer from related non-motor manifestations such as psychiatric disorders, sleep disorders, sensory symptoms, and cognitive disturbances.

Sensory symptoms such as a sensation of dry eye or photophobia have been identified to be associated with a specificity of 94% and a sensitivity of 77% in patients suffering from BEB.

Psychiatric disorders, such as anxiety and depression, are associated with BEB. However, other related conditions are also associated with higher rates of anxiety and depression.

**Severity Assessment**

In order to assess the severity of the disease, many scales have been developed. These include The Jankovic Rating Scale (JRC), The Blepharospasm Severity Scale (BSS), The Blepharospasm Disability Scale (BDS), and The Blepharospasm Disability Index (BDI).

The most widely used scale is the Jankovic Rating Scale. This is commonly used during the initial assessment and to monitor treatment response during patient follow up. This scale assesses severity and frequency separately, giving a score of 0 to 4 for each one of these, as shown in Table 1.

There also exist scales for severity grading of focal dystonia not specific for blepharospasm, but that are commonly used by some physicians when assessing patients with BEB. These include The Global Dystonia Rating Scale, The Burke-Fahn-Marsden Dystonia Rating Scale, and The Unified Dystonia Rating Scale.

**Neurophysiology**

**Electromyography**

Dystonia presents with the contraction of antagonistic muscles. Electromyography studies can be used to identify such abnormalities. However, in practice, this is not always used.

**Blink Reflex**

Assessment of the blink reflex is useful in the evaluation of BEB. The tapping of the forehead (glabella reflex) may be done to induce reflexive blinking. By repeatedly tapping the forehead, it is possible to assess the patient's ability to inhibit the glabella reflex. This is known as Myerson's maneuver.

In practice, the most frequently used method of inducing the blink reflex is electrical stimulation of the supraorbital nerve whilst performing an EMG on the orbicularis oculi muscle.

The blink reflex can be assessed by using the paired shock technique. Both of the supraorbital nerves are stimulated with an impulse of identical intensity.

This test does not have high specificity for dystonia, but can be used to rule out psychogenic dystonia which will present with normal features.