In the United States, approximately 430,000 patients are dependent on hemodialysis. Options for access include catheters, arteriovenous fistulas (AVFs), and arteriovenous grafts (AVGs).

Dialysis modality was an independent predictor of illness intrusion, with more significant intrusion felt in those on hemodialysis than peritoneal dialysis, which is considered more suitable for older patients with multiple comorbidities. The six-times-a-week hemodialysis regimen was associated with improved control of hypertension, hyperphosphatemia, and reduced left ventricular mass with enhanced self-reported physical health compared to the thrice-weekly regimen. However, a significant rise in mortality and hospitalization for heart failure was noted following the longer intradialytic intervals over the dialysis weekend.

Home hemodialysis is done 3 to 6 nights per week for 6-8 hours each for those who prefer it for lifestyle considerations. It is associated with a raised risk of vascular access complications, caregiver burden, and rapid decline in residual kidney function. Long frequent hemodialysis, either in-center or at home, is recommended during pregnancy in a female with end-stage renal disease. In case of low residual renal function, choose thrice-weekly hemodialysis, with each session lasting for a minimum of three hours. Additional or more extended sessions are considered for patients with significant weight gains, poorly controlled blood pressure, high ultrafiltration rates, poor metabolic control, or difficulty achieving dry weight. The chosen ultrafiltration rate for each session should allow for an optimal balance between achieving euvolemia, solute clearance, and adequate blood pressure control with minimal hemodynamic instability and intradialytic symptoms. Dialysis patients have a reduced health-related quality of life (HRQoL) associated with increased morbidity and mortality. The HRQoL is of the following kinds:

- Physical: It is defined by limited or impaired mobility and role limitations, manifesting as sleep disorders (obstructive sleep apnea, fatigue, restless legs).

- Mental: It encompasses depressive thinking and anxiety. Intensive hemodialysis (HD) positively impacts HRQoL by increasing the physical and mental component scores. It is also associated with significantly reduced post-dialysis recovery time.

Patients requiring dialysis while on the go can make an appointment at transient centers (local dialysis centers) 6 to 8 weeks in advance to ensure their place. The patient's usual dialysis center needs to pass information to the transient center about the patient's medical history, bloodwork and treatment records, a list of medications, insurance information, and any special requirements.