2D echocardiography, an easy and readily available modality of cardiac evaluation, is used in the diagnosis of PA-IVS.  Due to the widespread availability and use of fetal echocardiography in conjunction with prenatal screening for CHD, the majority of the patients with this disorder get diagnosed prenatally. In a recently published study on the utilization of fetal echocardiography, the overall rate of prenatal diagnosis for this specific heart defect was approximately 86%.

The diagnosis of PA-IVS is possible with echocardiogram alone, but the additional information regarding the coronary circulation, which are significant predictors of outcomes and type of repair, cannot be discerned from this modality alone. In spite of providing information regarding the anomalous connections between the RV and coronary arteries, it is not useful in the diagnosis of RVDCC. Therefore, cardiac catheterization with angiograms is often needed to arrive at a complete diagnosis, which includes the assessment for fistulous connections between the RV and coronary arteries and RVDCC.

**Echocardiogram:
**

The diagnosis of PA-IVS is possible from an apical four-chamber sweep. The absence of an outflow tract from the RV with intact ventricular septum is the diagnostic finding. While performing the echocardiography in these patients, special attention should focus on the anatomy of the interatrial septum, tricuspid valve, RV, and branch pulmonary arteries.

Interatrial septum:

These patients depend on the obligatory right to left shunting at the level of the interatrial septum to maintain the cardiac output and systemic perfusion. Therefore, it is prudent to evaluate for any obstruction across the interatrial septum. The subcostal views are generally optimal in imaging this part of the heart. A combination of 2D imaging, color doppler imaging, and spectral Doppler imaging are required to complete the assessment of the interatrial septum.

Tricuspid valve:

The assessment of the anatomy of the tricuspid valve is very crucial in these patients as the adequacy of the tricuspid valve is one of the major factor influencing the type of surgical repair. The assessment of the tricuspid valve should include the size of the tricuspid valve annulus, morphology of the valve leaflets, functional status of the valve (atretic vs. patent, competent vs. regurgitate). The patients with regurgitant tricuspid valves have a lower incidence of coronary anomalies as regurgitation through the valve helps to decompress the RV.

Right ventricle:

The morphological characteristics of the RV is another parameter that requires assessment in detail during the echocardiogram. Generally, the size of the RV is proportional to the size of the tricuspid valve. More than the absolute size of the right ventricle, it is important to evaluate the morphological characteristics of the right ventricle, which divides into three components, namely inflow, apical, and outflow. If the RV is tripartite, well-developed inflow, apical, and outflow components, the neonates can undergo biventricular repair even if it is hypoplastic, given that all the other characteristics favor the biventricular repair.

**Cardiac catheterization:
**

The cardiac catheterization with angiocardiography is often used in the evaluation of patients with PA-IVS as it provides additional information regarding coronary circulation; this is particularly important in patients in whom decompression of the RV is a consideration. The primary goal of the cardiac catheterization is to assess for RVDCC. The diagnosis of RVDCC is made when a significant portion of the ventricular myocardium depends on RV for the blood supply. The angiographic criteria for the diagnosis of RVDCC include stenosis of two or more major coronary arteries or atresia of the coronary ostia and the myocardium distal to the obstruction receiving the blood supply via fistulous connections from the RV. Loomba et al. proposed the aortic perfusion score based on the angiographic characteristics of coronary perfusion, as a predictor of patient outcomes.

Galindo et al. described various angiographic techniques that will help in obtaining adequate/optimal coronary imaging. The various techniques described in that article include RV angiogram, aortogram, aortogram with balloon occlusion of the aorta, and selective coronary angiograms. The evidence of myocardial ischemia on the surface electrocardiogram following the placement of the catheter in the RV (decompression of the RV from catheter-related tricuspid valve regurgitation) is very suspicious for RVDCC.