Managing phenytoin overdose requires an interprofessional team of healthcare professionals that includes a nurse, laboratory technologists, pharmacists, and several physicians in different specialties. Without proper management, the morbidity and mortality from phenytoin overdose are high. The moment the triage nurse has admitted a phenytoin overdose, the emergency department clinician is responsible for coordinating the care which includes the following:

- Ordering drug levels in the blood and or urine

- Monitor the patient for signs and symptoms of neurological or cardiac toxicity.

- Performing various tasks to help limit the absorption of the drug in the body

- Consult with the pharmacist about the use of activated charcoal and to perform a medication record check [Level 1]

- Consult with a toxicologist and nephrologist on further management, which may include dialysis, to assist in the removal of drug from the system, as well as a board-certified applied toxicology pharmacist as part of the toxicology consult

- Check of ingestion of other substances that the patient could have consumed with the drug

- Consult with the intensivist about regarding possible placement into the intensive care unit for care and monitoring while in hospital

The management of phenytoin overdose does not stop in the emergency department. Nursing will continue to provide followup care until the patient is stabilized and ready to move on to the next step, reporting any concerns to the treating clinicians. They will also monitor all relevant signs and symptoms of subsequent visits, informing the clinician of any concerns that arise.

Following the stabilization of the patient, one has to determine how and why the patient overdosed.

A consult with a mental health professional to evaluate the patient to determine if this was an intentional act and if the patient may be at continued risk for self-harm may be appropriate.

The pharmacist should ensure that there is minimal drug interaction, and the risk of possible drug overdose requires monitoring and coordination with the clinical team.

These examples and activities of an interprofessional healthcare team demonstrate that this approach is necessary for the safe and effective administration of phenytoin, as well as to provide care in cases of toxicity. [Level 5]