Radon is a highly radioactive element that was initially discovered in 1899 by physicist Ernest Rutherford in England. It is not a chemically produced gas; it is usually found in rock and soil. It is an inert gas and the heaviest known gas, known to be nine times denser than air. It is made of a single atom and thus can easily penetrate many materials such as paper, leather, plastic, concrete, wood paneling, and insulation. Radon occurs naturally in several isotopic forms, but only two are found in high concentrations in the environment: radon-220 and radon-222. Radon-220 is formed in the decay process of thorium-232 and has a half-life of 55 seconds.

Radon-222 has a half-life of 3.8 days and is the most stable isotope of radon. It is the immediate decay product of radium-226 and is transient in the decay process of uranium-238. Due to the longer half-life of radon-222, it can diffuse from the environment into homes and further decay into more chemically reactive radon progeny (also known as “radon daughters”). These radon progenies are known as the main source of human exposure to alpha radiation, which results in cellular injury and DNA damage in the respiratory tract. These changes in the respiratory epithelium eventually result in radon-induced lung disease and lung cancer.

Human exposure to radon occurs primarily through inhalation and ingestion. Given that radon exists in groundwater, soil, rock, and confined spaces such as buildings and basements, human beings are susceptible to exposure from multiple sources, including the ground, gas appliances, water supply, or pressure-driven flow in the home. Since it is also present in natural gas, radon (and its progeny) can thus be released into the air when it is burned in furnaces, fireplaces, heaters, and stoves. The inhalation of radon ultimately poses the greatest health concern.