**History**

The patient typically presents with a history of trauma to the wrist. The mechanism of injury is often a fall on a hyperextended wrist in ulnar deviation. These injuries can also occur in polytrauma patients and there may be other distracting injuries. Pain may be reported localized in the middle of the wrist, although pain can be reported to be more widely depending on the severity of the injury.

These injuries may be associated with neurovascular compromise. It is important to elicit a history of paraesthesia (tingling, pins, and needles) in the hand to help determine the presence of an acute carpal tunnel syndrome.

Patients presenting with upper limb injuries should always be asked about their hand dominance, occupation, hobbies, medical co-morbidities, and smoking status.

**Physical Examination**

Patients should be assessed according to Advanced Trauma Life Support principles as these injuries are often due to high energy trauma. On a normal physical examination, the lunate can be palpated distal to the radius and in line with the middle finger. With flexion of the wrist, the lunate becomes more prominent.

Because of the wide range of ligamentous injuries, clinical findings vary significantly. Physical findings associated with scapholunate ligament injury can be subtle. The scapholunate ligament is the most commonly injured ligament of the wrist. Patients may report localized pain and swelling to the radial side of the wrist. They may also report a snapping or clicking sensation with wrist deviation. Joint instability should be assessed using the scaphoid shift test. Patients may also report pain with hyperextension.

In perilunate and lunate dislocations, patients present with generalized pain and swelling to the wrist. Pain is typically worsened with wrist range of motion. Unlike many other joint dislocations, gross deformity is not typically present in carpal dislocations. There may be a possible fullness of the carpal tunnel appreciated. Median nerve injury is common if the lunate dislocates volarly into the carpal tunnel.

Acute carpal tunnel syndrome in the setting of trauma is a surgical emergency and it should be diagnosed as soon as possible. This is a clinical diagnosis. A thorough neurological assessment of the hand can help confirm its presence. The median and anterior interosseous nerve functions must be assessed and documented clearly in the patient's medical notes.

Median nerve sensory function: Compromise of the nerve in the carpal tunnel can result in reduced sensation in the thumb, index, and middle fingers, and radial half of the ring finger.

Median nerve motor function: Decreased strength of thumb flexion, opposition, and abduction may also be seen with median nerve injuries. Thumb abduction should be assessed with palpation of the thenar eminence and the abductor pollicis brevis muscle as it contracts. This identifies its action and differentiates it from abductor pollicis longus.

Anterior interosseous nerve (AIN): No deficit should be expected in the AIN because it arises from the median nerve in the forearm. The patient may still be able to make an 'OK' sign.

Palmar cutaneous branch of the median nerve: Patients would be expected to have sensation in the palm over the thenar eminence. The palmar cutaneous branch of the median nerve arises approximately 5cm proximal to the carpal tunnel.

If the wrist dislocation has occurred in association with other proximal injuries in the same limb,  the AIN and palmar cutaneous nerves may also be deficient.

Acute carpal tunnel syndrome has been reported in up to 46% of dislocations.