The administration of topical antibiotics and, for large abrasions, cycloplegics have been the mainstay of therapy, along with daily follow-up until the eye is healed. Patching was previously routine but is no longer recommended for most patients.

If a corneal foreign body is detected, an attempt can then be made to remove the foreign body with a swab or irrigation under direct visualization. Foreign bodies under the lid should be removed after flipping the lid. If irrigation or a cotton swab fails to remove the foreign body, a metal instrument is needed. Instill topical anesthetic. A 25-gauge needle or an eye spud can be used to remove the object. If the metal instrument fails, then an ophthalmology referral within 24 hours is needed for foreign body removal. Initiate topical antibiotics (erythromycin).

There are several antibiotic options. Ointment formulations provide lubrication to the injured eye. Contact lens wearers will need coverage for Pseudomonas with a fluoroquinolone or aminoglycoside.

Regarding pain control, small abrasions (less than 4 mm) rarely require analgesia. Mild to moderate pain can typically be controlled with oral nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs). Ophthalmic topical NSAID solutions provide pain relief.

In the few patients with small abrasions that fail to heal despite these treatments, oral opioid medications may be required. A two days oxycodone prescription should be adequate.

Cycloplegic medications can relieve photophobia. Like the opiate medications, two days of cycloplegic drops should be enough to manage the photophobia. There are side effects to cycloplegics, such as difficulty with reading. If a cycloplegic agent is going to be utilized, cyclopentolate is a good choice because of its short duration of action.