Disorders of peristaltic movement are common and can occur in different areas of the gastrointestinal tract. Many are due to dysfunction or absence of the myenteric plexus, which controls this process. Etiologies are diverse and can be congenital, degenerative, or medication-induced.

Hirschsprung disease is a congenital disorder defined by the absence of ganglionic cells in the submucosal and myenteric plexus, also referred to as congenital aganglionic megacolon. In these patients, the migration of neural crest cells fails to occur during embryogenesis. Infants present with symptoms of intestinal obstruction, such as abdominal distension, bilious emesis, and failure to pass meconium within 48 hours of birth.

Achalasia is the progressive inflammation and degeneration of ganglion cells in the myenteric plexus of the esophagus. This disease process preferentially targets the nitric-oxide-producing inhibitory neurons responsible for the relaxation of the esophageal smooth muscle. There is relative sparing of cholinergic neurons contributing to increased muscle tone.

Mu-opioids have pharmacological effects throughout the gastrointestinal tract. Primarily on the myenteric plexus of the longitudinal muscle layer, these medications inhibit peristalsis, stimulate pyloric tone, lengthen transit time, and increase the tone of the anal sphincter. At the cellular level, Mu-opioids lead to inhibition of acetylcholine and nitric oxide release.

Gastroparesis is a delayed gastric emptying in the absence of mechanical obstruction. Patients present with nausea, vomiting, early satiety, postprandial fullness, belching, and bloating. Gastroparesis involves dysfunction of extrinsic neural control, intrinsic nerves, interstitial cells, and smooth muscle movement. Diabetes is the most common cause of gastroparesis. It may also be idiopathic, associated with neurological disorders, occur after a viral or bacterial infection, or post-surgical. Diagnosis involves using gastric emptying scintigraphy.

Gut region-specific diabetic enteric neuropathy is proposed to be due to a regional reduction in matrix metalloproteinase 9 (MMP9) that leads to an accumulation of extracellular matrix that in turn leads to a region-specific thickening of the endothelial basement membrane of the capillaries supplying the myenteric ganglia.

Gastrointestinal schwannomas mostly arise from the Auerbach plexus.