Evaluation of pulmonic stenosis is best completed using echocardiography, due to its superior visualization of the pulmonic valve and surrounding structures.

Doppler studies using echocardiography provides flow gradients, which is used to grade severity. Guidelines from the European Association of Echocardiography, the American Society of Echocardiography, the American Heart Association, and American College of Cardiology (AHA/ACC) and the European Society of Cardiology have been summarized below.

- Mild stenosis: Peak doppler gradient across the valve <36 mm Hg, doppler jet velocity <3m/sec, or peak doppler gradient <30 mm Hg.

- Moderate stenosis: Peak doppler gradient across the valve 36 to 64 mm Hg, doppler jet velocity 3 m/sec to 4m/sec, or peak doppler gradient 30 to 50 mm Hg.

- Severe stenosis: Peak doppler gradient across the valve >64 mm Hg, doppler jet velocity >4m/sec, or peak doppler gradient >50 mm Hg.

Pulmonic stenosis may be interpreted through electrocardiography, despite not being diagnostic. Criteria supporting right ventricular hypertrophy correlates well with the severity of the disease. Right axis deviation may also be seen in mild disease, while prominent R waves in V1 and R waves in AVR are more likely seen in severe cases.

Cardiac catheterization and pulmonary angiography are typically not required for the diagnosis of pulmonic stenosis due to echocardiography's efficacy and safety profile. Cardiac magnetic resonance imaging (CMR) is a viable alternative to echocardiography. In the setting of suboptimal echocardiographic viewing or complicated anatomy, cardiac magnetic resonance imaging may assist in proper diagnosis.

The sensitivity of plain film x-rays is not sufficient to diagnose pulmonic stenosis. Radiographic evidence of pulmonic stenosis is supported by the prominence of the pulmonary arteries or a prominent right heart border.