In thrombosis, there is an obstructive process that prevents blood flow to some regions of the brain. Risk factors include atherosclerotic disease, vasculitis, or arterial dissection.

Embolic events occur when there is a clot that originated from another location in the body. Most commonly, the source of the clot is the valve or chambers of the heart, for example, when a clot forms within the atria in atrial fibrillation and dislodges into the arterial vascular supply.

Other less frequent causes include venous, septic, air, or fat emboli. Lacunar infarcts are usually seen in the subcortical areas of the brain and occur due to small vessel disease. The proposed mechanism is a perforating artery in the subcortical region that causes the blood vessel occlusion.

**Ischemic Stroke Syndromes**

Ischemic strokes can present in pre-determined syndromes due to the effect of decreased blood flow to particular areas of the brain that correlate to exam findings. This allows clinicians to be able to predict the area of the brain vasculature that can be affected.

**Middle Cerebral Artery (MCA) Infarction**

The middle cerebral artery (MCA) is the most common artery involved in stroke. It supplies a large area of the lateral surface of the brain and part of the basal ganglia and the internal capsule via four segments (M1, M2, M3, and M4). The M1 (horizontal) segment supplies the basal ganglia, which is involved in motor control, motor learning, executive function, and emotions. The M2 (Sylvian) segment supplies the insula, superior temporal lobe, parietal lobe, and inferolateral frontal lobe.

The MCA distribution involves the lateral cerebral cortex. MCA syndrome is best explained by the understanding of the somatosensory cortex, in which the lateral portion contains motor and sensory functions that involve the face and upper extremity. This correlates to the classical presentation of contralateral hemiparesis, facial paralysis, and sensory loss in the face and upper extremity. The lower extremity may be involved, but upper extremity symptoms usually predominate. Gaze preferences towards the side of the lesion may be seen. Additional symptoms include:

- Dysarthria is characterized by difficulty phonating words due to the physical weakness of the muscles of the face used for phonation.

- Neglect where the patient seems to “ignore” a hemisphere of their world due to an inability to see that area.

- Aphasia or the inability to produce or remember words due to injury to the verbal centers of the brain.

**Anterior Cerebral Artery (ACA) Infarction**

The anterior cerebral artery (ACA) provides blood supply to the frontal, prefrontal, primary motor, primary sensory, and supplemental motor cortices. Pure ACA infarcts are uncommon because of the significant collateral blood supply provided by the anterior circulating artery.  The sensory and motor cortices receive sensory information and control movement of the contralateral lower extremity. The supplemental motor area contains the Broca area, which is involved in the initiation of speech. The prefrontal cortex is used to organize and plan complex behavior and is thought to influence the personality.

The ACA distribution involves the medial cerebral cortex. The somatosensory cortex in that area comprises motor and sensory functions of the leg and foot. The clinical presentation of an ACA infarction includes contralateral sensory and motor deficits in the lower extremity. The upper extremity and face are spared. Kumral et al. examined clinical spectrums of ACA with correlation to MRI/MRA and demonstrated that left-sided lesions presented with more transcortical motor aphasia, in which patients have difficulty responding spontaneously with speech, but repetition is preserved. Right-sided lesions presented with a more acute confusional state and motor hemineglect (unilateral motor function is lost)

**Posterior Cerebral Artery (PCA) Infarction**

The superficial posterior cerebral artery (PCA) supplies the occipital lobe and the inferior portion of the temporal lobe, while the deep PCA supplies the thalamus and the posterior limb of the internal capsule, as well as other deep structures of the brain. The occipital lobe is the location of the primary and secondary visual areas, where sensory input from the eyes is interpreted. The thalamus relays information between the ascending and descending neurons, while the internal capsule contains the descending fibers of the lateral and ventral corticospinal tracts.

PCA infarctions can be divided into deep and superficial categories, based on the PCA supply. If the deep segments of the PCA are involved, symptoms may include hypersomnolence, cognitive deficits, ocular findings, hypoesthesia, and ataxia. Ocular findings may include homonymous hemianopsia, in which patients experience visual field deficits in one-half of their visual field. Larger infarcts that involve the deep structures can lead to hemisensory loss and hemiparesis due to the involvement of the thalamus and the internal capsule. Superficial infarcts present with visual and somatosensory deficits, which can include impairment of stereognosis, tactile sensation, and proprioception. Rarely, bilateral PCA infarcts present with amnesia and cortical blindness. Cortical blindness is due to lesions in the optic radiation that causes vision loss. A unilateral headache is a common finding, which can be confused with a complicated migraine.

**Vertebrobasilar Infarction**

The vertebrobasilar region of the brain is supplied by the vertebral arteries and the basilar arteries that originate within the spinal column and terminate at the Circle of Willis. These areas supply the cerebellum and brainstem.

The clinical presentation includes ataxia, vertigo, headache, vomiting, oropharyngeal dysfunction, visual-field deficits, and abnormal oculomotor findings. Patterns of clinical presentation vary depending on the location and the infarction pattern of embolism or atherosclerosis.

**Cerebellar Infarction**

Patients may present with ataxia, nausea, vomiting, headache, dysarthria, and vertigo symptoms. Edema and rapid clinical deterioration can complicate cerebellar infarction.

**Lacunar Infarction**

Lacunar infarcts result from the occlusion of a small perforating artery. The exact mechanism is under debate, as the nature of the infarct can result from intrinsic vessel occlusion or an embolism. Infarction in this territory can present with pure motor or sensory loss, sensorimotor deficit, or ataxia with hemiparesis.