The goal of treatment should be focused on the alleviation of symptoms and the prevention of adverse outcomes in the fetus. Mild symptomatic cases may be treated with reassurance, antipruritic preparations like calamine lotion, soothing oatmeal baths, menthol in aqueous cream, and weak steroidal ointments.

Patients should also be counseled regarding the temporary nature of the disease and prompt resolution of their symptoms following delivery. First-generation antihistamines like diphenhydramine, chlorpheniramine, pheniramine, or tripelennamine are safe during pregnancy and may be used as adjunctive therapy.

Severe or intractable pruritus with concomitant biochemical abnormalities can be treated with ursodeoxycholic acid (UDCA). UDCA, a hydrophilic bile acid, removes other hydrophobic salts from enterohepatic circulation by replacing them. UDCA can be used at a dose of 15mg/kg/day and helps control pruritus while correcting the biochemical abnormalities. UDCA has no teratogenic effects and works faster than other drugs available.

Other drugs that may be used include cholestyramine, S-adenosyl-D-methionine, oral corticosteroids, nonerythemogenic UVB radiation, and phenobarbital. These drugs are implicated more in the treatment of intrahepatic cholestasis of pregnancy, but since pruritus gravidarum and intrahepatic cholestasis of pregnancy share many features, these drugs are worth mentioning here.

There are increased risks of adverse fetal and neonatal outcomes in the setting of intrahepatic cholestasis of pregnancy including increased risk of preterm birth, meconium-stained amniotic fluid, neonatal depression, respiratory distress syndrome, and stillbirth