Upper motor neuron signs are secondary to damage to upper motor neurons. UMNs are first-order neurons that carry the electrical impulses for movement, and many descending UMN tracts coordinate movement. The pyramidal tract is the principal UMN tract that initiates voluntary movement. This tract provides a direct path between the cerebral cortex and spinal cord. Lesions at any point along the pyramidal tract in the brain or spinal cord can manifest as UMN signs.

The pyramidal tract divides into the corticospinal and corticobulbar tracts. Pyramidal tract cell bodies concentrate primarily in the motor area of the cerebral cortex. Motor areas organize somatotopically. The motor areas of the left and right hemispheres innervate musculature on the contralateral side of the body. For example, an upper motor neuron lesion in the left motor area will manifest UMN signs on the right side of the body.

From the cell bodies in the motor areas of the cerebral cortex, UMN axons travel through the following ipsilateral structures in sequential order: corona radiata, posterior limb of the internal capsule, cerebral peduncle of the midbrain, central pons, and pyramids of the medulla. At the pyramids, corticospinal tract axons crossover at the pyramidal decussation. The axons are now contralateral from their cell bodies of origin, and they enter the spinal cord at the lateral funiculus. In the spinal cord, the tract is the lateral corticospinal tract. Axons terminate at various levels of the spinal cord within the central gray column and base of the dorsal column. They can either terminate on interneurons or directly on lower motor neurons. UMNs that synapse directly onto lower motor neurons typically control more distal extremities. These direct connections are thought to be necessary for the fine control of the fingers and hands.

Corticobulbar tract axons follow a similar trajectory to the corticospinal tract, traveling through the corona radiata and internal capsule. Once the tract reaches the level of the brainstem, the axons synapse onto cranial nerve nuclei at the appropriate level. Most cranial nerves receive bilateral innervation from UMNs in the left and right hemispheres. Exceptions to this rule include parts of CN VII and XII. These cranial nerves only receive contralateral innervation from the pyramidal tract.

The lateralization of UMN signs is dependent on the location of UMN lesions. Lesions above the pyramidal decussation manifest as symptoms contralateral to the lesion. UMN lesions below the decussation cause symptoms ipsilateral to the site of the lesion. Unilateral lesions of UMNs to most cranial nerves tract do not manifest with significant symptoms because of their bilateral innervation from the motor areas with the exceptions of CN VII and XII.