**Peritonitis**

The peritoneum is of significant clinical importance. The peritoneum can develop inflammation that can present as peritonitis. The condition is often associated with perforation of the intestinal viscera and florid infection. Other causes of peritonitis include free blood, gastric and pancreatic juices, medications, and chemicals in the peritoneal cavity. Peritonitis may be localized or diffuse and often presents with signs of an acute abdomen, such as rigidity, rebound tenderness, or guarding. Treatment depends on the cause. All perforations need surgical treatment. Infections need to be treated with antibiotics. Mortality is highest in elderly patients.

**Ascites**

Normally, the peritoneal space only contains up to 100 mL of serous fluid. In various situations, such as cirrhosis or chyle leaks, there can be a pathologic increase in peritoneal fluid volume. Cirrhotic ascites is believed to be due to portal hypertension, leading to increased permeability in blood vessels, allowing for altered oncotic and hydrostatic pressures that result in an imbalance of protein and electrolytes, thus altering the fluid flow.

**Peritoneal Dialysis**
Infusion of a hypertonic fluid in the peritoneal cavity performs peritoneal dialysis. Once the waste products are absorbed, the fluid is then drained out. Several cycles are performed each time. The most common complication of peritoneal dialysis is the risk of infection. Another complication that is not rare is a perforation of bowel when the dialysis catheter is inserted inside the peritoneal cavity.

**Malignancy**

The peritoneal cavity is sometimes affected by malignancy of which the most common is mesothelioma. In addition, cancer can metastasize resulting in peritoneal carcinomatosis. A rarer manifestation of cancer presenting in the peritoneum is pseudomyxoma peritonei, which is believed to be a cancer of appendiceal or colon origin. Treatment is primarily surgical to resect involved areas.

**Hydrocephalus**

The peritoneum is also utilized in therapeutic approaches for hydrocephalus. Patients who want definitive treatment for their hydrocephalus or are refractory to medical management can pursue surgical management via a ventriculoperitoneal shunt where the excess cerebrospinal fluid is shunted to the peritoneum, where it is then reabsorbed by the body more appropriately.