The pathophysiology of lung cancer is very complex and incompletely understood. It is hypothesized that repeated exposure to carcinogens, such as cigarette smoke leads to dysplasia of lung epithelium. If the exposure continues, it leads to genetic mutations and affects protein synthesis.MYC, BCL2, and p53 for small cell lung cancer (SCLC) and EGFR, KRAS, and p16 for non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC).

Histopathological classification of lung cancers is based on cellular and molecular subtypes, which is an essential part of diagnosing and managing lung cancers. The 2021 World Health Organization (WHO) classification system of lung tumors divides the lung cancers as follows:

- Precursor glandular lesions

- Adenocarcinomas

- Adenosquamous carcinomas

- Squamous precursor lesions

- Squamous cell carcinomas

- Large cell carcinomas

- Sarcomatoid carcinomas

- Lung neuroendocrine neoplasms

- Salivary gland-type tumors

- Neuroendocrine tumors

- Neuroendocrine carcinomas

- And other epithelial tumors

According to the WHO, identifying histologic features, measuring the depth of invasion, and mode of spread is of prognostic value. For example, they state that tumor spread through air spaces is associated with a higher recurrence rate after limited resections and should be reported on pathological evaluation. Also, the previously described clear cell, rhabdoid, and signet ring subtypes have been discontinued by the most recent WHO classification as they appear to be cytologic features that can occur in any adenocarcinomas. The WHO classification places significant emphasis on immunohistochemical staining to classify cancers that may not have typical cytologic features on light microscopy. In the 2015 WHO classification system, poorly differentiated carcinomas were reclassified as squamous cell carcinomas if they had p40 expression; as adenocarcinomas with solid subtype if they had thyroid transcription factor 1 expression; and neuroendocrine carcinomas if they had chromogranin and synaptophysin positivity.

**Precursor Glandular Lesions**

These include atypical adenomatous hyperplasia (AAH) and adenocarcinoma in situ. AAH is a preinvasive lesion for lung adenocarcinoma and generally measures 5 mm or less. Adenocarcinoma in situ can be mucinous or nonmucinous and is generally a localized lesion of less than or equal to 3 cm. It shows a "lepidic" growth pattern defined as growth-restricted along the alveolar structures. It is noninvasive and shows intact alveolar septae.

**Adenocarcinoma**

Adenocarcinoma pathology consists of either neoplastic gland formation, pneumocyte marker expression (thyroid transcription factor 1 (TTF-1) with or without napsin expression, or intracytoplasmic mucin. It is further classified based on the extent and architecture of the neoplastic gland formation as mucinous or nonmucinous. Acinar, papillary, micropapillary, lepidic, and solid are nonmucinous subtypes. Pathological identification of these subtypes is important for prognosis. Solid, micropapillary, and cribriform (a subtype of acinar nonmucinous adenocarcinoma) patterns have adverse prognostic significance.

Minimally invasive adenocarcinoma (MIA) is a small, solitary adenocarcinoma less than or equal to 3 cm with minimal invasion (less than 5 mm) and a predominant lepidic growth pattern, resembling other similar precursor glandular lesions. If the invasion is greater than 5 mm, it is defined as lepidic-predominant adenocarcinoma. Invasive mucinous adenocarcinoma, previously described as mucinous bronchioloalveolar carcinoma, comprises mucinous lesions that cannot be classified as MIA. If more than 10% of mucinous and nonmucinous growth patterns are present, the lesion should be classified as mixed adenocarcinoma.

**Adenosquamous Carcinoma**

Adenosquamous carcinomas are lung tumors with more than 10% glandular and squamous components. This is an uncommon and highly aggressive lung tumor, and current recommendations propose adjuvant chemotherapy even in Stage I radically resected tumors with whole-brain postoperative prophylactic radiotherapy due to the high risk of recurrence and brain metastasis with this subtype.

**Squamous Cell Carcinoma**

Squamous cell pathology is defined by the presence of keratin and/or intercellular desmosomes on cytology or by immunohistochemistry (IHC) evidence of p40, p63, CK5, CK5/6, or desmoglein expression. Subtypes of squamous cell carcinoma include nonkeratinizing, keratinizing, and basaloid. Squamous cell carcinomas show extensive central necrosis with resulting cavitation. Squamous cell cancers can present as Pancoast tumors and hypercalcemia. A Pancoast tumor is a tumor in the superior sulcus of the lung. The brain is the most common site of recurrence postsurgery in cases of Pancoast tumors.

**Large Cell Carcinoma**

Large cell carcinoma (LCC) is a malignant epithelial neoplasm that does not have cytologic features consistent with glandular, squamous, or neuroendocrine cancers. They do not typically express p40 and TTF-1 on immunohistochemistry and lack cytologic features of small cell carcinoma. Typically LCC is comprised of round to polygonal cells with prominent nucleoli. The cells are large with abundant cytoplasm that does not have any defining features. LCC is a diagnosis of exclusion.

**Sarcomatoid Carcinoma**

These are rare carcinomas that exhibit malignant epithelial components and features that suggest sarcomas. Subtypes include pleomorphic carcinoma, carcinosarcoma, and pulmonary blastoma.

**Small Cell Carcinoma**

Small cell carcinoma (SCLC) is composed of round, oval, or angulated cells, with a small amount of cytoplasm and size roughly that of a resting lymphocyte. No distinct nucleoli are seen. SCLCs are extensively necrotic. They usually stain positive with chromogranin or synaptophysin. The WHO previously classified SCLC into three cell subtypes: oat cell, intermediate cell, and combined cell (SCLC with NSCLC component, squamous, or adenocarcinoma). However, studies have shown that such classification does not have much clinical significance or prognostic value.