When defining hemorrhagic shock, it is categorized based on the severity of impact on systemic circulation. The corresponding class of shock then determines appropriate intervention.

Class 1 hemorrhagic shock is defined by a blood loss of up to 750mL (or up to 15%) of total blood volume. At this stage, the remainder of the patient’s perfusion parameters is still within normal limits. The patient’s heart rate will typically remain under 100 bpm and their blood pressure and pulse pressure will remain stable if not slightly increased due to anxiety. The respiratory rate is stable at 14-20 breaths/min, and their urine output remains at greater than 30 mL/hr.

In Class 2 shock, the patient has lost 750 mL to 1500 mL of blood (between 15% and 30% of total blood volume) and is beginning to become symptomatic. They may start to appear more pale or diaphoretic, with mild tachycardia (100-120 bpm), the respiratory rate may increase slightly (20-30 bpm), and their urine output may drop slightly (20-30 mL/hr). It is important to note that even outside the realm of shock management, urine output remains the single most important indicator for monitoring fluid status in a patient. Additionally, blood pressure cannot be adequately relied upon to detect the beginning of shock, as the body’s compensatory mechanisms will keep blood pressure typically within normal limits until up to 30% of total blood volume has already been lost. Finally, the Class 2 shock patient may demonstrate a slight decrease in pulse pressure, which may be the first sign of the body failing to compensate for the sudden blood loss.

In Class 3 hemorrhagic shock, the patient has lost 1500-2000 mL of blood (30-40% total blood volume), they will be clearly symptomatic, confused and will be tachycardic (120-140 bpm), tachypneic (30-40 breaths/min), with blood pressure and pulse pressure decreased causing a drop in renal perfusion (urine output decreased to 5-15 mL/hr). Class 4 shock is the most severe case with acute blood loss of over 2000 mL (or over 40% total blood volume). The patient’s heart rate will be tachycardic, over 140 bpm, with nonpalpable or thready peripheral pulses. Their respiratory rate will have increased to over 35 breaths/min, and their blood pressure and pulse pressure will subsequently be severely decreased. Urine output will be negligible, and symptomatically they will be more lethargic with a likely altered mental status.