Amniotic fluid embolism (AFE) is a life-threatening obstetric emergency characterized by sudden cardiorespiratory collapse and disseminated intravascular coagulation. Amniotic fluid embolism (AFE) represents the second leading cause of peripartum maternal death in the United States and the number one cause of peripartum cardiac arrest. The presentation is abrupt, usually with sudden cardiorespiratory collapse followed by severe coagulopathy and refractory resuscitation. Survivors are frequently left with serious cardiac, renal, neurologic, and pulmonary dysfunction. In the United States, AFE occurs in 2 to 8 per 100,000 deliveries and is the cause of maternal mortality between 7.5% to 10%.

Steiner and Luschbaugh first described amniotic fluid embolism in 1941, after they found fetal cells in the maternal pulmonary circulation, who died during labor. Data from the National Amniotic Fluid Embolism Registry suggests that the process resembles anaphylaxis more than embolism, and the terminology of "anaphylactoid syndrome of pregnancy" has been recommended because fetal tissue or amniotic fluid components are not always found in women who present with signs and symptoms attributable to amniotic fluid embolism.

The diagnosis of AFE has been established at autopsy when fetal squamous cells are found in the maternal pulmonary artery blood; however, fetal squamous cells are also sometimes present in the circulation of laboring women who do not develop AFE. The diagnosis is of exclusion based on clinical presentation. Other causes of hemodynamic instability should be ruled out.