**Among the Nephritic Spectrum Diseases**

- PSGN has an excellent prognosis, especially in children with complete recovery, usually occurring within 6 to 8 weeks. In adults, around 50% of the patients continue to have reduced renal function, hypertension, or persistent proteinuria.

- Frequently IgA nephropathy has a benign course.

- Henoch-Schönlein purpura is typically a self-limited illness that demonstrates an excellent prognosis in patients without renal involvement. The majority of patients fully recover in four weeks.

- With timely and avid treatment, pauci-immune GN usually remits (75% of cases). But if left untreated, it carries a very poor prognosis.

- Membranoproliferative glomerulonephritis progresses to ESRD inevitably, despite therapy. Also, the frequency of recurrence is high even after a kidney transplant.

**Among the Nephrotic Spectrum Diseases**

- Minimal change disease has a very good prognosis for all ages if there is a response to corticosteroid therapy. The primary morbidity is related to the adverse effects of the medications.

- Approximately a third of patients with membranous nephropathy who have subnephrotic proteinuria respond to conservative management. Spontaneous remission has also been seen in cases of heavy proteinuria. However, in others with features of nephrotic syndrome, remission may take up to 6 months, provided adequate treatment is given.

- Appropriate treatment does slow the progression of HIV-associated nephropathy, but with progression into ESRD, a kidney transplant may be necessary.

- Amyloid light-chain (AL) amyloidosis takes 2 to 3 years for progression towards ESRD, while for amyloid A (AA) amyloidosis, remission can be achieved by identifying and managing the underlying disease.