**Open-Angle Glaucoma**

The exact mechanism of action by which timolol reduces the intraocular pressure in patients with open-angle glaucoma is unknown; however, the thinking is that timolol inhibits beta receptors on the ciliary epithelium.

**Ocular Hypertension**

Timolol’s exact mechanism in lowering the intraocular pressure in patients with ocular hypertension is unknown, but it appears similar to its mechanism in lowering intraocular pressure for patients with open-angle glaucoma.

**Infantile Hemangioma**

The mechanism of how timolol can treat infantile hemangiomas has yet to be fully elucidated. However, the postulated mechanism is that timolol’s effect likely involves antagonism of beta-adrenergic receptors causing multiple processes, including vasoconstriction, stimulation of apoptosis, and inhibition of angiogenesis.

**Hypertension**

The sympathetic nervous system is essential in the regulation of blood pressure. In normal physiology, beta-1 and beta-2 receptors become activated by endogenous catecholamines. Once these receptors are activated, they stimulate their associated G-protein, thereby activating adenylyl cyclase and increasing cyclic-AMP (cAMP).

**Myocardial Infarction**

There are many mechanisms by which beta-blockers can reduce morbidity and mortality in patients after myocardial infarction.

**Migraine Prophylaxis**

The exact mechanism of timolol as migraine prophylaxis is unknown. It likely exhibits its effects through a variety of processes. One proposed mechanism is that a blockage of beta-adrenergic receptors decreases the synthesis and release of norepinephrine, an important intermediate in the pathophysiology of migraines. Another pathway that could contribute to timolol’s migraine prophylactic properties is that beta-blockers can regulate the neuronal firing of periaqueductal gray matter using GABA. Timolol also appears to play a role in regulating the serotonergic system by inhibiting 5-HT, another important mediator in the pathophysiologic pathway of migraines. This modulation of serotonin’s effects also seems to contribute to the ability of beta-blockers to reduce the sensitivity of the auditory system, reducing the frequency of migraine attacks. There is also a hypothesis that beta-blockers play a significant role in reducing the excitability of the visual system in patients with migraines. Beta-blockers, such as timolol, are also thought to reduce the spread of signals through the brain, including the cortical spread and the excitability of the ventroposteromedial thalamic nucleus.

**Atrial Fibrillation**

The autonomic nervous system plays a significant role in developing atrial fibrillation. Aberrant sympathetic tone can stimulate myocyte contraction and promote irregular rhythms in susceptible patients.