The evaluation of lymphocytosis begins with a detailed history and physical examination. The complete blood count (CBC) and review of the peripheral blood smear (PBS) are essential to start an appropriate workup.

- CBC: CBC review will help to confirm the presence of absolute lymphocytosis and to delineate abnormalities in other blood components such as hemoglobin and platelets. Anemia and thrombocytopenia might indicate a clonal disorder such as CLL or lymphoma. Also, the magnitude of the rise and the presence of abnormal or immature forms of cells (e.g., blasts) will help dictate the urgency of evaluation.

- PBS: examples of distinct lymphocyte forms that may be identifiable on PBS include: 

- Small mature looking lymphocytes and "smudge cells" in CLL and MBL 
- Atypical large lymphocytes are visible in EBV and other viral infections such as CMV or early HIV 
- Lymphocytes that are cleaved angulated, or have indented nuclei can be associated with pertussis or malignancies such as follicular lymphoma. 
- "Hairy cells" with regular cytoplasmic projections are seen in hairy cell leukemia 
- Sezary Cells have cribriform nuclei with compact chromatin
- "Villous" lymphocytes are seen in MZL 
- Large lymphocytes with multiple azurophilic granules are present in T-LGL
- Lymphoblasts in ALL

- Additional testing: 

- Flow Cytometry: Peripheral blood flow cytometry is essential to determine the proliferation of monoclonal cells. It is a costly test and should not be ordered routinely on all patients with lymphocytosis. 

- Certain features on peripheral blood smear or on review of CBC which prompt a physician to order flow cytometry include: 

- The presence of lymphoblasts on the peripheral blood smear, suggesting ALL- This should also prompt a referral to a tertiary care center to obtain further workup. 
- The presence of other abnormal lymphocyte morphology on PBS as detailed above 
- ALC more than 30000 cells/microL
- Persistent unexplained lymphocytosis for more than one month 
- Abnormalities in other cell lines including anemia and thrombocytopenia 
- Presence of lymphadenopathy and/or hepatosplenomegaly in the right clinical context where reactive causes have been ruled out


- Flow cytometry patterns are beneficial in delineating clonality and differentiating clonal disorders as follows:

- CLL: lymphocytes are CD5+, CD23+, CD20 (dim), CD10-, cyclin D1-, weak sIg (surface immunoglobulin), FMC -, CD200 +
- MCL: lymphocytes are CD5+, CD23-, CD10-, CD20+, sIg +, cyclin D1 +, FMC +, CD200- 
- FL: lymphocytes are CD5-, CD10+, CD20+, sIg+ and often BCL2+, BCL6+
- MZL: lymphocytes are CD5-, CD10-, CD20+, sIg+, cyclin D1-
- HCL: lymphocytes are CD5-, CD10-, CD20+, sIg+, CD11c+, CD25+, CD103+
- T-LGL: lymphocytes are CD3+, CD8+, CD16+, CD56+




- Fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH), karyotype, and mutation analysis: FISH, karyotype, and certain mutation analysis help diagnose and risk stratification of hematologic malignancies, especially CLL and lymphomas. The FISH can not only help to ascertain the clonal nature of lymphocytosis but also helps to confirm the diagnosis of certain lymphomas. Examples include: 

- FL: characterized by t(14,18) 
- MCL: characterized by t(11,14) 
- HCL: characterized by the presence of BRAF mutation 
- CLL: different karyotypic abnormalities including del 17p, del 11q, trisomy 12, and del 13q14.