**Contemporary Procedures Endorsed by the American Society of Metabolic and Bariatric Surgeons**

Roux-en-Y gastric bypass is now one of the most performed procedures by bariatric surgeons. The surgery is characterized by creating a small, less than 30 mL proximal gastric pouch that is then divided and separated from the distal stomach. This is anastomosed to a Roux limb of the small intestine that is approximately 75 to 150 cm in length. Both the small created gastric pouch and narrower anastomotic outlet work in tandem to restrict caloric intake while the major digestive and absorptive process occurs in the common channel where pepsin, intrinsic factor, gastric acid, pancreatic enzymes, and bile are all mixed with ingested food particles.

The small intestine is divided at approximately 50 to 150 cm distal to the identified ligament of Tretiz. This division of the small bowel then creates a proximal biliopancreatic limb that is utilized to transport secretions from the gastric remnant, pancreas, and liver. The roux limb, also known as the elementary limb, is then anastomosed to the newly created gastric pouch that drains consumed food. The cut end of the biliopancreatic limb and the Roux limb is anastomosed at approximately 75 to 150 cm distal leave from the gastrojejunostomy.

The major digestive and absorptive process of nutrients occurs in the resultant common channel where the pancreatic enzymes and bile mixes with the ingested food. The smaller created stomach reservoir initially is only able to hold the capacity of approximately one ounce of food, which results in early satiety. Over time, the stomach reservoir stretches and can hold up to about one cup of food.

The gastrojejunostomy created by this procedure is associated with dumping physiology, thus causing nausea, diaphoresis, lightheadedness, abdominal discomfort, and diarrhea with the ingestion of a high sugar meal. This becomes a negative conditioning response if a patient consumes a high sugar diet in the postoperative period. The optimal Roux limb length has a balance between weight reduction and minimizing complications of absorption. Increasing this length can lead to more severe malabsorption as lengthening does shorten the common channel where the processes of major digestion and absorption of ingested nutrients occur. If surgeons do not create a Roux limb length that is longer than approximately 150 cm, "distalization" can be used to make a longer biliopancreatic limb length with a reduction in length of the common length has been utilized in patients who have had an inadequate weight loss response following a standard Roux-en-Y gastric bypass. Still, there are risks for metabolic complications to consider.

Important hormones involved in regulating food consumption and satiety include leptin, which signifies satiety, and ghrelin, which indicates hunger. Ghrelin is a peptide hormone secreted in the foregut and released in a pulsatile fashion. The normal release of this hormone is inhibited by gastric bypass due to the foregut bypass configuration, which is seen in laparoscopic sleeve gastrectomy. The reduction in ghrelin levels contributes to the loss of appetite typically seen in the postoperative Roux-en-Y gastric bypass period. Other notable hormones like cholecystokinin and glucagon-like peptide-1 are upregulated after a Roux-en-Y procedure and may promote an anorexic state. Two years following the Roux-en-Y gastric bypass, the expected excess weight loss is approximately 70%.

**Sleeve Gastrectomy**

A sleeve gastrectomy includes partial gastrectomy where the greater curvature of the stomach is resected, and a tubular-shaped stomach is created. This procedure was initially offered to patients with "super severe obesity" with a BMI greater than 60 kg/m². Of note, this was the most performed bariatric surgery worldwide and in the United States in 2016. This procedure is technically easier to perform than a Roux-en-Y gastric bypass as it does not require multiple anastomoses. This procedure is safer with the reduction of the risk of internal hernias as well as protein and mineral malabsorption. The antrum is divided at approximately 2 to 6 cm away from the pylorus. A 32 to 40 French bougie is used to create the sleeve.

The sleeve gastrectomy procedure creates a stomach that is a high-pressure organ with sphincters at the proximal and distal ends, which makes leaks more frequent compared to Roux-en-Y gastric bypass. Sleeve gastrectomy does have a higher incidence of gastroesophageal reflux disease secondary to the high-pressure nature. The weight loss mechanism involved in sleeve gastrectomy is not only restrictive as there is evidence of neurohormonal changes caused. Grehlin levels are reduced, promoting fewer feelings of hunger. Peptide YY levels and glucagon-like peptide-1 levels increase and improve insulin resistance and glycemic control. At the two-year mark, the expected excess weight loss is about 60% following a sleeve gastrectomy.

**Biliopancreatic Diversion with Duodenal Switch**

This procedure is a variant of a biliopancreatic diversion procedure. This procedure involves a partial sleeve gastrectomy but the preservation of the stomach pylorus and the creation of a Roux limb and short common channel. This procedure does pose significant long-term absorptive risks, so this is implemented for patients with very severe obesity, whose BMI is greater than 50 kg/m^2.

The indication for this surgery is unclear as some surgeons do prefer to perform this for super morbidly obese patients, while other surgeons tend to reserve this for a revisional procedure. This procedure results in the malabsorption of both fats and starches. It has been shown to have higher rates of protein malnutrition, diarrhea, stomach ulceration, and anemia, which has limited its usage. It is important to note that the biliopancreatic diversion with a duodenal switch is a technically challenging operation with higher complication rates.

The biliopancreatic diversion procedure with duodenal switch is a variant of the biliopancreatic diversion procedure, so it is important to touch on the original procedure. The original procedure divides the duodenum from the pylorus and then removes the pylorus, followed by dividing the ileum. The distal aspect of the ileum is anastomosed to the remnant stomach and proximal ileum. The biliopancreatic limb, which receives the output from the liver, pancreas, the duodenum, is anastomosed to the terminal ileum at approximately 50 to 100 cm distal to the ileocecal valve. The addition of the duodenal switch procedure involves the creation of sleeve gastrectomy, but with preservation of the stomach pylorus. A Roux limb is created with a short common channel as well.

The differentiating factors between these procedures are in the duodenal switch, the portion of the stomach removed, and the preservation of the pylorus, which has similarities to a sleeve gastrectomy. The duodenal switch procedure allows for more antegrade flow from the biliopancreatic limb and thus avoids the feared complication of stasis in the jejunoileal bypass. There is also a lower incidence of both stomach ulceration and diarrhea. The weight loss mechanism is a combination of both malabsorptive and restrictive. At the two-year postoperative mark, the estimated weight loss excess is 70 to 80%.

**Single-Anastomosis Duodenoileal Bypass with Sleeve Gastrectomy**

The procedure of a single anastomosis duodenoileal bypass with sleeve gastrectomy is essentially a variant of the biliopancreatic diversion with duodenal switch operation. A transected portion of the duodenum is anastomosed to a loop of the distal small intestine, which differs from the Roux-en-Y-like configuration used in the biliopancreatic diversion procedures. Hence, there is only one single anastomosis. The reasoning for the development of this single anastomosis procedure was to reduce both the complexity and risks of performing a Roux-en-Y with a smaller diameter distal bowel and a necessity for two anastomoses. This procedure has been endorsed as an appropriate primary metabolic bariatric surgery by the American Society for Metabolic and Bariatric Surgery.

There is some controversy for the utilization of this procedure after inadequate weight loss post-Roux-en-Y gastric bypass or a sleeve gastrectomy. The procedure involves the creation of a sleeve first. A sleeve-like gastric pouch is created. Next, the duodenum is divided just after the pylorus. A single anastomosis is created between the sidewall of the distal small intestine and the end of the sleeve-like gastric pouch and duodenum. The gastric pouch anastomosis to the distal ileum is a single end-to-side anastomosis. The common channel length is typically no less than 300 cm, but there is a variation with the sleeve gastrectomy sizes anywhere from 34 to 54 French. The weight loss mechanism involved in this procedure is restrictive, malabsorptive, and hormonal. In the two-year postoperative period, excess weight loss has shown to be approximately 85%.

In non-randomized comparative studies, this procedure achieved similar weight loss as the Roux-en-Y gastric bypass, sleeve gastrectomy, and biliopancreatic diversion with duodenal switch. The patients who underwent the single anastomosis duodenoileal bypass had fewer anastomotic complications, internal hernias, volvulus, and bowel obstructions. This is likely secondary to the one fewer anastomosis involved in the procedure. This procedure did have a higher risk of chronic diarrhea, even with a common channel measuring 300 cm.

With a common channel being less than 300 cm, malnutrition rates were high. The reasoning why the biliopancreatic diversion with duodenal switch can have a common channel of about 150 to 200 cm, but the single anastomosis duodenoileal bypass has improvements with a 300 cm common channel, is unclear.

**Intragastric Balloon**

An intragastric balloon is a soft, saline-filled balloon that is utilized to induce the feeling of satiety as well as a restriction. This has been advocated more as a bridge to definitive surgical intervention. The usage of such is approved for patients who fall in the class one category of obesity (BMI 30 to 34.9 kg/m^2). These intragastric balloons are indicated for patients who have failed prior attempts for weight loss through diet and exercise alone. These balloons are typically inserted in an endoscopic fashion and filled with approximately 400 to 700 mL of saline. The maximum duration of placement is for six months due to a significant increase in leak rate beyond this time. If the balloon deflates, it can migrate into the small bowel and cause subsequent obstruction, which requires a second endoscopic procedure for retrieval. The weight loss mechanism for an intragastric balloon is purely restrictive, with weight loss contingent upon adherence to lifestyle changes and compliance. As patients with severe obesity do not fall under the indications for intragastric balloons, this article will not go into further detail.

**Investigational Procedures**

Currently, there are investigational procedures not endorsed by the American Society of Metabolic and Bariatric Surgery. These procedures involve a single anastomosis gastric bypass, aspiration therapy, endoscopic sleeve gastroplasty, endoscopic gastrointestinal bypass device, laparoscopic gastric plication, and bariatric arterial embolization.