Opsonization of a pathogen can occur by antibodies or the complement system.

**Antibodies**

Antibodies are part of the adaptive immune system and are produced by plasma cells in response to a specific antigen. Different antigens stimulate different B cells to develop into plasma cells. An antibody’s complex structure enables its specificity to certain antigens. At the end of the light and heavy chains, antibodies have variable regions, also known as antigen-binding sites. These sites allow the antibody to fit like “a lock and key” into the epitopes of specific antigens. Once the antigen-binding sites are bound to the epitopes on the antigen, the stem region of the antibody binds to the receptor on the phagocytes. Multiple antibodies bind to multiple sites on the antigen, increasing the chance and efficiency in which the pathogen is engulfed in the phagosome and destroyed by lysosomes. Immunoglobulin A (IgA) often exists in a monomeric state when in the bloodstream but it is secreted into the lumen of mucosal surfaces in a dimeric form. The dimeric form is joined together by a "J chain" with two antigen-binding sites for the neutralization of pathogens. IgA can be found in saliva, tears, respiratory, gastrointestinal, and genitourinary secretions. Immunoglobulin M (IgM), on the other hand, exists as a pentamer joined by a "J chain" when secreted into the bloodstream. Its response to pathogen invasion is mostly swift while that of Immunoglobulin G is delayed. When IgM is affixed on the surface of B cells, it exists as a monomer. Immunoglobulin G (IgG) is produced by plasma cells after class switching of antibodies. It can also cross the placenta and establish passive immunity. Immunoglobulin D (IgD) is mainly found bound to B cells.

**Complement System**

The complement system is composed of over 30 proteins that improve the ability of antibodies and phagocytic cells to fight invading organisms. It initiates phagocytosis by opsonizing antigens. This system is also responsible for enhancing inflammation and cytolysis. However, in this article, we are going to focus on the complement systems role in Opsonization. The complement proteins, C1 through C9, are inactive when circulating throughout the human body. When a pathogen is detected, proteases cleave the inactive precursors rendering them active.

- Classical pathway: The formation of the antigen-antibody complex triggers the classical pathway. The antigen-antibody reaction activates C1, which then cleaves inactive C4 to active C4a and C4b. C1 combines with C4b to form enzyme C14b. This enzyme is used to split C2 to C2a and C2b. C2a works together with enzyme C14b to form C14b2a. C14b2a, also known as C3 convertase, splits inactive C3 into active C3a and C3b.

- Alternative pathway: The presence of lipid-carbohydrate complexes found in the cell wall of bacteria and fungus activates the alternative pathway. Factor C3, normally found in blood plasma, spontaneously hydrolyzes into C3b. The structure of C3b is more stable, increasing its reactivity. C3b reacts with Factor B, which is cleaved by Factor D into Ba and Bb. Then, Factor C3b and Bb come together to form C3bBb, also known as C3 convertase. C3 convertase splits inactive C3 into active C3a and C3b.

- Lectin pathway: When a pathogen enters the human body, mannose-binding lectin (MBL) is released from the liver. It releases the lectin in response to the carbohydrates and mannose residues found in the pathogen’s cell wall. This then activates MBL serine proteases MASP-1 and MASP-2. These proteases split inactive C4 and C2 into its active components: C4a, C4b, and C2a, C2b. Together, C4b and C2a form C3 convertase. C3 convertase splits inactive C3 into active C3a and C3b.

Once created by one of the 3 pathways, C3b binds to multiple sites on the cell surface of the pathogen. It then binds to receptors on the surface of the macrophage or neutrophil. C3b is best known for its opsonizing activity because when it coats the microbe, phagocytosis activity is increased.