The vast majority of post-intubation laryngeal edema (which has been ascertained after extubation) is asymptomatic or mildly symptomatic, as shown in the fibreoptic endoscopic evaluation of 136 patients within six hours after extubation

**Cuff Leak Test**

The CLT is an important non-invasive test evaluation to assess the risk for laryngeal edema and/or post-extubation stridor in intubated patients. Laryngeal edema is the major contributor for post-extubation stridor, as it also causes diminished mobility of oedematous vocal cords. In particular, the CLT ascertains the space available between the larynx and endotracheal tube, and a reduced or absent cuff leak could be due to a variety of causes, including post-intubation laryngeal injuries which involve laryngeal edema (the most common etiology), copious secretions and laryngotracheal narrowing. On the other hand, the cuff leak could be increased by associated or isolated conditions like tracheomalacia.

The CLT could be assessed qualitatively as well as quantitatively. A qualitative assessment is done by deflating the cuff and auscultating the tracheal area for any audible leak. The quantitative test is done by putting the patient in volume control mode and calculating the difference between the inspiratory tidal volume and the average value of lowest three expiratory tidal volumes obtained over a period of 6 breaths (cuff leak volume). A leak or 110 cc or more than 24% of the delivered tidal volume shows a positive leak test, which is considered normal. A negative leak test predicts risk for post-extubation failure with varying sensitivity and specificity. Hence a negative CLT test is a poor predictor of post-extubation stridor with sensitivity varying between 15 to 85 % and a specificity of 70 to 99 %. Although the positive predictive values differed between various studies depending on the cuff leak cut off values, the negative predictability was more than 90% in most studies. This variation could be explained by the fact that the cuff leak volume is determined not only by the expiratory leak via peri tubal space but also by the inspiratory leak volume, which depends on the inspiratory flow and the compliance of the lung.

A pooled analysis of nine studies published in 2009 estimated the sensitivity and specificity of cuff leak test as 56% and 92%, respectively.

**Laryngeal Ultrasonography**

It measures the Air Column Width (ACW), which is the width of the acoustic shadow at the level cords before and after cuff deflation in the intubated patients. This approach has been shown to predict the risk of post-extubation stridor. The ACWD is the difference in the air column measurement in the intubated and deflated state. Laryngeal ultrasonography is a simple, rapid, and non-invasive evaluation which could be done at the bedside. Ding et al., in a study on 51 patients (out of whom four developed post-extubation stridor) has shown significantly low ACW (4.5mm versus 6.4 mm; p= 0.01) and ACWD (0.35 mm versus 1.5 mm ;p<0.01) in those who developed post-extubation stridor.

Another study by Sutheresan et al. also showed a similar trend with decreased ACW and ACWD in patients who presented with post-extubation laryngeal edema. Again, an investigation on 72 patients found that the laryngeal ACW ratio (ACW before extubation/ACW after intubation) was less than 0.8 in all the five patients who developed post-extubation stridor.

**Video Laryngoscopy**

Video laryngoscopy or fiber optic endoscopy evaluation is conceptually promising in that they would be able to visualize the peri laryngeal structures and abnormalities. Unlike CLT, video laryngoscopy or fibreoptic evaluation can identify and differentiate between the structural versus functional laryngeal abnormalities (e.g., laryngeal edema versus laryngospasm) guiding appropriate management. However, the utility of the above modalities in the prediction of post-extubation laryngeal edema or stridor is yet to be evaluated.