It is imperative to make the correct diagnosis to avoid repeated injuries to the esophagus and thus preventing related complications. The determination of drug-induced esophagitis has its basis in both clinical presentation and endoscopic findings. Patients presenting with retrosternal chest pain, dysphagia or odynophagia, and recent history of taking medicines which are known to cause drug-induced esophagitis are diagnosable with history only.

Blood tests, including complete blood count, is not usually needed unless there is an associated history of hematemesis or melena. If a patient presents with severe symptoms including vomiting and unable to swallow, then a metabolic panel also should be done to check for any electrolyte imbalance and to ensure adequate replacement.

Endoscopy usually confirms the diagnosis and remains the gold standard for the evaluation and management of drug-induced esophagitis. It is usually necessary for patients who have either persistent symptoms after discontinuation of culprit medicine for one week or presentation with severe but rather rare symptoms of hematemesis, difficulty swallowing, melena, and abdominal pain. The most commonly observed endoscopic findings in patients with the diagnosis of drug-induced esophagitis are as follows in decreasing frequency

- Esophageal mucosal erythema and erosion

- Ulcer and Ulcer with bleeding

- Coating with drug material

- Impacted pill fragments

- Stricture

- Kissing ulcers

Histopathology may not be necessary for diagnosing drug-induced esophagitis, but it would exclude the possibility of malignancy.

A barium swallow study is not much useful in evaluating medication-induced esophagitis but usually gets done in the process of evaluation of dysphagia, which can be one of the presenting symptoms at the time of presentation.