The pharmacologic treatment of ACS can be broken down into several groups of medications that improve survival, decrease recurrent ischemic events, and provide symptomatic relief. Choosing an adequate treatment modality in ACS involves several critical decisions. It is essential to distinguish STEMI patients from those who are experiencing NSTEMI or UA. This distinction further impacts the priorities, timing, and selection of pharmacotherapy used in different patients with ACS.

First is a review of the choice of treatment modalities in patients with STEMI. In this group of patients, the most important objective is to provide timely reperfusion modality with the goal of ischemic time being less than 120 minutes. Ischemic time refers to the time from onset of symptoms to the administration of reperfusion therapy. Reperfusion therapy can be a fibrinolytic agent or a form of percutaneous coronary intervention (PCI). The choice of the reperfusion strategy will depend on the estimation of the time that will be necessary for the administration of reperfusion therapy. In the case of fibrinolysis, that time is referred to as door-to-needle, while in the case of PCI, it is door-to-balloon time. PCI is the preferred reperfusion strategy in all patients with STEMI presenting within 12 hours of symptom onset with the condition that it must be done 120 minutes from STEMI diagnosis.

Fibrinolysis should be a consideration if the patient first presents to a non-PCI capable facility and the anticipated time from first medical contact to the performance of primary PCI exceeds 120 minutes (this 120-minute duration usually accounts for a 30-minute door in-door out time (DIDO) time goal at the non-PCI capable facility). Upon deciding about whether or not to use fibrinolysis, it should preferably occur within the first 30 minutes of the first medical contact. This strategy can be achieved either as prehospital fibrinolysis by the emergency medical service (EMS) provider or within 30 minutes of arriving at a non-PCI capable facility (door to needle time). Contraindications to fibrinolysis require prompt review if this strategy is an option. Absolute contraindications are any previous intracranial hemorrhage, ischemic stroke in the past 3 months, central nervous system neoplasm or arteriovenous malformation, major head trauma or surgery within the past month, known active bleeding or bleeding diathesis (with the exception of menses), suspected aortic dissection, severe uncontrolled hypertension unresponsive to emergent medical therapy and use of streptokinase in the last 6 months.

Concomitantly with the decision of reperfusion strategy, it is of paramount importance to institute appropriate antiplatelet and anticoagulation treatment in patients with STEMI. Differences in approach exist depending on the selected reperfusion strategy. In all patients, regardless if they are undergoing PCI or fibrinolysis, aspirin should be administered as early as possible.

In patients with STEMI who are undergoing fibrinolysis, clopidogrel is the recommended P2Y12 inhibitor.

Anticoagulant agents for consideration in patients with STEMI undergoing primary PCI are unfractionated heparin (UFH), low molecular weight heparin (LMWH), and bivalirudin.

For patients with STEMI who are undergoing fibrinolysis, an anticoagulant is necessary until revascularization occurs. If there is no planned revascularization, it should be administered at least 48 hours, up to 8 days.

Other general pharmacologic therapy that needs to be chosen and considered in all patients with STEMI includes beta-blockers, nitrates, analgesics, and inhibitors of the renin-angiotensin-aldosterone system (RAAS).

All patients with STEMI should receive a beta-blocker in the absence of contraindications.

Routine use of nitrates in patients with STEMI is not a strong recommendation unless used for angina relief.

Analgesic treatment in patients with STEMI is important to reduce pain, which can lead to sympathetic hyperactivity, which further impairs myocardial oxygen demand. The recommended agent is intravenous morphine, and it should not be used routinely, but in those patients with severe chest pain, not responding to nitrates, and patients whose presentation is complicated by acute pulmonary edema. Side effects of bradycardia and hypotension require monitoring after morphine administration.

Oxygen is indicated in patients in patients with hypoxemia evidenced by oxygen saturation less than 90% or arterial blood partial pressure of oxygen less than 60 mmHg.

There is strong evidence that RAAS inhibitors, specifically angiotensin-converting enzyme (ACE) inhibitors, are beneficial in patients with STEMI.

Lipid-lowering agents are indicated in the treatment of STEMI.

The principal difference in the management of UA/NSTEMI compared to STEMI is that the initial choice of treatment modality focuses on medical management with anti-ischemic, antiplatelet, anticoagulant and analgesic therapy, all with the goal to minimize ischemia and prevent complications while simultaneously deciding on the timing and appropriateness of coronary angiography versus non-invasive testing and the type of revascularization strategy.

The first decision to make is whether the patient needs a coronary angiography versus a form of non-invasive functional testing (such as myocardial perfusion imaging or stress echocardiography). Generally, patients with UA/NSTEMI can undergo an early invasive strategy or an ischemia-guided (i.e., selective invasive) approach. The early invasive strategy involves coronary angiography performed within 48 hours of presentation, and subsequent PCI, CABG, or medical therapy alone, depending on the characteristics of coronary anatomy. The ischemia-guided approach puts medical management as a priority, while coronary angiography would be the choice in patients exhibiting clinical signs and symptoms of ischemia (e.g., non-resolving chest pain, arrhythmic events, etc.), hemodynamic instability or has positive non-invasive testing. When making this initial modality choice, one should keep in mind that early invasive strategy is not recommended in two groups of patients: 1) patients who have extensive, severe comorbidities, where the risk of revascularization outweighs the benefit, and 2) patients who have chest pain, but a low clinical likelihood of ACS with negative cardiac biomarkers

Antiplatelet agents have a well-established benefit in UA/NSTEMI patients.

Given the complexities in predicting how the revascularization strategy will change, depending on the clinical scenario and coronary anatomy, the timing of the P2Y12 inhibitor administration has been debated due to concern for potentially delaying CABG if such type of revascularization is needed. Based on the current European and American guidelines, both recommend that the P2Y12 inhibitor is administered as promptly as possible after the diagnosis of UA/NSTEMI.

Finally, there is limited use of GpIIb/IIIa inhibitors in patients with UA/NSTEMI.

In the absence of absolute contraindication, anticoagulation is indicated in all patients with UA/NSTEMI once the diagnosis is made.

Symptomatic therapy with nitrates, morphine, and beta-blockers in the acute phase of UA/NSTEMI, resembles that of patients with STEMI, as described above. High-intensity statin therapy is the recommendation for all patients with UA/NSTEMI and should be initiated as early as possible after admission to the hospital.

Dual antiplatelet therapy (DAPT) in patients after ACS should ideally be continued for 12 months, regardless if they underwent fibrinolysis, CABG, or PCI and irrespective of what type of stent is placed.