Serum calcium, vitamin D, and renal function require baseline monitoring before initiating bisphosphonates. In patients with calcium and/or vitamin D deficiency, the recommendation is to correct the deficiency before starting bisphosphonates. The clinician should take a detailed dental history before initiating bisphosphonates, and therapy initiation should delay if planning an invasive dental procedure in the near future. Bone mineral density shall be evaluated 1 to 2 years after initiating therapy and every two years or more frequently in patients deemed high risk. Annual measurements of height, weight, serum calcium, 25- hydroxyvitamin D, and an assessment of back pain to check for the development of compression fractures are also necessary.

In some circumstances, monitoring of biochemical markers of bone resorption such as N-telopeptide of type-1 collagen, C-terminal telopeptide of type 1-collagen and pyridinoline cross-links, and markers of bone formation such as bone-specific alkaline phosphatase, osteocalcin, and N-terminal propeptide of type 1 procollagen before and three months after bisphosphonate initiation can help monitor the effectiveness of the medication in inhibiting bone resorption and measuring compliance. However, these assays are fraught with significant variability within individual patients and poor standardization, so they are not routinely used.

Alkaline phosphatase should be monitored at 6 to 12 weeks after the treatment initiation in patients with a history of Paget disease and should be repeated at 6-month to 12-month intervals.