The treatment of choice for acne conglobata is using retinoids like isotretinoin for 20 to 28 weeks or, in some cases, even longer. Consider adding oral prednisone (1 mg/kg/d) for 14 to 28 days upon starting isotretinoin. Steroids have been shown to be effective if acne flares during the initiation of isotretinoin or when there are systemic constitutional symptoms. The sudden onset of severe acne with oozing and ulceration in relation to isotretinoin use is called acne fulminans, an immunologically induced systemic response that may have accompanying fevers, malaise, anorexia, and weight loss. In such cases, isotretinoin should be temporarily stopped while prednisone is used for 2 to 4 weeks, then isotretinoin can be restarted slowly (0.1 mg/kg/day) while continuing prednisone an additional four weeks, after which isotretinoin is tapered up while prednisone is tapered down.

Topical retinoids are not as effective as oral retinoids but can be used adjunctively. It is important not to administer retinoids to women of childbearing age in the absence of effective contraception, as these drugs are known to be teratogenic.

- Other options include the use of minocycline or doxycycline at 100 mg twice daily. These tetracyclines should not be combined with oral isotretinoin because there is a potential to induce pseudotumor cerebri.

- Dapsone dosed at 50 to 150 mg daily is an option if unresponsive, although care must be taken with lab monitoring for methemoglobinemia, G6PD deficiency, and agranulocytosis.

- Therapy with TNF-alpha inhibitors infliximab, adalimumab, and etanercept is supported in some case reports. These may be particularly helpful when acne conglobata arises as part of the follicular occlusion tetrad.

- Laser therapy with fractional and ablative carbon dioxide laser, Nd:YAG, and vascular laser has shown efficacy in a few case reports.

- In severe cases of acne conglobata that do not respond to the above treatments, another option is external beam radiation.

**Surgery**

- When nodules are large and fluctuant, they can be aspirated. Sometimes providers may use cryotherapy or intralesional triamcinolone. The large nodules can also be excised surgically.

- Once the lesions have healed, dermal fillers can be used to improve the scars. In 2015 the FDA approved using the bovine collagen filler to treat acne scarring. Other dermal fillers and biostimulators can be used as well.