History regarding occupation, hobbies and any topical or oral medications is important in diagnosing contact dermatitis. Patch testing is considered to be the gold standard in diagnosing contact allergic dermatitis and is used to determine the exact cause. A patch test mainly relies on the principle of a. The chemicals included in the patch test kit are chemicals present in metals (e.g., nickel), rubber, leather, formaldehyde, lanolin, fragrance, toiletries, hair dyes, medicine, pharmaceutical items, food, drink, preservative, and other additives.  Patch testing helps identify which substances may be causing a delayed-type allergic reaction.  It produces a local allergic reaction on a small area of the patient's back, where the diluted chemicals are applied.

Allergens are placed on Finn chambers and applied on the back. Patches are removed at 48 hours, and final results are read 48-72 hours later. Grading of the reactions is completed based on the International Contact Dermatitis Research Group guidelines.

- Negative (-)

- Irritant reaction (IR)

- Equivocal / uncertain (+/-)

- Weak positive (+)

- Strong positive (++)

- Extreme reaction (+++)

In patients with nickel allergy, a few drops of dimethylgloxime and hydroxide solutions are on a cotton tip applicator and rubbed on the metallic surface of the jewelry. If the color pink appears on the applicator, this is a positive test for nickel. Women with nickel allergy can perform the test at home on jewelry for the presence of nickel.