The exact etiology of cluster headaches is not clear. There have been several theories suggested and tested. Unfortunately, sample sizes are limited due to the relative rarity of patients suffering from this condition. Some studies have suggested a genetic component, and multiple loci associated with cluster headaches have been identified.

There is a known association between the trigeminovascular system, the parasympathetic nerve fibers involved in the trigeminal autonomic reflex, and the hypothalamus. However, how these structures interact to cause these headaches is not certain. Moreover, as there is a definite familial connection, considerable effort has gone into studying the genetics of the condition, which has also led to a biochemical assessment.

There is a definitive link between vasodilation and a pain attack. Activation of the trigeminovascular system causes perivascular afferent nerves to cause vasodilation. The belief is that the activation of the trigeminal nerve is unilateral; that said, it has not been detected and confirmed with functional imaging. Also, a complete trigeminal nerve root section does not affect the number or frequency of attacks. This lack of change does not rule out the trigeminovascular system as a component of the cluster headache; it merely shows that there are other components.

The hypothalamus has a definite association with cluster headaches. The attacks have a circadian periodicity, happen most often at night, have a relapsing-remitting course, and have seasonal variation, all of which imply the involvement of the hypothalamus, the biological clock.

The parasympathetic nerve fibers are part of the trigeminal autonomic reflex. Stimulation of trigeminal afferents projecting to nociceptive pathways like sphenopalatine ganglion and trigeminal ganglion may cause pain and autonomic symptoms, including conjunctival injection or lacrimation, rhinorrhea, and facial vasodilation; as a result of central disinhibition and neuropeptide release.

**Risk Factors**

- Male gender

- Age of more than 30

- Consumption of alcohol

- Prior brain surgery or trauma

- Family history