Mastectomy is typically an elective procedure, and patients usually report to the hospital or surgical center on the day of their surgery. Pre-operative antibiotics are indicated for patients undergoing mastectomy, with or without axillary surgery or reconstruction, to reduce the risk of surgical site infection; this consensus statement came from the American Society of Breast Surgeons and was updated in 2017. A first-generation cephalosporin is the antibiotic of choice for prophylaxis unless the patient is allergic or has a history of methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus infection.

Patient positioning is in a supine position in the operating room, and the breast, chest wall, axilla, and upper arm are exposed after induction of anesthesia. Many surgeons may include the contralateral breast in the prepped operative field. The field is sterilely prepped with an agent to decrease the presence of skin flora and reduce the risks of surgical site infection. Alcohol-based skin preps, such as chlorhexidine gluconate, are common agents chosen for surgical antisepsis.

Perioperatively, surgeons should prepare patients for their procedure and discuss anticipated postoperative course and care. Many surgeons elect to place a drain at the time of mastectomy to evacuate any fluids that may accumulate in the wound bed and to promote adherence of the flaps to the chest wall. Patients benefit from education on the aspects of drain care and recording an accurate log of output. Patients should also receive counsel regarding their postoperative restrictions regarding lifting, driving, and any other limitations in the immediate recovery period.