**Analgesia**

The nervous system comprises a high concentration of opioid receptors in periaqueductal gray, locus ceruleus (LC), rostral ventral medulla, substantia gelatinosa of the dorsal horn of the spinal cord and the peripheral afferent nerves. The peripheral receptors sense painful stimuli, and impulses get carried to the dorsal horn of the spinal cord for relay to higher centers of the brain. MOR activation by an opioid agonist in the midbrain causes the formation of descending inhibitory impulses(mediated through inhibition of GABA interneurons) to the periaqueductal gray which stimulates descending inhibitory neurons**See Fig 4.)**Exogenously administered opioids cause analgesia both through direct inhibition of substantia gelatinosa of the dorsal horn and through peripheral afferent nerves.

**Stress**

MOR play a central role in toning down the central stress response through inhibition of secretion of norepinephrine (NE) from locus ceruleus (LC), attenuating the stressful state characterized by sustained release of NE under the effect of corticotropin-releasing hormone (CRH) from the paraventricular nucleus of the hypothalamus (PVH)**. (See Fig 5.)**Therefore, MORs are instrumental in recovering from stress, demonstrated by the reduction in the risk of developing post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD) based on evidence obtained from studies showing the beneficial effect of morphine administration after a stressful event.

**Mood and Reward**

Presence of high density of MOR in the limbic system (emotional center) regulates mood and rendering these receptors potential targets to treat mood disorders like anxiety and depression.

The reward center of the brain comprising of ventral tegmental area (VTA) that sends projections to the ventral striatum within the mesolimbic dopamine system. MOR stimulation, through its inhibition of GABA secretion, results in the release of dopamine. Dopamine is responsible for the rewarding effects produced by opioid administration, leading to positive reinforcement.