**Laboratory Tests**

It is recommended to evaluate serum electrolyte levels, particularly potassium and magnesium. Hypomagnesemia and hypokalemia are frequently observed in individuals with alcoholism, particularly during initial hospital assessment.

Patients with atrial fibrillation may require systemic anticoagulation for stroke prophylaxis. The decision about indication and type of anticoagulation may depend on the patient's hemoglobin level and platelet count. A complete metabolic panel, including renal function and liver function, should be obtained as well. Many drugs used for managing atrial fibrillation need dose adjustment according to renal and hepatic clearance.

**12 Lead Electrocardiogram and Telemetry Monitoring**

Electrocardiogram is essential to rule out important differentials like acute coronary syndrome and pulmonary embolism. It is needed to identify the mechanism of tachycardia and the type of cardiac arrhythmia. These patients should be placed on a cardiac telemetry monitor to monitor heart rate trends and identify any initiation or termination events of arrhythmia.

**Chest X-ray**

Chest X-ray is important in patients who have symptoms of shortness of breath and clinical signs of congestive heart failure. Chronic alcoholic patients presenting with rapid atrial fibrillation may have pulmonary vascular congestion and may show signs of cardiomegaly.

**Echocardiography**

An echocardiogram should be performed to assess the left ventricular size, any wall motion abnormality, and systolic and diastolic function. It is important to look for any valvular pathology, left atrial size, right ventricular size, and systolic function.