The cellular physiology for the heart is complicated and will be broken down into two sections: the action potential, which is unique in the heart to other action potentials in the body, and electrophysiology.

**Action Potential**

Please see the image following this article for visual representation

**Cardiac Myocyte**

The action potential (AP) in the heart is unique to other action potentials in the body. It has five distinct phases numbered 0-4. The resting potential or baseline of the AP is roughly - 90 mV and is considered phase 4. For understanding, depolarization is considered the voltage change from the resting potential of - 90 mV toward a positive value. Repolarization will be represented by the return of the voltage of the cell from a positive value down to its resting potential of - 90 mV. The ultimate conclusion of a completed AP is contraction of the cardiac myocyte.

There are multiple types of potassium channels involved in the cardiac myocyte AP. To begin, phase 4 is at resting potential and consists of the first set of potassium channels open, with positively-charged potassium flowing out of the cell and thus keeping the voltage low at approximately - 90 mV. This set of potassium channels is passively open and consistently outflows potassium during phase 4.

In the next phase, phase 0, sodium channels open at approximately - 70 mV. The initial depolarization from - 90 mV to - 70 mV is caused by positive sodium and calcium ions entering the cell through gap junctions from neighboring cells. These ions depolarize the voltage just enough to open these voltage-gated (VG) sodium channels which further depolarize the cell to approximately + 50 mV. These voltage-gated sodium channels close very quickly upon depolarizing the cell.

Upon reaching peak voltage, voltage-gated potassium channels open and move potassium out of the cell, decreasing voltage once again. This is known as phase 1.

In phase 2, the plateau phase, potassium channels are open out of the cell, and voltage-gated calcium channels begin to open into the cell. This creates a net balance of charge in the cell, creating a plateau.

With phase 3, the voltage-gated calcium channels close, leaving the outward-flowing potassium channels as the only open channels. This causes rapid repolarization, dropping the voltage of the cell to - 90 mV and closing the currently open potassium channel. At the resting potential, the cell has only the original potassium channel slowly leaking potassium out of the cell, and we are returned to phase 4 of the action potential.

In summary, the 5 phases of the cardiac myocyte are as follows:

- Phase 4: Resting Potential at - 90 mV with minor depolarization from - 90 mV to - 70 mV; the passive outflow of potassium

- Phase 0: Rapid depolarization from - 70 mV to + 50 mV; inward VG sodium channels

- Phase 1: Minor repolarization; outward VG potassium channels

- Phase 2: Plateau at + 50 mV; outward VG potassium channels and inward VG calcium channels

- Phase 3: Repolarization from + 50 mV to - 90 mV; outward voltage-gated potassium channels

**Cardiac Pacemaker Cell**

The action potential for cardiac pacemaker cells (SA node, AV node, and Bundle of His/Purkinje Fibers) is unique to the AP of general cardiac myocyte. These cells undergo automaticity and are responsible for the heart rate. Therefore, each AP corresponds to one beat of the heart and the inherent frequency of these cells is essential for maintaining proper rate control.

Additionally, the electrophysiology and anatomy of these pacemaker cells are discussed in a later section. We will use phases in line with the previous discussion of the cardiac myocyte; to explain, there are 3 basic phases of the pacemaker AP, but they are named phase 0, 3, and 4 corresponding with the phases of the myocyte action potential. The biggest difference to note in this AP is that calcium is the driving factor for rapid depolarization.

To begin, phase 4 involves sodium influx into the cell. This phase initiates at - 60 mV and the main ion influx is sodium. As the cell gains positive charge due to the influx of positive ions, it reaches - 40 mV which is defined as the threshold for the pacemaker AP. As the voltage hits - 40 mV, voltage-gated calcium channels open into the cell to influx more positive ions. This influx of calcium ions denotes the beginning of phase 0, which is the action potential. The voltage continues to rise until it hits + 10 mV, which will shut off the voltage-gated calcium channels and open up voltage-gated potassium channels, which are efflux from the cell. The opening of the potassium channels begin phase 3 and the downslope of our voltage, and the voltage will drop back to the start of Phase 4 at - 60 mV where the potassium channels will close.

In summary, the 3 phases of the pacemaker action potential are as follows:

- Phase 4: Minor depolarization from - 60 mV to - 40 mV; passive inflow of sodium

- Phase 0: Rapid depolarization from - 40 mV to + 10 mV; inflow of VG calcium channels

- Phase 3: Repolarization from + 10 mV to - 60 mV; outflow of VG potassium channels

Lastly, each pacemaker cell has a different inherent rate at which it can maintain the heart. The SA node is responsible for heart rate under normal conditions; this means that the inherent rate of the SA node is typically around 60 to 100 beats per minute (BPM). The AV node is the second pacemaker which takes over rate if the SA node begins to fail; the AV node keeps the rate at 40 to 60 BPM. There are other foci situated around the SA and AV nodes (e.g., atrial foci and ventricular foci) that can contribute to the rate. In pathology such as atrial fibrillation, these Foci can even create a disease state through rapid firing which increases heart rate, but this discussion is out of scope for this article.

**Electrophysiology**

The electrical circuit of the heart follows a distinct pathway from the right atrium down throughout the ventricles of the heart. The electrical circuit begins at the Sinoatrial node, or SA node, which is located in the right atrium. This node is a unique bundle of cells that undergoes automaticity; these cells have their inherent rate of depolarization that is independent of other cells in the heart. As the SA node depolarizes, an electrical signal is simultaneously transmitted across from the right atrium to the left atrium via a bundle of cells termed “Bachman’s Bundle.” Following the SA node conduction, the current travels down to the Atrioventricular node, or AV node. The AV node is located further inferior in the Right Atrium by the interatrial septum. An important distinction to make about the AV node is that it creates a small pause in the electrical circuit. This pause is important because it delays the ventricles from contracting, and thus establishes successive contraction of the ventricles following the atria. If this pause did not occur, the atria and ventricles would contract simultaneously, and blood would not flow appropriately through the heart. The current leaves the AV node down a bundle of cells named the “Bundle of His” located inferior to the AV node in the interventricular septum. The Bundle of His then transmits the conduction down two bundle branches that arc throughout the two ventricles; specifically, these are named the right and left bundle branches. The right and left bundle branches have many fascicles that divide off and supply much of the ventricles. The main continuation of the right and left bundle branch is the Purkinje Fiber system, which is a set of many small branches arcing throughout the remaining ventricular space and supplying it with the electrical output.

In summary, the order of flow through the electrical system is as follows:

- SA node and Bachman’s Bundle

- AV node

- Bundle of His

- Right and left bundle branches

- Purkinje Fibers