Lu-177 dotatate therapy is a form of endo-radiotherapy that combines a radionuclide with a peptide that specifically binds to peptide receptors. The high affinity to these SSTRs causes internalization of the receptor–peptide complex by endocytosis. These peptide receptors (somatostatin receptors) are expressed to a high concentration on tumor cells as assessed by gallium-68 pet scans.

The FDA approved it in 2018 to treat somatostatin receptor (SSTR) positive gastroenteropancreatic neuroendocrine tumors. Most NETs show relatively high expression levels of SSTRs, which allows imaging and therapy using radiolabeled somatostatin analogs. Lutetium 177 is a commonly used radionucleotide for targeted radiation therapy. The combination of radionucleotide lutetium 177 with somatostatin analog dotatate delivers ionizing radiation targeting tumor cells that express somatostatin receptors causing radiation-induced double-stranded DNA breaks leading to apoptosis. This action is more specific for somatostatin receptor-positive lesions.

Based on recent clinical studies, this treatment yielded a response rate of up to 30%, with over 33% having symptomatic treatment. However, long-term effects include renal dysfunction, pancytopenia, and myelodysplastic syndrome. This treatment is indicated commonly for well-differentiated tumors where somatostatin receptor expression is relatively high. Lu-dotatate is the treatment of choice for well-differentiated neuroendocrine tumors and especially those who progress despite using long-acting somatostatin analogs. This treatment is favored over monitoring or administering targeted therapies such as everolimus or sunitinib.

Lu-177-dotatate is administered as an intravenous infusion in an outpatient setting. The recommended dose is  7.4 GBq (200 mCi) every eight weeks for four doses. Dose adjustments may be needed based on patients' renal and hematological parameters. Long-acting somatostatin analogs will be discontinued for at least four weeks before initiating this therapy. However, short-acting octreotide is prescribed as needed for symptom control. After the therapy, long-acting somatostatin analogs are continued every four weeks until the disease progresses.

The global phase III NETTER-1 trial is the most compelling evidence of clinical benefit for Lu-177 (Lu-dotatate) in midgut GINETs. In this study, 229 patients with inoperable, somatostatin-receptor-positive midgut NETs who experienced progressive disease on standard doses of long-acting octreotide were randomly assigned to four doses of Lu-dotatate every eight weeks (116 patients) or long-acting octreotide 60 mg administered intramuscularly every 28 days (113).

The estimated PFS rate at month 20 was significantly higher, with Lu-dotatate (65.2 versus 10.8 percent) reaching statistical significance. Among patients evaluable for radiographic response, Lu-dotatate showed a significantly higher objective response rate (18 versus 3 percent) compared to octreotide. The treatment-related serious adverse events (SAE) are more common with Lu-dotatate (9 versus 1 percent). The most common adverse event in the Lu-Dotatate was nausea, possibly due to the amino acid infusions administered during therapy for renal protection. Lu-Dotatate is associated with hematologic toxicities due to irradiation of the bone marrow. The Netter-1 study reported mild degrees of thrombocytopenia (25 percent), lymphopenia (18 percent, t), anemia (14 percent), and leukopenia (10 percent) that occurred four to six weeks after each infusion and resolved within eight weeks.

This treatment also has an impact on the quality of life. A study concluded that the time to deterioration in the quality of life was significantly longer with Lu-Dotatate compared with h octreotide in several domains, including global health status, physical functioning, role functioning, fatigue, pain, diarrhea, disease-related worries, and body image. The differences were clinically significant in global health status (median time to deterioration in the quality of life was 28.8 versus 6.1 months) and physical functioning (25.2 versus 11.5 months).

Long-term outcomes in a later analysis, five years after the last patient, were randomized (median follow-up of 76 months in both groups).

Myelodysplastic syndrome (MDS) was reported with this treatment. Based on this data from the NETTER-1 trial, Lu-dotatate was approved to treat somatostatin-receptor-positive gastroenteropancreatic NETs in adults. The recommended dose is 7.4 GBq (200 millicuries), with an intravenous infusion every eight weeks for four doses. There are no definitive selection criteria for Lu-dotatate. The European Society guidelines suggested Lu-dotatate therapy for an inoperable metastatic grade 1 and 2 well-differentiated NET with sufficient tumor uptake on diagnostic somatostatin receptor-based imaging and with adequate renal and bone marrow reserve.