Beginning in the 1980s, isolates of vancomycin-resistant Enterococcus were demonstrated in Europe, likely arising due to the use of the glycopeptide antibiotic avoparcin in livestock to promote growth. Development in the United States was probably due to increasing use of vancomycin in the clinical setting. Throughout the 1990s and 2000s, multiple epidemics have plagued hospitals due to person-to-person transmission. After fecal shedding, vancomycin-resistant Enterococcus is found on the skin and spreads via exposed or contaminated surfaces.

According to the National Healthcare Safety Network, enterococci species ranked as the second overall healthcare-associated infection between 2011 and 2014. In particular, E. Faecalis was a cause in 7.4% of cases. Furthermore, Enterococci species were found to be the number one isolate for central line-associated bloodstream infections (CLABSI), number three for catheter-associated urinary tract infection (CAUTI), number eleven for ventilator-associated pneumonia (VAP) and number two for surgical site infections (SSI). While the majority of Enterococcus isolates are E. faecalis, the majority of vancomycin-resistant Enterococcus isolates are E. faecium. From 2011 to 2014 the resistance of E. faecium to vancomycin was as high as 83.8 % of isolates for CLABSI and 86.2 % for CAUTI. In 2013 the CDC categorized vancomycin-resistant Enterococcus as a “serious threat,” suggesting the need for increased monitoring and prevention activities.

There are many risk factors for vancomycin-resistant Enterococcus colonization and subsequent infections. The most commonly observed risk factor is previous antimicrobial therapy. This mechanism likely is due to alteration in bowel flora. Furthermore, patients at increased risk are those with severe underlying illnesses or immunosuppression. This also includes patients with a long hospital stay, admission to long-term care facilities, extended use of antibiotics, and proximity to other patients with vancomycin-resistant Enterococcus.