**Decontamination and PPE**

Decontamination is the first, and one of the most important steps when evaluating and treating a victim of a WMD attack. Which type of decontamination you will choose will be dependent on your level of training, the nature of the exposure, and the availability of resources.

**Disaster Preparedness**

Education

The importance of education and preparedness activities cannot be understated. A comprehensive literature review noted that all preparedness activities will lead to improvement in the knowledge base, skill set, and attitude/comfort level during a response to a disaster in all allied health professions

The Disaster Paradigm

The Disaster Paradigm is an all-hazards model that may be applied to any mass casualty disaster and is a useful framework to describe preparation and response for WMD attacks. This was developed by the American Medical Association’s National Disaster Life Support program. The model uses the word disaster to outline stages of any mass casualty incident response. The components are as follows:

- Detection – Recognize that the situation will overwhelm the available resources of the provider arriving on scene first. Often the full scope of the WMD attack will not be identified immediately and will develop over time.

- Incident Command – Initiate the National Incident Management System Incident Command System early! This will provide the flexibility of response, clear leadership, and authority structure, and increase available resources.

- Scene security- Assess scene safety, access, and don PPE as necessary.

- Assess hazards – Be aware of other potential threats such as secondary devices, radiologic or chemical agents.

- Support – Initial responders may be tasked with the first needs assessment with regards to hospital readiness, additional EMS units, medical direction, HAZMAT response, fire/rescue, and logistic support.

- Triage/treatment- Initiate MCI triage with a standard protocol.

- Evacuation – Evacuation is a complex process requiring evacuation from the scene, coordination of resources, and potentially gross decontamination prior to leaving the scene.

- Recovery – Begin the process at the time of the response. Prepare for the physical and psychological needs of victims, responders, and families.