The goal of the management of PH in group 3 is to optimize the underlying disease and improve the functional status. This includes guideline-directed therapy using appropriate bronchodilators in obstructive lung disease, antifibrotics in patients with fibrotic lung disease, and immunosuppressive agents in connective tissue disease-induced ILD to slow disease progression.

Patients with obesity hypoventilation syndrome (OHS) should be encouraged to use noninvasive mechanical ventilation (NIV).

In patients with advanced disease with hypoxemia, long-term oxygen therapy (LTOT) in patients with COPD has shown a decrease in the progression of PH when used for >15 hours and improvement in PAP when used for >18 hours.

Systemic vasodilators have been associated with concerns regarding the theoretical risk of worsening gas exchange due to hypoxic vasoconstriction and subsequent ventilation-perfusion mismatch.

The most recent use of inhaled treprostinil in the INCREASE trial showed an improved six-minute walk distance compared to patients who received a placebo. This supports the idea that inhaled vasodilators may cause less ventilation-perfusion mismatch than systemic use of vasodilators.

While most vasodilator therapies are not effective and may be harmful, inhaled treprostinil is approved in group 3 PH. Based on the INCREASE trial, the US FDA approved inhaled treprostinil as the first and only treatment for group 3 PH associated with ILD. When supportive therapy and inhaled vasodilator therapy fail to control the disease progression, systemic vasodilators can be cautiously trialed on a case-by-case basis in tertiary pulmonary hypertension centers.

Patients with advanced lung disease should be referred to centers with expertise in advanced lung disease and pulmonary hypertension for early evaluation of the lung transplant.