As surgical site infections take a massive toll on resources and cause morbidity and mortality, there are many general rules and guidelines in place to prevent them in the first place. These include preoperative skin preparation, using films on the skin, theatre sterility rules, perioperative and postoperative prophylactic antibiotics, and dressings. Also, improving the patient's natural defense mechanisms such as early mobilization and improving nutritional status.

For prophylaxis considerations, a safe, narrow-spectrum agent should be used with coverage for the expected microorganisms and should be prescribed for the shortest effective period. The antibiotic should be given 30 to 60 minutes before knife to skin time to allow tissue concentrations to reach therapeutic levels at the time of operation. For clean procedures, the antibiotics need to cover Staphylococci. For clean-contaminated procedures, similar coverage for Staphylococci is required, with additional coverage as required depending on the surgery and geography. This is usually cefazolin 2g (weight-adjusted) or vancomycin 15mg/kg plus metronidazole, cefoxitin, or ertapenem. For contaminated and dirty procedures, prophylaxis is generally not indicated, because therapeutic antibiotic management is required.

For treatment, each surgical specialty, body region, and operation type needs to have its strategy to treat the already developed SSI as the microbial spectrum is often different. Also, foreign bodies (mesh, implant, metalwork) have to be considered for removal due to biofilm formation.

Often early surgical debridement is the preferred option to resolve infection successfully. However, in complex surgery, re-opening the surgical site can cause significant morbidity. If there is sufficient information that the infection is superficial, a decision can be made to treat conservatively.

If patients are found to be septic, a timely set of measurements and interventions can save patients' lives.