Blockade of the brachial plexus effectively provides anesthesia to the upper limb from the shoulder to the fingertips. Approaches to blocking the brachial plexus depend on the indication, planned surgery or procedure, patient-specific body habitus, medical comorbidities, and individual anatomical variants. This review addresses the indications, ultrasound probe placement, and sonoanatomy for the ultrasound-guided interscalene block, superior trunk block, supraclavicular brachial plexus block, infraclavicular brachial plexus block, and axillary brachial plexus block.

It is well established that brachial plexus blocks provide superior postoperative pain management compared to general anesthesia alone. Using catheter-based continuous infusions for brachial plexus blocks is superior to single-injection brachial plexus blocks for decreasing perioperative pain scores and opioid consumption requirements for various upper extremity surgeries.

While there may be some cost-saving aspects to using brachial plexus blocks as the sole anesthetic compared to general anesthesia, this is only true if there is no need to utilize general anesthesia as a rescue technique. This emphasizes the supreme importance of successful block placement and management in maintaining cost-efficient practices.

Exact needle placement is vital for successful block delivery. The choice and placement of the ultrasound probe are key factors in successfully using brachial plexus blocks. In addition, proper anatomic recognition is essential for successful ultrasound-guided brachial plexus blockade and patient safety.

The anatomy of the brachial plexus comprises six anatomical structures: nerve roots, trunks, divisions, cords, and terminal branches.

Identifying vascular structures, such as arterial vessels that traverse through or around neurovascular bundles during brachial plexus blockade, is essential.

In conclusion, blockade of the brachial plexus can provide significant postoperative pain relief in upper extremity surgery compared to general anesthesia alone. However, to ensure safety and efficacy, it is essential to have accurate knowledge of sonoanatomy and select the best approach based on patient characteristics. Furthermore, careful consideration must be given to needle placement and avoidance of vascular structures.