Early diagnosis is important because prostatic abscesses require prolonged treatment protocols and sometimes surgical drainage. While surgical procedures are not necessary in all cases of prostate abscesses, drainage procedures have been shown to limit the duration of antibiotics required, shorten hospitalizations, and enhance voiding function.

Once there is clinical suspicion of a prostate abscess, a diagnostic evaluation takes place with transrectal ultrasonography or alternate prostate imaging modality to determine the size, number, extent, and exact location of any abscesses. Conservative management is reasonable for abscesses up to 1 cm in diameter. Conservative treatment can be done between 1 cm and 2 cm in diameter, but surgical aspiration and drainage will generally speed recovery and reduce hospitalization time.

Conservatively treated patients should be closely monitored as they may need a surgical drainage procedure if no significant improvement occurs. Patients not responding to initial ultrasound-guided drainage should have additional imaging, such as a CT scan or MRI, to rule out extraprostatic spread of the abscess, in which case open drainage may be warranted.

Smaller abscesses, typically 2 cm or less, may respond to non-operative treatment, but complete resolution is likely to take longer without a surgical drainage procedure.

The emergence of more resistant organisms, such as extended-spectrum beta-lactamase-producing enterobacteria and methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus, has greatly complicated treatment as up to 75% of organisms causing prostatic abscess infections are resistant to first-generation antibiotics. This requires the use of intravenous carbapenem, third-generation cephalosporins, aztreonam, amikacin, or various combinations while awaiting blood and urine culture results, especially in patients who present with febrile urinary tract infections or sepsis after prostatic biopsies.

There is some controversy regarding urethral catheter drainage vs. a suprapubic tube. Urethral drainage with a Foley or intermittent catheterization can induce more prostatic manipulation, be uncomfortable or painful to the patient, and become infected. The standard recommendation for patients with poor bladder emptying is to use a suprapubic tube to avoid further irritation and manipulation of a swollen and infected prostate.

About 80% of patients will ultimately require early surgical drainage based on their overall condition or the size of the abscess.

In the past, transurethral drainage (unroofing or resection) was the most commonly selected therapy due to its reduced length of hospital stay. It is also the procedure of choice for larger abscesses and in those cases where aspiration alone has been inadequate. However, some experts are concerned about possible complications such as post-operative voiding dysfunction. Transurethral resection can also overlook or miss small prostatic abscesses.

As the abscess is not always visible cystoscopically, clinicians should be prepared to perform an extensive transurethral resection.

Currently, transrectal drainage with transrectal ultrasound guidance is the first choice approach, especially for smaller abscesses less than 2 cm in diameter, because it is done using only local anesthesia, has a low risk of complications, and is easily repeatable if necessary.

The transcutaneous perineal route of aspiration is also an option at times, and CT guidance can be used. MRI-transrectal ultrasound fusion-guided aspiration is also possible utilizing the same technology currently used for targeted prostatic biopsies. Transurethral resection is recommended for larger abscesses and patients who have failed transrectal ultrasound-guided aspirations. Open surgical drainage may be necessary if the abscess has spread to deeper tissue, such as the levator ani muscle, but should be avoided whenever possible due to prolonged wound healing, possible fistula formation, and the potential development of superinfections.