In the setting of brain anoxia due to cardiac arrest, resuscitation efforts, optimizing blood pressure, and maintaining systemic perfusion are critical components of treatment.

These randomized controlled trials indicated that patients who received hypothermia had lower mortality rates and improved neurological outcomes. In a 2006 meta-analysis including roughly 400 patients, authors calculated the numbers needed to treat to be seven patients to save one life and five patients to improve neurologic outcomes. There was no evidence of treatment-limiting side effects.

However, in a recent meta-analysis of patient data included in the Targeted Temperature Management (TTM) and TTM2 trials, hypothermia at 33°C was found to be of no benefit compared with normothermia with regard to survival or functional outcome at six months in adult patients surviving out-of-hospital cardiac arrest due to a cardiac etiology. This result contradicts the findings from the HYPERION trial that showed an apparent benefit of hypothermia on functional outcomes. The guidelines should incorporate these findings, and recommendations should be made regarding temperature management by targeting fever prevention.

Although a complete discussion targeted temperature management is outside the scope of this document, there are a few important points to note. Mild hypothermia acts via a number of mechanisms to inhibit apoptosis, excitotoxicity, and mitochondrial dysfunction. Lowering the body temperature also acts to decrease the cerebral metabolic rate, leading to a reduction in oxygen consumption and cerebral blood flow, and stabilizes the blood-brain barrier, which decreases edema formation.

If clinically significant bradyarrhythmias occur, careful rewarming by 1 to 2 degrees Celsius - i.e., from 33 degrees to 34 degrees - is sufficient to resolve the issue. Hypothermic patients are often hyperglycemic due to decreased insulin secretion and relative insulin resistance—additionally, induction of hypothermia results in an intracellular influx of potassium, which can result in hypokalemia. In addition, hypothermia may produce a "cold diuresis," which can contribute to electrolyte abnormalities and result in volume depletion. During the rewarming phase, the sequestration of potassium is reversed, which may result in hyperkalemia, especially if hypokalemia was overtreated during induction and maintenance of hypothermia. For this reason, frequent monitoring of blood glucose and electrolyte levels is required during the induction and rewarming phases. Adequate sedation and analgesia are critical during targeted temperature management, often requiring continuous infusions of sedative agents such as propofol or midazolam, as well as opiate medications. However, these agents can confound neurological assessment. Furthermore, seizures are a common complication of anoxic brain injury. Electroencephalography can, therefore, be very valuable.

Finally, shivering is a common complication of induced hypothermia or targeted temperature management. Shivering is problematic because it increases the metabolic rate, slows the rate of cooling, and can increase intracranial pressure. Consequently, shivering can seriously undercut the beneficial effects of therapeutic hypothermia. Several methods for treating and preventing shivering have been described in the literature. Adequate analgesia and sedation are important; opiates, in particular, have been shown to decrease the shivering threshold. Counterwarming the hands, face, and upper chest can be very effective. Other pharmacological interventions, including antipyretics, such as acetaminophen; magnesium sulfate; and central alpha-2 blockers, such as dexmedetomidine, have been shown to be valuable.