**Neurologic Monitoring**

While in the intensive care unit, continuous brain monitoring via electroencephalogram (EEG) can be useful to guide therapy and identify evolving hypoxic-ischemic brain injury and electrographic seizures. Neuroimaging can help identify a cerebral cause of cardiac arrest and assess the degree of severe brain injury.

**ECMO**

Mechanical circulatory support in the form of extracorporeal membrane oxygenation (ECMO) may be considered during post-cardiac arrest care (PCAC) if significant cardiorespiratory instability persists despite appropriate intervention. 2015 AHA guidelines recommend specifically that ECMO during CPR (ECPR) be considered in the setting of in-hospital cardiac arrest (IHCA) in a pediatric patient with a known cardiac diagnosis. Due to the limited benefit and resource-intensive nature of ECMO, the guidelines caution providers to consider the availability of skilled personnel, protocols, and equipment. Overall, the clinical effectiveness of ECMO after ROSC is inconclusive. Studies indicate ECMO may improve survival for rewarming and circulatory support of cold-water drowning victims. Case series and one study in a PICU population, identified reduced mortality associated with the initiation of ECMO within 24 hours of ROSC in children with refractory cardiogenic shock. If ECMO is initiated during CPR (ECPR), it must be continued during the post-cardiac arrest period until the patient can be separated from mechanical support.

**Seizure Management**

Acute, electrographic seizures are treated with benzodiazepines, levetiracetam, or phenytoin. Some seizures may be refractory to treatment. Providers must be aware of potential adverse effects of anticonvulsants such as cardiac arrhythmias, hypotension, and respiratory depression, and must take into consideration that any sedation induced by these medications may complicate the neurological examination.

**Glucose Management**

There is insufficient published evidence to determine the optimal blood glucose concentration during PCAC. During the peri-arrest and post-resuscitation period, providers should promptly identify, prevent, and treat hypoglycemia (≤45 mg/dL in the newborn and ≤60 mg/dL in the child) to avoid further neurologic insult. Additionally, severe hyperglycemia can exacerbate post–cardiac arrest volume depletion and hemodynamic instability, and should be avoided.

**Prognosis and Imaging Considerations**

Brain CT is useful to identify treatable intracranial causes of cardiac arrest, but is not reliable for neuroprognostication. Brain MRI after ROSC may be helpful, along with serial neurological examinations, EEG, and other adjuncts to estimate the extent of neurological recovery.