Congenital abnormalities of the kidney and urinary tract (CAKUT) occur in approximately 1 in 500 live births and are responsible for 40 to 50% of childhood end-stage renal disease. Research has revealed known genetic causes of CAKUT, such as mutations in Pax2 and BMP4, but also highlighted several environmental factors such as maternal diabetes and intrauterine exposure to ACE-inhibitors. CAKUT encompasses a broad spectrum of disorders leading to abnormal development which are covered below.

Renal agenesis is the congenital absence of renal tissue affecting one side (unilateral), or less commonly, both kidneys (bilateral). It is often associated with abnormalities of the heart, reproductive system in males, and the gastrointestinal tract.ANOS1, EYA1, and RET; however, further studies are necessary.

Multicystic dysplastic kidney disease (MCDK) is characterized by impaired renal function due to the presence of irregular cysts on the affected kidney. It affects approximately 1 in 4300 live births worldwide and is more common in males. The majority of cases get diagnosed via a prenatal ultrasound. Fetuses with bilateral MCDK die in utero whereas those with unilateral MCDK are healthy and simply require regular imaging to monitor any size changes in the affected kidney. Occasionally a nephrectomy may be carried out to remove the affected kidney. The causes of MCDK are currently unknown, although it is thought to be caused by a defect in the genes involved in the Gdnf-RET signaling pathway between the ureteric bud and the metanephric blastema.

Polycystic kidney disease (PKD) is a genetic disorder which causes fluid-filled cysts to form on the kidneys and progressively compromise renal function. There are two types of PKD, autosomal dominant PKD, and autosomal recessive PKD, with autosomal dominant PKD being the most common inherited kidney disease. Autosomal dominant PKD is thought to be caused by heterogeneous mutations in PKD1 in 85% of cases, with the remaining 15% due to PKD2 mutations.PKHD1, display symptoms shortly after birth. Up to 50% of affected neonates die due to pulmonary hypoplasia as a result of oligohydramnios; the remaining individuals have a shorter life expectancy and face other comorbidities including systemic hypertension and end-stage renal disease as they progress to adulthood.

In addition to structural abnormalities of the kidney itself, failure of the kidneys to ascend can also result in malformations, the two most common being an ectopic kidney and a horseshoe kidney. An ectopic kidney, also known as a pelvic kidney, occurs when a kidney fails to begin or complete its ascent into its final position in the lumbar region. A horseshoe kidney occurs when both kidneys fuse at their inferior poles to form a U-shape, similar to a horseshoe, just below the inferior mesenteric artery. In both cases, the affected individual tends not to show symptoms, and only discovers it when they are having investigations for an unrelated health issue.