Local anesthetics have a significant risk of systemic toxicity when administered intravascularly or orally in excessive dosages. Symptoms usually manifest in the central nervous system first (metallic taste, auditory changes, circumoral numbness, blurred vision, agitation, seizures), followed by cardiovascular effects (hypotension, decreased cardiac contractility, dysrhythmias, complete heart block, cardiovascular collapse). Bupivacaine is particularly cardiotoxic, and there have been reports of cardiovascular collapse in the absence of antecedent neurologic symptoms. Cardiopulmonary bypass or extracorporeal membrane oxygenation is still useful in refractory cases.

**Hypersensitivity**

Allergic or hypersensitivity reactions to local anesthetics are rare. In most cases, the hypersensitive response is not to the anesthetic itself but the preservative solution. The risk of an allergic reaction is higher with the ester group than with the amides. The cause of the hypersensitivity reaction appears to be para-aminobenzoic acid, which is a breakdown product generated by the actions of the pseudocholinesterase enzyme. Para-aminobenzoic acid is considered extremely antigenic and rapidly sensitizes lymphocytes.

More commonly, reactions to a local anesthetic arise from apprehension, anxiety, and phobia about needles. These feelings may result in a vasovagal response, a panic attack, or a syncopal episode.

If a patient develops a hypersensitive reaction to one anesthetic in the ester group, they will generally also be sensitive to all other anesthetics in the same class. Thus, it is better to use an amino group anesthetic in such scenarios.