Although this is not a definite part of the statistical process according to previous and current references on the topic, the "utilization of data in the healthcare setting" can still be an additional part of an overall process.  The use of relevant statistical findings and conclusions is vital in the decision-making process of both internal and external health stakeholders.

Just as there is a data analysis plan made before any study is implemented, a careful plan is required on how statistical results shall be shared with the appropriate audience. Graphical presentation as used in descriptive studies can effectively aid in the understanding of both technical and non-technical staff. The introduction of statistical output in presenting the results to the stakeholders may not always be beneficial at all times. Instead, the meaning and relevance of the statistical test and the practical application of its conclusion should be given more emphasis. Determining the recipients of the statistical findings will help in defining the method of disseminating specific statistical information.

Generally, the importance of statistics as a tool for the execution of health research and the development of new knowledge and understanding in the healthcare practice has already been proven both in the past and in contemporary situations. While statistics carry its specific language, like medicine, science, and other technical areas, each healthcare professional in clinics, hospitals, laboratories, and health industries must understand the basic concepts of statistics. It must always be emphasized that the application of statistics in health and medicine is meant to help the healthcare team to have a deeper understanding of health-related variables and events, and not to confuse them in any other way, for instance, due to the misuse and abuse of statistics