# Continuing Education Activity

Coats disease is an idiopathic ocular condition characterized by retinal telangiectasia and exudation. The incidence is relatively low, hence recognizing it will help in the early diagnosis and treatment. This activity reviews the evaluation and management of Coats disease and explains the role of the interprofessional team in improving care for patients with this condition.

**Objectives:**
- Describe the etiology of Coats disease.
- Explain the typical presentation of a patient with Coats disease.
- Review the typical imaging findings associated with Coats disease.
- Summarize the importance of collaboration and communication amongst the interprofessional team to improve outcomes for patients affected by Coats disease.

# Introduction

Coats disease is an idiopathic ocular condition characterized by retinal telangiectasia, aneurysms, and exudation.‘idiopathic retinal telangiectasia associated with exudation and frequent exudative retinal detachment with no signs of retinal or vitreal traction.’

# Etiology

Coats disease is usually sporadic.

Cremers and colleagues found a mutation in the CRB1 gene in 55% of eyes with retinitis pigmentosa and Coats-like secondary exudative vasculopathy.

# Epidemiology

Morris et al. conducted a population bases study of Coats disease.

# Pathophysiology

In Coats disease, the blood-retinal barrier breaks down, which causes plasma leakage into the vessel wall.

# Histopathology

Coats studied the histologic features of enucleated eyes.

# History and Physical

The presenting symptoms are varied. The patients can present with decreased visual acuity (43%), strabismus (23%), leukocoria/xanthocoria (20%), pain (3%), heterochromia (1%), and nystagmus (1%).

Visual acuity can range from 20/20 to 20/50 in 12% of cases, 20/60 to 20/100 in 11%, 20/200 to counting fingers in 18%, and hand motions to no light perception in 58%.

Retinal findings include telangiectasia, fusiform aneurysms, and intraretinal exudation. There may be sheathing of the vasculature.

Adult-onset Coats disease is characterized by systemic associations (usually hypertension), incidental detection, involvement of less than six clock hours of the retina, a benign natural course of the disease, and usually better visual outcomes compared to childhood-onset Coats disease.

# Evaluation

The diagnosis of Coats disease is clinical. Ancillary investigations are done when the diagnosis is in doubt, particularly with bullous retinal detachment with exudation and dilated vessels.

**Fundus Fluorescein Angiography (FFA)**

The typical fluorescein angiographic features are telangiectasia, aneurysms, beading of vessel walls, and peripheral retinal nonperfusion.

**Optical Coherence Tomography (OCT)**

OCT is helpful in monitoring for macular involvement. It helps in documenting cystoid macular edema, epiretinal membrane, subretinal/intraretinal fluid, subfoveal lipids, central macular thickness, and subfoveal choroidal thickness.

**OCT Angiography (OCTA)**

OCTA may be used to monitor the disease and response to therapy non-invasively.

**Ocular Ultrasonography (USG)**

It depicts the extent of retinal detachment. It characterizes the subretinal space, which is usually acoustically clear, but sometimes hyperechogenicity can be seen due to the presence of cholesterol deposits. Calcification can occur in advanced Coats disease along the retinal pigmentary epithelium. It is seen as a curvilinear pattern in contrast to retinoblastoma, where it is randomly distributed.

The analysis of subretinal fluid sometimes helps in diagnosis by demonstrating lipid-laden macrophages and cholesterol crystals.

**Computed Tomography (CT)**

CT is useful to rule out retinoblastoma. The presence of a solid mass with calcification is present in retinoblastoma. This is better delineated in the CT scan. In Coats disease, the scan would be clear of these lesions.

**Magnetic Resonance Imaging (MRI)**

MRI may be useful in diagnosing advanced Coats disease and ruling out retinoblastoma. The exudate in Coats disease is hyperintense on both T1-weighted and T2-weighted MRI images, whereas in retinoblastoma, the T1-weighted image will show a hyperintense mass, but the T2-weighted image shows a hypointense mass.

# Treatment / Management

The treatment for Coats disease depends on the stage of the disease. Mild cases with only retinal telangiectasia and no exudation can be observed and followed up at regular intervals. Treatment is needed when exudation develops. In less severe cases of exudation, laser photocoagulation to telangiectatic vessels is done.

FFA helps in detecting the leaking vessels.

Advanced cases with bullous exudative detachment abutting the lens might benefit from surgery. The subretinal fluid is drained either trans-sclerally or internally. The detached retina gets approximated. Pan retinal photocoagulation or cryotherapy is then done. In cases with the rhegmatogenous or tractional component, pars plana vitrectomy is done with or without tamponade. Surgery primarily aims to prevent a painful blind eye and avoid enucleation rather than vision restoration.

Enucleation is done in endstage disease with neovascularization or angle-closure glaucoma.

Intravitreal corticosteroids and anti-VEGF agents may effectively reduce macular edema and subretinal fluid.

# Differential Diagnosis

Diseases that produce leukocoria

Retinoblastoma can present in a younger child below one year; Coats disease is not as common in this age group and generally presents after 2 or 3 years. The large vessels in retinoblastoma go subretinally within the tumor, whereas in Coats disease, the telangiectatic vessels are always noted in the retinal surface. Bilaterality is common in retinoblastoma but very rare in Coats disease. Retinoblastoma often has a family history, but family history is usually not present in Coats disease. Retinoblastoma presents with leukocoria, and Coats disease has xanthocoria. On USG, retinoblastoma presents as a solid mass and calcification with shadowing. This feature is absent in Coats. The calcification in retinoblastoma is randomly distributed. Calcification in Coats is rare but, if present, is curvilinearly distributed along the retinal pigment epithelium.

FEVR and Noorie disease can be differentiated based on bilaterality, a positive family history, and the presence of retinal dragging, all of which are rare in Coats disease. Retinopathy of prematurity (ROP) is seen in preterm low birth-weight babies. Proliferative retinopathy due to chronic rhegmatogenous retinal detachment and pars planitis is another differential.

The classical finding in Coats is dilated telangiectatic vessels, aneurysms, hard exudates, peripheral avascularity, and exudative retinal detachment.

Sometimes a mass forms which might simulate

- Melanoma,

- Papillary or retinal capillary hemangioblastoma,

- Choroidal granuloma (sarcoidosis, tuberculosis), and

- Vasoproliferative tumor.

Other differential diagnoses of diseases with extensive hard exudates include

- Branch retinal venous occlusion,

- Vasoproliferative tumor,

- Capillary hemangioma,

- Chronic retinal detachment,

- Trauma, and

- Inflammation.

A Coats-like response (retinal telangiectasia, aneurysm, and hard exudates) may also be noted in

- Retinitis pigmentosa

- Healed choroiditis

- Tubercular subretinal abscess

- Retinal vasculitis,

- Pars planitis

- Leber Congenital amaurosis

- Facioscapulohumeral muscular dystrophy and deafness,

- Progressive facial hemiatrophy or Parry-Romberg syndrome or progressive hemifacial atrophy or hemifacial atrophy

- Isolated hemihyperplasia

- Tuberous sclerosis

- Alport's syndrome

- X-linked retinoschisis and regressed retinopathy of prematurity

- 'Blood-filled senile retinoschisis'

- Linear Scleroderma

- En coup de sabre scleroderma

- Epidermal nevus syndrome

As described by Gass and Blodi, type I macular telangiectasia is characterized by nonfamilial and usually unilateral disease with retinal telangiectasia and hard exudates.

# Staging

Shields et al. introduced the staging of Coats disease in 2000, which is most widely used:

- Stage 1 is characterized by retinal telangiectasia

- Stage 2 has telangiectasia and intraretinal exudation 

- Stage 2A: extrafoveal exudation 
- Stage 2B: foveal involvement

- Stage 3 denotes exudative retinal detachment

- 3A is a subtotal detachment

- 3A1: extrafoveal
- 3A2: foveal involvement


- 3B is a total retinal detachment

- Stage 4 has a total retinal detachment plus increased intraocular pressure

- Stage 5 is an endstage disease, occasionally with phthisis bulbi

# Prognosis

Shields et al. reported the visual outcome of 160 patients with Coats disease.

Overall most cases (76%) stabilized or improved anatomically following treatment. A minority (8%) of patients progressively worsened.

# Complications

The clinical course of Coats disease is progressive. Acute exacerbations of the disease infrequently occur, followed by a quiescent state. Spontaneous remissions are rare. In untreated eyes, secondary complications can develop, including:

- Orbital cellulitis (which may simulate retinoblastoma)

- Neovascularization

- Vitreous hemorrhage

- Cataract

- Rubeosis iridis

- Neovascular glaucoma

- Phthisis bulbi

# Deterrence and Patient Education

As Coats disease is idiopathic and sporadic, there are no preventative measures that can be taken by the patients' families. The patients' family members should be appropriately counseled regarding the prognosis of Coats disease and the importance of long-term follow-up.

# Enhancing Healthcare Team Outcomes

Any patient presenting with Coats disease should not only receive treatment by an ophthalmologist as it requires an interprofessional team evaluation by pediatricians and oncologists. Interprofessional team communication can lead to better patient management. The patient will most often present to the primary clinician, and these professionals should be aware of the condition as it is treatable. Prompt referral to an ophthalmologist is necessary. These patients can then be followed by their primary clinicians and ensure compliance with treatment. The nursing staff will be the first to the department to come in contact with patients on follow-up and can assess treatment progress as well as evaluate compliance with therapy and report any issues to the primary care clinician. This collaborative, interprofessional approach to care can ensure optimal patient outcomes.