Management of prurigo nodularis requires a multifaceted approach. Patients need to be educated on practices to reduce scratching of lesions, assurance and diagnosing of underlying causes of pruritus and diagnosis and treatment of any psychological disorder associated with scratching and picking at skin. Treatments, both topical and systemic, are targeted at disrupting the itch-scratch cycle.

**GENERAL CARE**

- Patients are encouraged to keep their nails short, wear protective clothing such as long sleeves and gloves, and to keep the nodules covered with bandages.

- Using gentle cleansers to bathe and applying emollients multiple times a day to keep skin moisturized should be encouraged.

- Calamine lotions and lotions containing menthol and camphor can provide relief from the pruritus.

- Stay in a cool comfortable environment.

- Reduce stress.

**SPECIFIC CARE**

TOPICAL AND INTRALESIONAL THERAPY

- Although none have been examined in randomized trials, topical treatments for prurigo nodularis include class one topical corticosteroids, intralesional corticosteroids, topical calcineurin inhibitors, topical capsaicin, and topical vitamin D analogs.

- First-line therapy is suggested to be topical corticosteroids, such as clobetasol dipropionate 0.05% ointment applied under occlusion with plastic wrap once at nighttime for at least two to four weeks.

-  Triamcinolone acetonide in concentrations of 10 mg/mL to 20 mg/mL injected intralesionally has been shown to flatten lesions and provide relief from pruritus.

- Pimecrolimus 1% is as effective as hydrocortisone and can be implemented in a long-term regimen.

- Calcipotriol ointment shows greater efficacy as compared to betamethasone valerate 0.1%.

- The menthol in low concentration ( less than 5% ) alleviates pruritus by heightening the threshold for pruritic stimuli.

ANTIHISTAMINES AND LEUKOTRINE INHIBITORS

- High dose non sedating antihistamines for daytime followed by First-generation sedating antihistamines at bedtime. A combination of fexofenadine and montelukast gives good results.

PHOTOTHERAPY/EXCIMER

- Phototherapy with PUVA, including bath/topical PUVA, long-wavelength ultraviolet A, narrowband ultraviolet B, and monochromatic excimer light of 308 nm, have been used and shown improvement of prurigo nodularis nodules in patients.

- Narrow Band UVB phototherapy results in significant improvement in prurigo nodularis at an average dose of 23.88- 26.00 j/cm2.

- An excimer laser is more beneficial than topical clobetasol.

ORAL IMMUNOSUPPRESSIVES

- As with topical therapies, no randomized trials have been reported involving the use of these systemic therapies and the benefits versus risks of the drugs must be considered before beginning treatment

- Oral immunosuppressive therapy should be considered for patients with severe, recalcitrant prurigo nodularis.

- A single-institution retrospective study demonstrated clinical improvement and a decrease in pruritus with Cyclosporine at a mean dose of 3.1 mg/kg dose.

- Methotrexate in a dose of 5-20mg/kg weekly demonstrated complete or partial remission of 2.4 months. These patients showed a mean duration of response of 19 months.

- Treatment with azathioprine and cyclophosphamide has also been reported to be successful.

- Oral tacrolimus therapy dramatically reduced pruritus in a patient who was previously treated with cyclosporine for prurigo nodularis.

- Combination therapy of three cycles of intravenous immunoglobulin followed by methotrexate and topical steroid was effective in prurigo nodularis associated with atopic dermatitis.

NOVEL TREATMENTS

- Thalidomide and Lenalidomide. Thalidomide is an immunomodulatory agent, which also acts as a central and peripheral depressant, and inhibits tumor necrosis factor-alpha.

- Both selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors and tricyclic antidepressants can also be considered for chronic pruritus. It is important for patients to also be seen in conjunction with mental health professionals.

- Naloxone and naltrexone exert antipruritic effect through inhibition of Mu-opioid receptors on nociceptive neurons and interneurons resulting in suppression of itch.

- NK1r antagonists, aprepitant and serlopitant, could prevent substance P mediated signaling in the pathogenesis of prurigo nodularis

- IL 31 receptor antibody, Nemolizumab, provided significant improvement in pruritus scores in patients with moderate to severe atopic dermatitis. However, its role in prurigo nodularis remains unclear.