Treatment for stable angina is geared toward reducing risk factors for presumed underlying coronary heart disease. An interdisciplinary approach would likely benefit individuals with multiple comorbidities; nutrition, diabetic educator, addiction counselor, physical and occupational therapy.

**First-line Treatment Includes Lifestyle Modifications**

- Tobacco cessation will result in the biggest risk reduction. 

- Cigarette smoking is the leading avoidable cause of premature death. The risk of cardiovascular mortality in current smokers is roughly two times that of nonsmokers. Interestingly enough, the risk of cardiovascular mortality in former smokers is roughly equal to that of individuals who have never smoked. That said, it is imperative to continuously encourage smoking cessation regardless of age or duration of smoking history

- Cholesterol reduction

- Evidence has supported that adherence to the Mediterranian diet (high in vegetables and fruits) reduces the risk of cardiovascular disease.

- Blood pressure control

- The 2017 AHA/ACC guidelines define hypertension as systolic blood pressure ≥130 mmHg or diastolic pressure ≥80 mmHg.

- Diabetes mellitus management

- Recommend weight reduction, increased physical activity, and adequate control of comorbidities.

- Weight loss

- Obesity is the second leading modifiable cause of premature deaths.

- Aerobic exercise

- An average of 150 minutes of moderate-intensity exercise per week or 75 minutes of high-intensity exercise per week has been shown to decrease overall cardiac risk factors and, in turn, decrease the risk of coronary heart disease.

Pharmacologic

- Aspirin: Determine the risk of coronary heart disease in each patient. In low-risk individuals, the use of aspirin for primary prevention decreases the risk of nonfatal MI without benefit in all-cause mortality and nonfatal stroke.

- HMG-CoA reductase inhibitor: Statin therapy in high, moderate, and low-risk primary prevention subjects without clinical evidence of coronary disease has demonstrated a reduction in myocardial infarction, stroke, cardiovascular death, and total mortality.

- ACE-inhibitor/angiotensin receptor blocker (ARB): May be used in primary prevention to assist in blood pressure control and recommended in the setting of high-risk individuals or known cardiovascular disease for cardioprotective efforts. The use of ACE-inhibitors or ARBs in high-risk individuals has been shown to reduce the risk of cardiovascular and all-cause mortality.

- Symptom Control

- Beta-blockers: Beta-blockers have been shown to decrease heart rate, blood pressure, and contractility, ultimately leading to decreased myocardial oxygen demand and decreasing anginal symptoms.
- Nitrates: Nitrates relax vascular smooth muscle leading to dilation of veins primarily; this decreases cardiac preload and, in turn, decreases myocardial oxygen demand providing relief in anginal symptoms.
- Ranolazine: The mechanism of action of this medication is not entirely understood; however, it is FDA approved for symptom control in stable angina.