The etiology of acne involves the interplay of multiple factors, including follicular hyperkeratinization, hormonally-induced sebum production, and inflammation. The gram-positive microaerophilic/anaerobic rod called Cutibacterium acnes (formerly Propionibacterium acnes) is a commensal organism of the skin found deep within the sebaceous follicle and mediates a portion of the inflammatory component.

The precursor of all acne lesions is the microcomedo. Increased follicular keratinocyte proliferation and cohesiveness lead to the accumulation of keratinocytes within the upper portion of the hair follicle rather than being shed and extruded as normal. This creates a follicular plug and bottleneck behind which additional keratinocytes and sebum build up within the follicle. Further accumulation of keratin and sebum leads to the formation of a comedo which develops into an inflammatory papule. Rupture of the follicular wall leads to intense inflammation and the formation of a nodule or cyst. Acne conglobata lies at the extreme end of the acne spectrum with many interconnecting comedones, cysts, inflammatory nodules, and draining sinus tracts. These can frequently become secondarily infected.

Sebaceous glands are controlled principally by androgens such as testosterone, 5a-dihydrotestosterone (DHT), and dehydroepiandrosterone (DHEA). Receptors for these hormones are found in the cells of the sebaceous gland and outer root sheath of the hair follicle, and increased levels of circulating hormones seen with the onset of puberty lead to a rise in sebum production.

The role of Cutibacterium acnes in the pathogenesis of acne vulgaris has been under much study in recent years. Previously, it was believed that an overgrowth of C. acnes led to acne formation, but studies have found that the quantity of C. acnes on the skin is no difference between those with acne and those without.C. acnes prevalent in the follicles mediates the inflammatory response in acne formation. Subtypes II and III are believed to play a protective role in the normal microbiome of the skin, but Subtype I appears to be pathogenic when out of balance with the other two subtypes.

Ingestion of thyroid medication and exposure to halogenated aromatic hydrocarbons may trigger acne conglobata. Other factors that can provoke acne conglobata include androgens (e.g., androgen-producing tumors) and anabolic steroids.

Acne conglobata has also been reported to occur in individuals who stop anabolic hormones or as a reaction to other hormonal agents.

Some people with acne conglobata have the XYY karyotype.