**Management**

**Spectacles**

Spectacles are the most commonly advised management option for childhood myopia. The refractive error correction is performed under cycloplegia. Spectacle coverage remains an important issue in resource-deficient areas and developing countries. While prescribing spectacles to children, it is important to address certain factors, including the shape and weight of frames and lenses, to ensure better compliance among children.

**Contact lenses**

Soft contact lenses and rigid gas-permeable lenses can be prescribed to correct myopia. However, there is no substantial evidence that these modalities can reduce myopia progression.

**Measures for controlling myopia progression**

**Drugs for Myopia Control**

As of June 2022, US Food and Drug Administration (US FDA) approved none of the myopia management drugs. However, atropine 0.01% is the most widely studied drug for halting myopia progression. The atropine in myopia-1 (ATOM-1) study was performed to evaluate the role of atropine 1%.

Atropine in myopia study 2 (ATOM-2) studied the role of atropine 0.5%, 0.1%, and 0.01% in managing myopia and was carried out in two phases. The study found that atropine 0.01% was a safe and effective option for myopia management, with minimal side effects of photophobia and loss of accommodation, as seen with atropine 1%/0.5%

Atropine is an anticholinergic drug that acts non-selectively on the acetylcholine receptors and down-regulates its functions. Acetylcholine controls the growth of the eye and has a crucial role in the developing retina.

At the cellular level, atropine has been found to downregulate the Epidermal growth factor receptor pathways (EGFR).

Atropine also reduces choroidal thinning caused by hyperopic defocus in myopic eyes.

**Pirenzapine**

Pirenzapine is a selective M1/M4 muscarinic receptor antagonist. Due to its better safety profile, pirenzepine was tried for myopia management; 0.5% and 2% of pirenzepine were used for myopia management.

**7 Methylxanthine**

7-Methylxanthine is a metabolite of theobromine and caffeine. The possible mechanism of action of the drug is to modulate the axial length by increasing the collagen fibril diameters and overall thickness of the posterior sclera.

**Intra-ocular Pressure-lowering Drugs**

Intra-ocular pressure-lowering drugs like timolol maleate and latanoprost

The biomechanically weaker scleral walls in myopes are at an increased risk of being stretched by the increased intraocular pressure. Hence, a decrease in the intraocular pressure can slow the elongation of the eye, thus ceasing myopia progression.

**Lifestyle Modifications: Outdoor Activities**

The risk of myopia is reduced by 2% for every hour of increase in outdoor activity.

Dopamine inhibits axial length elongation.

**Bifocal/ Multifocal Glasses**

Myopia progression is thought to be a result of prolonged accommodation. Treatment with bifocal or multifocal glasses is assumed beneficial as these relax the accommodation. Cheng et al., in their study, reported a 40% decreased myopia progression with bifocal glasses.

**Progressive Glasses**

Progressive glasses have been studied for their effectiveness in controlling myopia progression. Gwiazda et al., in their study on progressive additional lenses, found a 20% decline in myopia progression during the first year of usage.

**Defocus Incorporated Multiple Segments Spectacle  (DIMS)**

The defocus incorporated multiple segment spectacles inhibit myopia progression by inducing a myopic defocus. Animal studies have found that myopic defocus reduces the eye's axial length; however, hyperopic defocus increases the axial length.

This design of the lens induces myopic defocus with clear vision. In an observation by Lam et al., it was found that on continuously wearing the DIMS, the myopia progression was reduced by 52%, and axial length progression was reduced by 62%.

**Defocus Incorporated Soft Contact Lens (DISC)**

Defocus-incorporated soft contact lenses are bifocal soft contact lenses with a central correction zone and a sequence of alternating correction and defocusing zones in the periphery.

The power of the central zone was customized according to the cycloplegic refractive error, while the defocusing zones were relatively negative by 2.5 D. Daily use of the DISC for 5 to 8 hours has been found to reduce myopia progression.

**Orthokeratology**

Orthokeratology is the only US FDA-approved modality for myopia. Orthokeratology involves wearing overnight contact lenses that alter the shape of the cornea from prolate to oblate, thus reducing the refractive error. Contact lens appears to be a promising adjuvant to other options, but the issues of hygiene and maintenance need to be addressed and explained to the patients and guardians.

Other therapies explored in the management of myopia and reducing the progression of myopia include posterior scleral contraction, reinforcement of posterior sclera, scleral cross-linking with riboflavin but can cause loss of photoreceptors, outer nuclear layer, and RPE, sub-scleral injection of mesenchymal stem cells and dopamine, intravitreal injection of aquaporin-1, scleral strengthening using sub-tenon chemicals like ethyl acrylate and acrilamidehydrazide.