The extent of the physical and emotional elements of preparation can vary depending on the purpose of the operation. For example, it would be optimal to involve cancer nurse specialists in the event of cancer to help with pre-operative counselling. In the emergency situation, it is important to speak to the patient’s next of kin (NOK)/loved ones, should the patient wish, to help strengthen the patient’s support network during the acute stressful time. Informed consent is also vital in preparing the patient and his/her relatives to what to expect and likely outcomes. If the patient is unconscious or lacks capacity, then a Consent Form 4 can be completed by the surgeon to act in the patient’s best interests. To complete a Consent form 4, the patient must have a documented mental capacity assessment and a close member of the family must be discussed with if possible. Children below the age of consent, require consent form 2 completed with the parent or guardian actually providing the legal consent

Physical preparation varies somewhat based on the nature of the operation and whether it is an emergency procedure or a planned, elective operation.

The points to consider include the following:

- Hair removal from the abdominal wall

- Patient BMI – For those having a planned ileostomy in an elective setting, weight loss may be requested before the operation to improve the patient's anaesthetic suitability and reduce the distance the small bowel mesentery has to traverse to be bought to the skin without tension.

- Previous operative scars/deformities of the abdominal wall - A previous operation increases the extent of adhesions.

- Hernia presence

- In a planned setting, one would consider the effect of smoking and diabetic control on wound healing.

- To consider the positioning of a stoma site if appropriate – This is usually at a level where the patient can see it, access it easily, and not have it interfering with belts or skin folds. It should also ideally avoid the costal margin and umbilicus.

- A nasogastric tube in cases of obstruction/perforation or if anticipating a postoperative ileus

- Adequate fluid and electrolyte resuscitation

- Urinary catheter

- Intravenous antibiotics

- Crossmatching of units of blood products

-  Appropriate imaging, e.g. CT AP