The initial evaluation of hypercalcemia mandates a thorough history and physical examination, which can prompt the clinician to the underlying cause and pathology. Prior laboratory data is significant and can give clues about the baseline calcium levels and duration of hypercalcemia. Medication history (prescription drugs, over-the-counter vitamins, and supplements), dietary history, family history, and any evidence of prior granulomatous disease need to be reviewed systematically. Initial labs to be checked include PTH levels, as this can differentiate between PTH-related hypercalcemia and non-PTH mediated hypercalcemia. Hypercalcemia secondary to PTH is seen in primary hyperparathyroidism and familial hyperparathyroid syndromes, whereas non-PTH-related hypercalcemia is seen in malignancies, granulomatous diseases, endocrine diseases, and vitamin D intoxication.

Familial hypocalciuric hypercalcemia syndrome (FHH) should be suspected in patients with minimally elevated PTH levels and low urinary calcium excretion on 24-hour urinary calcium. Low-normal or low levels of PTH (less than 20 pg/mL) should raise the suspicion of non-PTH-related causes, and then PTHrP and vitamin D metabolites such as 25-hydroxyvitamin D and 1,25-dihydroxy vitamin D levels should be checked. If PTHrP is elevated, it signifies HHM. Vitamin D intoxication causes elevated 25-hydroxy vitamin D levels. Lymphoma and granulomatous diseases are suspected when 1,25-dihydroxy vitamin D levels are elevated. Serum electrophoresis (SPEP), urine electrophoresis (UPEP) with immunofixation, and serum-free light chains are to be checked to rule out multiple myeloma if the vitamin D levels are in a normal range.

In patients with malignancy-induced hypercalcemia, PTH levels also should be checked, as there is the possibility of coexisting PHPT. Very rarely, band keratopathy can be seen via slit lamp examination, which signifies calcium phosphate deposits in the cornea.