The pathogenesis of allergic bronchopulmonary aspergillosis remains incompletely understood.

Th2 cells (Helper T cells) play an essential role in the hypersensitivity reaction caused by the A. fumigatus antigen. It manifests as IgE production, eosinophilia, mast cell degranulation, and bronchiectasis.

A. fumigatus proteases release proinflammatory cytokines, such as IL-8, which causes epithelial cell damage and disruption of protective barriers, which triggers the hypersensitivity reaction. It also releases cytokines interleukin (IL)-4, IL-5, and IL-13, which increases blood and airway eosinophils as well as IgE.

- Immunocompetent individuals easily eliminate Aspergillus conidia from the airway by the innate immune system mechanisms; therefore, there are no manifestations of pulmonary fungal infections. If isolated in respiratory secretions like sputum or bronchoalveolar lavage, then it only reflects colonization, not an infection.

- Immunocompromised individuals do not eliminate Aspergillus conidia due to host immune defense imbalance; therefore, they colonize airways and germinate into somatic hyphae that stimulate a chronic allergic inflammatory response that results in tissue injury, which ultimately leads to the clinical features of ABPA.

- In atopic individuals (asthmatics), cystic fibrosis patients, and in patients with cavitary lung diseases, inhalation of Aspergillus fumigatus spores triggers an IgE-mediated hypersensitivity response in the respiratory tract that causes respiratory symptoms like cough with expectoration and breathlessness.