While the MPFL is an important medial stabilizer of the patella, certain muscles play a crucial role as dynamic stabilizers of the knee. The muscles are the vastus medialis, rectus femoris, pes anserinus, popliteus, biceps femoris, and semimembranosus. Of these, only the semimembranosus, vastus medialis, and pes anserinus are dynamic stabilizers of the medial knee. Stabilizing factors depend on the position of the knee and the magnitude and direction of a force acting on the knee. These muscles act as primary restraints, reinforcing anatomical structures. The semimembranosus, in particular, has been found to be the primary knee restraint to external rotation and anteromedial rotation.

The quadriceps femoris (QF) is composed of four muscles that insert at the patella and the tibial tuberosity. The patella is a sesamoid bone that is located inside the quadriceps tendon. The rectus femoris, vastus medialis, vastus lateralis, and the vastus intermedius compose the QF and are important stabilizers of the patella.

Of these muscles, the vastus medialis has the most significant contribution to medial knee stability. The deep fibers of the distal edge of the vastus medialis assist the medial patellar retinaculum in reinforcing the joint capsule. The fibers of the vastus medialis oblique are angled at 50 to 55 degrees and pull the patella medially. The vastus medialis oblique, and the vastus lateralis align the patella within the trochlear groove and aid in patellar tracking. This is crucial for patellar stability as the knee moves through flexion and extension.