**Radiation Therapy Personnel**

The WHO document on Quality reassurance in Radiotherapy delineates the following roles for various staff involved in the provision of Radiotherapy

Radiation oncologist/ Clinical oncologist (board certified) – Responsible solely for the provision of patient care, directly involved in initial planning and treatment, confirmation of delineation of treatment volume, supervision of set up, response assessment as well as management of adverse effects of treatment. Well-versed in cancer care. Must have the capability to delineate the role of radiation in the treatment of specific cancers, while also being aware of the role of other modalities in cancer therapeutics (Surgical and Medical oncology approaches that require the use of Chemotherapy, targeted agents, and immunotherapy drugs). Maintenance of teletherapy and brachytherapy equipment, positioning of the patient including marking and verification, acquiring patient data and planning, review of patient records, and patient safety. Designs the treatment plan. Ensures that limiting dose is delivered to critical organs. Prescription of treatment, monitoring of patients during treatment.

Medical Radiation Physicist – Vital role in monitoring the accuracy of dose of radiation delivered, Role in prevention of dosimetric, geometrical, and treatment planning errors. maintenance and upkeep of metrological equipment (Teletherapy and brachytherapy resources and equipment), acquisition of relevant patient data, delineation of target organs and demarcation of organs at risk, dose calculations and in vivo dosimetry, review of patient records, the performance of quality testing. Also plays an important role in patient safety and personnel safety. Involved in radiation, mechanical and collision avoidance, prevention of electrical hazards, prevention of mechanical failures, upkeep of facilities, shielding from toxic effects of radiation therapy, prevention of contamination, electrical safety measures such as earthing of equipment. Should have basic knowledge of anatomy, physiology, oncology, and radiobiology.

Medical radiation therapy technicians/ Radiotherapy technologists – Knowledge of machine set up, optimum patient positioning on the treatment table, placement of blocks and wedges to achieve the desired positioning. Should have knowledge in Anatomy, physiology, pathology, oncology, radiation physics, radiation biology, treatment planning, radiation protection, radiobiology, and essential aspects of patient care. Performs system quality assurance (constancy) tests.

Radiation technician – usually involved in the preparation of equipment for daily use, insertion of beam modifying equipment, optimum patient positioning, use of aids (wedges and blocks) while positioning, awareness of techniques involved in obtaining Field localization films, measurement of the clinical dose received, maintenance of treatment records and safe usage of radiotherapeutic isotopes.

Medical dosimetrists – Specially educated radiation workforce, provide treatment planning, mould work, calculation of the exact amount to radiation to be delivered.

Engineers – may be responsible for maintenance of equipment, provide technical expertise, functioning of radiation equipment. Usually, receive training from the manufacturer. Expertise in the resolution of technical, mechanical, and electrical faults.

Personnel in other categories may play an advisory role.

A historical perspective of the Radiation Oncology workforce and ongoing initiatives to impact recruitment and retention concedes that there has been a stagnation in the number of trained radiation delivery personnel over the years which had led to an acute shortage of Radiation therapists, dosimetrists, and oncology nurses in the United States. They also warn that this shortage is bound to worsen over the coming years