The differential diagnosis of the etiology of lymphadenopathy can be thought of in the following algorithm:After a thorough history and physical examination, lymphadenopathy can be initially categorized as:

- Diagnostic-where in the practitioner has a proximal cause for the lymph nodes and can treat them. Examples would be strep pharyngitis or localized cellulitis.

- The lymphadenopathy pattern history and physical examination can be suggestive; an example would be mononucleosis wearing the practitioner has a strong clinic index of suspicion can perform a confirmatory test which if positive he can go on and treat the patient.

- Unexplained lymphadenopathy.

- Unexplained lymphadenopathy can be generalized into localized or generalized lymphadenopathy.

Unexplained localized lymphadenopathy (after careful review of the history and epidemiology) is further divided into patterns at no risk for malignancy or severe illness, in which case the patient can be observed for 3 to 4 weeks and if response or improvement can be followed. The other alternative is if the patient is found to have a risk for malignancy or serious illness, a biopsy is indicated.

Unexplained generalized lymphadenopathy can be approached after review of epidemiological clues and medications with initial testing with a CBC with manual differential and mononucleosis serology; if either is positive and diagnostic, proceed to treatment. If both are negative, the second workup approach would be a PPD, and RPR, a chest x-ray, ANA, hepatitis BS antigen serology, and HIV. Additional testing modalities and lab tests may be indicated depending on clinical cues. If the results of this testing are conclusive, the practitioner can proceed on to diagnosis and treatment at the illness. If the results of the testing are still not clear, proceed onto biopsy of the most abnormal of the nodes.The most functional way to investigate the differential diagnosis of lymphadenopathy is to characterize it by node pattern and location, obtain pertinent history, including careful evaluation of epidemiology, and place the patient in the appropriate arm of the algorithm to evaluate lymphadenopathy.

**Generalized Lymphadenopathy**

**Common Infective Causation**

- Mononucleosis

- HIV

- Tuberculosis

- Typhoid fever

- Syphilis

- Plague

**Malignancies**

- Acute leukemia

- Hodgkin's lymphoma

- Non-Hodgkin's lymphoma

**Metabolic Storage Disorders**

- Gaucher disease

- Niemann-Pick disease

**Medication Reactions**

- Allopurinol

- Atenolol

- Captopril

- Carbamazepine

- Cephalosporin(s)

- Gold

- Hydralazine

- Penicillin

- Phenytoin

- Primidone

- Pyrimethamine

- Quinidine

- Sulfonamides

- Sulindac

**Autoimmune Disease**

- Sjogren syndrome

- Sarcoidosis

- Rheumatoid arthritis

- Systemic lupus erythematosus

**Localized Peripheral Lymphadenopathy**

******Head and Neck Lymph Nodes******

Viral infection

- Viral URI

- Mononucleosis

- Herpes virus

- Coxsackievirus

- Cytomegalovirus

- HIV

Bacterial infection

- 
Staphylococcal aureus

- 
Group A Streptococcus pyogenes

- Mycobacterium

- Dental abscess

- Cat scratch disease

Malignancy

- Hodgkin disease

- Non-Hodgkin lymphoma

- Thyroid cancer

- Squamous cell carcinomas of the head and neck

**Inguinal Peripheral Lymphadenopathy**

Infection

- STDs

- Cellulitis

Malignancy

- Lymphoma

- Squamous cell carcinoma of genitalia

- Malignant melanoma

**Axillary Lymphadenopathy**

Infection

- Localized Staphylococcal aureus

- Cat-scratch disease

- Brucellosis

Malignancy

- Lymphoma

- Breast cancer

- Melanoma

Reaction to breast implants

**Supraclavicular Adenopathy**

Infections

- Mycobacteria

- Fungi