In the wilderness setting, high-altitude pulmonary edema is primarily a clinical diagnosis, and thus a thorough history and physical are paramount. Most cases of HAPE present during the first two to four days of ascent. Symptoms usually begin on the second night at altitude. Initial symptoms may be insidious and easily dismissed as secondary to increased exertion. A non-productive cough, mild dyspnea on exertion, decreased capacity for exercise tolerance with a more extended recovery period can all occur.

If early HAPE goes unrecognized, symptoms will progress to increasing weakness and fatigue, mild cyanosis, and the development of tachypnea and tachycardia. The hallmark of HAPE is dyspnea at rest, which often increases at night. At this stage, with increasing respiratory distress, most will recognize the clinical significance of their symptoms and the need to seek treatment. Only in the late stages of HAPE will the patient’s cough produce pink, frothy sputum.

In about 50% of cases of HAPE, patients suffer from symptoms of acute mountain sickness (AMS) such as headaches, nausea and vomiting, insomnia, or dizziness.  Approximately 14% of HAPE cases have concurrent high-altitude cerebral edema (HACE), with mental status changes such as ataxia, confusion, with progression to coma in severe cases.

Hypoxia, often profound, is the most consistent finding in HAPE patients. On physical exam, this manifests as respiratory distress with an increased work of breathing. Tachypnea, tachycardia, cyanosis, and rales are common on pulmonary auscultation. Patients can uncommonly have elevated temperatures to 38.5 C (101.3 F). HAPE must be kept high on the differential for all patients at altitude who present with hypoxia and altered mental status, regardless of subjective respiratory complaints.