Levofloxacin is a widely prescribed respiratory fluoroquinolone by many healthcare professionals for a broad spectrum of bacterial infections. Levofloxacin is well-known to increase the risk of tendinitis and tendon rupture in all ages, especially in patients over 60 years old, taking corticosteroids, and with a history of kidney, heart, or lung transplants. It not only extends hospital stays but increases the cost of healthcare. All healthcare workers who prescribe this agent should stratify patients earlier for risk of these complications and should sparely use the drug for patients with acute sinusitis, acute bronchitis, and uncomplicated urinary tract infections. Healthcare staff should counsel patients to maintain adequate hydration to prevent crystalluria and avoid antacids to enhance bioavailability. As levofloxacin excretion is primarily via the kidney, providers should carefully adjust the dose in the presence of renal insufficiency to prevent levofloxacin accumulation. Consultation with an infectious diseases specialist is required to treat resistant infections.

Clinicians should monitor patients for changes in bowel frequency, fever, abdominal cramps, loss of appetite, nausea, vomiting, right upper quadrant tenderness, jaundice, dark-colored urine, or palpitations. Levofloxacin is well-known to cause pseudomembranous colitis, hepatotoxicity, and QT prolongation; therefore, patients should receive education to discontinue treatment when the clinical features develop. If diarrhea develops, it is essential to adequately manage fluid and electrolyte replacement in this patient population. Healthcare workers should limit the duration of levofloxacin therapy and abstain from the empirical prescribing of this agent due to the growing worldwide concern of drug resistance to levofloxacin and other fluoroquinolones.

Clear communication between clinicians (MD, DO, NP,  PA) and nurses is necessary to administer levofloxacin by slow infusion to avoid the risk of hypotension. Pharmacists need to verify dosing and treatment duration and check for drug-drug interactions. Nursing is on the front lines of observing adverse effects and promptly reporting these to the rest of the team. A concerted and collaborative interprofessional team effort between patients, clinicians, nurses, pharmacists, and other healthcare providers is necessary to achieve improved patient outcomes with reduced risk of adverse drug reactions and increased patient satisfaction related to levofloxacin therapy. [Level 5]