**Forehead Flap (Paramedian Forehead Flap, PFF)**

The PFF technique first was used in India as early as 700 BC. For many years, a broad midline flap was popular. In the 1960s Menick introduced the PFF, which had a much more narrow and mobile pedicle based on the supratrochlear artery. The PFF uses tissue from the forehead to repair larger, deeper defects on the distal nose (fig. 1a), and sometimes provide nasal lining.

The distal nasal defect is examined prior to designing the PFF. A template of the final defect is made, and the location and course of the supratrochlear artery can be identified by using Doppler ultrasonography or anatomic landmarks. The supratrochlear artery runs toward the scalp within 3 mm of a line drawn up from the medial canthus. Other authors have demonstrated the safety of simply taking a pedicle from the glabellar midline to 1.2 cm lateral to the midline.

**Melolabial Flap**

First used in India in about 600 BC, the medial cheek skin is an excellent color and texture match for defects on the caudal third of the nose (fig. 2a). Based superiorly, the cheek interpolation flap can be based on a cutaneous (fig. 2b) or a subcutaneous pedicle (fig. 2c). The subcutaneous pedicle has greater mobility and vascular supply than the cutaneous pedicle. For small-to-medium alar defects, an inferiorly based flap can also be used to avoid the transfer of facial hair. The cheek interpolation flap is a random flap, but it receives an ample blood supply from the perforating branches of the angular, nasal, and superior labial arteries. Small-to-medium, deeper defects on the nasal ala and nasal tip can be repaired by using the cheek interpolation flap.

**Postauricular Flap**

First described by Lewin in 1950, the postauricular interpolation flap provides good coverage and cosmesis in medium-to-large defects on the helix and adjacent antihelix, with or without the loss of small amounts of cartilage (fig. 3a). Branches of the posterior auricular, superficial temporal, and occipital arteries supply the broad pedicle of this flap. Although it is a random flap, it is rarely affected by vascular necrosis. This flap uses skin from the posterior ear and retro-auricular sulcus and retro-auricular skin to repair defects of the middle third of the auricular helix and adjacent skin.

**Deltopectoral Flap**

The deltopectoral (DP) flap was first described by Aymard in 1917