Adapalene is a topical retinoid that is FDA-approved for treating acne vulgaris.

Adapalene was initially FDA-approved in 1996 for acne in patients 12 years of age or older. The FDA-approved adapalene 0.1% gel as an over-the-counter acne treatment in patients 12 and older in 2016. Formulations of adapalene 0.1% lotion, cream, and 0.3% gel are available by prescription only.

Retinoids are vitamin A derivatives that are typically described in terms of generations with increased specificity of retinoic acid receptor (RAR) affinity with later generations. Adapalene is a third-generation synthetic retinoid developed to improve the side effect profile compared to tretinoin. This first-generation topical retinoid more closely resembles natural vitamin A in structure.

Third-generation retinoids include adapalene, tazarotene, and bexarotene. Of the third generation, bexarotene is a synthetic retinoid that binds exclusively to retinoid X receptors (RXR). Adapalene and tazarotene have higher specificity for RAR-gamma and RAR-beta and do not interact with RXRs making them suitable for topical administration with minimal systemic absorption.

Retinoids modulate epidermal growth and differentiation, stimulate humoral and cellular immunity, decrease the inflammatory response, and reduce cell proliferation. The diverse biological actions of retinoids make them ideal for treating various skin disorders.

Conventional teaching indicates that the retinoids used to treat acne have varying grades of efficacy and tolerability. Adapalene is perceived to be the least effective but the best tolerated. Tretinoin is understood to have moderate efficacy and tolerability. Tazarotene has maximum efficacy but is not tolerated due to skin irritation. Currently, conventional teaching does not yet compare trifarotene with prior generations; however, it has increased the ability to induce gene expression compared to tazarotene.

Despite these conventions, studies support that adapalene is more efficacious in treating acne vulgaris than other retinoids. A meta-analysis including five randomized controlled trials suggested that adapalene 0.1% gel had similar efficacy but enhanced tolerability in acne treatment compared to tretinoin 0.025% gel. Adapalene has also been compared to tretinoin in a vehicle formulation of microsphere gel, which allows for tretinoin to be delivered primarily to the epidermis to decrease irritation and increase tolerability. A randomized controlled trial of tolerability, safety, and efficacy of adapalene gel 0.1% and tretinoin 0.1% microsphere gel revealed that the efficacy was comparable in total, non-inflammatory, and inflammatory lesions. However, the adapalene patient group exhibited significantly enhanced cutaneous tolerability.

Adapalene also performs well when compared to tazarotene. In a 12-week randomized, evaluator-blinded study comparing adapalene 0.3% gel and tazarotene 0.1% gel, each group had a clinically significant reduction in total lesion counts. A 61% reduction in acne lesions occurred with the administration of adapalene, with a 57% reduction in the tazarotene group. Adapalene, 0.3% gel, had equivalent efficacy to tazarotene 0.1% gel. However, patients using adapalene experienced less irritation than patients in the tazarotene-treated group.

Adapalene has additional advantages when compared to other retinoids. Adapalene is a more stable molecule, which leads to less concern for molecular photodegradation, allowing for use during daylight hours. This stability contrasts with both tretinoin and tazarotene, which are photolabile. The stability of adapalene allows for use in combination with benzoyl peroxide, which has a synergist effect. A randomized double-blinded study of topical adapalene 0.3%-benzoyl peroxide 2.5% demonstrated significantly greater efficacy in patients with moderate-to-severe inflammatory, non-nodulocystic acne. With the synergistic effect of benzoyl peroxide, adapalene 0.3% increases patient treatment options for moderate to severe acne.