Surgical mapping for an excisional biopsy involves identifying the lesion of interest and marking the area around the lesion with a surgical marker, including an appropriate margin around the lesion to ensure complete removal. Two small triangles are then drawn on either side of the lesion in the predetermined orientation of the surgical excision as described above. The resultant shape is an ellipse with an ideal length-to-width ratio of 3:1.

Local anesthesia is the most common form of anesthesia in cutaneous biopsies. Injection of local anesthesia is often a source of great anxiety for the patient and should be handled gently. 1-2% lidocaine with or without epinephrine is commonly used in dermatologic surgery. The addition of epinephrine aids in decreasing bleeding, prolong anesthetic effects and reduce anesthetic toxicity. Additionally, buffering the anesthetic with sodium bicarbonate helps to decrease the pain associated with the infiltration of the acidic solution.

After administering anesthesia, the patient is placed in a comfortable position with good surgical lighting and at the appropriate height for the surgeon. The surgical site should is then prepped with antiseptic and draped. Popular agents used in antiseptic preparation include povidone-iodine and chlorhexidine. Special care should be taken in hair-bearing areas by clipping hairs in the surgical field or securing hair with sterile clips, rubber bands, or tape.

The surgeon should thoroughly wash and dry his or her hands before the procedure. A formal surgical hand scrub is unnecessary as prudent and simple hand antisepsis is sufficient. Face masks can be worn as personal protective equipment but are unnecessary in dermatologic surgery. Surgical gloves should be worn and kept clean throughout the duration of the procedure. The need for sterile gloves in dermatologic surgery remains a topic of interest, but recent literature reports no significant difference in surgical site infections when comparing sterile gloves with clean surgical gloves.