Treatment of acute hyperammonemia focuses on decreasing the level of ammonia and controlling specific complications, including cerebral edema and intracranial hypertension. Inborn errors of metabolism may lead to neonatal-onset hyperammonemia or may present as intercurrent episodes of hyperammonemia. These require continual treatments targeted at the specific etiology. The treatment of hepatic encephalopathy differs from that of inborn errors of metabolism.

**Treatment to Lower Ammonia**

Neonates with inborn errors of metabolism may present with hyperammonemic coma, a serious condition requiring immediate intervention. All protein intake should be stopped, and calories should be provided using glucose solutions. Hemodialysis is preferred over peritoneal dialysis for the rapid removal of ammonia.

Patients with masked urea cycle defects develop hyperammonemia in conditions of increased stress and should be treated when levels rise greater than 3 times the upper limit of normal. Calories should be provided intravenously by glucose solutions, and all nitrogen intake should be stopped. Intravenous sodium benzoate and phenylacetate should be started. Dialysis should be considered only when ammonia levels do not fall after 8 hours of continual treatment.

Medical treatment for hepatic encephalopathy is targeted towards decreasing the production of ammonia in the gut. The established first-line therapy for encephalopathy is oral non-absorbable disaccharides, including lactulose and lactitol. These sugars work by decreasing the production and absorption of ammonia in the intestine.

**Management of Complications**

Hypertonic saline is preferred over mannitol for the management of increased intracranial pressure due to cerebral edema.

**Dietary Management**

It is logical to assume protein intake needs to be restricted in patients with hyperammonemia. Protein restriction is not recommended, specifically in patients with chronic liver disease as they are already malnourished, and the general consensus is to continue a normal intake of proteins. Some compounds may play a role in lowering ammonia and can be supplemented in the diet. L-carnitine can be used to decrease the frequency of attacks in patients with urea cycle defects.