Patients with a palatal mass may present with a history of foul oral odor or halitosis, oral bleeding, poor-fitting dentures, dysphagia, odynophagia, changes in oral speech, and loose teeth. A detailed history including pain symptoms, the time of onset of the palatal mass, growth rate, swallowing difficulties, bleeding episodes, and prior oral trauma should be taken. Past medical history, surgical history, family history of malignancies, and social risk factors such as smoking, alcohol, drug use, and occupational hazards should be elicited.

Physical examination consists of a comprehensive head and neck exam with a focus on the oral cavity and its structures. Palatal malignancies most commonly present as a palatal mass with or without oral bleeding, and pain.

**Adenoid cystic carcinoma (AdCC)**may present with pain prior to any visible lesion.

**Mucoepidermoid carcinoma (MEC)**presents as a slow-growing, painless, and red-bluish mass.

**Polymorphous low-grade adenocarcinoma (PLGA)**presents as a painless, slow-growing mass with non-ulcerated mucosa and may resemble a benign tumor.

**Low-grade papillary adenocarcinoma (LGPA)**presents as a painless, lobulated, friable, yellow-tan, firm mass.

**Acinic cell carcinoma (ACC)**is an uncommon salivary gland malignancy that rarely appears in the hard palate. It presents as a painless, slow-growing mass.

**Mucosal melanomas (MM)**present as macular or nodular lesions with pigmented brown to black coloration. The majority of tumors within the oral cavity are between 2 to 6 cm in size.

**Kaposi sarcoma (KS)**presents with focal or widespread violaceous-brown patches, papules, plaques, or exophytic nodules. They can involve the mucosal membrane, skin, lymph nodes, and visceral organs.

**Non-Hodgkin lymphoma (NHL)**often presents as a painless, submucosal mass at the junction of the hard palate and soft palate without ulceration, and with cervical lymphadenopathy.