Although some of the exact mechanisms for tobacco smoking-related illnesses have yet to be elucidated, several studies have linked tobacco smoking to a plethora of devastating illnesses including coronary artery disease (CAD), cancers in every human organ system, chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD), and decreased reproductive health.

Several potential mechanisms have been described linking tobacco smoking with CAD. Inhaled tobacco smoke increases the amount of exogenous and endogenous free radicals in the body, leading to an increased amount of oxidative stress.  This increased oxidative stress leads to vasomotor dysfunction, increased pro-thrombotic and decreased fibrinolytic factors, leukocyte, and platelet activation, increased lipid peroxidation, increased adhesion and inflammatory molecules, and smooth muscle proliferation. Researchers postulate that a combination of these factors leads to the development of CAD in tobacco smokers.

Tobacco smoking correlates with an increased risk of developing at least 17 classes of human cancers. There are roughly 60 known cancer-causing molecules, called carcinogens, in tobacco smoke. It has been proposed that these carcinogens directly damage the DNA by forming covalent bonds with DNA, forming molecules called DNA adducts. These DNA adducts are damaged pieces of DNA that, if not repaired properly, cause mutations during cellular division when their reproduction results in a mutated copy of the DNA. Over time, these mutations collectively lead to disruption of the normal cell reproductive cycle leading to neoplastic tumor formation.

Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) has also been shown to heavily correlate with tobacco smoking. The reactive oxidants found with cigarette smoke create a chronic inflammatory state in the lungs, which may persist even after smoking cessation. This inflammatory state causes the lungs to remodel and can eventually lead to gross structural changes. It has also been proposed that there is an auto-immune component to lung disease, caused by the reaction of autoantibodies to antigens created either directly or indirectly from TS.

Tobacco smoking has several deleterious effects on human reproductive health. In men, smoking has been linked to decreased semen volume, decreased sperm density, and decreased total sperm count.