**Bleeding**

Bleeding is the most common and life-threatening complication due to the possibility of intracranial hemorrhage or bleeding in the lungs or gastrointestinal tract. Factors responsible for bleeding could be systemic heparinization, fibrinolysis, clotting factor hemodilution or platelet dysfunction, uremia, or hepatic dysfunction. Within minutes of initiation of ECMO, activation of contact and fibrinolytic system and consumption and dilution of coagulant factors can occur.

Aubron et al. reported 17% VV ECMO and 34% VA ECMO required surgery for bleeding from ECMO complications. Decrease or stopping heparin, infusion of platelets, and clotting factors like activated factor VII has been considered in case of life-threatening hemorrhagic episodes. Wittenstein et al. pointed out that factor VIIa has been associated with fatal thrombosis in several cases.

Prevention is better than cure is proved correct here as well. It has been advised to avoid invasive or surgical procedures wherever possible. Platelet count >150,000 mm, >200 mg/L of fibrinogen, prothrombin ratio <1.5 and lower activated clotting time is recommended. Temporary cessation of heparin infusion or another anticoagulation like bivalirudin is recommended.

Pulmonary hemorrhage is controlled using steroids or bronchoscopy in addition to the measures mentioned above. Between 10 and 15% of patients of ARDS on ECMO develop Intracerebral hemorrhage or infarction and is responsible for 43% of deaths on ECMO. Plasma-free hemoglobin exceeding 10% indicates hemolysis in patients; therefore, frequent measurement has been encouraged.

**Intracardiac Thrombosis**

Peripheral cannulation through the femoral artery and vein used in VA ECMO can predispose to retrograde blood flow to ascending aorta. As a result, stasis of blood in the ventricle and inadequate left ventricular output leads to intracardiac thrombus formation.

**Gas Embolism**

With a centrifugal pump, a large negative pressure of up to 100 mmHg is generated between the pump head and drainage cannula. Gas embolism results from the entry of air from this part of the ECMO circuit.

**Thromboembolism**

Systemic thromboembolism is an infrequent complication seen on VA ECMO patients more than VV ECMO. Vigilant observation of ECMO circuit for any signs of clot formation and heparin infusion to maintain target activated clotting time (ACT) prevents thromboembolism.

**Mechanical Complications**

Clot formation in the ECMO circuit is a very common complication. Factors responsible for clot formations could be pulmonary or systemic emboli, oxygenator failure, or consumption coagulopathy. To prevent clot formation, heparin-coated ECMO circuits are frequently used.

**Heparin-induced Thrombocytopenia (HIT)**

HIT is an uncommon complication, seen especially on long-term ECMO use. Disseminated intravascular coagulation has also been reported with ECMO use. #5. Cessation of heparin infusion and or replacement to non-heparin anticoagulants like Bivalirudin or Argatroban is encouraged.

**Neurological Complications**

Seizures, infractions,s or intracranial hemorrhages are common neurological complications. In contrast to bleeding, chances of clotting of blood predispose to the stroke in patients on ECMO.

**Renal Failure and Oliguria**

Acute tubular necrosis in the initial phase of ECMO may require dialysis or hemofiltration.

**GI Tract Complications**

GI tract hemorrhage secondary to stress, ischemia, or bleeding tendencies. Prolonged fasting or total parenteral nutrition, hemolysis, and diuretics while on ECMO may predispose to hyperbilirubinemia and or biliary calculi.

**Sepsis**

ECMO represents a foreign body that increases the chance of infection. Patients with postcardiotomy cardiogenic shock are more prone to develop an infection than other ECMO patients.

**Metabolic Complications**

Electrolyte disturbance, hypo or hyperglycemia, alterations in the concentration of drugs secondary to increased volume of distribution, and decrease in liver/kidney function may also be observed.

**Cannula-related Complications**

Cannula malposition, vessel perforation, hemorrhage, incorrect location (venous cannula within the artery), arterial dissection, pseudoaneurysm, and limb ischemia are seen in VA ECMO. Revision of cannulation is required, i.e., displacement of the cannula.

**Hypoxia**

In the case of VA ECMO, peripheral insertion of the catheter in the femoral artery perfuse more to the lower extremities and abdominal viscera. Therefore, the upper extremity, brain, and heart may suffer from hypoxia. Therefore, oxygen saturation is recommended to check both in the upper and lower extremities. In case of poor oxygen saturation in the upper extremities, oxygenated blood is infused into the right atrium.

**Hypotension**

During VA ECMO, reduced vascular tone and during VV ECMO reduced vascular tone, reduced preload, or cardiac function is considered to be responsible for hypotension. Sepsis is also a significant causative factor for hypotension development, and patients may require inotropic support in such cases.

**Others**

Reintubation, tracheostomy, LV distention, fatal arrhythmias, pressure ulcers are also seen in patients with ECMO resuscitation.