Lafora disease will reveal pathognomonic periodic acid-Schiff (PAS), positive polyglucosan particles, or LB usually accumulate in the skin, muscle liver, and brain tissues. Therefore, the diagnosis can be obtained by performing a biopsy from any of these organs, but the most commonly used and accessible site with high yield is the axillary skin region.

EEG in the early stages of the disease may be normal or show generalized slowing and loss of posterior dominant rhythm. With the progression of the disease, asymmetric, irregular, generalized spikes and polyspikes, maximum over the anterior regions associated with photosensitivity on a slowed background can be seen.

In later stages of the disease, myoclonic jerks become almost continuous. EEG usually will show paroxysms of generalized and fast irregular spike-and-wave discharges, exaggerated by photic stimulation at low frequency. These paroxysms are occipital predominantly. Other electrophysiological studies also may be abnormal in LD, especially visual evoked potentials (VEPs) that may demonstrate increased latencies or absence of response. Somatosensory evoked potentials can reveal aberrant integration of somatosensory stimuli and giant evoked potentials reflecting cortical hyperexcitability.

Neuroimaging including brain MRI is usually normal at the time of diagnosis; however, fluorodeoxyglucose positron emission tomography (FDG-PET) was found positive in two reported Lafora disease cases as it revealed posterior hypometabolism early in the disease.