According to Stary et al., atherosclerosis is classified in Roman numeral numbers in the sequence of lesion progression.

**Type I:**(initial) contains scattered isolated lipid-laden macrophage, also called foam cells.

**Type II:**consists of foam cells mainly in the form of layers, also called fatty streaks.

**Type III:**is the intermediate stage lesion, which contains foam cells in layers and scattered extracellular lipid droplets due to apoptosis of foam cells.

**Type IV:**consists of an extensive dense accumulation of extracellular lipid, which is also termed as lipid core, also called atheroma.

**Type Va****:**These lesions are also termed as fibro-atheroma, and it consists of the fibrous cap on top of atheroma. There are also smooth muscle cells present in an intimal layer that help in the deposition of the extracellular matrix of the fibrous cap.

- If fibro-atheroma has calcification, then it is termed as type Vb.

- One particular type-V lesion in which a lipid core is absent and lipid, in general, is minimal may be referred to as type Vc.

**Type VI****:**The disruption of the lesion surface leading to thrombosis or hemorrhage into lesion is a hallmark of this complicated lesion. These lesions are associated with high mortality and morbidity. Type VI may be subclassified by the superimposed features.

- Disruption of the surface may be labeled as type VIa.

- Hematoma or hemorrhage indicates type VIb.

- Thrombosis indicates type VIc.

- Type VIabc indicates the presence of all three features.