**Managing Radiotherapy in Pregnancy**

- The fetus is exposed to radiation from doses outside of the treated volume primarily due to photon leakage through the treatment head of the machine, radiation scattered from the collimators, and by beam modifiers such as blocks, multileaf collimators, wedges, and lastly by radiation scattered from treatment beams within the patient. Note that, for photons with energy higher than ten megavolts, there is a possibility of neutron production, which, although small in amount, has a higher bio-toxicity than photons or electrons.

- The most critical factor determining the fetal dose is the distance from the edge of the radiation field while administering external radiotherapy. The dose decreases exponentially with distance.

- Advanced techniques are seemingly counter-productive for dose reduction to healthy maternal and fetal tissue because of low dose bath by IMRT or radiotherapy-rotational methods. Additionally, image-guided radiotherapy is futile to reduce the dose to the pregnancy in utero. On-board cone-beam computed tomography might increase the radiation burden. Also, a significant radiation dose exposure to the fetus could occur from scattering.

- While pregnant, radiotherapy needs specific considerations, and it could only be used in selected cases of breast cancer and lymphomas. Since substantial clinical data is deficient, limiting the role of intensity-modulated radiotherapy and other modern techniques is recommended.

- Shielding:

- Commercially available breast shields reduce female breast dose by 40 to 61%.
- Shielding of these radiosensitive organs may substantially decrease associated radiation-related risks, especially in children and young adults.

- Once it is decided to proceed with the treatment, fetal exposure can be curtailed by altering the radiation administration technique or combining additional shielding between the treatment machine and the patient. Since this involves carefully choosing beams, angle and beam modifiers, and treatment beam localization techniques, treatment demands a close interaction between radiation oncologists, medical physicists, and medical dosimetrist.

- Perform treatment planning as if the patient was not pregnant and estimate the fetal dose without considering shielding while using a phantom. Remember to incorporate and calculate doses from localization techniques, portal imaging, portal films, or cone beam imaging.

- Technical alterations to the treatment plan that would help minimize the fetal dose.

- Change field size and angle.
- Use photon energy below ten megavolts to evade any possible neutron production.
- Avoid double exposure portal images, mainly if fields are closer to the fetus.

- If fetal exposure is still deemed unacceptable, design, and assemble special shielding.

- Measure fetal doses using a phantom simulation with shielding in place.

- Strictly document the devised treatment plan, including special shielding or technique alterations such as modified portal imaging without double exposure, and thoroughly discuss this plan and tailored new setup with all relevant personnel involved in providing treatment.

- Thoroughly inspect all aspects of safety, including the weight-bearing limits of the couch, swift movement, and comfortable positing of the shields to ensure that there will be no treatment inflicted injury to either the patient or personnel. Photograph the setup of each field for documentation.

- Constantly monitor fetal growth parameters through the entirety of therapy using physical examination and abdominal ultrasound.

- At the end of the treatment, document the total dose received, including the estimate of fetal dose exposure.

- If appropriate equipment and personnel meant to estimate and reduce fetal dose are not available in the local clinical setting, consider referring the patient to another well-equipped institution.