The most superficial of the anterior abdominal wall musculature is the external oblique muscle, which arises from the posterior aspect of the lower eight ribs. The muscle fibers are directed almost horizontally in its upper portion to oblique in the middle and lower portions where they continue as an aponeurosis. The fibers fan out and are inserted from above to below into the xiphoid process, linea alba, pubic crest, pubic tubercle, and anterior half of the iliac crest. The obliquely arranged anteroinferior fibers of the aponeurosis fold on themselves inwards to form the inguinal ligament, running between the anterior superior iliac spine and the pubic tubercle. The inguinal ligament is connected below to the fascia lata of the thigh, which results in its caudally directed convexity. The ligament bridges the neurovascular and muscular structures that pass from the deep pelvis to the thigh.

- The lateral femoral cutaneous nerve

- Femoral nerve

- External iliac artery to femoral artery

- Femoral vein to external iliac vein

- Femoral ring with deep inguinal lymphatic channels and lymph nodes

- The muscles from lateral to medial include iliacus, psoas, pectineus, and adductor longus

The mid-inguinal point is an important surgical landmark, which forms the midpoint of the imaginary line that joins the anterior superior iliac spine and the pubic symphysis. Deep to this point, the external iliac artery continues as the femoral artery, passing from the pelvic cavity to the lower limb. Palpation of the femoral artery is only possible below the inguinal ligament at the mid-inguinal point. The midpoint of the inguinal ligament (the midpoint between the ASIS and the pubic tubercle) is just lateral to the mid-inguinal point. It is an important surgical landmark of the deep inguinal ring, that lies 0.5 inches above the midpoint of the inguinal ligament.

**Attachments of the Inguinal Ligament**

The inguinal ligament attaches below to the fascia lata which is the deep fascia of the thigh. Superiorly it gives origin to the internal oblique from lateral two thirds, transverses abdomens from lateral one thirds, and cremaster muscle from the middle third.

**Extensions**

At the medial end, the inguinal ligament fans out when attaching to the pubic tubercle which is called the lacunar ligament or Gimbernat ligament. The apex of the lacunar ligament is at the pubic tubercle, anteriorly attached to the inguinal ligament and posteriorly attached to the pectinate line, while the base lies laterally. The pectinate ligament (ligament of Cooper) is a lateral extension from the base of the lacunar ligament that is attached to the pecten pubis.

Few reflected fibers of the inguinal ligament travel superomedially at an angle of 45 degrees initiating at the lateral crus of the superficial inguinal ring and decussates with fibers of the opposite side at the lines alba just anterior to the pyramidal muscle (if present), and if not present, is attached to the rectus sheath. Reflected fibers of the inguinal ligament are also called the Colle ligament, triangular fascia or reflex ligament. In a study from 2009, 83% of cadavers had a reflected inguinal ligament.

**Inguinal Ligament: A ligament or Tendon?**

The argument of the taxonomy of the inguinal ligament of being either a tendon versus ligament continues, as they both broadly include a similar type of connective tissue composition. Grossly, ligaments and tendons get classified according to their connections; either bone to bone for ligaments or skeletal muscle to the bone for tendons. However, the inguinal ligament that arises from the aponeurosis of the external oblique aponeurosis and connects the ASIS to the pubic tubercle does not fall neatly into either of the above basic definitions. Another consideration is that the function of a musculoskeletal ligament is to stabilize a joint between two bones. Although separate in children, mature adults have ileum and pubic bones fused into a single pelvic bone. Therefore, there is no joint to be stabilized by the inguinal ligament. According to previous literature, ligaments provide stability to joints and hence must always be preserved during surgery, and never to be divided intra-operatively. Since tenotomy of the inguinal ligament is continued to be performed by surgeons for patients with inguinal disruption, it poses questions over the anatomical classification of the inguinal ligament.