Rosiglitazone is a drug FDA approved for the treatment of type 2 diabetes mellitus. It belongs to the family called thiazolidinediones. It is capable of lowering the glucose levels by improving target cell response to insulin without increasing the stimulation and release of insulin by the pancreatic beta cells. This drug acts by activating the nuclear peroxisome proliferator-activated (PPAR) receptor gamma; the primary role of this intracellular receptor appears to be regulating adipogenesis along with glucose and metabolism. Rosiglitazone use can be as monotherapy or in combination with other oral hypoglycemic drugs, such as metformin or sulfonylureas. Rosiglitazone is a very potent thiazolidinedione; it has a binding affinity for PPAR-gamma 30-fold higher than pioglitazone.

Currently, there are two thiazolidinediones available: rosiglitazone and pioglitazone. Rosiglitazone carries a low risk of causing hypoglycemia and improves insulin resistance significantly; it has been incorporated into clinical practice and is prescribed by many physicians in selected patients.

There are reports that thiazolidinediones, including rosiglitazone, typically reduce hemoglobin A1c by 1 to 2% compared to placebo. Its potency to decrease glycemic levels is similar to the hypoglycemic effect of metformin and sulfonylureas. Its effect is mainly by increasing skeletal muscle glucose uptake. It is also considered to preserve pancreatic beta-cell function.

Thiazolidinediones first appeared for the treatment of type 2 diabetes mellitus in 1996. The first approved drug by the FDA was troglitazone. This drug got pulled from the market because of its idiosyncratic hepatotoxicity. Rosiglitazone was patented in 1987 and approved for medical use in 1999. In 2011 rosiglitazone was restricted given its apparent relationship with increased heart attack risk. In 2013, the FDA removed the restrictions of this drug after a clinical trial failed to show increased heart risk in patients using rosiglitazone.