Polypharmacy poses several issues of concern, both for the patients and the health care systems. The elderly population is affected by polypharmacy in multiple ways. It can cause vision and cognition impairment, which can further impair compliance, reduce the quality of life, and increase the fall risk. Polypharmacy is an independent risk factor for ADE like hip fractures. The other complications from polypharmacy include frailty, disability, and delirium, leading to multiple preventable visits to the hospitals or clinics, prolonged hospital stay, and long-term placement, adding to health care costs; negative outcomes are not limited to deaths.

It is imperative to understand the high-risk medications that should be avoided in the elderly if possible, and alternatives should be used. Some of the inappropriate medications which should be used carefully in elderly populations are summarized below.

- Anticholinergic medications - Anticholinergic medication use in the elderly can cause delirium, memory loss, hallucinations, blurry vision, constipation, dry mouth, elevated body temperature, and increased fall risk. These medications can precipitate acute angle-closure glaucoma and acute urinary retention. First-generation antihistaminic (chlorpheniramine, hydroxyzine, promethazine, meclizine, and diphenhydramine), antiparkinsonian medications (benztropine, trihexyphenidyl), skeletal muscle relaxants (cyclobenzaprine, methocarbamol), antidepressants (amitriptyline, desipramine, nortriptyline, paroxetine), antimuscarinics (oxybutynin, solifenacin, trospium, tolterodine), antipsychotics (chlorpromazine, clozapine, olanzapine, thioridazine) and antispasmodics( scopolamine, hyoscyamine, atropine) are commonly prescribed medications with anticholinergic properties.

- Sedatives/Anxiolytics - These medications can cause confusion, falls, fractures, respiratory failure, and dependence. Example of sedatives include benzodiazepine (diazepam, lorazepam, alprazolam, temazepam, chlordiazepoxide), and barbiturates (phenobarbital, pentobarbital).

- Narcotics - Narcotics can also cause dependency, confusion, constipation, falls, and respiratory failure. Hydrocodone, morphine, oxycodone, fentanyl, and tramadol are commonly used narcotics.

- Cardiovascular medications - Central alpha agonist (clonidine, methyldopa) can cause sedation and hypotension. Peripheral alpha-1 blockers (prazosin, doxazosin, terazosin) and nifedipine immediate release can cause hypotension. Digoxin has an increased risk of cardiotoxicity and heart blocks. Dipyridamole increases the risk of orthostatic hypotension.

- Other common medications - Long-acting sulfonylureas (increased risk of hypoglycemia), metoclopramide (risk of extrapyramidal side effects), testosterone hormone supplements (increased risk of cardiac events), nitrofurantoin (increased risk of pulmonary and hepatotoxicity), proton pump inhibitors (increased risk of bone fractures, pneumonia and clostridium difficile diarrhea) and non-steroidal anti-inflammatory medications (risk of renal failure, gastrointestinal bleeding, and high blood pressure) use should be minimized if possible.