The hypothalamus regulates feeding via the leptin and ghrelin pathways. Energy expenditure is regulated via the balance between proopiomelanocortin (POMC)/cocaine and amphetamine-regulated transcript (CART) and neuropeptide Y (NPY)/agouti-related peptide (AgRP) neurons in the arcuate nucleus. Leptin is a hormone produced by adipocytes in proportion to their energy reserves. High reserves mean high leptin. The arcuate nucleus of the hypothalamus receives the signal and decreases feeding and increases energy expenditure via the activity of POMC/ CART. These transmitters act on the nuclei responsible for feeding, increasing body temperature, metabolism, locomotor activity, and gonadotropin production. On the contrary, decreased fat reserves lead to increased feeding and cortisol (via the action of the transmitters NPY/AgRP within the hypothalamus) and decreased body temperature, metabolism, movement, and gonadotropin production. There is an ongoing investigation into the role of the MC4 receptor and leptin resistance in obesity.

The hypothalamus is also responsible for the acute-phase immune response. White blood cells cause endothelial production of PGE2, which activates prostaglandin receptors in the paraventricular and preoptic nuclei. This causes fever by raising the body temperature setpoint, triggering a sympathetic response, and causing muscle contractions (shivering). Cortisol and hepatic acute-phase protein production are increased. These effects cumulate in the malaise and sick behavior typical of many illnesses.

- Prolactin leads to lymphocyte survival and induces oligodendrocyte precursors to differentiate. Multiple sclerosis often improves during pregnancy.

- The mammillary bodies are destroyed by thiamine deficiency, leading to Wernicke encephalopathy and Korsakoff psychosis with prominent amnesia.

- Cerebral salt wasting is a common complication of traumatic brain injury, stroke, or intracranial hemorrhage. Findings include hypotonic hyponatremia and polyuria with increased urine sodium. Treatment is salt supplementation followed by fludrocortisone.

- SIADH is a complication of hypothalamic injury or neurosurgery, or AIDS. Findings include hypotonic hyponatremia, oliguria with increased urine sodium. Treatment is water restriction followed by hypertonic saline and then demeclocycline.

- Central diabetes insipidus is caused by hypothalamic injury, decreasing ADH production. Findings include polyuria without concentration. Treatment is desmopressin.