Appreciating the complexity and important anatomical relationships of the structures in the internal auditory canal is vital for both surgeons and clinicians when evaluating pathologies of the inner ear. Knowledge of anatomy helps physicians identify involved structures on imaging and aids in identifying landmarks to prevent iatrogenic injury during operations. The structures within the internal auditory canal have been implicated in pathology arising from tumors, vascular events, vestibular, and auditory structures.

Vestibular schwannomas, or acoustic neuromas, are the most common tumor affecting the internal auditory canal. Over 90% of schwannomas arise from the vestibular nerves within the internal auditory canal, with the majority involving the inferior vestibular nerve.

The knowledge of vascular anatomy plays an important role in the diagnosis and management of certain inner ear conditions. Since the labyrinth has no collateral blood flow, it is especially vulnerable to ischemic events, with even a 15-second cessation of blood flow having been shown to cause decreased auditory nerve excitability.

Microvascular compression of the nerves in the internal auditory canal can cause severe tinnitus, vertigo, and hemifacial spasm from the involvement of the facial nerve. Vascular loop syndrome results from a prominent loop of the AICA that enters the internal auditory canal and causes compression of the nerves within. While the exact pathology of compression by vascular loops is a topic of debate, some groups believe that pulsatile tinnitus has correlations with vascular loops in the internal auditory canal.

Benign paroxysmal positional vertigo (BPPV) is first treated conservatively with positional maneuvers with resolution seen in the vast majority of patients. However, a minority can develop disabling chronic BPPV. Since the BPPV is most commonly caused by pathology in the posterior semicircular canal, selective singular neurectomy has been shown to relieve positional vertigo in 95% of patients with BPPV refractory to more conservative measures.

A vestibular nerve section is a surgical option for patients who have vertigo refractory to medical treatment for diseases such as Meniere disease and vestibular neuritis. Episodic vestibular symptoms characterize Meniere disease. Vestibular neuritis is one of the most common causes of acute spontaneous vertigo and tends to occur from herpes simplex virus reactivation in the vestibular ganglion.