The clinical suspicion, as described in the section of the history and presentation, is backed with the laboratory test for the major causes of rapidly progressive glomerulonephritis:

- Urinalysis, urine protein, and creatinine ratio: looking for microscopic hematuria and proteinuria. The microscopic examination can further detect the dysmorphic red blood cell characteristics of glomerular hematuria. Proteinuria can suggest sub nephrotic or nephrotic range proteinuria.

- Elevated serum creatinine, abnormal electrolyte potassium, magnesium, and calcium

- CBC with differential: eosinophilia with eosinophilic granulomatosis with polyangiitis (EGPA)

- Serology for anti-GBM antibody through ELISA or western blot, approximately 10% of patients who have anti-GBM diagnosis through kidney biopsy do not have identifiable circulating antibodies with conventional assays. Serologic testing should not be the only method of diagnosis when kidney biopsy is available for that disease.

- ANCA test: the old test was through indirect immunofluorescence, and its qualitative assay resulted as P-ANCA or C-ANCA; the other newer method used now is through ELISA, which identifies specific antigen and provides titer (quantitative] for antiprotease 3 [PR-3] and anti-myeloperoxidase (MPO). It is essential to know that C-ANCA is 90% PR-3 reactive, 10% MPO reactive, while P-ANCA 90% MPO reactive, and 10% PR-3 is reactive.

- Serology to rule post infections: antistreptolysin titer for post Streptococcus infection, HIV, and Hepatitis B and C serology.

- Complement C3, C4 level: may be low in some form of granular immune complex disorders causing RPGN like lupus, cryoglobulinemia, primary MPGN.

- Serology for lupus: anti-nuclear antibody, ds DNA, anti-Smith

- Rheumatoid factor and cryoglobulin level in suspected cases of cryoglobulinemia

- Chest X-ray, chest of the chest CT if suspect diffuse alveolar hemorrhage, or looking for a cavitary lesion in case of vasculitis

- Bronchoscopy for diffuse alveolar hemorrhage if it is suspected.

- Otolaryngologic evaluation and biopsy or skin biopsy for vasculitis

- Histological diagnosis through renal biopsy is the mainstay for the definitive diagnosis

- Other pathogenic antibodies in ANCA-associated disorder: two new antibodies have been identified and associated with ANCA disease:

- LAMP-2 [lysosome-associated membrane protein-2] antibody: positive in more than 90% of ANCA positive patients and greater than 90% of ANCA negative pauci-immune crescentic GN patients, it activates neutrophil and also injure endothelium directly.
- Anti-plasminogen antibodies: ranging between 22 and 43% for proteinase-3 (PR3)- ANCA-associated vasculitis (AAV) and 6% to 27% for myeloperoxidase (MPO) AAV, correlate with both venous thromboembolic event.

- Other Tests: LDH, platelet, reticulocyte, blood film, anticardiolipin antibody to rule out other causes mimic RPGN like thrombotic thrombocytopenic purpura (TTP).