Surgery is the primary treatment of early-stage disease.

For SCC with a depth of invasion ≤1mm, wide-local excision without lymphadenectomy is sufficient with a recommended surgical margin of 1 to 2 cm. If tumor depth is greater than 1mm or tumor diameter exceeds 2 cm, radical resection with margins extending to the perineal fascia and inguinal lymph node assessment should be performed. This more aggressive treatment is recommended due to the risk of occult nodal metastasis and increased risk of death for groin recurrence. For verrucous carcinoma, local excision is typically sufficient; however, the advanced disease may require radical resection.

Similarly, wide local excision with tumor-free margins is also recommended for vulvar melanoma as in cutaneous melanoma because radical surgery to treat vulvar melanoma does not improve survival and is associated with increased morbidity.

**Lymph Nodes**: The decision to perform staging lymphadenectomy should be carefully considered based on the risk of occult disease and morbidity. There is no successful treatment for vulvar cancer patients with groin recurrence.

The type of node assessment also impacts morbidity, with those undergoing complete lymphadenectomy at five times higher risk of lymphedema than those undergoing sentinel lymph node (SNL) biopsy.

For vulvar SCC, if the primary lesion is unilateral (greater than 1cm from vulvar midline), an ipsilateral inguinal lymphadenectomy can be performed because the risk for contralateral lymph node involvement is less than one percent.

For vulvar BCC, lymph node biopsy is generally not required. In patients with melanoma, SLN biopsy is recommended at the surgical resection of the primary tumor.