Opioid Receptors are G protein-coupled receptors (GPCRs). They mediate the human body's response to most hormones, neurotransmitters, drugs, and are involved in sensory perception of vision, taste, and olfaction.**(See Fig 1.)**

The activation of cAMP is counteracted by a different type of G protein known as Gi protein, which couples to its ligand-binding receptor.**(See Fig 2**.) After binding of the opioid agonist (endogenous or exogenous) to the extracellular N-terminus domain of the receptor, G-alpha-i/o found on the intracellular C-terminus side of the receptor binds to GTP. This binding leads to its dissociation from G-beta-gamma, and these two subunits attach to different effector molecules until the GTP linked to G-alpha hydrolyzes, causing their re-association and eventual termination of the effect.**(See Fig 3**.) The inhibition of adenylate cyclase by G-alpha-i/o preventing cAMP production.

Recent advances in technology have elicited activation of G protein-dependent inward rectifying potassium channels (GIRK) on stimulation of GiCPR by agonists, including opioids through the interaction of the G-beta-gamma subunit to the Kir channels. An important concept worth noting is that these channels become activated by G-beta-gamma produced by Gi-coupled receptors, but not by Gs and Gq receptors. GIRKs are members of the inwardly rectifying potassium (Kir) family of ion channels consisting of Kir3.1, Kir3.2, Kir3.3 and Kir3.4 subunits which combine to form homo or heterotetramers producing GIRK channels. Of these four types, GIRK 2 (Kir3.2) is abundantly present in the nervous system and their activation by opioids leading to hyperpolarization of the neurons through increased outward K+ current mediating the inhibitory effects of the opioids.

N-type voltage-gated calcium channels (VGCC) are important targets of G-beta-gamma subunit of Gi-coupled receptor when stimulated by opioid agonists. These channels are present in the presynaptic region of neurons throughout the central and peripheral nervous system which when stimulated cause the influx of calcium into the presynaptic neuron ultimately resulting in the release of neurotransmitters into the synaptic cleft. The interaction of G-beta-gamma with N-type Ca2+ channels results in its inhibition and prevents the flow of Ca2+ current blocking the secretion of neurotransmitters.

GPCRs are phosphorylated at serine and/or threonine residues at the C-terminus using G protein kinases after binding of these receptors with opioid agonists. Following the phosphorylation process, beta-arrestins are recruited, which terminate the G protein activation and initiate the internalization process through acting as a mediator in the interaction between the receptor and clathrin-coated pits. Furthermore, upon internalization, receptors can either undergo rapid recycling to the plasma membrane or transferred to the endosomes where they are slowly recycled or degraded into lysosomes.

New and upcoming reports have documented modulation of MAPK/ERK pathway (Mitogen-activated protein kinase) which is involved in a variety of cellular processes including cell proliferation, differentiation, and apoptosis.