Genetic mutations affect both prokaryotic and eukaryotic cells in both beneficial or harmful ways. Genetic mutations result in genetic variation, which is a prerequisite for natural selection. A genetic mutation may result in higher or lower fitness of the organism depending on the consequences of the mutation.

Those organisms with higher fitness are more likely to reproduce and pass on their genetics, including any mutations, to subsequent generations. For example, bacteria can become resistant to antibiotics throughout thousands of generations due to, in part, the acquisition of new mutations.

Similarly, viruses such as HIV develop resistance to anti-viral medications, allowing their continued replication and spread. Bacteria, and particularly viruses, are prone to accumulating genetic mutations due to their very rapid generation times and decreased ability to repair their DNA. However, eukaryotic cells also are susceptible to acquiring mutations despite robust DNA damage repair mechanisms.

Deleterious mutations in a somatic cell may render the cell less able to carry out its required roles within its organ. The rate of somatic mutations is much more rapid than DNA damage repair (DDR) pathways can function, allowing these mutated cells to continue proliferating. As organisms age, their cells accumulate mutations that are initially tolerated well but will gradually decline tissue and organ function over time. This occurs via the process of apoptosis, or programmed cell death. As cellular stress or damage crosses a certain threshold, an irreversible cascade of proteins and signaling molecules are activated within the cell, ultimately leading to its demise.

These cells are replaced by the division of other neighboring cells so that loss in function in a tissue is not noticeable to the organism. In other situations, cells do not undergo apoptosis but instead are restricted from further progression through the cell cycle and enter an irreversible state termed senescence. They are still able to perform many normal cellular activities but can no longer replicate. Gradually, either through apoptosis or senescence, tissues and organs have decreased functioning and slower healing rates, and the organism experiences the process of aging. However, not all cells enter a state of senescence or undergo apoptosis even if they have acquired a significant mutational burden. Either process and its regulatory pathways can experience genetic mutations, thereby becoming defective and resulting in continued cell survival and replication.

This can lead to the development of cancerous cells should these cells continue to replicate and acquire new mutations. For example, the mutation of a key regulatory gene, TP53, and its product p53, can affect numerous apoptotic and DNA repair pathways and is implicated in the development of various cancers. Normally, p53 can activate DNA repair enzymes in the presence of DNA damage, it can arrest cell growth at the G1/S restriction point, and it can also initiate apoptosis or cellular senescence. TP53 mutation can interrupt any of these crucial functions. This mutation is often found alongside mutations in genes that enhance growth, limit inhibitory signals, and reduce dependence on signaling from neighboring cells.

Other disruptions in TP53 can occur due to HPV, as it encodes a protein called E6, which binds to and inactivates p53. This is part of the pathogenesis of HPV and how certain HPV types, such as HPV 16, have a higher probability of causing pre-cancerous and cancerous lesions. Typically, such cancer-causing mutations are spontaneous and only affect somatic cells, thereby sparing the offspring of any individual with such mutations. However, genetic mutations can also affect the gametes, in which case such acquired mutations would be spread to offspring.