# Continuing Education Activity

Dextran is a medication used in managing and treating various clinical conditions, including during hemorrhage, shock, surgical procedures, radiological imaging, antithrombotic administration, and ophthalmic relief of xerophthalmia. This activity reviews the indications, contraindications, adverse events, mechanisms of action, toxicity, and other key factors of dextran therapy in the clinical setting related to the essential information needed by members of a professional healthcare team in the treatment and management involved in patient care with the related conditions.

**Objectives:**
- Identify the mechanism of action of dextran.
- Describe the potential adverse effects of dextran.
- Review the appropriate monitoring for patients receiving therapy with dextran.
- Outline several interprofessional team strategies for improving care coordination and communication to advance dextran and improve outcomes.

# Indications

Dextran is a versatile compound with many clinical applications in medicine, ranging from anesthesiology and surgery to radiology and ophthalmology. In the operating room and intensive care unit settings, dextran is used osmotically as a colloid to treat hypovolemia and/or hemorrhage from trauma, burns, surgeries, or other causes if ABO compatibility tests are not possible in time.

# Mechanism of Action

Dextran is a polysaccharide made from natural sources of glucose by bacteria and with 1:6 glucoside links.

Microsurgeons can use dextran to decrease the risk of vascular complications such as thrombosis.

As an eye lubricant, dextran 70 increases viscosity on the surface of the eye to retain tear fluid.

# Administration

The most commonly utilized molecular forms for intravenous dextran are dextran 40 and dextran 70.

Technetium Tc99m-labeled dextran by intravenous administration is a blood vascular imaging agent for the diagnosis of pericardial effusion, ventricular aneurysms, or bleeds.

Dextran as a formulated component in eye drops will usually be administered 1 to 2 drops at a time.

# Adverse Effects

Adverse effects of dextran are uncommon when appropriately administered. However, focal allergic reactions at the injection site or systemic anaphylactic or anaphylactoid reactions are possible: the presence of rash, hives, wheezing, chest tightness, and shortness of breath should cue the healthcare provider to this possibility. Immediate discontinuation and emergency treatment with intravenous fluids and H1/H2 blockers, epinephrine, and steroids may be warranted in severe cases for supportive treatment and to prevent airway closure.

# Contraindications

To guard against adverse outcomes, it is important to obtain a careful patient history and review clinical laboratory data, as a matter of course, before the administration of dextran. It is relatively contraindicated in patients with untreated bleeding disorders, including platelet dysfunction, because of increased bleeding risk. Caution should be exercised in patients with heart failure, as rapid administration may prove dangerous due to the plasma volume expansion effects, potentially leading to circulatory overload and acute decompensation. However, even slower but continued administration may pose some risk as it may reduce plasma protein levels, which can reduce oncotic pressure and worsen edema. If volume overload occurs during dextran administration, an osmotic diuretic is the recommended intervention. For patients with underlying renal disease, failure to clear dextran can lead to worsening of renal function.

# Monitoring

Since dextran can prolong bleeding time and is antithrombotic, it is important to monitor its usage.

# Toxicity

Renal effects of dextran toxicity are due to the increased serum viscosity, especially in patients with oliguria. A low specific gravity of urine during therapy can suggest a failure of the kidneys to clear dextran, so patients require assessment for hydration during administration and signs of dehydration before the onset of acute renal failure.

Hepatic effects of dextran toxicity can include abnormal liver function test results with increased AST and ALT values, especially in patients undergoing surgery or cardiac catheterization procedures; this is because dextran accumulates in hepatocytes where it is metabolized, and excess levels of dextran can lead to hepatic oxidative stress.

# Enhancing Healthcare Team Outcomes

The polysaccharide dextran has versatile applications as a colloid in enhancing patient care and improving healthcare team outcomes. It can rapidly replace plasma volume losses in conditions of severe hypovolemia, especially during uncontrolled hemorrhage when compatible whole blood or blood products are not yet available.