A thorough history and physical is paramount in differentiating primary from secondary lymphedema as the 2 are very similar. Primary lymphedema is congenital, and secondary lymphedema results from insult, injury, or obstruction. A detailed history of duration, distribution, infections, foreign travel, cancer, liver dysfunction, cardiac dysfunction, and prior surgery, especially with lymph node dissection, is critical.

In its early stages, lymphedema often resembles general edema and is frequently dismissed as a simple swelling or edema. In lymphedema, the elevation of the extremity or diuretic therapy is inadequate and does not resolve the swelling. During the beginning stages, pitting is clear, the skin is soft, and limb elevation assists in resolving the edema. As the disease progresses, pitting ceases to be visible, the skin hardens, and elevation does not relieve the swelling.

**History**

- Thorough family history is essential if primary lymphedema is suspected. It is important to evaluate if other family members, usually from an earlier generation, suffer or have suffered from swollen feet, ankles, and legs due to an “unknown cause.”

- Cancer

- Injuries

- Severe burns

**Signs and Symptoms**

- Edema, especially of an extremity

- Hyperkeratosis: skin becomes scaly and thickens

- Lymphangioma: small blisters and bumps develop on the skin

- Lymphorrhea: lymph fluid leaks from the skin

**Physical Exam**

Skin

- Dryness, increased thickness, hyperkeratosis, lymphangiomas (blisters containing lymph fluid), abnormally warm or hot, unusually dark skin, and any nodules are all lymphedema indicators.

- Papillomatosis, a cobblestone appearance of the skin, may also be present; it results from dilated and distended lymph vessels enveloped in fibrotic tissue.

- Hyperkeratosis

- Lymphangioma

- Lymphorrhea

- Positive Stemmer's sign: inability to pinch a fold of skin at the root of the second toe suggests lymphedema

Extremity

- Size: Less than a 20% difference in the affected extremity is considered mild or moderate, and greater than 20% is considered severe.