The mainstay of treatment of NTDs such as spina bifida is actually prevention. Women of childbearing age should be supplementing their diet with folate to prevent NTDs. The US began to mandate the fortification of grains with folic acid to help diminish cases.

In the neonatal stage there are several implications and sequela that must be monitored and managed. Early closure within 72 hours is preferred to prevent significant neurologic decline and minimize the risk of infection or injury to any exposed defect. Patients will often require a ventriculoperitoneal shunt for hydrocephalus after the closure of the defect. Arnold Chiari malformations are common and often require repair however this repair carries significant mortality when patients are symptomatic. Long term management involves an interdisciplinary approach as several organ systems can be affected. Neurogenic bowel and bladder are common manifestations of the condition. Neurogenic bladder typically involves detrusor- sphincter dyssynergia which can lead to renal failure if poorly managed. Patients should have biannual renal ultrasounds for surveillance and may require intermittent catheterization for long term management. Patients also present with neurogenic bowel caused by impaired sensation and poor sphincter control. Patients may need to learn a consistent bowel program which includes stool softeners, motility agents, and digital stimulation for adequate control.

Children with NTDs can present with a wide range of motor involvement including weakness, flaccidity, spasticity, and contractures. Tendon lengthening procedures can be considered for patients with severe contractures that interfere with ambulation, hygiene, or positioning. Foot deformities are common in NTDs and include equinovarus, calcaneus, and rocker bottom deformities. Splinting, passive stretching and serial casting can help with significant spasticity and/or contractures.