Overall, there are 3 major indications of surgical management of multinodular goiters, and these are

- Suspicious or confirmed thyroid cancer

- Compression of the adjacent organs

- Cosmetic reasons

Most surgeons would argue for excision of the mass even if asymptomatic as most substernal goiters continue to grow and become more complex to resect when larger in size.

The most urgent and common indication for substernal thyroidectomy is compression of the cervical and mediastinal noble structures, such as the trachea, the esophagus, and the superior vena cava. The trachea is compressed in most symptomatic cases, while superior vena cava syndrome is a rare complication and is most often linked to thyroid malignancy.

Surgical excision of symptomatic mediastinal goiters is based on the following facts: a. goiters tend to grow over the years, b. use of radioiodine, which is an alternative to surgery, can potentially lead to acute goiter enlargement and further compression symptoms, c. thyroid cancer can exist in up to 25% of these goiters and d. transcervical goiter excision is possible in up to 90% of cases.

Patients with asymptomatic intrathoracic goiters and normal spirometry tests are not an absolute indication for surgery, and conservative management is usually recommended. Nevertheless, suspicion or proof of malignancy constitutes an indication for thyroid excision. Additionally, young, healthy patients are usually operated on because asymptomatic substernal goiters tend to grow, and they have a high risk for malignancy.

The Pemberton sign is a test used to have the patient raise their hands above their head. This causes facial flushing, dilation of the neck veins, and can even produce stridor from compression of the trachea. This test is an indication for surgery.

**Indications for Selection Between Transcervical and Extracervical Approaches**

Indications for an extracervical approach vary among different studies. First, it should be performed in primary retrosternal goiters or goiters with diameters exceeding that of the thoracic inlet.

As described by Vaiman and Bekerman, the exact anatomy of the thyroid gland and the chest should be considered before operating. More specifically, the tracheal-diameter-to-thoracic-inlet ratio is of great importance, and thus, the diameters and areas of the trachea and the superior thoracic aperture should be calculated. A wide trachea with a narrow inlet usually requires an extracervical approach, while a narrow trachea with a wide inlet a transcervical one.

According to Simo et al., surgeons can rely on the multiplanar CT findings, such as indicative signs of malignancy and calcification of the thyroid capsule, leading to difficult excision, to decide the ideal surgical approach.