The history should address whether the patient has an inherited or acquired form. From this, the clinician should narrow down the history further. Inquire whether the patient has signs, symptoms, or an official diagnosis of the acquired sources cystinosis, Wilson disease, hereditary fructose intolerance, and Lowe syndrome. Also, inquire as to whether the patient has a history of multiple myeloma or renal transplantation. Take note of the use of drugs such as valproic acid,

The physical examination may reveal excessive urinary excretion of amino acids, calcium, bicarbonate, glucose, phosphate, and uric acid. Findings that could be associated with deficiencies in these solutes are acidosis (due to lack of bicarbonate), dehydration, electrolyte imbalance, rickets, osteomalacia, and growth failure. Symptoms of osteomalacia include Bone fractures that happen without a real injury and widespread bone pain, especially in the hips. Whereas hypophosphatemic osteomalacia may be seen in adults, hypophosphatemic rickets would be seen in children. In this presentation, bony deformity consistent with rickets would be observed.

The loss of water and electrolytes observed in this condition would cause thirst, fatigue, weakness, and polyuria. Hypophosphatemia causes a variety of signs and symptoms, especially if the serum phosphorus level gets below 1 mg/dL. Neuromuscular symptoms such as paresthesia, tremor, and muscle weakness may be noted. Severe hypophosphatemia may impair myocardial contractility though this rarely results in clinical congestive heart failure. It may also impair the ability of patients to be weaned from mechanical ventilation. Though rhabdomyolysis theoretically can be due to hypophosphatemia, there are few reports of this association in humans.

If Fanconi syndrome is associated with cystinosis, then the patient is expected to experience deposition of the amino acid cystine in the bone marrow, the liver, the cornea (where the crystals can be seen), and the kidney.