Children may remain asymptomatic, however, most manifest early in the form of wheezing, stridor, refractory cough, pneumonia, atelectasis.

Fortunately, the malposition of the ETT is rare because most cases arise from the right side of the trachea approximately within 2 cm from the carina but still need to be considered in all patients with a tracheal bronchus. As tracheal bronchus can arise at any point from the trachea, there is no standard safe distance point from the incisor mark to prevent its obstruction either by insufflation of the cuff or by endotracheal tube entrance itself. Hence follow-up chest x-ray is of paramount importance in such cases.

Based on normal anatomy left main bronchus is longer and divide into upper and lower secondary bronchus. While right main bronchus is much smaller and divides into apical, anterior, and posterior secondary bronchi. The left-sided double-lumen tube is preferred in most cases. The right-sided tube is used in selective cases where the right lung needs to be isolated. In right-sided tracheal bronchus, a right-sided tube is contraindicated given it can easily block the tracheal bronchus from its tracheal cuff. Based on the location of tracheal bronchus and its origin, one-lung ventilation for procedures such as thoracotomy, lobectomy, segmentectomy can be achieved either by the opposite side double-lumen tube. The position of the endobronchial tube should be confirmed with flexible tracheobronchoscopy. Lung isolation is achieved by either clamping the tracheal tube or endobronchial tube depending on which side the procedure is performed.

Similarly uninvent tube can be used, which has 2 lumens within a single tube and has a tracheal and endobronchial cuff of in-build bronchial blocker. Another technique employed is the use of bronchial blockers for the tracheal bronchus and a regular endotracheal tube for the rest of the lung.

Some reports preferred left-sided double-lumen tube overuse of bronchial blockers for tracheal bronchus.