Primidone is a first-generation barbiturate type antiepileptic medication developed to treat seizures, commonly for partial and generalized seizures. Nowadays, it is not prescribed as first-choice to treat psychomotor, grand mal, and focal epileptic. This drug can also be utilized in the management of tremors as since the early 80's it can be considered a valid alternative to propranolol in the treatment of essential tremors.

The drug was developed by Carrington and Yule Bogue in 1949. Subsequently, on 8 March 1954, in the United States, the Foods and Drugs Administration (FDA) endorsed this medication in the treatment of epilepsy.

The high efficacy of primidone in these forms has also been clinically documented in patients resistant to other therapies, suffering from idiopathic, post-traumatic forms, associated with clear signs of brain injury or with specific modifications of the EEG trace. This antiepileptic drug can also be used in the therapy of focal or Jacksonian seizures, myoclonic, and akinetic seizures.

Although primidone is currently not a first-choice drug, its pharmacokinetic and pharmacodynamic properties must be well known to clinicians, as the use of the drug can be particularly effective in specific clinical settings. For instance, QT-prolongation is a potentially fatal form of ventricular arrhythmia with an increased incidence among patients who have epilepsy. This complication may be precipitated by antiepileptic treatment. Because primidone has a favorable profile on QT-prolongation, it offers an alternative in managing epilepsy and essential tremor when accounting for special arrhythmogenic considerations. Nevertheless, it is still unclear if the drug may be beneficial in QT-interval shortening.

Primidone has also been studied for other clinical purposes. In the 1990s, researchers investigated using it in cases of theophylline-resistant neonatal apnea. Some studies, indeed, showed a possible role as an adjuvant in preventing apnea.