**Patient Positioning:**

Patient positioning should be for comfort. To allow for minimal head or body movements, legs should remain uncrossed, the neck not twisted, and patients should receive instruction to take shallow breaths. The head should be aligned such that when inserting the wire speculum, an equal amount of sclera is visible on the superior and inferior aspect of the globe. In unilateral surgeries, the nonoperative eye should be covered or taped closed while the operative eye gets identified with an adhesive label or temporary mark on the forehead. Patient skin prep is usually with alcohol wipes or povidone-iodine. A gauze pad may be placed between the operative eye and ear to absorb any fluid run-off.

**Excimer Laser:**

The excimer laser should be calibrated on the day of surgery and checked for an adequate homogenous beam profile, alignment, and power output. Relevant data input includes the patient’s name, refraction, intended correction, epithelial removal technique, keratometry values, optical zone, and transition zone.

**Pupil fixation:**

Various techniques exist to ensure proper fixation of the pupil, which is essential to avoid complications such as decentration. Self-fixation, in which patients focus on a target light, is the most popular method as it produces more accurate centration than globe immobilization by the ophthalmic surgeon.

Communication to the patient is essential as they are expected to maintain fixation and remain motionless throughout the procedure. Surgeons should regularly encourage the patient to relax and inform the patient when their vision will blur. Other distractions should be minimal, as both the patient and surgeon may become distracted by any level of background conversation.

**PRK technique**

**Removal of superficial epithelial cells:**

- The first step of PRK is the removal of the superficial epithelial cells, which may be through a variety of methods. Each of these techniques should be performed quickly to avoid desiccation and skillfully to avoid nicking Bowman’s layer.

- The first technique, mechanical debridement, involves using a blunt spatula to scrape off epithelium from the periphery toward the center. The next step is wiping a sponge hydrated with balanced salt solution (BSS) or carboxymethylcellulose 0.5% across the cornea. This technique benefits from not depending on laser optics; however, mechanical debridement tends to be a lengthy process in inexperienced surgeons, which subsequently increases patient anxiety and reduces stromal hydration.

- The “laser-scrape” technique removes 38 to 45 um of epithelial cells, and then residual debris is mechanically removed with a spatula.

- The transepithelial technique similarly uses a blue fluorescent light to demonstrate when ablation is complete but does not require manual scraping with a spatula to remove cellular debris.

- Epithelial cells may alternatively be removed with a dilute solution of 20% alcohol. The alcohol solution is dropped onto a 6 or 7 mm optical marker placed on the cornea.

- Lastly, the surgeon may opt to use a rotary brush that contains fine hairs that remove the epithelium without injuring the underlying Bowman’s layer. This technique allows for the epithelium to be easily removed and provides a smooth corneal surface. However, patients may lose fixation when the pupil becomes occluded with the brush, with an increased risk of the surgeon removing too much epithelium.

**Laser**

After exposing the stroma, the laser is centered and focused according to the manufacturer’s recommendations. Correction of myopia involves placing a large number of laser pulses centrally and fewer pulses in the periphery of the optical zone, thereby flattening the natural arc of the cornea. In contrast, the correction of hyperopia involves delivering the largest number of laser pulses in the periphery to steepen the corneal arc.

**Use of collagen cross-linking:**

There has been a trend to combine photorefractive keratectomy with collagen cross-linking (CXL) in patients with keratoconus and post-LASIK ectasia.

**Application of topical mitomycin-C:**

Topical mitomycin-C (MMC) is often applied as a soaked pledget on the ablated surface to 1 minute or less immediately after laser ablation to reduce the incidence of primary or recurrent haze.

**Post-treatment management:**

After laser ablation is complete, topical nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drops, antibiotic drops, and steroid drops get instilled. The ocular surface gets irrigated with chilled BSS, which is believed to reduce postoperative haze formation

Patients should be advised that their vision will likely remain blurry while re-epithelialization of the corneal surface occurs. This change in vision may hinder their ability to participate in work, hobbies, or travel; patients should allow for the healing process to complete before resuming activities that require critical vision. Ghosting, glare, and shadows in the vision are common, transient occurrences in the immediate postoperative period; these phenomena tend to be worse at night and more prevalent in young patients with myopia and large pupillary diameters. Patients should also be instructed to maintain good ocular hygiene due to the increased risk of infection while the epithelium is regenerating.

**Post-treatment discomfort:**

90% of patients experience no postoperative pain; the other 10% typically only experience mild to moderate pain or discomfort in the 24 to 36 hours following the procedures.

**Post-treatment medications:**

Other medications included in the postoperative management include topical fluoroquinolones used four to five times daily for five to seven days or until re-epithelialization is complete.

Topical corticosteroids are often used in order to avoid significant regression and postoperative haze. However, no consensus remains on the most appropriate duration of treatment. Among all topical steroids, prednisolone acetate, loteprednol, and fluorometholone are the most commonly used following PRK. Steroids may be administered four times daily for a week and tapered off over the following three weeks or five times daily for a month and tapered off over four months; the latter regimen is typically only administered in patients with high levels of myopia.

**Post-treatment course:**

Re-epithelialization is complete in most patients by postoperative day 3; BSCL, antibiotic drops, and NSAID drops may be discontinued at this time. Corneal videokeratoscopy should take place at one month following refractive surgery to demonstrated when the ablation was centered correctly.