The patient is positioned supine with a thigh tourniquet.  General anesthesia is recommended.

The procedure begins laterally, careful to avoid the sural and intermediate dorsal cutaneous nerve, starting at the distal tip of the fibula and carried until the base of the fourth and fifth metatarsal. The incision is continued deep, until the arrival of the fascia overlying the extensor digitorum brevis muscle.  A communicating branch of the sural nerve to the intermediate cutaneous branch can be encountered at this point and may have to be sacrificed to proceed. The extensor digitorum brevis then gets reflected off of its origination on the sinus tarsi. Peroneal tendons may be retracted plantarly.

The sinus tarsi may then be identified and excavated. Fibrofatty tissue in the sinus tarsi (Hoke's tonsil) must be removed for adequate exposure of the subtalar joint. All subtalar joint attachments must be released, including the interosseous ligament, to expose the anterior and middle facets.

Following the former incision distally, the calcaneal cuboid joint will be identified, and its dorsal ligaments must be released.

Following this, the medial incision will be placed between the medial gutter of the ankle and extended to the inferior aspect of the navicular. The great saphenous vein is often in this area and retractable superiorly.  The capsular tissue of the talonavicular joint can be incised in line with the incision, leaving the attachment of the posterior tibial tendon intact. A cobb elevator is often useful in exposing the entire aspect of the joint.

Resection of the talonavicular joint can be performed using a variety of methods.  Curettes or osteotomes may be used for cartilage resection and exposure of subchondral bone, maintaining the original contour of the joint.  Adequate resection of cartilage and fenestration of the bone is crucial to ensure satisfactory osseous union.

Once the talonavicular joint is prepped, resection then continues at the calcaneocuboid joint.  Once again, curettes or osteotomes are options, or a sagittal saw can be employed.  If transverse plane deformity of the foot exists, a wedge of the calcaneus can be taken for correction.

Finally, the subtalar joint gets prepped for arthrodesis. The posterior facet can be prepped using curettage, osteotome, or a rotary burr to ensure adequate subchondral bone exposure.  If the middle facet has been exposed, it too can be resected using this method.  If a bone graft is employed for wedging, it can be placed for deformity correction.

After prepping all joints, the talonavicular joint can undergo manual manipulation and then fixated temporarily using Kirschner wires or Steinmann pins.  Following this, the subtalar joint and calcaneocuboid can be temporarily fixated using the same methods.

Ensuring the foot is in the optimal position for fusion, the subtalar joint is then permanently fixated.  For fixation, screws can be used from a posterior and lateral angle on the calcaneus extending to the dorsal medial aspect of the talus.  The talonavicular joint can then be fixated using screws from a distal and inferior aspect of the navicular into the head of the talus. The calcaneocuboid joint can finally be fixated utilizing a variety of hardware options.

The final position of the foot should be the following: heel in neutral to slight eversion, midtarsal joint in slight valgus.

Incisions are then irrigated and closed using anatomically layered closure.  Skin closure can be through many methods. A drain may be used to prevent hematoma formation. Patients are typically placed in a splint and are non-weight bearing following the procedure.