The survival of a fetus in utero is dependent on several factors. These factors can be broken down into the well-being of the host in its environment, the function of the uteroplacental unit, the condition of the environment in which the fetus lives, and the absence of lethal fetal factors. A single insult or a combination of factors may affect the function of these life-sustaining factors and lead to a stillbirth. The ability to maintain and support a pregnancy is dependent on multiple physiologic, hormonal, and anatomic adaptations.

The integrity of the uteroplacental unit may be compromised by structure, function, or genetic anomalies or insults such as hemorrhage or infection. Placental findings could include 1) single umbilical cord insertion, 2) velamentous umbilical cord insertion, 3) furcate umbilical cord insertion, 4) circummarginate insertion of the placental membranes, 5) circumvallate insertion of the placental membranes, 6) terminal villous immaturity, 7) terminal villous hypoplasia, 8) terminal villous hyperplasia, 9) acute chorioamnionitis of placental membranes, 10) acute chorioamnionitis of the chorionic plate,  11) acute funisitis, 12) acute umbilical cord arteritis, 13) acute umbilical cord phlebitis, 14) chorionic plate acute vasculitis of the fetal blood vessels, 15) chorionic plate vascular degenerative changes, 16) acute villitis, 17) chronic villitis, 18) avascular villi, 19) retroplacental hematoma, 20) parenchymal infarction, 21) intraparenchymal (intervillous) thrombosis, and 22) perivillous fibrin deposition, 23) intervillous fibrin deposition, 24) placental weight, 25) ratio placental weight/birth weight.

In a study of placental pathology and stillbirth, of the 25 examined findings, 15 were significantly associated with stillbirth and 11 with growth restriction. Placental abnormalities were linked to stillbirth both in fetuses with and without evidence of growth abnormality. 10/11 placental findings associated with growth restriction were also associated with an increased risk for stillbirth. Five placental findings, however, were associated with stillbirth but not with growth restriction. In this study, looking at placental pathology, five patterns were highlighted.

In group 1, stillbirth occurred in the absence of growth restriction. The effect was acute and severe. Findings included chorioamnionitis, fetal chorionic plate vascular degenerative changes, perivillous and intervillous fibrinoid deposits, fetal vascular thrombi in the chorionic plate.

Group 2 demonstrated growth restriction associated only with stillbirth. This included velamentous cord insertion, terminal villous hyperplasia, and parenchymal infarcts.  With these conditions, it may impair placental function and lead to growth restriction and stillbirth. In its milder forms, it might not affect growth and result in a live birth.

Group 3 had growth restriction in live births only.  Findings included a single umbilical artery, which may impair circulation chronically and lead to growth restriction without causing stillbirth. Terminal villous hypoplasia and parenchymal infarction had different effects depending on whether the fetus was preterm or term. Preterm, they were associated with growth restriction and stillbirth, and term, they were associated with growth restriction and live birth. This suggests that greater severity may result in stillbirth before term, and a less severe condition may result in growth restriction and live birth.

Group 4 had similar growth restriction in live births and stillbirths. Placental weight in preterm births and intraparenchymal thrombus formation in term births were both associated with growth restriction in both stillbirth and live birth. In these cases, a second insult may have accounted for the stillbirth.

Group 5 had different patterns of growth restriction for live births and stillbirths. There was a more severe effect on placental function; the group with growth restriction and stillbirth and a milder effect on placental function resulted in the group with growth restriction and live birth. Preterm stillbirth demonstrated terminal villous immaturity, avascular villi, placental edema, or retroplacental hematoma. Term stillbirth demonstrated retroplacental hematoma. All placental abnormalities associated with growth restriction were also associated with stillbirth except for terminal villous hypoplasia.