An interprofessional approach to these procedures will promote smooth surgery and improve patient satisfaction. This begins with thorough patient education regarding typical postoperative recovery and helps to manage expectations. Appropriate pain management and activity restrictions for four weeks after surgery should be discussed to optimize postoperative healing. A conversation regarding the role of adjunctive procedures, such as skin resurfacing, botulinum toxin, and dermal filler injection, to further augment a youthful appearance should occur as well.

Before starting the case, a meeting with all surgical teams (anesthesia, nursing, assistants, and surgeon) will delineate equipment needs and outline the flow of the operation. This will help minimize delays during the procedure. Thorough communication with the anesthesia provider regarding blood pressure control can reduce intraoperative bleeding and immediate postoperative hematoma. In the recovery room, the nurses should be aware of the blood pressure parameters.

The compressive head dressing should be kept in place for twenty-four hours. The dressing can then be changed to a jaw bra with ice on/off the area at twenty-minute intervals. The drain should be removed on a postoperative day one. Facial nerve function should be evaluated and documented. Patients should have a second follow-up appointment at one week for suture removal and wound check; another appointment should be scheduled one month after surgery for wound evaluation and to discuss overall patient satisfaction. Photos should be taken three months postoperatively and at every follow-up visit after that.