The range of motion is the measurement of movement around a specific joint or body part. To measure the range of motion, doctors, osteopaths, physical therapists, or other health professionals most commonly use a goniometer, which is an instrument that measures angle motion at a joint.

There are three types of range of motion, dependent on the purpose of the assessment:

- Passive

- Active

- Active assistive

**Types of Goniometers**

- Universal Goniometer - comes in two forms: short arm and long arm.

- The short arm goniometer is used for smaller joints like the wrist, elbow, or ankle,
- The long arm goniometers are more accurate for joints with long levers like the knee and hip joints.

- Twin Axis Electrogoniometer -

- The inter-rater and intra-rater reliability of the electrogoniometer is higher than the universal goniometer but challenging to apply in patients' clinical evaluation, hence used more often for research purposes.

- Gravity Goniometer/Inclinometer

- One arm has a weighted pointer that remains vertical under the influence of gravity.

- Software/Smartphone-based Goniometer

- A smartphone as a digital goniometer has several benefits like availability, ease of measurement, application-based tracking of measurements, and one-hand use. These applications use the accelerometers in phones to calculate the joint angles.

- Arthrodial Goniometer

- Ideal for measuring cervical rotation, anteroposterior flexion, and lateral flexion of the cervical spine.

Of all the types, a universal goniometer is most widely used.