The exact cause of benign essential blepharospasm is not well understood, and, as such, there is no definitive cure for BEB. However, there is a range of treatment options available.

**Photochromatic Modulation**

It has been shown that patients suffering from blepharospasm are able to tolerate light intensities similar to those tolerated by patients without blepharospasm. However, when particular wavelengths were blocked out using lens tints, the patients suffering from blepharospasm were no longer able to tolerate similar light intensities. This implies that photophobia in blepharospasm is dependent on both light intensity and wavelength.

Multiple studies have shown symptomatic improvement in patients treated with photochromatic modulation.

**Botulinum Toxin injections**

Botulinum toxins:
****

There are seven serotypes of the botulinum toxin (A, B, C, D, E, F, G), but only serotypes A and B are available for use.

Mode of action:

Botulinum toxin injection is the standard treatment for patients with BEB. It exerts its effect by inhibiting acetylcholine release at the neuromuscular junction, which leads to decreased muscle contraction.

Technique:

Approximately 1.25-5 units of botulinum toxin are used per injection site.

It usually takes 48 hours from injection to clinical response. However, the response to treatment is highly variable. Nevertheless, the reduction of abnormal movements is seen in all subjects. Treatment response and duration of the effect appear to be dose-related, and the latter may be as long as 170 days.

Botulinum toxin injections are recommended every three to four months. Some authors report a more intense effect seen with the first round of injections and decreasing efficacy with subsequent doses.

Potential reasons for a poor response to botulinum toxin injections include the development of antibodies against the botulinum toxin, poor injection technique, and the presence of apraxia of eyelid opening.

**Oral Pharmacotherapy**

Oral pharmacotherapy for BEB has failed to show persistent relief from symptoms and tends to vary in effectiveness between patients.

This includes medications such as benzodiazepines, anticholinergics (benztropine and trihexyphenidyl), levodopa, baclofen, VMAT2 inhibitors (tetrabenazine), lithium, valproate, methylphenidate, zolpidem amongst others. All of these have a limited role, but might be considered for refractory disease, before taking patients to the operating room for a more invasive strategy and as an adjunct to botulinum toxin injections. Oral pharmacotherapy is also associated with potentially undesirable side effects, which are not associated with botulinum toxin injection along with the potential risk of developing dependence of benzodiazepines.

**Surgical Management**

Surgical intervention is indicated in patients who fail to show a response to medical therapy and have persisting symptoms. Surgical management is performed with the intent to improve functionality and reduce the frequency of spasms.

In patients in whom the disease is refractory to standard measures, neurectomies, myomectomies, and deep brain stimulation (DBS) represent appropriate treatment alternatives. About half of patients treated with myomectomies or neurectomies will require botulinum toxin injection five years after surgery, but at lower doses, than previously needed. Evidence supporting the use of DBS for BEB is not robust and should be considered as a last resort.

Surgical myectomy:

Surgical myectomy consists of the resection of the protractor muscles (corrugator supercili, orbicularis oculi, procerus, and depressor supercili). Gillum and Anderson described the surgical technique for full myectomy, which succeeds in controlling blepharospasm as there is an 88% improvement in patients with blepharospasm but may be associated with postoperative lymphedema, lagophthalmos, and facial anesthesia. Currently, modified and partial myectomy is the preferred technique. This is performed in addition to correcting the effects of blepharospasm, which include brow ptosis, ptosis, dermatochalasis, and lateral canthal dystopia.