**Basic Principle**

Radiotracer used in positron emission tomography undergoes radioactive decay, which releases a positron. A positron is an antiparticle of an electron. It travels a short distance (depending on the positron range) and interacts with an electron. This interaction between the electron and positron results in the destruction of both the particles and conversion into two photons of the same energy but in the opposite direction. PET depends on the detection of these photons simultaneously on the opposite side detectors. By this coincident detection of two photons per decay, PET provides greater spatial resolution and less noise than single-photon emission tomography (SPECT).

A three-dimensional image of myocardial perfusion is generated by mapping the distribution of the radiotracer both at stress and rest. The absolute concentration of radiotracer can also be mapped dynamically as it distributes in the myocardium. After that, the high-quality three-dimensional perfusion images are collected over the period of 2–10 min. In hybrid PET/CT imaging, a PET scan is combined with a fast CT scan, which delineates anatomical structures around the heart. The hybrid CT scan can be used to correct attenuation artifacts and scattering of PET data, which allows an accurate measurement of myocardial perfusion.

**Radiotracers**

**Perfusion Tracers**: Although there are multiple radiotracers available worldwide, rubidium-82 (Rb) and nitrogen-13-ammonia (N-ammonia) are most commonly used in clinical practice.

Rb is a potassium analog that is produced artificially in the nuclear laboratory via a generator. It has a short half-life of around 76 seconds, and it mimics Thallium-201 in its kinetic properties. Rb is the most commonly used radiotracer for the assessment of myocardial perfusion with PET.

A cyclotron produces N-ammonia. It has a half-life of around 10 min. After injection, N-ammonia is converted to glutamine, and it disappears rapidly from the circulation. Its uptake in the lungs increases significantly in patients with left ventricular systolic dysfunction and chronic lung diseases, which may affect the images' quality adversely by increasing background activity. This effect can be minimized by increasing the time between injection and image acquisition to optimize the contrast between myocardial and background activity. Although N-ammonia allows very high-resolution imaging, its use is limited due to its production by an on-site cyclotron.

Although oxygen-15-water (O-water) radiotracer diffuses freely across the membrane and its retention in the cell is not affected by the metabolic factors, it produces noisy and low count images, so its use is not recommended for clinical imaging.

Fluorine-18-flurpiridaz (F-flurpiridaz) is another radiotracer with relatively smaller kinetic positron energy, leading to a short positron range. F-flurpiridaz has a very long half-life of 110 min as compared to other radiotracers. It does not require cyclotron on-site, which makes it a favorable radiotracer for clinical use. Recent trial shows an added advantage of myocardial blood flow measurement with F-flurpiridaz cardiac PET, making it an excellent agent for coronary artery disease diagnosis.

**Viability Tracers:**18F-FDG (fluorodeoxyglucose) is a glucose analog globally used to assess myocardial viability. FDA also approves it for metabolic scanning in clinical oncology. It utilizes myocardial glucose use as an indicator of myocardial viability. Its increased uptake could be found in ischemic tissue, whereas reduced or absent uptake signifies a myocardial scar.

**Protocol**

A positron emission tomography (PET) imaging usually takes less time than single-photon emission tomography (SPECT) due to the shorter half-life of radiotracers used in PET. Complete stress–rest myocardial perfusion study with Rb and can be completed within 30 min.

In a typical Rb protocol, a tomographic acquisition used for the patient positioning is followed by a CT transmission scan. Then the radiotracer is injected into the patient at rest. After injecting a radiotracer, six minutes rest imaging acquisition is initiated. After completion of rest imaging, a second CT transmission scan is performed, followed by pharmacologic stress. Pharmacologic stress is commonly produced by using dipyridamole, adenosine, or regadenoson infusion. At two minutes after the infusion of pharmacologic stressor, Rb is administered using a separate intravenous line.  A 6-min stress imaging acquisition protocol is initiated with the start of the Rb infusion. Both the rest and stress CT transmission scans are acquired by holding the breath at the end of expiration, and patients are advised to breathe normally during the PET image acquisition.

The O-water tracer has a short decay time similar to Rb. A similar protocol is followed with 10–30 mCi of the radiotracer is infused to measure the activity for both the stress and a rest image. The activity is measured for around 5–6 minutes.

PET imaging with N-ammonia protocol usually requires a longer time due to the longer decay life. Immediately after the acquisition of a tomogram for patient positioning, a CT transmission scan is acquired. Then N-ammonia is injected into the patients at rest after starting a 10-min rest imaging acquisition protocol. After completion of the rest images, a stress CT transmission scan is usually acquired. Similar to the Rb PET protocol, pharmacologic stress is produced by dipyridamole, adenosine, or regadenoson. Three minutes later, N-ammonia is administered using a separate intravenous. Just like rest imaging, stress image acquisition starts a few seconds before the stress N-ammonia injection.

Currently, available PET scanners operate in three-dimension detection mode without an interplane septum. This mode enables the scanners to detect all coincident photon pairs. The three-dimension model provides an advantage of up to six times higher photon sensitivity than the traditional two-dimensional model. The quantitative three-dimensional PET imaging still has substantial technical limitations due to scanner saturation with the radiotracers' standard bolus dose. Therefore, quantitative PET imaging may require a slow infusion of radiotracers to avoid scanner saturation during first-pass arterial activity.

**Attenuation Correction**

Respiratory and cardiac motions are the major source of attenuation artifacts in PET scans. Easy availability of attenuation correction is a key component of PET scan, which is routinely not available in SPECT. It is usually performed with transmission sources on standalone PET scanners. Whereas in hybrid PET/CT, the attenuation correction map is formed with the help of non-contrast CT imaging, which is acquired separately for both the rest and stress studies to ensure perfect alignment with PET scan.

Cardiac PET and hybrid PET/ CT provides a highly accurate assessment of obstructive CAD. Overall, the average sensitivity for detecting at least one coronary artery was reported as 89% (range: 83–100%), whereas the average specificity was reported as high as 90% (range: 73% to 100%).

**Interpretation**

Myocardial perfusion imaging with positron emission tomography (PET) is performed with the flow tracers, including Rubidium 82 and Nitrogen 13 ammonia. Images are taken at rest as well as during pharmacologic or physiologic stress. Metabolism imaging using positron emission tomography identifies metabolic activity in the myocardium. It is performed with fluorine 18 2-fluoro-2-deoxyglucose (FDG) as a metabolic radiotracer.

Perfusion and metabolic images taken by PET scan are displayed on a computer monitor by using linear grayscale, monochromatic color scale, or a multicolor scale, depending on the available display type or operator preference. Images are displayed in the following orientations:

- Short-axis views are displayed by slicing the heart perpendicular to the left ventricle's long axis from apex to base.

- Vertical long-axis views are prepared by slicing the heart vertically from the septum to the lateral wall.

- Horizontal long-axis views are made by slicing the heart from the inferior to the anterior wall.

The above-mentioned views and slices are then aligned and displayed adjacent to each other to compare and interpret metabolic and perfusion images.

Following alignment, the perfusion images are first normalized with the metabolism images using the maximal myocardial pixel value in each of the aforementioned three image sets. The perfusion images are then normalized to their own maximum pixel value. The metabolism images are usually normalized to the maximum counts in the same myocardial region on the perfusion image.

Perfusion images at rest and stress are compared. Normal myocardial perfusion signifies the absence of obstructive epicardial coronary artery disease. In contrast, stress-induced regional myocardial perfusion abnormalities (normalize at rest) imply ischemia due to obstructive epicardial or small vessel disease. (Figure 1)

On the other hand, impaired perfusion both at stress and rest suggests a myocardial scar. The size and extent of perfusion defect and reversibility are quantified using the 17-segment model of the left ventricle.

In addition to this, cardiac chamber size, transient ischemia-induced cavity dilatation, right ventricular uptake, and pulmonary tracer uptake are also identified, and these findings signify different pathologies and diseases.

For interpretation of metabolism images, the extent and location of regional myocardial FDG uptake are compared and described according to the qualitative description of perfusion defect severity and extent. Regional increases in FDG uptake relative to myocardial blood flow is called perfusion-metabolism mismatch, and it a characteristic feature of hibernating myocardium.(Figure 2) While reductions in FDG uptake in proportion to the decreased myocardial perfusion are called the perfusion-metabolism match, they are characteristic features of myocardial scar.