PCNSL is highly sensitive to radiation and some chemotherapy agents, which is in contrast to the other primary brain-related tumors. The role of surgery is limited. Antimetabolites such as methotrexate (MTX) given at high doses constitutes the backbone for the treatment of PCNSL. Standard CHOP (cyclophosphamide, doxorubicin, vincristine, prednisone) regimen, the backbone for extra-CNS DLBCL exhibits negligible activity in PCNSL and/or has higher toxicity in combination with high dose MTX (HD-MTX) without improved outcomes.

Due to the high sensitivity of the PCNSL to radiation, patients initially were treated with whole-brain radiation therapy (WBRT). The use of WBRT as a first-line treatment is decreasing as chemotherapy-based regimens are optimized, and no significant benefit is noted with added WBRT, and it is associated with significant neurotoxicity.

It is proven in multiple trials, induction therapy with the combination of HD-MTX with other agents showed improved complete response (CR) compared to single-agent MTX.

MTX doses greater than 3.5 gm/m2 yield tumoricidal levels in the CSF and the brain parenchyma and doses as high as 8 gm/m2 were used in the clinical trial but required dose reductions secondary to side effects.

MTX at low doses is not nephrotoxic. At high doses, as used in PCNSL, MTX can precipitate in the tubules of the kidney and cause direct damage, the risk of which increases in the presence of acidic urine. Even though the MTX related kidney injury is reversible, the major risk is the decreased clearance of MTX after the high dose administration leading to increased systemic toxicity. This likelihood of renal injury can be minimized with aggressive hydration and alkalinization of urine. Leucovorin rescue is initiated within 24 to 36 hours of starting HD-MTX until the plasma level of MTX is less than 0.05 to 0.1 microliter.

In patients who achieved CR, at least half of them will relapse within five years. High dose chemotherapy with autologous hematopoietic stem cell transplantation (HCT) and whole-brain radiation therapy (WBRT) are the two consolidation approaches being considered. A growing number of prospective studies are researching these approaches, and overall evidence supports efficacy to be similar to both approaches, but there is higher neurotoxicity with WBRT.

**Surveillance**

After completion of initial therapy, patients are followed for any concern for relapse and long-term toxicities. Patients are evaluated with an MRI with gadolinium enhancement. The majority of relapses occur within 5 years after completion of the therapy. It is recommended to follow up with patients every three months during the first 2 years and every 6 months for the next 3 years.

**Relapse/Refractory Disease**

Treatment of relapsed and refractory disease is limited and therapeutic approaches to consider are retreatment with an MTX-based regimen, alternative chemotherapy agents such as pemetrexed, temozolomide, and ifosfamide, and high dose chemotherapy with HCT, and WBRT in previously non radiated patients. Other options include the use of other agents like lenalidomide and ibrutinib.