Anaplasmosis was first reported in 1994 by Chen et al. (J Clin Micro 1994;32(3):589-595). The latest CDC estimate for 2016 reported cases is 4151 cases (https://www.cdc.gov/anaplasmosis/stats/index.html accessed June 27, 2018). In the 10 year period between 2000 through 2010, cases increased from 346 to 1761 with estimates of 1.4 to 6.1 cases per million. Cross-sectional seroprevalence studies have demonstrated that up to 15% of the population in northwest Wisconsin; 1% Connecticut habitants and US military personnel; 17% of Slovenians; and 12% of the population of Sweden's Koster Islands have positive antibodies for Anaplasma phagocytophilum without a history of clinical manifestations. This suggests that infection is frequently subclinical.

Anaplasmosis occurs at any age in both genders; however, it is more frequent in men over the age of 40 years. Men are at higher risk of getting infection compared to women, with a 1.4 fold higher likelihood. The case fatality rate is usually less than 1%.

Anaplasmosis is found worldwide, particularly in the northeast United States, northern Europe, and Southeast Asia (has been reported in China, Mongolia, and Korea). The disease is transmitted by the bites of nymphal or adult Ixodes ticks. The species varies according to the region where the infection is transmitted. In the Eastern and the Midwestern United States, the vector is the Ixodes scapularis tick commonly known as the black-legged or deer tick; whereas in the Western United States, the tick vector is Ixodes pacificus. Other important tick vectors are Ixodes ricinus in West Europe and Ixodes persulcatus in Asia. It is important to point out that Ixodes ticks are commonly coinfected with other organisms and can transmit Lyme disease, Babesia, Ehrlichia, Rickettsia, and Powassan virus.

The reservoir for Anaplasma phagocytophilum includes domestic and wild mammals. In North America, it includes the white-footed mouse, Peromyscus leucopus, whereas in the Eastern United States, the reservoir is the white-tailed deer. Other mammals also identified as reservoirs include squirrels, voles, wood rats, white-tailed deer, red deer, and roe deer. Larval ticks acquire the bacterium after feeding on small mammals which were previously infected by nymphal ticks. After infection, the white-footed mouse develops immunity to the organism which decreases transmission.

A different species, Anaplasma capra, has been detected in Northern China. This organism infects goats, and approximately 6% of individuals with a history of tick bites have evidence of infection detected by PCR studies. These patients presented with a febrile illness, the presence of rash, or an eschar was variable.

Infection can also be transmitted during a blood transfusion. Even though this is a rare form of transmission, the diagnosis should be considered in patients with symptomatic clinical presentation and a history of a blood transfusion.