Spontaneous rupture of the asymptomatic imperforate hymen has previously been reported in 1 day and 1-month-old infants.

Other genital anomalies may be discovered at the presentation. Identification of an imperforate hymen prior to an acute presentation may assist with planned hymenectomy. Ideally, surgery should be deferred until puberty when the vaginal tissue is adequately estrogenized, which promotes wound healing after surgical incision of the hymenal tissue. Treatment options for an imperforate hymen include:

- Hymenectomy using cruciate or annular incisions

- Hymenectomy using electrocautery

- Placement of a 16Fr Foley catheter with 10ml balloon insufflation to preserve hymenal tissue

- Carbon dioxide laser treatment

Purulent vaginal fluid on needle aspiration may be found prior to drainage, which suggests that the hydrometrocolpos may become infected even before surgical intervention.

The traditional method of hymenectomy entails making a cruciate incision (cross-shaped) over the hymenal tissue with excision of the quadrants and approximation of the hymen edges to the vestibule with absorbable sutures. Other methods reported in the literature include hymen-sparing techniques. Annular hymenotomy using electrocautery to perform a circumferential annular (ring-shaped) hymenotomy reported no postoperative hymenal closure or scarred tissue beyond the hymenal contour in 14 patients aged 14.2 +/- 2.2 years at the time of surgery.

The traditional treatment for microperforate hymen includes cruciate hymenectomy.