During inspiration, the diaphragm and the inspiratory intercostal muscles actively contract, leading to the expansion of the thorax. The intrapleural pressure (which is usually -4 mmHg at rest) becomes more subatmospheric or more negative. As a result, the TPP increases, given that TPP is equal to alveolar pressure minus the intrapleural pressure. An increase in TPP during inspiration leads to expansion of the lungs, as the force acting to expand the lungs, i.e., the TPP, is now superior to the inward elastic recoil exerted by the lungs. Expansion of the lungs creates subatmospheric pressure in the alveoli, leading to airflow into the alveoli down the pressure gradient. According to the Boyle law, since the pressure exerted by a stable number of gas molecules at a given temperature is inversely proportional to the volume of a container, the alveolar pressure will decrease when the lungs expand. As long as there is a difference between the TPP and the elastic recoil of the lungs, there is airflow. At the end of inspiration, the more inflated lungs exert a higher elastic recoil due to their size, which equals the increased TPP, at which point equilibrium is re-established, and airflow ceases.

During passive expiration, the diaphragm and inspiratory intercostal muscles cease contracting and relax, resulting in inward recoil of the chest wall and a decrease in the lung size. The intrapleural pressure increases to its baseline value, which decreases the TPP. At this point, the TPP holding the lungs open is smaller than the elastic recoil exerted by the more inflated lungs, resulting in the passive recoil of the lungs to their baseline dimensions. Decreased lung dimensions lead to the alveolar pressure surpassing the atmospheric pressure, as explained by the Boyle law. As a result, air flows from the alveoli to the atmosphere until reaching a new equilibrium between the two pressures.

Expiration of air can also be enhanced by contraction of the abdominal muscles and a separate set of intercostal muscles, which leads to a further decrease in the thoracic volume. When specific abdominal muscles contract, the increased intra-abdominal pressure pushes the diaphragm further into the thoracic cavity, leading to decreased thoracic volumes.