The interprofessional team is crucial in delivering optimum care for a patient with labyrinthitis. Firstly, it is key that primary and secondary care clinicians are well aware of both the signs and symptoms of labyrinthitis and the other common/ serious differential diagnoses. This will ensure that the patient receives prompt and effective management and that potentially life-threatening conditions that can mimic labyrinthitis, such as cerebellar CVA, are not missed.

Both nurses and pharmacists are essential in the initial management of a patient with labyrinthitis and, therefore, must have a good understanding of the condition. For example, nursing staff must be aware that the patient could be at high risk of falls and may need assistance with transfers due to vertigo. They may also take much longer completing tasks and should not be rushed. Pharmacists should advise on the most appropriate medications to help treat the patient's symptoms, e.g., nausea and vertigo. For example, benzodiazepines and antihistamines to manage acute vertigo should only be prescribed short-term as they can hinder vestibular recovery. They should also be aware of medications that can cause symptoms that mimic those of labyrinthitis when taking a drug history, as this is a cause that is occasionally overlooked. Aby concerns regarding the patient's medication regimen, including adverse effects or interactions, should be communicated to the prescribing clinician for remediation. Nurses must likewise assist in monitoring the patient and liaise between various team members. This interprofessional approach will yield the best patient results with the fewest adverse events or outcomes. [Level 5]

Patients can be left with residual vestibular symptoms, which severely impact their quality of life. This is when input from both occupational and physiotherapists is essential. Occupational therapists can perform assessments of the home environment and implement changes to improve patient safety and maintain quality of life. While physiotherapists can offer vestibular rehabilitation. After 1 or 2 sessions of vestibular rehabilitation, symptoms can be significantly improved or may be eliminated.