**Outcomes and Complications of ONSF for PTC/IIH**

Optic nerve sheath fenestration is most commonly performed in the setting of IIH; therefore, most of the data published on postoperative complications and outcomes are in this clinical context. There are a variety of reported complications, most of which are transient and minor. There is no published comparison of outcomes and complications between different ONSF techniques.

In 2017, Kalyvas et al. looked at ONSF efficacy, complications, and the associated costs of surgical procedures for IIH. There were 525 ONSF procedures performed on 341 patients, with an average follow-up time of 42.3 months. The medial approach was performed in 342 eyes, the lateral in 53 eyes, combined in 3 eyes, and superomedial lid incision in 1 eye. They concluded that ONSF could reduce papilledema and improve vision. Disc swelling improved in 95% of patients, visual acuity improved in 67%, and visual fields showed improvement in 64%. However, ONSF was less efficacious in headache relief (41%). Approximately 11% required a second fenestration procedure even after initially improving.

Interestingly, a retrospective chart review published in 2011 by Alsuhaibani et al. showed bilateral improvement of papilledema and vision with unilateral ONSF.

In a 2008 prospective study in India that compared ONSF for papilledema from IIH vs. cerebral venous thrombosis, there was an improvement in 94% of patients in optic disc edema and vision with minimal and transient complications. These complications included tonic pupil (13.4%), diplopia (3.4%), and orbital cellulitis in 1 patient. Visual worsening was found in 2 eyes at 1 month postoperatively that failed to improve despite repeat fenestration.

Fonseca et al. compared ONSF to CSF diversion procedures. They found that CSF shunting was superior to ONSF regarding visual improvement. However, ONSF patients in this study had worse preoperative papilledema and visual acuity. There were no complications reported, but 21% of ONSF patients eventually required CSF shunting.

Additional studies on repeat fenestrations for papilledema also show significant improvement in visual function despite requiring multiple surgeries. There were two studies published in 1991 that looked at repeat ONSF procedures. In Kelman et al., 12 patients required repeated decompression with concurrent functioning lumboperitoneal shunts. All 12 patients showed improvement in visual function without surgical complications.

In general, visual outcomes tend to be worse the longer a nerve has been subjected to elevated perioptic ICP causing irreversible loss of axonal function. The earlier the intervention can be instituted to prevent progressive vision loss, the better.

Although not employed solely for the treatment of headaches, ONSF may reduce headaches in over half of patients with IIH undergoing the procedure.

The most feared and serious complication of ONSF is complete visual loss, which occurs either as a complication of the procedure or therapeutic failure of an uncomplicated fenestration despite improvement of the appearance of the optic nerve. The risk of blindness from ONSF is rare and reportedly 1 to 2% based on a large series study.

Other potential complications of ONSF include the following:

- Conjunctiva and sclera: chemosis, globe perforation, conjunctival bleeding

- Cornea: corneal dellen, corneal ulceration

- Anterior chamber: acute angle-closure glaucoma, microhyphema

- Iris: tonic pupil

- Retina and choroid: branch retinal artery occlusion, central retinal artery occlusion, choroidal ischemia/infarction, chorioretinal scarring

- Optic nerve: optic nerve cysts/pseudomeningoceles, traumatic optic neuropathy

- Posterior ciliary nerve and ciliary ganglion: diplopia, ptosis, mydriasis

- Orbit: orbital apex syndrome, infection, hemorrhage/hematoma

- Extraocular muscles: strabismus, diplopia

Considering that visual loss is a very rare complication and others are relatively minor and transient, ONSF is an attractive option for the treatment of vision loss in PTC/IIH. This is especially true when considering the risks of alternative treatments, such as CSF diversion procedures and bariatric surgery.