**Dosage Formulation**

- Amantadine hydrochloride oral capsules and oral tablets: 100 mg

- Amantadine hydrochloride oral capsule ER 24 Hour: 68.5 mg, 137 mg

- Amantadine hydrochloride oral syrup: 50 mg / 5 mL

- Amantadine hydrochloride oral tablet ER 24 Hour: 129 gm, 193 mg, 258 gm

**FDA Approved**

Amantadine is typically administered orally once daily or in divided doses depending on the indication.

- For the treatment of influenza A, amantadine 200 mg daily or 100 mg twice daily should be administered within 24 to 48 hours after the onset of symptoms and should be continued for 24 to 48 hours after the symptoms have resolved. For prophylaxis, patients should continue treatment for the entirety of the influenza season.

- For the treatment of Parkinson disease, amantadine is also given orally at 100 mg twice daily and increased to 200 mg twice daily as needed. Dosing should begin at 100 mg once daily for patients taking other parkinsonian drugs.

**Non-FDA Approved**

- Huntington chorea: 100 mg orally three to four times daily.

- Multiple sclerosis-related fatigues: 100 mg orally twice daily, increasing to 200 mg twice daily as needed.

- Restless leg syndrome: 100 mg orally daily, increasing to 300 mg per day as needed.

- Traumatic brain injury: 100 mg orally twice daily, increasing to 200 mg twice daily as needed.

**Discontinuation of Therapy**

It is important not to discontinue amantadine abruptly as it can cause neuroleptic malignant syndrome-like symptoms, such as high fever, tachycardia, muscle rigidity, and altered mental status. Instead, reduce the dose by half for one week before discontinuing.

**Patients with Renal Impairment**

The clearance of amantadine greatly diminishes in elderly patients and patients with renal impairment. Therefore, dose modification merits consideration in such cases.****Depending upon Kidney function (creatinine clearance), the following dosage adjustments are recommended.

Creatinine clearance (mL/min/1.73m): Dose for Amantadine hydrochloride IR capsules

- If CrCL 30 to 50 mL/min: 200 mg on 1st day and followed by 100 mg each day after that.

- If CrCL 15 to 29mL/min: 200 mg 1st day and followed by 100 mg on alternate days.

- If CrCL 15 mL/min or lesser: 200 mg every seven days.

- If patients are on hemodialysis: 200 mg every seven days.

**Patients with Hepatic Impairment**

Exercise caution when amantadine is used in patients with liver diseases. There are rare reports on the reversible elevation of AST, ALT, and other liver enzymes in patients using amantadine. Although this relationship is not established, care needs to be taken when used in patients with pre-existing hepatic impairment.

**Pediatric Considerations**

There is a lack of safety and efficacy data on amantadine in infants below the age of one year.

**Geriatric Considerations**

Amantadine is primarily excreted in the urine; it accumulates in the plasma and the body if renal function is declined. Hence the dose of amantadine should be decreased in individuals 65 years of age or older patients or patients with renal impairment. The dose of amantadine may need a reduction in patients with peripheral edema, congestive heart failure, or orthostatic hypotension.