Menkes disease is a fatal disease with death usually occurring between 6 months to 3 years. Treatment outcome depends on the severity of ATP7A gene deletion and residual functioning ATP7A protein. When designing a treatment plan for patients with Menkes kinky hair disease, providers should take into account three basic principles:

- Bypass the block in enteral absorption of copper

- Copper should be made available to the cellular enzymes that need it as a cofactor

- To avoid irreparable neurodegeneration in Menkes kinky hair disease, infants should be identified and treatment must be commenced earlier in life

The goal of the treatment is to provide copper to the copper-dependent enzymes. Early treatment of Menkes disease is essential (ideally within four weeks of life). The copper histidine component has been reported to be the most effective. Oral copper treatment is not effective because it gets trapped in the enterocytes. The subcutaneous or intravenous route is preferred. Neurodegeneration can be effectively reduced in some patients if the treatment is started at less than three weeks of age. Copper-histidine treatment can effectively reverse skin and hair changes, improving appendicular tone, weight gain, and achievement of socio-cognitive milestones. Outcomes also depend on the initiation of treatment and residual functioning ATP7A.

Menkes disease needs multiple specialists in the management of complications. For example, a feeding tube may be given to ensure proper nutrition, a G tube for a patient with significant dysphagia, surgical correction for urological complications, seizure management with multiple antiepileptics. In addition to medical and surgical management, the patient needs extensive physical, occupational, and speech therapies. Orthopedic aids may improve symptoms due to connective tissue problems.

Although replacing copper does not ensure substantial neurologic improvement in all cases of Menkes kinky hair disease, its use leads to modest clinical benefits, such as reduced seizure frequency and decreased irritability.

Damage to the proximal renal tubule is a known complication of copper overload.

Other treatment options that have been studied but still need more evidence to become established management options include the following:

- Vitamin C may help limit copper and metallothionein interaction

- Vitamin E

- Carbamic acid derivative - diethyldithiocarbamate

- Brain-directed viral gene therapy

In Menkes kinky hair disease, there is no heightened anesthetic risk.

- Myringotomy tubes - for chronic otitis media

- Gastrostomy tube - for feeding problems

- Bladder diverticula repair