In the development process of the central nervous system, cholinergic receptors influence neuronal cell growth and survival, cell differentiation, and synapse formation. Nicotinic receptors compose some of the first receptor proteins observed in CNS development. Expression of various nicotinic receptor subtypes in the brain influences cell migration, neuronal outgrowth, and signaling pathways. The varied expression of receptor subtypes can confer different development pathways in the brain. Receptor subtypes may exhibit separate ionic permeability. Receptors that are permeable to Ca++ exhibit a regional variance in activating second messenger systems, stimulating the growth of neuronal progenitor cells or the activation of gene expression through indirect phosphorylation of the cyclic adenosine monophosphate (cAMP) response element-binding protein (CREB).

The nicotinic receptors perform a wide range of functions due to small changes in the overall subunit structure. Furthermore, nicotinic receptors influence the release of multiple neurotransmitters such as dopamine, noradrenaline, acetylcholine, glutamate, and GABA. Similarly, muscarinic receptors display regional specificity within the brain, contributing to development. These receptors have also been shown to play a role in the growth of neuronal cells as well as astrocytes and oligodendrocytes; however, they also exhibit specialized function by mediating the development of spatial memory and long-term potentiation through contributions to neuronal plasticity. Cholinergic receptors play an early and essential role in brain development. The many functions of these receptors in development have long-term implications for dysfunction due to their presence in areas of high neuronal plasticity throughout adulthood, like the hippocampus.