Developmental variations in the azygos system are usually asymptomatic and typically detected during routine examinations. The most documented congenital abnormalities include an azygos lobe of the right lung, agenesis of the azygos vein, azygos continuation of the IVC, and partial venous return.

Azygos Lobe of Right Lung

Incomplete medial migration of the right posterior cardinal vein gives rise to an azygos lobe of the right lung. This anomaly is easily identifiable on CT scans. The scan would show the azygos vein more lateral than the usual anterior arching before entering the SVC or right brachiocephalic vein. This lateral positioning of the azygos arch leads to the intrusion of the lung farther into the pretracheal and retro-tracheal mediastinum.

Agenesis of the azygos vein

Agenesis of the azygos vein is the result of the failed development of the superior segment of the right supracardinal vein. This variant is typically asymptomatic because the hemiazygos and accessory hemiazygos veins ensure the draining of the right and left posterior intercostal veins.

Azygos continuation with the IVC

Azygos continuation with the IVC results from the congenital interruption of the IVC; this occurs due to the failure of the union between right subcardinal veins and the hepatic veins. Failure of development of the right subcardinal vein, which is the precursor of the prerenal segment of the IVC, prevents the IVC from developing.  Identification of this vascular anomaly is necessary before surgical procedures involving the azygos vein.

Azygos continuation can be suspected on a chest X-ray if the radiograph shows a focal enlargement of the right paratracheal stripe above the right mainstem bronchus. A CT scan can be useful to confirm enlargement of the azygos vein and azygos arch. A CT scan would discover an absence in the intrahepatic portion of the IVC. Azygos continuation is typically identified in otherwise asymptomatic patients but can also be associated with severe congenital heart disease, asplenia, or polysplenia syndromes.