**Liquefactive Necrosis**

Three major factors contribute to liquefactive necrosis:

- Enzymatic digestion of cellular debris in dead or dying tissues.

- Enzymatic digestion of surrounding tissues.

- Denaturation of cellular proteins.

Because infectious agents are rich in digestive enzymes and likely to elicit an inflammatory response, they can bring about the process of cellular digestion rapidly. This manifests as liquefactive necrosis. Cellular dissolution and digestion are brought about by several enzymes some from the infecting organism and some from the lysosome of the dying cells.

Enzymes involved in liquefaction includes:

- Proteases (Collagenases, elastases),

- DNases

- Lysosomal enzymes

**Coagulative Necrosis**

A major difference between liquefactive and coagulative necrosis is the fact that in liquefactive necrosis, the enzyme system of the necrotic tissue is intact and can commence the process of cellular digestion almost immediately via autolysis. In addition to self-digestion (autolysis), heterolysis occurs as a result of a release of enzymes and inflammatory cells from the invading organism.

In coagulative necrosis, cellular digestion is principally dependent on heterolysis since a hypoxic injury would have damaged the enzymes of the cell undergoing ischemic necrosis. This partly explains the late onset of digestion and removal of dead tissues in this type of necrosis.

**Caseous Necrosis**

This pattern is almost unique to tuberculosis. Certain fungi can also exhibit caseous necrosis. In tuberculosis, the organism is partially resistant to digestion and phagocytosis by tissue macrophages, and this leads to activation of the macrophages to form giant cells and epithelioid cells. This sets off several steps which lead to recruitment of more macrophages and inflammatory cells and production of cytokines and slow degradation of the mycobacteria. Mycolic acid and other lipid constituent of the mycobacteria cell wall confers a characteristic "cheese-like" appearance on the tubercle of tuberculosis hence the descriptive term,"caseous."

**Fat Necrosis**

The release of lipases and amylases from the pancreatic cells is the major trigger for fat necrosis in the pancreas. This processed is usually triggered by several factors leading to inflammation of the pancreas, otherwise known as pancreatitis. Causes of acute pancreatitis include alcohol, gall bladder stones, poisoning, and insect bites. Since fat necrosis in the pancreas is triggered by an inadvertent release of enzymes, this process is also referred to as enzymatic fat necrosis. Breast tissues can also give rise to fat necrosis. The trigger for this is usually trauma.

**Fibrinoid Necrosis**

This is a pattern which not grossly discernible but can be seen microscopically. Fibrinoid necrosis is a pattern of cell death characterized by endothelial damage and exudation of plasma proteins (especially fibrin).

**Gangrenous Necrosis**

See description in the introduction above. Not a true pathological type, rather, it is a clinical term describing coagulative necrosis (dry gangrene) or sometimes liquefactive necrosis (wet gangrene) affecting the extremities.