**Bridging Anticoagulation**

Perioperative and periprocedural anticoagulation management is a constant clinical dilemma for providers. Estimation of the risk of thromboembolism, bleeding, and timing of anticoagulation should be considered for patients undergoing elective procedures. Bridging anticoagulation, most commonly with low molecular weight heparin, should be considered in cases with considerable risk of thromboembolic events. For patients with low risk, bridging anticoagulation is not indicated. However, for patients with significant risk, bridging anticoagulation is indicated.

**Initiating Anticoagulation Treatment with Warfarin**

- Nonvalvular Atrial Fibrillation: No bridging with heparin product is indicated when initiating therapy with warfarin for patients with uncomplicated nonvalvular atrial fibrillation. Bridging anticoagulation is not recommended for patients at low or moderate risk for thromboembolism.

- Mechanical Heart Valve: Bridging with heparin is indicated for patients with a mechanical heart valve.

- Recent Venous Thromboembolism (VTE) or Active Arterial Thromboembolism (TE): Bridging anticoagulation with a heparin product is indicated when initiating treatment for recent pulmonary emboli

- Coronary stenting within 12 weeks

**Bridging Overlap**

Therapeutic doses of the direct oral anticoagulants are achieved within two to three hours of initiating treatment, and bridging therapy with heparin may be discontinued.

For oral Vitamin K antagonists, bridging overlap may last for up to 4 to 5 days before achieving a therapeutic level.