The classification of the hypospadias has changed throughout time. The classification most commonly used, divides hypospadias as follows: distal, midshaft, proximal.

- Distal hypospadias is the most common (60% to 70%). It is also called anterior or minor and includes glandular and sub-coronal hypospadias.

- Midshaft hypospadias, also called penile, includes distal, midshaft and proximal hypospadias.

- Posterior hypospadias includes peno-scrotal, scrotal, and perineal hypospadias.

Despite the location of the meatus, patients may have a hooded foreskin, which is described as abundant foreskin in the dorsal aspect of the penis and absent or scant in the ventral surface of the penis.

In mild hypospadias, the urinary stream is usually not affected, but in more severe forms, the meatus may be narrowed, and the angle of the stream may be angled downward. Patients with abnormal angulation of the penis may have painful erections, compromised fertility with abnormal ejaculation, and in some cases inability of penetration during intercourse.

Hypospadias in most patients present as an isolated malformation, but in some cases, it can present with additional genito-urinary malformations. The most common malformation associated with proximal hypospadias is cryptorchidism (8% to 10% of cases), and inguinal hernias (9% to 15%). Other genito-urinary abnormalities such as vesicoureteral reflux, ureteropelvic junction obstruction, pelvic or horseshoe kidney, crossed renal ectopia, and renal agenesis is most commonly seen in proximal hypospadias but may be seen in a small percentage of the patients affected with distal hypospadias.

Hypospadias is an associated finding in up to 200 different syndromes. These syndromes include WAGR syndrome or complex (Wilms tumor, aniridia, genitourinary anomalies, a range of intellectual abilities), Denys-Drash, Smith-Lemli-Opitz, Wolff-Hirschhorn, CHARGE (coloboma, heart defect, atresia choanae, retarded growth, genital anomalies, ear abnormalities).