The management of an AEF is based on rapid diagnosis and aggressive surgical intervention. Initial hemodynamic support with ongoing resuscitation is necessary to best temporize the patient for the operating theater. At the time of AEF diagnosis, blood cultures should be drawn, and broad-spectrum antibiotics initiated to be narrowed following specific microbial growth.

Surgical management is completed either through a traditional invasive open approach in the form of a laparotomy with or without thoracotomy or via a less invasive endovascular repair of the aorta (EVAR). Each methodology is associated with its own benefits and drawbacks, which are discussed briefly here.

In patients that can tolerate the increased physiologic demand, open surgery is associated with a lower rate of sepsis and ongoing infection postoperatively. In one study, open surgery was associated with a 19% rate of late sepsis in two years of follow up while endovascular repair was associated with a significantly higher rate of sepsis at a rate of 42%.

However, open surgery does have some significant limitations. In one review analysis, open surgery produced an in-hospital mortality rate of 33.9% compared to just 7% with EVAR.

Therefore, in the setting of primary AEF without signs of infection, endovascular repair should be sought primarily. In secondary disease or those with infection, endovascular repair represents a suitable bridging therapy to stabilize the critically ill patient or those who lack the necessary physiologic reserve for open surgery.

Prevention cannot be overstated. A one-time screening ultrasound of the aorta has been recommended for all male patients age 65 to 75 who have ever smoked in their lives by the United States Preventive Services Task Force (USPSTF).

Following the survival of an AEF repair, patients must undergo regular aortic screening examinations for the rest of their lives.