A surgical error is an unintentional, preventable injury occurring in the perioperative period that is not considered a known acceptable risk of surgery and could have been avoided by following appropriate procedure-specific training protocols. Surgical errors are a type of medical error and include retained foreign bodies, mislabeled surgical specimens, and wrong-site, wrong-procedure, and wrong-patient errors (WSPEs). An analysis of these errors over the last few decades has revealed their cause is often multifactorial. However, miscommunication, unnecessary or emergent procedures, insufficient training, and provider burnout represent common causes of surgical error.

Medical errors pose a substantial challenge to public health. The significance of medical errors first came to light in 1999. The Institute of Medicine published a report demonstrating nearly 100,000 deaths annually due to medical errors.

**Medical Error**

A medical error is defined as an unintentional act, either by omission, where an action is not taken, or commission, where the wrong action is taken. Medical errors may or may not be directly linked to adverse patient outcomes.

**Adverse Event**

An adverse event is a preventable or unpreventable injury directly caused by medical management and unrelated to any underlying medical condition of the patient. The injury sustained due to the adverse event does not meet the standard of a sentinel event.

**Negligence**

Negligence is medical care that fails to meet the standard of care as defined by the care provided by a reasonable clinician sharing similar specialty training, knowledge, and experience.

**Near Miss**

A near miss is an unplanned event that almost occurred and had the potential to result in patient harm. A near-miss analysis enables healthcare systems to identify and modify protocols before patient harm occurs.

**Never Event**

A never event, commonly referred to as a "serious reportable event," is an error in healthcare delivery that is easily identifiable and preventable and results in severe consequences to the patient. Never events identify issues in the care provided and the credibility of a healthcare facility.

**Sentinel Event**

A sentinel event is an unexpected event, including loss of limb or death, that leads directly to severe psychological or physical harm. This type of medical error requires immediate investigation. Sentinel events include WSPEs, post-surgical and post-procedural retained foreign bodies, administration of incompatible blood products resulting in a hemolytic transfusion reaction, and treatment-related errors resulting in death, such as incorrect medication administration.

**Root Cause**

The root cause is defined as the fundamental cause for the occurrence of an undesired outcome. Common root causes of sentinel events include but are not limited to human factors and poor communication and leadership.