**Treatment and Management of Capgras Syndrome**

Generally, delusional disorders are challenging due to poor patient insight. Lack of empirical data poses a significant challenge to manage Capgras syndrome patients effectively.

**Counseling Patient and Family Education**

Due to the risk of violence meted on the misidentified person, it is crucial to assist CS patients' caregivers by utilizing communication techniques, counseling, medications, and reasonable problem-solving skills. Caregivers' feelings must be taken into consideration to reassure them. Better auditory interaction is advocated. Such communication is aimed primarily to circumvent CS patient's difficulty connecting with caregivers through face-to-face encounters. The caregiver needs to announce themselves and communicate clearly while out of sight to establish better emotional ties. The caregiver should self-evaluate to recognize gaps and strengths in managing the patients' condition while also relying on other family, friends, and relatives.

**Prognosis and Complications of Capgras Syndrome**

The onset of the Capgras syndrome can occur concurrently or later than the initiation of the comorbid psychosis. A study following 20 CS patients found the resolution of Capgras Syndrome symptoms after remission of the depressive disorder. The CS symptoms were more persistent in the schizophrenia patients that present with psychosis. If the onset of CS coincides with psychosis, the reappearance of the psychotic condition may return the CS symptoms.

CS symptoms may result in intrapersonal and interpersonal conflicts, along with poor social relationships. An individual with this kind of disorder is prone to self-harm and violence. There are also implications for the patient's family, as the stress on the caregiver and stigma-related stressors could further compound the issue.