Patients with acute anal fissures present with complaints of anal pain that is worse during defecation. At times, there is associated bleeding with bowel movements but usually not frank hemorrhage. The pain usually persists for hours after defecation. Often, acute anal fissures may be misdiagnosed as external or internal hemorrhoids. Therefore, a thorough physical exam should be performed to delineate between the two. Patients with chronic anal fissures will have a history of painful defecation with or without rectal bleeding that has been ongoing for several months to possibly years. Associated constipation is the most common factor involving chronic anal fissures, and patients will provide a longstanding history of hard stools. Patients with underlying granulomatous diseases such as Crohn disease, among others, will sometimes provide a history of chronic anal pain during defecation that is intermittent rather than constant over an extended period.

The physical exam of the patient with an anal fissure should involve the most comfortable position for the patient. Literature suggests the best position is the prone jackknife position where the patient lies prone, and the bed is folded so that the patient is flexed at the hips. The bed typically used to achieve this position is usually in an operating room or procedure room. Therefore, the best way to achieve this position in the acute care or office setting would be to have the patient bend over the exam table. However, many times, an adequate physical exam can be achieved by having the patient in a lateral decubitus position. It is imperative that physical manipulation of the anus or rectum via digital exam should be kept to a minimum, and instrumentation such as anoscopy should never be used.

An anal fissure will appear as a superficial laceration in the acute presentation, usually, longitudinal extending proximally. Bleeding may or may not be present. The fissure and sometimes the entire anal sphincter may be extremely tender to palpation. In thin patients, this laceration is usually easily identified; however, in obese patients, it may not be as identifiable. In an obese patient, gently pressing on the anterior or posterior anal sphincter may reproduce the pain, and a diagnosis can be made.

In chronic anal fissure, there may be a tear large and deep enough to expose the muscular fibers of the anal sphincter. Also, due to the repeated injury and healing cycle, the edges sometimes appear raised, and thickening of tissue at the distal ends of the tears may be present, which is called a sentinel pile. Granulation tissue may or may not be present, depending on the chronicity and the stage of healing.