# Introduction

The dermis is a connective tissue layer sandwiched between the epidermis and subcutaneous tissue. The dermis is a fibrous structure composed of collagen, elastic tissue, and other extracellular components that includes vasculature, nerve endings, hair follicles, and glands. The role of the dermis is to support and protect the skin and deeper layers, assist in thermoregulation, and aid in sensation. Fibroblasts are the primary cells within the dermis, but histiocytes, mast cells, and adipocytes also play important roles in maintaining the normal structure and function of the dermis.

# Structure

The dermis is a connective tissue layer of mesenchymal origin located deep to the epidermis and superficial to the subcutaneous fat layer.

The dermis is divided into two layers: the papillary dermis and the reticular dermis. The papillary dermis is the superficial layer, lying deep to the epidermis. The papillary dermis is composed of loose connective tissue that is highly vascular. The reticular layer is the deep layer, forming a thick layer of dense connective tissue that constitutes the bulk of the dermis.

Collagen is the principal component of the dermis. Specifically, type I and type III collagen are found in abundance. Elastic fibers also play an important structural role within the dermis. Elastic fibers are composed of elastin and fibrillin microfibrils. In contrast to collagen, the biochemical configuration of elastin allows for gliding, stretching, and recoiling of fibers.

The dermis houses blood vessels, nerve endings, hair follicles, and glands. There are many cell types found within the connective tissue of the dermis, including fibroblasts, macrophages, adipocytes, mast cells, Schwann cells, and stem cells.

# Function

**Skin Support and Protection**

The structure of the dermis provides a connective tissue framework for strength, flexibility, and protection of the deeper anatomical structures. Collagen and extracellular components like hyaluronic acid fortify the skin and facilitate an anchor for the epidermis via hemidesmosomes and other adhesive basement membrane zone (BMZ) components.

**Thermoregulation**

Vasoactive dermal vessels regulate body temperature. Specialized structures called glomus bodies also take part in thermoregulation through AV shunt formation.

**Sensation**

Several mechanoreceptors are present in the dermis. Nerve endings in the dermis surround hair follicles. These nerve endings sense hair movement and act as mechanoreceptors allowing sensation to extend beyond the skin's surface. Deep pressure receptors also exist. Pacinian corpuscles are large, lamellar, ovoid structures found in the deep dermis and they provide deep pressure and vibratory sensation. Meissner's corpuscles, located in the dermal papillae of the papillary dermis, respond to low-frequency stimuli. Meissner's corpuscles are concentrated in glabrous (hairless) skin.

**Cells of the Dermis and Their Function**

The dermis contains many cell types. Fibroblasts, the principal cell of the dermis, handle the synthesis of collagen, elastic and reticular fibers, and extracellular matrix material. Histiocytes are tissue macrophages present within the connective tissue that assist the immune system. Mast cells are inflammatory cells located in the perivascular areas of the dermis. Mast cells secrete vasoactive and proinflammatory mediators important in inflammatory reactions, collagen remodeling, and wound healing.

# Tissue Preparation

The dermis is examined using a standard skin biopsy. The tissue sample should first be fixated with formalin to preserve tissue structure. After fixation, the specimen is dehydrated with an alcohol (e.g., ethanol) to remove water. The alcohol agent is then cleared using xylol. After, the tissue sample is embedded in paraffin. After hardening of the paraffin medium, a microtome slices the specimen. The tissue specimen may be stained according to hematoxylin and eosin (H&E) staining protocols.

# Histochemistry and Cytochemistry

Immunofluorescence of tissue samples is an important diagnostic tool in autoimmune blistering diseases such as bullous pemphigoid and dermatitis herpetiformis. For example, linear deposition of immunoglobulin G (IgG) and complement (C3) along the dermoepidermal junction is characteristic of bullous pemphigoid. Granular deposits of IgA in the dermal papillae is characteristic of dermatitis herpetiformis.

# Microscopy, Light

Light microscopic analysis of H&E-stained samples delineates the epidermis, dermis, and subcutaneous adipose. The epidermis is easily visualized due to the presence of basophilic keratinocytes. Scanning across the tissue sample, one can appreciate the alternating dermal papillae and rete ridges. Dermal papillae are the protrusions of dermal connective tissue into the epidermal layer. Rete ridges are the extensions of epidermis into the dermal layer. This undulating pattern is more apparent in thick skin of the hands and palms. There is no clear line of distinction between the papillary and reticular dermis. Collagen patterns are mostly horizontal throughout. The superficial papillary dermis possesses thinner elastic fibers compared to the thicker elastic fibers of the reticular dermis. The papillary dermis is composed of loose connective tissue (LCT) and is highly vascular. The reticular dermis shows thick collagen bundles and forms the bulk of the dermal layer.

Hair follicles, glands, and ducts can be seen throughout the epidermis, dermis, and hypodermis. Higher magnification view can further distinguish sebaceous, apocrine, and eccrine sweat glands. Meissner's corpuscles and Pacinian corpuscles can also be distinguished upon light microscopy. Pacinian corpuscles in the deep dermis or hypodermis have an onion-like appearance on cross-sectional views. Meissner corpuscles are seen in the dermal papillae as oblong structures with neurons in a spiral orientation surrounded by a fibrous capsule.

Polarizing light microscopy is useful in the diagnosis of depositional diseases such as amyloidosis and gout. Tissue samples, stained with Congo red dye, may be examined under polarized light, producing a characteristic apple-green birefringence of protein deposits in amyloidosis.

# Microscopy, Electron

Electron microscopy (EM) can be used to visualize the ultrastructural features of the skin. Most importantly, EM has been used to visualize the basement membrane zone of the dermoepidermal junction. EM shows ultrastructural components of hemidesmosomes, the lamina lucida (LL), the lamina densa (LD), and various anchoring fibrils.

# Pathophysiology

There are numerous diseases that affect the skin. The following discussion describes some common and uncommon diseases that affect the dermis. This discussion is not all-inclusive but demonstrates the importance of understanding the normal structure and function of the

Genetic diseases can affect dermal structure and function. Ehlers-Danlos syndrome is a group of genetic connective tissue disorders caused by various mutations in collagen. The mutations in dermal collagen result in skin hypermobility and fragility. Osteogenesis imperfecta is a genetic disorder of type I collagen causing decreased dermal collagen and impaired skin elasticity. FBN1 gene encoding fibrillin-1 protein. While skin complaints are not required for diagnosis, patients are prone to the development of striae distensae (stretch marks) due to rapid growth phases in adolescence.

Cushing's syndrome, chronic glucocorticoid use, and pregnancy are other conditions causing striae distensae. Glucocorticoids inhibit fibroblasts, thus disrupting the synthesis of collagen and ECM material. Histology of striae distensae reveals flattening of the epidermis with loss of rete ridges and changes in the architecture of collagen bundles coupled with elastin degeneration throughout the dermis.

The overactivity of fibroblasts have been implicated in many skin-related diseases. Myofibroblasts, expressing alpha-smooth muscle actin (a-SMA), have been implicated in both hypertrophic scars and keloids.

Aging and chronic sun exposure can weaken the dermis. Solar elastosis is due to chronic ultraviolet (UV) radiation exposure, resulting in damage to elastic fibers. Histology reveals basophilic degeneration of elastic fibers in the dermis.

Urticaria is an inflammatory dermatosis characterized by vascular hyperpermeability, causing superficial dermal edema with resultant lymphatic dilation. The pathogenesis of urticaria often involves degranulation of mast cells and IgE-dependent pathways but is not true for all cases.Mycobacterium leprae infects Schwann cells of peripheral nerves leading to diminished or absent cutaneous sensation in leprosy.

Burns and ulcers are important to consider as the depth of burn or wound involvement affects patient diagnosis and management. Partial-thickness burns, also known as second-degree burns, destroy the epidermis and extend into the dermis.

# Clinical Significance

The clinical significance of the microanatomy and function of the dermis is a broad and complex topic. Below is a brief list of diseases that involve the dermis. Please note many of these diseases can affect other cutaneous layers and organs of the body. Understanding the normal anatomy and physiology of the dermis is paramount in mastering the cutaneous manifestations of the diseases listed below.

**Structural Disorders**

- Structural disorders of the dermis include inherited and acquired diseases of collagen, elastic tissue, and fibroblasts.

- Solar elastosis
- Actinic, or senile, purpura
- Striae
- Scars, hypertrophic scars, and keloids
- Burns or wounds (e.g., puncture or laceration)
- Dermatofibroma and dermatofibrosarcoma protuberans
- Morphea
- Nephrogenic systemic fibrosis
- Genetic diseases (e.g., Ehlers-Danlos syndrome, osteogenesis imperfecta, and Marfan's syndrome)

**Inflammatory and Autoimmune Disorders**

- Autoimmune blistering diseases (e.g., dermatitis herpetiformis)

- Drug eruption

- Granulomatous disease (e.g., sarcoidosis, granuloma annulare, mycobacterial infections)

- Lichen sclerosis

- Leukemia cutis

- Mastocytosis (e.g., urticaria pigmentosa)

- Polymorphous light eruption

- Sweet syndrome

- Urticaria and eczematous dermatitis

**Depositional Disorders**

- Cutaneous depositional diseases involve the deposition of endogenous or exogenous substances in the dermis or subcutaneous tissue.
- Amyloidosis (protein)
- Calcinosis cutis (calcium)
- Gout (uric acid)
- Myxedema (mucopolysaccharides)
- Xanthoma/xanthelasma (cholesterol)