Promethazine contraindications include patients with hypersensitivity to the drug, any drug components, or other phenothiazines. It is contraindicated in children under two years of age due to the risk of potentially fatal respiratory depression. Promethazine is contraindicated for subcutaneous or intra-arterial administration due to the risk of tissue damage. Contraindications also include comatose patients and patients with lower respiratory tract symptoms.

**Precautions/Warnings**

**Seizures:**Promethazine should be used with caution in patients with seizure disorders or in persons taking concomitant medications, which may also lower seizure threshold (i.e., narcotics, local anesthetics, etc.)

**Bone-Marrow Depression**: Promethazine should be used cautiously in patients with bone marrow depression (Leukopenia and agranulocytosis). The risk is higher when it is coadministered with other known marrow-toxic agents.

**Neuroleptic Malignant Syndrome:**A potentially fatal NMS is reported in patients using promethazine alone or combined with other antipsychotic drugs. Clinical symptoms of NMS are hyperpyrexia, altered mental status, muscle rigidity, and autonomic instability (i.e., diaphoresis, irregular heartbeats or blood pressure, tachycardia, and cardiac dysrhythmias). The diagnostic evaluation of patients with NMS is complicated. It is important to identify patients when the clinical presentation includes untreated or inadequately treated EPS and serious medical conditions (e.g., pneumonia, systemic infection, etc.).

**Drug Interactions**

**Central-Nervous-System Depressants:**Promethazine may intensify, increase, or prolong the sedative action of other CNS depressants, such as tricyclic antidepressants, sedatives/hypnotics, narcotics, narcotic analgesics, alcohol, general anesthetics, and tranquilizers; therefore, those medicines should be avoided or administered in a lower dosage to patients taking promethazine concomitantly. When promethazine is concomitantly administered, the dose of barbiturates should be reduced by at least 50%, and narcotics by 25% to 50%. Dosage must be individualized according to the patient's clinical presentation. High amounts of promethazine relative to narcotics may lead to motor hyperactivity and restlessness in the patient with pain, and these symptoms normally disappear with adequate pain management.

**Anticholinergics:**Concomitant use of other medicines with anticholinergic properties should be done with caution.

**Monoamine Oxidase Inhibitors (MAOI):**Concomitant use can result in drug interactions, including an increased incidence of EPS.

**Drug/Laboratory Test Interactions:**Some laboratory tests may be altered in patients receiving promethazine therapy. Diagnostic pregnancy test results based on immunological reactions of HCG and anti-HCG could result in false-positive or false-negative interpretations. Also, a glucose tolerance test may report falsely elevated blood glucose levels in patients receiving promethazine.