The choice of orbital fracture treatment depends on findings following a clinical examination. Indications for surgery vary among different countries; but, there is a consensus about several indications for surgery.

However, considerable differences in opinion may exist regarding the management of blowout fracture due to a lack of a reliable consensus. Nonetheless, early surgical intervention (preferably within 24 hours)  is necessary when other injuries threaten the eye, such as nerve incarceration, acute enophthalmos or hypoglobus, and limitation of gaze caused by extraocular muscle or periorbital tissue entrapment. Many clinicians have recommended that orbital volume increases be treated as an indication for early reconstructive surgery. However, the increased post-traumatic orbital volume is not particularly useful in predicting late enophthalmos or diplopia.

- Entrapment of muscle or periorbital fat leads to diplopia and/or the initiation of the oculocardiac reflex with bradycardia, nausea, and vomiting. These can be life-threatening and indicate a need for immediate surgery.

- Retrobulbar hematoma with a progressive loss in visual acuity

- Enophthalmos (more than 2 mm) on first clinical examination

In general, surgery should be undertaken within 14 days to prevent fibrosis. Most surgeons wait 24-72 hours to allow the edema to subside before undertaking surgery. If the patient's only complaint is infraorbital nerve dysfunction, then the decision to repair requires judgment and experience. Some surgeons report good results with an early repair.  Children with orbital fracture and oculomotor dysfunction tend to have a more favorable outcome if the repair is done within the first 7 days.

Relative indications for surgery are high-risk fractures for enophthalmos, which involve over one-half of the orbital floor or lateral orbital wall.

Use an observation with possible intervention within 1 to 2 weeks in all other cases of confirmed orbital floor fractures.

Patients with fractures where the orbital floor fragments are not displaced, and the orbital volume remains unchanged can be addressed without any surgical intervention.

The goal of surgery is to restore herniated structures into the orbital cavity. The surgery may be done via a transconjunctival or transmaxillary approach. Today there are endoscopic techniques to manage orbital fracture. Several types of implants are also available for reconstruction of the orbit, but these should be avoided in the presence of an obvious infection. Prior to any procedure, the patient's visual acuity, extraocular motor function, diplopia, degree of enophthalmos, and dysesthesia should be documented. During surgery, the function of the pupil must be serially assessed. The anesthesiologist should be told to avoid medications that cause pupillary constriction or dilatation. When manipulating the extraocular muscles, the anesthesiologist should be warned about bradycardia secondary to the oculocardiac reflex.

Relative contraindications for surgery, according to Kim et al., include the following conditions:

- Hyphema

- Retinal tears

- Globe perforation

- Medical instability

Begin prophylactic antibiotic treatment for oral organisms in all types of fractures of the orbit.

Corticosteroids may help reduce the edema in some cases. At the same time, the patient should be discouraged from blowing the nose or performing a Valsalva maneuver because this may worsen the orbital emphysema.