Treat supportively for mild injuries such as sinus squeeze, middle ear squeeze. Use NSAIDs, decongestants, or analgesics as needed. Mild middle ear disease may be treated with topical or systemic steroids and topical or systemic decongestants. For tympanic membrane (TM) rupture, prescribe oral amoxicillin/clavulanate and fluoroquinolone ear drops. Suppurative otorrhea should be treated with antibiotics. Otolaryngology referral is also warranted for TM ruptures. They may also be consulted to drain affected sinuses, to evaluate persistent tinnitus or vertigo, and to evaluate sensorineural hearing loss. Perilymph leaks in inner ear trauma may be surgically corrected by patching of the round or oval window. A delayed dental referral would be appropriate for specific dental injuries. Dental abscesses should be started on antibiotics. An acute gastrointestinal rupture would present as an acute abdomen, most likely in shock. Early sepsis must be treated immediately, and urgent surgical consultation obtained, with direction toward prompt exploration. Most pulmonary barotrauma can be treated conservatively with rest and oxygen as needed. High flow 100% oxygen hastens the absorption of subcutaneous, mediastinal, and pericardial nitrogen, thereby shrinking the emphysematous tissue. The exception is pneumothorax with often requires decompression (needle, pigtail, or chest tube). Tension pneumothorax must be decompressed promptly. Chest thoracostomy tube drainage should be employed for any patient with pneumothorax and arterial gas embolism. Recompression in a hyperbaric chamber (see below) would allow an otherwise (needle) reduced pneumothorax to expand. Any diver with arterial gas emboli should be expeditiously transferred to a center with a hyperbaric chamber. The transfer should be utilizing high flow oxygen. Recompression with high ambient pressure oxygen shrinks the size of gas bubble emboli, and also, by establishing a high nitrogen gradient between gas emboli and the blood, absorbs the emboli. A standard chamber protocol is rapid recompression to 6 Atm of air for thirty minutes and then continued recompression with 100% oxygen at 2.8 Atm for 30 minutes. Pulmonary barotrauma was the most common complication of mechanical ventilation, but modern strategies have mitigated the incidence of ventilator-associated ARDS by limiting tidal volume (6 to 8 mL/kg) and plateau pressure to less than 30 to 50 cm. As an indicator of trans alveolar pressure, which predicts alveolar distention, plateau pressure is the best predictor of risk, but there is no accepted safe pressure at which there is no risk.  Aspiration of stomach contents and pre-existing diseases such as pneumonia and chronic lung disease also increase risk.