The mechanisms that cause watery eyes can be simplified as follows:

- Overproduction due to abnormal stimulation of the lacrimal gland: primary hypersecretion (rare) or reflex tearing

- Dysfunctional distribution of tears through the ocular surface

- Inadequate drainage is caused by an obstruction in any part of the lacrimal drainage system

The tear film is divided into three layers:

- Inner mucin: produced by the conjunctival goblet cells, adheres to the aqueous layer on the eye surface.

- Middle aqueous: secreted by the autonomically innervated lacrimal gland and the accessory glands of Krause and Wolfring.

- Outer lipid layer: produced by the meibomian and Zeiss glands - it reduces the evaporation of the aqueous layer.

Any problems affecting any of these glands alter the correct composition of the tear film, which causes compensatory reflex hypersecretion.

In cases where the neurosensory receptors from the trigeminal nerve in the cornea and conjunctiva are stimulated (i.e., neuralgia, conjunctival disease, corneal disease, ocular inflammation, or eyelid inflammation), there is increased lacrimal gland secretion (reflex tearing). In addition, mechanical wiping of the tears can irritate the conjunctiva further, which causes reflex tearing and perpetuates the cycle.

Eyelid movement must also be normal to facilitate proper tear film circulation across the conjunctiva and corneal surface. Thus, the upper eyelid should move downwards, touching the inferior eyelid with each blink and consequently picking up the tear meniscus for its distribution vertically. Moreover, the orbicularis muscle (pretarsal and preseptal segments) should contract its fibers narrowing the palpebral fissure to spread the tear film toward the punctum. As a result, this blink circle facilitates tears circulation from the punctum through the lacrimal sac and down to the nasolacrimal duct.

Once the tears enter the upper and lower puncta, they flow into a vertical portion before entering the horizontal part of the canaliculi that ends at the lacrimal sac in the lacrimal fossa. The tears then flow down the nasolacrimal duct to end at the inferior meatus of the nose.

An abnormality partially or completely blocking anywhere along this path usually causes epiphora. This epiphora not only depends on how complete the obstruction is but also on how many tears are produced. Therefore, younger patients may be more symptomatic than older patients as tear production decreases with age.