**Gastroesophageal Reflux Disease (GERD)**- A common digestive disorder in the western world, the characteristic presentation of GERD shows the retrograde movement of gastric contents across the LES into the esophagus. Predisposing factors for GERD include an incompetent LES, hiatal hernia, a short intraabdominal esophagus, diaphragmatic crura or phrenoesophageal ligament weakness, and elevated intraabdominal pressure. The most common symptoms reported by patients are heartburn and regurgitation. Less common symptoms include cough, hoarseness, and chest pain.

Esophageal pH monitoring is the gold standard for diagnosing GERD, but barium studies and endoscopy can also play a role in evaluating for hiatal hernia and Barrett metaplasia. Medical treatment is often preferable as behavioral modification and acid-reducing medications (PPIs, H2-antagonists) are effective in many cases. Surgery is an option for patients who fail conservative management to restore length to the intraabdominal esophagus, close the crura of the diaphragm, and reinforce the LES via fundoplication.

Complications of GERD include stricture formation and Barrett metaplasia. Intestinal metaplasia can predispose patients to dysplasia and adenocarcinoma of the esophagus.

**Achalasia**- A rare esophageal disorder caused by denervation of the myenteric (Auerbach) plexus, leading to failure of LES relaxation and loss of esophageal peristalsis. Patients typically complain of dysphagia progressing from solids to liquids, regurgitation, and possibly a foreign body sensation of the lower esophagus. Barium swallow reveals narrowing of the LES and proximal dilation of the esophagus ('bird beak' appearance). Esophageal manometry reveals a failure of LES relaxation and the absence of normal esophageal peristalsis. Endoscopy is necessary to rule out distal obstruction (pseudoachalasia). While conservative treatment with oral nitrates and calcium-channel blockers has been attempted, they are minimally effective.

Endoscopic treatment options include balloon dilation of the LES, botox injections, and peroral endoscopic myotomy (POEM). Balloon dilations and botox injections are effective in the short-term but require repeat treatments. Repetitive dilations increase the risk of esophageal perforation. POEM involves submucosal tunneling with circular myotomy of the LES and increases the risk for GERD as the LES is rendered incompetent. Surgical management with Heller myotomy is possible via open or laparoscopic techniques and includes fundoplication to prevent reflux.

**Hiatal hernia**- Herniation of the esophagus, stomach, or other structures through the esophageal hiatus of the diaphragm. There are four types:

- Type I - also known as sliding hiatal hernias, involves the gastroesophageal junction (GEJ) and LES retracting superiorly above the diaphragm. This is the most common type and frequently occurs with laxity of the phrenoesophageal ligament. Intermittent loss of tension from the diaphragmatic crura predisposes these patients to GERD.

Types II-IV are all forms of paraesophageal hernias, which involves herniation of the stomach through the esophageal hiatus.

- Type II - purely paraesophageal, with the GEJ remaining in place

- Type III - mixed sliding-paraesophageal hernia

- Type IV - paraesophageal hernia with herniation of another GI organ (commonly the colon or spleen) through the hiatus

Paraesophageal hernias increase the risk of stomach entrapment, with subsequent ischemia and infarction. Diagnosis can be suggested by an abdominal X-ray, with the finding of an air-fluid level above the diaphragm, but it is confirmed with a contrast upper GI study.

Treatment of asymptomatic sliding hernias often consists of conservative management, while symptomatic cases are treated surgically similarly to GERD. Asymptomatic paraesophageal hernias are controversial, with some advocating for surgical repair to remove the risk of incarceration. In contrast, others argue that this complication is rare and watchful waiting can be appropriate. Symptomatic paraesophageal hernias require surgical repair.

**Esophageal Foreign Body**- Foreign body ingestion is most common in pediatric patients and patients with cognitive disabilities. Three likely locations for esophageal entrapment are the areas of anatomic constriction, the UES/cricopharyngeus, the crossover of the aorta/left main-stem bronchus, and the esophageal hiatus. Approximately 75% of foreign bodies ingested in pediatric patients are trapped at the UES, while a distal esophageal stricture traps 67% of foreign bodies in adults.

Patients often present complaining of a foreign body sensation, chest pain, or inability to swallow. Drooling, or the inability to swallow secretions is a concerning feature indicative of an emergent obstruction. High-risk objects include batteries, magnets, and sharp objects. Batteries lodged in the esophagus can cause thermal injury to the mucosa, increasing the risk of bleeding and perforation. Sharp objects also increase the risk of perforation. Multiple magnets become a concern in the lower GI tract, where they can become separated and reattach across the bowel wall, increasing the risk for infarction and perforation of the bowel.

Diagnosis can often be made on chest X-ray, with anterior-posterior and lateral films to localize the object. Cervical or mediastinal emphysema are clues to esophageal perforation. Treatment is frequently endoscopic removal, but surgical removal can be performed with failure of endoscopic removal or in cases of esophageal perforation.

**Hypertensive LES**- A hypertensive LES is a poorly characterized motility disorder associated with symptoms of chest pain and dysphagia. A hypertensive LES is classified as an LES with a mean pressure > 45 mmHg, relaxation greater than 75%, and normal peristalsis. Studies have determined hypertensive LES to be a heterogeneous disorder, with such causes as GERD, anxiety, and somatization. Despite abnormal LES parameters, most patients have normal esophageal function and frequent psychological abnormalities.