Patients with cyanide toxicity will present initially with tachycardia and hypertension. Severe poisoning will lead to the development of bradycardia, hypotension, and cardiac arrest.

**Hypotension and bradycardia are pathognomonic for cyanide poisoning
**

Seizures are also common in cyanide poisoning. They are relatively rare in carbon monoxide poisoning. Suspect cyanide poisoning in patients who have soot or carbonaceous material in the nose or around the mouth or in the oropharynx. Take note of the pupils as well.

**Cyanide poisoning causes pupillary dilation
**

Carbon monoxide does not affect the pupils. Patients with pure carbon monoxide poisoning improve when they are removed from the smokey environment and are placed on 100% oxygen. Patients who remain obtunded likely have concomitant cyanide poisoning. Cyanide poisoning often causes prolonged unconsciousness and the need for endotracheal intubation for airway protection. Cyanide does not cause cyanosis and in fact, may cause a cherry red color due to the excess oxygen in the bloodstream that is unable to be used by the mitochondria for cellular respiration.

A patient who has high levels of plasma lactate (greater than 8 mmol/L) is 94% sensitive and 70% specific for significant cyanide toxicity. Patients presenting with an anion gap are also likely to have cyanide poisoning. Patients with carbon monoxide toxicity may have elevated lactate levels if they have had a loss of consciousness or prolonged exposure. However, their levels will not be as high as in victims of cyanide poisoning. ECG may show shortening of the ST segments. It is important to recall that patients with carbon monoxide poisoning get better when removed from the source of the poisoning. Cyanide poisoning victims do not show such improvement.