Any rapidly progressing skin or soft tissue infection should be managed aggressively due to the difficulty in differentiating non-necrotizing from necrotizing skin and soft tissue infections.

The Laboratory Risk Indicator for Necrotizing Infection (LRINEC) Score was developed in a 2004 report to distinguish NSTIs from other severe soft tissue infections. The scoring system is hinged on abnormalities in six independent variables:

**C-reactive protein, mg/L**

- Less than 150 (0)

- More than 150 (4)

**Total white cell count (WBC), cells/mm**

-  Less than 15 (0)

-  15 to 25 (1)

-  More than 25 (2)

**Hemoglobin, g/dl**

-  More than 13.5 (0)

-  11 to 13.5 (1)

-  Less than 11 (2)

**Sodium, mmol/L**

- 135 or greater  (0)

- Less than 135 (2)

**Creatinine, mg/dL**

- 1.6 or less (0)

- More than 1.6 (2)

**Glucose, mg/dL**

- 180 or less (0)

- More than 180 (1)

A score of six has a positive predictive value of 92% and a negative predictive value of 96%. A score of eight or greater represents a 75% risk of necrotizing infection.

The diagnosis of NSTIs is still primarily a clinical one. Imaging may be useful in providing data when the diagnosis is uncertain. The most common plain film finding is similar to cellulitis with increased soft tissue thickness and opacity. Computed tomography (CT) has greater sensitivity than plain film in identifying necrotizing soft tissue infections. Plain x-rays have no value in the diagnosis.  Sometimes under local anesthesia, one may probe the area with a finger for signs of necrotizing tissue. In most cases, the necrotic tissue can be penetrated with little resistance. Aspiration and gram stain can also be done.

The use of B-mode color Doppler ultrasound can help in the early diagnosis of necrotizing fasciitis at the bedside. It should be understood that no lab or imaging test should delay surgical intervention.