- 
**Imaging**

- 
**Biopsy & analysis**

- 
**Blood tests**

- Optical coherence tomography (OCT)

- Fundus fluorescein angiography (FFA)

- Indocyanine green angiography (ICGA)

- Fundus autofluorescence (FAF)

- Ultrasonography (USG)

- Neuroimaging

- Histopathology

- Immunohistochemistry

- Cytokine analysis

- Polymerase chain reaction

**I. Imaging**

- **Optical coherence tomography (OCT):**It is helpful to demonstrate or analyze lesions at the posterior pole. Findings include nodular hyperreflective lesions in the retinal pigment epithelial layer corresponding to subretinal and sub-retinal pigment epithelium (RPE) lymphoma deposits (**Figure 1**).

- **Fundus Fluorescein angiography (FFA):**Findings in FFA include small hypofluorescent lesions in the early and late phase corresponding to infiltrates masking the choroidal fluorescence, with late staining at the level of RPE in another series.

- **Indocyanine green angiography (ICGA):**It shows small hypofluorescent lesions in the early phase, which become less apparent in late phases. The hypofluorescent lesions are more numerous in FFA compared to ICGA.

- **Fundus Autofluorescence (FAF):**Sub-RPE pigment clumps that give rise to "leopard spotting" appearance are hyperautofluorescent, whereas white lesions above the RPE are hypoautofluorescent.

- **Ocular ultrasound:**There are no definitive findings of PIOL on ocular ultrasonography. The most common ultrasound findings in the case of PIOL include vitreous echoes, elevated chorioretinal lesions, and retinal detachment.

- **Neuroimaging:**Computed tomography (CT) and magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) imaging of the brain show unifocal or multifocal periventricular, homogenously contrast-enhancing lesions.

**II. Biopsy and Analysis**

The definitive diagnosis depends on the demonstration of the malignant lymphoma cells in the ocular specimens (vitreous, aqueous, chorioretinal biopsy) or the cerebrospinal fluid (CSF).

**Ocular Biopsy**

**Technique:**Techniques of ocular biopsy include fine-needle aspiration of vitreous via pars plana (21G to 25G), pars plana vitrectomy, transscleral biopsy for subretinal lesions, anterior chamber tap, and enucleation. Vitrectomy has added advantage of clearing vitreous debris, maximizing sample collection, and access to subretinal space, although there is a risk of extension of lymphoma through the sclerotomy site to peribulbar space.

Techniques to increase the diagnostic yield include

- Any corticosteroid use should be discontinued for at least two weeks before the biopsy.

- Precautions during vitrectomy include the use of large-bore cutters and a low cut rate to reduce the shearing of cells.

- Collect undiluted fresh vitreous with infusion off.

- Since lymphoma cells undergo morphological degeneration within 60 minutes, the sample should be transported to the laboratory quickly.

- Fixation of the sample in HOPE (HEPES-glutamic acid buffer-mediated Organic solvent Protection Effect) solution may increase the yield.

**Cerebrospinal Fluid (CSF) and Brain Biopsy**

A lumbar puncture can be done to obtain CSF in cases with suspected PCNSL. In cases with a positive yield on CSF and if an intraocular lesion suspicious of PIOL is present, the need for ocular tissue biopsy is less important unless the intraocular process does not respond to the treatment initiated.

**Analysis**

- ****Histopathology:****Histopathological analysis reveals a monoclonal population of large B cells with scanty cytoplasm, high nuclear: cytoplasmic ratio, hypersegmented round, oval, or clover-shaped nuclei with coarse chromatin pattern, and prominent or multiple nucleoli (**Figure 2**).

- **Immunohistochemistry and flow cytometry:**The presence of a monoclonal population of a single immunophenotype supports the histopathological diagnosis. Most cases of PIOL are monoclonal B cell lymphomas and stain positively for B cell markers like CD19, CD20, CD 22, and germinal center markers such as BCL 6 and CD 10.

- **Cytokines**: B cells secrete high amounts of interleukin (IL) IL-10, an immunosuppressive cytokine.

- **Polymerase chain reaction (PCR):**In cases of PIOL, monoclonality of the B cell population can be detected using framework regions (FR)- FR2, FR3, and complementarity determining regions 3 (CDR3) primers.

Given the paucity of vitreous available for testing, the histopathological analysis gets precedence, and the supernatant sample can be sent for cytokine analysis.

**III. Blood tests:**These are basically done to rule out infective causes of uveitis such as syphilis, tuberculosis, herpes, toxoplasmosis, HIV (human immunodeficiency virus) status; inflammatory disorders such as sarcoidosis, Vogt Koyanagi Harada disease, Behçet, and also to look at side-effects of systemic chemotherapy.