Compared to HIV-1, infection with HIV-2 is defined by three major differences 1) a longer asymptomatic phase, 2) a slower rate of CD4 decline, 3) and lower plasma viral loads. Given these significant advantages over HIV-1, it has historically been associated with overall lower mortality.

The pathophysiologic differences noted above result in distinctly different natural histories when comparing HIV-1 and HIV-2. Those with HIV-2 have been shown to have half the rate of CD4 decline over time (0.4% vs. 0.9% per year) and, on average, have viral loads that are 28-fold lower after seroconversion.

Data from another HIV-2 cohort quantified median survival more granularly. It was noted that those with HIV-1 had a median survival of 8.2 years compared to 15.6 years among those with HIV-2.

Although the natural history may differ, the transmission of HIV-2 occurs by the same routes as HIV-1, including perinatal, sexual contact, and bloodborne exposure. While the mechanisms of transmission overlap, HIV-2 is a markedly less efficient virus and thus significantly less infectious. Globally, this has resulted in disproportionately fewer cases of HIV-2 and more limited spread in comparison to HIV-1. The comparatively lower efficiency of HIV-2 has been well illustrated in studies examining mother-to-child transmission from the pre-antiretroviral era. Remarkably, perinatal transmission among HIV-2 positive mothers has been notably low at l-2%, whereas in mothers with HIV-1, transmission ranges from 15% to 30%.

Interestingly, dual infection with both HIV-1 and HIV-2 can occur in regions where both viruses circulate widely. It has most commonly been reported in West Africa, where seroprevalence studies estimate dual infection in up to 5-10% of those infected.