Hypoglycemia presents with varied symptoms. It involves autonomic (cholinergic and adrenergic) and, if it gets severe, leads to neuroglycopenic symptoms. Therefore, hypoglycemia fulfilling Whipple's triad (as described below) needs further evaluation. Whipple’s triad includes the following:

- Symptoms and signs consistent with hypoglycemia

- Biochemical evidence (capillary blood glucose or venous glucose) of hypoglycemia

- Resolution of symptoms with correction of hypoglycemia

The patient may give a history of autonomic (shaking, sweating, palpitation, anxiety, hunger, paresthesis) and neuroglycopenic (drowsiness, feeling dizzy, generalized or focal weakness, seizure, and confusion) symptoms. It is important to take a detailed history, including the age of onset, nature, and timings of symptoms. Hypoglycemia is classified into reactive (post meals) or fasting hypoglycemia. Weight gain is seen in Insulinoma, whereas neoplasia is frequently associated with weight loss. The existence of underlying illnesses or conditions, drug history, and family history is important in history. It is important to find out about recent gastrointestinal surgery, e.g., gastric bypass. Other signs related to causative factors, including hyperpigmentation (Addison’s disease), other auto-immune diseases, and a history of previous gastric bypass.

Infants and children with hypoglycemia usually have an inborn error of metabolism (IEM), and it is associated with other features including hepatomegaly (glycogen storage disease), seizures (hereditary fructose intolerance), weight loss, vomiting and cataract (galactosemia), and short stature (growth hormone deficiency).

Signs of hypoglycemia are non-specific but include sweating, pallor, tachycardia, raised blood pressure, confusion, and impairment in cognition. These signs are reversible once blood glucose levels are normalized. Prolonged hypoglycemia can result in neurological damage, which can be permanent though this is rare. Physical evaluation involves full general physical examination, including weight and height measurement. It should include signs of auto-immune disease—abdominal exam to look for hepatomegaly and previous surgical scars.