Complete ophthalmologic evaluation for any individual suspected of RP is needed, including expert fundoscopic examination and the evaluation of retinal function. These tests will establish a baseline and assist in determining the rate of progression and formulating a prognosis for the disease. Visual field assessment with kinetic perimetry is considered the most effective way to evaluate the loss of peripheral vision. Color vision assessment will be needed to determine the presence and progression of dyschromatopsia, indicating the degree of cone photoreceptor involvement.  Electrophysiologic evaluation of the entire retina is also helpful, as electroretinographic abnormalities may be detected early, even before nyctalopia and fundoscopic abnormalities are present.

Retinal imaging has made significant progress. In the past, fluorescein angiography was the predominant method employed, but newer, non-invasive modalities have made studies easier to perform and more sensitive in detecting abnormalities. Adaptive optics scanning laser ophthalmoscopy (AOSLO) enables high-resolution evaluation of the retina to detect photoreceptor damage early in the disease. This process is likely to be of use in monitoring the progression of the disease as well as evaluating the effectiveness of treatment efficacy.

No specific laboratory testing is indicated unless there is suspicion for other disease processes contributing to vision loss, such as syphilis or cytomegalovirus (CMV) retinopathy, or unless confirmatory genetic testing is indicated.