Labs and cultures are rarely indicated to confirm the diagnosis of conjunctivitis. Eyelid cultures and cytology are usually reserved for cases of recurrent conjunctivitis, those resistant to treatment, suspected gonococcal or chlamydial infection, suspected infectious neonatal conjunctivitis, and adults presenting with severe purulent discharge.

Imaging studies do not play an important role in the workup of conjunctivitis unless an underlying pathology is suspected. For instance, MRA, CT scan, and orbital Doppler may play a role in the case of a cavernous sinus fistula. In addition, an orbital CT scan may help rule out an orbital abscess when the conjunctivitis is coexistent with orbital cellulitis.

Certain procedures could help manage a known or suspected underlying cause of conjunctivitis. Removal of offending lashes may be required in trichiasis. Nasolacrimal duct irrigation could be attempted to relieve an obstruction that predisposes to infection. In the case of a foreign body, the eversion of the eyelid at the slit lamp is indicated.

Conjunctival scrapings can be done with a topical anesthetic. This should be preceded by antibiotic therapy. Gram stain is useful in identifying bacterial characteristics. Giemsa stain is used to screen for Chlamydia. Cultures may be completed for viral and bacterial agents. A fungal culture is generally not needed except in the case of a corneal ulcer or known contamination of a contact lens solution, such as observed in the epidemic of early 2006.

In cases of viral conjunctivitis, viral isolation methods may help in establishing the diagnosis of acute follicular conjunctivitis; however, they are not indicated in chronic conjunctivitis. Enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA) and direct immunofluorescence monoclonal antibody staining are rapid and widely available detection methods.

In allergic conjunctivitis, superficial scrapings may help to diagnose by revealing eosinophils in the most severe cases because eosinophils are only present in the deeper layers of the conjunctiva. Therefore, an absence of eosinophils on conjunctival scrapings does not rule out the possibility of allergic conjunctivitis.

Many investigators have described the measurement of various inflammatory mediators in tears, such as IgE, tryptase, and histamine, as indicators of allergic response.