**Laboratory Findings**

Hematological changes seen in miliary TB are usually nonspecific. The patient can have pancytopenia, anemia, leucopenia, leucocytosis predominantly lymphocytosis, thrombocytopenia, or thrombocytosis. The most common hematological abnormality encountered in miliary TB is anemia of chronic disease. Elevated acute phase reactants in the form of erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR) and C-reactive protein (CRP) are frequently encountered. Leukaemoid reaction is also described and can be mistaken for leukemia. Disseminated intravascular coagulation (DIC) is rare and seen in the setting of MODS and ARDS.

Biochemistry panels can be normal or have subtle disturbances. Hyponatremia, secondary to meningeal involvement or abnormal antidiuretic hormone levels, is frequently encountered and is an indicator of neurological involvement. Hyperbilirubinemia, hypoalbuminemia (negative acute phase reactant), and elevated alkaline phosphatase are also seen. Hypercalcemia, though rare, has also been reported.

**Diagnosis**

Due to the high morbidity and mortality associated with the disease, it is pertinent for the clinician to have a high index of suspicion for the disease, even in the setting of varied clinical presentations. A multi-pronged approach comprising of meticulous history taking, thorough clinical examination, radiological and laboratory investigation is required for early diagnosis and adequate treatment.

There are no uniform guidelines for the diagnosis of miliary tuberculosis. The following criteria have been suggested for the diagnosis of miliary TB: (i) clinical presentation consistent with a diagnosis of TB, such as pyrexia with evening rise of temperature, weight loss, anorexia, tachycardia, and night sweats of greater than six weeks duration responding to the antituberculosis treatment; (ii) classical miliary pattern on chest radiograph; (iii) bilateral diffuse reticulonodular lung lesions on a background of miliary shadows demonstrable either on plain chest radiograph or HRCT; and (iv) microbiological, cytopathological, histopathological, or molecular evidence of TB.

The chest radiograph shows typical miliary mottling, i.e., homogenously distributed discrete uniform size (1 to 2 mm) millet-shaped lesions in all lung zones, which is also the hallmark for making the diagnosis of miliary TB.

**Tuberculin skin testing (TST)**shows anergy in miliary TB more frequently than pulmonary TB, but it can become positive during antituberculosis therapy. A positive interferon-gamma release assay (IGRA) indicates the only infection and does not signify active disease; thus, its use is limited in highly endemic areas.

**Invasive diagnostic procedures**are indicated for patients with suspected extrapulmonary TB. In addition to testing of specimens from the involved sites (e.g., CSF for tuberculous meningitis, pleural fluid, ascitic fluid, gastric aspirate, urine, and pus from a cold abscess), biopsy and culture of bone marrow and liver tissue have a good diagnostic yield in miliary TB. Image-guided radiological procedures, such as fine-needle aspiration for cytological examination (FNAC) and biopsy under CT or MRI guidance, are useful for procuring tissue and body fluids for diagnostic testing.

**The definitive diagnosis**of TB depends on the isolation and detection of mycobacterial isolates from a clinical specimen (sputum, body fluids, tissue, and biopsy samples) and by inoculating it on agar-based (e.g., Lowenstein-Jensen) or liquid media having fluorescence detection. Samples are evaluated for direct visualization of acid-fast bacilli using ZN staining or auramine-rhodamine (fluorochrome dye) staining, which is more sensitive than conventional ZN staining.M. tuberculosis can be differentiated from isolated non-tuberculous mycobacteria by hybridization using nucleic acid probes or biochemical methods or by matrix-assisted laser desorption/ionization time-of-flight mass spectrometry (MALDI-TOF).

**Histopathological examination**of a tissue biopsy specimen is characteristic and shows granulomatous inflammation with central caseation, with or without tubercle bacilli. Demonstration of tubercle granuloma in the biopsy sample in a typical clinical scenario is suggestive of tuberculosis; however, either demonstration of bacilli by staining or by culture is required to confirm the diagnosis.

Application of molecular methods such as PCR, Gene Xpert MTB/RIF, and line probe assays (LPA) can be useful for the early diagnosis of pulmonary and extrapulmonary TB, along with the detection of drug resistance in tubercle bacilli. These techniques are advantageous in a way that test results may be available within hours and can be used on a wide array of specimens for the diagnosis of TB and drug resistance.

Serological tests are not advocated for the detection of TB because of low sensitivity and specificity. However, adenosine deaminase (ADA) and interferon-gamma (IFN- γ) can be used as an adjunct for the diagnosis of tuberculosis in pleural, pericardial, and ascitic fluids.

The cut-off value of ADA for pleural effusion and pericardial effusion is 40 U/L, for tubercular ascites 39 U/L, and for CSF is 10 U/L.