The operon model has been the paradigm for understanding gene regulation and has laid a foundation for the development of modern molecular biology. In 1941, experiments by Jacques Monod showed that bacterial colonies of Escherichia grown in the presence of glucose and lactose metabolized glucose until it is completely exhausted. The metabolism of lactose only began after a lag period, which resulted in a diauxic bacterial growth curve. It shows two distinct exponential growth phases separated by a brief period of lag phase, signifying the sequential utilization of different carbon sources. The first phase corresponds to the utilization of glucose, followed by the second phase for lactose. The lag phase arises due to the time taken by bacterial cells to synthesize enzymes required for lactose metabolism. Based on this behavior, Karstrom coined the term “enzyme adaptation” for the enzymes produced only in the presence of their particular substrate. This was later redefined and termed “enzyme induction.”

These observations were followed by Monod’s experiments to study the kinetics of enzyme induction in Escherichia coli. He observed that the addition of a small metabolite to bacterial colonies increased the production of beta-galactosidase (an enzyme, then called lactase). The metabolite was recognized as allolactose, a natural inducer of beta-galactosidase, produced from a side reaction catalyzed by beta-galactosidase. Many other inducers were synthesized that could mimic the activity of allolactose and induce the synthesis of beta-galactosidase. One such effective molecule is isopropyl beta-d-1 thiogalactopyranoside (IPTG). Although capable of inducing the enzyme, it cannot be catabolized by beta-galactosidase, unlike allolactose, which can be hydrolyzed to glucose and galactose. Therefore, it is called a gratuitous inducer. Many mutant bacterial strains were produced that affected the synthesis of the enzyme, depending on the deleted genes. While some strains could produce the enzyme constitutively, others lost this ability even in the presence of an inducer.

Andre Lwoff and Francois Jacob observed a similar induction phenomenon while exploring the development of a lambda bacteriophage. The bacteriophage could switch from a lysogenic phage to a lytic phage in response to noxious environmental stimulus. This raised the same fundamental question of how cellular events and genetic elements are switched on and off. The PaJaMa experiments in 1959 demonstrated that these inducers work by relieving the genetic synthetic machinery from a reversible inhibition. These observations led to the development of the operon model for which Francois Jacob, Jacques Monod, and Andre Michel Lwoff received the Nobel Prize in Physiology or Medicine in 1965.