Periodic limb movement disorder is rarely a primary disorder. It is mainly associated with restless leg syndrome, which may be primarily idiopathic or secondarily due to pregnancy or systemic disorders, particularly iron deficiency and chronic renal insufficiency.

The pathogenesis of PLMD is not clearly defined. Previous studies suspected cortical or subcortical involvement in patients with PLMS.

In a recent study, the role of the iron-dopamine hypothesis as an etiopathogenetic hallmark in RLS and the efficacy of treatment modalities in milder to more severe forms supported the discussion on the prevalence of secondary RLS among comorbid conditions like end-stage renal disease, idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis, attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder, and irritable bowel syndrome. Currently, RLS treatment utilizes only symptomatic agents since a disease-modifying therapy is not yet evident.

A study by Rijsman et al. suggests that in patients with PLMD, there is spinal-level inhibition. They suspect the following mechanisms; altered function in the descending spinal tracts, changes in the interneural circuitry or possible peripheral influence at the spine, or any combination of these.

Several risk factors for PLM independently predict an increase in PLMSI >15/hour.

- Age

- Male gender

- Restless leg syndrome

- Physical inactivity

- Current smoking

- Obesity

- Diabetes

- Antidepressant use

- Low magnesium

- Specific BTBD9, TOX3,  and MEIS1 SNP distribution

A study by Li et al. showed a relationship between low ferritin and greater PLMs in a general population of older adults, independent of genetic polymorphisms, which suggested that low iron stores play a role in the expression of these phenotypes. Furthermore, high PLMI patients may need to be checked for iron deficiency.

Another study determined the prevalence of PLMS among transplanted and waiting-list haemodialysed patients through polysomnography. PLMS was observed in 27% of the transplanted and 42% of the waiting-list group (P = 0.094); the proportion of severe disease was twice as high in waiting-list versus transplanted patients (32 versus 16%, P = 0.024). Transplanted patients had a higher risk of stroke. Meanwhile, both transplanted and wait-listed patients have a higher 10-year coronary heart disease risk.