Interprofessional support and communication are vital to developing, implementing, and maintaining proper ergonomics and their associated factors in the workplace. Studies point to multiple associated factors that can impact ergonomic stature and thus WMSDs, including autonomy and support at work, gender resulting in a strength-job mismatch, and proper support staff and equipment.

Level 1 studies have demonstrated the importance of having a multifaceted approach to ergonomics within the workplace, including equipment, ergonomics, employee training on patient handling, and exercise programs for workers in healthcare.

Safe Patient Handling and Mobilization Programs (SPHMs) have been proven through level 1 studies to be an effective means to incorporate proper ergonomics to increase the safety and reduce injuries of both clinicians and patients within the work field.

One study noted that patients report feeling safer when staff uses safe transfer techniques than those who used poor techniques, which translated to improve quality of patient care (in addition to the already mentioned safety benefits for patients and clinicians alike).

A recent level 5 study following the surge in mass fatality handling secondary to the COVID-19 pandemic demonstrated the need for not only implementation of ergonomic training for staff but the benefits of having an SPHM team in place at facilities to assist in situations where singular transfers are not safe, or patient size requires multiple individuals to transfer without injury.

Level 2 studies have also demonstrated the importance of arranging the workstation to meet physical, ergonomic requirements for those participating in office work which is important to note only for its transferability to the stations that clinicians spend time documenting at but also for the need for many patients seeking treatment. It is important to remember that many of the same ergonomic principles that should be applied to the healthcare workers' daily tasks can be used as educational pieces to better serve patients faced with similar positional and task components within their own line of work.