Treatment and management of associated life-threatening, intracranial pathology should be the primary focus. The management of temporal bone fracture complications should be addressed once the patient is stable.

**Facial Nerve Paralysis**

Immediate paralysis and/or significant degeneration (>90%) on EnOG are indications for surgical exploration and decompression. Findings in such surgery most often demonstrate bony impingement of the nerve, stretch injury, or edema/hematoma rather than transection of the nerve.

**CSF Leak**

Conservative management including elevation of the head, bed rest, avoidance of straining should be instituted. Antibiotic prophylaxis to avoid the development of meningitis is somewhat controversial, though nearly always employed in the setting of ongoing CSF leak.

**Hearing Loss**

Early evaluation is only able to identify conductive versus sensorineural loss. Formal audiological evaluation is deferred several weeks post-injury to ensure edema and hemotympanum have completely resolved. Persistent conductive hearing loss is an indication for surgical exploration with ossiculoplasty. Persistent sensorineural hearing loss can be treated with hearing aids or a cochlear implant, depending on severity.

**Vertigo**

Vestibular function testing should be performed on an elective, outpatient basis once the patient has returned to their neurological baseline. In cases of perilymph fistula, surgical repair is warranted. Post-traumatic perilymphatic hydrops should be managed with corticosteroids and diuretics.