The evaluation of patients for whom the initiation of PCP prophylaxis is being considered should include a physical examination, complete blood count (CBC) with differential to assess for signs of hematologic malignancy, comprehensive metabolic panel (CMP) to assess electrolytes as determinants of nutritional status, along with serology for infectious etiologies known to cause immunosuppression. In the case of suspected autoimmune disease, serological studies such as an antinuclear antibody (ANA), anti-dsDNA, and other markers should be tested. In the case of organ transplant recipients and other patients with iatrogenic immunosuppression, prophylaxis should be initiated without delay. HIV patients require evaluation of CD4 count, CD4 percent, and viral load before initiation of any sort of prophylaxis unless they are currently suffering from an AIDS-defining illness.

The diagnosis of PCP infection relies on clinical presentation and suspicion, presence of risk factors in combination with laboratory testing, imaging, sputum studies, which include microscopic detention of cysts and trophic form in respiratory secretion, evaluation of bronchoalveolar lavage fluid, or lung biopsy. Laboratory evaluation can be nonspecific, like elevated serum lactate dehydrogenase (LDH) and serum 1-3 beta D glucan. Beta D glucan can be found in the cell wall of most fungi, including Pneumocystis jirovecii. In the appropriate clinical context, serum LDH and 1-3 beta D glucan elevation should raise suspicion of PCP.

Imaging evaluation with a chest radiograph can reveal diffuse bilateral interstitial infiltrates. Other radiologic findings can include lobar infiltrates, solitary or multiple nodules that can progress to cavitary lesions, and pneumothorax. A negative chest radiograph with a high clinical suspicion should determine further imaging evaluation, and a chest computed tomography (CT) should be performed to look for findings of ground-glass opacities or cystic lesions. Definitive diagnosis requires organism identification with a polymerase chain reaction assay of respiratory specimens of sputum or bronchoalveolar lavage, fluorescein antibody, or dye staining. Sometimes the definitive diagnosis of PCP may not be possible. However, the treatment should not be delayed, and the patient should be treated accordingly.