The following factors need to be taken into consideration while deciding upon the treatment options in patients with brain metastasis:

- Volume and number of metastasis

- Performance status

- Age

- Presence of extracranial disease and leptomeningeal disease

- Location of metastasis

- Site of the resection cavity

- Patient's preference

- Primary tumor site

- Type and molecular profile

Points favoring the continued use of whole-brain radiotherapy (WBRT) in the setting of intracranial metastasis include:

- Improvement in CNS control

- Management of micrometastasis

- Reduction in the rate of recurrence

- Improvement in overall survival and HRQoL

- Prevention of the life-threatening and imminently fatal brain compression syndrome

Factors favoring the use of hypofractionation dosing include:

- Presence of a large lesion (more than 30 mm)

- Proximity to a critical structure

- History of previous irradiation

- Presence of comorbidities such as stroke and vascular dementia

**Whole-Brain Radiotherapy (WBRT)**

WBRT is indicated in patients in whom stereotactic radiotherapy or stereotactic radiosurgery (SRS) cannot be performed, including those with leptomeningeal disease, numerous metastasis, low radiation therapy oncology group (RTOG) diagnosis-specific graded prognostic assessment (DS-GPA) scores, or medical contraindications.

The presence of comorbidities, location of metastasis, tumor size, patient preference, and the extent of edema determine the choice of treatment in the presence of a single metastasis.

Brain metastasis velocity may be used to determine patients who might benefit from WBRT who have distal brain failure after initial SRS.

The two main concerns that have persisted with the continued preference for the use of WBRT in this setting include:

- The limited impact on survival outcomes

- The potential to lead to neurocognitive decline

Tumor regression after WBRT has been shown to correlate with improvement in neurocognitive function.

Irradiation to neuro regenerative zone of the hippocampus has been postulated to be associated with neurocognitive deficits.

Various tools have been used to assess the neurocognitive dysfunction associated with receipt of radiotherapy to the brain (mainly WBRT). Psychometric tools that have been validated in this setting include Hopkins verbal learning test (HVLT), controlled oral word association, grooved pegboard test, trail making tests a, and b.

WBRT with hippocampus avoidance (HA-WBRT), use of SRS, and spatially partitioned adaptive radiotherapy (SPARE) have been used to mitigate the effects of WBRT on the neurocognitive decline. SPARE employs a technique of administering single-fraction SRS over multiple days, limiting the daily treatment time to less than 60 minutes in those with 10-30 brain metastases. This technique has been postulated to have the least possible off-target effects on the hippocampus.

RTOG 933 criteria have described the dosimetric characteristics of dual-arc conventional volumetric modulated arc therapy (DAC-VMAT) in WBRT with hippocampal sparing. Dual arc conventional volumetric modulated arc therapy covers a large field to provide the requisite planned tumor volume.

The following issues may be encountered:

- Reduction in gantry velocity from one angle to another

- Acquisition of limits prescribed for traveling distance for the MLC upon reaching the distal part of the planned target volume

A wide jaw opening has been linked with suboptimal multileaf collimator function (due to interference with movements).

The role of WBRT has been mired in some controversy given the results of the QUARTZ trial, where 538 non-small lung cancer patients with brain metastasis were not eligible for SRS. These patient subgroups were randomized to either WBRT or best supportive care. No significant differences in overall survival, overall HRQoL, or dexamethasone dosing were noticed between the two arms.

Though randomized control trials in this setting are lacking, the presence of extensive nodular or symptomatic linear leptomeningeal metastasis is also an indication for WBRT.

The Choose Wisely Campaign orchestrated by the American Society for Radiation Oncology has advised against the addition of WBRT in the adjuvant setting to SRS for patients with limited intracranial metastasis.

A continued deferral of WBRT with receipt of multiple SRS courses for progression of recurrent brain metastases (in those who have received initial courses of SRS) has led to higher rates of local control, lower toxicity, and favorable overall and neurological progression-free survival.

**Stereotactic Radiosurgery**

Emerging randomized data demonstrate a potential beneficial effect on survival from the use of SRS.

SRS provides the advantages of delivering higher dose conformal radiation in a single session, without any inordinate delay in the provision of systemic chemotherapy or immunotherapy.

Pre-operative SRS has also been proposed as an adjunct to surgery due to challenges associated with contouring the post-operative surgical cavity, higher local failure rates with the use of WBRT, risks of leptomeningeal spread (with the use of cavity SRS due to sterilization effect), and radiation-induced necrosis (smaller amount of non-malignant brain tissue irradiated, resection of a majority of irradiated tissue). Other potential advantages of pre-operative SRS include increased local control due to improved target delineation, sterilization effect, and improved oxygenation. Lack of pathological confirmation and impaired wound healing are potential disadvantages.

It has been postulated that the decision to use WBRT or SRS should not be solely based upon the number of brain metastases (in those with the number of metastases limited to less than 15). A total cumulative volume of 12-13 cm3 may be considered to a better prognostic indicator of overall survival. More than ten lesions in the brain (have been) can be treated (successfully) using stereotactic radiosurgery.

Several studies have demonstrated SRS's utility in brain metastasis due to tumors, traditionally considered to be radioresistant such as melanoma and renal cell carcinoma, with comparable local control rates (compared to non-radioresistant histologies).

The risk of radiation necrosis needs to be weighed against the potentially unproven clinical benefit with reirradiation of a local recurrence with SRS, in those who have received SRS earlier.

**Fractionated Radiosurgery**

Fractionated radiosurgery (with 2 -5 fractions) combines the use of steep dose gradients and closer treatment margins associated with SRS, with the radiobiological advantages of fractionation.

**Prophylactic Cranial Irradiation**

While prophylactic cranial irradiation is recommended in those with limited-stage small-cell lung cancer (SCLC), who show a good response to systemic therapy, it remains a controversial option for those with extensive-stage SCLC or other unfavorable prognostic factors such as advanced age and presence of multiple comorbidities.