Trauma is the most common mechanism of femoral shaft fractures, typically involving a direct hit to the thigh or an indirect force transmitted through the knee. Younger individuals generally are engaged in high energy mechanisms such as automobile accidents, frequently resulting in other associated injuries. Gunshots can also cause significant isolated injuries. Individuals with osteoporosis are at an increased risk of fracture, even with low-energy trauma. Irrespective of the mechanism, the deforming forces of a fracture depend on the fracture characteristics. The proximal segment is most commonly pulled into flexion and external rotation by the psoas and abduction by the abductors. The distal fragment is drawn into varus by the adductors, into extension by the two heads of the gastrocnemius, and shortening by the extensor mechanism and hamstrings.

Associated orthopedic injuries of the femur that must be ruled out include fractures of the proximal femur (femoral head and neck, intertrochanteric fractures), and bilateral femoral fractures. A study demonstrated that simultaneous injuries to the proximal femur occur in 1% to 9% of patients, and 20% to 50% were not identified during the initial evaluation. The presence of associated injuries is clinically relevant because it will determine the order of fixation and implant selection.

Fat emboli syndrome is a systemic disorder prevalent in the polytraumatized patient with shaft fractures. It classically presents as respiratory compromise, altered mental status, fever, and rash. Manifestations can span the spectrum from subclinical symptoms to acute respiratory distress syndrome (ARDS). Up to 36% of patients with long bone fractures will require some form of ventilatory support.