The 5th edition of the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders (DSM-5) classifies enuresis as an elimination disorder. The **DSM-5 Diagnostic Criteria**are as follows:

- Whether involuntary or intentional, repeated voiding of urine into bed or clothes.

- The behavior should be clinically significant, with either:

- Frequency of at least two times a week for at least three months consecutively
- Clinically significant distress
- Academic (occupational), social, or other areas of functioning are impaired.

- Chronological age of at least 5-years or equivalent developmental level is required.

- The behavior is not attributable to another medical condition (seizure disorder, diabetes, urinary tract infection, spina bifida, neurogenic bladder, etc.) or substance (diuretic, antipsychotic, etc.).

Specifiers include the following subtypes:

- **Nocturnal-only**is during nighttime sleep.

- **Diurnal-only**is during waking hours.
- Diurnal-only which is involuntary is also called "urinary incontinence." The sub-groups include:

- Urge incontinence (frequent urination due to increased urge to urinate)
- Stress incontinence (during periods of intra-abdominal pressure increase, such as during Valsalva maneuvers)
- Voiding postponement (situational delay in urination, such as in public places)
- Giggling incontinence (during laughter)

- 
**Nocturnal and diurnal**

Classification of enuresis:

- **Primary enuresis**means continence was never established.

- **Secondary enuresis**means continence was achieved then lost.

In addition to the standard medical, surgical, and family histories, it is important to obtain more details regarding toilet training, nutrition, and sleep histories. Ask about any family history of enuresis and specific detailed questions that rule out differential diagnoses, such as urinary tract infection, constipation, seizure, diabetes, or sleep apnea.

Obtain a **voiding diary**that logs the wet days or wet nights (voiding pattern), the volume of urine, the volume of fluid intake (hydration history), and the urge to urinate on a provided scale. It can also include bed and wake times. Ideally, the diary should be done for at least three days consistently. Urine is collected using a collecting pan, also known as a "Texas Hat." The collecting pan can be obtained from the physician's office or medical supply stores.

**Physical exam**should include vital signs, neurological exam, and examination of the tonsilar size, suprapubic area, abdomen, external genitalia, and lumbosacral spine.