These have been well summarized in a review that was derived from entry criteria in several studies

- Right, ventricular dysfunction: Either primarily or right heart failure, not secondary to left heart failure. Improper function of the right ventricle leads to insufficient filling of the left heart, which may lead to inadequate inflow in the device and, ultimately, device malfunction.

- Acute cardiogenic shock with a neurological compromise: Without adequate higher functions, LVAD placement is not recommended as it would only increase morbidity and decrease the quality of life.

- Coexisting severe terminal comorbidity: Severe renal, pulmonary, liver, or neurological disease or evidence of advanced metastatic cancer are considered contraindications.

- Bleeding: Active bleeding or thrombocytopenia (platelet count less than 50000 x 10 per L) or confirmed heparin-induced thrombocytopenia. Not just the bleeding but also the inability to be placed on anticoagulation makes this a contraindication.

- Anatomical factors: Hypertrophic cardiomyopathy or a large ventricular septal defect are a hindrance to device placement and function.

- Technical limitations: Body surface area less than 1.2 to 1.5 m2 or any other factor.

- Social considerations: LVAD management requires a high degree of patient compliance, which necessitates adequate psychological function to comply with medications and device maintenance. It also requires family education in interpreting basic functions and alarms. Thus, any difficulty posed by such factors could pose a contraindication to LVAD placement.