Closed wounds can be managed inside or outside of the OR, depending on the nature of the wound. In either case, the equipment is prepared in a sterile field. The wound site is cleaned with an alcoholic chlorhexidine preparation (if not already surgically prepared in the OR) and allowed to air dry before applying the NPWT dressing.

Open wounds require admittance to the OR for initial management and therefore necessitate the pre-operative completion of a written consent form along with patient safety checklists. The consent process should include a discussion about the indications, benefits, and risks of the procedure, with an assurance to tailor each risk to the individual patient in accordance with the Montgomery principles of consent.

The open wound is first sterilized using alcoholic chlorhexidine and then surrounded by a sterile field using sterile drapes as per standard surgical preparation protocols. Once a sterile field has been established, the wound bed itself requires careful preparation before applying the VAC device. This is because any necrotic or infected tissue which remains will impair wound healing through the compromised blood supply and colonization of bacteria.

Thorough debridement of infected or necrotic tissue should be carried out (only indicated at the first application of the VAC device unless further necrosis is identified), followed by a washout of the wound with a copious volume of 0.9% sodium chloride. Following wound bed preparation, the wound should be dried with sterile gauze and protected with a sterile, atraumatic, non-adhesive wound contact layer. Current practice favors a non-paraffinized, coated polyester net.