The history behind TTP is exciting and shows the transition from a clinical disorder into a specific condition with exclusive biological criteria: the ADAMTS-13 severe deficiency. ADAMTS-13, a disintegrin and metalloprotease with thrombospondin type 1 repeats, member 13, is an enzyme synthesized in the liver able to cleave large vWF multimers.

In physiological conditions, endothelial cells release ultra-large vWF multimers to the circulation. In the blood, these multimers exude high shear forces, and at a critical point, the force unfolds the A2 dominium of vWF. The ADAMTS identify this site and cleave vWF progressively, thus leading to smaller multimers that are less adhesive to platelets.

Some conditions correlate with ADAMTS-13 deficiency and may be considered a risk factor for TTP, such as female sex, obesity, Black ethnicity, and LA-DRB1*11.

In most cases, the mechanism of deficiency is the result of acquired autoantibodies against ADAMTS-13 (known as immune TTP), this is in accordance with the finding of positive anti-ADAMTS-13 IgG in a high percentage of cases during the acute phase. The majority of autoantibodies inhibit the proteolytic activity of ADAMTS-13, limiting its capacity to cleave vWF and thus called inhibitor antibodies. No inhibitors antibodies appear in 10% to 25% of cases; they might enhance the clearance of ADAMTS-13.

Nonetheless, in 25% of cases, the autoantibodies are not present, and the mechanism of enzyme deficiency remains unclear. These can be explained by lack of sensitivity of assays in detecting another form of IgG and immune complexes, degradation of ADAMTS-13 by sepsis enzymes or inhibition by free hemoglobin and interleukins.

Another mechanism of severe deficiency is recessively inherited biallelic mutations of ADAMTS-13 gene, also known as Upshaw-Schulman syndrome (USS) or congenital TTP (cTTP). It accounts for less than 5% of all cases of TTP, representing 33% in childhood-onset and only 2.5% of adult onset. About 150 distinct mutations are reported worldwide.