Sciatica is defined as irritation or compression of the sciatic nerve that causes pain in the buttock area with radiation to the lower leg. The vast majority of cases have a spinal cause, such as disc herniation or rupture causing L5 or S1 nerve root impingement. Other common causes include spinal stenosis, degenerative disc disease, and spondylolisthesis. There are also many non-spinal causes of sciatica, which are less common. These include piriformis syndrome, trauma, postoperative complications, gynecologic conditions, and herpes zoster.

Symptoms include mid-buttock pain that radiates down the leg, most often unilaterally. Depending on where the sciatic nerve is irritated, the patient will often experience paresthesias in a dermatomal distribution, either L5 or S1. Weakness and changes in reflexes are less commonly seen. L5 has no reflex. S1 is the ankle jerk reflex.

One test that should always be done in patients with low back pain is the Lasegue straight leg raising with the patient supine. The test is positive if there is ipsilateral pain between 10 to 60 degrees. This test is quite sensitive (90%) but not specific. If this test elicits pain in the contralateral leg, one should suspect disc herniation and order an imaging test. MRI is very useful when the exact level of compression in the spine is unclear.

MRI can also assess the soft tissues (including discopathy), the presence of an infection, or a neoplastic cause. If there is urine retention or dysesthesia around the anus in a patient with sciatica, one should suspect cauda equina syndrome. Prompt surgical decompression is indicated for this disorder.

The majority of cases of sciatica are treated conservatively with rest for a few days, pain medication, and some physical therapy. Surgery may be required in cases where there is significant stenosis or there is evidence of irritation of the nerve.