Although there is no internationally agreed classification system, the etiology of the disease can be divided into three main categories: congenital defects in tracheal integrity, acquired conditions weakening the whole or partial tracheal structure, and conditions causing extrinsic compression of the airway.

**Congenital Defects in Tracheal Integrity**

Numerous diseases may cause immaturity of the tracheobronchial cartilage and, in turn, congenital tracheomalacia. Systemic conditions like Ehlers Danlos and bronchopulmonary dysplasia can result in an innately weakened trachea. There are many childhood syndromes associated with tracheomalacia. There is a significant incidence of coexisting congenital heart diseases and tracheoesophageal fistula (a tracheal defect may be present in up to 75% of the patients with tracheoesophageal fistula) or esophageal atresia.

Some conditions may compromise the normal development of the trachea in the area where they exert compression. Among these conditions that compromise the tracheal integrity, there are vascular rings; they primarily result from the persistence of the double aortic arch after the second month of fetal life and determine a localized alteration of the development of the trachea (and esophagus). Apart from the double aortic arch, which accounts for approximately 40% of the congenital vascular compressions, other conditions including a right aortic arch, a left-sided origin of the (right) innominate artery, a right-sided origin of the left common carotid artery, or an anomalous origin of the left pulmonary artery from the right pulmonary artery can provoke tracheal compression.

In adults, congenital tracheomalacia can be due to Mounier-Kuhn syndrome. It is a rare disease produced by the atrophy of elastic fibers in the trachea and main bronchi, which induces tracheobronchial flaccidity, dilatation, and collapse. The syndrome is often associated with Ehlers-Danlos syndrome, Marfan syndrome, and cutis laxa. The disorder, also referred to as tracheobronchomegaly, can occur at various ages but is usually diagnosed in young adults with recurrent bronchopulmonary infections with chronic non-productive or productive cough, dyspnoea, hemoptysis, and wheezing. However, clinical manifestations vary from paucisymptomatic cases (chronic cough) to severe cases with bronchiectasis or bullous emphysema, which can lead to severe impairment of respiratory function. Although Mounier-Kuhn syndrome may have a link to a genetic defect, research has yet to identify any gene alteration.

**Acquired Conditions Weakening the Tracheal Structure**

There are multiple potential causes for acquired tracheomalacia. Inflammatory processes such as tracheobronchitis, recurrent polychondritis, and chronic lung conditions such as bronchiectasis can weaken the structure of the airway, predisposing it to collapse. Recurrent polychondritis is a rare autoimmune rheumatic disease characterized by episodes of painful and destructive inflammation of the cartilage and other connective tissues in various organs. Acquired diffuse tracheobronchial collapse is often a finding in chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD). Other conditions such as prolonged intubation, surgery (e.g., pulmonary resection), chest trauma, or foreign bodies can cause segmental disease. Neoplastic pathologies in the respiratory tract (e.g., cylindroma) may also affect the structure of the airway leading to tracheomalacia.

**Extrinsic Compressions**

Disease processes extrinsic to the respiratory system, such as cardiovascular masses (e.g., vascular aneurysms and dilated cardiomyopathy), non-pulsatile fixed compressions including large thyroid goiters, and intrathoracic neoplastic diseases may externally compress on the airway leading to tracheomalacia.