# Introduction

Fertilization is a complex multi-step process that is complete in 24 hours. The sperm from a male meets an ovum from a female and forms a zygote; this is the point in which pregnancy begins and leads to a 280-day journey for a female. There are two ways to track this process, and they differ by the day counting begins. There are the post-ovulation age and the gestational age, calculated by adding two weeks to the last menstrual period. There are many steps that both the egg and sperm must go through for this process to be successful. Furthermore, the fertilized egg itself goes through drastic changes. This article will detail the process in the following sections.

# Development

In the first weeks after fertilization, the zygote makes many changes and develops rapidly. The first eight weeks of development is known as the organogenic period and is the embryonic stage of development. This period is a crucial phase of development for the embryo’s organs. During the first three weeks, teratogens have an all or nothing effect on the embryo. During the third through eighth-week growth and function are affected. Weeks nine to thirty-seven are known as the fetal period. This period is important for extensive growth in size and continuous differentiation of organ systems. The respiratory system completes development just prior to birth. An important part of embryology that does not complete during the embryonic or fetal phase is gametogenesis. In both males and females, these processes begin during the fetal period and continue into puberty. This process is a mitotic and meiotic process that results in the production of an ovum and sperm.

# Cellular

Once fertilization takes place, there are quick changes at the cellular level of the zygote. The zygote is a single cell, and it undergoes mitosis to create many cells. Once the zygote has reached the thirty-two cell stage, it becomes morula. Day four begins blastulation and cavities begin to form by first forming a hollow ball. Some studies suggest that the timing of this process may affect implantation.

# Biochemical

There are significant changes that the egg and sperm must undergo for the fertilization process to occur; this starts as soon as sperm gets deposited in the vagina. Sperm undergoes capacitation to have increased motility and metabolism to help it make the journey to the fallopian tube. Capacitation occurs due to the acidic environment of the vagina. It activates ATP enzymes in the cytosol of the sperm. The process of capacitation is important because it makes changes in the plasma membrane by altering the lipid and glycoprotein composition, which is one of two changes the sperm undergoes during this process.

# Molecular Level

We have discussed in previous sections changes occurring at the biochemical and cellular levels. Here we will discuss the molecular changes taking place during the fertilization process. Before the actual fertilization process occurs, the sperm travels to the fallopian tubes where it will penetrate the egg. The spermatozoa in ejaculate vary, and the make-up of each spermatozoon contributes to its ability to get to the egg and fertilize it.

# Function

The function of fertilization is to create a diploid(2N) zygote. Fertilization by a sperm activates the ovum, which takes place in the distal third of the fallopian tube. Once the sperm has entered the ovum, immediate changes take place not to allow further penetration of the ovum. These exact changes are in the biochemical section of this article. Once the sperm has penetrated the ovum, the sex of the embryo will be determined based on the presence or absence of a Y chromosome, which contains the SRY gene known as the testis-determining factor and also known as sex-determining region Y.

# Mechanism

A follicle must mature from an oocyte to a Graafian follicle to be ready for fertilization. During ovulation, the follicle will be released and swept into the fallopian tube. If the sperm were deposited in the last ten hours, the spermatozoa would have made their way to this location, and fertilization can occur. Fertilization must take place within twenty-four hours of ovulation; otherwise, the ovum will not be available to be fertilized and will end in menses. The follicle has two layers that the sperm must penetrate, both the corona radiate and zona pellucida. The first step is the penetration of the corona radiata. The acrosome of the spermatozoa then releases enzymes, which aid in the digestion of this layer and allows for access to the secondary oocyte.

# Testing

Infertility is a common problem encountered in the medical community. If a female patient cannot become pregnant after one year of unprotected intercourse performed regularly, an evaluation is in order. An important consideration is the patient’s body mass index. If a patient is overweight, weight loss may improve her chances of becoming pregnant.

# Clinical Significance

There are numerous clinical scenarios in which fertilization comes into play. Fertilization and the development that follows is a delicate and complex process that can result in defects. Hormones are important for preparing the female body to implant a fertilized egg and to grow and nourish it. FSH, which causes the release of estrogen from the ovaries, aids the cervical mucus in being more hospitable to sperm movement through the vaginal canal and cervix. An LH surge is necessary for the release of an egg from the ovary out of the follicle and into the fallopian tube where it can undergo fertilization. Progesterone produced by the corpus luteum and later by the placenta creates and maintains a thickened endometrium to allow a nourishing environment for implantation and growth. Pregnancy tests detect fertilization by measuring beta-human chorionic gonadotrophin released by the growing placenta after implantation.  Another important clinical significance is neural tube defects, which are birth defects of the central nervous system that occurs when the neural tube fails to close completely.