It remains imperative to identify the risk factors and perform a thorough assessment of the patient prior to performing hair transplantation. A team approach is an ideal way to limit the complications of this procedure. Before surgery, the patient should have the following done:

Evaluation by a surgeon experienced in selecting the appropriate patient for HT.

Evaluation by a primary care physician to diagnose and/or treat potentially reversible causes of hair loss (e.g., hypothyroidism, hormonal imbalance, malnutrition), if applicable.

Evaluation by a dermatologist to diagnose and/or treat inflammatory causes of hair loss (e.g., lichen planopilaris), if suspected either on physical exam, laboratory studies, or histopathological analysis.

The pharmacist will have some involvement, depending on the medication needs surrounding the procedure.  The pharmacist should examine the patient's medication record and ensure everything is in place for the hair transplantation, and that there are no drug interactions. Any concerns should be reported to the nurse to pass on to the clinician. Nursing will have extensive involvement, including preparation, assistance intraoperatively, and monitoring and followup. Nursing duties are covered in more detail in the following sections.

An interprofessional team of an experienced surgeon, hair technicians, and operative nurses should be involved during the HT to maximize outcomes. Close follow-up during the initial post-operative period, either by a wound care nurse and/or clinician experienced in the post-operative care of HT, should monitor the patient for possible complications including infection or hematoma. It is also important to provide patient education on properly maintaining the surgical wounds. The patient should also avoid strenuous activity for 1 to 2 weeks to help prevent complications.