Although early and late postmortem changes are heralded as definite signs of death in traditional textbooks, in practical reality, they are not criteria in considering the diagnosis of death. Nevertheless, the immediate postmortem changes are clinically significant in diagnosing death. In the context of the determination of death, the condition known as suspended animation or apparent death should also merit consideration. Suspended animation is a condition where the person appears to be dead because the vital conditions are at such a low pitch as to be minimum compatible with life. This condition may occur in a person fished out of water or hypothermia. In such situations, doctors erroneously declaring a patient dead is a huge embarrassment. Nonetheless, the literature contains reports of cases of wrongful declaration of death.

The early and late postmortem changes are significant from a forensic perspective in primarily estimating the time since death or PMI.

**Forensic Significance**

Postmortem interval (PMI) is the time that has passed since the death of a person until found, is an essential tool in forensic investigations as providing an estimated time since death, is pivotal in judicial cases and can even either incriminate or acquit a suspect.

Understanding the appearance and progression of the postmortem changes is essential in estimating the PMI.

Secondly, a doctor should also be aware of the postmortem changes to avoid misinterpretation of these findings as signs of physical violence or unnatural death. It is not uncommon for the emotionally charged legal heirs of the deceased or members of the lay public to wrongly interpret postmortem lividity for a contusion, especially in instances where death is not witnessed by them, despite assertions from a forensic pathologist.

Incorrect opinions from a misinterpretation of postmortem changes for traumatic injuries during the postmortem examination may mislead the investigation in the wrong direction leading to unnecessary inquiries that may even end up in the miscarriage of justice.

Two specific reasons for a doctor to know the progress of postmortem changes include:

- To recognize the normal changes that occur after death as distinct from traumatic injuries thus avoiding misinterpretation of postmortem changes for signs of violence [for example, livor mortis (postmortem change) that generally occurs in the early postmortem period should not be subject to incorrect interpretation as a contusion (blunt force trauma)]

- To estimate the time since death based on the postmortem changes