The elevation of the gracilis muscle is relatively straight forward. The skin incision will vary depending on whether or not a myocutaneous flap is raised.

Standard surgical prep is used from the pubis to below the knee. With the patient under general anesthesia, the leg is abducted and externally rotated. While in this position, the adductor longus becomes taught and easily palpated at its origin from the pubis. The gracilis muscle originates posterior to the origin of the adductor longus. Next, a line is drawn from the gracilis origin to the medial femoral condyle. The incision is placed 2 to 3 cm posterior to this line in the proximal aspect of the thigh.

The gracilis muscle is the most superficial of the adductors, located in between the adductor longus anteriorly and adductor magnus posteriorly. If questions arise, the microsurgeon may flex or extend the knee as the gracilis is the only one of the three muscles to cross the knee joint. After the muscle is isolated, meticulous dissection around the muscle belly takes place to identify the vascular pedicle from the deep surface. The pedicle is consistently 10 cm from the pubic tubercle between the adductor longus and magnus. Dissection of the pedicle occurs from distal to proximal ligating branches to the adductor longus and magnus until traced back to the origin. If the flap is for functional free tissue transfer, the microsurgeon will need to locate the anterior branch of the obturator nerve and follow it back as far as necessary.

The muscle is then divided from its origin through the same incision, and distally at the pes anserinus through a separate incision. The insertion of the gracilis tendon lies in-between the sartorius superficially and semitendinosus deep.

After harvesting the flap, it is flushed with heparinized saline, placed at the site of the defect, temporarily fixated to a position that will allow for safe microsurgical anastomosis. Many different techniques exist for vessel anastomosis; most incorporate hand sewn arteries and venous coupler. After ischemia time ends, the flap is then inset into the defect. If a muscle flap is harvested and inset depending on preference, the microsurgeon may skin graft immediately or wait several days. For myocutaneous flaps, the skin is inset into the defect, and a perforator is identified for Doppler probe monitoring.