The diagnosis of A-T can be challenging due to the rarity of the disorder. The diagnosis is usually based on the following features:

**Clinical Picture**

Early-onset of ataxia within the first decade in the classical form and oculomotor apraxia are usually crucial to narrow the diagnostic algorithm. The concomitant presence of tumors may raise the suspicion of A-T. The cohort of other symptoms, such as other neurological manifestations, the involvement of the immunological, pulmonary, and endocrinological systems, can help in the diagnosis as well.

**Telangiectasias**

Telangiectasias are present in almost all patients, and therefore, are an important and almost unequivocal sign to make the correct diagnosis. However, telangiectasias are not always easy to recognize. Moreover, they can present in unusual locations, and therefore, can go undetected if not searched for attentively.

**Neuroimaging**

Cerebellar atrophy mostly involving the vermis is the cardinal radiological feature of this disease. Brain magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) is the best current imaging for these findings. Cerebellar atrophy becomes more prominent with age and may be absent early on. In older patients, white matter abnormalities have been reported as well.

**Laboratory Tests**

Elevation of the alpha-fetoprotein is a characteristic feature of A-T, even if it is not exclusive of this condition. Blood tests can also show a decrease in the total amount of IgG and IgA and variable levels of IgM.

**Genetic Testing**

The definitive diagnosis of A-T is reached through the detection of homozygous or compound heterozygous mutation of the ATM gene that can be reached through targeted sequencing of the gene, or through sequencing done as part of ataxia panels or whole-exome sequencing. In the case of a new gene variant, immunoblotting of the ATM protein can be performed to confirm whether the detected mutation causes a significant reduction of the levels of ATM.