Patients with palmoplantar psoriasis and palmoplantar pustulosis report symptoms that may include itching, pain, and fissuring. Though spontaneous remission can occur, the persistence of flares is common.  Patients may experience exacerbations brought on by seasonal changes, household work, and detergents. In fact, palmoplantar psoriasis is more common amongst farmers, manual laborers, and housewives. Significant palmoplantar skin disease may indicate underlying joint disease.

On physical exam, thick hyperkeratotic plaques, sterile pustules, or a mixture of morphologies may be seen in palmoplantar psoriasis.  Hyperkeratotic plaques are the most common subtype. Symmetrically distributed lesions are common, as well as erythema, fissuring, and scaling. Sites other than the hands and feet are commonly involved, with 33% of patients having up to 10% of their body surface area (BSA) involved in studies. The nails are involved up to 60% of the time, with findings including coarse pitting, subungual hyperkeratosis, and longitudinal ridging. Palmoplantar pustulosis begins as a unilateral eruption of pin-sized sterile yellow pustules. Hyperkeratosis with erythema, scaling, and fissuring is seen over time. The most common locations include the thenar, hypothenar, and central portion of the palms and soles. Palmoplantar pustulosis typically resolves with residual brown pigmentation.

The differential diagnosis of palmoplantar psoriasis includes dyshidrotic eczema, contact dermatitis, pityriasis rubra pilaris, acquired palmoplantar keratoderma, and tinea pedis/manuum. Acrodermatitis continua of Hallopeau is a related disease to palmoplantar psoriasis that features painful, pustular, periungual and subungual lesions with an inflammatory base that is chronic and recurrent.