Colon and rectal cancer (CRC) is a relatively common cancer in the US. Because of its varied presentation, the malignancy is managed by an interprofessional team. All newly diagnosed patients with rectal cancer should be universally screened for DNA mismatch repair/microsatellite status present in up to 13% of all sporadic rectal cancer cases. A careful history and physical examination, including a digital rectal exam, are paramount on clinical suspicion. An endoscopy examination with rigid sigmoidoscopy is required to measure the distance from the lesion to the anal verge (less than 15 cm) and for tissue biopsy for pathological confirmation of rectal cancer. Baseline computed tomography of the chest, abdomen, and pelvis may initially grossly rule out metastatic stage disease. Nevertheless, a combined approach by magnetic resonance imaging or transrectal ultrasound will accurately determine tumor extension and node status of the local rectal disease at diagnosis.

An interprofessional evaluation by medical oncology, radiation oncology, and surgical oncology should discuss the best peri-operative chemo-radiotherapy route that could augment the chance of cure on high-risk patients. Oligo-metastatic, liver and lung, and local-recurrence patients with rectal cancer are potentially curable with multimodality therapies. It is important to involve the dietitian early on in the care of these patients. The pharmacist should educate the patient on the different chemotherapeutic agents, their benefits, and adverse effects. The Palliative nurse team should consult with non-surgical candidates to ameliorate symptoms, improve quality of life, inform patients about the right to die, DNR, and ways to improve the quality of life.