**Excisional Surgery**

Excisional margins for melanoma depend on the thickness of the tumor (Breslow). There has been a debate on the margins to use.

**Most Widely Accepted Margins**

1-cm margin

- Melanoma tumors less than 1 mm thickness

Greater than a 1-cm margin

- Melanoma tumor 1 to 2 mm thickness

2-cm margin

- Melanoma tumor greater than 2 mm thickness

- Ulcerated

**Unique Depth of Resection for Lesions in Specific Areas of the Head and Neck**

Face

- Resect to the level of muscles of facial expression (facial mimetic muscles)

Lesions Overlying the Parotid Gland

- Resect down to masseteric fascia (parotideomasseteric fascia). This fascia covers the masseter muscle. It is attached to the lower border of the zygomatic arch, and behind, it invests the parotid gland proceeding into the parotid fascia. However, if the thickness of the melanoma extends into this region, a superficial parotidectomy is performed.

Scalp

- Resect to the calvarial periosteum

Ear

- Auricle: Partial or total auriculectomy depending on the size of tumor and presence of satellite lesions

- Ear canal: Lesions in the ear canal may require temporal bone resection

**Sentinel Node Biopsy and Neck Dissection**

Finite regions of skin have lymphatic drainage to an initial node within a nodal basin. This is known as the sentinel node (SLN). A tool to characterize the regional nodal basin in patients with cutaneous melanoma of the head and neck is the sentinel node biopsy. The frequency of SLN metastasis increases with increasing tumor thickness and other adverse clinicopathological prognostic factors.

- Status is highly predictive of overall and disease-free survival

- Sentinel node biopsy has largely replaced elective neck dissection

- Sentinel node tumor burden is considered a regional disease prognostic factor that should be collected for all patients with positive sentinel nodes but is not used to determine N-category groupings

- Lymphoscintigraphy is performed 1 to 24 hours before SLN biopsy. A SPECT/CT is performed to map the lymph nodes draining the site.

- SLNs that are biopsied are sent for H and E staining. SLN also undergoes immunohistochemistry (IHC) evaluation utilizing S-100, MART-1 (Melana-A), and HMB-45.

- Neck dissection is reserved for those with positive lymph nodes.  A neck dissection is necessary for those with positive SLN or metastatic melanoma.

- For stage III melanoma of the head and neck, the standard of care involves a neck dissection (selective versus modified). Superficial parotidectomy is for areas that drain into the parotid basin: temple, forehead, and cheek. For those that undergo neck dissection for retroauricular melanoma, posterior ear, or posterior scale, nodes from the suboccipital and postauricular must be included.

- Negative sentinel lymph node must be watched closely for recurrent disease

Indications for SLN Biopsy

- Localized stage only

- Breslow depth greater than or equal to 1 mm

- Breslow depth 0.75 to 1 mm (T1) in the presence of adverse prognostic variables:

- Tumor extension to deep margin: ulceration

- Lymphovascular invasion

- Extensive regression to 1.0 mm

- Young age

- High mitotic rate (greater than or equal to 1 mm

- Clark level IV or V (reticular dermis or deeper)

**Parotidectomy**

A superficial parotidectomy is required in patients with melanoma lesions on the anterior scalp, facial, temple, or ear with evidence of regional disease.

Melanoma on the chin or neck does not require a parotidectomy.

**Medical Oncology**

Agents that are used in the medical management of melanoma include the following:

- High dose interleukin-2

- Interferon alfa

- Pegylated interferon alfa-2b

- Granulocyte-macrophage colony-stimulating factor (GM-CSF)

- Dacarbazine

- Temozolomide

- Cisplatin, vinblastine, and dacarbazine (CVD)

- Cisplatin, dacarbazine, carmustine, and tamoxifen

- Carboplatin and paclitaxel

- Trametinib

**Immunomodulators**

- Ipilimumab: A monoclonal antibody that targets CTLA-4

**Programmed Cell Death Protein-1 (PD-1) Inhibitors**

- Nivolumab

- Pembrolizumab

**Molecularly targeted therapy approved by FDA for the treatment of BRAF mutated melanoma**

**BRAF Inhibitors**

- Vemurafenib

- Dabrafenib

**MEK Inhibitors**

- Trametinib

**BRAF and MEK Inhibitor Combinations**

- Dabrafenib + Trametinib

- Vemurafenib + Cobimetinib

**Radiation Therapy**

Melanomas are radioresistant. Radiation therapy is used as adjuvant therapy for multiple positive nodes or macroscopic extranodal extension. It is used as primary therapy for elderly and nonsurgical patients. Radiation therapy is indicated for patients with brain metastasis (stereotactic radiosurgery). Radiation is generally reserved for palliation.