**Drug/Substance****Abuse**

**Family Risk Factors**

- Parental drug/alcohol use

- Intrauterine exposure to drugs

- Marital conflict

- family dysfunction

- Use among siblings

- Recent trauma

- Parent-child conflict, child abuse

**Individual Risk Factors**

- Difficult temperament/inflexibility, low positive mood, withdrawal

- Irritability

- Motor, language, and cognitive impairments

- Early aggressive behavior

- Poor social skills: impulsive, aggressive, passive, and withdrawn

- Poor social problem-solving skills

- Sensation-seeking

- Lack of behavioral self-control

- Early persistent behavior problems/antisocial behavior

- Attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder

- Poor impulse control/impulsivity, poor concentration

- Low self-esteem, perceived incompetence, negative explanatory and inferential style

- Poor grades/achievements/school failure, low commitment to school

**Peer Risk Factors**

- Substance-using peers

- Attending college

- Deviant peer group

**Community Risk Factors**

- Law and norms about alcohol and drug use

- Availability of the drug

**Co-occurring Disorders**

There is a high rate of co-occurring mental disorders among adolescent youth (12 to 18 years) who use substances or have a substance use disorder, including:

- Conduct disorder

- Attention deficit hyperactivity disorder

- Major depressive disorder

- Bipolar disorder

- Anxiety disorder

- Schizophrenia

- Post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD)

In studies of children 13 to 18 years of age with a mental disorder, rates of a co-occurring substance use disorder (SUD) have ranged from 61% to 88%.

**Alcohol Abuse**

Alcoholism is etiologically complex, with a variety of other vulnerability factors.

**Environmental Factors**

It has been estimated that there is a 7-fold risk of alcoholism in first-degree relatives of alcohol-dependent individuals, with male relatives of male alcohol-dependent individuals having the greatest risk for the disorder.

**Genetic Factors**

Among type 1 and type 2 alcoholics (typologies developed by Cloninger), type 1 alcoholics are characterized by the late onset of problem drinking, the rapid development of behavioral tolerance to alcohol, prominent guilt and anxiety related to drinking, and infrequent fighting and arrests when drinking. Cloninger also termed this subtype “milieu-limited,” which emphasizes the etiologic role of environmental factors. In contrast, type 2 alcoholics are characterized by early onset of an inability to abstain from alcohol, frequent fighting and arrests when drinking, and the absence of guilt and fear concerning drinking. Cloninger postulated that transmission of alcoholism in type 2 alcoholics was from fathers to sons, hence term the male-limited alcoholism. Type 1 alcoholics are characterized by high-reward dependence, high-harm avoidance, and low-novelty seeking. In contrast, type 2 alcoholics are characterized by high-novelty seeking, low-harm avoidance, and low-reward dependence. Cloninger also hypothesized that specific neurotransmitter systems underlie personality structure. Specifically, dopamine is hypothesized to modulate novelty seeking, characterized by frequent exploratory behavior and intensely pleasurable responses to novel stimuli. Serotonin is hypothesized to modulate harm avoidance, which is a tendency to respond intensely to aversive stimuli and their conditioned signals. Finally, norepinephrine is hypothesized to modulate reward dependence or the resistance to extinction of previously rewarded behavior.

**Pharmacological Vulnerability**

Some studies show a decreased sensitivity to the effects of alcohol in adult children of alcoholics. Other data indicate the effects of the alcohol metabolizing enzymes aldehyde dehydrogenase and alcohol dehydrogenase polymorphisms in individuals of Asian ancestry, in which adverse reactions to the effects of alcohol are associated with reduced risk of alcohol dependence. Flushing reaction happens to individuals homozygous for the gene that codes the enzyme, aldehyde dehydrogenase (ALDH2). This enzyme breaks down acetaldehyde, one of the byproducts of alcohol metabolism includes the GABRG1 and GABRA2 genes that encode the gamma-1 and alpha-2 subunits of the GABA-A receptor, COMT Val158Met, and DRD2 Taq1A, which may affect dopamine receptor sensitivity, and KIAA0040. Genes may influence which individuals are more susceptible to alcohol-related comorbidities like alcoholic liver disease.

**Affective Deregulation**

It is proposed that alcoholism is caused by repeated alcohol use to “self-medicate” negative affective states such as anxiety and depression.

**Personality Disorders**

These include hyperactivity, distractibility, sensation seeking, impulsivity, difficult temperament, and conduct disorder.