The effects of the neuromuscular blockade are assessable by evaluating a mechanically evoked response to an electrical stimulation using a peripheral nerve stimulator. Routine use of peripheral nerve stimulators is strongly encouraged by the Anesthesia Patient Safety Foundation (APSF) to monitor the depth of neuromuscular blockade during surgery and after reversal by the reversal agent to confirm and rule out any residual neuromuscular blockade.

Routinely two sites are used for peripheral nerve stimulation - the distal forearm where the ulnar nerve is stimulated using two electrodes placed on the anatomical path of the ulnar nerve to stimulate the adductor pollicis muscle of the hand and around the eyes on the forehead to stimulate the facial nerve and orbicularis oculi muscle. The peripheral nerve stimulator can provide an electrical current of specific strength and duration to create a pattern of stimulation. A train of four (TOF) is most commonly used to evaluate the amount of muscle contraction. Other types of stimulation include a single twitch response, double burst stimulation, tetany, and post-tetanic stimulation. In a TOF stimulation, four electrical stimulations at 2Hz are delivered every 0.5 sec, and the twitch height response of the fourth twitch is compared to the first twitch. In patients under the effect of rocuronium and other nondepolarizing neuromuscular blocking drugs, the fourth twitch response is smaller than the first due to the depletion of Ach released on successive stimulation. This leads to the calculation of the TOF ratio and fade and is a hallmark of nondepolarizing neuromuscular blockade. Loss of 2 twitches out of four is considered adequate for surgical anesthesia, and if all four twitches are lost, one should not administer any more muscle relaxant until there is a recovery of some twitches. A TOF ratio of >0.7-0.9 is considered adequate for complete reversal.