In 80% of cases, Alport syndrome is inherited in an X-linked pattern and caused by COL4A5 gene mutations, although other inheritance patterns exist. It can be inherited as an autosomal recessive or dominant pattern by mutations in COL4A3 or COL4A4 gene. Approximately 80% of men with XLAS develop some hearing loss until they reach their teenage years.

Alport syndrome is caused by mutations in the genes responsible for alpha-3, alpha-4, and alpha-5 chains of type IV collagen. The following three genetic forms of Alport syndrome are mentioned with their proximate causes:

- XLAS - caused by mutations in the COL4A5 gene; 85% of cases of Alport syndrome

- ARAS - due to mutations in COL4A3 or COL4A4 gene; leading to approximately 10-15% of cases

- ADAS - caused by mutations in the COL4A3 or COL4A4 gene, although rare

Over 300 mutations have been observed in the COL4A5 genes in families with XLAS. Majorly, COL4A5 mutations are minor, including splice-site mutations, missense mutations, and deletions of fewer than ten base pairs.

Around 20% of the mutations are large and medium-sized deletions in the COL4A5 gene. A certain kind of deletion involving the COL4A5 and COL4A6 genes leads to a combination of XLAS and leiomyomatosis of the esophagus, female genital tract, and tracheobronchial tree.

In patients with Alport syndrome, to date, only six mutations in the COL4A3 gene and twelve mutations in the COL4A4 gene are seen in patients with ARAS. The mutations include frameshift deletions, amino acid substitutions, missense mutations, splicing mutations, and in-frame deletions.