Ideally, the site would be marked pre-operatively with indelible ink or an "X" scored into the skin. This is so that the site can still be seen at the end of a long operation when the antiseptic prep or blood may have distorted the skin. If a laparotomy has been formed then the linea alba, which is the cut edge of the abdominal wall, is grasped with Kocher clamps or Littlewood clamps and retracted toward the midline to approximate the two wound edges together. As this will be the anatomically correct position of closure of the abdominal wall, it will also help identify where the ileostomy will be sited once the wound is closed. If a loop ileostomy is being made laparoscopically, then under vision the ileum can be grasped with a pair of Johan atraumatic graspers and bought towards the anterior abdominal wall to sit in a position where it is not under tension.

A 2.5 to 3 cm circle or ellipse of skin is excised using monopolar diathermy (it may be helpful to lift the skin upward using an Alice clamp or Littlewood clamp). The tissue is then dissected down through the subcutaneous fat to the anterior fascial sheath of the rectus muscle, which is then opened through a cruciate incision. The rectus muscle is spread or retracted medially; however, caution must be taken to avoid injuring the epigastric vessels that run deeply in the center of this muscle. Once the muscle is retracted, the posterior sheath is seen underlying this which is usually closed attached to the peritoneum on its under-surface. Another cruciate incision is made to the posterior sheath, and then two Kelly clips are used to grasp the peritoneum and lift it up. Using dissection scissors, a cut is made in the peritoneum between the two clips which will gain access into the peritoneal cavity. The surgical defect is stretched to allow two fingers to traverse through it thus ensuring enough room for the small bowel to be bought up to form the ileostomy. The next step is to gently pass the selected segment of terminal ileum (which has been checked to have enough length, mobilization and is tension-free) through the trephine that you just formed. If a loop ileostomy is being formed, it is the loop of ileum that is bought up through the abdominal wall defect to the skin. If an end ileostomy is being formed, then it is simply the stapled off the end of ileum that is bought up. The ileum should be positioned such that the proximal limb is cephalad and is at 12 o’clock. It should also protrude approximately 5 cm above the skin before a seromuscular absorbable stay suture (e.g., 3.0 monocryl or vicryl rapide) is placed to the skin to prevent the ileum from slipping back inside. This then allows you to perform your final checks (checking orientation, controlling hemostasis, washout, rectus sheath catheters, drains) prior to closing up the abdomen and protecting the wounds with dressings before focussing on the ileostomy formation. It is considered common practice to close any abdominal wounds prior to the formation of the ileostomy so as to prevent faecal contamination of the wound with stool from the ileum.

**Loop Ileostomy Formation**

The distal limb is opened transversely for two-thirds of its diameter in a position about halfway up from the skin level. Submucosal bleeding can be controlled with bipolar cautery. Interrupted absorbable sutures are placed at the 3, 9 and 12 o’clock position taking seromuscular bites at the lumen of the proximal limb as well as approximately 4 cm down the loop before taking a subcuticular bite of the skin at the trephine skin edge. The positions here are away from the supplying mesentery. A Langenbeck retractor can then be used to help evert the lumen so that the limb is now spouting. The interrupted sutures are then tied in place using square knots. The distal limb is also everted similarly, however, will be less spouted as there is less protrusion of the distal limb above skin level. Interrupted absorbable sutures are applied circumferentially around both limbs, taking care not to compromise the vascular supply of the mesentery.

**End Ileostomy**

The formation of the trephine is the same here as mentioned above. Once you pull the stapled end of ileum through the abdominal wall defect and apply the stay suture, you still proceed to carry out the usual checks and close the wounds as previously mentioned. Then taking the monopolar diathermy, you excise the staple line from the ileal end and discard it. Some surgeons may choose to cut the staple line off using dissecting scissors. However, this increases the risk of bleeding from the cut edges of the bowel which can be troublesome at times to control. Once the staple line has been excised, open up the lumen and then apply the 3 interrupted absorbable sutures at the 3, 9 and 12 o’clock position taking seromuscular bites. Again using a Langenbeck retractor, evert the mucosa of the lumen so that the limb is now spouting. The interrupted sutures are then tied in place using square knots.