Treatment of psychiatric symptoms following concussion/mTBI should be based on individual factors and the nature and severity of symptom presentation. It may include physiotherapy, psychotherapeutic, and pharmacological treatment modalities.

**Physical Rehabilitation**

TBI may result in a decrease in short and long-term global health (physical and behavioral) and put them at an elevated risk for disability, pain, and handicap (i.e., difficulty with a return to work, maintaining peer networks.) Rehabilitation therapies like physical therapy, occupational therapy, speech-language therapy, and assistive devices and technologies may help to strengthen patients to perform their activities of daily living.

**Psychotherapy**

- Initial education, long-term support groups (symptom-focused and process groups), family education, and social issues like financial, legal and transportation.

- Virtual reality and videogaming-based therapy in treating balance, coordination, and cognitive issues like attention and concentration data are under larger scale clinical trials to prove efficacy.

**Medications**

- Depakote, NSAIDs, and triptans: May be considered for headaches which are the single most common symptom associated with concussion/mTBI

- SSRIs: Citalopram 10 mg daily for 1 week, then 20 mg daily if tolerated (up to 80 mg daily if needed). Sertraline 25 mg daily increasing weekly in 25 mg increments to a maximum dose of 200 mg/day for depression

- Anticonvulsants: mood stabilization and seizure prevention

- Atypical antipsychotics: for agitation and irritability with beta-blockers in severe cases

- Dopaminergic agents: for concentration and focus

- Cholinesterase inhibitors/cognitive enhancers for memory

- Atypical agents: Buspar for emotional stabilization and Modafinil for focus.

**General Guidelines for Using Medications**

- Start low, go slow, whenever medications are required

- Rule out social factors first, such as abuse, neglect, caregiver conflict, and environmental issues

- No large quantities of lethal medications, high suicide rate due to disinhibition

- Full therapeutic trials, since under treatment is common

- Minimize benzodiazepines (impairs cognition), anticholinergics (induces sedation), seizure-inducing (impedes neuronal recovery), and antidopaminergic agents

- No caffeine (due to agitation and insomnia), no diet, herbal, or energy drinks (may precipitate aggression).

**Other Considerations in Treating PTSD in Patients with mTBI**

- Present information at a slower rate

- Use a structured intervention approach with agenda, outline, or handouts

- In groups, ask “PTSD” to respond first, then ask others to respond

- Allow free contribution, use refocus/redirection with a clear transition between topics

- The therapist should avoid frustrating mTBI patients by forcing them to recall incidents that are only partially encoded.

**Management of Sleep Dysfunction**

Immediately following TBI, the difficulty in falling asleep and frequent waking is common; whereas, after several years excessive somnolence is more typical.

- Acute Phase less than 3 months: Provide education about concussion about changes in sleep quality and duration sometimes associated with concussion. Provide information on good sleep habits with specific suggestions to improve the quality and duration of sleep (regularly scheduled bedtime). Sleep medications may be helpful in the short-term. Zolpidem 5 mg at night, if poor results after 3 nights of therapy, increase to 10 mg nightly. Also, prazosin, with 1 mg at bedtime for 3 days, may increase to 2 mg at bedtime through day 7.

- Chronic phase: more than 3 months: Review current medications and other current health conditions for factors that might contribute to chronic sleep disturbances, including chronic pain or co-morbid psychiatric conditions. Consider sleep study to provide objective evidence of sleep disturbance and to rule out coexisting sleep apnea or other sleep disorders. Consider a course of cognitive-behavioral therapy (CBT) focused on sleep.

**Hyperbaric Oxygen Therapy (HBO2)**

Some researchers discussed the role of oxygen delivered at supraphysiological amounts in the treatment of TBI. A study published in 2010 included closed-head trauma victims with GCS scores of 3 to 8 after resuscitation, without effects from paralytics, sedation, alcohol, and/or street drugs. HBO2 treatment began within 24 hrs post-injury admission to hospital with a mild or moderate TBI compared the effect of HBO2 to normobaric oxygen. They found a significant post-treatment effect of HBO2 on cerebral oxidative metabolism due to its ability to produce a brain tissue PO2 greater than or equal to 200 mmHg (higher cerebral blood flow lead to higher PO2, lower levels of lactate by 13% compared to control group, and lower intracranial pressure). However, in severe TBI, it is not an all or nothing phenomenon but represents a graduated effect. Some controversy still surrounds the use of HBO2 due to the limitations of studies such as the lack of blinding to the intervention, cost, time-consuming practice, and the validity of the actual diagnoses of the patients with reported TBI and PTSD who had a subsequent improvement.

**Hypothermia**

Studies have shown some controversy in the practicality of this practice depending on the patient’s characteristics (age, the initial GCS, the presence or absence of pupillary abnormalities, and CT-based classification of the severity of the injury). In general, there has been an increased belief that cooling the body to systemic temperatures around 34 C to 35 C, helps reduce secondary injury and improve behavioral outcomes. Studies have suggested that this occurs because of the ability of hypothermia to suppress the post-traumatic inflammatory response, in turn, preserving the blood-brain barrier and reducing the number of cytokines released as well as glutamate.

**Medical Measures to Reduce Intracranial Pressure**

Head end of bed elevation to 30 degrees, transient hyperventilation, hyperosmolar therapy, therapeutic cooling, and medically induced comatose state are some measures to reduce intracranial pressure. Some patients will need monitoring of the intracranial pressure.

**Surgical Measures to Reduce Intracranial Pressure**

This involves the evacuation of intracranial hematoma or decompressive craniectomy.