The usual symptoms of lateral medullary infarction include vertigo, dizziness, nystagmus, ataxia, nausea and vomiting, dysphagia, and hiccups. Dysphagia is more profound in lateral medullary syndrome patients. Nevertheless, the manifestation is broad and includes dysphonia, facial pain, visual disturbance, and headaches. There is:

- Impairment of pain and thermal sensation over the contralateral side of the trunk and limbs

- Impairment of pain and thermal sensation over the ipsilateral face

- Ipsilateral Horner syndrome

- Ipsilateral limb ataxia

- Dysphagia

- Nystagmus (horizontal or horizontal–rotational, opposite to the side of the lesions, usually more prominent on looking downward)

- Hiccups (can easily be overlooked)

- ipsilateral hyperalgesia

Study shows that the onset of the lateral medullary syndrome is sudden in 75% of patients and gradual in 25% of patients. Sensory signs and symptoms are the most frequent manifestations (96%). Less common clinical presentation includes facial paresis, dysarthria, and eye pathologies such as skew deviation, diplopia, and gaze deviation. Among those with gradual onset, patients usually first have headaches, vertigo, dizziness, or gait ataxia, while sensory clinical features, dysphagia, hoarseness, and hiccups usually occur later.

Patients with lateral medullary syndrome show conjugate deviation of eyes towards the side of the lateral medullary infarct. Various types of eye problems correlate with LMS. These are nystagmus, gaze-evoked nystagmus, skew deviation, and ipsipulsion. Among these, ipsipulsion is more specific to LMS.