**Protractors**

Directly under the upper and lower eyelid skin is the orbicularis oculi muscle. This is the main protractor muscle (closure) of the eyelid. The orbicularis oculi muscle is a large, thin, circular muscle that is divided into pretarsal, preseptal, and orbital segments. The pretarsal and preseptal segments are responsible for involuntary eyelid closure (blinking). The orbital segment is primarily responsible for voluntary/forced eyelid closure.

**Retractors**

Upper Eyelid

The levator muscle originates in the apex of the orbit, travels forward over the eyeball, and splits into two unique structures: the levator aponeurosis anteriorly and the superior tarsal muscle (Muller's muscle) posteriorly. The split occurs superiorly at the Whitnall ligament and inferiorly at the Lockwood ligament.

The levator aponeurosis continues inferiorly and splits into an anterior and posterior portion near the upper tarsal border. The anterior portion of the levator aponeurosis inserts into the pretarsal orbicularis and skin to form the upper eyelid crease. The posterior portion of the aponeurosis inserts into the upper anterior surface of the tarsal plate.

Muller's muscle extends from the undersurface of the levator aponeurosis at the level of the Whitnall ligament and inserts along the upper eyelid superior tarsal margin. It is a sympathetically innervated retractor muscle of the upper eyelid and provides approximately 2mm of eyelid elevation.

Lower Eyelid

The capsulopalpebral fascia is analogous to the levator aponeurosis in the upper eyelid. Its fibers originate from attachments to the inferior rectus muscle. It extends forward, envelops the inferior oblique muscle, forms the Lockwood ligament, and continues anteriorly, attaching to the orbital septum and inferior conjunctival fornix before finally inserting on the inferior tarsal border.

The inferior tarsal muscle is analogous to the Muller's muscle in the upper eyelid. This muscle is poorly developed and runs posterior to the capsulopalpebral fascia of the lower eyelid.