There are several theories postulated for the pathogenesis of TPE, but the exact mechanism is still unclear. Eosinophils play a central role in the pathogenesis of TPE. The microfilariae are periodically released from the lymphatic system, which gets trapped within the pulmonary microcirculation. This triggers an immune response by releasing eosinophils. Eosinophil degranulates releasing eosinophilic cationic protein (ECP), eosinophil-derived neurotoxin (EDN), major basic proteins (MBP), and eosinophil peroxidase (EPO), which helps in the clearance of microfilariae as well as causes lung damage. Compliment activation and opsonization by antifilarial antibodies also help in microfilariae clearance. It is postulated that MBP-2 is associated with airway hyperactivity and interleukin (IL)-4 induces while interferon (IFN)-gamma suppresses the airway hyperactivity induced by microfilariae. Microfilariae in pulmonary circulation also generate an overactive systemic and pulmonary TH2 response resulting in increased levels of IL-4, IL-5, filarial-specific IgG, IgM, IgE antibodies, and massive pulmonary eosinophilia.

The Bm22-25, a major antigen of the infective L3 stage larvae of B. malayi, has been shown to induce IgE production in patients with TPE. The gamma-glutamyl transpeptidase present on the surface of human pulmonary epithelium is found to have similarities with the gamma-glutamyl transpeptidase found in the infective L3 stage larvae. Therefore, it has been proposed that the filarial gamma-glutaryl transpeptidase plays an important role in the pathogenesis of TPE. Treatment with diethylcarbamazine (DEC) suppresses the intense eosinophilic alveolitis seen in a patient with TPE.

Some studies show that oxidants like superoxide and hydrogen peroxide are released from the lower respiratory tract inflammatory cells, which cause an acute and chronic form of TPE. Thus, a short course of corticosteroids is needed to suppress the production of oxidants.