**Maintain Accurate Medical Records of Opioid Prescriptions**

All clinicians should maintain accurate, complete, and current medical records, including:

- Records of controlled substance prescriptions

- Record instructions provided

- Detailed history, physical exam, the reason for prescribing, and monitoring measures

**Federal and State Laws**

Several regulations and programs at the federal and state levels reduce prescription opioid abuse, diversion, and overdose. These laws require:

- Immunity from prosecution for individuals seeking assistance during an overdose

- Patient identification before dispensing

- A physical examination before prescribing opioids

- Prescription limits

- Limitations from obtaining controlled substance prescriptions

- Tamper-resistant prescriptions

**Federal Laws**

The U.S. Drug Enforcement Administration (DEA) sets national standards for controlled substances. Drug scheduling was mandated under The Federal Comprehensive Drug Abuse Prevention and Control Act of 1970 (also referred to as the Controlled Substances Act). This act addresses controlled substances within Title II. The DEA maintains a list of controlled medications and illicit substances categorized from schedule I to V. The five categories are based on the medication's proper and beneficial medical use and the medication's potential for dependency and abuse. The purpose of the law is to provide government oversight over the manufacturing and distribution of these types of substances. Prescribers and dispensers are required to have a DEA license to supply these drugs. The licensing provides links to users, prescribers, and distributors.

The schedules range from Schedule I to V, with Schedule I drugs having the highest risk of abuse and Schedule V drugs having the lowest potential for abuse. Other factors considered by the DEA include pharmacological effect, evidenced-based knowledge of the drug, risk to public health, trends in the use of the drug, and whether or not the drug has the potential to be modified into a more dangerous drug.

- "High abuse potential with no accepted medical use; medications within this schedule may not be prescribed, dispensed, or administered"

-  Examples include marijuana (cannabis), heroin, mescaline (peyote), lysergic acid diethylamide (LSD), methylenedioxymethamphetamine (MDMA), and methaqualone.

- "High abuse potential with severe psychological or physical dependence; however, these medications have an accepted medical use and may be prescribed, dispensed, or administered"

-  Examples include fentanyl, oxycodone, morphine, methylphenidate, hydromorphone, amphetamine, methamphetamine (meth), pentobarbital, and secobarbital.

- Schedule II drugs may not receive a refill

- "Intermediate abuse potential (i.e., less than Schedule II but more than Schedule IV medications)"

- Examples include anabolic steroids, testosterone, and ketamine

- "Abuse potential less than Schedule II but more than Schedule V medications"

- Examples include diazepam, alprazolam, and tramadol

- "Medications with the least potential for abuse among the controlled substances."

- Examples include pregabalin, Diphenoxylate/atropine, and dextromethorphan.

It is essential to understand the DEA controlled-substance scheduling to ensure adequate caution when prescribing medications with high abuse potential and to ensure against prescribing outside of one's authority.

The Controlled Substances Act has great potential to improve patient safety by providing federal oversight for drugs with a high potential for abuse. Providers of scheduled substances (physicians, dentists, podiatrists, advanced practitioners) may have links to the distribution of these substances. They are required to have a DEA license and record prescriptions of scheduled drugs. This licensing prevents overprescribing and identification of potential drug-seeking patients. The dispenser must also be aware of a patient's medication history and be mindful of the potential for polypharmacy if a patient seeks multiple providers. The current opioid epidemic is when federal oversight and interdisciplinary coordination can potentially reduce harm to patients who are prescribed scheduled drugs. However, it will take further time and evaluation to know if drug scheduling actually reduces abuse, addiction, and overdose.

**State Requirements**

Tennessee laws govern the prescribing, dispensing, reporting, and consumption of controlled substances. A summary of key clinical information is as follows.

**Summary Healthcare Practitioner Prescribing**

- 
**No Requirements Before Prescribing**

- 
              
- Rx - Up to 3-day opioid prescription, maximum dose 180 morphine milligram equivalent (MME)

- 
**Requirements Before Prescribing (Check CSMD, thorough patient evaluation, document consideration of alternatives and why an opioid was used, obtain informed consent, include ICD-10 code on the chart and RX)**

- 
              
- Rx - Up to 10-day opioid prescription, maximum dose 500 MME
              
              
- Rx - Up to 30-day opioid prescription, maximum dose 1200 MME, for a minimally invasive procedure
              
              
- Rx - Up to 30-day opioid prescription, maximum dose 1200 MME, medical necessity (after trial and failure or contraindication of a non-opioid treatment)

- 
**Exempted Patient Prescriptions (Includes ICD-10 Code and the word "exempt")**

- 
              
- Receiving active cancer treatment, palliative or hospice care
              
              
- Sickle cell disease
              
              
- Receiving opioids from a licensed facility
              
              
- Pain specialist
              
              
- Treated with an opioid for 90 days or more in the last year or who are subsequently treated for 90 days or more
              
              
- Treated with buprenorphine, methadone, or naltrexone
              
              
- Treated for severe burns (thermal or chemical 2nd or 3rd degree)
              
              
- Treated for major physical trauma (serious injury due to blunt or penetrating force that resulted in serious blood loss, fracture, temporary or permanent impairment, or disability)

**Chronic Pain Guidelines For the Management of Chronic Non-Malignant Pain**

The practitioner should review the detailed guidelines provided by the Tennessee Department of Health. The following is a summary of the key points.

**Section I: Before Initiating Opioid Therapy for Chronic Non-Malignant Pain**

- Try non-opioid therapy first. Do not initiate opioid therapy just because a previous provider did

- A full medical workup including history, physical, review of systems, prior opioid use, comorbid conditions, mental health disorder screening, and review of medical records should be documented.

- Conduct an in-person exam. Do not initiate prescription through telemedicine.

- A current diagnosis should justify the need for opioids

- Assess for risk of abuse using risk assessment tools, obtain a urine drug test, and check the Controlled Substances Monitoring Database (CSMD)

- Establish and follow goals for treatment with the 3-item PEG Assessment Scale (**P**ain average, interference with**E**njoyment of life, and Interference with**G**eneral Activity). The goal is to increase function and reduce pain

- Administer a urine drug screen to the newly pregnant woman; before administering opioids or renewing prescriptions to child-bearing women, discuss a birth control plan and evaluate for a possible pregnancy

**Section II: Initiating Opioid Therapy for Chronic Non-Malignant Pain**

- Prescribe the lowest effective dose for the shortest time period required

- Start with immediate-release opioids and gradually switch to extended-release or long-acting opioids if required

- Avoid benzodiazepines or naloxone combinations with an opioid for chronic pain

- Methadone should only be used for addiction or by pain specialists

- Document any deviations from guidelines

- Obtained informed consent discussing and documenting risks and benefits

- Obtain a written treatment agreement that includes reasons for discontinuation, refill policy, lost prescription policy, safe storage, periodic drug testing, and pregnancy issues

- Establish ongoing monitoring for abuse, misuse, or diversion

- If potentially child-bearing, obtain pregnancy test and discuss methods to avoid unintended pregnancy if child-bearing age with documented and signed discussion of risks and benefits

**Section III: Ongoing Opioid Therapy for Chronic Non-Malignant Pain**

- All opioid therapy should be from a single provider and single pharmacy

- One opioid should be prescribed.

- Document five A's (analgesia, activities of daily living, adverse side effects, aberrant drug-taking behaviors, and affect).

- Review the patient's history of controlled substance prescriptions using the Controlled Substance Monitoring Database (CSMD) data to determine whether the patients are receiving opioid dosages or potentially dangerous combinations.

- Continually monitor for signs of abuse, misuse, or diversion—order urine drug screen at least twice per year.

- Emergency physicians should inform providers of any incidents or conditions.

- Opioids are to be discontinued when the risks, side effects, lack of efficacy, or aberrant behavior outweigh the benefits.

- Document CSMD queries.

- Discuss a method to prevent unintended pregnancy with every woman of childbearing age who has reproductive capacity when opioids are initiated.

- If the patient plans to become pregnant, refer her to an obstetrician.

- Document urine drug screen results.

**12 Core Competencies for Prescribing Controlled Substances**

- Understand the epidemiology and population level of opioid addiction.

- Develop competence in performing a pain evaluation.

- Have a pharmacologic and nonpharmacologic treatment of pain.

- Understand the practical aspects of prescribing and communication.

- Develop techniques for conflict prevention and resolution.

- Follow chronic pain goals.

- Understand acute pain care for chronic pain patients.

- Develop an interoffice and interprofessional focus.

- Always perform a substance use disorder risk evaluation.

- Development of the treatment plan for the patient with substance use disorder.

- Educate patient and family on the management of overdose risk.

- Know the professional and legal standards.

**State Laws on Opioid Prescribing**

- Offer reasonable alternatives, risks, and benefits.

- Explain opioid use, what to expect, and disclose the risk of dependency, addiction, diversion, and misuse

- A consent signed by the patient or legal representative

- Discussion and consideration of whether an opioid should be taken

- If childbearing age, include access to information on birth control and neonatal abstinence syndrome

- Give and document an opportunity to ask and answer questions

- An agreement (contract), usually including informed consent, providing patient-provider long-term conditions for the prolonged (typically > 90-days) use of opioids or controlled substances

- Informed consent is for the episode of care for which the controlled substance is prescribed (TN law does not specify an expiration)

- Agreement (contract) is for the duration of care under that provider or practice and are typically renewed with major changes in treatment or periodically

- Sent electronically

- If PA or ARNP must include collaborating physician's name, address, and phone

- MME = (Daily amount opioid prescribed) X (# days prescribed)

- Example

- Oxycodone = 1.5X as potent as morphine
- Oxycodone 10 mg = Morphine 15 mg (30 MME)
- Prescribe Oxycodone 10 mg q 12 hours for 30-days

- Oxycodone 20 mg X 1.5 = 30 mg morphine
- 30 mg X 30 days = 900 MME

- Before a new controlled substance prescription

- Before each new controlled substance prescription for 1st 90 days

- Before prescribing, if abuse suspected

- At least every 6 months

- Benzodiazepines

- Gabapentin

- Opioids

- Pregabalin

- An authorized delegate may check

- 3-day or less prescription

- Hospice or palliative patient

- 3-day or less prescription, maximum 180 MME

- In-person H & P with a diagnosis

- In-person documentation of reaction

- counsel patient on disposal of initial prescription

- Dispenser confirmation remainder will not be filled

- 10-day maximum of one opioid, 500 MME

- In-person exam

- Document non-opioid and other treatments discussed or tried or reasons not tried.

- Document reasons for opioid

- ICD-10 code in the chart and on prescription

- Informed consent (if childbearing age, includes access to information on birth control and neonatal abstinence syndrome)

**Post-Op Pain (1-30-days)**

****

- 30-day maximum of one opioid, 1200 MME

- In-person exam

- Document non-opioid and other treatments discussed or tried or reasons not tried.

- Document reasons for opioid

- ICD-10 code in the chart and on prescription

- Signed informed consent (if childbearing age, includes access to information on birth control and neonatal abstinence syndrome)

****

**Prolonged Pain (1-30-days)**

****

- 30-day maximum of one opioid, 1200 MME

- In-person exam

- Document non-opioid and other treatments discussed or tried or reasons not tried.

- Document reasons for opioid

- ICD-10 code in the chart and on prescription

- Signed informed consent (if childbearing age, includes access to information on birth control and neonatal abstinence syndrome)

- Write "Medical Necessity" on the prescription.



-  Maximum of 14 days

- Active cancer, palliative, and hospice care

- Sickle cell

- Severe burn

- Major physical trauma

- Inpatients

- Pain management prescribers (or supervised APRN or PA) or under a supervised collaborative direction of a care plan

- Treatment with an opioid agonist

- Patients treated with opioids daily already for 90 days or more

- ICD-10 code for primary disease on prescription

- Include the word "EXEMPT" and the reason on the prescription

- Signed informed consent (if childbearing age, includes access to information on birth control and neonatal abstinence syndrome)