The basic tenets of critically ill patient management remain focused on initial attention to airway, breathing, and circulations. Consider endotracheal intubation in patients with worsening signs and symptoms of toxicity due to the risk of rapid hemodynamic deterioration — some advocate preadministration of atropine to offset vagally mediated hypotension and bradycardia during laryngoscopy.

If rapid deterioration is not evident, the patient should still be on a continuous cardiac monitor with close, intensive care monitoring. History should focus on underlying medical conditions, type of formulation ingested (immediate vs. sustained release), co-ingestants, and time of ingestion. Obtain an ECG to identify conduction abnormalities. Atropine is mostly ineffective in severe CCB toxicity.

Use intravenous crystalloids during initial resuscitation while remaining cognizant of the risk of fluid overload with drug-induced inotropic failure. Therefore, dynamic assessment of fluid responsiveness with pulse pressure variability or stroke volume variability may be worthwhile.

Finally, seek early consultation with a medical toxicologist or poison control center. Cardiology consultation is also prudent considering the likelihood of a transvenous pacemaker or intra-aortic balloon pump in severe overdose.

Conventional decontamination measures like urinary alkalinization, hemodialysis, or hemofiltration are ineffective in CCB toxicity because of their large volume of distribution and lipophilic nature. Whole bowel irrigation is the mainstay of elimination in extended-release preparations.

**Gastrointestinal Detoxification**

Controversy exists regarding the utility of GI decontamination in early intervention patients. It should not take precedence over resuscitation and avoid it in unstable patients.

Administer activated charcoal in a dose of 1 gm/kg within 1 to 2 hours for maximum benefit.

**Pharmacological Therapies**

**Calcium**

The rationale behind calcium administration is that increased extracellular concentration will promote calcium influx via unblocked L type calcium channels. However, responses are variable and suboptimal with severe toxicity. Calcium may improve hypotension and conduction disturbances but is less effective in the management of bradycardia. The optimum dose ranges from 4.5 to 95.3 mEq/L based on reports, and there appears to be no identifiable dose-response relationship.

Calcium chloride contains triple the amount of elemental calcium on a weight to weight basis over calcium gluconate. (10% calcium chloride: 272mg elemental calcium or 13.6 mEq/1g ampule; 10% calcium gluconate: 90mg elemental calcium or 4.5 mEq/1g ampule). However, CaCl ideally should be administered via a central line because of the risk of skin necrosis on extravasation. The initial recommended dose is 10 to 20 ml of 10% calcium chloride (30 to 60 ml for calcium gluconate) with repeat boluses every 10 to 20 minutes for 3 or 4 additional doses if clinical response is inadequate.

As the effect of calcium is transient, some centers recommend an infusion of calcium chloride titrating to effect and monitoring calcium levels, usually at 0.2 to 0.4 ml/kg/hour. Kerns et al. recommend monitoring calcium levels 30 minutes after starting infusion and every 2 hours during infusion.[19] Calcium gluconate is safe through a peripheral IV but requires higher volumes to achieve the same calcium dose. There have been cases of multiorgan failure with acute tubular necrosis, hepatic necrosis, splenic infarcts, and skin involvement from calciphylaxis related to over-aggressive use of calcium in the setting of CCB overdose. Most practitioners will administer calcium as an initial measure, but if toxicity reoccurs or worsens will switch to other interventions.

**Insulin**

Hyperinsulinemic euglycemia (HIE) has emerged as a potent therapy for severe calcium channel blocker toxicity. Experimental models show that CCB toxicity shifts myocardial substrate preference to carbohydrates from free fatty acids; thus, cardiac substrate delivery is impaired. CCBs also reduce insulin secretion, creates tissue insulin resistance, and interfere with glucose catabolism leading to lactic academia and metabolic acidosis. Insulin administered in such a setting helps to reverse all of those derangements of metabolism. Insulin has a direct positive inotropic effect that contributes to its clinical role here.

The foundation of insulin used in CCB toxicity stems from several canine studies that showed an improvement in cardiac function and survival rate compared with placebo, epinephrine, glucagon, and calcium in verapamil overdose.

The current insulin dosing recommendation is 1 Unit/kg regular insulin intravenous bolus followed by 1 to 10 U/kg/hour continuous infusion.

Before the initiation of insulin therapy, check blood glucose and potassium. If less than 200 mg/dl and 2.5 meq/L, respectively, then dextrose and potassium supplementation are necessary.

**Methylene Blue**

Methylene can counteract post coronary artery bypass vasoplegia (low systemic vascular resistance) by inhibiting guanylate cyclase, thus decreasing cyclic guanosine monophosphate (cGMP) and inhibiting nitric oxide synthesis. It has successfully treated refractory cases of CCB overdose as an adjuvant to vasopressors and HIE therapy.

**Lipid Emulsion Therapy**

Intravenous lipid emulsion is an oil-in-water emulsion that creates a lipid phase within the plasma and pulls a lipid-soluble drug into the lipid phase in blood. Lipid emulsion infusion can sequester intensely lipophilic drugs like verapamil and diltiazem and thus reduce their volume of distribution.

There is also an enhanced metabolism theory that argues that the infusion of lipid emulsion provides a sustained fatty acid energy source to the myocyte under a toxic metabolic milieu.

The role and efficacy of lipid emulsion therapy in CCB toxicity are mostly based on animal studies and case reports and is therefore recommended only in refractory shock or severe toxicity unresponsive to conventional treatments.

American Society of Regional Anesthesia recommends an initial bolus of 1.5 ml/kg of 20% lipid emulsion followed by 0.25 to 0.5 ml/kg/min over 30 minutes.

Reported adverse effects of therapy in high doses and multiple administrations include acute pancreatitis, ARDS, interference with vasopressors, and fat overload syndrome inducing hepatosplenomegaly, seizures, fat embolism, and coagulopathy.

**Glucagon**

Glucagon secreted from alpha cells of the pancreas act through activation of adenylate cyclase via G proteins resulting in a positive chronotropic and inotropic effect.

It is an emetic and nausea; vomiting can occur with bolus doses above 50 micrograms/kg. It can also induce hyperglycemia, hypokalemia, and ileus.

**Catecholamines**

Refractory hypotension and shock may result from both cardiac depression and loss of peripheral vascular resistance in severe CCB toxicity. Catecholamine infusion may become necessary in such a setting in addition to the other pharmacological therapies. There hasn’t been a single established agent of choice between dopamine, norepinephrine, epinephrine, or even dobutamine. The optimal agent of choice is, therefore, unclear. Thus, the mechanism of shock and assessment of cardiac performance should guide decisions. The Society of Critical Care Medicine consensus guidelines recommends using norepinephrine or epinephrine, with preferential use of norepinephrine in the presence of vasodilatory shock. (Level 1D recommendation).

**Other Agents**

Phosphodiesterase inhibitors like milrinone may provide inotropic support in decompensated cardiogenic shock. Similarly, levosimendan is an inotropic agent that enhances myofilament response to calcium and increases myocardial contraction and could, therefore, be beneficial in verapamil intoxication.

**Non-Pharmacological Aspects Of Treatment**

As mentioned before, management and monitoring in an ICU setting are essential with the availability of advanced hemodynamic interventions like transvenous pacers, intra-aortic balloon pump, or extracorporeal membrane oxygenation if it is necessary.

Consider incremental increases in the dose of high dose insulin infusion therapy and veno-arterial extracorporeal membrane oxygenation (VA–ECMO) for the patient with refractory shock.

Once stabilized, arrangements for appropriate psychiatric evaluation and behavioral health consultation may be appropriate.