Prior to starting a DMARD, patients shall be screened for hepatitis B and C. Additionally, screening for tuberculosis is strongly recommended before initiating any biologic DMARD.

Some of these agents are teratogenic, while safety has not been established in pregnancy for other agents. In women of childbearing age, a pregnancy test shall be done before initiating these agents. Further, all women of childbearing age using these agents (especially methotrexate or leflunomide) must be on appropriate contraception.

Myelosuppression and hepatotoxicity are more common early in therapy, although they can occur at any time in a patient on a DMARD. Therefore, more frequent monitoring is recommended early in therapy, and less frequent but regular monitoring shall be continued as long as the patient is on the DMARD once early safety has been established.

- Complete blood count and liver function test shall be performed monthly for at least 3 months initially, and every 2 to 3 months thereafter in patients initiated on agents including methotrexate, leflunomide, sulfasalazine, tocilizumab, tofacitinib, and sarilumab.

- Lipid panel shall be monitored at baseline and then every 3 months for at least 6 months and then every 6 months thereafter in patients initiated on tocilizumab, tofacitinib, and sarilumab.

- CBC shall be monitored every 6 months in patients on any of the biologic DMARDs.

- Since many of these agents require dose adjustment in renal insufficiency, close monitoring of renal function every 3 to 6 months is also recommended in patients on DMARDs.

- Comprehensive ophthalmology exams including visual field testing and ocular coherence tomography are necessary at baseline, at 5 years, and then annually in patients on hydroxychloroquine.