Complications following diode laser treatment vary depending on the type of diode laser employed, the underlying glaucomatous diagnosis, and the treatment protocol administered.

Commonly observed complications following diode laser include transient mild-moderate discomfort, conjunctival hyperemia, conjunctival burns, conjunctival hyperpigmentation, transient pupillary ovalization, and transient anterior chamber inflammation.

More serious reported complications include hyphaema, vitreous hemorrhage, loss of visual acuity, cataract formation, lens subluxation, malignant glaucoma, choroidal hemorrhage, scleral perforation, hypotony, phthisis bulbi, and sympathetic ophthalmia.

Energy levels in TCP greater than 60J per treatment session are generally found to be at higher risk of developing postoperative hypotony.  Similarly, the greater number of shots delivered in TCP is a significant risk factor for hypotony.

MP-TCP is noted to have an improved safety profile compared to traditional TCP regarding rates of hypotony and phthisis bulbi, presumably due to its improved control in reducing collateral thermal tissue damage. Longer treatment duration and higher power settings are associated with higher rates of complications.

Potential risks from ECP include all of the above for transscleral cyclodiode except for conjunctival surface burns.  Most studies suggest a lower rate of severe postoperative complications compared to TCP, particularly when power levels less than 500mW are applied.