Thirty-three vertebrae comprise the human spine. Each vertebra is organized one on top of the other. The lumbar spine, made up of five vertebrae, is the most common site of compression fractures that require vertebral augmentation.

Between each vertebra is the intervertebral disc, which acts as a shock absorber and keeps bones from contacting each other.

The posterior aspect of the vertebra contains a spinous process that is palpable on a physical exam. Lateral to the spinous process are two transverse processes, which connect to the spinous process via laminae.

Pedicles connect the vertebral body to the transverse processes anteriorly. Together the pedicles, laminae, spinous, and transverse processes make up the vertebral arch. The spinal canal runs within the hollow space created by the vertebral body anteriorly, transverse processes laterally, and laminae and spinous process posteriorly. The spinal cord resides within this spinal canal, as well as blood vessels, fat, and ligaments.

The spinal cord runs from the brainstem to the first lumbar vertebra (L1). It is roughly 2.5 cm thick. Inferior to the L1, the spinal cord nerves separate into the cauda equina.

There are 31 spinal nerves that branch off of the spinal canal. The spinal nerve exit the spinal canal under the pedicles at the intervertebral foramen. These spinal nerves are organized and numbered according to the vertebra which exists in the spinal canal, above its respective spinal nerve. There are eight cervical spinal nerves numbered C1 through C8, 12 thoracic spinal nerves, numbered T1 through T12, five lumbar spinal nerves are L1 through L5, and five sacral spinal nerves numbered S1 through S5. There is also one coccygeal nerve.

Each vertebra has four facet joints; two superior facets and two inferior facets connect each vertebra. For example, the superior facets of L2 connect the inferior facets of L1 superiorly, and the inferior facets of L2 connect the superior facets of L3 inferiorly.

Paravertebral muscles run longitudinally along the spine.

There are three main ligaments of the spine; the ligamentum flavum, anterior longitudinal ligament (ALL), and the posterior longitudinal ligament (PLL). The PLL and ALL are continuous band-like structures that run along the spinal column of the vertebral bodies. The ALL and PLL prevent excessive motion of the vertebrae. Separately, the ligamentum flavum attaches between the lamina of each vertebra.