Normally, there is no mixing of fetal and maternal blood. Although, this is possible with specific infectious agents or small breaks in the placental membrane that can happen during parturition. If there are breaks in the membrane, maternal red blood cells are able to cross into the fetal circulation and vice versa. Treponema pallidum (syphilis infection) can cross the barrier without breaks in the membrane. Toxoplasma gondii (toxoplasma infection) can create its own breaks in the membrane to get across into fetal circulation and infect the fetus.

Erythroblastosis fetalis, also referred to as hemolytic disease of the newborn, happens when the mother makes antibodies to the fetus’s Rh factor after an Rh-negative mother becomes exposed to the fetus’s Rh-positive blood. The mom makes IgG anti-Rh antibodies, which can cross the placenta. The first pregnancy is not an issue because it takes time for mom to elicit this response, but can cause problems in future pregnancies with an Rh-positive fetus. The antibodies can cross the placenta and attack the fetal red blood cells, causing fetal hydrops (anemia and edema).

Placenta accreta is when the placenta grows too far into the myometrium due to a lack of decidua, which allows the villi to anchor to the myometrium. In placenta increta, the villi bury even deeper into the myometrium. Placenta percreta is when the placenta grows through the full thickness of the myometrium and reaches the serosa of the uterus. This invasion of myometrium can cause bleeding during pregnancy and bleeding complications postpartum.

A healthy umbilical cord should contain two umbilical arteries and one umbilical vein. If there is only one artery, there may be other defects present in the fetus, such as growth restriction or genetic abnormalities.

The umbilical cord normally attaches to the center of the placenta. The umbilical cord can implant abnormally both in the fetus and the placenta. In the placenta, there can be a velamentous insertion or a marginal insertion. A velamentous insertion is when the vessels separate as they develop between the amnion and chorion as they grow toward the placenta. As they get closer to the placenta, they are exposed and not protected by Wharton’s jelly; this can be dangerous, especially in vasa previa where the vessels are especially prone to rupture.

Many pathologies of the placenta are visible on histological examination, but some pathologies are visible grossly.

The detachment of the placenta is a very dangerous circumstance: if it happens, in fact, the placenta detaches from the uterus causing a strong haemorrhage, putting not only the life of the fetus at risk, which does not receive more oxygen and nutrients needed to survive but also of the expectant mother. Placental detachment may be due to: hypertension, overdistention of uterine walls due to excess of amniotic fluid (polyhydramnios), multi-twin pregnancy, diabetes, drug use.