Action potentials initiate muscle contraction through excitation-contraction coupling. Excitation-contraction coupling is the mechanism by which neural action potentials convert to cross-bridge cycling, i.e., contraction. Action potentials of the motor neuron cause the release of ACh from the neuron terminus at the NMJ or motor endplate. The ACh causes depolarization at the NMJ and transmits the action potential to the muscle fiber. In this process, action potentials travel along the cell membrane and into the T tubules to carry the signal to the interior of the muscle fiber. Depolarization causes a conformational modification in the dihydropyridine receptors of the T tubules, with or without calcium (Ca) influx. This conformational change opens ryanodine receptors on the terminal cisternae of the sarcoplasmic reticulum to release Ca from its storage site in the sarcoplasmic reticulum into the intracellular fluid (ICF), increasing the concentration of ICF Ca by a factor of 10 (from 10 to 10 M).

The increased ICF concentration of Ca causes a conformational change of the troponin complex by binding troponin C on the actin filament. Each troponin C can bind a maximum of four Ca ions, and binding is cooperative (similar to hemoglobin binding of oxygen). This allows a small change in [Ca] to saturate the troponin C binding sites. The conformational change of troponin C uncovers the myosin-binding sites on actin by pulling tropomyosin out of the way, which begins the cross-bridge cycling that causes skeletal muscle contraction. After excitation and subsequent depolarization of the T tubules ceases, Ca is released from troponin C and sequestered by the sarcoplasmic reticulum in the terminal cisternae through a Ca-ATPase in the membrane of the sarcoplasmic reticulum known as SERCA. Sequestration of Ca allows tropomyosin to cover the myosin-binding sites on actin, causing muscle relaxation.

Cross-bridge cycling is the mechanism by which skeletal muscle contracts. At the beginning of this cycle, myosin is bound tightly to actin in a step termed rigor. In the absence of basic physiologic energy, such as death, this is a semi-permanent state called rigor mortis. In living tissue, this is a transient state, as ATP binding by the myosin head causes a conformational change of the myosin head that causes the release of the actin-myosin cross-link. After ATP is bound and the cross-link is released, ATP is hydrolyzed to adenosine diphosphate (ADP) and inorganic phosphate, “re-cocking” and moving the myosin head toward the positive end of actin (closer to the ends of the sarcomere). As long as there is adequate Ca to maintain an uncovered actin-binding site, the myosin head will form a cross-bridge with actin. The release of ADP and inorganic phosphate causes the power stroke where the myosin head moves toward the negative end of actin (toward the center of the sarcomere), displacing the actin filament and shortening the sarcomere. To complete the cycle, ADP is released, and the sarcomere returns to a state of rigor. This cycle repeats as long as Ca is bound to troponin C.

The force of contraction is a summation of the number of motor units recruited and the frequency of action potentials that reach those motor units. The motor unit is defined as a single motor neuron and all the muscle fibers it innervates, with multiple motor units stimulating a single muscle. The number of muscle fibers comprising a motor unit depends on the function of the muscle. Muscles that require fine motor control will involve fewer fibers, whereas larger muscle groups will involve significantly more muscle fibers. Muscles that function over a prolonged period, such as lower back muscles, will asynchronously recruit fibers so that fatigue of individual fibers is spread out over time and space.

Tension on a whole muscle scale results from the additive tension of individual muscle fibers. Recruitment of muscle fibers occurs when an action potential causes the release of a fixed amount of Ca from the sarcoplasmic reticulum, which produces a single muscle twitch followed by sequestration for calcium. Continual stimulation of the muscle by further action potentials causes increased release of calcium and summation of twitches, which allows the muscle to continue contracting. Maximal contraction occurs in a process called tetany when all Ca-binding sites are in use, and all myosin-binding sites remain uncovered.

Cleavage of ATP to ADP and inorganic phosphate provides the energy needed for the power stroke mechanism by which skeletal muscle contracts and the reuptake of Ca by the terminal cisternae. ATP stores within the muscle rapidly deplete, so ATP must be regenerated. The first mechanism for ATP generation within the muscle is the transfer of a phosphate group from creatine phosphate to ADP. Upon the depletion of creatine phosphate stores, ATP production is via the citric acid cycle and the electron transport chain. Oxygen becomes the limiting factor in actively contracting muscle and glycolysis alone, and the subsequent conversion of pyruvate to lactate later becomes the primary source of ATP generation for muscles.

Neuromuscular spindles are present within skeletal muscles and function in proprioception. Intrafusal fibers, or neuromuscular spindles, are interspersed among extrafusal fibers. Intrafusal fibers are composed of two separate cells: the nuclear bag fiber and the nuclear chain fiber. The entire unit functions partly as a muscle, as the fibers can contract, and partly as a sensory receptor for length, tension, and rate of contraction. Primary afferent nerve fibers have annulospiral endings around both the bag and chain fibers and sense muscle length and rate of contraction. Secondary afferent fibers have flower spray endings, mostly on nuclear chain fibers, and function to sense muscle length.