Electrodiagnostic studies can play a vital and ancillary role in diagnosing mono and polyneuropathies, including those that affect the ulnar nerve. We will review basic electrodiagnostic concepts and neuromuscular clinical definitions, as they are vital to understanding the changes seen in ulnar neuropathies.

**Nerve conduction studies (NCS)**are used to evaluate large myelinated sensory and motor fibers. Small myelinated fibers in the autonomic and spinothalamic tracts need specialized studies for neuropathy evaluation and will not be picked up by the NCS (e.g., Quantitative Sudomotor Axon Reflex Test-QSART, useful to diagnose type II diabetes mellitus polyneuropathy). NCS should be performed in ideal conditions, including room temperature, affecting measurements such as latency, duration, and amplitude. NCS is an electrodiagnostic study that measures the summated actions potentials of sensory (SNAPs) and motor muscle fibers (CMAPs) and has multiple measurements that are important to review.

- Conduction velocity- the speed of the fastest conducting motor axon and tends to be prolonged in demyelinating disorders.

- Amplitude- voltage difference from baseline to maximal negative peak with depolarization, a reflection of intact, non-diseased muscle fibers that can depolarize.

- Latency- reflects the speed of neurotransmission and is defined as the time from stimulus to initial CMAP deflection from baseline.

- Duration- reflects the synchronous transmission of action potentials; it can give a global evaluation of the motor fiber conduction, with a large number of fibers slowing conduction affecting the duration of action potentials. It is measured as the time from an initial deflection from baseline to the first crossing.

**Electromyogram (EMG)**measures the integrity of the nerve-muscle connections when electrical stimulation is applied, with an anatomical evaluation of nerves, roots, and plexuses. It predominantly evaluates motor unit action potentials of type 1 muscle fibers and does not pick up type 2 fibers. EMG will evaluate the insertional, spontaneous, and exertional activity of motor units.

- Insertional activity- muscle fiber action potentials burst provoked by the irritation of the needle electrode.

- Increased activity in neuropathy and myopathic processes
- Decreased activity in muscle necrosis

- Spontaneous activity- can be silent (in normal tissue) or show abnormal waves.

- Fibrillations and positive waves- the rhythmic firing of individual muscle fibers representing subacute (7 to 10 days) denervation or muscle inflammation
- Fasciculations- the irregular popcorn-like firing of muscle fibers representing acute muscle-nerve denervation
- Complex repetitive discharges- rhythmic, frequent, complex, and rumbling running motor-like firing of motor unit action potentials (MUAPs)
- Myotonic discharges- waxing and waning diver bomber-like firing of muscle fibers

- Exertional activity- MUAP activity, recruitment, firing rate, etc., during muscle contraction 

- Recruitment- number of firing motor units firing x force applied during voluntary contraction

- Early recruitment in myopathy
- Delayed recruitment in neuropathic and axonal disorders


- Firing-rate- frequency of discharges during voluntary contraction
- Innervation of muscle fibers: polyphasic versus single motor unit innervation

- Single motor unit innervation can be a sign of reinnervation from chronic neuropathic lesions.


- Amplitude: similar to NCS definition

- High amplitude can be seen in neuropathic lesions.


- Duration: similar NCS definition 

- The increased duration can be seen in neuropathic/axonal injury.

**Neuromuscular Clinical Definitions**

- Myopathy: Diseased muscle fibers

- Motor neuron disease: Diseased motor neuron unit within the upper or lower motor spectrum.

- Neuromuscular junction disorder: Diseased connection or neurochemical process between the nerve and muscle at the synapse

- Myelopathy: Diseased or damaged spinal cord

- Neuronopathy: Diseased cell body. It can be sensory, motor, sensorimotor, or related to ganglions.

- Neuropathy: Diseased cell body, axon, or myelin

**Ulnar Neuropathy**

Diagnosis of ulnar neuropathy begins with a thorough history and physical examination. In most cases, it can be diagnosed clinically without the need for electrodiagnostic testing. When doubt exists, NCS and EMG can be used to localize and confirm the diagnosis, as well as assess the severity of the neuropathy.