**Treatment for Obstetrical Neural Injury**

Successful results in the treatment of the compression neuropathies discussed in this paper depend first of all on an accurate diagnosis by a neurologist. This begins with the history and results of the physical examination by a neurologist. Special tests such as imaging (especially important in the case of radiculopathies) and electrophysiological examination to localize the lesion accurately are essential in helping to establish the diagnosis.

In terms of treatment in the absence of other underlying pathology of a non-obstetrical origin, an important aspect of treatment is to use non-invasive treatment modalities.

**Lumbosacral Radiculopathy:**For non-surgical treatment, patient education, exercise, manual therapy, and non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs are all part of the treatment regimen. Oral corticosteroids may also be employed to reduce inflammation in the acute phase. The next step may include pain injections with a glucocorticoid and bupivacaine into the area generating pain.

For lumbosacral radiculopathy, pain may be alleviated with transcutaneous electrical nerve stimulation and lidocaine patches.

**Lumbosacral plexopathy:**Treatment with analgesics and muscle relaxing drugs may be employed. Other drugs that may be used include amitriptyline, duloxetine, gabapentin, pregabalin, and opioids.

**Common Fibular Neuropathy:**In addition to the pharmacological agents discussed for lumbosacral plexopathy, physical therapy and gait retraining can be helpful. Ankle foot orthoses may be employed to treat the foot drop to enable the patient to walk better. In more severe cases of common fibular neuropathy, surgical operations can be performed to improve nerve function. Surgery may be especially important in farm workers whose livelihood depends on the ability to work in a squatting position.

In terms of prognosis, full mobility was seen in 6 months following a common fibular nerve injury, with rapid improvement often occurring in the first two months. Occasionally some symptoms persist for a year. Total recovery should occur even in prolonged symptoms by two years.

Only a few of the reported patients still presented with deficits as of their last visit. These deficits were generally benign and were not reported to negatively impact the quality of life. For L5 radiculopathy causing foot drop, the symptoms had almost disappeared by six months after delivery.

Regarding physical therapy, the most important aspect is to stretch the plantar flexors and inverters to remove resistance to dorsiflexion.

The nerve damage in foot drop is usually not so severe as to cause severe muscle atrophy if the physical therapy regimen is carried out, but if this is a concern, electrical stimulation to promote muscle contraction to prevent atrophy is a possible therapeutic option.