Structure general:

The spinal cord initiates at the base of the foramen magnum and extends to conus medullaris which ends, on average, between spinal vertebrae L1-L2 but can end as early as T12 or as far down as between L2-L3. The spinal cord is surrounded by the meninges consisting of the dura mater, arachnoid mater, and pia mater; the end of the subarachnoid space terminates around the S2 vertebrae. The vertebral canal is 33 vertebrae of which seven are cervical, 12 are thoracic, five are lumbar, and 5 are sacral along with four coccygeal.

Structure vertebrae:

- The vertebral body is the main weight bearing aspect of the vertebral column, separated by the intervertebral discs (which allow cushioning). The size increases as the vertebrae move caudally, so the lumbar bodies are the largest ones which also bear the most weight.

- The vertebral arch forms the posterior and lateral aspects of the vertebrae with a central lumen in the middle which forms the vertebral canal where the spinal cord exists. The arch is made of pedicles which attach the arch to the body and the laminae which extend from each pedicle to meet at the midline and close off the arch; from where the spinous process also forms.

- The superior articular processes and inferior articular processes are located on each side of the pedicles connect with inferior and superior articular processes respectively of the adjacent vertebrae to form the intervertebral foramen through which blood vessels and nerves can exit and enter the spinal cord.

- Transverse processes are present on each vertebra; however, they differ between the cervical, thoracic, and lumbar. They form at the junction between the pedicle and laminae and face posterolaterally. In the cervical vertebrae, the transverse processes contain a luminal space called the transverse foramen through which the vertebral arteries course through on both sides.

Function:

The function of the spinal canal and vertebral column is to protect the spinal cord and provide support to the body. It includes foramen such that blood supply and nerves to and from the spinal cord can occur at every level.