**Gross Findings**

Grossly, PTC typically presents as an invasive neoplasm with poorly defined margins, a firm consistency, and a granular white-cut surface. Calcifications may be present. The size is widely variable, with a mean diameter of 2-3 cm. Papillary thyroid carcinoma has three classification categories based on the size and extent of the primary lesion. Minimal carcinoma or occult carcinoma/micro-carcinoma tumors are 1.5 cm or smaller and show no evidence of invasiveness through the thyroid capsule or cervical lymph nodes. These lesions are typically nonpalpable, and they are usually found as incidental findings during operative or autopsy examination. Intra-thyroid tumors are greater than 1.5 cm in diameter but remain confined to the thyroid gland with no evidence of extra-thyroid invasion. Extra-thyroid tumors extend through the thyroid capsule to involve the surrounding viscera.

**Microscopic Findings**

The two cardinal morphological features of conventional PTC are the papillae and the nuclear changes. The papillae are composed of a central fibrovascular stalk covered by a neoplastic epithelial lining. The papillae may be long, straight, or arborizing; arranged in a parallel, regimented fashion; short and stubby, or tightly packed. The thickness and composition of the papillary stalk are variable. The stalk is usually made up of loose connective tissue and variously sized thin-walled vessels.

The diagnosis of papillary carcinoma has as its basis the nuclear morphology of a thyroid neoplasm. The existence of multiple architectural variants proves the irrelevance of architecture.

- Enlarged and elongated nuclei with crowding and overlap

- Irregular nuclear contour

- Chromatin clearing with peripheral margination of chromatin, giving rise to what has been described as Orphan Annie Eye nuclei

- Multiple micro-nucleoli located immediately underneath the nuclear membrane

- Nuclear grooves resulting from an irregularity of nuclear contour seen in 2 dimensions

- Intranuclear cytoplasmic pseudo-inclusions from the accumulation of cytoplasm in prominent nuclear grooves

- Presence of psammoma bodies

**Immunohistochemical Findings**

Immunohistochemistry is seldom of value in diagnosing PTC, although it may play a role in metastatic disease. The neoplastic cells are strongly and diffusely immunoreactive with keratin, CK7, thyroglobulin, TTF1, and PAX8, while other markers (HBME-1, Galectin-3, S100 protein, CITED1, CK19) yield variable results.