Infants born with Pierre Robin Sequence are at risk of developing airway-related complications, hypoxia, cor-pulmonale, and failure to thrive. Active multidisciplinary management of such infants is indispensable to reduce the complications of neurocognitive impairment secondary to the associated malformations.

The preparation of a neonate/ infant who is scheduled to undergo surgery or anesthesia should involve the child's family, pediatrician, anesthesiologist, plastic surgeon, and other specialists caring for the child. Conveying relevant information among the individuals caring for the patient is vital to ensure a pleasant perioperative course. Pre-operatively, involving the nursing staff to provide appropriate feeding techniques to ensure adequate hydration and nutrition will reduce the incidence of regurgitations, aspiration and will improve growth and development.

Shared decision-making involving the interprofessional provider team may prevent unnecessary surgeries and complications post-surgery. In addition, shared decision-making would allow them to determine the best possible management plan for the PRS patient. To establish a culture of patient safety and safe medication handling in the operation room and post-anesthesia care unit, the involvement of pharmacists is critical. Pharmacists should be involved in analyzing adequate dose adjustments in neonates, dosing frequencies, especially opioids and anti-emetics. Pharmacists can also be a part of educational activities and alert anesthesia providers about changes in labels or concentrations of anesthetic medications.

Close postoperative monitoring of the PRS patients in the Post Anesthesia Care Unit (PACU) by the nursing staff and anesthesia providers can lead to early recognition of post-op complications, and early interventions will prevent catastrophes. Nursing professionals also play a critical role in helping neonate's parents/ family verbalize their concerns and prepare them to care for the baby appropriately. They can provide reassurance, reduce their anxiety and promote coping. Thus, a multidisciplinary team approach can enhance patient-centered care, improve outcomes, patient safety, and improve team performance.

Various aspects of teamwork to improve patient outcomes and safety include:

- Adopting a quality collaboration by showing mutual respect and trust.

- Developing shared goals, perception of a situation, and understanding of tasks and roles within the team.

- Adaptive coordination allocates tasks for new team members, facilitates information exchange and planning in critical situations, and exhibits openness and excellent communication quality.

- Practicing specific communication practices such as team briefing.

- Leadership that encourages the participation of team members in the decision-making process and increases explicit leadership behavior in critical situations.