Abortion may seem to be a minor procedure but many management issues are surrounding this procedure and they include the following:

- The vital signs have to be frequently monitored.

- All patients should have 2 large-bore IVs and oxygen, even if they initially appear to be stable. Blood must be crossed and typed in cases of bleeding.

- Always obtain a thorough gynecological and obstetric history so as not to miss any other cause of the symptoms.

- The rate and amount of bleeding can be easily underestimated especially when the patient is in the supine position. Thus, clinicians should always perform a pelvic exam in a post-abortion patient to determine that no blood has collected in the vagina or uterus. The nurse should check the vaginal area for blood.

- Uterine perforation if missed can be life-threatening. If the patient has abdominal pain post-abortion, the gynecologist should be consulted as soon as possible and a CT scan ordered. Some patients may benefit from a diagnostic laparoscopy.

- In any post-abortion patient, clinicians should never rule out an ectopic pregnancy.

- If the patient appears septic, broad-spectrum antibiotics need to be started even before the diagnostic workup is complete.

- Consider the fact that the patient may have retained products of conception, which may be the cause of complications.

- Bowel injury in post-abortion should be considered; nurses may note that the patient has a tender abdomen with peritoneal signs and should consult with the clinician immediately because if missed, it carries a high mortality.

- Provide psychological support as the patient may go through anxiety and maintain the confidentiality of the patient.