When caring for a trauma victim, EMS providers have three critical tasks: physical examination and recognition of injuries, stabilization, and transportation to a nearby trauma center or another hospital. The primary survey follows the “ABC” dogma: airway, breathing, and circulation. An issue with any of these categories requires resolution before progression to the secondary survey. These considerations remain the same regardless of whether the patient has an apparent or distracting traumatic injury.

**Airway**

Assessment and stabilization of the airway should always be a priority in the management of trauma patients. A preliminary impression is ascertainable from the patient’s appearance and verbalization. However, it can become more complicated if the patient has a decreased mental status or injury to the head or neck regions. Cervical spine precautions are imperative, and there should be a low threshold for immobilization and placement of a cervical spine collar. Necessary airway interventions include jaw thrust maneuvers, oropharyngeal or nasopharyngeal airways, suctioning, and supplemental oxygen via nasal cannula or non-rebreather facemask. Further airway control may involve temporizing measures (supraglottic airway) or more definitive ones (endotracheal intubation).

**Breathing**

The patient’s respiratory status is assessed immediately following (or often simultaneous with) the airway assessment. Fundamental evaluation of respiratory rate, chest wall movement, breath sounds, and oxygenation are useful in determining whether immediate intervention is necessary. In particular, providers may look for signs or symptoms of tension or open pneumothoraces, as well as, flail chest.

**Circulation**

An assessment of circulatory system status is of particular importance in cases of chest trauma, as hemodynamic compromise can be rapid and profound. Cardiac monitoring, examination for signs of internal or external bleeding, and application of direct pressure and/or tourniquet if indicated are all critical steps. IV or IO (intraosseous) access for fluid bolus may be obtained en route, but should not delay transport considerations. Similarly, cardiac monitoring and a 12-lead ECG may be helpful in cases of chest trauma, but should not come at the expense of timely delivery to the hospital.

**Other Considerations**

There are several considerations unique to the prehospital setting for which EMS must take into account. One is an assessment for and establishment of scene safety. EMS providers practice in a diverse range of environments, from cramped personal living quarters to widespread disaster areas.  Each poses unique threats to both patient and EMS personnel safety. Although they have an innate inclination to help the victim, providers must recognize that their personal well-being is imperative to be able to help others. Precautions must be taken early to minimize the risk to providers during their treatment of victims. Additionally, environments often change rapidly, and recommendations are for periodic reassessment of scene safety whenever possible.

EMS providers also encounter circumstances in which there are several injured individuals. Thus they must rely on their clinical assessment and knowledge of their system’s established set of triage criteria to distribute resources appropriately and provide each victim with the proper setting and in the appropriate order. Different systems have a variety of triage protocols available, and such protocols are continually being reviewed and refined.

**Ultrasound Use in Pre-Hospital Setting**

Though far from universal, the use of ultrasound (US) devices imaging of trauma in the prehospital setting has been explored in Europe and parts of the United States. The benefits of US use include increased diagnostic accuracy and improved decision-making (i.e., triage, choice of transport modality, receiving facility). Regarding chest trauma specifically, US can aid in a quicker and more reliable diagnosis of pneumothorax, pericardial effusion, and more. However, additional research is necessary to determine if the prehospital US is truly helpful in decreasing morbidity and mortality in trauma patients.