Management of diaper dermatitis has two main goals: healing of damaged skin and prevention of rash recurrence.

The strategies to achieve these goals include:

- Good hygiene is essential to maintain skin integrity and prevent further breakdown. Reducing the exposure to irritants, like urine and feces, can be achieved with frequent diaper changes and using superabsorbent diapers that help reduce skin over-hydration.

- Bathing and cleaning the diaper area with water and a soap-free cleanser.

- The use of wet wipes has been controversial over the years, mainly due to the concern that the components could cause further irritation to the skin. However, recent studies have shown that baby wipes do not cause any harm to the skin. Furthermore, the newer formulations of wipes that include pH buffers help to balance the alkaline pH of the urine and prevent skin damage due to pH changes. It is important to advise parents that the wipes should be free of soap, essential oils, or other fragrances and harsh detergents that can be irritant to the skin.

- The use of topical emollients is recommended for both prevention and treatment. They can improve the skin barrier function, and they also provide a barrier between the skin and the diaper, urine, and feces, not limiting the contact with the skin and diminishing irritation, but also preventing over-hydration to the skin. For the management of current diaper dermatitis, apply with each diaper change. Examples of emollients available include zinc oxide, petrolatum, cod liver oil, lanolin, among others.

- For cases of diaper dermatitis that do not improve within 2 to 3 days of implementing the measures above, or in moderate to severe cases, a short course of low-potency corticosteroids can be used. Hydrocortisone 0.5% 2 times a day for one week.

- When treating candida diaper dermatitis, topical antifungals should be added to the regimen. Nystatin can be used first, applied with every diaper change, with a generally good response; however, if by 1 to 3 days, there is no improvement of symptoms (also keeping in mind Candida resistance to nystatin), switching to azoles is recommended. Clotrimazole, miconazole, or ketoconazole can be used, applied twice a day for 7 to 10 days.

- In cases of bacterial infection, topical antibiotics may be necessary. And in cases of severe infections, such as perianal streptococcal dermatitis, oral antibiotics are indicated.