The proximity of the sinuses to critical structures is the main source of complications during ESS.

**Orbital Injury**

The maxillary sinus and ethmoid sinuses surround the orbit inferiorly and medially. While performing an uncinectomy, it is important to stay low and to identify and medialize the uncinate off the orbital wall. Also, during maxillary antrostomy, it is important to identify the ostium inferiorly and to find the inferior orbital wall as a landmark. When reviewing the CT scan, the lamina papyracea is studied carefully to identify any dehiscence that could lead to a breach of the orbital wall during an ethmoidectomy. Sphenoethmoidal cells should also be identified and the optic nerve and carotid should be checked for any dehiscence. In case the lamina papyracea is violated and bleeding occurs, the periorbita should be examined and in case of breach and exposure of orbital fat, ophthalmology should be consulted intraoperatively to measure intraocular pressure. If that is elevated, massage of the eye should be performed along with the administration of mannitol and intravenous dexamethasone. More aggressive management with canthotomy/cantholysis is done if the intraocular pressure is greater than 40mmHg in an anesthetized patient and if the patient is awake has retro-orbital pain, cherry red macula, or Marcus-Gunn pupil.

**Skull Base Injury/Cerebrospinal Fluid Leaks**

The preoperative CT scan is extremely useful to assess the slope of the skull base, the height of the sinuses, its thickness, and the presence of any dehiscence. The length of the lateral lamella varies among patients and sides, the Keros classification is helpful to assess the length and risk of injury.

Keros Classification:

- Keros type I: 1 to 3 mm deep

- Keros type II: 4 to 7 mm deep

- Keros type III: 8 to 16 mm deep

The deeper the lamella is (higher Keros type), the higher the risk of injury of the skull base. The cribriform plate and lateral lamella are the most common sites of injury.

CSF leaks can be spotted intraoperatively or postoperatively.

If CSF leak is noted intraoperatively, the site should be identified. This is a crucial step to be able to repair the leak and avoid delaying the repair. Delayed exploration leads to a higher risk of infection and longer hospital stays. Once the site of the leak is identified, the area is cleaned to get adequate access and good result. For small defects (less than 2mm), overlay autogenous mucosal grafts are used for closure. If the defect is between 2mm and 6 mm, then the middle turbinate can be used as a composite graft ( bone and mucosa), as for defects larger than 6 mm a multilayered reconstruction is performed with cartilage or bone and fibrin glue can be applied.

CT is obtained to rule out pneumocephalus and intracranial bleeding.

A patient presenting postoperatively with CSF leak is diagnosed with Beta transferrin, intrathecal fluorescein, and imaging.

**Epistaxis**

Minimal bleeding for the few days postoperatively is normal; but in cases of profuse bleeding, intervention is needed. The patient should be stabilized and in cases of severe bleeding, the airway should be protected initially. The nose is examined to identify the site of bleeding. Options for managing epistaxis include topical vasoconstrictors, resorbable or non-resorbable packing, cautery ( silver nitrate or electrocautery). In severe cases with persistent and recurrent bleeding not controlled with the previously mentioned options, surgical arterial ligation or endovascular embolization are considered as a next step.

**Recurrence of the Disease**

When FESS is performed for CRS, there is always a risk of recurrence or persistence. Failure to perform a proper maxillary antrostomy and widen the natural ostium can lead to the recirculation of mucus through the accessory ostium.

Lateralization of the middle turbinates leads to obstruction of sinus drainage. Synechiae, due to inadequate postoperative cleaning and management, is another cause of nasal obstruction post sinus surgery. Excessive removal of the mucosa, bone exposure, and failure to remove bony septations are all possible causes of the recurrence of rhinosinusitis.