Obturator nerve: Originates from nerve roots L2-L4 and exits through the obturator canal before splitting into an anterior division that runs anterior to obturator externus and a posterior division which runs posterior to obturator externus. The obturator nerve supplies sensory innervation to the inferomedial thigh via the cutaneous branch of obturator nerve and motor innervation to gracilis (anterior division), adductor longus (anterior division), adductor brevis (anterior/posterior divisions), and adductor magnus (posterior division). Iatrogenic injury can occur from retractors placed behind the transverse acetabular ligament when utilizing a medial approach to the hip, an approach commonly used in pediatric cases.

Genitofemoral nerve: Originates from nerve roots L1-L2.  It pierces the psoas muscle and continues down the anteromedial surface of psoas before dividing into femoral and genital branches. The femoral branch provides sensory innervation to the proximal anterior thigh over the femoral triangle. The genital branch provides sensory innervation to the scrotum/labia. It has no motor function.

Lateral femoral cutaneous nerve:  Originates from nerve roots L2-L3.  Crosses inferior to the anterior superior iliac spine (ASIS) and provides sensory innervation to the lateral thigh. It has no motor function. Iatrogenic injury can occur during hip arthroplasty utilizing an anterior approach or when placing the anterior portal for hip arthroscopy.

Femoral nerve: Originates from nerve roots (L2-L4). It lies between the psoas major andiliacus and branches in the femoral triangle. The femoral nerve provides sensory innervation to the anteromedial thigh via anterior cutaneous branches and motor innervation to psoas, pectineus, Sartorius, quadriceps (rectus femoris, vastus lateralis, vastus intermedius, vastus medialis).

Sciatic nerve: Originates from the sacral plexus and projects through the greater sciatic foramen descending down the posterior thigh deep to the hamstrings and superficial to adductor magnus. The sciatic nerve has two distinct divisions: tibial division and common peroneal division. The tibial division originates from nerve roots L4-S3 and provides motor innervation to biceps femoris (long head), semitendinosus, and semimembranosus. There is no sensory innervation in the thigh. The common peroneal division originates from nerve roots L4-L2 and provides motor innervation to biceps femoris (short head).  Anatomical variations have been noted involving divisions of the nerve in relation to the piriformis muscle. In the majority of the population, both divisions of the sciatic nerve pass under piriformis. Two distinct anatomical variations have been described: common fibular division passes through the piriformis or over the piriformis. The sciatic nerve is at risk for iatrogenic injury during hip arthroplasty utilizing a posterior approach. Injury can be avoided by reflecting piriformis.

Posterior femoral cutaneous nerve: Originates from nerve roots S1-S3 and passes through the greater sciatic foramen medial to the sciatic nerve. The posterior femoral cutaneous nerve provides sensory innervation to the posterior thigh and has no motor function.