The etiology of interstitial cystitis is not well understood, and the current thoughts around its pathogenesis remain multifactorial. Leading concepts include:

- Autoimmune or immune-mediated processes

- Fibrosis

- Increase in grey matter volume leading to heightened pain sensitivity

- Mast cell dysfunction or hyperactivation

- Neurogenic inflammation/edema

- Pelvic floor hypertonicity or dysfunction

- Upregulation and proliferation of sensory afferent fibers

- Urothelial dysfunction, especially in the epithelial and glycosaminoglycans (GAG) layer

- Vascular malformations that are seen as glomerulations on cystoscopy.

Current research strongly suggests an underlying inflammatory process, although the precise cause for this is not well understood.

In a recent study, they describe an organic process behind interstitial cystitis. Through cystoscopy, they observed submucosal inflammation, which is seen as glomerulations, with large groups of mast cells, which further stimulates afferent sensory fibers. They also describe increased urothelial permeability due to diminished glycosaminoglycans (GAG) levels and ultrastructural abnormalities seen on biopsies that show loss of tight junctions and adhesive junction proteins. This results in a loss of mucosal barrier protection and results in a "leaky urothelium." This is also thought to be the reason why immunoglobulin and immune mediators are detected at higher levels in the urine of affected individuals.

Fibrosis also results from the chronic inflammatory process, evident by the upregulation of extracellular matrix proteins, increased myofibroblasts, and decreased capillary density, which reduce bladder capacity and leads to further stretching and stimulation of afferent sensory pain fibers.

Another multi-center study has demonstrated a non-organic process behind interstitial cystitis, demonstrating increased grey matter volume in some patients with interstitial cystitis in brain regions that are responsible for pain perception. This was observed using functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI).

An interesting relationship to discuss is between severe interstitial cystitis-like symptoms to the use of illegally sourced ketamine. With this, the etiology remains unknown as well. The main theories behind this are urothelial damage, microvascular changes, autoimmunity, and infection either by ketamine or through metabolites. The symptoms, cystoscopy, and biopsy findings have a great degree of crossover with interstitial cystitis, and the main difference would be the recreational abuse of ketamine. The risk of developing ketamine cystitis does not appear to be increased with the proper medical use of the drug.