# Continuing Education Activity

Mallet finger is the term usually applied to extensor avulsion fractures. However, this entity may also be caused by distal extensor tendon ruptures. Either one results in an inability to extend the DIP joint. Mallet finger injuries are named for the resulting flexion deformity of the fingertip, which resembles a mallet or hammer. Mallet finger injuries are caused by the disruption of the extensor mechanism of the phalanx at the level of the distal interphalangeal joint, usually due to a forced flexion at the distal interphalangeal joint. This injury results in the inability to extend the distal phalanx. A mallet fracture occurs when the extensor tendon also causes avulsion of the distal phalanx. There are three subtypes of mallet fractures based on the age of the patient and the percent of the articular surface of the distal phalanx involved. This activity describes the pathophysiology, evaluation, and management of mallet finger/extension tendon avulsion, and highlights the role of the interprofessional team in the care of affected patients.

**Objectives:**
- Describe the basic mechanism behind mallet finger injuries, and cover the three particular variants.
- Review assessment and examination strategies for extensor tendon avulsion injuries, including diagnostic imaging.
- Summarize the treatment options for extensor tendon avulsion injuries, based on particular etiology.
- Discuss how interprofessional team strategies for improving care coordination and communication to advance the recognition and management of proximal humeral extensor tendon avulsion injuries and lead to improved outcomes.

# Introduction

Mallet finger is the term usually applied to extensor avulsion fractures. However, this entity may also be caused by distal extensor tendon ruptures. Either one results in an inability to extend the DIP joint**.**Mallet finger injuries are named for the resulting flexion deformity of the fingertip, which resembles a mallet or hammer. Mallet finger injuries are caused by the disruption of the extensor mechanism of the phalanx at the level of the distal interphalangeal joint, usually due to a forced flexion at the distal interphalangeal joint. This injury results in the inability to extend the distal phalanx. A mallet fracture occurs when the extensor tendon also causes avulsion of the distal phalanx. There are three subtypes of mallet fractures based on the age of the patient and the percent of the articular surface of the distal phalanx involved. The treatment remains controversial. In general, it is guided by the amount of articular surface involved in the fracture.

# Etiology

The distal extensor tendon is ruptured. The rupture occurs when the distal phalanx of a finger is forced into flexion while being actively extended. The extrinsic extensor tendon originates in the forearm and courses over the metacarpophalangeal joint, has an indirect attachment to the proximal phalanx, and finally attaches to the distal phalanx. These tendons are responsible for the extension of the digits.

# Epidemiology

Mallet finger injuries usually occur in the workplace or during sports-related activities. There is a predisposition to these injuries during participation in ball sports, as the ball hits the fingertip of an extended finger. This compels the distal interphalangeal joint into a forced flexion position and thereby causes an extensor tendon disruption. Most often, such injuries involve the long finger, ring finger, or the little finger of the dominant hand. Frequently these injuries are seen in young to middle-aged men and occasionally in older women as well.

# Pathophysiology

Mallet finger injuries are usually caused by a traumatic event resulting in forced flexion of the extended fingertip. This causes a stretching or tearing of the extensor tendon. In severe injuries, this forced flexion can cause an avulsion of the tendon insertion on the distal phalanx and is described as a mallet fracture. Mallet finger injuries can also be caused by a laceration/abrasion, or more rarely, a forced hyperextension of the distal interphalangeal joint.  Such an injury results in a fracture at the dorsal base of the distal phalanx. This disruption of extensor tendon function causes an unopposed flexion force on the finger and is accompanied by the inability to extend the digit. This injury results in the classic “mallet” appearance of the finger.

**Classification System**

Acute mallet finger deformities are defined as those occurring within four weeks of the injury, while chronic mallet finger deformities occur four weeks after the injury.

**Doyle’s Classification of Mallet Finger Injuries**

- Closed injury, with or without small dorsal avulsion fracture

- Open injury (laceration)

- Open injury (deep abrasion involving skin and tendon)

- Mallet fracture

- Distal phalanx physeal injury in children

- Fracture fragment involving 20% to 50% of the articular surface

- Fracture fragment involving more than 50% of the articular surface

# History and Physical

The diagnosis of mallet finger injuries is usually a clinical diagnosis. Patients typically present with the history of a forced flexion injury. However, this is not always the case. Patients usually complain of pain, flexion deformity, and/or difficulty using the affected digit.

The physical examination should begin with an inspection of the soft tissue. The examination should include a full assessment of the metacarpophalangeal joint and the proximal interphalangeal joint for full range of motion. When evaluating the distal interphalangeal joint, the fingertip will rest around 45 degrees of flexion with the inability to actively extend at the distal interphalangeal joint. There may or may not be swelling and tenderness over the distal interphalangeal joint, depending on the time-frame between injury and its presentation.

# Evaluation

The diagnosis of a mallet finger is usually a clinical diagnosis. However, to distinguish between mallet finger injuries and mallet fractures, providers should obtain a three-view radiograph of the affected finger. Referring to these radiographs, one will either see a bony avulsion of the distal phalanx as in a mallet fracture, or the radiograph will be normal as in a mallet finger, the latter is due only to a ligamentous injury. The most valuable radiograph is the true lateral radiograph of the affected finger. This can help determine the size of the fracture fragment, displacement of the fracture fragment, and subluxation of the distal phalanx.

# Treatment / Management

The treatment for mallet fractures remains controversial.

Numerous types of splints have been used for mallet finger injuries. These include the stack splint, the perforated thermoplastic splint, or the aluminum-foam splint.

Surgical management is generally accepted for mallet fractures involving greater than one-third of the articular surface and for fractures with associated joint subluxation.

# Differential Diagnosis

- De Quervain tenosynovitis

- Distal interphalangeal joint dislocation

- Distal interphalangeal joint fracture/dislocation

- Distal interphalangeal volar plate avulsion fracture

- Finger amputation

- Fingertip laceration

- Jersey's finger

- Mallet Finger Fracture

- Metacarpophalangeal ulnar ligament rupture

- Nail avulsion

- Nailbed laceration

- Ring avulsion injury

- Subungual hematoma

- Swan-neck deformity

- Trigger finger

# Pearls and Other Issues

The two major complications from mallet finger injuries and mallet fractures are residual extensor lag and swan neck deformities.

# Enhancing Healthcare Team Outcomes

Mallet finger injuries are best managed by an interprofessional team because the ideal treatment is not known. While conservative treatment with splints is widely used for mild injuries, the outcomes are unpredictable. Surgery is often done but again the results are not optimal. The nurse practitioner, emergency department physician, and primary care provider may need to refer these patients to a hand or plastic surgeon for further evaluation. Poorly treated mallet finger injuries are associated with high morbidity. Orthopedic or emergency department nurses should educate patients about splinting and communicate with the treating provider if there are issues. Irrespective of the type of treatment, patients should be encouraged to seek physical therapy. [Level 5]