# Continuing Education Activity

Plagiocephaly is defined as an asymmetric shape of the head due to unilateral flattening. The term flathead can be used as a synonym. Plagiocephaly can be categorized into synostotic or deformational types. This activity reviews the evaluation and management of plagiocephaly and highlights the role of the interprofessional team in evaluating, treating, and improving care for patients with this condition.

**Objectives:**
- Describe the etiology of plagiocephaly.
- Summarize the common physical findings associated with plagiocephaly.
- Identify the indications for plagiocephaly surgery.
- Identify the most common complications associated with plagiocephaly.

# Introduction

The meaning of plagiocephaly is an oblique head.

The International Classification of Diseases defines isolated synostotic plagiocephaly as a form of nonsyndromic craniosynostosis characterized by premature fusion of one coronal or lambdoid suture leading to skull deformity and facial asymmetry. Unilateral coronal synostosis produces anterior plagiocephaly.

# Etiology

More than 95% of cases of nonsyndromic craniosynostosis are sporadic.

Intrauterine deformational forces include a fetus's odd position, irregular uterus shape, compression of the fetus' head when descends into the pelvis, or due to multiple fetus pregnancy. Postnatal deformational forces most commonly occur due to prolonged position of the head for long periods. The etiology of craniosynostosis can be multifactorial due to intrinsic bone abnormalities, genetic mutations, and environmental factors.

The incidence of deformational plagiocephaly increased after the "Back to Sleep" campaign started in 1992, which promoted a supine position to prevent sleep-related infant deaths; however, the incidence of sudden infant death syndrome has decreased.

# Epidemiology

The incidence of anterior plagiocephaly is around one out of 10,000 live births.

The prevalence of deformational plagiocephaly is 15 to 20% of infants.

Secondary craniosynostosis can occur in systemic diseases such as rickets and hypothyroidism in newborns with microcephaly and following shunt placement for hydrocephalus.

# History and Physical

In synostotic anterior plagiocephaly, the forehead is flattened, and the supraorbital margin is high.

It is often challenging to distinguish deformational plagiocephaly from synostotic posterior plagiocephaly clinically.

Increased intracranial pressure (ICP) features can be present in 15-20% of children with coronal or lambdoid synostosis.

# Evaluation

Computed tomographic (CT) scan with three-dimensional (3D) reconstruction is the principal imaging modality for evaluating craniosynostosis.

The findings in unilateral coronal synostosis are a shallow ipsilateral anterior cranial fossa, contralateral frontal bossing, and an elevated roof and lateral wall of the ipsilateral orbit called the "harlequin eye" sign. The findings of unilateral lambdoid synostosis are ipsilateral occipitoparietal flattening, contralateral frontal and occipitoparietal bossing,  a unilateral small posterior cranium, and a tilted skull base. There is an ipsilateral deviation of the posterior fossa in the endocranial skull base view of unilateral lambdoid synostosis. Morphometric analysis of the skull base with the help of 3D CT can differentiate the three causes of plagiocephaly.

Lambdoid synostosis can cause crowding of the posterior fossa and herniation of the caudal part of the cerebellum into the foramen magnum resulting in Chiari malformation.

Anthropometric measurements help to assess the severity of plagiocephaly.

# Treatment / Management

Conservative treatment should be adopted for patients with deformational plagiocephaly and mild unilateral synostosis.

Surgical treatment is indicated in nonsyndromic craniosynostosis to reduce the morphologic abnormality, prevent increased ICP, and prevent psychosocial issues. Surgical aims are to achieve sufficient intracranial volume for brain growth and correct the skull's shape.

The surgical options are open craniotomy with reconstruction or endoscopic suturectomy. The procedures are fronto-orbital remodeling for anterior plagiocephaly and occipital advancement for posterior plagiocephaly.

The cranial bones are flexible until the age of six months and can be easily manipulated by the endoscopic approach.

# Differential Diagnosis

The principal differential diagnosis in plagiocephaly determines if it is deformational (positional) or synostotic due to a suture's premature closure. Anterior plagiocephaly is due to coronal synostosis. Posterior plagiocephaly should be differentiated as synostotic or deformational.

Facts noted in history are the presence at birth, preferred sleep position, and improvement with time.

The child with unilateral lambdoid synostosis has a thick ridge over the fused suture, with compensatory contralateral parietal and frontal bossing.

# Prognosis

In deformational plagiocephaly, satisfactory outcomes can be achieved with conservative treatments if the treatments are initiated at an early stage of the disease.

There is evidence that nonsyndromic single suture synostosis can result in persistent neuropsychological deficits. Surgical intervention improves motor and cognitive function, especially in severe craniosynostosis. Long-term follow-up after surgery often found normal academic and social function.

# Complications

Deformational plagiocephaly usually corrects with frequent repositioning of the baby; however, it can produce cosmetic deformities if not treated adequately. Untreated unilateral coronal plagiocephaly may cause strabismus, astigmatism, amblyopia, and mandible malalignment.

Surgical complications after synostotic plagiocephaly correction are usually relatively few and minor and do not produce permanent sequela.

- Excessive blood loss

- Venous air embolism

- Consumption coagulopathy

- Cerebrospinal fluid leak

- Dural tears

- Hyperthermia

- Hypoactivity

- Wound infection local

- Epidural abscess

- Ear infections

- Subcutaneous hematoma

- Epidural hematoma

- Residual plagiocephaly

- Reoperation

Helmet therapy can lead to complications, although very rare.

- Inadequate correction

- Pressure damage to the skin at the site of application

- Scalp erosion, ulcer, and temporary hair loss

- Contact allergic dermatitis

# Postoperative and Rehabilitation Care

The child should be monitored after surgery in the pediatric intensive care unit.

# Deterrence and Patient Education

Early diagnosis and appropriate treatment of synostotic plagiocephaly can prevent aesthetic sequelae in children.

Deformational plagiocephaly treatment primarily includes position behavior modification; however, in some cases, additional measures are necessary, including helmet therapy.

Education should be given to parents regarding positioning and the use of tummy time. Intervention should be started as soon as the diagnosis is made.

Deformational plagiocephaly will not cause any developmental or neurocognitive delay.

# Enhancing Healthcare Team Outcomes

Healthcare professionals must teach parents regarding measures to prevent plagiocephaly.

A multidisciplinary team to manage complex syndromic craniosynostosis cases is needed and requires the combined efforts of a pediatric neurosurgeon, plastic surgeon, and maxillofacial surgeons. The nurses will closely monitor the patient's vital signs, administer medications, evaluate scalp dressings, and assist with the family's education. In the postoperative period for pain, wound infection prophylaxis, and vomiting, the pharmacist will ensure that the patient is on the right analgesics, antiemetics, and appropriate antibiotics.