In most clinical settings, intervention is often necessary without a complete history and physical exam. Treatment strategies require tailoring to different patient populations, including pediatrics, geriatrics, and obstetric populations. There is some debate regarding optimal first-line agents in diverse populations. As of the time of this authorship the Florida Regional Common EMS Protocol recommends 4 mg/kg IM ketamine for violent and agitated patients with excited delirium syndrome, with options for midazolam, lorazepam, diazepam, diphenhydramine, and haloperidol via various routes based on paramedic judgment.

Geriatric patients may have multiple chronic medical comorbidities, poor physiologic reserve, and may have abnormal physiology due to polypharmacy. The Beers list, a frequently cited resource for medications to use with caution in the geriatric population, includes all antipsychotic drugs, diphenhydramine, and benzodiazepines. Ketamine is not on the Beers list, but it does have multiple adverse reactions that carry higher morbidity in older adults, including an increased risk of the need for intubation, and sympathetic effects. Many reviewed resources include no recommendations for the management of older adults beyond the general avoidance of these medications. Others recommend the use of typical or atypical antipsychotics at half of the normal adult dosage.

Pediatric populations represent challenges both in regards to weight-based dosing and in medication selection; pediatric patients will frequently display paradoxical agitation to small or moderate doses of benzodiazepines. Many of these medications are also not FDA approved for use in pediatric populations despite their frequent use in the emergency department, children’s hospitals, and psychiatric facilities off-label.

Management of pregnant patients requires a second level of consideration with regards to risk/benefit, as the teratogenicity of medications used must be a consideration. All benzodiazepines have well-established teratogenicity and Class D for use in pregnancy by the American College of Gynecology (ACOG). Most typical and atypical antipsychotic medications, including haloperidol, are category C.

As of 2001, ACOG guidelines had recommended haloperidol as a first-line agent for the acutely agitated, aggressive, and psychotic pregnant patient; despite some evidence of harm in long-term use, there has been no demonstration of significant fetal harm in short-term or single-dose use.

The overall consensus is for using antipsychotics for the management of delirium and reserving benzodiazepines for treatment in cases of withdrawal from alcohol or drug use.

Apart from medication management, the patient's environment plays a vital role as these patients should be kept in a quiet setting. Familiar objects can be brought from home and placed in the hospital room. The room should have adequate sunlight. Family and friends are encouraged to talk, orient, and reassure patients frequently.