Though the most common side effect of the OCR is bradycardia, further decline to potentially fatal arrhythmias, asystole, and even cardiac arrest may occur. Apt et al. (1973) and Espahbodi et al. (2015) reported the OCR occurrence rate of OCR in patients undergoing ophthalmologic surgeries as 67.9% and 63% respectively. Though the majority of these patients do not experience detrimental outcomes following activation of the OCR, this potential makes this phenomenon important to note.

Activation of the OCR has also been associated with noncardiac consequences. Due to the activation of the vagal motor response, other reported vagal effects include hypotensive episodes, syncope, and gastrointestinal responses such as nausea and vomiting. The latter has been questioned to have an impact on the severity of postoperative nausea and vomiting (PONV). In the pediatric population, the incidence of PONV has been reported to be as high as 85% following strabismus surgery and is the most common reason for inpatient admission following an outpatient procedure.

When discussing the prevention and treatment of the OCR and its potentially devastating consequences, it is important to note that the only definitive treatment is the immediate cessation of the triggering stimulus. When in the operating room, immediate removal of pressure to the globe of the eye or surrounding orbital tissues can terminate the reflex. The next step of the procedure is to proceed with caution. In less controlled circumstances, such as trauma, cessation of the triggering stimulus can be more challenging. In these instances, pharmacologic management may be required and cardiac monitoring should be initiated.

Understanding different anesthetic agents can be used to help decrease OCR occurrence, as the incidence may vary with each agent used. Multiple studies have shown that pretreatment with intravenous anticholinergics, such as atropine or glycopyrrolate, decreases the incidence of OCR. Atropine works by blocking peripheral muscarinic receptors of the heart and causes increased firing at the sinoatrial node as well as conduction through the AV node. This opposes the vagal response, or the efferent limb, of the OCR. Through its stimulation of sympathetic activity, ketamine may counteract vagal stimulation caused by OCR. Choi et al. reported a lower incidence of OCR when a ketamine infusion was used as the primary anesthetic agent in comparison to sevoflurane, halothane, and propofol. Espahbodi et al. (2015) found ketamine superior to atropine in decreasing the incidence of OCR. Other studies associated ketamine with a lower incidence of postoperative nausea, vomiting, and agitation.

Blunting the afferent limb of the reflex arc can also decrease OCR occurrence. Retro or peribulbar blocks with xylocaine hydrochloride can be used to block the ciliary ganglion. When combined with other agents shown to decreased OCR incidence, such as atropine, further protection from OCR activation is provided.

The administration of fast-acting opioids, such as fentanyl, sufentanil, and remifentanil, can potentially facilitate bradycardia caused by the OCR. Many anesthetic agents have been studied regarding their effects on OCR and several still require further investigation. However, it has repeatedly been reported that pr-anesthetic medication with atropine, retrobulbar blocks, or other agents used to blunt the OCR should be routinely utilized during procedures or traumas related to the eye. This protects patients against the potential consequences of OCR activation.