The complexity of many mental disorders requires an interprofessional treatment approach, and the role of good interprofessional teamwork to treat mental disorders is increasingly recognized. Eating disorders, as essential manifestations of body image distortion often require interprofessional collaboration. The interprofessional team approach for patients with disordered eating enjoys wide acknowledgment as the best practice. Team members include mental health professionals, nutritionist, social worker, internist, endocrinologist, gastroenterologist, pharmacist, and specialty trained nurses that all require experience in the care of patients with disordered eating. Although each member of the team has unique responsibilities and skills concerning patient care, there is substantial overlap in the responsibilities of the treatment team to help recovery from disordered eating.

Individuals with BDD are generally secretive about their symptoms. Healthcare professionals may indeed stigmatize these patients by considering only an actual disfigurement as worthy of medical attention. Hence, patients with BDD are more likely to present to healthcare professionals with complaints such as social anxiety or depression since these are less stigmatizing. Healthcare professionals should provide accurate information to patients and their families and help them to understand their symptoms are involuntary.

PCPs and other nonpsychiatric physicians may tend to refer the patient to another nonpsychiatrist or even a cosmetic specialist; however, this is unlikely to be helpful.

Body image distortion and its accompanying disorders is a complex clinical scenario and require an interprofessional team approach, including physicians, specialists, specialty-trained nurses, and pharmacists, all collaborating across disciplines to achieve optimal patient results. [Level V]