Fortunately, more than 90% of patients with L5/S1 disc injuries will improve without surgical treatment. Conservative management includes six weeks of physical therapy with an emphasis on core strengthening and stretching. Additional non-surgical intervention includes- modification of the activity that may exacerbate the pain, non-steroidal anti-inflammatory medications (NSAIDs), and epidural injections. Epidural injections may provide moderate/short-term relief for lumbosacral-related pain due to disc herniations, but the literature regarding the usefulness of injections for chronic non-radiating back pain is less certain. Injections can also be targeted at the facet of L5/S1 if MRI-T2 correlates with this site being an area of increased inflammation.

With a failed conservative course the patient has three options- continued pain, complete avoidance of activities that elicit pain, or surgical intervention. One of the most cited guides on the outcomes of surgical versus conservative management for lumbar disc herniations comes from the Spine Patient Outcomes Research Trial (SPORT). In their report, patients electing for surgery had better outcomes at three months, two years, and four years compared to the non-surgery patients. The literature regarding the optimal surgical procedure, approach, and roles for decompression/instrumentation continues to expand. Currently, the literature shows that traditional open surgery compared to microdiscectomy are both broadly similar and effective. In regards to the amount of disc removed during a discectomy, while a “limited” discectomy provides better pain relief and patient satisfaction compared to a subtotal discectomy, they have a higher risk of repeat herniations. Interestingly, patient outcomes and satisfaction are similar in repeat/revision micro discectomies as compared to their initial discectomy. The operation at times requires overnight hospitalization, but frequently these are designed to be outpatient procedures. It is important for the patient to understand that while surgical intervention has favorable outcomes for relieving radicular pains, the results are less predictable for non-radiating lower back pain.