Yersinia infections can present with enterocolitis, pseudoappendicitis, reactive arthritis, sepsis, pharyngitis, myocarditis, mesenteric adenitis or dermatitis. Clinically the infection can manifest in 2 ways:

**Acute Yersiniosis
**

This condition manifests as diarrhea, abdominal pain, nausea, vomiting, and fever. The duration of diarrhea can range from 12 to 22 days. Yersiniosis is difficult to distinguish from other causes of acute diarrhea given the similar presentation. The localization of pain to the right lower quadrant may be a diagnostic clue for yersiniosis. Bloody diarrhea is more frequently observed in children compared to adults. Sepsis has been described in infants and patients who are immunocompromised or in iron overload state with an overall 50 percent fatality rate.

Following the acute infection, the bacteria may continue to shed in the stool for a median of 40 days (range 17 to 116 days).

**Pseudoappendicitis
**

Acute yersiniosis can mimic appendicitis and present with right lower quadrant abdominal pain, fever, vomiting, elevated white blood count, and diarrhea. Patients taken for surgery demonstrate inflammation of the terminal ileum and mesenteric lymph node with a normal appendix. Pseudoappendicitis is most common in young children resulting in appendectomy in many cases.

Reactive arthritis can also occur after yersinia and tends to affect multiple joints. The larger joints are usually involved and the symptoms may last for 30-120 days. In most cases, the joint symptoms appear 7-14 days after the gastrointestinal symptoms.

Another feature of yersinia is erythema nodosum with lesions appearing 2-14 days after the abdominal pain. The lesions are more common in adult females and usually resolve on their own.