# Introduction

Lung capacity or total lung capacity (TLC) is the volume of air in the lungs upon the maximum effort of inspiration.  Among healthy adults, the average lung capacity is about 6 liters. Age, gender, body composition, and ethnicity are factors affecting the different ranges of lung capacity among individuals. TLC rapid increases from birth to adolescence and plateaus at around 25 years old. Males tend to have a greater TLC than females, while individuals with tall stature tend to have greater TLC than those with short stature, and individuals with a high waist-to-hip ratio generally have a lower TLC.

Clinicians can measure lung capacity by plethysmography, dilutional helium gas method, nitrogen gas washout method, or radiographically by a relatively new technique using by computed tomography (CT). Methodically, the TLC is calculated by measuring the lung capacities: inspiratory capacity (IC), functional residual capacity (FRC), and the vital capacity (VC). Illustrated in Figure 1, Panel A, the lung capacities can be further divided into the following lung volumes: tidal volume (TV), inspiratory reserve volume (IRV), expiratory reserve volume (ERV), and the residual volume (RV). This review article will not delve into definitions of all of the lung capacities and lung volumes but instead will outline the methods in which lung capacity is measured and discuss the clinical significance of TLC (see image).

# Related Testing

The volume of air that makes up the TLC can be calculated by directly measuring the lung volumes at different phases of the respiratory cycle and by measuring the remaining volume of air in the lungs after maximum exhalation. This relationship calculates as the total lung capacity equaling the sum of functional residual capacity and the inspiratory capacity or as the equation: **TLC = FRC + IC**. The FRC is only measurable by plethysmography, nitrogen gas washout, or helium gas dilution methods, or using computed tomography (CT). Once the FRC gas volume is measured and the RV is determined, the following additional equations that can be used to calculate the TLC; the sum of the four lung volumes:**TLC = RV + ERV + IRV + TV**or the sum of vital capacity and the residual volume:**TLC = VC + RV**.

**Plethysmography**

Plethysmography is used to measure the changes of pressure within a constant temperature and volume chamber. This test requires a patient to exercise various respiratory maneuvers inside of an air sealed chamber while breathing through a spirometer or a pneumotachograph. During the respiratory exercises, chest wall expansion and collapse cause changes in the pressure within the chamber and a transducer within the chamber measures these changes.**P1V1 = P2V2**is applied to plethysmography as initial pressure in the chamber multiplied by the initial volume in the chamber equals the pressure at the end of a chest expansion multiplied by the volume in the chamber at the end of chest expansion. Plethysmography is the gold standard and most accurate test for measuring lung volumes.

**Helium Gas Dilution**

The helium gas dilution method utilizes helium gas, a non-absorbable gas by the alveoli of the lungs, to measure the FRC lung volume in patients. This test begins by having a patient breathe a known volume and concentration of helium gas mixture from a spirometry chamber through a tube attached to the patient’s mouth. During this time, the helium concentration within the chamber then equalizes with the helium concentration in the lungs, and the test concludes when a change in gas concentrations is less than 0.02%.**FRC = V1(FHe1-FHe2) / FHe2**.****Helium and nitrogen gas dilution methods may measure lower lung volumes or TLC in patients with airflow obstruction; this is because both of these tests are unable to measure poorly ventilated areas of the lung.

**Nitrogen Gas Washout**

A nitrogen washout method is also a form of a gas dilutional technique used to measure the FRC to calculate the TLC by giving a patient 100% oxygen to remove nitrogen gas from the lungs. This test requires a patient to breathe through a mouthpiece that has two-one way valves, one valve that allows the patient to inhale 100% oxygen and a second valve that allows the patient to exhale breaths into a pneumotachograph that measures nitrogen gas concentration and the volume of exhaled air.**FRC nitrogen gas = (nitrogen gas washed out) - (**nitrogen gas**tissue excretion) / initial - final nitrogen**gas**lung concentration**.

**Computed Tomography (CT)**

Computed tomography scan of the thorax is a method that requires the use of radiological imaging to calculate lung volumes. This test requires a patient to hold their breath at full inhalation while lying supine in the process of receiving a CT scan of the chest.

**Spirometry**

Spirometry is a common test used in the clinical setting for assessing pulmonary function and diagnosis of pulmonary diseases by measuring forced expiratory volume in one second (FEV1) and forced vital capacity (FVC). The use of spirometry alone is often misconstrued as a test used to calculate the TLC when in fact, this test can not measure the RV, the remaining volume of air in the lungs after maximum exhalation. Furthermore, to use spirometry to calculate the TLC, it should be combined with plethysmography, gas dilution, gas washout, or radiographic imaging to estimate the RV.

# Clinical Significance

**Indication for Lung Volume Testing**

The clinical indication for measuring lung volumes/capacities is usually when a patient presents with abnormal spirometry FEV1/FVC ratios significant for either obstructive or restrictive lung disease. Clinicians will then order additional testing either plethysmography, dilutional gas study, or radiographic imaging to confirm the presences of disease.

**Restrictive Lung Disease and Obstructive Lung Disease Effects on Lung Capacity**

The American Thoracic Society/European Respiratory Society (ATS/ERS) defines a restrictive ventilatory defect as a reduced TLC below the 5th percentile of normal predicted value with a normal FEV1/VC ratio.

**Obesity and Lung Capacity**

Obesity is known to have many consequences on an individuals health and correlates to the causes of comorbidities among individuals in North America. Obesity is also a cause of reduced TLC on lung volume testing with characteristics of a restrictive lung disease pattern on pulmonary function testing.

**Lung Capacity Used as Predictors of Health Outcomes**

Patients with COPD and an inspiratory capacity/total lung capacity ratio (IC/TLC ratio) less than 25% are found to be at an increased risk for the following: the need for careful monitoring of treatment, frequent hospital admissions, and risk for both all-cause and respiratory mortality.

With late progression of COPD, patients can develop hyperinflation of the lungs, a complication that results in shortness of breath with exertion or at rest. For patients with COPD, the residual volume/total lung capacity ratio (RV/TLC ratio) greater than 40% is a predictor of resting hyperinflation and an independent risk factor for all-cause mortality.