Procedural education and informed consent:

Just like every other surgical procedure, patients that have been evaluated and found to fit the criteria for tympanocentesis should have the procedure explained to them in detail and should have the benefits, risks, and other possible alternative therapy options explained to them clearly. Once this is achieved, informed written consent should be documented on the patient's chart.

- Antibiotics: Unlike some minor surgical procedures, preoperative antibiotics are not required before performing tympanocentesis.

- Anesthesia: Tympanocentesis can either be performed under topical and local or general anesthesia. The use of general anesthesia requires the availability of more trained personnel, and it is usually reserved for patients that might be uncooperative such as children. Topical agents such as lidocaine, prilocaine, and phenol are used in more cooperative patients and are associated with faster recovery time, reduced bleeding tendencies due to the vasoconstrictive properties of these agents and overall a reduced procedural cost. The use of newer non-invasive techniques such as Iontophoresis and the application of the EMLA cream (eutectic administration of local anesthesia) can also be utilized. Oral pain relief in patients during the procedure can be achieved with acetaminophen and codeine. While more sedating agents such as midazolam require further expertise help for an anesthesiologist and also typically requires a standard operating room setting.

- Positioning: The standard positioning for a patient scheduled to undergo tympanocentesis is supine or semi-reclined (beach-chair) position, with the patient's head, turned away from the operator to allow for adequate visualization of the tympanic membrane with the appropriately sized ear speculum.