# Continuing Education Activity

Deferoxamine (DFO) is a medication used for iron (approved indication) and aluminum toxicity (off-label). It is in the chelator class of drugs. Deferoxamine chelates non-transferrin bound iron (free iron), iron in transit between transferrin and ferritin (labile chelating iron pool), hemosiderin, and ferritin. This activity will highlight the mechanism of action, adverse reactions, interactions, and other factors such as off-label use, dosing, indications, monitoring, and pharmacokinetics. The information is pertinent for members of interprofessional teams in the treatment of iron toxicity and aluminum toxicity.

**Objectives:**
- Identify the mechanism of action of deferoxamine.
- Describe the potential adverse effects of deferoxamine.
- Review the appropriate monitoring for patients using deferoxamine.
- Outline interprofessional team strategies for improving care coordination and communication to advance the use of deferoxamine and improve outcomes.

# Indications

Deferoxamine (DFO or DFOA) is FDA approved to treat iron overload, either acute or chronic. The definition of iron overload is serial ferritin levels above 800 to 3000 ng/mL.

Transfusion-related iron overload occurs in patients that require frequent transfusions throughout their life. These patients include those affected by Thalassemia, Sickle cell disease, myelodysplastic syndromes, ineffective hematopoiesis, and other inherited anemic disorders. In this population, chelation should begin two years after transfusions start, serum ferritin levels greater than 1000 mcg/L, or when liver iron concentration (LIC) is greater than 3 mg Fe/g.

Another indication for iron chelation is a cardiac T2* <20 milliseconds found on cardiac magnetic resonance.

The use of deferoxamine in acute ingestion of iron is an indication when patients present with systemic toxicity, hemodynamic instability, lethargy, persistent vomiting, metabolic acidosis, or toxic serum iron levels.

Aluminum toxicity is an off-label use for deferoxamine chelation therapy. Aluminum toxicity can occur in patients with chronic kidney disease who undergo bladder irrigation with aluminum-containing products, use phosphate binders that contain aluminum, or receive hemodialysis with a water source contaminated with aluminum. Its use is indicated in patients with signs and symptoms associated with chronic aluminum levels greater than >20 mcg/L, such as osteomalacia, anemia, hypercalcemia, and dialysis dementia.

# Mechanism of Action

Iron is an essential part of human physiology. It is a vital element in proteins such as hemoglobin, myoglobin, and cytochrome and also functions as a cofactor for many enzymes. It is stored by ferritin and transferred throughout the serum by transferrin. No physiological mechanism exists to excrete iron. Instead, humans regulate GI uptake by altering hepcidin levels.

Cells also take up free iron to form labile iron pools (LIP) within their cell membranes.Streptomyces pilosus.

The bound form of deferoxamine is then excreted via the urine or bile.

Deferoxamine can also bind aluminum within the plasma to form aluminoxane, which is renally excreted. In the case of CKD/ESRD patients, the product is dialyzable using a high-flux membrane.

# Administration

Deferoxamine is poorly absorbed from the GI tract when taken orally. For this reason, it must be given intramuscularly, subcutaneously, or intravenously.

A 25 gauge or smaller butterfly needle is used for the SQ route. The abdomen is generally the safest and most common area to avoid important vessels and nerves. A 10% deferoxamine solution is administered subcutaneously over 8 to 12 hours using a slow infusion pump.

Intravenous administration is reserved for those patients with severe acute iron toxicity with Iron levels >500 mcg/dL, severe cardiac disease (dysrhythmias, LV dysfunction, severe heart iron loading (T2*<6 ms on MRI)), or those who cannot tolerate the subcutaneous infusion.

The dose of deferoxamine may be reduced or increased by using clinical judgment, decreasing liver ion concentrations, or calculating the therapeutic index, which divides the daily dose of deferoxamine by the serum ferritin levels. The therapeutic index should be <.025 at all times to avoid serious adverse effects.

Vitamin C can potentiate the therapeutic effect of deferoxamine by mobilizing iron stores, subsequently increasing the concentration of chelatable iron.

In aluminum toxicity, the appropriate dosing and therapy duration of the drug is uncertain and should be tailored by serum aluminum levels, symptoms, and response. The National Kidney Foundation has listed specific guidelines for the use of deferoxamine in aluminum toxicity, which this article will cover. A proposed mechanism by the Kidney Disease Outcomes Quality Initiative states that in symptomatic patients with serum aluminum levels >60 μg/L but <200 μg/L or a rise in aluminum after DFO >50 μg/L, deferoxamine should be given to treat the aluminum overload. Deferoxamine's ability to draw aluminum out of tissues and into the plasma makes its use very dangerous in those patients with serum aluminum levels >200 μg/L. To avoid DFO-induced neurotoxicity in these patients, its use should delay until the completion of intensive dialysis (6 days per week) with a high-flux dialysis membrane and a dialysate aluminum level of <5 μg/L and until the pre-dialysis serum aluminum level has been reduced to <200 μg/L.

# Adverse Effects

Chronic deferoxamine therapy can lead to sensorineural hearing loss and retinopathy. Though the mechanism of ocular injury is not well understood, it appears to partially occur due to damage to the retinal pigment epithelium, which can lead to decreased visual acuity, visual field defects, and color vision defects.

Administering less than 2.5 g of deferoxamine per day and monitoring the therapeutic index is the best means to avoid such complications. Acute side effects can include GI complaints, anaphylaxis, skin discoloration, skin irritation, and anaphylaxis. Chelation of iron and formation of the water-soluble compound ferioxamine may lead to rose-colored urine. Deferoxamine can increase the risk of infection by specific pathogens and invasive fungi such as mucormycosis, Yersinia, and Vibrio.

# Contraindications

Deferoxamine is relatively safe and well-tolerated by patients. Its use is contraindicated in patients with previous hypersensitivity reactions to the drug and those with renal disease or anuria. Deferoxamine is a pregnancy category C drug and is usually reserved for women at high risk of cardiac disease or severe symptoms from acute ingestion. Although there is no evidence to indicate that the drug is a teratogen, animal studies have shown adverse fetal effects. Clinicians should be cautious in using during pregnancy, and the risks vs. benefits must merit consideration in each case. It is unknown if deferoxamine is excreted in breast milk.

# Monitoring

The therapeutic index is a crucial measurement for deferoxamine therapy, and the provider should calculate it regularly. It can be calculated by dividing the mean daily dose over seven days by the measured ferritin levels.

An evaluation by an ophthalmologist should take place in children every six months and annually in adults. Since the kidneys excrete most of the chelation byproduct ferrioxamine, it is essential to monitor the patient's renal function. The patient's chemistry, BUN/Cr, and urine protein/Cr ratios should be measured at least four times a year, and the clinicians should reduce the deferoxamine dose with worsening renal function.

# Toxicity

Patients tolerate deferoxamine well, and there is no specific antidote for the medication. The precautions and dose reductions are described elsewhere in this paper.

# Enhancing Healthcare Team Outcomes

Deferoxamine treatment can be a tedious and painful process, with common local skin reactions. The patient will require strong supportive relationships with several providers, nurses, and family to maximize compliance. To provide safe chelation therapy, a patient must comply with their primary care doctor, ophthalmologist, endocrinologist, nephrologist, and hematologist. These interprofessional teams are vital to successful outcomes that decrease mortality and complications. Many of those who require chelation begin at a young age due to hereditary disease. Compliance in this age group is usually high compared to others due to parental support.

Compliance with the strict regimen can become problematic in adolescence or when life burdens become too cumbersome for a patient to manage. One multicenter study in Germany found that patients had more misery from chelation treatment than the disease requiring it.

Patient involvement, education, and behavioral support are of utmost importance. A systematic review from the Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality on interventions to improve adherence to self-administered medications found that reduced out-of-pocket expenses, case management, and patient education with behavioral support improved medication adherence.