The pathophysiological mechanisms underlying reflux esophagitis are related to the etiological causes and will be discussed in more detail below.

- Transient relaxation of the lower esophageal sphincter: This change results in regurgitation of the gastric acid, peptic enzymes, and bile acids into the esophagus. In patients with increased intra-abdominal pressure (patients with ascites and pregnant women), this effect is enhanced.

- Hiatus hernia: The presence of a hernia disturbs the anatomical relationship between the crural diaphragm and the lower esophageal sphincter function. Also, hernias act as a reservoir for gastric contents, which can reflux into the esophagus during swallowing (relaxation of the lower esophageal sphincter).

- Increased intra-abdominal fat: The change increases the gastroesophageal pressure gradient and increases the frequency of transient lower esophageal sphincter relaxation phase. These changes result in the reflux of the stomach contents into the esophagus.

- Impairment of the physiological defense mechanisms: For example, dysregulation of esophageal peristalsis could result in ineffective clearance of acids from the lower esophagus.

- Impairment of saliva production could impair the role of saliva in neutralizing the acids refluxed into the esophagus.

- Impairment of esophageal mural defense mechanisms: This comprises three different mechanisms:

- A pre-epithelial barrier (unstirred water layer combined with bicarbonate from swallowed saliva and the secretion of submucous glands).
- Epithelial defense mechanisms include tight intercellular junctions, cellular, intercellular buffers, and cell membrane transporters.
- Post-epithelial line of defense, including blood supply to the esophagus.

- The pathogenesis of reflux esophagitis and the development of complications such as Barrett esophagus are mediated by cytokines rather than the results of chemical injury. Reflux esophagitis activates hypoxia-inducible factor (HIF)-2 alpha and nuclear factor kappa-light-chain-enhancer of activated b cells (NF), causing increased pro-inflammatory cytokines and migration of T cells inflammatory cells, causing damage to the esophagus.