COPD is often evaluated in patients with relevant symptoms and risk factors. The diagnosis is confirmed by spirometry. Other tests may include a 6-minute walk test, laboratory testing, and radiographic imaging.

Pulmonary function testing (PFT) is essential in the diagnosis, staging, and monitoring of COPD. Spirometry is performed before and after administering an inhaled bronchodilator. Inhaled bronchodilators may be a short-acting beta2-agonist (SABA), short-acting anticholinergic, or a combination of both. A ratio of the forced expiratory volume in one second to forced vital capacity (FEV1/FVC) less than 0.7 confirms the diagnosis of COPD. Patients with a significantly reduced FEV1 and signs of dyspnea should be evaluated for oxygenation with pulse oximetry or arterial blood gas analysis.

The Global Initiative for Chronic Obstructive Lung Disease (GOLD) is a program initiated by the World Health Organization (WHO) and the National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute (NHLBI). The program is recognized worldwide for providing updated and detailed reports on the recommendations for the diagnosis and management of COPD. The GOLD recommendations are often used to assess disease severity and choice of therapy.

The 2019 GOLD report outlines a simplified method of evaluating and choosing the initial treatment for patients with COPD. The refined ABCD assessment tool guides healthcare providers to determine the severity of disease and the GOLD group classification. Once the diagnosis of COPD is confirmed by spirometry (FEV1/FVC <0.7), the FEV1 is used to determine the severity (GOLD classification 1-4). The GOLD group (A-D) is then determined by the severity of symptoms and the history of exacerbations. The assessment of COPD is summarized in **Figure 1**.

Symptom severity is evaluated using the modified British Medical Research Council (mMRC) questionnaire (**Table 1**) and the COPD Assessment Test (CAT) (**Table 2**). The mMRC questionnaire assesses the degree of breathlessness on a scale of 0-4 with 4 being the most severe. The COPD Assessment Test (CAT) provides a score on eight functional parameters to measure the impact of the disease on a patient’s daily life.

A 6-minute walk test is commonly performed to assess the submaximal functional capacity of a patient. This test is performed indoors on a flat and straight surface. The length of the hallway is usually 100 feet and the test measures the distance the patient walks over a period of 6 minutes.

Laboratory testing often requires a complete blood count to assess for infection, anemia, and polycythemia. Alpha-1 antitrypsin levels should be checked for other causes of COPD.

Radiographic imaging includes a chest x-ray and computed tomography (CT). Chest x-rays may show hyperinflation, flattening of the diaphragm, and increased anterior-posterior diameter. In cases of chronic bronchitis, bronchial wall thickening may be present. CT imaging may be useful in patients with bronchiectasis, malignancy, or if planning surgical procedures. CT of the chest in patients with COPD will be significant for centrilobular emphysema. Bullae may be present in the subpleural regions.

A biopsy is not required for the diagnosis of COPD. Histopathologic findings include an increase in inflammatory cells, structural changes, and lymphoid follicles.

Acute exacerbation of COPD is an acute worsening of respiratory symptoms. Assessing severity is often based on the model developed by Anthonisen and colleagues which classifies severity by the presence of worsening dyspnea, sputum volume, and purulence. Mild exacerbations are defined by the presence of 1 of these symptoms in addition to one of the following: increased wheezing, increased cough, fever without another cause, upper respiratory infection within 5 days, or an increase in heart rate or respiratory rate from the patient's baseline. Moderate and severe exacerbations are defined by the presence of 2 or all 3 of the symptoms respectively. Patients may have acute respiratory failure and physical findings of hypoxemia and hypercapnia. Arterial blood gas analysis, chest imaging, and pulse oximetry are indicated.