Evaluation of a patient with GUTB requires a detailed history, physical examination, and a combination of laboratory and radiographic investigations. The gold-standard test in diagnosing GUTB or TB, in general, involves the demonstration of the causative M.tuberculosis in clinical samples. In GUTB, the sample can involve but is not limited to urine, prostatic massage fluid, tissue from a biopsy, pus, or discharge fluid.

- **Smear microscopy:**Smear microscopy is performed using Ziehl–Neelsen (ZN) or auramine staining. Light-emitting diode-based fluorescent microscopy has also been found to have similar sensitivities and specificities but is three times faster than ZN microscopy.

- **The GeneXpert MTB/RIF assay:**The WHO recommends the GeneXpert MTB/RIF assay for the rapid diagnosis of TB. In addition to a quick turnaround time, it is also affordable. It can detectMycobacterium tuberculosis and the presence of rifampicin resistance by detecting mutations in the rpoB gene simultaneously in pulmonary TB.

- **Mycobacterium culture:**Mycobacterial culture remains the gold standard for diagnosing active TB.

- **Whole-genome sequencing (WGS) and Next-generation sequencing (NGS):**WGS can provide the near-total genome of the bacilli in a sample. NGS can provide detailed sequencing information for multiple gene regions or whole genomes of particular interest. These are much faster than mycobacterial cultures but are yet to be widely available due to associated costs and specialized infrastructure requirements.

- **Histology:**Granulomatous inflammation in biopsy tissue and the presence of acid-fast bacilli are hallmarks of TB.

**There may also be indirect methods that can provide supportive evidence of TB, which include:**

- **Blood tests:**Complete blood counts, CRP, and renal function tests should be performed routinely in suspected GUTB. A raised CRP and serum creatinine should raise the suspicion of GUTB in the appropriate clinical context. These tests are useful adjuncts to more confirmatory testing and may be useful in assessing disease response to treatment.

- **Urinary lipoarabinomannan (LAM):**LAM is a constituent part of the cell wall ofMycobacterium tuberculosis and is detected in the urine of patients with active TB. LAM can be detected in all forms of TB, not just with TB bacilli in the urine.

- **Imaging:**X-rays, Ultrasonography, Urography, CT scans, MRI scans, and PET-CT scans may all be useful in GUTB, especially in the setting of an absence of microbiological diagnosis as well as to direct samplings such as a biopsy for microbiology and histopathology.

- **Others:**These include endoscopies including cystourethroscopy, ureteroscopy, hysteroscopy and laparoscopy, and Hysterosalpingography. These are again useful in obtaining samples for confirmatory testing by the microbiological or histopathological techniques mentioned above.