The diagnosis of paradoxical embolism is one of exclusion.  Other causes for the patient's signs and symptoms should be considered first.

The evaluation should include:

- **EKG**to assess for arrhythmia or atrial fibrillation.

- **Transthoracic echocardiogram (TTE) with color-flow Doppler**to evaluate for intracardiac shunts, cardiac myxomas, and thrombus formations. Agitated saline or contrast can also be injected during TTE to help visualize and diagnose an intracardiac shunt. However, to accurately diagnose a PFO, the saline or contrast needs to be injected at the end of a Valsalva maneuver where the left of right shunt transiently reverses. TTE can also be used to evaluate for the presence of aortic plaques in the ascending aorta.

- **Transcranial Doppler sonography (TCD)**to detect any shunt, including PAVM. TCD is non-invasive and can be done at the bedside by injecting agitated contrast into a peripheral line and looking for microemboli in the middle cerebral artery.

- **Ear oximetry**is a simple screening tool for intracardiac shunts that can be utilized with high sensitivity and specificity. When the patient performs a Valsalva maneuver, the left to right shunt transiently turns into a right to left shunt, resulting in a transient decrease in the arterial oxygen saturation, which is detected by the ear oximeter.

- **Coagulation studies,**including tests for protein C and S antigen levels.

- **D-Dimer**levels if pulmonary embolism is suspected

- **Arterial blood gas**will help determine the oxygenation and ventilation status.

- **Ultrasound to**evaluate for a DVT

- **CT angiography scan of the chest**to assess for a pulmonary embolus.

- **Noncontrast CT scan of the brain**to assess for intracranial hemorrhage.

- **CT angiogram or MRI**for acute occlusion of the extremity, kidneys, or bowel.

- **Ancillary blood chemistries and urinalysis**as indicated to assess for other metabolic causes.