Despite the wide spectrum of potential risk factors for developing small-intestinal malignancies, the following factors have been considered as definitive risk factors to play a role in the consequent small-intestinal tumors: 1) specific diet, including red meat, and ingestion of smoked or cured foods, 2)chronic inflammatory bowel involvement, including Crohn disease, 3) malabsorptive immune disorders, including celiac sprue, and 4) hereditary intestinal disorders, including nonpolyposis colorectal cancer (HNPCC), familial adenomatous polyposis (FAP), and Peutz-Jeghers syndrome. Over time, national registries have found that the incidence of certain types of malignant SI neoplasms varies based on location. While all of the previously mentioned malignancies can be found throughout the SI, studies have shown that these can be seen in higher incidence in certain portions of the SI. For example, adenocarcinoma is considered the most common neoplasm of the duodenum, while neuroendocrine tumors are more common in the ileum. It appears that sarcomas and lymphomas occur at equal rates throughout the SI.

- **Sarcoma -**is generally classified as leiomyosarcoma and primarily arises from muscle tissue; and it is most commonly found in the ileum but can be found throughout the SI.

- 
              
- **GIST**or gastrointestinal stromal tumors are thought to arise from the interstitial cells of Cajal. These particular tumors are considered soft tissue sarcomas.

- ****Adenocarcinoma -****usually develops through the malignant transformation of glandular cells of the SI.

- **Neuroendocrine tumors**- Also known as carcinoid tumors and are generally derived from hormone-producing cells and therefore are generally associated with secretory cells that cause particular clinical features.

- **Lymphoma**- derived from the lymphatics associated with the small intestine.

**Risk Factors**

Full details regarding epidemiology and rates of occurrence have been delineated below. Certain cancer syndromes and underlying medical conditions may predispose patients to certain types of small bowel neoplasms.

**Celiac Disease**

- Longstanding celiac disease is an independent risk factor for the development of high-grade lymphomas of the small bowel. Primarily noted to consist of non-Hodgkin lymphoma subtypes. Although rare, patients with type 2 refractory celiac disease have been found to have an increased risk of enteropathy-associated T cell lymphoma (often referred to as EATL). A high index of suspicion should be considered for patients with severe Celiac Disease with significant issues consistent with a recurrent obstruction or evidence of steatorrhea. Despite this primarily being noted through observational studies, some suggest that the diagnosis of EATL usually is heralded by a clinical relapse after the patient is found to have an adequate response to abstinence from gluten.

**Inflammatory Bowel Disease**

- Most specifically, Crohn disease has been found to carry an increase in small bowel cancer. Studies have shown that patients with Crohn disease can have up to a 60 fold increase in the risk of developing adenocarcinoma of the small bowel.

**Hereditary Cancer Syndromes**

- Cancer syndromes that carry an increased risk of cancer development in the colon can often carry an increased risk of cancer of the small bowel. Examples of such syndromes include familial adenomatous polyposis (FAP), hereditary nonpolyposis colorectal cancer (HNPCC/Lynch syndrome), and Peutz-Jeghers syndrome (PJS), MUTYH-associated polyposis, as well as cystic fibrosis. All of the syndromes noted above carry an increased risk of adenocarcinoma. The risk of developing small bowel cancer often carries high mortality rates in patients with such diagnoses despite often undergoing prophylactic colectomy. For example, individuals who have undergone colectomy for colon cancer prevention in the known diagnosis of FAP still require surveillance of the upper GI tract with serial upper endoscopy at intervals that vary depending on polyp burden and initial screening pathology results.

Two well-studied small intestine malignancies considering their molecular pathogenesis are adenocarcinomas and GISTs. However, less significant progress has been reported in exploring the pathogenesis of the other small-intestinal tumors. A similar pathogenesis background to colorectal adenocarcinoma with sequential genetic aberrancies has been attributed to small intestine adenocarcinoma. Villous adenomas with maximal aggressive behavior and a specific tendency to grow exponentially large are mainly found in the second portion of the duodenum, and malignant transformation has been well-documented in almost half of the villous adenomas with histopathological evaluation. Along with the histopathological subtype of small intestine adenomas, family and personal history of hereditary polyposis disorders, including familial adenomatous disease, has a critical role in predicting the potential for malignant transformation. Accordingly, almost all diagnosed duodenal adenomas polyps in the context of FAP will eventually transform into adenocarcinoma, and the duodenal cancer risk in these patients is more than 100-times greater than in the general population. Moreover, hamartomatous polyps in patients with Peutz-Jeghers syndrome might contain adenomatous loci with the potential for malignant transformation. However, pathological sequences of GIST tumors, including mutations with a gain of function tendency of proto-oncogene KIT, with a key role in unopposed cellular growth, have been well identified. The interstitial cells of Cajal have an integral role in the GISTs tumor, and the specific staining for CD117 antigen, the KIT receptor, is present in most GIST tumors.