Pre-hospital thrombolytic therapy is a new treatment paradigm that can dramatically change patient outcomes. Several studies have shown that trained pre-hospital professionals may identify ST-segment elevation with 12­ lead EKGs, thereby playing a role in pre-hospital administration of thrombolytic or advance notification to the coronary care facility. However, when administered by skilled first responders, pre-hospital fibrinolysis is safe and reasonable. Therefore, tissue plasminogen activator, alteplase, or modified forms of it reteplase or tenecteplase are commonly used fibrinolytic agents in pre-hospital settings. Reteplase or tenecteplase is preferable for their convenient single­ or double­bolus dosing. Besides, to ensure standard out­ of ­hospital thrombolytic treatment, appropriate protocols with checklists, interpretation, and transmission of 12 lead EKG, advanced cardiac life support (ACLS) training, and uninterrupted availability of medical direction are mandatory.

When fibrinolytic is used in acute ischemic stroke, strict blood pressure monitoring and control are essential to prevent hemorrhagic complications with a goal blood pressure of less than 180/110 mmHg. Clinicians should avoid adjunctive therapies with anticoagulants and antiplatelets within 24 hours of thrombolytic treatment for acute ischemic stroke. An emergent CT scan of the brain is necessary if there is a change in neurologic examination during or after thrombolytic administration in the setting of acute ischemic stroke. A pharmacy consult is crucial to ensure proper dosing and prevent interactions.

Thrombolytic therapy is a crucial tool in treating conditions where it is indicated (e.g., AMI, occlusive stroke). It requires the coordinated efforts of an entire interprofessional team, including EMTs/paramedics, clinicians, specialists, nurses, and pharmacists. Through collaborative effort and open communication between all these disciplines, patients who require thrombolytic therapy can achieve the best possible outcomes with the fewest adverse events. The interprofessional PERT (The Pulmonary Embolism Response Team) model has been developed to manage pulmonary embolism. The PERT team consists of healthcare providers from critical care, pulmonary medicine, vascular medicine, emergency medicine, interventional and noninterventional cardiology, interventional radiology, vascular surgery, cardiac surgery, hematology, and clinical pharmacy. This multidisciplinary PERT team rapidly engages multiple experts. It provides rapid evidence-based care for patients with pulmonary embolism improving patient outcomes.

The Heart Team relies on the principles of collaboration, respect, and commitment to excellence in patient care with CAD. Observational studies in the Multidisciplinary Heart Team have included interventional cardiology, cardiac surgery, and noninvasive cardiologists. Additional clinicians who offer input may include the patient’s primary physician and palliative care, critical care, anesthesiology, and imaging specialists. The multidisciplinary heart team (MHT) approach reduced the MACCE(major adverse cardiovascular and cerebrovascular events) treatment for CAD. Therefore, the dedicated interprofessional MHT approach can improve the outcomes for patients with CAD.

A dedicated acute stroke team that includes physicians and other clinicians, nurses, and laboratory/radiology personnel is recommended by AHA/ASA. Multidisciplinary teams with access to neurological expertise are recommended to improve patient outcomes related to IV fibrinolytic treatment.