Managing patients taking nevirapine requires several factors, one of which is cohesive interprofessional teamwork. For treatment to be conducted smoothly and for the patient to receive the most significant benefit possible from it, every member of the interprofessional healthcare team, including clinicians (MDs, DOs, NPs, and PAs), nursing staff, and pharmacists, must be well informed about the treatment regimen and must actively work to ensure all members of the team are on the same page.

Another critical component is the meticulous and regular follow-up with said patients. Because of this medication’s known potential for causing hepatotoxicity in those consuming it, patients’ liver functions must be monitored, especially in the beginning stages of treatment.

It is also important to note that the effectiveness of this medication relies heavily on patient compliance with taking the medication as prescribed. It is up to healthcare professionals to ensure patients are well informed about their responsibilities in ensuring they receive maximal improvement from the treatment. Healthcare professionals must further ensure that they view their patients as more than their illness and consider factors such as social support, finances, and mental health when monitoring patient adherence. If they note any signs of non-adherence (in patient interviews, failure to pick up prescriptions, etc.), they must immediately alert all interprofessional team members to implement interventions. All drugs require teamwork and open communication, but this is heightened for HIV therapy since non-adherence can invalidate entire classes of antiretroviral agents. Below are some examples of recommendations for methods to increase the success of HIV treatment in patients on antiviral therapy:

- Actively monitoring patient compliance with regular visits to see their healthcare professional.

- Beyond initially presenting for medical care, it is essential to ensure a patient follows up with their healthcare provider to determine treatment efficacy.

- Patients should be asked for self-reported adherence regularly

- Although patients overestimate their adherence, self-reporting has a high predictive value.

- When monitoring patient adherence, checking refill data from the patient’s respective pharmacy is recommended.

- Observational studies involving medical records and claims data confirm the validity of pharmacy refill data used to measure patient adherence to antiretroviral therapy.

- Altering patient regimens from being complex to simpler once-daily regimens is a recommendation.

- Several studies have shown that switching patients to an easier regimen for taking medication improves their overall adherence.

- Using technological devices to set reminders for taking medication is a recommendation.

- Studies have shown that setting routine alarms or reminders helps to increase adherence. Examples of some methods include receiving reminders via text message and receiving weekly check-ins from the clinic either via text message or phone call.

- Working to concurrently provide antiretroviral therapy with screening, managing, and treating various mental illnesses is recommended.

- Randomized, controlled trials have shown that for patients with illnesses such as depression, providing them with cognitive-behavioral therapy and adherence counseling helps to improve their compliance with taking medication on time.

With an interprofessional team approach that includes clinicians, specialists (particularly those infectious disease specialists who focus on HIV therapy), mid-level practitioners, nurses, and pharmacists, patient outcomes will be better, and adverse events will be minimized. [Level 5]