**Intraoperative Complications**

Pneumothorax is a rare complication of LARS with an incidence of less than 2%. Typically, it is a consequence of pleural violation without injury to the lung. Carbon dioxide will diffuse into the pleural cavity but will be rapidly absorbed and is rarely of clinical consequence. If a pleural violation is identified intraoperatively, the opening should be repaired with suture. If a postoperative chest X-ray shows a pneumothorax, it may be managed conservatively with oxygen therapy. Serial chest X-rays are minimally useful. They are only indicated in patients who continue to require oxygen therapy or are symptomatic from the pneumothorax, as in shortness of breath. Rarely, this is a cause of tension pneumothorax requiring chest tube drainage.

Gastric or esophageal perforation is another complication of LARS. Its incidence is less than 1%. If identified intraoperatively, it should be repaired with sutures. Postoperative diagnosis typically requires reoperation unless the leak is small or contained and the patient is hemodynamically stable.

A splenic injury may occur during the mobilization of the fundus intraoperatively. This injury is usually parenchymal and may require splenectomy. A more rare complication is a postoperative splenic infarction due to inadvertent coagulation of branches from the main splenic artery. This injury occurs during the division of the short gastric arteries.

**Postoperative Complications**

A feeling of gastric distention, nausea, and even inability to intake liquids following LARS can occur. These effects are thought to be multifactorial. They involve a mechanical barrier at the gastroesophageal junction that prevents belching as well as vagal nerve fiber injury leading to relative gastroparesis. This is a common postoperative effect, but it persists in few patients. If an individual has persistent nausea with inadequate oral intake, an abdominal X-ray should be obtained. If there is evidence of gastric distention, a nasogastric tube should be placed to decompress the stomach temporarily. Very rarely do patients require further interventions.

A temporary mild postoperative dysphagia is expective after LARS. It is secondary to the expected postoperative edema at the fundoplication site. A more rare etiology is a hematoma at the wrap site which usually causes more severe dysphagia. However, it is also self-limited. Mild dysphagia is normal during the first 2 to 4 weeks postoperatively. If the patient can tolerate liquids in early postoperative care with mild subjective dysphagia, they should be watched without intervention. If the patient cannot tolerate fluids to keep themselves hydrated, an upper gastrointestinal series should be obtained. This series will rule out anatomical abnormalities such as a postoperative hiatal hernia. If the patient has subjective dysphagia for greater than 3 months postoperatively, an upper gastrointestinal series should also be obtained. At this time if the upper gastrointestinal is normal, an esophagogastroduodenoscopy with balloon dilation of the gastroesophageal junction should be performed.

Less than 10% of patients have recurrent symptoms after LARS.

A slipped wrap is secondary to technical errors during surgery. Preventative measures include tacking sutures to the diaphragm and complete mobilization of the fundus and esophagus, with at least 2 to 3 cm of the intra-abdominal esophagus. These measures help avoid wrapping the fundus onto the stomach as opposed to the fundus onto the esophagus. The Nissen fundoplication can slip caudally in the postoperative period. This slip may occur immediately postoperatively or gradually. Caudal slippage leads to the acid-producing stomach being incorporated in the wrap, thus leading to increased reflux and severe esophagitis, gastritis, or ulcer formation. Diagnosis is made with barium upper gastrointestinal series and esophagogastroduodenoscopy. The required treatment is reoperative; the surgeon must redo the fundoplication.