The function of the ventricles of the brain is to produce and transmit CSF fluid into the spinal canal, ventricular system, and the subarachnoid space. The choroid plexus produces the majority of CSF, along with the ependymal cell layer of the ventricles and cells lining the subarachnoid space.

The fourth ventricle is the most inferiorly located ventricle, draining directly into the central canal of the spinal cord. Superiorly, it connects to the third ventricle through a thin canal called the cerebral aqueduct of Sylvius. It is surrounded anteriorly by the pons and medulla, posteriorly by the cerebellum, and inferiorly by the spinal canal and spinal cord. At its superolateral portions, two channels drain CSF into the surrounding neural tissue. These are called the lateral apertures, or the foramina of Luschka. Inferomedially is the median aperture or the foramen of Magendie. These apertures help spread CSF around the spinal cord and the surrounding neural structures. All of the CSF that does not drain out of these apertures goes into the central canal of the spinal cord.

The lateral wall of the fourth ventricle is surrounded inferolaterally by the cuneate and gracile tubercules, along with the inferior cerebellar peduncles. The lateral wall is also surrounded superolaterally by the superior cerebellar peduncle. The dorsal wall, or roof of the fourth ventricle, is formed by two cerebellar peduncles that are bridged together by a thin sheet of white matter called the superior medullary velum. The floor of the fourth ventricle forms from the posterior surface of the pons and the superior medulla.