The most common adverse effect associated with Lu-dotatate therapy is nausea. The incidence is up to 60%, associated with the amino acid infusions administered along with the treatment for renal protective effects. Beyond the administration day, the incidence of nausea has been substantially low. Hematological toxicities, including thrombocytopenia, lymphopenia, anemia, or leukopenia, were reported in the range of 10 to 25%. They are expected to occur after four weeks of infusion, which can last an average of 8 weeks.

There are risks associated with radiation risks that need close monitoring and counseling. Following each treatment, low radiation activity levels occur due to the ongoing decay of radionucleotide disintegration. After the day of the treatment, the amount of radiation released is not harmful to surrounding individuals. This limited radiation could trigger alarms at international airports.

The most severe long-term toxicity associated with PRRT, with a median incidence of one year after completion of PRRT, is a therapy-related myeloid neoplasm, such as myelodysplastic syndrome, acute leukemia, or myeloproliferative neoplasms. The incidence was approximately 0.5 to 2%.

The definitive patient-related risk factors that could potentially place them at higher risk of developing therapy-related neoplasms are unknown. However, advanced age and bone metastasis are the potential risk factors that need further confirmation.

Therefore the patients at high risk for developing myeloid neoplasms require close monitoring with complete blood counts for at least the first two years after Lu dotatate therapy. Renal dysfunction of up to 20% secondary to glomerular damage by radiation was with PRRT.

The limitations of Lu-dotatate at present also include the complexity of administration. The Lu dotatate infusion is currently administered in the nuclear medicine department and needs thorough communication with medical oncology.