Given that malakoplakia is rare, large prospective trials are lacking, and evidence reporting successful treatment is largely anecdotal; there are no standardized treatment guidelines. General principles of treatment include systemic antibiotics, surgical excision, and limiting immunosuppression.

Antibiotics that optimize the intracellular killing of bacteria by phagocytes have been successful in the treatment of malakoplakia. Such antibiotics include fluoroquinolones, trimethoprim/sulfamethoxazole, and rifampin.

Surgical excision of malakoplakia lesions should be considered based on the site affected, complications, or if medical treatment fails. Malakoplakia of the upper urinary tract tends to be aggressive. If the renal parenchyma is affected, nephrectomy should be considered. Additionally, if there is urethral, bladder, or ureteral obstruction, surgical excision or resection should be considered.

Malakoplakia is often associated with acquired immunosuppression, including regimens used for organ transplantation or connective tissue diseases. One case series suggested that the use of prednisone and azathioprine were associated with decreased bacterial killing by neutrophils and monocytes; malakoplakia improved with discontinuation of immunosuppression.

Per a review of 140 cases of malakoplakia comparing treatment modalities, van der Voort et al. suggested the following treatment steps: “(1) If feasible, stop prednisone and azathioprine treatment in those cases where malakoplakia developed during the use of this medication. (2) Perform surgical resection and drainage in combination with ciprofloxacin administration. (3) If surgery is impossible, give ciprofloxacin hydrochloride, 500 mg twice daily. (4) Whether the addition of bethanechol and ascorbic acid offers any advantage to the other treatment modalities remains to be proved.”