Following a median sternotomy, the Ross procedure begins with standard exposure of the heart and the aorta followed by establishing cardioplegia and initiation of cardiopulmonary bypass. The ascending aorta is opened transversely about a centimeter above the origin of the right coronary artery (RCA). The aorta is opened and the aortic valve is inspected. In some cases, the valve may be repaired. If repair is not possible, then the pulmonary artery is opened and the pulmonary valve is inspected to ensure that it has normal anatomy. If the decision is made to proceed with the Ross procedure, the aorta is separated from the aorta, the diseased aortic valve is excised and the coronary buttons are prepared. Next, the pulmonary valve is excised.

If no abnormalities are present, the main pulmonary artery (PA) is opened transversely proximal to the bifurcation. The pulmonary valve (PV) is then itself inspected for anomalies. Again if no abnormalities exist, then the valve replacement is performed using the full root approach. The full root approach is most commonly used about 90% of the time because it has the lowest risk of pulmonary autograft failure.

In this article, we describe the full root approach because it is the most commonly used method. The full root approach is begun by moving the root out of the surgical plane and pushed upwards. The posterior PA root is then cut to the muscle to visualize the right ventricular outflow tract (RVOT) through the incision. Next, the PA is separated from the aorta, and a clamp is then used to designate the most proximal area to the pulmonary valve. It is vital that the surgeon be aware of the left anterior descending coronary artery and the first septal while dissecting on the lateral side.

In the next step, an opening into the RVOT is created followed by dividing the anterior right ventricle and scoring the posterior muscle of the right ventricle partially. Following this, the pulmonary artery root is excised and separated. Next, removal of the aortic valve and root occurs after carefully cutting out the ostia with buttons from the native aorta.

Once the pulmonary valve is removed, it is sized and prepared for implantation into the aortic root.

Now the pulmonic autograft is anastomosed to the LVOT followed by reimplantation of the right and the left coronary arteries on to the autograft, followed by proximal anastomosis of the pulmonic autograft, and hemostasis is secured.

A cryopreserved pulmonary homograft is then trimmed as needed and implanted into the pulmonary root. After weaning from cardiopulmonary bypass, a transesophageal echocardiogram is done to assess the function of the autograft and the homograft.

Prior to discharge, an echocardiogram is repeated to ensure that both the aortic and pulmonary valves are functioning normally. Patients are then examined every 4-6 weeks with echos. It is important to cover patients with antibiotics prior to any procedure.