A thorough history and physical exam are crucial in the evaluation of SFN. Patients with SFN often present initially with sensory symptoms, including pain, burning, numbness, and tingling. While most cases of SFN present in a length-dependent pattern (symptoms beginning in the feet and advancing proximally), some cases have followed either a non-length-dependent (proximal, diffuse, or patchy distribution involving different body parts including the mouth, face, trunk, scalp, or upper limbs before or simultaneously with lower limb involvement) or an asymmetric mono/multiplex neuropathy (involvement of one or more sensory peripheral nerve, often with burning mouth syndrome, vulvodynia, or notalgia and meralgia parasthetica).

Length-dependent SFN often occurs due to metabolic causes, including diabetes or neurotoxic exposure, while non-length-dependent SFN often occurs due to paraneoplastic disorders and immune-mediated pathologies such as Sjögren syndrome.

Patients with SFN often present initially with neuropathic foot pain. Symptoms may be mild at onset, with some patients noting a vague discomfort in the feet. Reported descriptions may include numbness in the toes, a wooden quality in the feet, or a feeling that the patient describes as walking on sand, golf balls, or pebbles. Burning pain in the feet expending proximally in a stocking-glove distribution is often the most bothersome and typical symptom.

This burning is often accompanied by aching or stabbing pains, pins and needles sensation, electric shock, or cramping in the feet and calves. Patients with SFN typically experience the worst of their symptoms at night, often complaining of restless legs, bed sheet intolerance, and clothes causing allodynia or dysesthesia. Some patients do not report pain but note a feeling of swelling and tightness in their feet. Autonomic fiber involvement may lead to additional symptoms, including dry mouth, dry eyes, constipation, bladder incontinence, orthostatic dizziness, sexual dysfunction, red or white skin discoloration, or trouble sweating.

Upon initial presentation, a detailed history should be obtained, including medical history, family history, alcohol use, and use of neurotoxic medications such as colchicine, metronidazole, and chemotherapeutics.

Given the known association between SFN and conditions such as hepatitis C and Human immunodeficiency virus (HIV), the examiner should inquire about relevant risk factors such as sexual history, intravenous drug use, and blood transfusions. A thorough neurologic physical exam can differentiate small fiber from large fiber neuropathy.

Examination often demonstrates allodynia, hyperalgesia, or reduced thermal and pinprick sensation in the affected area. Findings such as weakness, reduced proprioception, and absent deep tendon reflexes should not be seen in SFN, as they instead indicate large fiber involvement. When history is suspicious for autonomic fiber involvement, vitals should be checked to screen for orthostatic hypotension, and skin should be checked, which may appear dry, shiny, atrophic, discolored, or mildly edematous due to vasomotor or sudomotor abnormalities. A physical exam should also evaluate any previously mentioned systemic disorders known to be associated with SFN.