The new tri-leaflet aortic valve can either be sutured or attached to the annulus by first expanding the annulus and then deploying a stent mounted catheter system. The initial percutaneously implanted aortic stent valves failed because they were too large, but over the years, the newer generation of aortic valves have a better profile and hemodynamic performance. The smaller catheter-based valves do not obstruct the coronary arteries or interfere with the function of the mitral valve. However, they still need to be accurately placed at the annulus.

The following is a summary of the different types of aortic valves that are currently available:

- Cribier-Edwards Valve (Edwards Lifesciences, Irvine, CA): Stainless steel stent; equine pericardial valve; currently available in 23 and 26 mm diameters

- CoreValve (CoreValve, Inc, Irvine, CA): Self-expanding nitinol stent; porcine pericardial tissue valve; repositionable and retrievable

- Direct Flow percutaneous aortic valve (Direct Flow Medical, Inc, Santa Rosa, CA): Stentless, inflatable, fabric-cuff; equine pericardial tissue valve

- Lotus Valve System (Sadra Medical, Campbell, CA): Self-expanding nitinol frame; bovine pericardial tissue valve; repositionable and retrievable

- AorTx percutaneous aortic valve (Hansen Medical, Mountain View, CA): Low-profile, folded, metallic frame; pericardial tissue valve; repositionable and retrievable

To deploy the stent valve, either expand the balloon on a balloon-expandable stent or withdraw the sheath that releases a self-expanding stent.

Once the valve is deployed it must remain secure around the diseased aortic valve and be able to resume hemodynamic function right away

Once the valve is functioning, its hemodynamic performance should be arranged in the same way as the valves that are implanted via a median sternotomy. The left ventricular outflow gradient must be 10 mmHg or less and the aortic valve area should be between 1.5 and 2.0 cm2. Once the prosthetic valve has been deployed, it is vital that it does not occlude the native coronary vessels or affect the function of the mitral valve which is located just underneath the aortic valve. In addition, the newly seated valve should be firmly seated on the aortic annulus and prevent the development of a paravalvular leak or aortic insufficiency.