Several professional societies offer recommendations on breast cancer screening. They include the American College of Obstetrics and Gynecology, the American College of Radiology, the Society for Breast Imaging, the American Cancer Society, the American Medical Association, the National Comprehensive Cancer Network, and the United States Preventative Service Task Force (USPSTF).

Patients with an increased risk of developing breast cancer require special consideration since they may develop breast cancer at an earlier age or require supplemental screening modalities beyond routine mammograms. Patients are considered to have an intermediate risk or 15% to 20% lifetime risk of developing breast cancer if they have any of the following:

- Personal history of breast cancer

- Atypical ductal hyperplasia on a prior breast biopsy

- Lobular neoplasia on a prior breast biopsy

Patients with intermediate-risk should receive a screening mammogram annually and may benefit from supplemental screening with breast ultrasound and possibly breast MRI. Ultrasound is particularly useful in the setting of dense breast fibroglandular tissue, as a high-quality ultrasound examination is not impeded by increased breast density.

Finally, patients with a 20% or higher lifetime risk of developing breast cancer are considered high-risk. In addition to supplemental screening modalities, these patients also benefit from initiating breast cancer screening at a younger age. High-risk patients are those with the following:

- Women with specific gene mutations, including BRCA 1 and 2.

- Those with a strong family history of breast cancer, even in the absence of a known gene mutation.

- Patients that have received radiation therapy of the chest between 10 to 30 years of age.

Patients with a family history of breast cancer should begin screening mammography ten years before the age at which the youngest first-degree relative developed breast cancer; however, with the caveat that these patients should not start screening before the age of 30, as there are concerns that these patients may have an increased sensitivity to ionizing radiation, which mammography relies upon.

It is recommended that women undergo a risk assessment by age 30 to determine the appropriate screening timeline. Screening mammography is not recommended for male patients with breast tissue, known as gynecomastia.