Diagnosis is based on findings from the history and physical examination. If the findings on history and physical are suggestive of a specific diagnosis that is causing chronic pelvic pain, the diagnosis should be confirmed.

A cotton swab can be applied to the abdominal to help determine if there is a cutaneous source of pain. Completing the cotton tip applicator test helps determine if there is cutaneous allodynia. This test is 100% specific for patients with chronic pelvic pain.

The effects on quality of life and function should also be part of the assessment and can be completed by filling out a standardized questionnaire.

The first step in the evaluation of a patient with suspected chronic pelvic pain is to determine if they have any alarm symptoms, concern for acute abdomen, or potential malignancy. If there are no alarm symptoms and no accurate diagnosis, then labs and imaging are warranted. The initial workup would include a complete blood count (CBC), erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR), urinalysis (UA), a urine pregnancy test, testing for gonorrhea and chlamydia, and a pelvic ultrasound. If a specific etiology is suggested after the initial workup, it should be evaluated and treated. Pelvic ultrasonography is indicated to rule out anatomic abnormalities. Ordering transvaginal ultrasonography is an essential part of the initial workup for suspected chronic pelvic pain. It can help identify cysts, masses, and adenomyosis. Furthermore, ultrasound detects hydrosalpinx, an indicator of pelvic inflammatory disease, a comorbidity often seen in chronic pelvic pain. Separately, a pelvic ultrasound is useful to identify masses less than four centimeters that may be missed on the physical exam.

Separately, if the patient is experiencing severe, uncontrolled pain, or there is a concern for acute abdomen, the patient should be referred for laparoscopic surgery or sent to the emergency department.

Diagnostic nerve blocks can be useful to determine if the patient with chronic pelvic pain complains of symptoms of neuropathic pain. If a sacral nerve root is numbed from a nerve block, and the patient's pain is eliminated, this helps confirm the diagnosis of chronic pelvic pain secondary to peripheral nerve dysfunction.

Pain mapping can also be done during laparoscopic surgery, and the patient is under local sedation. The patient's tissue is probed with surgical tools. The patient is asked about the severity of their pain. It can be a helpful test to focus treatment on the specific area of pain.