The patient should have had a full history and examination, as well as appropriate anteroposterior (AP) and lateral radiographs of the hip and pelvis. They should consent and be marked in preparation for surgery. These patients tend to be elderly with numerous comorbidities. It is important that they are optimized pre-operatively. Healthcare providers need to pay particular attention to whether these patients are on any anti-coagulants, which may require reversal with Vitamin K and fresh frozen plasma (FFP in the case of warfarin). Available reversal agents vary by country and geographic region.

Routine pre-operative labs should be checked, including a complete blood count (CBC), a basic metabolic panel (BMP), and a type and screen/cross-match. Pre-operative medical service co-management may include additional consultation services depending on the degree and severity of pertinent medical comorbidities. Such patients should be appropriately optimized before posting for surgery; at the same time, the procedure should be expedited as the results are better when the surgery is done as early as possible.

Other routine pre-operative workup elements include:

- Chest radiograph

- Electrocardiogram (ECG)

Patients should undergo review by the anesthetist and consideration for spinal versus general anesthetic.

Once in theatre, the WHO checklist should be completed, the patient positioned as detailed below, and appropriately prepped and draped.

**Sliding Hip Screw/Cannulated Screws**

The patient is placed supine on a radiolucent traction table. The foot on the side to be operated on is in a traction boot. The unaffected side is placed in the lithotomy position, strapped in a leg holder, and placed in a flexed, abducted, and externally rotated position to ensure the radiographic c-arm can access the fracture site appropriately. Gentle traction and internal rotation should be applied to reduce the fracture. Slight abduction may be needed to reduce any varus malalignment. Before prepping and draping, the fracture should be in near-anatomic alignment with radiographic confirmation. If closed reduction is not possible, open reduction may be necessary.

Correct lower extremity rotational alignment is imperative, and the patient should be positioned with the patella facing toward the ceiling.

**Intramedullary Nail (IMN)**

The positioning is the same as for DHS/cannulated screws, but it is important that the hip is in an adducted position. The torso can be pushed 10 to 15 degrees to the contralateral side to achieve this. The reduction is as above with traction and internal rotation with the image intensifier. Care should be taken not to rotate the pelvis when applying traction.

**Hemiarthroplasty/THA**

The patient is positioned in a lateral decubitus position with support over the anterior superior iliac spine and the sacrum. The pelvis should be at 90 degrees to the table. It is important to review the pre-operative radiographs and assess offset. This is the distance between the center of the femoral head and a line drawn down the middle of the femur. The femoral head size should also be checked and match the patient's own as closely as possible.