**Diagnosis of Myasthenia Gravis:**The edrophonium test for MG diagnosis is performed in an incremental approach. Initially, the patient receives 2 mg intravenously (IV) of edrophonium. After each 60-second interval, the patient will receive another 2 mg IV dose until the symptoms improve. MG symptoms usually improve after 4 to 6 mg for most patients. Therefore, this incremental approach of administering 2 mg doses every 60 seconds prevents unnecessary muscarinic side effects. 0.4 to 0.6 mg of atropine must be readily available when performing the Tensilon test. Atropine is reserved for situations where serious side effects of bradycardia or bronchospasm manifest in patients receiving edrophonium.

**Differential Diagnosis of Myasthenia Gravis vs. Cholinergic Crisis:**A tuberculin syringe containing 1 mL (10 mg) of edrophonium is prepared with an intravenous needle of 0.2 mL (2 mg) and is administered intravenously. The needle is left in situ. If there is a cholinergic reaction (skeletal muscle fasciculations and increased muscle weakness)  after administering the edrophonium, the drug is immediately discontinued, and atropine is administered intravenously.

**Reversal of Neuromuscular Block:**Edrophonium is rarely used to reverse non-depolarizing NMBA after a surgical procedure. Nonetheless, for the rare cases where it is used, an IV dose of 0.5 to 1.0 mg/kg of edrophonium is either simultaneously administered with atropine or a few minutes after glycopyrrolate to prevent bradycardia and other cholinergic adverse effects.

**Use in the Specific Patient Population**

**Patients with Hepatic Impairment:**No information has been provided in the manufacturer's product labeling regarding the use of edrophonium in patients with hepatic impairment.

**Patients with Renal Impairment:**No information has been provided in the manufacturer's product labeling regarding the use of edrophonium in patients with renal impairment.

**Pregnancy Considerations:**The safety of edrophonium use during pregnancy has not been established according to the manufacturer's product labeling.

**Breastfeeding Considerations:**Edrophonium has a short half-life and quaternary ammonium structure; hence it is unlikely to be excreted into breastmilk or orally absorbed by the infant. Administering the edrophonium just after breastfeeding and waiting 2 to 3 hours before breastfeeding should avoid any adverse drug reactions in the infant. There is no information regarding the use of edrophonium during breastfeeding. Therefore, using edrophonium in nursing mothers requires risk-benefit analysis considering possible hazards to mother and child.