**Adnexal Masses**

Adnexal mass management depends on age, the evolution of mass, radiographic characteristics, tumor markers, disease process, and symptomatology.

Simple cysts can be expectantly managed if asymptomatic up to 10 cm in the adult but carry a risk of torsion.

Ovarian cystectomy and/or oophorectomy can be performed during pregnancy (optimally in the second trimester) if there is a concern for malignancy, high torsion risk, or symptomatic.

When benign pathology is suspected and an ovarian cystectomy is planned, there remains an inherent risk of an oophorectomy if ovarian stroma is denuded, the mass cannot be fully excised, or bleeding cannot be controlled.

**Torsion**

If there is a concern for ovarian torsion, timely surgical intervention with detorsion and possible cystectomy is indicated. This preserves ovarian function and, thus, fertility. Oophorectomy should only be considered if the ovary is severely necrotic and friable.

**Infection**

Oophorectomy for pelvic inflammatory disease with tubo-ovarian abscesses (TOA) is rarely indicated. Antibiotics are the first-line treatment. Depending on the response to antibiotics and the size of TOA, drainage of the fluid can be considered.

**Elective**

Elective bilateral salpingo-oophorectomy (BSO) refers to removing both fallopian tubes and ovaries without specific indication, but rather at the time of a hysterectomy due to surgical nature and ease. This should be discussed with a patient in the pre-operative planning phase, and the risk of surgical menopause should not be taken lightly. A BSO for benign disease is associated with increased all-cause mortality if performed under 65 years of age.

**Risk-Reducing**

A risk-reducing BSO (however, it could be unilateral) refers to removing both fallopian tubes and ovaries to reduce the risk of re-operation or cancer. Risks of re-operation compared to risks of menopause should be discussed in patients with a history of pelvic inflammatory disease, TOAs, endometriosis, pelvic adhesions, or primary dysmenorrhea.

**Fertility Preservation**

Oophorectomy for ovarian tissue cryopreservation is still considered experimental for fertility preservation, but this field is rapidly evolving. Since 2004, this process has achieved more than 100 live births.