Bacterial pharyngitis should be treated with appropriate antibiotics once the infection has been confirmed. The symptoms for any pharyngitis should be additionally treated with nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs or acetaminophen for antipyresis and analgesia.

For GABHS, the first-line antibiotic treatments are penicillins because they are inexpensive and effective, and no significant antibiotic resistance has been discovered. Penicillin V and amoxicillin are typical. Cephalosporins are also appropriate for patients with a mild penicillin allergy or when penicillin is not available. Treatment with the narrowest possible spectrum cephalosporin is recommended to avoid developing resistance. In patients with a more severe allergy to penicillin, treatment with azithromycin can be appropriate, but macrolide resistance has been increasing. Finally, when resistance to azithromycin is known, clindamycin can be used to treat those with severe penicillin allergies, though it too faces resistance and has higher rates of intolerance due to taste, intestinal side effects and possible opportunistic bacterial infections such as with clostridium difficile.

Cases of pharyngeal gonorrhea or chlamydia should be treated as would be genital infections, typically co-treating for both gonorrhea and chlamydia with 250 mg of ceftriaxone intramuscularly and 1000 mg of azithromycin per orally.

Cases of diphtheria should be reported to the CDC and are best treated with antibiotics (erythromycin or penicillin) and antitoxin (available through the CDC). Patients should be placed on respiratory droplets and contact isolation until two consecutive cultures taken 24 hours apart are both negative.

Cases of Yersinia pestis should be treated with appropriate antibiotics (aminoglycosides or tetracyclines, primarily), and patients should be placed on respiratory droplet precautions until cultures are negative and antibiotics have been given for at least 48 hours.

Local infectious complications of acute pharyngitides, such as a peritonsillar abscess, should be managed in a hospital setting, where interventions can be made with appropriate surgical and specialist support, such as availability of rapid intubation if a patient's airway becomes compromised.