Nerve impulses get conveyed and transmitted via action potentials, which are brief changes in membrane potential. Neurons have a resting membrane potential around -60mV; this is due to a layer of negatively charged ions on the inner cell membrane of the neuron and a layer of positively charged ions on the outer cell membrane. This separation of charge results in electrical potential, which at rest (not during an action potential) is 60 mV more negative in the cell interior. This potential is generated from the movement of sodium, potassium, and chloride ions into and out of the cell down their concentration and electrical gradients, with the Na-K pump, actively pumping sodium and potassium against their concentration gradient to prevent concentration equilibrium. The potassium concentration inside a neuron is high, and sodium concentration is relatively low, so potassium ions are driven out of the cell by their concentration gradient while sodium ions are driven inside the cell - this is balanced by the electrical gradient as well, with the negatively charged cell interior pulling positively charged ions inside. The neuron cell membrane is most permeable to potassium due to a large - amount of potassium channels, so the resting cell membrane of the neuron is most affected by relative potassium concentrations.

Upon stimulation, a change in sodium channel permeability or opening of the voltage-gated sodium channel causes sodium to rush into the cell following the concentration gradient of sodium. The membrane potential rapidly changes to approach zero and becomes positive, a process known as depolarization. This action potential only lasts a millisecond, but it spreads to adjacent sections of the axon, causing an electrochemical wave. Also, action potentials are an all-or-none phenomenon, meaning that the minimum threshold of depolarization must be met to trigger a full amplitude action potential, or none will occur at all.

This depolarization process is mediated by the flow of ions across voltage-gated ion channels. A sufficiently strong depolarization event causes voltage-gated sodium ion channels to open, allowing sodium ions to flow across the cell membrane into the neuron. As this occurs, the membrane potential increases dramatically. Voltage-gated potassium channels also open, but only after a small delay. This allows potassium ions to flow outside of the neuron, away from the now more positively charged cell interior, which brings the cell membrane potential back down towards the original -60mV. The voltage-gated sodium channels, which were activated first, also close first, resulting in a brief period where sodium channels close while potassium channels remain open, resulting in a temporary hyperpolarization period where the membrane potential is below -60 mV until the voltage-gated potassium channels inactivate as well. These voltage-gated ion channels have a brief refractory period of inactivity after closing, where no amount of stimulus can reactivate them, which prevents redundant action potentials from occurring.

Nerve impulses are dependent on the ability of the resulting action potential to propagate down the length of the axon without losing amplitude. This process differs in myelinated and unmyelinated axons. In unmyelinated axons, the original action potential results in the inflow of sodium ions. These sodium ions will be repelled from each other and attracted to the nearby more negative section of the axon, which causes depolarization there as well, thus opening of adjacent voltage-gated ion channels, allowing more sodium ions to enter, further depolarizing along the length of the axon. The speed of propagation is dependent on the rate of depolarization of the segment of axon in front of the action potential. This speed gets influenced by the concentration of the sodium channels and the diameter of the axon. The larger the axon, the less internal resistance there is to ion flow, thus there is greater conduction and faster nerve impulses. The presence of myelin greatly increases conduction velocity. Myelin decreases the capacitance, which is the ability to store charge, of the section of the axon it covers. If the section of the axon cannot store charge, more charge is spread along the rest of the axon, increasing the rate of depolarization and speed of propagation. Myelin is wrapped so tightly around the axon that ion flow across the axon membrane cannot occur, otherwise known as increased transmembrane resistance, which is why myelinated axons only develop action potentials at small gaps in myelin called nodes of Ranvier. Once an action potential develops at a node, the current travel quickly along the myelinated section to the next node, where another action potential gets generated. These jumps in action potentials in myelinated axons are termed saltatory conduction. Myelinated axons have developed specific characteristics to maximize effectiveness. Voltage-gated sodium channels are much denser at nodes of Ranvier and sparse to absent under the myelin sheath. This allows the neuron to focus its energy on opening and synthesizing channels in the nodes rather than wasting resources in the myelinated section where ions need to propagate along the axon.

The properties of neurites allow conduction of action potentials along the length of the neuron. When a neural impulse reaches the end of the neuron, it must be transmitted to a neighboring neuron to communicate with the rest of the body. This process, called synaptic transmission, can occur electrically or chemically. Neurons that are close enough together can directly transfer ions from one neuron to another. This electrical synapse allows the rapid transfer of information. With chemical synapses, the presynaptic neuron releases neurotransmitters from storage vesicles into the synaptic cleft. These neurotransmitters bind to the postsynaptic neuron, causing either an excitatory or inhibitory reaction in the cell.