There are two methods to treat mandibular body fractures, i.e., non-surgical conservative management and surgical management. Whether to treat the fracture using surgical or non-surgical means depends on the type, severity, and consequences of fracture. In non-surgical management, also known as closed reduction, maxillomandibular fixation (MMF) serves to stabilize the fracture.

- Non-displaced favorable fractures

- Presence of healthy dentition with sufficient teeth to obtain a stable occlusion

- Grossly comminuted fractures

- Edentulous fractures

- Fractures in children with developing dentition

- Presence of adequate occlusion

- Good facial esthetics and adequate open mouth

The procedure involves the placement of Ivy loops using 24-gauge wire between two stable teeth followed by a smaller gauge wire to provide MMF between Ivy loops. Arch bars with 24- and 26-gauge wires are also frequently used. The arch bar provides additional stability by tension banding mechanism resulting in a second line of resistance. While placing arch bars, at least all the teeth in the affected quadrant of the mandible should be included. Encompassing the whole dental arch is not necessary. Arch bars are easy to place, have low cost, restore normal occlusion, and reduce the distraction of bone at the healing site. However, they require a second procedure for their removal and provide only semirigid fixation. In the case of an edentulous mandible, dentures can be wired to the jaw using circum-mandibular wires. But it has some disadvantages, including postoperative discomfort due to wires in the mandibular vestibule. Also, there is a risk of submental scar formation and damage to structures on the floor of the mouth.

Alternatively, MMF screws are an option to fix the dentures. MMF screws are self-tapping screws placed in the sound bone in the vestibular regions anteriorly and posteriorly. They provide a bone anchor where elastics or wires can be placed for MMF when establishing the patient’s occlusion.

On the other hand, in surgical management, i.e., open reduction and internal rigid fixation (IRF), the surgeon can visualize the fracture site easily and controls the reduction. There is the prompt recovery of the occlusion, maintenance of periodontal tissue, reconstitution of anatomic osseous morphology to its pre-surgery form, and return to early function (due to good nutrition and verbal communication).

Surgical management can take place using an intraoral or extraoral approach, the choice of which depends mainly on the site and type of body fracture. Simple and fractures in the anterior segment with no or only slight dislocation should preferably have treatment using an intraoral approach.

On the other hand, the clinician can treat comminuted and fractures in the posterior segment with a high degree of dislocation using an extraoral approach as placing longer and stronger plates is difficult using the intraoral approach. An extraoral surgical approach is also a possibility with fractures that lie between the mandibular body's inferior and lingual aspects. Care is necessary to avoid injuring the marginal mandibular nerve.

Indications for open reduction include:

- Displaced unfavorable body fractures

- Fracture of an edentulous mandible involving a severe displacement of fracture fragments to reestablish mandible continuity.

Postoperatively, patients should receive an analgesic. With the open reduction, antibiotic therapy covering gram-positive organisms is indicated. Wire cutters must remain at the bedside in case of vomiting. Reevaluation of the nutritional needs should also follow. In most adult mandibular fracture cases, intermaxillary fixation (IMF) is maintained for 4 to 6 weeks. In patients with a minimally displaced fracture in the tooth-bearing area, two weeks may be sufficient. After removing the wires, a radiograph is to ensure the union of the fracture.