Detection and localization of the IOFBs are essential. Anterior segment photography using a slit-lamp or fundus camera helps document the disease and may be helpful in counseling the patient about their clinical condition.

X-ray of orbits (anteroposterior and lateral view) can detect metallic foreign bodies but cannot detect radiolucent objects like wood or glass. It also reveals multiple metallic foreign bodies, if present. X-ray orbit with a limbal ring-rod sutured at the limbus and a proportionate geometric drawing can be used to localize an intraocular IOFB.

The patient's X-ray is taken with his eye at primary gaze. Then he is asked to look sideways, and again an X-ray is taken. If the foreign body is intraocular, it will rotate with eye movement. If it rotates in the same direction as the eye, then the IOFB is in the anterior segment. If it rotates in the opposite direction, then it is in the posterior segment.

USG B scan is a cheap and useful investigation to detect metallic foreign bodies. The metallic body appears as a hyperechoic structure with acoustic shadowing and a high spike on A-scan. Aluminum, steel, and bottle glass usually show a flashlight artifact, a focused and narrow ring-down artifact.

Ultrasound has varied detection rates for a glass IOFB ranging from 24 to 97%.

CT (computed tomography) scan can accurately detect the number, size, shape, and location of a foreign body.

MRI (magnetic resonance imaging) can detect organic and glass objects with greater sensitivity. MRI is contraindicated in the metallic foreign body as it can dislodge it and cause further damage.

Ultrasound biomicroscopy (UBM) can detect a foreign body at the angle of the anterior chamber, behind the iris, and ciliary body. UBM uses a 50 MHz frequency and has a penetration of 5mm, which allows for finer resolution.

Anterior segment optical coherence tomography (AS-OCT) is a non-contact imaging modality and helps visualize the anterior segment IOFBs.

Patients with long-standing iron IOFB present with siderosis. The full-field electroretinogram (ERG) is done to know the status of the photoreceptors' function. In the early stages, increased amplitude of a-wave and b-wave is present (supernormal response).

Patients with chalcosis show reduced b-wave amplitude on ERG. A hyper-normal b-wave is not observed. Then a steady decrease is seen in the b wave amplitude. An abnormal ERG  precedes the clinical findings in almost 50% of patients.

Multifocal ERG may detect subclinical siderosis bulbi even if full-field ERG is normal.