Hyaluronic acid, a naturally occurring chemical, is a glycosaminoglycan polysaccharide composed of alternating residues of the monosaccharides d-glucuronic acid and N-acetyl-d-glucosamine, which form a linear polysaccharide chain. In its pure form, hyaluronic acid is the same in all organisms and is not species or tissue-specific. Therefore, hyaluronic acid theoretically should not cause an immune response.

Hyaluronic acid, a chief component of the extracellular matrix, is found throughout various human tissues such as the skin, eyes, connective tissue, and synovium. Due to hyaluronic acid's highly anionic proprieties, it can attract water to swell and create volume and provide structural support. Aging leads to decreased production of hyaluronic acid and collagen in the skin. Once the skin has lost its viscoelastic properties, overlying wrinkles begin to form. Hyaluronic acid dermal fillers work to counteract aging by replacing lost volume. In addition to this, hyaluronic acid fillers have also been shown to increase collagen production and affect fibroblast morphology.

The hyaluronic acid filler can classify as animal-derived or non-animal derived. Animal-derived fillers come from a rooster comb, and non-animal derived hyaluronic acid production occurs through biofermentation of Streptococcus. The hyaluronic acid filler can further be classified based on whether it is processed through particulate or non-particulate manufacturing. The particulate size determines the longevity of particulate manufactured hyaluronic acid filler, whereas cross-linking density determines the longevity of non-particulate manufactured hyaluronic acid filler.

The hyaluronic acid filler contains modified hyaluronic acid particles that are cross-linked, which allows for the production of a more concentrated hyaluronic acid that has greater resistance to chemical and physical degradation. During the degradation and breakdown of hyaluronic acid filler, water slowly takes its place, resulting in a less concentrated hyaluronic gel yet occupying the same amount of volume. This action is termed “isovolumetric degradation.” The effects of hyaluronic acid filler are last up to 4 to 6 months depending on location, a specific brand of filler used, and injection technique.

The mechanism of action of hyaluronic acid when used intra-articularly is similar. Hyaluronic acid is a naturally occurring part of the synovial fluid and cartilage, and in osteoarthritis, the concentration of hyaluronic acid decreases along with a decrease in the size of individual hyaluronic acid molecules, thus decreasing the viscosity of the synovial fluid. When injected into the joint, hyaluronic acid is cleared within several hours, with half-lives ranging from 17 hours to 1.5 days.

Despite such a short half-life, the clinical benefit, including pain relief from intraarticular hyaluronic injections, lasts several months. Several mechanisms have been proposed for this long-lasting efficacy of intraarticular hyaluronic acid injections. Injection of hyaluronic acid may stimulate the native synovial sites that produce hyaluronic acid. Anti-inflammatory and anti-nociceptive effects of hyaluronic acid have been demonstrated as well.