**Medical Treatment**

Management of SHPT targets abnormal phosphocalcic metabolism. Maintaining the serum calcium and phosphorus levels within the normal range along with control of PTH and vitamin D levels is the key in management of secondary hyperparathyroidism. The U.S. National Kidney Foundation (NKF) proposed the Kidney Disease Outcomes Quality Initiative (KDOQI) guidelines and established targets for biomarkers (calcium, phosphorus, and PTH levels) to lower SHPT related mortality.

Phosphate binders, vitamin D, and calcimimetics have been reported in the management of calcium and phosphate levels in patients with CKD. In addition, patients are advised to restrict dietary intake of phosphorus by limiting phosphate-rich foods such as soda beverages, meat, cheese, and dietary products.

Phosphate binders include aluminum hydroxide, sevelamer hydrochloride, sevelamer carbonate, and lanthanum carbonate.

Vitamin D metabolites include cholecalciferol (vitamin D3) and ergocalciferol, which is vitamin D2. Vitamin D analogs such as calcitriol, paricalcitol, alfacalcidol, and doxercalciferol are grouped under vitamin D receptor activators (VDRA) based on their site of action. Vitamin D could have a possible survival benefit in CKD patients.

Calcimimetics are agents that increase the sensitivity of calcium-sensing receptors (CaSR) in the parathyroid gland and lead to decreased PTH production. Cinacalcet is a calcimimetic drug that is commercially available and extensively used in dialysis patients. Etelcalcitide is another calcimimetic. Important side effects of calcimimetics include nausea, hypocalcemia, QT prolongation, arrhythmias, worsening heart failure, and convulsions.

**Surgical Treatment**

Parathyroidectomy is a surgical modality available if medical therapy is unsuccessful or refractory. Other indications include calciphylaxis, refractory pruritus, severe hypercalcemia (serum calcium greater than 10.2 mg/dL) or hyperphosphatemia (serum phosphorus greater than 5.5 mg/dL), anemia hyporesponsive to erythropoietin, PTH levels more than 800 pg/mL (for more than 6 months despite medical therapy) and extraskeletal calcification.

Surgical techniques include subtotal parathyroidectomy and total parathyroidectomy with or without autotransplantation.

An interesting postoperative complication of surgery is the hungry bone syndrome where the lack of osteoclastic activity causes decreased PTH, leading to hypocalcemia.