**Risk Analysis**

The HIPAA security requirements place significant emphasis on risk analysis, especially now that electronic healthcare technology is the norm. All hospitals not only have to work with their healthcare workers, but also third-party contractors, vendors, and solo practitioners; and they must identify and address the appropriate security options to ensure the security of data. The use of the internet is perhaps the biggest threat to data leaks. When transmitting data over the internet, the hospital IT must encrypt the data to ensure that it remains private. For example, a provider who is an independent contractor and has a patient admitted to the hospital will transmit over the internet the patient's medical history to the hospital. However, this information must be encrypted to prevent leaks and eavesdropping. Today, encryption of healthcare records is standard, and there are many software programs that one may use.

**Use of Wireless Networks**

These days many healthcare workers use wireless networks to access medical records. However, if many computers connect through a wireless network, then the encryption function of the wireless network must be activated. Furthermore, healthcare workers must be asked to stop using the unencrypted wireless network for communication because of the risk of interception.

**Storage of PHI Data**

Another area of great concern is the storage of PHI on hard drives, especially portable devices like laptop computers and flash drives. Over the years, many privacy breaches have occurred as a result of stolen laptops and flash drives. To address this problem, healthcare workers should refrain from storing any patient data on their laptops, flash drives, or CDs. If the data is stored, it must be encrypted. Another option is to use the laptop only to view the data, but never to store the information. This has become possible with cloud technology and storage systems.

**Passwords**

All healthcare workers who use the computer to access patient records must have a secure password. The password should be unique and changed every 3 to 4 months. No one should share their password with other individuals. The information technology (IT) department must determine the quality of the password before access is granted to the system. The password must be sufficiently strong so that it cannot be guessed or even predicted with the available computer programs. The password must contain a combination of numerical and alpha characters with symbols to increase their complexity. Further, no worker should paste the password anywhere near the PC or leave a sticker with the password on a desk, as this defeats the purpose of security. However, passwords alone are not adequate for security measures and offer a very weak method of protection.

**Unique User Identification**

There have been many instances when both the healthcare worker and non-healthcare workers who were not involved in the care of the patient have accessed the medical records of celebrities and other important people. The purpose was to pass the documents to the tabloid magazines. Thus, HIPAA enhancements under the health information technology for economic and clinical health (HITECH) act now require a system that will track all users the moment they sign on and off. The tracking system will show who signed on, when, what data they accessed, and if they downloaded any information. Thus the importance of assigning unique names and passwords that are never shared with anyone, otherwise tracking is not possible in the event of a data breach.

**Stronger Authentication**

Today many healthcare institutions have started to implement stronger authentication requirements. Besides the password, some systems also require a specific biometric feature to enter the system. Some hospitals have started to use fingerprints to identify the individual entering the system and others have started to incorporate facial recognition.

**Selective Access**

To ensure privacy and authenticate the computer used, some organizations have started to limit access to individuals based on their role in healthcare. For example, a laboratory technologist would only need access to the patient’s laboratory record, so there is no need to provide that worker access to the patient’s medical history. Similarly, a pharmacist may only have access to the patient's medications or pertinent parts of the medical history regarding drug reactions; whereas, an internist would have access to most of the medical information. Customized access is the new wave of the future, and so far, limited studies do show that it works in maintaining the security of patient data.

**Electronic Health Records**

HITECH was enacted to promote the widespread adoption and meaningful use of electronic health records (EHRs) and related technologies. Among other things, HITECH requires covered entities that implement an EHR to provide an audit trail accounting for all disclosures of information. When a patient asks for an electronic copy of their records, HITECH also stipulates that healthcare organizations provide the PHI maintained in an EHR. Therefore, an EHR is very broadly defined in the proposed rule as "any electronic data." Furthermore, healthcare entities must acknowledge and fulfill a patient's request that the healthcare provider not share PHI with a health insurance plan if the individual pays for the care out of pocket and in full.

**Audits and Risk Assessment**

Once a security system is in place, risk management should audit the system to look for any flaws and identify any gaps in maintaining the integrity, confidentiality, and security of PHI. All risks identified must go through a HIPAA-compliant risk management process and the flaws rectified. Risk analysis is not a one-shot deal but must be conducted regularly because new technology is constantly introduced. This is also repeated whenever there is a change in clinical practice.

**Dedicated IT Staff**

All healthcare institutions should employ persons who are dedicated to maintaining the security and privacy of PHI. In most cases, a team of IT professionals should ensure that everyone follows the established procedures and policies. Moreover, this team must ensure that all healthcare workers use the system appropriately. It is the job of the IT staff to conduct audits to ensure that everyone is HIPAA compliant regularly.

**Obtain Authorizations**

While HIPAA does permit the use of PHI for many hospital-based services like treatments, pharmacy operations, rehabilitation and outpatient care, any other use or disclosure of PHI must be authorized by the patient in writing before any PHI is disclosed. For example, there are protocols to follow when a patient is enrolled in a clinical trial. Plus, when patients want their medical records transferred to another unrelated provider or out of state, then written consent must be obtained from the patient.

**Third-Party Agreements**

Ensure third-party business agreements are in place. Sometimes a third party may need access to PHI to perform a service on behalf of the hospital. For example, the patient may be entering an outpatient rehabilitation unit, and the therapist requires medical records or the patient may be going for radiation therapy at another center. The rehabilitation center and the radiation clinic also need to comply with HIPAA rules. These third-party entities must provide the hospital with a business associate agreement that the requirements of HIPAA are understood and are being followed.

**Inadvertent Disclosure**

In the past, it was routine for healthcare workers to share patient information between family and friends sometimes out of concern or in an attempt to help. Now, this is not acceptable, and a provider can violate the law. HIPAA does not permit deliberate or accidental disclosure of PHI for any reason. For example, a disgruntled healthcare worker can be held liable if he or she steals PHI and then shares the data for monetary gain or revenge purposes. Sometimes the PHI disclosure may occur accidentally when the patient’s chart is left unattended in the lobby or the radiology suite. When a patient’s chart is taken along with the patient on the trolley, it is important to make sure that the transporter knows not to leave the chart lying where the information may be inadvertently or purposefully looked at by persons not directly involved in that patient's care.

**Personal PHI**

Under HIPAA, all patients are legally permitted to obtain copies of their PHI which includes billing and medical records over the past 6 years. Some exclusions cover legal documents, mental health notes, or laboratory results. The healthcare provider may deny access to PHI if he or she believes that such access may harm the patient or others. A patient has to request, in writing, to obtain his or her medical chart.

**Inform Patients of Privacy Practices**

All healthcare facilities that are covered by HIPAA must document their private practice and share that information with patients. When patients ask for HIPAA information, they should be provided with the information and asked to sign a form to ensure that they have received the booklet.