# Continuing Education Activity

Neonatal seizures are a commonly encountered neurologic condition in neonates. They are defined as the occurrence of sudden, paroxysmal, abnormal alteration of electrographic activity at any point from birth to the end of the neonatal period. During this period, the neonatal brain is developmentally immature. Thus, neonatal seizures have unique pathophysiology and electrographic findings resulting in clinical manifestations that can be different (and more difficult to identify) when compared to older age groups. This activity reviews the evaluation and treatment of neonatal seizures and highlights the role of the interprofessional team in evaluating and treating patients with this condition.

**Objectives:**
- Identify the etiology of neonatal seizures.
- Review the appropriate evaluation of neonatal seizures.
- Outline the management options available for neonatal seizures.
- Identify interprofessional team strategies for improving care coordination and outcomes in neonates with seizures.

# Introduction

Neonatal seizures are a commonly encountered neurologic condition in neonates.

When a patient with neonatal seizures is encountered, it may be the first clinical sign of a serious neurologic disorder.

# Etiology

When a neonate presents with seizure activity, a correctable underlying cause may be identified.

Diagnoses that require priority evaluation and urgent treatment are categorized as follows:

- Metabolic disturbances
- Hypoglycemia
- Hypocalcemia
- Hypomagnesemia
- Hyponatremia
- Hypernatremia

- Hypoxic conditions
- Hypoxic-ischemic encephalopathy
- Perinatal asphyxia

- Intracranial hemorrhage
- Intraventricular
- Intraparenchymal
- Subarachnoid
- Subdural

- Infection
- Bacterial meningitis (Group B Streptococcus, Escherichia coli, Listeria monocytogenes)
- Viral encephalitis (Herpes simplex encephalitis, Enteroviruses)
- Intrauterine infection (Cytomegalovirus, Toxoplasmosis, Varicella, Zika virus)

- Inborn errors of metabolism – selected enzyme deficiencies 

- Urea cycle defects
- Peroxisomal disorders
- Organic acidemias
- Amino acid disorders

- Inborn errors of metabolism – vitamin and cofactor deficiencies

- Pyroxidine deficiency
- Molybdenum cofactor deficiency

- Thromboembolic

- Arterial ischemic stroke
- Sinus venous thrombosis

Other conditions that should be considered include:

- Neonatal epilepsy syndromes 

- Benign neonatal seizures
- Benign familial neonatal epilepsy
- Early myoclonic encephalopathy
- Early infantile epileptic encephalopathy
- Genetic epilepsy syndromes

- Congenital brain malformations 

- Schizencephaly
- Lissencephaly
- Holoprosencephaly
- Hydranencephaly

# Epidemiology

Neonatal seizures are a commonly encountered neurologic emergency.

# Pathophysiology

The neonatal brain is unique when compared to different age groups. Upon birth, it is in a state of continued brain development; thus, some areas are immature.

Seizures are abnormal, synchronous, neuronal discharges within the cerebral cortex. This can be due to excessive excitatory or deficient inhibitory neuronal discharges.

Several factors result in this imbalance. The primary factor is the developmental state of the neonatal neuron. In mature brains, the GABA receptor is responsible for creating a synaptic potential that makes the postsynaptic neuron less likely to generate an action potential. This is achieved by establishing a decreased cellular membrane potential through its modulation of chloride and potassium channels.

Other factors involved in this imbalance include the development of excitatory synapses before inhibitory synapses and early maturation of voltage-gated ion channels specific to depolarization.

# History and Physical

When a neonate presents with seizures, a thorough history, and physical examination are required.

As there is often an underlying provoking cause, the clinical history should focus on identifying risk factors and the likely etiologies.

Physical examination should focus on findings that may indicate an underlying etiology. This includes the general appearance of the neonate, vital signs, head circumference, mental status (and level of alertness), and the quality of the fontanelle to identify if the patient has bacterial meningitis (with or without septic shock) or acute intracranial hemorrhage.

If the patient is having seizure activity during the examination, the provider should focus on assessing the physical features to ensure it is a true seizure and to assist in identifying the etiology.

The classification of neonatal seizure types and their significant features are as follows:

- Focal clonic seizures
- Manifests as repetitive rhythmic contractions
- It can involve the face, upper or lower extremities, neck, or trunk
- It cannot be extinguished by the physical suppression of movement or limb repositioning
- May migrate to other areas of the body within the same seizure (most commonly contralaterally but can occur ipsilaterally as well)
- If generalized, the seizure activity is diffuse, bilateral, and synchronous

- Focal tonic seizures
- Manifests as a continuous but transient extremity posturing or asymmetric posturing of the trunk or neck
- May include horizontal eye deviation
- If generalized, may mimic decerebrate posturing (upper and lower extremity tonic extension) or decorticate posturing (upper extremity flexion and lower extremity extension)

- Myoclonic seizures
- Manifests as nonrepetitive contractions
- Involves flexor muscle groups of the extremity (commonly upper extremity), trunk, diaphragm, or face
- If generalized, the seizures may appear as bilateral jerking of the flexor muscles of the upper and lower extremities

Abrupt autonomic vital sign changes, while rare in otherwise healthy neonates, can be associated with subclinical seizure activity in neonates at risk for seizures.

# Evaluation

The suspected etiology directs the evaluation of neonatal seizures. Acutely, the provider should immediately rule out hypoglycemia (via blood glucose); hyponatremia, hypomagnesemia, hypocalcemia (via an electrolyte panel); (3) sepsis/meningitis/encephalitis (via a complete blood count, C reactive protein, blood cultures, and cerebral spinal fluid studies).

# Treatment / Management

After ensuring the patient has a patent airway, is hemodynamically stable, and has intravenous access, therapy should be targeted to treat the underlying condition identified. This can include therapeutic hypothermia for hypoxic-ischemic encephalopathy

If the seizure is clinically evident and prolonged, the most common first-line agent utilized is phenobarbital.

Following the initiation of the acute treatment for neonatal seizures, pediatric neurology should be contacted urgently to assist with management. Pediatric neurology can arrange for continuous electroencephalography monitoring that can confirm the presence of neonatal seizures, assist with the identification of subclinical seizure activity, and participate in the treatment of refractory seizures.

# Differential Diagnosis

Non-epileptic behaviors must be distinguished from neonatal seizures.

- Anoxia

- Myoclonus

- Benign epilepsy syndromes

- Mitochondrial cytopathies

- Myoclonic epilepsy

- Organic acidurias

- Pyridoxine-dependent epilepsy

- Subdural hematoma

- Subarachnoid hemorrhage

- Tuberous sclerosis

- Viral encephalitis

- Viral meningitis

- Vein of Galen malformation

- Benign neonatal convulsions

- Cerebellar hemorrhage

- Herpes simplex encephalitis

- Myoclonic epilepsy

- Child abuse

- Neonatal meningitis

- Shuddering attacks

# Prognosis

The prognosis of neonatal seizures depends on the underlying etiology. If EEG is normal the prognosis is excellent but if EEG has many abnormalities such neonates have a poor prognosis and may develop cerebral palsy and epilepsy. The presence of spikes on EEG has a 30% risk of developing future epilepsy. The mortality rate of neonatal seizures is reported to be as high as 20%.

# Complications

A majority of neonatal seizure complications are associated with the adverse effects that can occur with antiepileptic medication administration. Thus, the provider should be vigilant for loss of airway with hypoxemia or hypercarbia, especially when a benzodiazepine or phenobarbital is administered.

- Cerebral palsy/spasticity

- Cerebral atrophy/hydrocephalus ex-vacuo

- Epilepsy

- Feeding difficulties

# Deterrence and Patient Education

First and foremost, if the patient has a seizure that lasts longer than 5 minutes, or if he or she has repeated seizures over a few minutes, emergency services must be contacted. The patient may be prescribed an emergency antiepileptic medication (i.e., rectal diazepam); thus, the parents may be counseled on its use.

Parents should also be counseled on the prognosis of neonatal seizures, particularly the possibility of neurologic impairments in patients who survive and the importance of referral to early rehabilitation services.

A child with seizures should have routine clinical follow up with pediatric neurology, and the parents should be advised of the importance of medication adherence.

# Enhancing Healthcare Team Outcomes

The diagnosis and management of neonatal seizures require an interprofessional approach to avoid the complications from the underrecognition of clinical seizures and the adverse effects of the medications administered.

Referral to critical care services (neonatal or pediatric) should be performed early to place the patient under the care of neurocritical care experts and to ensure that the patient is stabilized from an oxygenation and hemodynamic standpoint.

Pediatric neurology should be consulted to evaluate the patient and confirm the diagnosis of neonatal seizures.

Electroencephalography technicians need to be readily available to initiate monitoring as well as screen for electrographic seizure activity that may be subclinical.

The medications utilized to control seizures need to be ordered, obtained, and administered in a timely manner. Pharmacists with pediatric expertise should be available to safely provide these medications as well as assist providers in understanding specific pharmacological characteristics in relation to the unique renal and hepatic physiology of the pre-term or term neonate.

Finally, the bedside nurses are vital to helping providers to identify clinically evident seizure activity, annotate pertinent events, and help ensure the patient is safe from the adverse effects some antiepileptic agents have.