**General Considerations**

A pre-travel evaluation is necessary for the traveler to a malaria-endemic area. The patient’s past medical history, including psychiatric history, current medications, pregnancy status, and allergies, should be obtained. When considering chemoprophylaxis, providers should consider the traveler’s comorbidities, medication allergies, itinerary, activities, length of travel in endemic areas, and medication cost. Providers should research Plasmodium species endemic to the area of travel as well as resistance patterns, seasonality, and intensity of transmission in the area to be visited. Travelers should receive counseling on the prevention of mosquito bites, including wearing clothing that reduces exposed skin, using DEET on any exposed skin, staying in well-screened rooms, sleeping under permethrin-treated bed nets, and avoiding the outdoors at both dawn and dusk. When using sunscreen and mosquito repellant simultaneously, apply insect repellant after sunscreen. Women should be screened and asked about anticipated pregnancy, as this will affect prophylactic choices.

Multiple resources are available for researching malaria-endemic areas and resistance patterns as part of the pre-travel assessment. The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention and the World Health Organization offer free resources for providers and travelers with detailed information. Subscription sites also provide detailed information that clinicians and travelers may reference.

**Chemoprophylaxis Choices**

Malarial chemoprophylaxis functions by targeting the liver schizont, blood schizont, or hypnozoite stages of the plasmodium life cycle. The three most commonly prescribed medications for chemoprophylaxis are atovaquone-proguanil, doxycycline, and mefloquine. Studies examining the efficacy of the medications have found them all to be equally effective in the prevention of malaria in short-term travelers, but atovaquone-proguanil and doxycycline appear to have the fewest side effects. For long term travelers, studies suggest that adherence is lower in young travelers and those on mefloquine.

Atovaquone-proguanil: Atovaquone-proguanil targets both liver and blood schizonts and is effective against chloroquine-resistant P. falciparum. Dosing begins 1 to 2 days before the traveler enters the malarial zone, and one tablet is taken at the same time each day until seven days after exiting the malarial zone. The medication is relatively expensive compared to other regimens but has a longer half-life and is, therefore, more forgiving if a traveler misses a dose. The drug is well-tolerated; side effects include gastrointestinal upset, headaches, and transaminitis. Atovaquone-proguanil is not indicated for pregnant women, children under 5kg, or patients with creatinine clearance less than 30mL/min. There is no evidence regarding the clinical impact of co-administering warfarin and atovaquone-proguanil, but monitoring of the international normalized ratio may be required.

Doxycycline: Doxycycline targets blood schizonts and is effective against chloroquine-resistant P. falciparum. The medication is started 1 to 2 days before travel and continued daily until four weeks after return. Side effects include GI upset, pill esophagitis, and photosensitivity. Doxycycline is typically the most inexpensive of the medications. The short half-life of the drug, however, results in a lack of protection if a traveler misses even a single dose. When taken as indicated, doxycycline has been shown to have an efficacy rate of 92 to 96% for P. falciparum and 98% for P. vivax.

Mefloquine: Mefloquine targets blood schizonts and is effective against chloroquine-resistant P. falciparum, though mefloquine resistance has emerged in parts of Southeast Asia. Travelers begin the medication at least two weeks before travel and take it weekly until four weeks after return. Neuropsychiatric adverse effects include seizures and psychosis. Providers should avoid the drug in patients with these histories as well as recent or active depression, schizophrenia, or generalized anxiety disorder. Other adverse effects include vivid dreams, gastrointestinal upset, and headaches. Many prescribers will start the medication 1 to 2 months before travel to assess for these adverse effects. An FDA black-box warning exists with rare reports of persistent dizziness following mefloquine use.

Chloroquine and hydroxychloroquine: Chloroquine targets blood schizonts. There is considerable resistance to these medications, and they should only merit consideration for travelers to areas with chloroquine-sensitive P. falciparum (the Caribbean, Central America west of the Panama Canal, and some parts of the Middle East). Travelers start the medication one week before travel and take it once every seven days until four weeks after return. The medication is usually well-tolerated, but side effects include gastrointestinal upset, headache, dizziness, and flaring of pre-existing psoriasis. The retinopathy associated with high doses in the treatment of rheumatoid arthritis is unlikely when dosing weekly for malarial prophylaxis.

Primaquine: Primaquine targets liver hypnozoites and can be used as prophylaxis in areas with only P. vivax. Travelers begin the medication two days before travel and take it daily until seven days after return. Primaquine is more common as presumptive antirelapse therapy (PART), where it is taken daily upon returning from a P. vivax or P. ovale endemic area in the final 14 days of post-travel treatment. The exception is when atovaquone-proguanil was used for primary prevention, in which case primaquine gets administered along with the final seven days of the primary prevention drug and for an additional seven days. Providers must test travelers for glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase (G6PD) deficiency before prescribing the medication as it can cause fatal hemolytic anemia. Side effects consist mostly of gastrointestinal upset. Prophylaxis with primaquine is currently an off-label recommendation from the CDC.

Tafenoquine: Tafenoquine is active against hypnotize and erythrocytic forms of Plasmodium species. It also has activity against pre-erythrocytic forms, which prevents relapses of P. vivax. It is approved for prophylaxis for those over 16 years old. Dosing is daily for three days before travel to an endemic area, then weekly until seven days after return from travel. This drug also may cause life-threatening hemolytic anemia in patients with G6PD deficiency, and testing is essential before initiating the regimen. There are reports of psychiatric side effects, and use should discontinue in cases of psychotic symptoms.  Other side effects include GI upset, headache, asymptomatic elevations in methemoglobin levels and epithelial keratopathy. Because the medication has a half-life of 17 days, delayed presentations of adverse reactions may occur.

Fewer than 50% of travelers who contracted malaria sought pre-travel consultation. Those at particular risk for malaria include those taking last-minute vacations and those visiting family and friends abroad, often because they do not believe they are at risk of contracting malaria or do not see the disease as particularly dangerous. These risks may be due to the erroneous belief that they carry lifelong immunity to malaria even after emigrating from the endemic area.

**Vaccines**

Addressing challenges of longterm immunity and durable protection are all currently underway.