In patients with pancytopenia, the first step is to examine the peripheral blood smear for abnormalities, including B12 and/or folate deficiency (hypersegmented neutrophils and oval macrocytes). Next, perform a bone marrow biopsy and aspirate to look for any evidence of myelodysplastic morphology or clonal cytogenic abnormalities. Rule out acquired bone marrow failure by stopping suspected medications, treating active infections, and testing for hepatitis, pregnancy, or paroxysmal nocturnal hemoglobinuria (PNH). Patients with bone marrow failure with a positive family history of MDS/AML or SCC, extra-marrow findings associated with inherited bone marrow failure syndromes, or age less than 40 years need to be evaluated for inherited bone marrow failure syndromes. It is imperative not to discount these conditions in adults.

Screen for Fanconi anemia by the presence of abnormal chromosome breakage in metaphase preparations of lymphocytes or skin fibroblasts cultured with phytohemagglutinin (PHA) dosed with bifunctional DNA interstrand crosslinking agents such as diepoxybutane (DEB) or mitomycin C (MMC). An alternative screening test involves complement analysis using flow cytometry analysis of G arrest in melphalan-dosed cells after transduction. Confirm with gene sequencing.

The screening test for dyskeratosis congenita is a quantitative analysis of lymphocytic telomere length using flow fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH). Because it is similar to FA, simultaneously test for chromosomal fragility. Confirm with gene sequencing.

Gene sequencing in other disorders (Shwachman-Diamond syndrome, congenital amegakaryocytic thrombocytopenia, DBA, reticular dysgenesis) is mandatory because there are no screening tests. Blackfan-Diamond anemia is associated with increased serum adenosine deaminase (ADA) levels.

Other causes of bone marrow failure are acquired. The most common forms occur from drugs, chemicals, radiation, viral infections, immune disorders, MDS, PNH, or large granular lymphocytic leukemia.