**1. Afferent Projections and Neurotransmitters**

The afferent projections of the suprachiasmatic nucleus were described initially in the early 1980s through research with hamsters. Krout and colleagues discovered that approximately 40 brain regions have monosynaptic projections to the suprachiasmatic nucleus.

The RHT receives direct inputs from photosensitive ganglion cells in the retina. By secreting glutamate into the core VIP regions of the suprachiasmatic nucleus, the RHT mediates the photic regulation of circadian rhythmicity.

The median raphe nuclei from the midbrain release serotonin neurotransmitters to retinorecipient regions of the suprachiasmatic nucleus, specifically its VIP-containing regions. The primary role of the median raphe nuclei is to modulate pacemaker responses to light within the SCN. During the daytime, serotonin activates the circadian pacemaker by potentiating glutamate input, then at nighttime inhibits this input. Serotonin regulates SCN neurons by both presynaptic and postsynaptic mechanisms.

Other afferent projections to the suprachiasmatic nucleus arise from the pedunculopontine, parabigeminal, and laterodorsal tegmentum nuclei. These projections carry cholinergic neurotransmitters to the SCN.

**2. Efferent Projections and Neurotransmitters**

Most monosynaptic efferents of suprachiasmatic nucleus neurons terminate in nearby hypothalamic and thalamic nuclei. In the hypothalamus, efferent SCN projections terminate at several nuclei: the medial preoptic nucleus, subparaventricular zone, ventromedial nucleus, dorsomedial nucleus, ventral lateral geniculate nucleus, and lateral septal nucleus.

The major polysynaptic efferents of suprachiasmatic nucleus neurons project to the pineal gland. During the night, these fibers release norepinephrine and stimulate postsynaptic beta-1 and alpha-1 adrenergic receptors on pinealocytes, triggering the production of melatonin. Melatonin serves as a humoral signal that varies in intensity as the nights lengthen then shorten throughout the year. Melatonin production is thereby prolonged in the winter season when nights are longer, as compared to the summer season when melatonin production shortens.

As the master oscillator, the suprachiasmatic nucleus uses humoral and neuronal inputs to coordinate peripheral circadian clocks. Peripheral organs including the lung, liver, kidney, heart, and muscle all produce circadian gene expression based on the combination of photic input to the SCN and non-photic input such as the timing of food intake or motor activity.