The diagnosis of NAFLD/NASH is often made incidentally when routine lab tests show abnormal liver biochemical tests or imagining tests show hepatic steatosis or hepatomegaly. Imaging modalities include ultrasonography, computed tomography (CT), or magnetic resonance imaging (MRI). Ultrasonography, however, is most widely used as it is the least expensive and most available modality. A diagnosis of NAFLD should be made only in the absence of excessive alcohol intake (defined as alcohol consumption of more than 20 g/day for men and more than 10 g/day for women), and other causes of liver disease such as viral hepatitis, autoimmune hepatitis, hereditary or drug-induced liver disease. Alanine aminotransferase (ALT) and aspartate aminotransferase (AST) are usually mildly elevated at two to five times the upper level of normal with ALT greater than AST in a 2:1 ratio. This pattern of serum aminotransferase elevation helps distinguish NAFLD from alcoholic hepatitis, as the AST is usually greater than ALT in alcoholic hepatitis in a greater than 2:1 ratio. Please note that this pattern flips in NASH with advanced fibrosis or cirrhosis and the AST is usually greater than ALT in such cases. Serum alkaline phosphatase can be mildly elevated, usually up to twice the upper limit of normal. Bilirubin, albumin, and INR are usually within the normal limits but will be elevated in patients who develop cirrhosis. Ferritin can be elevated in up to 60% of patients and usually indicates more advanced disease given it is a marker of inflammation. Autoimmune antibodies such as antinuclear antibody (ANA) can be detected in low titers.

Liver biopsy is often needed to confirm the diagnosis of NASH and stage the fibrosis when patients present with a chronic unexplained elevation of serum aminotransferases. Liver biopsy is often not indicated when aminotransferases are normal, and the only abnormality is a hepatic steatosis on imaging. Liver biopsy is the gold standard for diagnosis but is not always accurate due to observer-related bias and sampling error (only 1/50,000 of the liver volume is sampled with a biopsy, and the features of NAFLD are not always uniformly present throughout the liver). The histologic features on liver biopsy can be classified as steatosis, steatohepatitis, and fibrosis. Steatosis is the accumulation of lipid droplets in hepatocytes. It is pathologic when it involves more than 5% of the hepatocytes. Steatosis is termed macrovesicular when the lipid droplets are large and displace the nucleus to the periphery of the cell, and microvesicular when the droplets are small and accumulate without causing any nuclear displacement. Both mixed and macrovesicular steatosis is seen in NAFLD, but a pure microvesicular pattern is not seen in NAFLD (but is seen with alcoholic hepatitis and various other conditions). NASH is present when there is steatosis, inflammation (chronic mononuclear cell inflammatory infiltrate composed of lymphocytes, rare plasma cells, and monocytes) and hepatocyte ballooning. The NAS (NAFLD activity score) ranging from 0 to 8 points is the most widely used grading and staging system for histological features on the biopsy. It scores and grades NASH based on steatosis, lobular inflammation, hepatocyte ballooning with a score of 5 or higher correlating with NASH and less than 3 as unlikely to be NASH. There is a separate fibrosis score ranging from 0 to 4 with this system. While this a valuable tool for research, its use in an individual patient to diagnose, prognosticate or exclude NASH remains controversial.

Various non-invasive tests are used for predicting the severity of fibrosis in NAFLD patients. These include both serologic tests and imaging techniques. The serologic tests include AST to Platelet Ratio Index (APRI) score, Fibrosis-4 (Fib-4) calculator and NAFLD fibrosis score (NFS). A score of greater than 1 with APRI less than 0.676 with NFS and greater than 2.67 with Fib-4 predicts the presence of advanced fibrosis, while NFS less than -1.455 and Fib-4 score less than 1.3 suggests a low risk for advanced fibrosis. Commercial fibrosis marker panels such as enhanced liver fibrosis (ELF) test and FibroTest are also helpful to predict/exclude advanced fibrosis. Radiologic techniques such as FibroScan (using ultrasound transient elastography), acoustic radiation force impulse imaging and magnetic resonance elastography are also useful. Of these, FibroScan is more widely used, and a score greater than 9.3 kPa with XL probe or greater than 9.6 kPa with M probe predicts advanced fibrosis and scores less than 7.2 kPa and less than 7.9 kPa with respective probes reliably exclude advanced fibrosis.

In summary, a diagnosis of NAFLD should be considered in patients with features of metabolic syndrome, radiological evidence of steatosis, and/or abnormal liver biochemical test results, if there are no risk factors for alcoholic liver disease or other chronic liver diseases. A combination of the serologic non-invasive scores or imaging test scores may be used to predict the risk for advanced fibrosis. Such a prognostic methodology offers us the option to reserve liver biopsy for only those patients who are at either intermediate or high-risk for advanced fibrosis.