Neuraxial regional techniques, especially caudal and epidural, are the most common regional techniques performed in children. The anatomy of the vertebra and the relative position of spinal cord placement in the vertebral canal varies with age. Classical literature states that spinal cord ends (conus medullaris) as low as the L3 vertebra in infants, compared to L1 in adults.

The dural sac may extend down to S3-S4 in neonates and infants, compared to S1 in adults. Because of this, caution has to be exercised during the caudal block to prevent inadvertent dural puncture. The sacral hiatus is covered by the sacrococcygeal ligament. This space is wide open in infants, toddlers, and smaller children, allowing easy access into the epidural space. Ossification and eventual closure of the hiatus, as well as the changing axis of the coccyx, make the caudal block challenging in older children and adults. Epidural fat is very fluid up to 8 years of age, aiding the extensive spread of the LA in children below this age. The spinous processes are more parallel and horizontal, allowing easier midline access into the neuraxis. The CSF volume in a neonate is about 4 mL/kg, compared to the adult volume of 2 mL/kg, and a greater proportion of this CSF volume lives in the spinal subarachnoid space compared to adults. This is significant during neonatal/infant spinal anesthesia. The local anesthetic (LA) injected is immediately diluted by the greater spinal CSF volume, necessitating a greater dose of local anesthetic (up to 1 mg/kg of 0.5% bupivacaine) for the spinal block.

Pharmacological differences from adults result from different anatomy at the neuronal level. Myelination is incomplete at birth; this can take up to 12 years to complete. Due to this reason, a dilute local anesthetic will be able to provide a denser block with a fast onset of action. However, the duration of effect may be shorter than in adults because of greater systemic absorption secondary to greater cardiac output and decreased LA trapping in the immature sheath.

Amide local anesthetics are bound to plasma proteins, namely alpha-acid glycoprotein and albumin. The free fraction of the LA contributes to systemic toxicity. Infants have low levels of binding proteins, resulting in greater levels of unbound LA. Adult levels are reached by 1 year of age. CYP450 enzymes necessary for the metabolism of amide local anesthetics are immature in neonates.

Physiological differences between children and adults exist in pain perception itself, mainly due to the ongoing development and maturation of central and peripheral nervous systems. The receptive field of neurons may be greater in children, leading to poor pain localization.