Postural instability is a clinical diagnosis made subjectively. Depending on the findings of the history and physical examination, appropriate laboratory testing and imaging can be ordered to discover any underlying disease processes contributing to the clinical manifestation.

For patients without a clear diagnosis of postural instability following a history of physical examination, laboratory tests to consider for initial evaluation include complete blood count, rapid plasma reagin test, electrolytes, blood urea nitrogen, thyroid function test, glucose, creatinine, and vitamin B12 levels.

Because of the association between postural instability and risk of falls, routine measurement of 25-OH vitamin D3 levels may be helpful and should be completed in all patients newly diagnosed with Parkinson disease. Given the risk of bone mineral loss and fractures, hyponutrition should be ruled out, and bone densitometry can be used to detect osteoporosis.

Other diagnostic tests may be ordered to rule out neurological conditions based on the patient's gait pattern:

- If the patient presents with weakness and spasticity with gait (upper motor neuron signs), central lesions or spinal cord disease are possibilities, and brain or spine MRI can be ordered for further evaluation.

- Foot drop may suggest a lower motor neuron disease such as lumbar spinal stenosis, mononeuropathy, or radiculopathy, and lumbosacral spine MRI or nerve conduction studies with electromyography can be ordered.

- A frontal or apraxic gait in which the patient has difficulty initiating walking could suggest normal pressure hydrocephalus or neurodegenerative dementia, in which brain MRI may aid with evaluation.

- A narrow-based or festinating (hurrying) pattern of the walk would suggest a Parkinsonian gait, in which MRI of the brain could be useful.

- Functional gait disorder, in which walking does not conform to any of the typical patterns, is often seen with psychiatric disorders. This is usually a clinical diagnosis.

- Patients with a vestibular gait pattern, in which patients may fall towards the side of the affected ear, can be evaluated in part with sensorineural vestibular testing.