The knee is a weight-bearing joint that serves to allow flexion and extension of the lower leg around a transverse axis in a sagittal plane. During this motion, the tibial condyles articulate with the femoral condyles as well as the medial and lateral menisci. Also, the patella articulates with the femoral trochlear groove. The knee secondarily allows for internal and external rotation, compression and distraction, anterior and posterior translation, medial and lateral translation, and varus and valgus movements. The tendonous and ligamentous structures of the knee are lubricated by bursae. The names of the bursae correspond with their location within the knee. The prepatellar bursa is located between the patella and the overlying subcutaneous tissue. The infrapatellar bursa has a superficial and deep component. The superficial infrapatellar bursa is located between the tibial tubercle and the overlying skin. The deep infrapatellar bursa is located between the posterior aspect of the patellar tendon and the tibia. The suprapatellar bursa is located between the quadriceps tendon and the femur. The pes anserinus bursa is located on the anteromedial aspect of the tibia, on the medial tibial epicondyle. Within the layers of the medial collateral ligament is the medial collateral ligament bursa. The iliotibial bursa is located on the distal iliotibial band by its insertion on the Gerdy tubercle. The popliteal bursa is located in the popliteal hiatus by the proximal popliteal tendon. Although the knee is an inherently unstable joint, it has many dynamic stabilizers (muscles) and static stabilizers (ligaments).