**Description**

- Muscle contraction

- Dystrophin

- Dystrophin-glycoprotein complex

**Muscle Contraction: **It is essential first to understand the underlying physiology of muscle cell function. The sliding filament model represents muscle tension as a function that depends on the contraction of the muscle filaments; this is promoted by calcium, which, delivered from the sarcoplasmic reticulum, leads to muscle depolarization. Intracellular calcium binds to the anionic charge of troponin C, which leads to tropomyosin uprooting off of the G-actin site. Once exposed, a myosin head attaches to the presented G-actin site generating a pivot that requires energy in the form of ATP (adenosine triphosphate) to function. This pivot lets filaments made of actin to slide past filaments made of myosin, which achieves muscle shortening, which transfers to the muscle cell's glycoprotein rich cytoskeleton.

**Dystrophin: **Dystrophin is restricted to the cytoplasmic surface of the muscle fiber plasma membrane and connects the internal cytoskeleton to the extracellular matrix via glycoproteins that traverse the plasma membrane.

**Dystrophin-Glycoprotein Complex: **This protein meshwork seems to strengthen the sarcolemma.

**Most Common Findings**

- Chronic respiratory infections precipitated by weakness in the smooth muscle of bronchioles.

- Impotence caused by gonadal atrophy, which is characteristically associated with myotonic dystrophy.

- It is common to possess dysphagia, which is esophageal muscle involvement.

- Myotonia is a term that describes the inability to relax muscles, which classically manifests as an inability to loosen one's grip or release a handshake.

- As a pediatric disease, parents will often complain that their child is clumsy or becomes extremely weak quickly.

- Gower sign is when subjects try to stand from a supine position, they "march" their hands and feet to each other).

- Weakness and stiffness of distal muscles are usually the presenting symptoms in adolescents with myotonic dystrophy.