Secondary pneumonia or otitis media may occur. Superimposed pneumonia is a major cause of mortality in infants and young children and may be caused by aspiration of gastric contents during paroxysms of cough or because of decreased respiratory clearance of pathogens. Fever should subside during the catarrhal phase, and its presence during the paroxysmal phase should raise suspicion for pneumonia. The most common causes of secondary bacterial pneumonia are Streptococcus pneumoniae, Streptococcus pyogenes, Haemophilus influenzae, and Staphylococcus aureus; although viral infections with the respiratory syncytial virus, cytomegalovirus, and adenovirus superinfections are also common.

Rarely (less than 2% of cases), CNS complications such as seizures and encephalopathy can occur, likely secondary to hypoxia, hypoglycemia, toxins, secondary infections, or cerebral bleeding from increased pressure during coughing. Sudden increases in intrathoracic and intraabdominal pressures can also result in periorbital edema, pneumothorax, pneumomediastinum, subcutaneous emphysema, diaphragmatic rupture, umbilical and inguinal hernias, and rectal prolapse.

Pertussis toxin also causes histamine hypersensitivity and increased insulin secretion.

Infants are particularly prone to bradycardia, hypotension, and cardiac arrest from pertussis. The development of pulmonary hypertension has been increasingly recognized as a factor contributing to infantile mortality, as it may lead to worsening systemic hypotension and hypoxia.