Domestic violence is a serious and challenging public health problem. Approximately 1 in 3 women and one in 10 men 18 years of age or older experience domestic violence. Annually, domestic violence is responsible for over 1500 deaths in the United States and as many as 200 deaths in Florida. In Florida, more than one in three women and one in four men experience physical violence, stalking, or rape.

Domestic violence victims typically experience severe physical injuries requiring care at a hospital or clinic. The cost to individuals and society is significant. The national annual cost of medical and mental health care services related to acute domestic violence is estimated at over $8 billion. If the injury results in a long-term or chronic condition, the cost is considerably higher.

Financial hardship and unemployment are contributors to domestic violence. An economic downturn is associated with increased calls to the National Domestic Violence Hotline.

Fortunately, the national rate of nonfatal domestic violence is declining. This is thought to be due to a decline in the marriage rate, decreased domesticity, better access to domestic violence shelters, improvements in female economic status, and an increase in the average age of the population.

**National**

- Most perpetrators and victims do not seek help.

- Healthcare professionals are usually the first individuals with an opportunity to identify domestic violence.

- Nurses are usually the first healthcare providers victims encounter.

- Domestic violence may be perpetrated on women, men, parents, and children.

- Fifty percent of women seen in emergency departments report a history of abuse, and approximately 40% of those killed by their abuser sought help in the two years before death.

- Only one-third of police-identified victims of domestic violence are identified in the emergency department.

- Healthcare professionals who work in acute care need to maintain a high index of suspicion for domestic violence as supportive family members may, in fact, be abusers.

**State**

In Kentucky, a state task force (The Division of Protection and Permanency) has recommended standards to precisely measure the extent of domestic violence and develop strategies for education and increasing public awareness. The results include:

- The legislation now involves professional (rather than the former "universal") mandatory reporting law. This requires reporting by a physician, osteopath, coroner, medical examiner, medical resident, medical intern, chiropractor, nurse, dentist, optometrist, EMT, paramedic, licensed mental health professional, therapist, Cabinet employee, child care personnel, teacher, school personnel, ordained minister, victim advocate, or any agency employing these individuals.

- According to Kentucky law, primary care physicians who are granted licensure after July 1, 1996, are required to successfully complete a 3-hour domestic violence training course within 3 years of the date of initial licensure.

- The online Kentucky Child/Adult Protective Services Reporting System is available for professionals to report non-emergency situations that do not require an immediate response.

- In 2017, the state passed KRS 209A, amended by HB 309, which expands state protection to all victims (including intimate partner/dating violence).

- The statute requires reporting to law enforcement any relevant information on the death of a domestic violence victim.

- Kentucky is one of three states (with Oklahoma and Arkansas) with a mandatory reporting law specific to domestic violence.

Domestic violence offenses result in approximately 40 deaths in Kentucky annually. The perpetrators are usually male, and victims usually female. Two-thirds of the victims lived with the perpetrators of domestic violence in one analysis of Kentucky occurrences. One in 4 had some form of domestic violence report prior to the homicide.  As stated in a Domestic Violence Fatality Review (https://ag.ky.gov/pdf_news/DVFR%20book.pdf), Kentucky "has no formal statewide surveillance system to track intimate partner violence-related homicides and no statewide formal procedure to review intimate partner-related homicide cases."

Age, family income, and ethnicity are all risk factors for both sexual abuse and physical abuse. Gender is a risk factor for sexual abuse but not for physical abuse.****

**Race**

Maltreatment of children is found in every race, culture, ethnicity, and socioeconomic status.

**Gender**

The genders are equally affected, but homicide rates are somewhat higher in males.

**Morbidity and Mortality**

Children may experience pain, humiliation, fear, loss of self-esteem, and injury. Physical damage may range from minor injury to disfigurement to brain trauma and even death. Long-term health consequences and adverse experiences may increase anxiety, depression, substance abuse, self-mutilation, suicides, criminal behavior, cancer, cardiovascular disease, diabetes, premature mortality, low well-being, obesity, and chronic mental health problems.

Mortality increases with multiple episodes of trauma. Homicide is a leading cause of death in aged children 1 to 4 years, and over 80% of fatalities from child abuse are in children younger than 4.

**Intimate Partner Violence**

According to the CDC, 1 in 4 women and 1 in 7 men will experience physical violence by their intimate partner at some point during their lifetimes. About 1 in 3 women and nearly 1 in 6 men experience some form of sexual violence during their lifetimes. Intimate partner violence, sexual violence, and stalking are high, with intimate partner violence occurring in over 10 million people each year.

One in 6 women and 1 in 19 men have experienced stalking during their lifetimes. The majority are stalked by someone they know. An intimate partner stalks about 6 in 10 female victims and 4 in 10 male victims.

At least 5 million acts of domestic violence occur annually to women aged 18 years and older, with over 3 million involving men. While most events are minor, for example, grabbing, shoving, pushing, slapping, and hitting, serious and sometimes fatal injuries do occur. Approximately 1.5 million intimate partner female rapes and physical assaults are perpetrated annually, and approximately 800,000 male assaults occur. About 1 in 5 women have experienced completed or attempted rape at some point in their lives. About 1% to 2% of men have experienced completed or attempted rape.

The incidence of intimate partner violence has declined by over 60%, from about 10 victimizations per 1000 persons age 12 or older to approximately four per 1000.

**Race**

African American, American Indian, Alaskan Native women and men, and Hispanic women report higher domestic violence rates. Asian and Pacific Island women and men report lower rates of intimate partner violence. However, differences among groups tend to diminish when sociodemographic and relationship variables are controlled.

The spousal homicide rate among African Americans is significantly higher than for Whites. The incidence of homicide between partners is higher in interracial marriages when compared with intraracial marriages.

**Gender**

Women are more likely to be attacked, injured, or raped by their partners than by any other person. According to the United States Department of Justice, women are 6 times more likely than men to experience violence committed by a spouse or ex-spouse, boyfriend or girlfriend, ex-boyfriend, or ex-girlfriend. Of all violence against women committed by a single offender, an intimate partner is a perpetrator in approximately one-third of cases.

Lesbians report higher levels of sexual violence, in the range of 30% to 40%. There is some evidence that homosexual males also experience higher levels of sexual violence.

Approximately 10% of women who live with intimate female partners report being raped, physically assaulted, or stalked by their cohabitant. One-third of women living with a male partner reported victimization by their male cohabitant.

Approximately 15% of men living with a male intimate partner report being raped, physically assaulted, or stalked by their cohabitant. In comparison, less than 10% of men who have lived with a female partner experience similar problems.

More than half of all homeless women and families are fleeing domestic violence.

**Age**

Women aged 16 to 24 years are more likely to be victims of violence at the hands of an intimate partner. Twenty to 30% of women who attend college report violence during a date.

Rates of spousal homicide peak in the 15 to 24-year-old age category. Rates decline with age in African Americans but not in whites.

As the age difference between males and females increases, so does the risk of spouse homicide.

**Mortality and Morbidity**

Approximately 2 million injuries and deaths occur each year as a result of domestic violence. About one-third of domestic violence patients will seek care in an emergency department. Injuries include over 40,000 gunshot wounds, stab wounds, fractures, internal injuries, and loss of consciousness; over 50,000 injured as a result of intimate partner sexual assault; and approximately 400,000 with soft tissue trauma.

- Most intimate partner murders are committed with firearms.

- The number of intimate partner homicides has decreased by about 15%.

- Almost half of the females murdered visited an emergency department within 2 years of the homicide.

- About 10% of females are abused at least once during pregnancy.

- Women are more commonly victims of intimate partner murder.

- A home in which anyone has been hurt in a family fight is approximately five times more likely to be the scene of a homicide.

- Females are the victims in 85% of intimate nonlethal violence.

- While it is commonly reported that women are more likely to be injured than men, some studies suggest male and female victims are equally affected by domestic violence.

- While males are less likely than females to be victims of gunshot wounds or be injured in an assault, they are more likely to be stabbed.

**Elder**

Due to underreporting and difficulty sampling, obtaining accurate incidence information on elder abuse and neglect is difficult. Elder abuse is thought to occur in three to 10% of the population of elders.

Edler patients may not report due to fear, guilt, ignorance, or shame. Clinicians underreport elder abuse due to poor recognition of the problem, lack of understanding of reporting methods and requirements, and concerns about physician-patient confidentiality.

The elderly may be unable to respond to a survey, not speak English, or have dementia, leading to inaccurate reports on the number of abused older persons. While obtaining the exact frequency of elder abuse is difficult, it will commonly be encountered in clinical practice. All healthcare providers must maintain a high index of suspicion.

**Gender**

Women are more commonly victims of intimate partner abuse. It is thought they report abuse at higher rates or because the severity of injuries is usually greater than in males. Some studies have found little or no differences based on gender.

**Age**

There is no universally accepted definition of when old age begins. As a result, statistics on elder abuse are highly variable. Typically, 60 or 65 years of age is the cutoff for being considered elderly.

**Race**

All racial, socioeconomic, and religious backgrounds are affected by elder abuse.

The estimated racial and ethnic distribution in older persons abused is on average:

- White: 60%

- Black: 20%

- Hispanic: 10%

- Other: 5%

**Mortality and Morbidity**

In the elderly population, victims of physical abuse and neglect have a much higher mortality rate than those who were never reported as abused. Early detection of elder abuse cases results in decreased morbidity and mortality. Healthcare provider involvement is important as only 1 in 6 victims will self-report mistreatment to the appropriate legal authorities.