Histologically, focal segmental glomerular sclerosis (FSGS) is characterized by sclerosis, hyalinosis, and adhesions/synechiae formation, resulting in segmental obliteration of glomerular capillaries. On electron microscopy (EM), foot process effacement is the predominant finding without significant basement membrane abnormalities. Immunofluorescence shows staining for IgM and C3 in sclerotic areas. Juxtamedullary nephrons are affected first; hence, inadequate sampling may miss focal lesions.

Histologically, FSGS is classified into five variants: perihilar, tip, cellular, collapsing, and not otherwise specified (NOS).

Perihilar: The sclerosing lesion is located at the vascular pole of the glomerulus. This is commonly seen in adaptive FSGS due to increased pressure in the glomerulus near the afferent arteriole. Foot process effacement is mild, resulting in subnephrotic proteinuria and relatively normal serum albumin levels.

Tip: The segmental lesion involves the tubular pole of the glomerulus. This is commonly seen in Whites, presenting with diffuse foot process effacement and abrupt onset of nephrotic syndrome. These patients have lower baseline creatinine, an excellent response to treatment, and the lowest rate of progression.

Cellular: This is the least common variant of FSGS, characterized by the hypercellular glomerulus, including endocapillary and glomerular epithelial cell hyperplasia. It presents with diffuse foot process effacement and full-blown nephrotic syndrome.

Collapsing: This is characterized by hyperplasia and hypertrophy of visceral glomerular epithelial cells leading to the collapse of the glomerular tuft. This is commonly seen in viral (parvovirus B19, CMV, HIV) and drug-associated forms of FSGS (IFN, pamidronate) and presents with diffuse effacement of foot processes, heavy proteinuria with the lowest rate of remission, and the worst prognosis.

NOS: This is the most common subtype of FSGS and does not fit into any other morphological forms of FSGS. It presents with a variable degree of effacement and proteinuria.

Histopathology may sometimes resemble nodular sclerosis, as in diabetes and other conditions.