Managing the administration of aluminum hydroxide as an antacid to patients requires an interprofessional team of healthcare professionals that includes a nurse, laboratory technologists, pharmacists, social workers, and several physicians in different specialties. After the diagnosis of an illness treatable with aluminum hydroxide, such as heartburn, is made, care is necessary to ascertain if the patient possesses any risk factors or contraindications to aluminum hydroxide.

**Recommendations for Increasing Successful Outcomes of Antacid Aluminum Hydroxide Therapy**

- Discontinue administration of aluminum hydroxide in patients with renal impairment.

- Do not administer aluminum hydroxide concurrently with antimicrobials such as fluoroquinolones.

- Avoid the use of antacid treatment in patients taking medications that depend upon the acidic nature of the stomach for proper absorption.

- Prescribe aluminum hydroxide for temporary use rather than prolonged management

- Discontinue administration of aluminum hydroxide when used as an antacid if the patient develops severe diarrhea

The clinician and nurses should monitor the patient and report untoward findings to the team. Pharmacists can also counsel the patient regarding dosing and the proper application of topical dose forms. The pharmacist should also check for drug interactions. Complications or issues with therapy should be reported to the medical team. All practitioners should be aware of the potential problems of long-term use, and counsel and direct the patient accordingly, particularly in those with renal compromise. Interprofessional monitoring of patients taking aluminum hydroxide will lead to better outcomes. [Level 5]