Thyroiditis can occur due to autoimmune disease (Hashimoto thyroiditis, Graves disease, postpartum thyroiditis or painless sporadic thyroiditis), infection (painful subacute thyroiditis or suppurative thyroiditis), drugs (amiodarone, lithium, interferons and interleukin-2; and checkpoint inhibitors) or fibrosis (Riedel thyroiditis)

Painful thyroiditis encompasses infectious, subacute thyroiditis, traumatic or radiation-induced thyroiditis, and painless thyroiditis encompass autoimmune, postpartum, and drug-induced thyroiditis.

It can be classified into acute, subacute, and chronic thyroiditis.

Acute thyroiditis is caused by bacterial infection of the gland.

Subacute, also known as granulomatous thyroiditis, is caused by viruses.

Chronic includes autoimmune thyroiditis, Hashimoto thyroiditis, postpartum thyroiditis, and other painless thyroiditis, including iatrogenic and drug-induced thyroiditis.

**Acute Thyroiditis**

Infectious thyroiditis: Infection of the thyroid gland is rare as it is encapsulated with rich blood supply and extensive lymphatic drainage. This is usually seen in the elderly, chronically ill and immunocompromised patients.Staphylococcus or Streptococcus. Sometimes mycobacteria and fungi, including pneumocystis, can be the culprit in immunocompromised patients. Source of infection is usually hematogenous or congenital abnormalities like pyriform sinus usually seen in children.

Radiation-induced thyroiditis: Radiation treatment of neck cancer can cause thyroiditis, followed by hypothyroidism. Patients who receive radioactive iodine for ablation of Graves disease occasionally develop severe thyroid pain 7 to 10 days after therapy. It is rare, and the incidence is about 1%.

**Subacute Thyroiditis**

It is usually preceded by upper respiratory tract infections and is presumed to be due to a viral illness, though definite evidence is lacking.

**Chronic Thyroiditis**

Autoimmune thyroiditis: It includes Hashimoto thyroiditis and postpartum thyroiditis and its association with HLA-DR3, HLA-DR4, HLA-DR5 has been reported in Whites.

Postpartum thyroiditis: It is an autoimmune phenomenon where antibodies formed against fetal thyroid cells accumulate in the mother's thyroid gland.

Drug-induced thyroiditis: The most common drugs causing thyroid dysfunction are amiodarone, lithium, and tyrosine kinase inhibitors.

Amiodarone can cause both hyper and hypothyroidism. In euthyroid individuals, amiodarone can cause transient changes in thyroid function tests (TFT), followed by normalization. In patients who have underlying Hashimoto, or pregnant are at risk of developing worsening hypothyroidism. It is thought to be secondary to the antithyroid effect of the iodine in amiodarone. Amiodarone can induce hyperthyroidism in two ways. In type 1, there is increased synthesis and release of thyroid hormone, whereas, in type 2, there is destructive thyroiditis leading to the release of preformed T4 and T3 from the damaged thyroid gland.

Checkpoint inhibitors are a type of immunotherapy with anti-neoplastic properties and include drugs like nivolumab, ipilimumab, pembrolizumab, and atezolizumab. They are associated with endocrinopathies especially, hypothyroidism secondary to destructive thyroiditis.

Lithium is known to cause hypothyroidism by decreasing the secretion of thyroid hormones. This causes a rise in TSH and eventually enlargement of the thyroid gland and goiter. About 15% of patients on interferon alfa therapy can develop thyroid dysfunction.

Riedel thyroiditis: Reidel thyroiditis is a rare condition characterized by progressive fibrosis of the thyroid gland. The exact etiology is unclear, but recent data indicate that it is closely related to IgG-4 related sclerosing disease. The fibrosis of the thyroid gland may or may not be associated with progressive fibrosis of other organs.