Leprosy is a disease with myriad different presentations, largely due to the broad immune response towards the M. leprae strain.

**Ridley-Jopling classification****system**covers the entire depth of the clinical feature.

This includes:

- Tuberculoid (TT)

- Borderline tuberculoid (BT)

- Mid-borderline (BB)

- Borderline lepromatous (BL)

- Lepromatous (LL)

- Indeterminate (I)

There are varying degrees of severity in the presentation of this disease. In cases where there is a significantly elevated cell-mediated immune response along with delayed hypersensitivity presentation consists of well-demarcated lesions with central hypopigmentation and hypoesthesia. Mentioned specifically as a polar tuberculoid, this inflamed granulomatous growth is also coupled with uncommon acid-fast bacilli within the tissues as well.

In individuals with no observed resistance to the M. leprae strain are shown to have several ill-marked, raised lesions throughout the body. This type of infection, with a considerable affliction of disease, is labeled as polar lepromatous. It is important to note that these persons have no record of immunosuppression; however, they are not able to build immunity to M. leprae.

Initial presentation of lesions is shown as broad-based perineural invaders where acid-fast bacilli are potentially determined. Without developed establishment criteria, it is then further labeled as indeterminate. These cases usually present in children with spontaneous healing. This classification is recommended to only be utilized when biopsy results show confirmed leprosy; however, not progressive enough to lock in the severity on the spectrum. Indeterminate cases are recommended to be confirmed through lab or visual means before labeling as such.

**WHO Classification**

Another classification profile was developed for cases where minimal clinical or lab support would be available. This system is based on the number of lesions present. In situations where five or fewer skin lesions are present without any bacilli evident on skin smears, it would be considered as paucibacillary (PB) leprosy. Where if only a single lesion is seen, it is labeled as a single lesion PB. Six or more lesions with a positive skin smear test are considered as multibacillary (MB) leprosy.

Additional physical features evident when considering leprosy includes symptoms such as:

- Reddish skin patches with sensory loss

- Paresthesias with associated numbness in extremities

- Painless burns in extremities

- Lumps or swelling on the earlobes

- Enlarged sensitized peripheral nerves

Findings found after significant development include weakness with claw fingers, facial paralysis, lack of eyebrows and eyelashes, or perforated nasal septum. Generally, the severity of the manifestations relies on the level of nerve immersion, the classification type, and any active immune responses.

Skin lesions that are commonly seen in leprosy can be categorized in the following subsections:

- **Tuberculoid leprosy (TT)**

- This presents with large hypopigmented or erythematous lesions with clear demarcation and raised margins. Plaque presentation was shown to be scaly.

- **Borderline tuberculoid (BT**)

- BT is defined as macules with a “target” appearance in lesions. In this specific disease, the number of lesions is higher than TT and usually shows on one side of the body. When referencing the previously mentioned WHO classification, these types of lesions are considered “paucibacillary.”

- **Mid-borderline (BB)**

- Referenced as “multibacillary,” this disease most closely emulates BT leprosy or border-lepromatous with its appearance of “punched out” lesions. Note, the central areas are mostly anesthetic.

- **Borderline lepromatous leprosy (BL)**

- Lesions, in this case, include erythematous macules, nodules, or papules that show no distinct pattern of appearance on the body. Though normal patches of skin can be found, the delineation of the lesions is not clear and spread out. Larger sized lesions are shown to have a disproportionate distribution.

- **Lepromatous leprosy (LL)**

- Significantly progressed cases present with body hair loss along with nodular enlargement of earlobes.

- **Indeterminate disease**

- Shows as a hypopigmented or erythematous macule with little to no sensation. Bacilli are not usually found in this biopsy. If the lesion shows not to be fully developed, it should develop into another type within the leprosy spectrum.

**Neuropathy**

Nerve association is evident early in the progression of leprosy, measured through the general decrease of sensation in lesions.

In individuals with tuberculoid disease, depending on the nerves located around the areas of the skin lesion, potential sensory and motor loss could occur. In cases involving lepromatous disease, the damage is more generalized. The involvement of nerve trunks of the body includes ulnar/median nerves, the peroneal nerve, posterior tibial nerve, facial nerve, and the great auricular nerve.

Subclinical neuropathy seems to be increasingly involved than originally anticipated.

In the final presentation of nerve injury for this disease, a common theme is segmental demyelination.

**Ophthalmic Injury**

Diminishing innervation of nerves associated with the muscles in the eyelids and signal to the cornea could potentially lead to lagophthalmos, corneal abrasion and ulceration, and drying. Full ocular assessment is important to comprehensive examinations.

**Immunologic Reactions**

These types of reactions are systemic responses that could occur before the start of treatment, during treatment, or even a significant time after the treatment has been completed.

In all reaction types, fatigue, malaise, and fever are possible with other presentations, including neuritis, arthritis as well as nasopharyngeal symptoms. The nerve injury consequent from the immune reactions can lead to paralysis and deformity. An important note is to realize that drugs do not cause these reactions, and the treatment originally specified should progress. The following is a review of the previously mentioned reactions:

**Type 1 Reaction (T1R)**

Typically comes up in BT, BB, or BL cases. Presentation includes:

- Red, swollen areas with existing lesions associated with nerve trunk or face

- Erythema of skin lesions present

- Inflammation due to reactions leading to deformity and paralysis

- Edema

- Ulceration of lesions on the skin

- Weakness or loss of nerve function

Without treatment, the pathway for T1R lasts approximately a couple of months. Further studies have shown that this reaction appears to arise from the free development of cell immunity as well as hindered hypersensitivity to M. leprae antigens.

**Type 2 Reaction (T2R, ENL)**

- Presented in individuals with BL and LL

- The scale has been developed to further support physicians in further understanding the specific case.

Type 2 reactions usually present as sudden onset of painful nodules, which could be either superficial or deep within the dermis. Pustule formation is possible with the excessive discharge of pus. The exudate is shown to contain polymorphs and acid-fast bacilli. Lesions are primarily located on the surfaces of limbs and face with the typical life of a small number of days.

A specific condition, labeled as the Lucio phenomenon, is considerably rare that could present in cases with Type 2 reaction and manifests with the onset of necrotizing vasculopathy in individuals with ignored lepromatous leprosy.

Known risk factors related to T2R incorporate puberty, pregnancy, and lactation.