B. cereus infection is usually self-limited and does not require any targeted therapy. Treatment for most patients is symptomatic care with oral hydration. Most patients recover within 24 hours after symptom onset. Empiric antibiotic therapy for gastrointestinal syndromes secondary to B. cereus infections is not indicated. In severe cases, intravenous fluid hydration may be necessary.

The majority of severe and systemic illnesses are caused by ocular infections by this organism. B. cereus ocular infections can rapidly destroy an infected eye, especially in penetrating trauma with a foreign body. In suspected cases, rapid therapeutic intervention is mandatory irrespective of the results of immediate diagnostic testing. The outcome varies with the microbial agent involved and the rapidity of and response to treatment. B. cereus produces beta-lactamases and is resistant to beta-lactam antibiotics. When antibiotics are required, treatment with vancomycin, gentamicin, chloramphenicol, or carbapenems should be considered. Clindamycin, tetracycline, and erythromycin have had variable results with susceptibility testing and are not considered first-line agents. A 2007 study testing susceptibility of Bacillus species to various antibiotics reported universal resistance to trimethoprim/sulfamethoxazole and beta-lactam antibiotics by various B. cereus species. Some were clindamycin and erythromycin resistant as well. According to this study, all Bacillus isolates were susceptible to chloramphenicol, ciprofloxacin, gatifloxacin, gentamicin, levofloxacin, linezolid, moxifloxacin, rifampicin, streptomycin, tetracycline, tigecycline, and vancomycin.