Patients presenting with PCP may have subtle or obvious signs of illness. Literature notes that HIV-infected patients will likely have a more indolent and subtle onset of symptoms such as non-productive and dry cough, 95%; low-grade fever, greater than 80%; and progressive dyspnea, 95%, over several weeks.

History must be aimed at evaluating the patient for underlying causes of immunodeficiency and, as such, their risk of contracting an opportunistic infection. As mentioned before, PCP is considered an AIDS-defining illness; therefore, a history of HIV infection must be obtained along with whether the patient is undergoing antiretroviral therapy (ART). History may reveal signs and symptoms such as fatigue, weight loss, myalgia/arthralgia, rash, and headache, indicating an undiagnosed and underlying HIV infection. Also necessary during the evaluation is to ascertain if a patient has recently been on glucocorticoids or had a change to their dose of immunosuppressive therapies.

Physical exam findings are important in determining a patient's level of distress. No classic exam findings point directly at a Pneumocystis infection, but many findings indicate a respiratory illness such as pneumonia. The exam may reveal crackles and rhonchi on auscultation, but 50% of cases will have normal and clear lung sounds. Other common physical exam findings include associated dyspnea, tachypnea, and tachycardia. Patients will likely present with a fever, most times greater than 38.1 C (100.6 F). HIV-infected patients often will present with oral thrush as a co-infection; therefore, it is essential to do a thorough head-to-toe examination to evaluate for any other signs that may indicate an underlying immunologic disorder. A study in London, England, has shown that exertional dyspnea, interstitial infiltrates, oral thrush, and granulocyte percentage > 75% are associated with an increased likelihood of PCP compared to tuberculosis or bacterial pneumonia in patients with HIV.