Respiratory failure is a syndrome with a myriad of etiologies; therefore, a thorough history and physical examination are required to narrow the differential diagnosis.

**History**

Patients typically present with respiratory symptoms (i.e., dyspnea, cough, hemoptysis, sputum production, and wheezing); however, symptoms from other organ systems (i.e., chest pain, decreased appetite, heartburn, fever, and significant weight loss) are important. Loss of smell and/or exposure to sick people or unprotect contact with individuals with coronavirus infection (COVID-19) is essential in suspecting COVID-19 illness and associated respiratory failure, particularly in high-risk patients (older patients, men, and morbidly obese).

For patients already diagnosed with airway disease, it is important to assess inhaler compliance and technique, recent steroid use, as well as exposure to environmental triggers. For patients with hypertension and chronic cough, the use of angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitors or angiotensin receptor blockers should be investigated.

Social history is also crucial when considering respiratory failure. Alcohol use and sexually transmitted diseases may lead to an immunocompromised state, making patients more susceptible to certain infections, while a sedentary lifestyle may increase the risk of pulmonary embolism. Habits such as having birds and hobbies such as diving and flying may have implications when considering etiologies of respiratory failure. Most importantly, a patient's tobacco smoking history should be investigated, including exposure to second-hand smoke, marijuana smoking, smoking e-cigarettes, and vaping.

Finally, an occupational history may be helpful when considering work-related lung disease (i.e., hypersensitivity pneumonitis and pneumoconiosis), while a family history may be beneficial when considering atopic, genetic (i.e., alpha-1-antitrypsin deficiency and cystic fibrosis), and infectious diseases (i.e., tuberculosis).

**Physical Examination**

Signs of respiratory failure may be present throughout the body. Physical examination findings by region appear below:

- General inspection: Accessory muscle use, altered mental status, cachectic, conversational dyspnea, diaphoresis, fever, respiratory distress (i.e., at rest or with exertion), obesity, and purse-lipped breathing

- Head: Cushingoid appearance, central cyanosis, Horner's syndrome, and pale conjunctiva

- Neck: Jugular venous distention, lymphadenopathy, and tracheal deviation

- Chest/thorax: Asymmetrical chest expansion, bradypnea, bronchial breath sounds, Cheyne-Stoke breathing, crackles, decreased breath sounds, dullness to percussion, hyper-resonance to percussion, Kussmaul breathing, kyphoscoliosis, loud P2, paradoxical breathing, pectus carinatum, pectus excavatum, pleural rub, reduced chest expansion, rhonchi, stridor, tachypnea, tactile vocal fremitus, vesicular breath sounds, vocal resonance, wheezes, and whispering pectoriloquy

- Abdomen: Hepatomegaly

- Upper extremities: Asterixis, digital clubbing, peripheral cyanosis, tobacco staining, and tremor

- Lower extremities: Edema, peripheral cyanosis, and unilateral swelling.