The clinical utility of fructosamine and GA includes monitoring of diabetes, diagnosis of pre-diabetes, and prediction of both the microvascular and macrovascular complications. They have the advantage of not requiring a fasting sample.

**Monitoring of  Glucose Control in Diabetes**

Fructosamine and glycated albumin can be utilized as short-term markers of glucose control.  Both correlate significantly with HBAIc levels. While HbA1c reflects glucose control over a period of the preceding 8 to 12 weeks, fructosamine reflects the average glycemia over the preceding 2 to 3 weeks. This is a result of the inherent shorter half-life of albumin in comparison to hemoglobin in the erythrocyte.

Fructosamine has largely been used as an alternative to the use of HbA1c monitoring in the presence of certain conditions that preclude the use of HbA1c, such as hemoglobin variants and alterations in erythrocyte lifespan. Fructosamine and glycated albumin are not affected by hemoglobin level, or red blood cell characteristics to which HbA1c is susceptible. This includes conditions such as hemoglobinopathies, sickle cell anemia, and anemia related to iron, vitamin B12, or folate deficiency.

Additionally, fructosamine has clinical utility in conditions where information regarding short-term glucose control is important in the management of the patient such as in pregnancy, or recent medication adjustment. FA and GA can also be useful in monitoring people with diabetes with fluctuating or poorly controlled diabetes.

**Diagnosis of Diabetes**

Recent studies have evaluated the use of the alternate glycaemic markers of fructosamine and glycated albumin for the diagnosis of diabetes. It has been reported that in the diagnosis of diabetes, serum GA measurements can be used to ascertain the need for an oral glucose tolerance test (OGTT). There appears to be a negative correlation between GA and body mass index (BMI), and hence it could potentially underestimate glycemia in the obese. Currently, no guidelines support the use of GA or FA for the diagnosis of diabetes or pre-diabetes.

**Diabetes Outcome**

Previously there was little evidence of the relationship of fructosamine and glycated albumin with diabetes complications and long-term outcomes. Recent studies, like for example, the Atherosclerosis Risk in Communities Study (ARIC), have demonstrated that fructosamine and glycated albumin were strongly associated with retinopathy as well as significantly associated with the risk of incident chronic kidney disease and incident diabetes. Besides, both Fructosamine and GA, even following adjustment for HBAIc, are significant prognosticators of cardiovascular outcomes and mortality.