Fanconi anemia leads to pancytopenia. Thus, a history with a decrease of all three blood cell lines, including red blood cells (RBCs), platelets, and leukocytes, is evident in the blood work. Shortness of breath, chest pain, dizziness, and fatigability are common manifestations of anemia. A history of epistaxis, petechiae, and unstoppable bleeding from a wound site is common due to thrombocytopenia. The risk of recurrent infections increases with the severity of leukopenia, which presents with fever and flu-like illness. History of low birth weight is present in some cases, and a history of weight loss is important to elicit from patients for cases complicated by cancer. Family history and marriage history are important, particularly where the prevalence of the consanguinity marriage system is high.

Approximately 75% of Fanconi anemia is associated with birth defects. On physical examination, the stature of the child may be short, and there are light-brown skin pigmentation ("cafe-au-lait") lesions in more than 50% of cases.

Other additional anomalies include abnormal epicanthal fold, proptosis, ptosis, cataracts, blindness, epiphora, ear anomalies such as absent eardrums, small or large pinnae, and atresia of the ear canal. Physical signs of pancytopenia are sometimes visible, including pallor, petechiae and bruising, and coldness of the hands and feet. Gastrointestinal abnormalities such as imperforate anus, tracheoesophageal fistula, atresia of the intestine, Meckel diverticulum megacolon, and umbilical hernia are less common.