**Inferior oblique myokymia:**Inferior oblique myokymia is a rare condition described by Chinskey and Cornblath in 2013. The eye demonstrates excyclotorsion as opposed to incyclotorsion seen in SOM. The excyclotorsion can be induced by the supraduction of the eye.

**Alternating superior and inferior oblique myokymia:**Smith and Cornblath described a case of alternating superior and inferior oblique myokymia in 2014 where there were monocular, high-frequency, low-amplitude contractions with incyclotorsion and excyclotorsion of the eye, suggesting alternating superior and inferior oblique myokymia.

**Eyelid myokymia:**Although the clinical features of SOM are very distinctive, eyelid myokymia, where patients note contractions of the orbicularis oculi muscle, may result in the patient noting a vision change. This is caused by the pressure of the eyelid against the globe as the muscle fibers contract and is not true oscillopsia or double vision. Clinical examination will reveal the fine high-frequency fasciculations of the orbicularis oculi muscle affecting the upper or the lower eyelid. Eyelid myokymia is said to be triggered by fatigue, stress, or caffeine intake, but the exact cause of the condition is unknown. Eyelid myokymia may occur for several hours to days and persist for many weeks. Most will resolve spontaneously, but some require local botulinum toxin injection.

**The Heimann-Bielschowsky phenomenon:**This phenomenon is seen in patients with reduced vision in an eye. There is monocular vertical eye movement with low-frequency and pendular vertical oscillations of the eye. There are no associated neurological conditions with this phenomenon. In SOM, the oscillations have a low amplitude (less than 4 degrees) and high frequency (up to 50 Hz), whereas in the Heimann-Bielschowsky phenomenon, the frequency is low (less than 5Hz) and the amplitude is high (possibly up to 30 degrees).

**Square wave jerks:**These are low-amplitude eye movements with high frequency and occur with central neurological lesions that cause fixation instability. Patients may be asymptomatic but may also describe side-to-side image movements. In contrast, SOM patients describe images that bounce up and down. The movements in square wave jerks are usually horizontal and saccadic in nature.

**Ocular neuromyotonia:**Sudden and episodic contraction of one or more extraocular muscles may occur. This is often associated with radiation injury and is also thought to be caused by ephaptic transmission with injury to the nerve lining.  Ocular neuromyotonia may be monocular or binocular, and any extraocular muscles may be involved, including the superior oblique muscle. However, the spasms are slower than those seen with SOM, and involvement of just the superior oblique muscle alone is rare. Ocular neuromyotonia is usually triggered by an eccentric gaze.