To understand the pathophysiology of TA, it is first important to understand the path of blood flow and anatomy. In patients with TA, systemic venous blood normally returns to the right atrium and flows into the right ventricle. Pulmonary venous blood from the lungs normally flows through the pulmonary veins into the left atrium and to the left ventricle. The VSD allows oxygenated and deoxygenated blood to mix before it is ejected through a common truncal valve to a single great artery, subsequently supplying the coronary, pulmonary and systemic circulations.

The common semilunar valve may have 1 to 4 cusps with tricuspid most frequently seen. The presence of a single arterial trunk can be associated with several cardiac, aortic, and pulmonary abnormalities. These abnormalities include right-sided, interrupted, or hypoplastic aortic arches, abnormal origins of the coronary arteries, pulmonary artery stenosis, and patent ductus arteriosus. Depending on the origins of the pulmonary arteries, Collett and Edwards (CE) and Van Praagh each classified various forms of TA. Collett and Edwards based their system solely on the origins of the pulmonary vascular system, while Van Praagh also took into account aortic abnormalities.

Throughout fetal development and the first week of life, PVR is relatively high, resulting in greater shunting of mixed oxygenated and deoxygenated blood into the systemic circuit causing mild cyanosis. As the PVR drops and PBF increases, pulmonary over-circulation causes congestive heart failure (CHF). If left untreated, pulmonary over-circulation may eventually lead to severe irreversible pulmonary vascular disease and death. As the pulmonary vascular disease worsens, PVR increases. This results in worsening cyanosis or right-to-left shunt (Eisenmenger syndrome).

The mixing of pulmonary and systemic blood before departure from the heart combined with the degree of pulmonary blood flow (PBF) and pulmonary vascular resistance (PVR) drives the pathophysiology and the clinical picture.