**Erythema Infectiosum**

The prodrome of symptoms begins during viremia, where patients experience a headache, myalgias, and fever. The exanthem develops one to one and one-half weeks later. It is important to know that the patient is not contagious once the eruption occurs. At this time, the patient will have a “slapped cheek” appearance, described as erythema of the cheeks, sparing the central face. This finding is the most recognizable for this disease. Adults may not have the facial rash with this infection. Later, a maculopapular eruption occurs that looks “lacy” and reticular and favors the extremities but occurs on the trunk to a lesser extent. The eruption can last anywhere from one to three weeks. The rash can worsen when exposed to heat or sunlight. Arthritis of the small joints may occur, namely the hands, feet, and knees; however, this is more common in adults. It is especially common in women and is rare in children, where it occurs in only 10%.

Arthritis may occur without the skin findings, and it usually lasts one to three weeks.

**Aplastic Crisis**

This may occur in those with preexisting conditions such as decreased red cell production (iron deficiency and thalassemias) or increased red cell destruction (sickle cell anemia, hereditary spherocytosis, pyruvate kinase deficiency, glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase deficiency), as well as recipients of allogeneic hematopoietic stem cell or solid organ transplants and patients with HIV infection.

**Fetal B19 Infection**

Vertical transmission of parvovirus B19 can occur from the mother to the fetus. Transmission is the highest before 20 weeks gestation. The virus blocks fetal erythropoiesis, leading to profound anemia, stillbirth, hydrops, and/or fetal death. Hydrops is defined as the abnormal accumulation of fluid in two or more fetal compartments, including ascites, pleural effusion, pericardial effusion, and skin edema. Most fetal losses occur in the second trimester. However, the overall risk of fetal loss while pregnant is 2% to 6%. The virus is not usually tested for in preconception or antenatal screenings. Most babies born to mothers with the infection are born asymptomatic and full-term.

**Papular Purpuric Gloves and Socks Syndrome**

This condition usually occurs in young adults but can occur at any age. On exam, one will find petechiae and purpura with a sharp demarcation at the wrists and ankles. There also will be symmetric edema and erythema of the palms and soles that may extend onto the dorsal surfaces, and patients may complain of burning or pruritus. Some sources have documented cases involving intertriginous areas of the body as well. Unlike erythema infectiosum, patients are contagious when they have a rash. Erosions and petechiae may occur in the mouth involving the palate, pharynx, and tongue.