In nuclear medicine, computed tomography (CT) is used with positron emission tomography (PET) and single-photon emission computed tomography (SPECT) machines, which are combinedly called PET-CT and SPECT-CT, respectively. This dual-modality acquires co-registered images of structural and functional details in a single study with datasets complementary to each other and highlights the abnormal functional images with accurate localization of structures. CT imaging, when used in nuclear medicine, helps to improve the quantification of functional images by correcting for attenuation, scatter, and partial volume effects. The images from both modalities are fused using software, and standard uptake values (SUVs) are calculated.

The concept of combining planar images of two modalities dates back to the 1960s, even before the invention of CT machines. However, software for fusion imaging started to develop in the late 1980s.

A similar concept of combining PET with CT was suggested independently in 1991, and the first working prototype PET/CT scanner was developed in 1998, but the first commercial PET-CT was available in 2001.

The development of SPECT/CT has improved the sensitivity and the confidence that many nuclear medicine investigations are interpreted.

Similarly, the PET-CT has been a game-changer in managing oncology, cardiology, and neurology patients, along with many others. Head and neck cancers, thyroid cancers, lung cancers, breast cancers, esophageal cancers, colorectal cancers, melanoma, lymphoma, and solitary pulmonary nodules have shown better accuracy when diagnosed with PET-CT. The difference in accuracy between PET/CT and the PET alone or the CT alone for staging and restaging is statistically substantial and averaging nearly 10 percent to 15 percent across all malignancies.