A thorough history and physical exam will reveal likely etiologies of macrocytosis and place it in a clinical context. Macrocytosis without anemia is unlikely to result in specific signs or symptoms, and in many cases, may have minimal clinical significance. Patients should be screened for symptoms of anemia, including fatigue, generalized weakness, dyspnea, palpitations, lightheadedness, and syncopal or near-syncopal events. Assess for pallor of the skin and mucous membranes, which may also suggest anemia. Tachycardia may be present in cases of significant anemia.

A medical history should be obtained and should include all current and recent medications, with attention to medications listed in the above sections, including anti-convulsants, biguanides, proton pump inhibitors, antihistamines, chemotherapeutic agents, and reverse-transcriptase inhibitors. Alcohol use should be quantified. Diet should be discussed to screen for the insufficient intake of folate and vitamin B12.

Neurologic signs and symptoms, including paresthesia or impaired proprioception of the distal extremities, should be identified as suspicious for vitamin B12 deficiency. Glossitis may also be observed. Stigmata of cirrhosis, including jaundice, gynecomastia, telangiectasias, ascites, and asterixis may be elicited in cases of macrocytosis due to liver dysfunction, although these findings are not sensitive. Assess for lymphadenopathy, hepatosplenomegaly, and areas of bony tenderness as these may suggest a neoplastic cause such as multiple myeloma. Findings such as petechiae, ecchymosis, and epistaxis may indicate thrombocytopenia or platelet dysfunction, which is often associated with macrocytic anemia caused by primary bone marrow pathology.