The pathophysiology of puberty can be broken down into three main categories: premature (precocious) puberty, delayed puberty, and contrasexual development.

**Precocious Puberty**

Precocious puberty, or early development of secondary sexual characteristics, is defined as the appearance of secondary sexual characteristics prior to the age of eight in girls or before the age of nine in boys. Precocious puberty can be broken down by pathological location into central or peripheral precocious puberty. Central precocious puberty (CPP) involves activation of the hypothalamic-pituitary-gonadal (HPG) axis, which leads to early but normal pubertal development. CPP is more common in girls, and while most cases are idiopathic, it can be caused by neoplasm, radiation, head trauma, or genetic conditions.

Many causes of early pubertal development are shared among girls and boys; however, some causes of early puberty are unique to each of the sexes.

- **Premature adrenarche**correlates with the premature presence of pubic or axillary hair and possibly increased sebaceous gland activity, without other signs of puberty present, usually before six years of age. This is typically an isolated abnormality, and most children go on to develop the other signs of puberty at a normal age. Plasma DHEAS is usually elevated to pubertal levels, while FSH, LH, estradiol, and testosterone are typically at levels found in prepubertal children. Other studies, such as a GnRH stimulation test, will show prepubertal results. An ACTH stimulation test may help exclude congenital adrenal hyperplasia, which may present with similar symptoms.

- **CNS and pituitary lesions**will typically present with normal but early occurring stages of puberty, and children may present with a bone age greater than their chronological age. Additionally, these lesions may cause other problems to develop, such as visual field defects. If a CNS or pituitary lesion is suspected, an MRI of the brain should be ordered to confirm or rule out this diagnosis.

- **Constitutional/idiopathic precocious puberty**can occur in males and females but tends to be more prevalent in females. Precocious or premature puberty is considered idiopathic when a child has no familial links to premature development, and there is no other cause that explains the premature development of puberty. Constitutional precocious puberty can be linked to a familial tendency toward early development. Children with these disorders will respond to a GnRH stimulation test with pubertal levels of sex hormones, including FSH and LH. These children may have a bone age that is much higher than their chronological age. Additionally, all other causes of premature puberty must be ruled out, such as CNS pathology and elevated adrenal hormones.

- **McCune-Albright Syndrome**is associated with cafe-au-lait spots, polyostotic fibrous dysplasia, precocious puberty, and may be associated with other endocrine disorders. Precocious puberty seen in McCune-Albright syndrome manifests in early childhood, with sudden onset vaginal bleeding typically the initial sign of the condition. Individuals may begin to experience vaginal bleeding as early as two years of age.

- **Exogenous sex hormones**in substances such as oral contraceptives and anabolic steroids can cause secondary sexual characteristics to develop. These causes can usually be ruled in or out rather quickly by performing a urinalysis, as the metabolites of exogenous hormones can be found in the urine. Additionally, children who have an exogenous hormone source and are not undergoing natural puberty will lack pubic hair. Girls may have darkened areolas, and boys will have small testicles resembling the size of a prepubertal child.

Causes of premature puberty unique to males include gonadotropin-secreting tumors and testotoxicosis.

- **Gonadotropin-secreting tumors**typically secrete hCG-like components that can have a similar function in signaling to LH, resulting in an incomplete type of premature puberty in boys. Girls, however, need FSH to increase estrogen production in the ovaries and thus, will not have premature development due to this type of tumor alone. Examples of tumors that might produce hCG are hepatomas, teratomas, and germinomas of the pineal gland.

- **Testotoxicosis**is a cause of peripheral precocious puberty in which boys present with early-onset puberty between 2 and 4 years of age. Patients experience early development of secondary sexual characteristics, accelerated growth, and diminished adult height. The cause of testotoxicosis is linked to a heterogenous constitutively activating mutation of the LHCGR gene encoding the luteinizing hormone receptor. Laboratory analysis will show an increased level of sex steroids in the setting of low LH levels.

**Delayed Puberty**

Delayed puberty is the lack of physical evidence of puberty by 2 to 2.5 standard deviations above the mean age for the initiation of puberty. In boys, this is considered a period longer than four years between the first signs of testicular enlargement and the end of puberty or the absence of testicular growth by 14 years old. Delayed puberty in girls is considered the absence of breast growth by 13 years of age or more than four years between thelarche and menarche. The causes of delayed puberty include hypogonadotropic hypogonadism, hypergonadotropic hypogonadism, hypopituitarism, chromosomal abnormalities, and hypothalamic dysfunction due to secondary causes.

- **Hypogonadotropic hypogonadism**is due to a hypothalamus or pituitary gland disorder, resulting in GnRH, LH, or FSH deficiency. Several causes of hypogonadotropic hypogonadism exist, including damage to the hypothalamus or pituitary gland from surgery, tumor, infection, or injury. Genetic defects, severe stress, and long-term use of opioids or glucocorticoids can also be a cause. Additionally, nutritional problems and iron overload may also cause hypogonadotropic hypogonadism.
- **Constitutional delay of growth and puberty**is a transient state of hypogonadotropic hypogonadism associated with prolongation of the childhood growth phase, delayed skeletal maturation, delayed pubertal growth spurt, and low IGF-1 secretion. On a GnRH stimulation test, these children will have prepubertal levels of FSH, LH, estradiol, and testosterone. Eventually, puberty will spontaneously occur, resulting in the progression of development in these children. In most cases, the final adult height does not meet the predicted adult height, and individuals tend to have a disproportionately short trunk.

- **Hypergonadotropic hypogonadism**is the failure of the gonads to produce sex hormones. FSH and LH will be elevated due to minimal negative feedback on the hypothalamic-pituitary-gonadal axis. There can be many causes of gonadal failure, including genetics and physical trauma. In boys, Noonan syndrome and myotonic dystrophy have been known to cause gonadal failure. Additionally, there have been cases of LH beta-receptor mutations reported in boys resulting in a lack of a gonadal response. Trauma to the testes by testicular torsion or cryptorchidism is also a cause of gonadal failure in boys. In females, autoimmune ovarian failure is a possible cause of hypergonadotropic hypogonadism, with the child likely also exhibiting signs or symptoms of other autoimmune conditions. Interestingly, half of the girls with galactosemia have been shown to develop ovarian failure, thought to be due to toxic metabolites.

- **Hypopituitarism**is a lack of release of hormones from the pituitary gland. Delayed puberty is not the only sign of hypopituitarism, as endocrine dysfunctions such as hypothyroidism, delayed bone growth, and adrenal insufficiency may also be present. Kallman syndrome is a specific disorder falling under hypopituitarism where neurons in the developing brain fail to migrate, resulting in anosmia, the absence of a sense of smell, and a lack of GnRH cells in the hypothalamus.

- **Chromosomal abnormalities**are a cause of delayed puberty shared by both males and females. In females, Turner syndrome (45 XO) is a common cause of ovarian failure resulting from a missing or incomplete X chromosome. Along with ovarian failure, Turner syndrome has many other identifying characteristics, including but not limited to a webbed neck, short stature or delayed growth, coarctation of the aorta, and a "shield" chest with widely spaced nipples. Females with Turner syndrome will typically present with delayed puberty or primary amenorrhea secondary to ovarian failure. A common chromosomal disorder in males with delayed puberty is Klinefelter syndrome (47 XXY), a chromosomal abnormality resulting from a random genetic error after conception. These patients typically present with small testes, gynecomastia, tall stature, long legs, and short arms. Due to low testosterone, adolescents affected by Klinefelter syndrome will typically undergo delayed or incomplete pubertal development.

- In addition to the above causes of delayed puberty, pubertal delay can also occur in several illnesses where hypothalamic dysfunction can occur. Examples are hypothyroidism, cystic fibrosis, sickle cell disease, celiac disease, and diabetes mellitus.

**Contrasexual Development**

Contrasexual development occurs when male or female children develop physical features of the opposite gender. This condition tends to be more common in girls and is commonly caused by polycystic ovaries and increased responses by the adrenal gland. Girls will have a male-like distribution of hair and may develop hirsutism. Girls can also develop clitoromegaly and lose the contour of the breast mass. Possible causes include Cushing syndrome, acromegaly, exogenous androgens, adrenal tumors, ovarian tumors, and hyperprolactinemia. Although contrasexual development is less common in boys, the cause is typically estrogen-secreting tumors when it does occur.