Pronator teres syndrome is a rare syndrome characterized by pain and numbness in the forearm and is caused by compression of the median nerve between the humeral head and ulnar head of the pronator teres. Patients with this syndrome often experience neuropathic symptoms and weakness of the muscles innervated by the anterior interosseous (AIN) branch of the median nerve. The muscles commonly involved are the flexor pollicis longus, flexor digitorum profundus of the second digit, and the pronator quadratus. The pain caused by this syndrome tends to be more concentrated at the wrist and is worsened by excessive pronation of the forearm.

Patients may often find themselves dropping items and have a new sense of clumsiness. They also may discover previously simple tasks that involved these muscles challenging to perform, such as opening a prescription bottle with a lock.

Electromyography (EMG) and nerve conduction velocity (NCV) studies are typically not necessary for diagnosis but may be used. NCV will show a slowed conduction velocity of the median nerve in the proximal forearm. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) is not necessary for diagnosis, but it can be of utility and typically shows atrophy of the muscles innervated by the median nerve in the forearm and abnormally increased signal intensity in the pronator teres on T2-weighted image. Treatment for this condition often involves rest, NSAIDs, and physical therapy focused on stretching. However, a corticosteroid injection into the pronator teres should be considered if this approach fails. The last line of treatment involves surgical decompression.

Strains of the pronator teres are rare, but they have been reported in some athletes. The mechanism of injury typically involves a bat or club striking the ground during a swing. This presents an eccentric force to an elbow in pronation. Due to its rarity, this condition may be confused with other injuries such as medial epicondylitis or injury to the ulnar medial collateral ligament. Patients can present with ecchymoses and tenderness to palpation over the pronator teres. MRI can often assist diagnosis of this injury. Conservative management with rest, NSAIDs, and physical therapy is the mainstay of treatment, and it often yields excellent results.

Athletes engaging in forearm pronation as in tennis or golf may be at risk for pronator teres pathology. Insufficiency of the ulnar collateral ligament, flexor-pronator tendinosis, medial epicondylitis, and lateral epicondylitis can be accompanied by injury to the pronator teres.

The two muscles responsible for pronation of the forearm (pronator teres and pronator quadratus) are both innervated by the median nerve. Therefore damage to this nerve can result in weakness or even loss of this movement. EMG and NCV can help clinicians pinpoint the exact location of this injury. Possible etiologies for this pathology include direct trauma to the nerve at the elbow or axilla or fracture of the supracondylar humerus.