Overdose toxicity from nitroglycerin is mainly a consequence of increased vasodilatory response. Hypotension, venous pooling, increased vasodilation, and reduced cardiac output can be expected in these patients. Compensatory effects, such as tachycardia and palpitations, can also be expected. Vasodilation and venous pooling can increase the amount of blood in the cranial space, resulting in increased intracranial pressures; this can cause persistent, throbbing headaches, along with confusion, fever, vertigo, nausea, vomiting, and visual disturbances.

No currently known antagonist is available to counteract the effect of nitroglycerin. Since the effects are related to venodilation and relative arterial hypovolemia, efforts to increase central fluid volume have proven effective. Intravenous administration of normal saline, in addition to the passive elevation of the patient's legs, may provide adequate support, but there are no controlled trials to prove its effectiveness. Epinephrine or other arterial vasoconstricting agents are not recommended as they will not likely improve the patient's condition and may cause more difficulties in the future. Methemoglobinemia has some rare reports as a consequence of nitrate overdose. Clinician suspicion should be raised in patients with hypoxemia symptoms despite a lack of respiratory symptoms, normal arterial PO2, and adequate cardiac output. Blood from patients with methemoglobinemia has a "chocolate brown" appearance in color, with no change in color upon exposure to air.