**Colobomas are seen in**:

- The Treacher Collins syndrome (autosomal dominant with variable penetrance)

- In association with cryptophthalmos (absence of eyelid formation)

- Cat eye syndrome is a chromosome 22 abnormality with vertical iris colobomas

- Patau syndrome (trisomy 13)

- Fraser syndrome

- Manitoba Oculotrichoanal syndrome (seen in Northern Manitoba Aboriginal patients), Goldenhar syndrome

- First arch syndrome.

- Franceschetti syndrome

- Amniotic band syndrome

- The CHARGE syndrome is composed of coloboma, heart defects, choanal atresia, growth retardation, genital abnormalities and ear abnormalities. Microphthalmia may also be seen.

- Other associated conditions include renal coloboma syndrome, Aicardi syndrome, Solomon syndrome, and Noonan syndrome.

**In the presence of a congenital coloboma involving any of the eye structures, it is wise to perform a complete ophthalmic examination, looking specifically for the following:**

- Eyelids: trichiasis, dermoid, lipodermoid

- Eyebrows: defect

- Conjunctiva: symblepharon, caruncle abnormalities

- Cornea: exposure keratopathy, pyramidal cornea, corneal scarring

- Sclera: epibulbar dermoid

- Lacrimal system: punctal or canalicular obstruction

- Lens: anterior polar cataract, subluxation

- Iris: coloboma

- Choroid: coloboma

- Optic Disc: coloboma

Central visual acuity in children born with colobomas involving the optic nerve correlates with the development of normal foveal anatomy, regardless of the size of the coloboma. Olsen et al. studied optic nerve colobomas of 23 eyes. Two graders masked to patients’ visual acuities were asked to rate coloboma size, optic nerve color, foveal development, and subfoveal retinal pigment epithelial changes. Increased relative coloboma excavation (ratio of coloboma depth to axial length) was significantly associated with an increased risk of retinal detachment. A relative coloboma excavation more than 0.15 was associated with a 52% increased risk of retinal detachment, compared to those with a relative coloboma excavation less than 0.15 (23%, P = 0.014). The presence of any structural abnormality or retrobulbar cyst were associated with an increased risk of retinal detachment and severe visual impairment of worse than 20/200. An increased coloboma depth, width, volume, and relative coloboma excavation were not associated with an increased risk of severe visual impairment.

On a typical funduscopic exam, clinicians see large optic nerve excavations usually inferiorly. Defects occur both unilaterally and bilaterally at equal rates. Patients may have microphthalmia or optic nerve cysts that communicate with the subarachnoid space. Cysts rarely expand to cause compressive optic neuropathy.

Optic coherence tomography (OCT) of the optic nerve can help elucidate the different optic nerve anomalies that look similar on fundoscopy alone. OCT of optic nerve coloboma shows retinochoroidal-scleral excavation of the nerve. On follow up examinations, OCT is used to monitor for peripapillary CNVs. OCT angiography could be used to distinguish between morning glory syndrome, which has a dense peripapillary network, and optic nerve pits and optic nerve colobomas that do not have a radial peripapillary network.