The use of interpolated flaps is contraindicated in patients who are unwilling or unable to tolerate multiple-staged surgical procedures. Likewise, these procedures should be avoided in patients who cannot leave their surgical sites undisturbed, or special measures must be taken to protect the sites in these patients. Actively infected skin should not be covered with a flap or used to form a flap. When performing the paramedian forehead flap (PFF) on a patient with a forehead of low vertical height, a variation of the forehead flap or another repair method may be required to avoid transferring hair-bearing skin to the nose, or the patient must be counseled that subsequent hair removal will be required via laser or electrolysis.

Smoking is a relative contraindication to the use of staged island pedicle flaps because it increases the risk of flap necrosis. However, procedures with these flaps can usually be performed safely if fat is not thinned excessively from the undersurface of the flap. In addition, avoiding the use of previously radiated skin or a previous surgical site is generally best, unless no better repair options are available. Interpolated flaps should be performed with great care in patients who are receiving anticoagulant therapy or in patients with bleeding disorders. Consultation with the physician who prescribed the medication is prudent before discontinuing any anticoagulant therapy. Contacting consulting physicians is appropriate before operating on individuals with bleeding dyscrasias.