**Anesthesia**

General anesthesia associated with a regional nerve block, e.g., interscalene brachial plexus block, is usually used for RTSA.

**Patient Position**

For RTSA, the patient is usually positioned in a beach chair position with the chest is tilted to 60 degrees. The shoulder should be on the edge to allow full arm extension and adequate exposure of the humerus during the procedure. To give the surgeons enough access to the surgical field, the recommendation is for the anesthetic team to be on the other side of the operative table.

**Examination Under Anesthesia**

Shoulder passive range of motion could be masked by pain, and challenging to determine the exact range while the patient is awake.  After patient positioning, it is useful to examine the shoulder for passive range movement and soft tissue tension to allow proper planning for soft tissue contracture release as required.

**Surgical Approach**

RTSA is commonly performed through the deltopectoral approach or the anterior superior approach.

**Deltopectoral Approach**

The bony landmarks for the deltopectoral approach are the coracoid process, the acromion, and the proximal humerus. The inter nervous plane for the deltopectoral approach is between the axillary nerve, which innervates the deltoid muscle, and medial and lateral pectoral nerves, which innervate the pectoralis major muscle. A 10 to 15 cm long skin incision is required along the line between the coracoid process and the proximal humeral shaft over the deltopectoral groove. Careful dissection is required to identify and protect the cephalic vein. The cephalic vein is usually mobilized laterally toward the deltoid muscle. The conjoint tendon (the short head of the biceps and coracobrachialis) is then identified and retracted medially without much traction to protect the musculocutaneous nerve. The clavipectoral fascia should be incised lateral to the conjoint tendon to expose the subscapularis muscle. Subscapularis muscle can be divided lateral to the musculotendinous junction to reveal the shoulder joint capsule.

**Anterior Superior Approach**

****Bony landmarks are the acromion, acromioclavicular joint, anterior border of the clavicle. Skin incision starts 1 cm medial to and on the anterior half of the acromioclavicular joint. The incision extends in the line of the anterior clavicle border to the point 3 cm lateral to the acromion. The anterior deltoid muscle fibers are identified and detached from the acromion. The subacromial bursa is excised, and the rotator cuff muscles are explored.

**Procedure Steps**

**Humeral Head Dislocation**

Regardless of which surgical approach has been used, the humeral head is dislocated by adducting and externally rotating the arm while pushing the elbow upward and forward.

**Humeral Preparation**

The humeral head is resected slightly below the greater tuberosity tip. Intra medullary or extramedullary guide can guide the humeral head resection depending on the surgeon's preference. Resection guides are specific for each prosthesis type and have different resection angles.  The humeral head is usually resected at about 30 degrees of retroversion.  The forearm axis with the elbow flexed in 90 degrees is used as a reference axis for retroversion.****

**Glenoid Exposure**

The subscapularis muscle is released and retracted medially by a glenoid retractor to expose the glenoid. For full glenoid exposure, the labarum is excised from all around the glenoid. Diathermy tip is used to identify the anterior bony margin of the glenoid (position at 5 o’clock in right shoulder and 7 o’clock in left shoulder). The glenoid's bony margins are adequately exposed and examined to address any bony deficit in the glenoid before seating the base plate. Glenoid bony defects less than 25 degrees can be managed by eccentric reaming and bone graft. For example, if there is a bone loss from the superior glenoid, the upward tilt of the glenoid component is avoided by reaming inferiorly and superior bone graft insertion to maintain the desired inferior tilt of 10 degrees. Glenoid bony defect larger than 25 degrees requires a patient-specific graft prepared using preoperative 3D planning software.

**Glenoid Preparation**

It is important to identify the lower glenoid rim for proper base plate seating. Inferiorly placed a base plate with 10 degrees inferior tilt shown to reduce the base plate failure.****The pilot wire is then removed from the glenoid. The base plate holder is used to apply for the glenoid plate, and it is flushed to the bone. The base is compressed to the exposed glenoid subchondral bone by the central screw. Superior and inferior screws aiming for dense bone are inserted to secure the base plate and reduce the micromotion at the plate-bone interface.

**Glenosphere Trial and Offset Selection**

Lateralized and eccentric glenosphere in the modern prosthesis designs reduce the scapular notching and allow a better range of motion without bony impingement.****Different glenosphere sizes (32 to 42 mm) are available depending on the prosthesis type. Glenosphere trial is used to determine the suitable diameter size, offset, and eccentricity direction.  The suitable glenosphere should allow enough separation from the scapular pillar anteriorly, posteriorly, and inferiorly as well as free humeral component movement without superior impingement. The 36 mm glenosphere size is commonly used for female patients and 40 mm for male patients. Trials with different lateral offsets and eccentricities can be carried out to find adequate soft tissue tension. Proper soft tissue tension is necessary for prosthesis stability and deltoid muscle function after RTSA.

**Humeral Tray and Polyethylene Insert Trial**

The humeral tray and polyethylene insert trials are mounted onto the stem trial, and the prosthesis trial is reduced and checked. Different tray and insert heights can be tried to achieve the optimal range of motion,  soft tissue tension, and stability. The deltoid muscle, conjoint tendon, and triceps muscle tension are tested to ensure proper soft tissue tension. Joint stability in all directions without impingement is checked at this stage. If there is excessive soft tissue tension or the prosthesis trial cannot be reduced, the proximal humerus can be resected into a lower level.

**Definitive Prosthesis******

Once all components are confirmed and checked, trial components are removed, and the definitive components are prepared for use. The glenosphere is implanted first while there is more space, followed by implanting the humeral stem (cemented or cementless). If a cemented stem is to be used, antibiotic-loaded cement is recommended. A cement restrictor is inserted then the humeral canal is washed and kept dry prior to cementing.  Once the stem is secured, the humeral cup is mounted onto the humeral stem, followed by the polyethylene insert on top. The prosthesis is reduced, and a final check is carried out for stability and soft tissue tension. The wound is then washed out with normal saline.****

**Subscapularis Muscles Repair and Wound Closure**

It is still controversial whether to repair subscapularis muscle or not during RTSA. Some published evidence indicates increased shoulder internal rotation after subscapularis muscle repair.

**Post-operative Care******

The operated shoulder is immobilized in a board arm sling after the surgery for two weeks. Arm external rotation beyond the neutral level is avoided for the first four weeks. Pendulum shoulder exercises and elbow movement can start early. Post-operative X-rays are obtained to check the prothesis components, anchoring screws, and the bone of the humerus and glenoid. A regular follow-up should be organized starting from two weeks after the surgery to check the surgical wound and exclude any complications.

**Advances of RTSA**

**Stemless Humeral Component**

The stemless humeral component is also known as the canal sparing humeral component. The canal-sparing component is especially useful for patients who have a humeral deformity. The stemless humeral component preserves the bony stock of proximal humerus in case it is needed for future secondary revision procedures.

**Preoperative 3D Planning Software**

Digital software is a new development to allow virtual RTSA preoperative planning. This software creates a 3D virtual shoulder model from the shoulder 3D CT scan. It enables the surgeon to navigate the shoulder, identify any bony loss and plan for different components size, glenoid component tilt, and humeral component version.