Bilateral vocal cord paresis may be the presenting finding of a pathology that will then progress to true bilateral vocal cord paralysis, but it can also be an entity in its own right and non-progressive. This depends on the underlying etiology.

**Causes of bilateral vocal cord paresis:**

- Scarring: Any cause of scarring of the arytenoid joints will impair the motion of the vocal cords, and may or may not progress to total paralysis. Radiation therapy, posterior glottic scarring from prolonged intubation, inhalational injury, or inflammatory diseases such as relapsing polychondritis can lead to scarring of the joint and tethering of the vocal cords, even if the muscles are intact and functioning. In severe cases, this can progress to glottic stenosis.

- Iatrogenic causes: In addition to prolonged intubation, surgical trauma to the vagus or recurrent laryngeal nerves can weaken the contraction of the intrinsic laryngeal muscles resulting in impaired vocal cord function. This is classically seen in the thyroid, tracheal and esophageal resections. This can remain as a temporary paresis or can progress to true paralysis as the nerves undergo Wallerian degeneration.

- Malignancy: Early-stage glottic and supraglottic malignancy can impair the normal motion of the vocal cords. If left untreated, this can progress to vocal cord fixation/paralysis or airway obstruction due to tumor bulk.

- Central nervous system pathology: Stroke, CNS tumors, MS, and other conditions may affect the nuclei of the vagus nerves and lead to paresis or paralysis of the vocal cords.

- Systemic disease: ALS, Guillain-Barre syndrome, and other such conditions can lead to vocal cord weakness, usually in the setting of a known systemic disease.

**Causes of bilateral vocal cord paralysis:**

-  Scarring: Progressive scarring from radiation therapy, prolonged intubation, inhalational burns or caustic ingestions, or inflammatory conditions such as scleroderma and relapsing polychondritis can cause significant progressive scarring in the glottis. This can lead to vocal cord fixation and paralysis, but also can lead to glottic stenosis.

- Iatrogenic causes: In addition to prolonged intubation and scarring as discussed above, post-surgical trauma to the RLN, SLN, and/or vagus nerves are the most common cause of bilateral vocal cord paralysis. Classically associated with thyroidectomy, bilateral vocal cord paralysis can also be seen after tracheal resection, esophagectomy, neck exploration for trauma, or congenital heart/aorta surgery.

- Malignancy: Advanced laryngeal malignancy can destroy the vocal cords or their neuromuscular controls, leading to paralysis. Additionally, subglottic, tracheal, esophageal, and thyroid malignancies can extend and involve the RLNs, leading to bilateral vocal cord paralysis.

- Central nervous pathology: Stroke, CNS tumor, and MS can all affect the nuclei of the vagus nerve and potentially lead to bilateral vocal cord paralysis. While MS can have a relapsing/remitting course, most CNS causes of this condition carry a very poor chance of recovery of function.

- Systemic disease: ALS, Miller-Fisher, and other systemic syndromes may include bilateral vocal cord paralysis as a component of a systemic condition. There is a variant of Guillain-Barre that can present with isolated bilateral vocal cord paralysis even in the absence of the classic ascending paralysis.

- Idiopathic: This represents a significant minority of adult bilateral vocal cord paralysis, though is far rarer in children.

Benninger et al estimated that bilateral vocal cord paralysis can be attributed to surgical trauma in 44% of cases, malignancies in 17%, secondary to endotracheal intubation in 15% of cases, due to neurologic disease in 12% of patients and idiopathic causes in 12% of cases.

In infants and children with bilateral vocal cord paralysis who primarily present with stridor

A palsy of the superior laryngeal nerve (SLN) causes pitch changes in a patient’s voice secondary to paralysis of the cricothyroid muscle. Bilateral SLN palsy leads to hoarseness and abduction of the vocal cords, increasing aspiration risk.

Another extremely rare cause of bilateral RLN paralysis is Guillain Barre syndrome (GBS), the most common acquired demyelinating neuropathy. Although GBS classically presents as loss of deep tendon reflexes with ascending muscular paralysis, cranial nerves can be affected in addition to peripheral nerves. GBS can also manifest with respiratory distress necessitating mechanical ventilation, development of cardiac arrhythmias, and hemodynamic instability.