**Resectable (Localized) Bile Duct Cancer**

Surgical resection remains the only possible chance of cure for the localized intrahepatic and extrahepatic bile duct tumors. Assessment of the patient on the basis of physical and radiological examination should be carried out prior to surgery, which includes the size and anatomic location of the tumor, vascular, and lymph nodes involvement and the presence of metastatic disease.

For the purpose of staging the tumor adequately, surgical exploration via laparoscopy may be necessary. Extrahepatic cholangiocarcinoma can be treated effectively with surgical resection. The perihilar cholangiocarcinoma is a subtype of extrahepatic cholangiocarcinoma, also known as Klatskin tumor may need extensive surgical resection, which may involve the resection of a part of the liver and extrahepatic bile duct. The goal is to render the margins tumor-free.

Post-treatment surveillance in patients with resected tumors includes imaging with CT-scan to assess for any biliary tract abnormality following surgery.

The National Comprehensive Cancer Network (NCCN) guidelines for a negative margin R0 and negative regional nodes resected tumor recommends no chemotherapy or radiation therapy, alone or in combination. In patients with resected cholangiocarcinoma but positive margins or lymph node involvement, adjuvant 5-fluorouracil (5-FU) based chemoradiation therapy is suggested.

**Advanced and Unresectable Tumors**

Advanced tumor stage at the time of diagnosis, including metastatic and recurrent bile duct cancers, or in patients who do not fit as surgical candidate, the following treatment options are considered.

- Chemotherapy

- Palliative therapy

- Immunotherapy

- Molecular targeted therapy

Chemotherapy is considered in patients with advanced tumor stage or unresectable tumors. Studies based on phase III and phase II clinical trials, involving gemcitabine alone and in combination with cisplatin have shown better results in gemcitabine/cisplatin combination as compared to gemcitabine monotherapy.

In most individuals who are not surgical candidates for tumor resection, palliative treatments such as; systemic chemotherapy with first line medical therapy involving gemcitabine and cisplatin, other gemcitabine based-regimen, second line medical therapy supported by clinical trials involving fluoropyrimidine FOLFOX chemotherapy associated with better survival outcomes, biliary drainage with endoscopic or percutaneously placed stents to relieve symptoms associated with cholestasis and in patients who have persistent symptoms of biliary tract obstruction, despite stent placement, fluoropyrimidine plus oxaliplatin is a treatment option, while studies in recent years have shown fluorouracil (FU) based combination therapies with better outcomes.

- Recent studies have shown that therapies against targetable mutations should be considered in patients with unresectable tumors. New data about these targeted molecular therapies have been emerging with time. As previously mentioned intrahepatic bile duct tumors express isocitrate dehydrogenase (IDH) genes – IDH1 and IDH2 genes mutation, phase I clinical trial of ivosidenib, a selective and reversible MIDH1 inhibitor drug has shown anti-oncogenic properties with a better outcome and safety profile. Fibroblast growth factor receptor (FGFR) gene fusion and translocation have also been found in cholangiocarcinoma. Fibroblast growth factor inhibitor strategies can improve survival rates in patients with advanced unresectable tumors. Evaluation of such drugs for targeted therapy against bile tract cancer are still occurring with expected promising results. A clinical trial involving valproic acid have shown promising results in a group of 12 patients which needs further studies for evaluation.

- Ongoing clinical trials using target therapy against the downstream effectors of KRAS mutation RAF and MEK have shown anti-tumor activity in a group of 28 patients with unresectable biliary tract cancer. Studies using combining BRAF and RAF inhibitors are still ongoing. Bevacizumab, an anti-vascular endothelial growth factor receptor (VEGF) has been tested in combination with GEMOX (gemcitabine plus oxaliplatin) and with erlotinib have also shown promising results. Further evaluation with clinical trials are needed. Furthermore, erlotinib a tyrosine kinase inhibitor, inhibits epidermal growth factor receptor by binding to its ATP binding site has shown clinical activity in combination with bevacizumab (anti-VEGF).

Patients with unresectable advanced stage tumors should consider molecular testing for microsatellite instability or a deficient mismatch repair system. Those with deficient mismatch repair system (dMMR) or high microsatellite instability (MSI-H) tumors can be considered for treatment with pembrolizumab therapy, which is directed against the programmed cell death protein 1 (PD1).