Wrist arthrodesis instrument set can be provided by a number of medical device companies, and they contain all the necessary instruments and implants for the procedure. The implants are usually made of stainless steel or titanium and come in a variety of shapes and sizes to offer the best surgical outcome to each patient.

Precontoured plates usually come with a dorsal bend or angulation of 15 degrees to match the contour of the dorsal aspect of the wrist and also to provide maximum functional results. The plates can be bent more during the procedure to accommodate the anatomy of the patient; however, it is advisable to avoid bending the plate at the level of the holes as well as avoid bending the plate multiple times in opposite directions as this will weaken the plate.

The screws used in this procedure can be of various sizes, most commonly of 2.3 mm, 2.7 mm, and 3.5 mm, and they can be used in either locking or non-locking mode depending on which slots of the plate they are inserted in (threaded or nonthreaded).

Bone grafts are sometimes used during the procedure, depending on the surgeon's preference, experience, and patient requirements. The bone graft can either be harvested directly from the patient during the procedure or can be used from a tissue donation bank.

Image intensifiers are commonly used in theatre during the procedure. Because of this, the patient, the operating room staff, as well as the operating team, should wear adequate protective equipment during this procedure.

Tourniquets can be used as well, depending on patient factors as well as surgeon preference. Tourniquets should be applied and inflated at the beginning of the procedure and deflated prior to the closure of the wound to identify any bleeding areas.

Other equipment that can be used during this procedure includes a suction device as well as diathermy.