Diuretic therapy, while typically well-tolerated, requires the comprehensive effort of an interprofessional medical team, including clinicians, specialists, NPs and PAs, nurses, and pharmacists. Patient education plays a crucial role and adequate knowledge of the adverse effects, dietary, and lifestyle modifications necessary while on diuretics. Patients (especially in an outpatient setting) must understand to report any changes in their compliance pattern or any adverse effect thereof. Adherence to strict treatment protocols and timely intake of the drug, and avoiding any overdosing when the patients miss their dosing will significantly improve the clinical course and the effectiveness of the diuretic agent.

Nurses, as immediate caregivers, should be cognizant of the adverse effects of diuretics and should be able to alert the treating clinician if a patient’s condition worsens. This situation is particularly true in hospitalized patients in intensive care units where updating urine output charts, daily body weight measurements, and periodic arterial blood gas analysis ensures patient safety. Pharmacists play an essential role in an outpatient setting and should be vigilant to check any drug-drug interactions or incorrect dosage in the prescriptions. Diuretics are prescription-only drugs, and any over-the-counter request of these drugs should be refused and, if needed, be reported to avoid damage to health by suspected misusers of diuretics. Several health professionals, including clinicians and specialists like cardiologists, otorhinolaryngologists, plus clinical pharmacists, nurses, and other healthcare workers, form part of the interprofessional team to operate in collaboration to avert any adverse outcome with diuretic therapy.