Contraindications to dopamine agonists include pregnancy and for nursing mothers, as these medications inhibit lactation.

Hypersensitivity reactions to ergot derivatives, bromocriptine, and cabergoline, or any component of the formulation may occur. Non-ergot dopamine agonists, ropinirole, rotigotine, and apomorphine, may also cause hypersensitivity reactions to these drugs or any component of the formulation.

Ergot dopamine agonists have a high risk for cardiac valvular, pulmonary, or peritoneal fibrotic disorders. Prescription of ergot dopamine agonists is contraindicated in patients with a history of fibrosis.

In patients with uncontrolled hypertension and who are also pregnant during treatment for prolactinoma, acromegaly, or Parkinson disease, bromocriptine is contraindicated because of the risk of increased hypertension. It is also contraindicated in postpartum women with severe cardiovascular disease or a history of coronary artery disease.

Apomorphine is a potent emetic and vasodilator. Antiemetics that block central dopamine receptors antagonize the anti-Parkinson action of apomorphine. Serotonin receptor antagonists are antiemetics that produce profound hypotension and loss of consciousness. Therefore, concomitant use of serotonin antagonists, antihypertensives, or vasodilators is contraindicated with apomorphine. It is also contraindicated in patients with severe renal or hepatic impairment.

Clinicians should not prescribe dopamine agonists with monoamine oxidase inhibitors (MAOI). It requires discontinuation at least two weeks prior to starting the dopamine agonist.