The transmural myocardial infarction due to the occlusion of either the left anterior descending artery or the dominant right coronary artery leads to the formation of a true left ventricular aneurysm. Two principal mechanisms are involved in its formation, the early expansion phase, and the late remodeling phase.

**Early Expansion Phase**

A true left ventricular aneurysm following acute myocardial infarction can occur as early as 48 hours or two weeks post-infarction.

Within hours of the infarction, the gross thinning of the infarct zone occurs. The migration of inflammatory cells in the infarct zone occurs by 2 to 3 days post-infarction. They contribute to the lysis of the necrotic myocytes by 5 to 10 days. Some viable myocytes are often present in the infarct area. There is a disruption of the collagen fibers, and along with the necrotic myocytes, it forms the nadir of myocardial tensile strength. Usually, in the infarcted zone, an extravascular hemorrhage can occur, leading to the decreased diastolic and systolic function of the heart. The factors contributing to the formation of the left ventricular aneurysm in the early phase include:

- Preserved contractility of the surrounding myocardium

- Transmural infarction

- Lack of collateral circulation

- Lack of reperfusion

- Elevated wall stress

- Hypertension

- Ventricular dilatation

- Wall thinning

**Late Remodeling Phase**

About 2 to 4 weeks post-infarction, remodeling of the myocardium begins with the appearance of highly vascularized granulation tissue. It is replaced by fibrous tissue 6 to 8 weeks post-infarction. As the myocardium becomes replaced by fibrous tissue, it greatly decreases the ventricular wall thickness due to the loss of myocytes.