Benign Paroxysmal Positional Vertigo

Benign Paroxysmal Positional Vertigo (BPPV) is the commonest cause of vertigo, accounting for 17% of all cases.

Vestibular Neuritis

Vestibular neuritis also referred to as vestibular neuronitis, is a self-limiting form of vertigo that occurs due to a viral infection or due to residual inflammation following viral infection of the vestibular nerve.

Meniere’s Disease

Meniere’s disease is a vestibular disorder caused by endolymphatic hydrops, which is an accumulation of endolymphatic fluid that distorts the endolymph within the labyrinthine system. Meniere disease characteristically demonstrates episodic vertigo, hearing loss, tinnitus, and aural fullness. Episodes of vertigo last from minutes to hours.

Presbycusis

Presbycusis refers to age-related hearing loss due to the loss of hair cells. Presbycusis categorizes into either sensory and neural. Sensory refers to hair cell dysfunction that begins at the basal end of the cochlea, leading to loss of high-frequency sounds. Neural refers to cochlear nerve cell atrophy, leading to a defect in speech discrimination.

Sudden Sensorineural Hearing Loss

Sudden sensorineural hearing loss (SSHL) is the sudden loss of hearing due to pathology within the cochlea or vestibulocochlear nerve that cannot be explained by some other disease related to the outer or middle ear. The criteria for diagnosing SSHL include the sudden hearing loss (within 72 hours) of 30 dB in at least three sequential frequencies.

Tinnitus

Tinnitus is the unwanted perception of sound, often in the absence of external stimuli. The sound is described as ringing, buzzing, humming, or swooshing and can have a detrimental effect on a patient’s quality of life. Tinnitus can be either objective or subjective. Objective tinnitus is audible by both the patient and clinician and is due to sound created by the flow of blood within vessels or of the contraction of a muscle in nearby structures. Causes include dural arteriovenous malformation, carotid bruits, venous bruits, carotid sinus fistulas, carotid dissections, and stapedial myoclonus.

Vestibular Schwannoma

Vestibular schwannoma (VS), previously referred to as acoustic neuroma, is a benign tumor of the Schwann cells that myelinate the vestibular branches of the vestibulocochlear nerve.