Acetylcholine derives from two constituents, choline, and an acetyl group, the latter derived from the coenzyme acetyl-CoA.

The synthesis of acetylcholine occurs in the terminal ends of axons. Choline acetyltransferase (CAT) is the enzyme that catalyzes the reaction of choline with acetyl-CoA to create a new molecule of acetylcholine. CAT is produced in the neuronal soma (body) and subsequently transported to the axon terminus via axoplasmic transport in which vesicles full of various proteins are “hitched” to actin filaments that span the length of the neuron for transport. Although localized mainly to the axon terminus, CAT is present throughout the neuron itself.

In the axon terminal, newly formed acetylcholine will be placed in vesicles with a minuscule number of free molecules still free in the cytosol. The vesicles are acidified via an energy-dependent pump (H-ATPase), which is utilized to create a gradient for acetylcholine to enter via vesicular acetylcholine transporter (VAChT), which exchanges one vesicular proton for one molecule of acetylcholine.

The release of acetylcholine occurs when an action potential is relayed and reaches the axon terminus in which depolarization causes voltage-gated calcium channels to open and conduct an influx of calcium, which will allow the vesicles containing acetylcholine for release into the synaptic cleft. This release is highly dependent upon the SNARE protein system.

There are two subtypes of nicotinic receptors, the muscular type (N1) and the neuronal type (N2). The muscular type is found specifically on the surface of muscle cells at the neuromuscular junction. The neuronal subtype is in the peripheral and central nervous systems. Specifically, N2 receptors are present in the adrenal medulla, on the postsynaptic cell bodies of neurons within the sympathetic and parasympathetic nervous systems, as well as in various locations in the brain such as the ventral tegmental area, hippocampus, prefrontal cortex, amygdala, and the nucleus accumbens.

There are five different types of muscarinic receptors, M1, M2, M3, M4, and M5. All these subtypes are metabotropic receptors, contrasting them from the nicotinic type of acetylcholine receptors. Furthermore, each subtype is either stimulatory or inhibitory. Subtypes M1, M3, and M5 function through the phospholipase C second messenger pathway, while M2 and M4 function through a second messenger pathway that inhibits adenylate cyclase and prevents the formation of cAMP from ATP.

Termination of acetylcholine action in the synaptic junction occurs when acetylcholine rapidly binds, then unbinds from its receptor in the target cell’s surface and gets subsequently cleaved by acetylcholinesterase into choline and acetate. Acetylcholinesterase is present in the synaptic cleft as a free molecule or GPI-linked protein on the surface of the postsynaptic cell surface.