N. meningitidis is a gram-negative coccus in pairs with adjacent sides flattened. It is non-motile, aerobic, and facultatively anaerobic. It produces catalase and is oxidase positive. It produces acid from glucose and maltose. Fresh isolates require enriched media like blood or chocolate agar. Incubation in a humidified 10% carbon dioxide (CO2) environment enhances growth.

Virulence factors include the polysaccharide capsule, which enhances invasiveness by inhibiting phagocytosis and enhancing organism survival during the bloodstream and central nervous system (CNS) invasion. Pili mediate attachment, colonization, and invasion of the organisms to the mucosal cells of the nasopharynx. The antigenic variation of pili by a cassette mechanism allows the bacterium to escape the host's immune system.

**Outer Membrane Proteins**

Porin proteins can insert themselves into membranes of target cells, and phagolysosomes can induce apoptosis. OPC protein functions in mucosal adherence and invasion of endothelial cells. IgA1 protease hydrolyzes IgA1 molecules in the hinge regions. The enzyme inactivates IgA1 at mucosal surfaces, enabling initial attachment and subsequent invasion. Pathogenic Neisseria survives and multiplies by their ability to extract iron from high-affinity iron-binding proteins. N. meningitidis can acquire penicillin resistance from commensal Neisseria species in the nasopharynx through DNA fragments by the transformation. Meningococcus also exhibits a phase variation of surface antigens, thus evading the host immune response.

The capsular polysaccharides are antigenic and form the basis of serogroups. Twelve serogroups are A, B, C, H, I, K, L, X, Y, Z, W-135, and 29F. Serogroups A, B, C, W-135, X, and Y are the most common causes of invasive disease worldwide.