The primary objective of treatment is a cessation of the binging and purging behavior.

Selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors such as fluoxetine, citalopram, and sertraline have shown to reduce symptoms of bulimia nervosa. Fluoxetine is the only FDA approved medication for bulimia nervosa. It appears that a higher dose (60 mg) is significantly better than a placebo in decreasing the frequency of binge and vomiting episodes.

Clinical trials of cognitive-behavioral therapy and interpersonal psychotherapy have also demonstrated a benefit for patients with bulimia nervosa.

Bulimia nervosa can lead to a variety of general medical complications, including metabolic alkalosis, dehydration, constipation, and cardiac arrhythmias. The most common cause of metabolic alkalosis in patients with bulimia nervosa is fluid volume depletion, for which saline administration is indicated in addition to the cessation of the purging behavior. For inpatients, consider intravascular administration; however, these patients require monitoring for signs of volume overload. The treatment for dehydration associated with bulimia nervosa is similar. In the uncommon cases of average or increased fluid volume with alkalemia in a patient with bulimia nervosa, intravenous saline has no role. Treatment for constipation associated with bulimia nervosa or with discontinuation of laxatives include adequate hydration, exercise, and dietary fiber. If laxatives are still needed, low doses of polyethylene glycol powder or lactulose may be used. For patients who experience severe or symptomatic cardiac complications of bulimia nervosa, which are generally caused by electrolyte derangements, consider obtaining a cardiology consult.