Kaposi varicelliform eruption, also called eczema herpeticum, refers to a disseminated skin infection due to a virus that usually leads to localized vesicular eruptions, occurring in a patient with an underlying cutaneous disease. Although rare, it is potentially life-threatening disorder. Herpes simplex virus is considered the main causative agent. The most commonly reported cases occur in patients with atopic dermatitis. However, it has been described in association with other skin conditions such as pemphigus foliaceus, ichthyosis vulgaris, bullous pemphigoid, Darier disease, Grover disease, Hailey-Hailey disease, dyskeratosis follicularis, mycosis fungoides, Sezary syndrome, psoriasis, pityriasis rubra pilaris, rosacea, seborrheic dermatitis, contact dermatitis (both allergic and irritant), second degree burns and skin grafts. Clinical features of Kaposi varicelliform eruption include widespread clusters of umbilicated vesicles and pustules that evolve into crusted skin erosions. The most frequently affected sites are the trunk, neck, and head. The diagnosis of Kaposi varicelliform eruption is made primarily on clinical findings. The Tzanck smear, viral cultures, skin biopsy, or detection of viral DNA by Polymerase Chain Reaction may be helpful in doubtful cases. Antiviral therapy has been effective but should be started as soon as possible after diagnosis to reduce morbidity and mortality. This activity reviews the evaluation and treatment of kaposi varicelliform eruptions and the role of the interprofessional team in evaluating and treating this condition.

**Objectives:**
- Describe the morbidity and mortality associated with kaposi varicelliform eruptions.
- Review the co-morbid conditions associated with kaposi varicelliform eruptions.
- Explain how the diagnosis of kaposi varicelliform eruptions is usually made.
- Outline the importance of the medical team in evaluating and managing patients with kaposi varicelliform eruptions.