The back is covered by the superficial and deep fascia. The superficial fascia acts as a layer of thickness and strength.

The deep fascia of the neck and the back area, a dense fibrous structure, is attached to the occipital bone, spinous processes of the vertebrae, and the iliac crest. The thoracolumbar fascia (TLF), which also may be classified as a strong aponeurosis, is located between the twelfth rib and the iliac crest. The middle fibers of the transversus muscle and upper fibers of the internal oblique muscle lie as the thoracolumbar fascia. Moreover, there are a number of ligaments that lie between the thoracal vertebrae and the parts of the ribs and between successive vertebrae. One of these ligaments, the ligamentum nuchae, is a fibrous membrane. It starts from the external occipital protuberance and attaches to the spinous process of the cervical vertebrae. While in lower animals, it helps to sustain the head position; it is exclusively the rudiment of an important ligament in humans.

The back serves many different functions in the human body. It primarily serves as the primary structural support for the human torso and allows flexibility for movement. Running centrally down the posterior midline is the spinal column.

The spinal column is composed of bony vertebrae, which house and protect the human spinal cord.

In addition to the bones, three groups of muscles comprise the back. These muscles are grouped as the intrinsic muscle group, also known as the deep, superficial, and intermediate muscle groups.