# Introduction

Mallory bodies (MB), also known as Mallory-Denk bodies (MDB), are cytoplasmic hyaline inclusions of hepatocytes, once thought to be specific for alcoholic hepatitis now occur in other liver diseases which include nonalcoholic steatohepatitis (NASH), cholestatic liver diseases, primary biliary cirrhosis (PBC) and hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC).

# Issues of Concern

The development of Mallory-Denk bodies indicates that intracellular protein quality has failed.

# Causes

In general, Mallory-Denk body formation presents in liver diseases. Those include hepatitis B and C, alcoholic liver disease, nonalcoholic fatty liver disease (NAFLD), HCC, PBC, chronic cholestasis, focal nodular hyperplasia Wilson disease, and copper toxicosis.

However, it also presents in glucocorticoid therapy, intestinal bypass surgery for obesity, Weber-Christian disease, von Gierke disease, radiation pneumonitis, asbestosis, amiodarone, a beta lipoproteinemia, porphyria cutanea tarda, antitrypsin deficiency, Indian childhood cirrhosis, perhexiline maleate hepatitis, cirrhosis, 2′3′-dideoxyinosine diethylaminoetheoxyhex-estriol-induced hepatitis, hepatic adenoma, sclerosing hyaline necrosis in Bloom syndrome, congenital fibrosis.

Rarely do Mallory-Denk bodies present in nonhepatic cells, but examples do exist which present as in asbestosis renal cell carcinoma and type 2 pneumocytes.

# Anatomical Pathology

P62 (a sequestosome), ubiquitin, and intermediate filament proteins keratins 8 and 18 (K8/18) are the significant elements that make up a Mallory body.

# Clinical Pathology

Cytoplasmic inclusion bodies intracytoplasmic hyaline bodies (IHB) and Mallory-Denk bodies can be present in HCC. MDB was linked steatohepatitis variant of HCC while intracytoplasmic hyaline bodies (IHB) was not. However, the presence of IHB correlates shorter survival than MDB.

# Morphology

MDBs are cytoplasmic inclusions that are predominantly filamentous ranging from a diameter of 3 to 24 nm vs. 10 nm of classical IF.

# Mechanisms

As Denk had used griseofulvin in his study to create MDB, recent studies have used diethyl-1, 4-dihydro-2, 4, 6-trimethyl-3, 5-pyridine dicarboxylate (DDC).

Before MDB occur, ballooning of hepatocytes occurs first, which are the response of oxidative stress, such as abnormal protein (heat shock proteins) or fat result in water accumulation into the hepatic cytoplasm.

The first mechanism is that epigenetics (acetylation, methylation, and ubiquitination of histones) contribute to hepatocyte memory during MDB formation.

The second pathway is the shift from the 26s proteasome to the immunoproteasome. The 26S proteasome plays a part in degradation intracellular (cytosolic, nuclear and membrane) proteins.

The third is the chronic activation of the Toll-like signaling pathways which stimulate proinflammatory and cell growth pathways. IFN-gamma and TNF-alpha stimulate TLR receptors, which cause up-regulation of growth factor resulting in the proliferation of MDB forming cells. Drugs as well can create a shift to the formation of the immunoproteasome rather than the 26s proteasome.

DDC stimulates tumor necrosis factor-alpha (TNF-alpha) and interferon-gamma (IFN-gamma) expression, which in turn activates the toll-like receptor (TLR). Proinflammatory cytokines TNF-alpha and IFN-gamma via TLR signaling cause up-regulation of the immunoproteasome and down-regulation of the 26s proteasome which results in undigested proteins and MDB formation.

# Clinicopathologic Correlations

Clinical findings of ASH (jaundice, leukocytosis, fever) may demonstrate classical histological finding of steatosis; however few or no MDB.  The opposite may be true, as well.

Inclusions do occur in the liver, muscle, and neural tissues which suggest a common intracellular network of protein synthesis and degradation along with responsiveness to stressors. MBD can be considered a protective mechanism of cell injury or rather a step in the pathogenesis of liver damage.

# Clinical Significance

Abnormal protein folding is known to cause other diseases, including Alzheimer disease.  In a recent literature review,

Denk, in his publication, notes that MDB formation occurs secondary to abnormal hyperkeratosis, which has links to Vitamin A deficiency.  In his animal study, Vitamin A level was decreased from 30% at day 12 of treatment with Griseofulvin down to13% at 60 days.

In patients with alcoholic liver disease, about 70 to 75% have MDB.  However, in patients with NAFLD, MDB ranges from 7% to 90%.[4] The wide range of MDB in NAFLD is likely the result of not having the specific amount which qualifies as excessive alcohol use, which would categorize the patient as alcoholic rather than non-alcoholic.

In severe alcoholic hepatitis, non-responders to corticosteroids had high histopathological findings of ballooning degeneration and MDB suggesting that histopathology findings can identify those who may respond to corticosteroids.

Methyl donors like Betaine and SAMe prevent MDB formation. SAMe prevents demethylation of histones, which occurs with DDC while Betaine prevents MDB formation by preventing the changes in methionine metabolism and by betaine-homocysteine methyltransferase (BHMT) methionine increases from homocysteine.