Auriculotemporal nerve neuralgia and Frey syndrome are two common disorders of the auriculotemporal nerve.

- Neuralgia of the nerve can present as a throbbing unilateral pain in any of the sites of its terminal branches including the temporomandibular joint, skin of the scalp, skin of the external auditory meatus, skin of the ear, and the parotid gland. The neuralgia can result from compression along its path. One example of this is compression of the nerve by the lateral pyrgotid muscle upon mastication. Although uncommon, with an incidence rate at about 0.4%, diagnosis can be difficult due to its vague symptoms and has an extensive list of differential diagnoses which can include cervicalgia, temporomandibular joint disease, migraine, continuous hemicrania, otitis, trigeminal neuralgia, atypical facial pain, temporal arteritis, and odontalgia. Diagnosis is possible by blockade of the nerve with complete resolution of symptoms.

- Frey syndrome is unilateral sweating of the cheek and external ear accompanied by reddening of the area seen after eating or drinking food. Interestingly, it can also present if the affected patient thinks, sees, or dreams about food that causes salivation. The syndrome results from a lesion of the auriculotemporal nerve where inappropriate regeneration of damaged parasympathetic fibers regenerates innervating sympathetic receptors of salivary glands in the face. Frey syndrome is most commonly seen secondary to surgery, parotid gland infection or facial trauma and is the most common adverse side effect of a parotidectomy.