The study of low-carb diets has centered on weight loss in obese and overweight people and patients with or at risk for cardiometabolic diseases such as type 2 diabetes and nonalcoholic fatty liver disease. Ketogenic diets have also been used for seizure disorders and, more recently, have found use in the athletic population as an alternative fuel for performance and health.

**Weight Loss**

Most research on low-carb approaches has shown that a low-carb diet, specifically ketogenic approaches, induces rapid induction of weight loss. Initial weight loss is due partly to water loss, but fat loss occurs with adherence to the low carb approach. With all dietary interventions, as adherence to the diet wanes, the weight loss effect becomes similar to other dietary approaches after one year.ad-libitum approach to caloric intake (limiting carbs instead), while most comparison diets are calorie-restricted. In general, shared decision-making is a valid and person-centered approach to determining nutritional strategies for weight loss.

**Type 2 Diabetes**

Before medications, carbohydrate control has been the cornerstone of glycemic control in both type 1 and type 2 diabetes. Dietary carbohydrates increase insulin needs, and reduction of carbohydrate intake can improve glycemic control.

Approaches to nutritional lifestyle and approaches to diabetes (medical nutrition therapy) have included low carb as an option in recent guidelines.

**Cardiovascular Risk Factors**

As mentioned above, the effect of low-carb diets on cardiovascular risk factors continues to be controversial. While a few studies have demonstrated an increase in LDL cholesterol with low-carb diets, others showed negligible changes. However, other metabolic markers, such as lowering triglycerides, and increases in HDL, have been demonstrated with low-carb diets.