The most common pathology associated with the corpus callosum is multiple sclerosis, resulting in demyelinating lesions in the corpus callosum and pericallosal region. Corpus callosum congenital anomalies are often associated with other brain defects, so evidence of an abnormality in corpus callosum development should prompt a workup for other potentially serious defects. In addition to the physiologic variants, corpus callosum lipomas are considered to be congenital malformations of the primitive meninges. Corpus callosum lipomas classify as either curvilinear, which are usually located posteriorly and are asymptomatic, and tubulonodular, which are found anteriorly and associated with severe frontal abnormalities. Ischemia of the corpus callosum is uncommon due to vascular inputs from three main arteries: the anterior communicating, anterior pericallosal, and posterior cerebral arteries. However, ischemia can result from emboli, and stenosis the result of atherosclerotic plaques, or vasospasm of the supplying arteries. Ruptured aneurysms in the anterior cerebral or pericallosal arteries typically cause hemorrhages of the corpus callosum. Consequently, hematomas located in the anterior corpus callosum should be investigated using computed tomogram (CT) angiography or three-dimensional time of flight MR angiography. The corpus callosum has been implicated in many other pathologies as well. Marchiava-Bignami disease involves acute demyelination and necrosis of the corpus callosum, most commonly observed in the body region of the corpus callosum in patients with chronic alcoholism. Other toxins like carbon monoxide and drugs like cocaine and heroin have also correlated with demyelination and lesions in the corpus callosum. Other pathologies that can cause corpus callosum lesions and demyelination include exposure to certain viruses, metabolic dysfunction, and traumatic brain injury. The most common tumors found in the corpus callosum are glioblastomas, as well as lymphomas and metastases.