**History**

A thorough history is mandatory in each. The presenting complaint in most cases is defective vision and whitish opacity in each case. A prior history of ocular infection, history of ocular surgery, retinal pathology, duration of corneal opacity, amblyopia, and visual acuity before surgery or opacity. A history of ocular injury, infectious pathology, nutritional deficiency, collagen vascular disease, chronic ocular surface disease, history of herpetic keratitis, and systemic comorbidity must be documented.

**Ocular Examination**

**Visual Acuity**

Every patient must undergo Snellen's uncorrected, best-corrected, and pinhole visual acuity evaluation. In cases with the perception of light, the projection of rays must be checked in all four quadrants. If the patient is unable to decipher, it can be evaluated with an indirect ophthalmoscope.

A stenopic slit can be used to evaluate visual acuity in cases with small central corneal opacity. In some cases, visual acuity can be taken after pupillary dilatation.

In children resistant to visual acuity evaluation, occlusion, preferential looking test, and Cardiff acuity can be used to check the visual acuity.

**Ocular Examination**

**Slit Lamp Biomicroscopy**

**Anterior Segment**

Anterior segment examination is a must in every case to rule out local lid pathologies such as trichiasis, distichiasis, lacrimal gland pathology, blepharitis, meibomian gland disease, ectropion, entropion and signs of any infection such as conjunctivitis.

The tarsal and bulbar conjunctiva, episcleral, and sclera should be evaluated for the presence of foreign bodies, inflammation, or signs of infection. The cornea should be assessed for size, shape, extent, and severity of corneal opacity, degree, and extent of corneal vascularization, and corneal sensations. In the case of a previous graft, the graft size, presence of any sutures, and graft characteristics must be documented. The anterior chamber depth, presence and absence of anterior synechiae, and clock hour of synechiae must be documented. Pupillary dilatation, presence of posterior synechiae, pupil characteristics such as occlusion pupillae, seclusio pupillae, or festooned pupil.

The lens status should be documented, whether phakic, aphakic, or pseudophakia. Phakic patients require cataract removal and IOL implantation, and the aphakic patient may require anterior vitrectomy, pupiloplasty and posterior chamber, iris claw, or SFIOL implantation.

**Posterior Segment**

Posterior segment examination is mandatory in each case to look for the retinal status and rule out glaucoma. The disc, macula, retinal arcades, and periphery should be thoroughly evaluated. In patients with limited view, a B scan ultrasound should be done to rule out any vitritis, vitreous hemorrhage, glaucomatous cupping, and retinal or choroidal detachment.

**Intraocular Pressure Evaluation**

The intraocular pressure should be evaluated in each case. In cases where non-contact tonometry gives an error, Mackay Marg, pneumotonometer, scleral tonometer, or Tono-Pen should be used. If these devices are not available, then digital tension should be assessed.

**Dry Eye Workup**

Dry eye evaluation must be performed by documenting the tear film break-up time, staining pattern, and height by noticing the meniscus at the lower lid and assessing the Schirmer's value.

**Refraction**

Objective and subjective refraction must be performed in each case.

**Gonioscopy**

In needed cases with PAS formation suspected of synechial angle closure.

**Keratometry**

In cases that undergo IOL implantation along with penetrating keratoplasty, it is essential to assess the keratometry to ascertain the IOL power. When keratometry cannot be calculated, the other eye IOL power is chosen, or normal standard keratometric values are taken for the calculation. Keratometric values also give an idea about irregular astigmatism.

**Pachymetry**

Pachymetry gives an idea of the corneal thickness needed for documentation.

**Anterior segment Optical Coherence Tomography (ASOCT)**

ASOCT gives an idea about the opacity depth, that is, whether it is anterior stromal, posterior stromal, or extending. ASOCT helps plan for either full thickness graft or a lamellar graft.

**Ultrasound biomicroscopy (UBM)**

In a few cases, ultrasound biomicroscopy may be required to look for the angle and ciliary body characteristics.

**Tissue Storage**

The death to enucleation time is 6 hours. The storage of corneal tissue is extremely important as the outcome of penetrating keratoplasty depends on the quality of corneal tissue and the endothelial cell count. For OPK, the tissue should be ideally used within 48 hours, and the endothelial cell count should be at least more than 2000 cells. The storage media available are a moist chamber for 48 hours, M-K media for up to four days, cornisol media for 7 to 10 days, organ culture for 35 days, and cryopreservation for up to one year.

**Preoperative Tissue Evaluation**

A preoperative tissue evaluation form is done before keratoplasty. The corneal tissue is assessed in the format of corneal epithelium, bowman, stroma, Descemet, and endothelium. The epithelium is assessed for defects, haze, slough, and exposure. The stroma is assessed for any opacity, arcus senilis, and compactness. The Descemet is assessed for any folds, edema, detachment, guttae, or defect. The endothelium should be assessed for clarity and compactness.

Finally, a specular count should be done, and tissue should be labeled whether fit for the research, wet lab, TPK, lamellar, or OPK.

The various contraindications for donor button selection are

- Death due to an unknown cause

- Rabies

- CNS pathologies like Creutzfeldt-Jacob disease, Subacute sclerosing panencephalitis (SSPE), and progressive leukoencephalopathy.

- AIDS

- Septicemia

- Systemic infections like syphilis, hepatitis B and C, CMV, EBV

- Intraocular tumors

- Leukemia and lymphoma

**Preoperative Preparation of the Eye**

If there is a presence of blepharitis or MGD, the adnexal infection should be treated first. If corneal neovascularization is present, it should be treated with preoperative topical steroids, electrocautery, adrenaline-soaked sponges, or argon laser photocoagulation. The ocular pressure should be controlled preoperatively by either intravenous mannitol or a Honan's balloon. It helps to decrease the vitreous pressure during the open sky procedure, which reduces the vitreous loss and risk of expulsive choroidal hemorrhage. Pilocarpine is injected in cases of phakic OPK, and tropicamide in patients with cataracts to dilate the pupil.