Being important as a cofactor and even a partial substrate in several stages of tyrosine catabolism, collagen renewal, and development, ascorbate (vitamin C) has historically been tried via megadosing but without much success or efficacy.[13]

Tyrosine and phenylalanine dietary restrictions have been successful for phenylketonuria treatment though it is particularly hard to accomplish, and efficacy is similar to vitamin C megadosing.

Nitisinone, approved as first-line treatment for the closely related disease, hereditary tyrosinemia, is the only intervention proven to modify disease progression. As such, it is the mainstay of treatment, although its use should be judicious and carefully watched.

In addition to corneal checks for iatrogenic dendritic keratopathy, the anterior chamber should be assessed for normal pressure and changing pigmentation that predisposes individuals to glaucoma.

Tracking liver function tests, along with serum tyrosine measurements, is advisable for serological workup.

Neuropsychiatric follow-up is recommended, as this was a significant sequela seen in hereditary tyrosinemia.

This substance blocks activity of hydroxyphenylpyruvate dioxygenase, the very enzyme required to form homogentisate from hydroxyphenylpyruvate, its precursor. Nitisinone has shown much promise in normalizing homogentisate serum levels.

Historically, acquired or iatrogenic ochronosis was notoriously difficult to treat aside from skin grafting, with chemical peeling via glycolic acid and derma-abrasion.

With exogenous ochronosis, treatment was primarily preventative, and stopping the use of offending agents should still be a first-line approach, along with dietary tyrosine/phenylalanine reduction, but recent advancements in photobiomodulation and photodynamic therapy are new therapies.