Three clinical strategies may be chosen to assist in ventilator management.

**Lung Protective Strategy**

This strategy should be used for any patient with the potential to develop acute lung injury (ALI) or whose disease state risks progression to acute respiratory distress syndrome (ARDS). This low tidal volume strategy was developed after the landmark ARDSnet trials, specifically, the ARMA study, which showed low tidal volume ventilation in patients with ARDS improved mortality.

Tidal volume should be initially set at 6 ml/kg based on ideal body weight.

Immediately after intubation, an attempt should be made to reduce the FI02 to 40% to avoid hyperoxemia.

**Table 1. ARDSnet PEEP/FIO2 Protocol**

Upon connecting a patient to mechanical ventilation, it is essential to frequently reassess its effects on the patient, especially the alveoli.

**Obstructive Strategy**

Generally, patients with obstructive lung disease (OLD), such as asthma and COPD, are often treated with non-invasive ventilation. However, they sometimes require intubation and placement on mechanical ventilation. Obstructive lung disease is characterized by narrowed airways and the collapse of the small airways on expiration.

The most important thing to accomplish when managing the ventilator for an obstructive patient is to increase the expiratory phase, allowing for more time to exhale, which will reduce auto-PEEP and dynamic hyperinflation.

The ventilator waveform requires careful assessment. If the waveform does not reach zero by the beginning of the new breath, then the RR must be decreased, or else hyperinflation and auto-PEEP will rise. If an obstructive patient suddenly desaturates or drops their blood pressure, they should be disconnected from the vent to allow for a full exhalation with a clinician pushing on their chest to facilitate exhalation. After this, a full workup specifically ruling out pneumothorax due to volume trauma should be undertaken.

**Intermediate Strategy**

The PReVENT trial showed no difference in an intermediate tidal volume strategy (10 ml/kg) versus a low tidal volume strategy (6 ml/kg) in patients without ARDS.