In pathological conditions like fibroid uterus, the course of uterine artery and its branches are distorted significantly. Uterine fibroids are most common uterine tumors in reproductive age of a female. The uterine artery supplies blood the growing fibroids, and this blood supply facilitates the growth of the fibroid. Most of the fibroids are benign and asymptomatic. Symptomatic fibroids may cause severe pelvic pain, dysmenorrhea, menorrhagia and iron deficiency anemia. Symptomatic fibroids are the most common indication of hysterectomy in the United States. Symptomatic fibroids are usually treated by surgery. After the reproductive age, uterine fibroids may be treated with gonadotropin-releasing hormone (GnRH) to shrink the fibroids. Uterine artery embolization blocks blood flow to fibroids, shrinking them in size; this radiological procedure may improve symptoms in many patients. It is not recommended during the reproductive period as it may cause atrophy of ovaries leading to menopausal symptoms.

During a hysterectomy, it is important to isolate the descending ureter from the uterine artery to avoid injury to the ureter. A surgical injury to the lower ureter happens during a difficult surgery, such as in cases of a tubo-ovarian abscess, pelvic mass or various malignant conditions of pelvic organs. Many times, injuries of the ureter are missed during surgery. Postoperative cystoscopy and visualization of the free flow of a dye from both ureters may assure intact ureters.

During a cesarean delivery, there may be excessive bleeding during the surgery. Suturing or compressing the uterus or medical management may not succeed. In this situation, bilateral uterine artery ligation may stop bleeding. Recanalization of uterine vessels automatically takes place after recovery.