Since bullying is a very complex problem there is no “quick fix” to prevent or intervene with this issue.  It is important to understand the issues that are unique to the individual and the context in order to develop and implement interventions. Here we describe important elements for intervention to address this issue.

**To stop bullying, remember prevention is the best intervention.**

- Assist child and family in providing a supportive and safe environment

- Provide assurance to the child that bullying is not his or her fault

- Work with school and other agencies as applicable to protect the victim

- Defuse or de-escalate an acute situation

**Addressing bullying is a multi-step process.**

- Teach children not to bully; discourage bullying

- Improve supervision in commonly under-supervised areas such as playground, cafeteria, hallway and bus

- Bullying prevention strategies should be clear and visible to other children

- Educate children about consequences of bullying and letting him/her know that bullying is wrong and a serious act.

- Apply consistent disciplinary consequences (e.g., removal of privileges, reparation).

- Enforce penalties such as requiring community service as “payback” for unacceptable behavior

Be aware that punishment based strategies (suspension and expulsion) should be reserved for severe disruptive and aggressive behavior. These may not be the most effective strategies.

**Engaging the Victim**

- Empathetic listening to the child; trying to understand child’s view

- Provide emotional support to child and family

- Obtain permission for a discussion with school officials

- Discuss when to contact parents; consider parents as partners

- Psycho-educational counseling

- Long-term support and intervention

**Engaging Bullies**

Explore the basis of bully’s behavior: it is also important not to label them as a bully.

- Listen to their perspective. Remain non-confrontational; share concern for the victim, ask for suggestions for improvement.

- Set the boundaries between acceptable and unacceptable behavior; communicate that this behavior is unacceptable

- Children may quit bullying when they become aware of the hurt they have caused and learn alternative ways of coping

Team approach: Many researchers believe that bullying is a group process and therefore interventions against bullying should be targeted at the peer-group level rather than at individual bullies and victims. Research has shown that the most successful programs are those that use multi-level interventions.

- Involve parents; determine the best time and most effective method of involving parents

- Family therapy is one effective method of reducing anger and improving interpersonal relationships

- Encourage schools to develop an anti-bullying policy that should be included in the student code of conduct

- Pediatricians should consider screening children for their potential involvement in bullying activities and encourage youth to prevent and intervene with bullying in safe ways (even as bystanders)

Bullying is a learned behavior that may be preventable. School-based interventions have shown a significant reduction in bullying by up to 20%.  These interventions included the following

- Changes in the school and classroom climate to increase awareness about bullying

- Increase teacher and parent involvement

- Improved supervision

- Setting clear rules against bullying

- Providing support and protection for bullied children********************