Treatment of alkaptonuria centers around reducing levels of HGA or BQA by targeting various steps in the tyrosine catabolism pathway. There is currently no standard treatment protocol, so a combination of management strategies is tailored to each individual patient to achieve the best possible outcomes.

Nitisinone, or NTBC (2-(2-nitro-4-trifluoromethylbenzoyl)-cyclohexane-1,3-dione), is an oral medication that inhibits the enzyme 4-hydroxyphenylpyruvatedioxygenase. This enzyme normally converts 4-hydroxyphenylpyruvic acid to HGA. Therefore, inhibition of the enzyme via nitisinone reduces the production of HGA, alleviating symptoms of alkaptonuria.

Dietary restriction of tyrosine and phenylalanine in protein has also been utilized to decrease the amount of starting precursors for the pathway. Protein restriction has been shown to significantly lower urinary excretion of HGA, with more prominent beneficial results in patients younger than 12 years of age.

Ascorbic acid, or vitamin C, has been found to act as an antioxidant that prevents HGA non-enzymatic conversion into BQA, reducing hyperpigmentation damage.

Gene or enzyme replacement therapy that directly replaces the missing HGD enzyme is being investigated as a potential cure for alkaptonuria. While ideal, in theory, studies focusing on this therapy have reported difficulties in its implementation. Enzyme replacement therapy requires precise tissue localization and can accumulate reactive, toxic intermediates of tyrosine metabolism in the blood and tissues.

In addition to treatment targeting biochemical pathways, supportive management that addresses the most noticeable and distressing symptoms should also be discussed. Physical and occupational therapy can help maintain muscle strength, flexibility, and range of motion, while anti-inflammatory analgesics can be used for arthralgias. In more advanced degenerative arthritis, joint arthroplasty may be indicated.

For glaucoma, a trial of standard medication therapy (e.g., timolol, carbonic anhydrase inhibitor, and latanoprost topical eye drops) can be utilized. Still, it may not prove effective due to the different pathogenesis of the complication.