The periodontium is responsible for supporting and maintaining healthy teeth. It is comprised of four components: the gingiva, periodontal ligament, alveolar bone, and cementum. The gingiva, also known as the gums, is a specialized epithelial tissue that surrounds the teeth via specialized cells known as junctional epithelial (JE) cells. This junctional epithelium is strategically located at the bottom of the gingival sulcus, where it acts as a barrier to both mechanical trauma and microbiological insult. In addition to its protective function, the oral gingiva is also responsible for sensation in the mouth and absorption of micronutrients. Lastly, the gingival epithelium plays a crucial role in the innate immune response to infectious inflammation in periodontal tissue. Thus, it is a key mediator in the initiation of periodontal disease.

The gingival connective tissue (also known as the lamina propria) is composed of collagen fibers, cells, and ground substance. Cells make up 5% of the gingival connective tissue, while collagen fibers and ground substance make up 60% and 35%, respectively. The different cell types present in gingival connective tissue include fibroblasts, mast cells, macrophages, and inflammatory cells. Fibroblasts are the predominant cell type and are responsible for the formation of the collagen fibers and ground substance found in connective tissue.

Collagen plays a significant role in the structural integrity of the gingival connective tissue. The basic unit of collagen is tropocollagen, a triple helix made up of 3 polypeptide chains. Collagen forms through a series of steps, which include translation, hydroxylation, glycosylation, and peptide cleavage. Once tropocollagen is formed, these molecules aggregate intro fibrils via crosslinks between each staggered tropocollagen molecule. Finally, fibrils coalesce into fibers, which gives collagen its tensile strength. In the gingiva, Type I collagen is the most prominent type, found in all layers of the gingival connective tissue. Type III collagen mainly underlies the gingival epithelium, and type IV collagen is associated with the gingival basement membranes and the blood vessels supplying the gingival mucosa.

The ground substance found in gingival connective tissue is composed of proteoglycans and glycoproteins. Proteoglycans are large molecules made up of polysaccharides covalently bonded to proteins, and they function to regulate fluid flow and diffusion through the tissue matrix. Glycoproteins play a crucial role in maintaining the structural integrity of connective tissue. The key glycoprotein in gingival connective tissue is fibronectin, which orients fibroblasts to collagen and provides adequate attachment points for cellular adhesion to the connective tissue matrix.