Volar splint: Apply splinting material to the volar (anterior) aspect of the forearm. The material should span from the 1 cm proximal to the transverse palmar crease to the proximal forearm.

Thumb spica: Place the forearm in a neutral position (no pronation/supination). Apply splinting material to the radial side of the forearm, wrapping around the thumb. The material should span from just past the thumb IP joint to the proximal forearm. Once applied, mold to the patient with the thumb in a functional position (“soda can” grasp), and the wrist extended 20 to 30 degrees. Apply the elastic wrap to keep the splint in place, ensuring not to stretch while applying. Check fingertip movement, capillary refill, and sensation after applying a splint to rule out a neurovascular compromise.

Sugar tong: Place forearm in neutral position (no pronation/supination). If utilizing an assistant, have the patient rest their elbow on a table with their forearm elevated; if sole provider, the patient may rest the ulnar aspect of their forearm on a table to assist with splint adherence. Apply splinting material from the proximal palmar crease, wrapping around the elbow, and extending to the dorsal metacarpal pharyngeal joint. Once applied, mold to the patient with the wrist slightly extended. Apply the elastic wrap to keep the splint in place, ensuring not to stretch while applying. Check fingertip movement, capillary refill, and sensation after applying a splint to rule out a neurovascular compromise.

For pre-fabricated splints, such as those for carpal tunnel or OA, simply apply the splint according to the instructions on the packaging. Ensure that the splint is secure but do not overtighten. Always check fingertip movement, capillary refill, and sensation after applying a splint to ensure there is no neurovascular compromise.