**Patient Rights in Modern Medicine**

The 1973 American Hospital Association patient bill of rights was the first bill of rights written specifically for patients. Patient bills of rights by non-legal entities are limited with respect to the enforceability of the number of people they protect.

Many North American laws do protect a variety of patient rights. In 1984, Canada passed the Canada Health Act. In 1986, the United States passed 42 Code of Federal Regulations § 482.13, which established a list of patient rights that hospitals must provide patients in order to be eligible for Medicare reimbursement. In 2005, Mexico passed Article 4 as part of its national Constitution. In 2010, the United States improved patient rights when passing the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act.

However, none of these countries has a specific law outlining a general patient bill of rights, in contrast to multiple European countries. The North American countries' "bills of rights" protecting human rights do not relate to healthcare per se. The closest that a North American government has come to pass an actual patient bill of rights was in 2001. That year saw the failed American Bipartisan Patient Protection Act, the failed Canadian Standing Senate Committee on Social Affairs, Science and Technology bill, and the failed Canadian C-261 bill. Many individual states and provinces have created their own specific patient rights policies. In the states that have no plans, the decision regarding whether or not to use such a system is up to the individual hospital. Thus, there continues to be considerable variation in standards from region to region and from hospital to hospital.

Examples of patient rights in common usage are listed below. Some rights are influenced by only one of the principles discussed above, some rights are affected by several principles, and others are influenced by other ethical principles altogether.

**Informed Consent**

The right to informed consent is composed of two parts: first, the right to be informed of potential harm to one’s property (one’s body) caused by a hired agent, and second, the right to autonomy. It was not until the 19th century that physicians began to advocate that a patient should be given an adequate amount of information to understand his or her state of health.

The roots of informed consent stem from the social contract theorists of the 1600s and 1700s mentioned previously. Under this social construct, patients own their bodies (their “property”). Medical therapies may have a genuine possibility of damaging that property. Thus, patients have the right to decide independently what risks and costs to incur regarding their bodies. The null assumption by physicians for most of the history of Western medicine has been that the patient is interested in whatever plan the medical professional thinks is best. In contrast, the null assumption under the moral philosophy of autonomy is that the physician has no way of knowing what patients want and must enable patients to decide for themselves whenever the patient has the mental capacity to do so. American courts have established that a risk of harm as low as 1% must be explained to the patient before submitting the patient to any therapy if that harm entails death or a life-altering complication, such as paralysis (Canterbury v. Spence).

In the United States, the right to informed consent is protected to some degree by legislation at both the state and federal levels. 42 CFR § 482.13 states that the "patient or his or her representative (as allowed under State law) has the right to make informed decisions regarding his or her care. The patient's rights include being informed of his or her health status, being involved in care planning and treatment..." Nearly all states have statutes that provide more detail than the US Congress with respect to the specifics of informed consent rights in their particular jurisdictions. Nevertheless, in large part, because of the vagueness of informed consent rights specified by executive branches of government, the judicial branch of government is usually the branch that enforces informed consent rights as part of tort claims brought by patients against healthcare providers.

The following are the required elements for documentation of the informed consent discussion: (1) the nature of the procedure, (2) the risks and benefits and the procedure, (3) reasonable alternatives, (4) risks and benefits of alternatives, and (5) assessment of the patient's understanding of elements 1 through 4.

**Refusal of Treatment (by both patient and physician)**

A patient may refuse treatment that the healthcare provider deems to be an act of beneficence out of the principle of autonomy. In the United States, the right to refuse treatment is protected by 42 CFR § 482.13. Conversely, a physician may refuse to offer a treatment out of nonmaleficence because the physician believes the treatment would cause greater harm than good. Physician refusal of treatment is a more complicated issue that depends on the situation. That is primarily addressed in the United States at the state level by statutes or judicial decisions. Either way, the medical professional must provide informed consent regarding the issue when it is possible to do so (i.e., in a non-emergent condition).

**Medical Treatment in an Emergency**

The right to medical care in an emergency is derived from the principles of beneficence and justice, and its concept dates to the Hippocratic Writings. Life-saving measures must be taken to the point of stabilization, regardless of the patient’s ability to pay for treatment. At present, medical institutions differ in their extension of this right. First, institutions differ regarding precisely what constitutes an emergency. Second, they differ in the determination of what point a patient is considered stable enough to discontinue treatment or to require some guarantee of future compensation before providing additional treatment. These differences mean that patient experiences can vary from institution to institution when receiving care in an emergency. In the United States, the right to obtain medical treatment in an emergency was established in 1986 by 42 U.S. Code § 1395dd, better known as the Emergency Medical Treatment and Active Labor Act (EMTALA) as part of the Consolidated Omnibus Budget Reconciliation Act (COBRA).

**Confidentiality**

Confidentiality stems both from the physician-patient fiduciary relationship and from autonomy. The patient trusts that the physician will not allow others to know particulars of the patient’s illness or situation, information that could be used by others to take advantage of or otherwise harm the patient. By preservation of confidentiality, patients are granted autonomy in that they retain control over who has access to know the status of their health. In the United States, the right to confidentiality is protected by 42 CFR § 482.13.

Exceptions to confidentiality include imminent danger to the patient or others and certain infectious diseases. Reportable sexually transmitted infections (STIs) include Human papillomavirus, genital herpes, Chlamydia, gonorrhea, HIV/AIDS, and syphilis. Parental consent is needed in most situations but this excludes contraception, STI treatment, and mental health care.

**Continuity of Care**

Continuity of care refers to a patient’s ability to choose future relationships with healthcare providers. A patient has the right to have a role in accepting or refusing referrals to certain specialists and home treatment plans. This is in the patient's best interest (beneficence) because it empowers the patient to make decisions over his or her own treatment (autonomy). Additionally, continuity of care helps preserve a patient-physician fiduciary relationship. Joint physician-patient decision-making is enhanced when care is continued beyond the initial encounter. Continuity of care also necessitates that a patient receives an explanation of how to maintain health beyond the hospital or clinical setting. If transfer to another facility or provider is required, then the patient is entitled to an explanation of why this is necessary. In the United States, continuity of care is not currently a legal right, but the Affordable Care Act did create payment incentives for organizations in order to promote continuity of care.

**Ability to Speak Against Unfair Treatment**

The ability for a patient or patient representative to elevate a concern to a higher level when it is not being addressed by healthcare providers in the immediate care setting helps protect a patient from persons who have been subjected to treatment that places provider desires above patient well-being. This right is protected in the United States by 42 CFR § 482.13.

**Other Patient Rights in the United States at the Federal Level**

In 1986, 42 CFR § 482.13 established patient rights

- limiting physical restraint or seclusion and

- enabling visitation.

In 2010, the US Congress passed the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act (ACA), although many of its rules did not go into effect until years later. Patient rights established by the ACA are distributed across 45 CFR § 146, 147, 148, 153, 155, 156, and 158.

The ACA established the following patient rights:

- Right to insurance despite having a preexisting health condition, in many circumstances (e.g., for children) without facing additional charges

- Right to many types of preventive care for free

- Right to essential health benefits without lifetime and yearly dollar limits on coverage

- Right to maintain health insurance despite becoming sick

- Right to have some choice of healthcare provider

- Right to some protections against employer retaliation

- Right to some previously non-insured health benefits, such as benefits for mental conditions

**Patient Rights in Other First World Countries**

Patients in many other first world countries have rights beyond those established by the American laws cited above. In contrast to many other first world countries, in the United States, a citizen’s ability to obtain treatment for a common non-life-threatening condition at a heavily subsidized cost is not a right. Some countries protect a patient’s finances from seizure by the patient's healthcare provider and healthcare insurer.

**Patient Declaration or Bill of Rights at Private Institutions**

Some organizations, as a way of educating patients about their rights and/or as a way of adding rights not stipulated by law, use their own declarations of patient rights. The term "bill," when used formally, refers to a document that contains language that legislators evaluate for merit in becoming a law. However, when used informally, the expression "bill of rights" can refer to any declaration of rights (usually published in the form of a list). As an example of a current patient bill of rights, Indiana University Health's patient bill of rights includes the following patient rights:

- To be treated justly.

- To receive information about care.

- To refuse treatment

- To have confidential medical care.

- To have continuity of care.

- To have pain treated to a level of toleration.

- To be free from physical restraints (unless the patient is thought to be likely to hurt himself or others)

- To view medical records.

- To have explanations about bills.

- To provide advanced directives.

Patient rights are a subset of human rights applied in the specific context of medical treatment. The establishment of patient rights standardizes the application of ethical principles to particular medical situations. Such documents provide the framework by which a patient can expect to receive care and by which members of a healthcare team can best promote the rights for each patient. Knowledge of certain ethical principles is necessary for understanding the context by which patient rights are created. Patient rights extend to the whole person. They preserve aspects of the patient’s relationship with their health care provider, even extending to third parties such as a health care insurer in some cases. Although patient rights can be traced to ancient cultures, the idea of a formal patient bill of rights is a relatively recent development, with the first such composition occurring in 1973. Though American federal laws enforce some patient rights nationally, many issues pertaining to patient rights vary by the healthcare institution.