HTLV Vaccination: Currently, no vaccine is available; however, it has been hypothesized that various features of HTLV-1 render it amenable to vaccine development. These features include low antigenic variability of the virus and the observation that natural immunity does develop in humans. Some animal studies, including envelope antigens, have shown encouraging results.

Treatment for ATLL: Various combination chemotherapy regimens have been compared with highly active antiretroviral therapy (HAART) protocols in an effort to improve the morbidity and mortality of ATL patients. There is limited evidence that HAART (zidovudine-interferon alpha) may be beneficial in lymphomatous ATLL, whereas multi-agent chemotherapy is more beneficial in acute aggressive leukemic ATL. These strategies should be switched in non-responders.

Intensive chemotherapy followed by allogenic hematopoietic stem-cell transplantation has shown promise in younger patients with aggressive disease; however, clinicians have expressed concerns that many patients are too old to receive this treatment as the median age at diagnosis is 68.

Treatment for HAM/TSP: There are limited, robust treatment options for HAM/TSP though many have been trialed; the mainstay of management remains symptomatic. Corticosteroids have been widely used, and limited evidence suggests a moderate benefit in the rate of disease progression. Japanese centers have used mogamulizumab (a monoclonal antibody against CCR4) and reported decreased spasticity and improved motor function.