One of the most significant burdens of modern medicine is atherosclerotic and cardiovascular disease, besides various cancers. There have been numerous advances in the comprehension of these diseases, and ROS have been directly implicated. The presence of these molecules in higher than normal concentrations drives towards the formation of the atherosclerotic plaques and to defects in the endothelial relaxation, thus promoting the progress from asymptomatic disease to a broad clinical picture.

Mutations of SOD1 resulting in a decrease of 50 to 80% of function have correlated with the development of amyotrophic lateral sclerosis, a neural disorder that causes motor neuron death in the spinal cord and brain, that results in mixed upper and lower motor neuron symptoms and gradually leads to paralysis of the entire body.

As previously mentioned, NADPH oxidase is crucial in the endogenous production of superoxide and other oxidative species. Mutations that affect the function of this enzyme have been shown to cause chronic granulomatous disease (CGD), a rare disease (1 in 200,000 live births) that presents with multiple bacterial and fungal infections starting in infancy or early childhood.Staphyloccocus aureus, Burkholderia cepacia, Nocardia, Serratia marcescens, and Salmonella, all of which are catalase-positive organisms. These patients can also develop local or systemic disease after the application of the BCG vaccine.

Finally, reactive oxygen species also carry implications in developing neurodegenerative diseases, such as Huntington disease, Alzheimer disease, vascular dementia, frontotemporal dementia, and Parkinson disease.