The goal of rehabilitation, especially occupational therapy, is to help those return to their activities that they need and want to do. To achieve this, it is important to apply the current research, evidence, and critical reasoning to better achieve certain outcomes. Formalized assessments are important because they reduce biases, which is very important to classify specific categories being assessed. These specific assessments listed above are important because they serve as a way to identify any deviations from 'normal.' These deviations can then be analyzed, and there can be specific therapies that can be used to help address the needs of the patient/client. Finally, the assessments also provide a way to measure the change over time and are a way to track the progress the patient/client has made.

Occupational therapists work with many people, from children to the elderly. The first appointment with an occupational therapist typically involves an assessment of the situation. This includes the history of any condition that the patient had and, in particular, the evaluation of the difference between what could be done in the past and what can be done now. Goal setting is an important part of occupational therapy. The occupational therapist will work with the patient to determine which activities are most important to him and establish clear goals that will improve his ability to perform them. What often distinguishes occupational therapy from physiotherapy is that while a physical therapist focuses on improving physical function and movement, an occupational therapist tries to figure out if there is an alternative way to perform a certain activity. Occupational therapy is, therefore, much more oriented towards adaptation.

Another important distinction with the physiotherapist is that the latter works with patients in acute and chronic phases, while the occupational therapist works with chronic or resolving diseases.