Patients with V. vulnificus infection may present with one of three distinct symptomatologies; 1) primary septicemia, 2) wound infection, or 3) gastroenteritis

In primary sepsis, the patient appears very ill and may even be in shock on hospital arrival. At this point, there may be no history of gastroenteritis or skin problems, though the classic skin and soft tissue findings (v.i.)  may abruptly appear.

Any infected wound sustained in seawater or brackish water raises the possibility of V. vulnificus infection. Swimmers, fishers, scuba divers, snorkelers, beach walkers, coral collectors, surfers with wounds or skin disease must be considered to have V. vulnificus amongst other likely etiologies. Even contaminated seafood contacting skin can be causative.

The patient with V. vulnificus gastroenteritis would commonly have a sudden onset of vomiting, diarrhea, fever, and abdominal pain. This is usually within 24 hours of suspect seafood ingestion. In the limited gastroenteritis presentation of V. vulnificus infection, there would be no sequelae after routine treatment. However, similar GI symptoms may precede the primary septicemic form, so caution is advised.

History of recent shellfish ingestion, especially raw oysters, or exposure to marine water with trauma should elevate suspicion of V. vulnificus infection. Questions about recent dining experiences or seafood purchases, or of recent travel to coastal areas, as well as swimming, diving, snorkeling, should be pursued.

Since chronic underlying disease raises the morbidity and mortality of V. vulnificus infection, a very detailed past medical history must be obtained. History of cirrhosis, hepatitis, hemochromatosis, sickle cell anemia, diabetes, cancers, or HIV or immunocompromise of any type is significant.

Deteriorated mental function is seen in approximately a third to one-half of septic patients on initial hospital evaluation. This may make history taking difficult.

Initial physical findings are related to the manner of presentation.

Septic patients presenting for care will generally, but not always, appear very ill. Vital signs must be determined promptly, and include blood pressure, pulse rate, respiratory rate, pulse-oximetry, core temperature, and pain level. Patients with temperatures exceeding 38 C or below 36 C should immediately initiate screening for sepsis. Similarly, patients with any marked elevation of their heart rate (greater than 90 bpm) or respiratory rate (greater than 20/min) should heighten suspicion of sepsis. Blood pressure should be measured lying, seated, and standing (unless dizziness is induced). Parameters for septic shock in adults are a systolic BP less than 90 mmHg, OR a mean arterial pressure (MAP) less than 60, or a 40 mmHg drop in systolic pressure from the patient’s known prior ‘normal’ systolic pressure. Sepsis is seen on arrival in over 50% of patients presenting with V. vulnificus.

Determination of qSOFA, SIRS, or REMS scores should be part of the initial examination. If scoring is indicative, sepsis protocols must be initiated.

Acute skin findings following V. vulnificus ingestion usually appear within 24 hours of the onset of sepsis. These are usually on the lower extremities, frequently bilateral, and manifest as severe cellulitis with fluid-filled bullae, which then may become hemorrhagic. These may progress rapidly to necrotic ulceration, gangrene, and then to underlying necrotizing fasciitis with myonecrosis.

Patients with primary wound infections present with severe cellulitis, swelling, blister formation, ulceration, hemorrhagic bullae, and abscesses of a wounded area. They may rapidly go on to develop necrotizing fasciitis and myonecrosis. However, these manifestations are localized to the area of initial wounding and therefore are to be differentiated from the bilateral lower extremity pattern of skin findings in the primary septicemic presentation. Additionally, these primary wound patients are at high risk for developing bacteremia, sepsis, and limb loss.

In the limited primary gastroenteritis presentation, focal or diffuse abdominal tenderness without peritoneal signs is common. Bowel sounds may be normal or increased. Hepatosplenomegaly is negative unless related to an underlying preexisting disease. Core temperature may be normal or slightly elevated. A rectal exam should be done, stool heme-tested, and appropriate fecal samples sent.