**Genetic Factors**

A large number of recent studies have indicated that PDS has genetic characteristics, and the majority of cases are inherited in which sporadic cases predominate. Various genetic loci play an essential role in the inheritance of PDS, such as 7q35-q366 and 18q11-q21.5,6,93. A single gene does not cause PDS. Instead, it results from a combination of genetic mutations. Tandon et al. in their analysis, reported that most PDS cases are sporadic, and only 10.1% of the first-degree relatives developed PDS.

Another proposed theory is that congenital mesodermal abnormalities and degenerative iris changes are related to PDS, accounting for the higher incidence of lattice degeneration and breaks in myopic patients with PDS.

**Mechanical Factors**

Pigment dispersion from the iris and ciliary body occurs due to mechanical contact of lens or IOL with the iris, rubbing of iris against zonules, reverse pupillary block, hypoplastic iris, and hypoperfusion. The pigment release has been linked to idiopathic atrophy of the iris pigment epithelium. The other mechanical factors related to PDS are mechanical movement and bowing of the iris posteriorly, deep anterior chamber, and myopia. Karickhoff hypothesized that a higher aqueous pressure causes backward push to the iris and collapse of the posterior chamber.

**Physiological Factors**

Lid movement, accommodation, movements of eyes, and exercise are linked with reverse pupillary block. In PDS, there is more iris and lens contact, resulting in elevated aqueous humor pressure. The rise in pressure results in pigment dispersion syndrome. Iris shape and change in axial length are responsible for the resolution of PG.