The pathophysiology of acute and chronic pain is complex and not completely understood. Research is ongoing. In general, the following provides an overview of the current understanding of pain pathophysiology.

**Acute Pain**

Acute pain is caused by the activation of peripheral pain receptors and specific A-delta and C-sensory nerve fibers (nociceptors). It is commonly a response to tissue injury. It may be classified based on time (typically pain that lasts a duration of 3 months or less).

**Chronic Pain**

Chronic pain may be classified by duration, typically pain that lasts beyond a period of 3 months.not occurred, and the pain is still classified as "chronic" (for example, pain associated with inflammatory disease or metastatic carcinoma). In fact, chronic pain may be caused by persistent activation of pain fibers secondary to ongoing tissue injury. Chronic pain may also develop from ongoing damage to or dysfunction of the peripheral or central nervous system (i.e., in the case of neuropathic pain).

**Nociceptive Pain**

Nociceptive pain receptors may be somatic or visceral.

Somatic pain receptors are located in the subcutaneous tissues, fascia, connective tissues, endosteum, periosteum, joint capsules, and skin—stimulation results in pain that is typically well localized.

Visceral pain receptors are located in the viscera and connective tissue. Visceral pain may be due to infection, stretch, distension (i.e., fluid or gas), or compression (i.e., tumors) of hollow organs. This pain is deep, cramping, poorly localized, and may be referred to a remote site. Visceral pain from injury of connective tissue or organ capsules may be more localized and sharp.

**Neuropathic pain**

Neuropathic pain typically occurs when there is metabolic, traumatic, infectious, ischemic, toxic, and/or immune-mediated damage to structures of the peripheral and/or central nervous system. Some common examples include diabetic neuropathy, postherpetic neuralgia, or lumbar radiculopathy (i.e., sciatica). This pain is typically described as numbness, tingling, shooting, and/or burning in nature.

**Psychologic Factors**

Psychologic factors in the modulation of pain intensity are highly variable. Culture, emotions, and thoughts affect an individual's perception of pain. Patients who suffer from chronic pain may also have psychological stress. Chronic pain patients often have comorbid mental health disorders and have a higher incidence of anxiety and depression in particular than the general population.

**Multifactorial Pain Syndromes**

Many pain syndromes are multifactorial; for example, cancer and chronic low back pain syndromes have a nociceptive component and may also involve neuropathic pain due to nerve damage.

**Pain Modulation and Transmission**

Pain fibers enter the spinal cord at the dorsal root ganglia and synapse in the dorsal horn. Fibers then cross to the contralateral side and travel up the lateral columns reaching the thalamus and, finally, the cerebral cortex. Repetitive stimulation from prolonged pain can sensitize neurons in the posterior horn of the spinal cord so that a minimal peripheral stimulus results in pain.

Peripheral and nerves at other levels of the central nervous system are sensitized, resulting in long-term synaptic changes in cortical receptive fields that can result in exaggerated pain perception. This process of chronic afferent input causes increased sensitivity and lower pain thresholds, with the remodeling of the central nociceptive pathways and receptors termed central sensitization.****The consequence may be:

- Allodynia (nonpainful stimulus perceived as painful)

- Hyperalgesia (excessive pain response to a normally painful stimulus)

**Substances Released When Tissue is Injured**

The inflammatory cascade can sensitize peripheral nociceptors. Substances released include vasoactive peptides such as calcitonin, gene-related protein, neurokinin A, substance P, and mediators such as bradykinin and epinephrine, prostaglandin E2, and serotonin. The pain signal is modulated in both segmental and descending pathways by neurochemical mediators such as endorphins (enkephalin) and monoamines (norepinephrine, serotonin). These mediators are thought to increase, reduce, shorten, and/or sustain the perception and response to pain. They also mediate the benefits of CNS-active drugs such as antidepressants, antiseizure drugs, membrane stabilizers, and opioids interacting with neurochemicals and specific receptors that treat chronic pain.

Psychologic factors are important pain modulators. They affect how patients describe and react to pain. Overt pain behaviors may include complaining, being irritable, grimacing, or being stoic. These responses to pain may also generate neural output that modulates neurotransmission along pain pathways. The psychologic reaction to protracted pain interacts with central nervous system factors that may induce long-term changes in pain perception.

**Gate Control Theory**

In 1965, Patrick David Wall and Ronald Melzack announced the first theory that viewed pain through a mind-body perspective. This theory became known as the gate control theory.

The sensation of pain that an individual feels results from the complex interaction among these three components of the spinal cord. Simply stated, when the “gate” closes, the brain does not receive the information that is coming from the periphery to the spinal cord. However, when the signal traveling to the spinal cord reaches a certain intensity level, the “gate” opens. Once the gate is open, the signal can travel to the brain, where it is processed, and the individual proceeds to feel pain. The information mentioned above accounts for the physical component of pain. Still, as stated earlier, the Gate Control Theory was one of the first to acknowledge that psychological factors contributed to pain as well. In their original study, Melzack and Wall suggested that in addition to the control provided by the substantia gelatinosa, there was an additional control mechanism located in cortical regions of the brain.

In more recent times, researchers have postulated that these cortical control centers are responsible for the effects of cognitive and emotional factors on the pain experienced. Current research has also suggested that a negative state of mind amplifies the intensity of the signals sent to the brain.

The gate control theory has proven to be one of the most significant contributions to the study of pain throughout history. The concepts that Melzack and Wall introduced to the study of pain are still utilized by researchers today. Even though this theory initiated the idea that pain wasn’t solely a result of physical injury but rather a complex experience influenced by cognitive and emotional factors, additional research was necessary to comprehend the mechanisms and etiology of pain completely. This need precipitated the introduction of the following two philosophies regarding pain.

**Neuromatrix Model**

Almost thirty years after introducing the gate control theory of pain, Ronald Melzack introduced another model that contributed to the explanation of how and why people feel pain. Until the mid-1900s, most pain theories implied that this experience was exclusively due to an injury that had occurred somewhere in the body. The thinking was that if an individual suffered an injury, whether it be through trauma, infection, or disease, a signal would transmit to the brain, which would, in turn, result in the sensation of pain. Although Melzack had contributed to these previous theories, his exposure to amputees experiencing phantom limb pain in well-healed areas prompted his inquiry into this more accurate philosophy of pain. The theory he proposed is known as the neuromatrix model of pain. This philosophy suggests that the central nervous system is responsible for eliciting painful sensations rather than the periphery.

According to Melzack, the neuromatrix consists of multiple areas within the central nervous system that contribute to pain signals, which allows for the feeling of pain. The signal that these areas of the central nervous system work together to create is responsible for allowing an individual to feel pain, which he referred to as the “neurosignature.” Furthermore, this theory states that input coming in from the periphery can initiate or influence the neurosignature, but these peripheral signals cannot create a neurosignature of their own.

This idea that peripheral signals can alter the neurosignature is an important concept when considering the effect of nonphysical factors on an individual’s experience with pain. Melzack’s theory claimed that not only are there specific neurosignatures that elicit certain sensations, but when there is an alteration in a certain signal, this allows for memory formation of these particular experiences. If the same circumstances occur again in the future, this memory allows for the same sensation to be felt. In addition, the neuromatrix model continued to elaborate on the idea that was initially brought forward in the gate control theory, that pain can be affected not only by physical factors but by cognitive and emotional factors. Melzack suggested that hyperactivity of the stress response would lead to an individual experiencing a higher pain level.

**Biopsychosocial Model**

The biopsychosocial model provides the most comprehensive explanation behind the etiology of pain. This specific theory of pain hypothesizes that pain results from complex interactions between biological, psychological, and sociological factors.

This methodology takes into account that the human body cannot be divided into separate categories when considering treatment options. Instead, it is beneficial to acknowledge that illness and disease result from complex interactions between biological, psychological, and sociological factors, and they all affect an individual’s physical and mental well-being.

**Mechanism of Action of Opioids**

Any compound that binds to an opioid receptor is considered an opioid. There are endogenous opioids (i.e., endorphins, enkephalins, dynorphins) released in response to noxious stimuli, and there are prescription and illicit opioids, all of which bind opioid receptors. Opioid analgesics act on the 3 major opioid receptors: mu, delta, and/or kappa, as well as several minor classes of opioid receptors (i.e., nociceptin and zeta) at both pre and post-synaptic terminals. Most commonly, opioid analgesics are potent mu receptor agonists.

Simplifying significantly, the mu receptors are thought to provide analgesia, respiratory suppression, bradycardia, physical dependence, gastrointestinal dysmotility, and euphoria. Kappa agonism can yield hallucinations, miosis, and dysphoria. The delta receptor likely has pain control and mood modulation effects, but some have suggested that mu agonism is necessary for the delta receptor to function strongly for analgesia.



**Mu Receptor**

**Kappa Receptor**

**Delta Receptor**

Main location

Brainstem, medial thalamus

Diencephalic systems (limbic system), brain stem, spinal cord

Brain

Subtypes

Mu1, Mu2, Mu3

Kappa1, Kappa2, Kappa3

Delta1, Delta2

Functions

Supraspinal analgesia (mu1), euphoria (mu1), respiratory suppression (mu2), pruritis (mu2), physical dependence (mu2), sedation (mu2), vomiting (mu2), bradycardia, reduced gastrointestinal motility

Spinal analgesia, sedation, dysphoria, respiratory depression, hallucinations, miosis, dependence

Weak analgesia, antidepressants, physical dependence, and constipation may modulate mu receptor-mediated respiratory depression.

Endogenous opioid ligand

Endorphins (precursor: pro-opiomelanocortin); Dynorphins (precursor: pro-dynorphins)



Enkephalins (precursor: pre-enkephalin)

Note that there is also the opioid-receptor-like (ORL-1) receptor, at which the endogenous ligand nociceptin (precursor: prepronociceptin) binds. Unlike the aforementioned endogenous opioids, nociceptin acts as a hyperalgesic agent; additionally, it may play a role in anxiety and depression.

All opioid receptors are G-protein coupled receptors (GRCRs) that send signals via a second messenger (cAMP) to activate protein kinases. When activated, cAMP kinase may increase excitability, catecholamine synthesis, and alter gene transcription proteins and gene expression. Opioid receptors are distributed widely in the brain, spinal cord, peripheral neurons, and digestive tract. When opioids bind to their receptors located on presynaptic terminals of pain fibers (C-fibers and A-delta fibers), voltage-gated calcium channels are inhibited, thereby decreasing calcium ion entry into the cell, and cAMP levels are reduced. As a result, there is a reduction of nociceptive fibers' presynaptic release of pro-nociceptive neurotransmitters like glutamate, calcitonin gene-related peptide (CGRP), and substance P, resulting in diminished nociception.

Opioids decrease the release of GABA, resulting in an increase in the firing of dopaminergic neurons. An increase in dopamine levels in the nucleus accumbens plays a role in pleasure, reward, addiction, and analgesia.

Opioids may be pure mu receptor agonists (like morphine, fentanyl, oxycodone, etc.), agonists/antagonists (aka mixed agonists/antagonists), or partial agonists.

- **Opioid agonists/antagonists**have variable activity on each opioid receptor. Nalbuphine, pentazocine, and butorphanol have a high affinity and limited efficacy at the mu receptor, functioning as mu antagonists, and they are partial kappa agonists

- **Opioid partial agonists**have a strong affinity for the mu receptor, resulting in some efficacy (less than a full agonist would offer). Buprenorphine is a partial agonist that may be used as an analgesic, a medication-assisted treatment for addiction, and/or may be formulated with naloxone to deter intravenous abuse. Tramadol is a synthetic 4-phenyl-piperidine codeine analog that acts as a partial mu agonist with activity at the GABA, catecholamine, and serotonin receptors.

- **Opioid antagonists**are competitive mu, kappa, and delta receptor, antagonists. They****have a strong affinity for mu-opioid receptors but produce no or very low receptor activation, thereby reversing the effects of opioids. Naloxone acts centrally and peripherally to effectively and quickly reverse opioid overdose, given its rapid onset, but it also has a rapid offset. As such, when used to treat opioid overdose, naloxone will likely require re-dosing or an infusion as the duration of action of the opioid will be longer than the duration of action of this antidote. Naltrexone also acts centrally and peripherally; it has a long half-life and is typically used to deter abuse (but only should be used following opioid detoxification).

Pure mu agonists offer dose-dependent analgesia and side effects, whereas agonist/antagonists and partial agonists have a "ceiling effect," resulting in a plateau in analgesia and side effects after surpassing a given dose. As a result, these medications offer a safer profile regarding respiratory depression. It is important to note that in patients using pure opioid agonists, initiating treatment with an agonist/antagonist or a partial agonist may result in withdrawal as these medications have a higher affinity for the mu-opioid receptor but with less activation of the receptor than a pure agonist.

There are 4 chemical classes of opioids:

- **Alkaloids extracted from poppy seeds/****Pheneathrene****opioid agonists**:
- Morphine, codeine
- Semisynthetic derivatives: oxycodone, oxymorphone, hydromorphone, hydrocodone

- **Synthetic phenylpiperidines**: Meperidine, fentanyl, sufentanil, alfentanil, remifentanil

- **Diphenylheptanes**: Methadone, propoxyphene

- **Benzomorphans**: Pentazocine

**Metabolism of Opioids**

Opioids are mainly metabolized by glucuronidation or by the CYP450 enzymes (most commonly CYP3A4 or 2D6) of the liver and then excreted by the kidney. The CYP3A4 enzyme is responsible for the metabolism of more than 50% of all pharmaceuticals, so there is a high risk of drug-drug interactions when using opioids metabolized by the CYP3A4 system. Conversely, the CYP2D6 system metabolizes fewer medications, so opioids metabolized by this system have a moderate risk of drug-drug interactions. Opioids metabolized by glucuronidation (morphine, hydromorphone, oxymorphone) have little risk of drug-drug interactions.

The opioids metabolized by the CYP3A4 system include fentanyl (to inactive metabolites), oxycodone (and a small amount metabolized by CYP2D6 to oxymorphone [active] and noroxycodone [inactive]), tramadol (CYP3A4 and CYP2D6* to active metabolite O-desmethyltramadol [M1] excreted by kidneys), and methadone (complex metabolism including up to 6 different CYP450 enzyme systems; no active metabolites, no extensive renal elimination).

The opioids metabolized by the CYP2D6 system include hydrocodone (metabolized to active metabolite hydromorphone), codeine (to active metabolite morphine), and dihydrocodeine (to active metabolite dihydromorphine), as well as (partially) tramadol*. There is wide genetic variability in the CYP2D6 gene, which is highly polymorphic, resulting in a wide range of phenotypes ranging from poor metabolizers to ultrarapid metabolizers.

The opioids metabolized by phase 2 glucuronidation include morphine, oxymorphone, and hydromorphone. Oxymorphone produces very little (<1%) active metabolite (6-hydroxy-oxymorphone). Morphine is metabolized into two main metabolites; M3G predominantly, which lacks opioid activity and is neuroexcitatory and may cause seizures, and M6G, which offers some analgesia and may contribute to respiratory depression. Hydromorphone is mainly metabolized to hydromorphone-3-glucuronide (H3G), which is neuroexcitatory (similar to M3G). These metabolites are really excreted, so caution is advised when using morphine or hydromorphone in elderly patients and/or patients with renal failure or dehydration.

**Opioid Conversions and Morphine Milligram Equivalents (MME)**

Potency is the dose required to offer the desired outcome (in this case, pain control). The equianalgesic dose is the dose at which one opioid at steady-state provides an equal amount of pain relief as another opioid at steady-state.

There is a large variability in suggested conversion ratios (both for route and conversion from one opioid to another).**Prescribers must use their best clinical judgment when converting between routes of administration or medication and not rely solely on recommended conversion tables.**

When converting any given opioid from one route to another (for example, from oral administration to IV administration or vice versa), this rough guidance is generally followed:

Intrathecal

Epidural

Intravenous

Oral

1

10

100

300

When converting from one opioid to another, all potencies are discussed compared to morphine (in other words, all opioid potencies are discussed in terms of their MME). Relative opioid potencies are represented by equianalgesic dose tables; several such tables exist (a few online examples include the GlobalRPh online calculator and the Agency Medical Directors' Group opioid dose calculator). There is some variability between these different tables' equipotent dose recommendations.

One consideration to take into account when rotating from one opioid to another is the concept of incomplete cross-tolerance. Cross-tolerance occurs when there is a reduced effect from a substance after being exposed to a different but pharmacologically similar substance (especially if these two substances have action on the same receptor site). With opioids, there is incomplete cross-tolerance.

If the half-lives of the 2 medications in question are not similar, that should be accounted for when calculating the conversion. As mentioned above, other considerations must include concurrent medications and the patient's overall clinical picture. It is generally better to start a hypoalgesic dose and titrate up to effect than to overshoot and suffer potentially fatal consequences of respiratory depression.

It is worth mentioning that while other opioids are typically converted based on a static MME conversion factor at any given dose, methadone's conversion ratio is dose-dependent; its MME conversion ratio increases as the methadone dose increases.