Migraines are due to local cranial vasodilatation and the release of neuropeptides (calcitonin gene-related peptide, vasoactive intestinal peptide (VIP), and substance P) in the trigeminal system. Zolmitriptan is a selective 5-hydroxytryptamine 1B/1D receptor agonist with a weak affinity for the 5-HT 1A receptor subtypes.

**Pharmacokinetics**

**Absorption:**Zolmitriptan is rapidly absorbed after oral administration for zolmitriptan tablets and orally disintegrating tablets. Zolmitriptan exhibits linear kinetics over the dose range of 2.5 to 50 mg. Food has no substantial effect on the bioavailability of zolmitriptan. Zolmitriptan has a quick onset of action and is detected in the brain within 5 minutes of intranasal administration.

**Distribution:**The mean apparent volume of distribution is 7 L/kg. Plasma protein binding of zolmitriptan is 25%.

**Metabolism:**Zolmitriptan is metabolized into three major metabolites by the human hepatic cytochrome P450 enzymes—primarily CYP1A2. Two-thirds of the parent compound breaks down into the active metabolite N-desmethyl-zolmitriptan (183C91). At the same time, the remaining one-third separates into the other two inactive metabolites: zolmitriptan N-oxide and an indole acetic acid derivative. Because the metabolite's 5HT1B/1D potency is 2 to 6 times that of the zolmitriptan, the metabolite ( N-desmethyl-zolmitriptan) contributes significantly to the overall effect after zolmitriptan administration. The pharmacokinetics of the N-desmethyl metabolite is similar to that of zolmitriptan for all nasal spray doses. The N-desmethyl metabolite is detected in plasma within 15 minutes, and peak plasma concentration is generally achieved by 3 hours after administration. A recent study revealed that CYP2D6 is the primary enzyme responsible for the metabolic activation of zolmitriptan. Zolmitriptan can be metabolized to anα,β-unsaturated imine intermediate by CYP2D6.

**Excretion:**Zolmitriptan has an elimination half-life of about three hours; it is primarily excreted by renal elimination; its clearance is greater than the glomerular filtration rate, indicating some renal tubular secretion of the drug.