The diagnosis of PPCM requires a high index of suspicion based on the three clinical criteria because symptoms are similar to those related to physiopathologic changes secondary to pregnancy. PPCM is a diagnosis of exclusion, and detailed investigation is required to rule out other more common causes of cardiomyopathy.

- Initial evaluation consists of routine blood work to evaluate for other causes of those symptoms such as anemia, electrolyte abnormalities, endocrine conditions as thyroid dysfunction, and renal or liver dysfunction. Elevation of brain natriuretic peptide (BNP) is commonly found elevated in patients with heart failure and patients with PPCM.

- Radiography of the chest can be part of the initial evaluation, showing cardiomegaly and/or pulmonary edema. These findings are nonspecific for PPCM but suggestive of heart failure.

- Cardiovascular studies such as an electrocardiogram and echocardiogram are part of the initial evaluation.

- Electrocardiographic findings can be nonspecific. The common findings are sinus tachycardia, supraventricular tachycardia (including atrial fibrillation or flutter), and occasionally ventricular tachycardia. ST segment and T wave abnormalities have been reported but are nonspecific. Dilation of chambers by electrocardiogram can be present too. Despite this nonspecific findings, QRS prolongation of greater than 120 milliseconds is related to increased mortality in patients with PPCM. Echocardiography is the main study to evaluate the anatomy and functionality of the heart in patients with suspected PPCM. Evaluation of the left ventricular ejection fraction (LVEF) is key to rule out PPCM, as part of the criteria requires an LVEF less than 45%. Echocardiography also evaluates for other causes of heart failure such valvular diseases or any other structural abnormalities. Dilation of the ventricles and atriums can be present, and LV thrombus or atrial thrombosis can be found.

Further cardiovascular testing can be done with cardiac MRI; this modality can help to diagnose other causes of heart failure not related with PPCM and can determine the volume of the chambers and ventricular function in a more precise fashion than echocardiography. A further role of cardiac MRI in PPCM is to be determined.

Cardiac catheterization is only for selected patients. Left heart catheterization is indicated in patients with suspicion of ischemic cardiomyopathy. Right heart catheterization is less frequently used for the evaluation of PPCM. Echocardiographic parameters for chamber pressure can be used initially, and if further assessment is necessary or patient illness is severe and more accurate measurement is required, a right heart catheterization can help with these situations.

Endomyocardial biopsy is not recommended and is mostly used to evaluate for infiltrative diseases that can be causing the failing heart.

At the moment, there is a specific test for diagnosis of PPCM.