Chronic pain is a significant condition that affects many millions of people and is an important public health concern with considerable morbidity and mortality and associated opiate drug diversion and misuse. Thus chronic pain is best managed with an interprofessional approach. Managing chronic pain requires an interprofessional team of healthcare professionals that includes a primary care physician, nursing team, pharmacist, and pain medicine specialists. Without proper management, the patient's quality of life can have a deleterious impact.  The evaluation and treatment of such patients are paramount but in order to avoid drug diversion and misuse, health professionals must work as a team.

Chronic pain correlates with several severe complications, including severe depression and suicide attempts, and ideation. The lifetime prevalence for chronic pain patients attempting suicide attempts was shown to be between 5% and 14%; suicidal ideation was approximately 20%.

- Evaluation of a patient with acute pain by the primary care provider to prevent the progression of chronic pain is the recommended first step.

- Conservative management of chronic pain should commence when symptoms are mild or moderate, including physical therapy, cognitive-behavioral therapy, and pharmacological management.

- A pharmacist or other expert knowledgeable in the medications frequently utilized to treat chronic pain should evaluate the medication regimen to include medication reconciliation to preclude any drug-drug interactions, and alert the healthcare team regarding any concerns.

- The patient should follow up with a primary care provider as well as pain specialists as necessary regularly to assess and effectively treat the patient's pain.

- Clinicians must address comorbid psychiatric disorders. This action may require the involvement of a psychiatrist, depending on the severity of the patient's symptoms.

- If symptoms worsen on follow-up or if there is a concerning escalation of pharmacological therapy such as with opioids, a referral to a pain medicine specialist merits consideration.

- If the patient has exhausted various pharmacological and nonpharmacological treatment options, interventional procedures can be a consideration.

- If at any time the patient expresses concern for suicidal ideation or plan, an emergent psychiatric team should evaluate the patient immediately.

- Patients who have developed opioid dependence secondary to pharmacological therapy should be offered treatment, possibly referral for addiction treatment or detoxification if indicated. The patient should be put on a medication weaning schedule or possibly medications for the treatment of opioid dependence.

- Based on CDC recommendations, patients on high-dose opioid medications or patients with risk factors for opioid overdose (e.g., obesity, sleep apnea, concurrent benzodiazepine use, etc.) should receive naloxone at home for the emergent treatment of an unintentional overdose.

The interprofessional team should openly discuss and communicate clearly about the management of each patient so that the patient receives optimal care delivery. This area is where nurses and pharmacists can play a crucial role by helping verify patient compliance with the treatment plan and monitor for progress (or lack of) with the present treatment plan. Nurses and pharmacists can help monitor for adverse medication side effects, concerns regarding diversion or misuse of opioids, and communicate any areas of concern to the treating clinicians. Effective, open interprofessional communication is crucial in the optimal management of chronic pain [Level 2] and in minimizing the negative effects of chronic pain in the patient.

**Interprofessional Team Case Study #1**

**CC: Syncope and Confusion**

**HPI:**A 70-year-old confused female arrives in the trauma after she was found passed on the bathroom floor near the toilet. The husband reports a past history of morbid obesity, diabetes, kidney disease, and chronic right hip pain, for which she has been scheduled for prosthetic hip surgery replacement that has been delayed to get her weight under control. She has been prescribed a combination of hydrocodone and acetaminophen to allow control of the pain enough for ambulation and daily pool exercises. Lately, the pain has been getting worse, and the husband mentions that occasionally she takes more medicine than prescribed.

**PE:**Vital signs T 98.7 degrees F, Bp 100/70, HR 110, RR 14, and O2 Saturation 92%.

Physical exam reveals a somnolent and female that arouses to a painful stimulus. The heart, lung, and extremity exam is normal. There are no focal neurologic deficits.

**Work-up**

Laboratory studies including a CBC, chemistry, and urinalysis are normal except for a moderate elevation of the blood urea nitrogen and creatinine. A chest x-ray and pelvic film are negative for fracture. The ECG was normal. The drug screen is positive for opioids and cannabinoids.

The patient is given naloxone and becomes awake and conversant. She admits that she was sitting on the toilet urinating, and the last thing she remembers is feeling faint. She indicates that she has difficulty sleeping and walking due to chronic hip pain, and she has severe pain with exercise in their home pool. She denies suicidal ideation. She admits to taking an extra pain pill and “smoking a joint” prior to the episode.

Checking CSAPP reveals she has been on a three times a day dose of her oxycodone and acetaminophen for the last six weeks prescribed by her orthopedic surgeon.

**Treatment**

The patient is admitted to the hospital, and orthopedic surgery, pain management, pharmacy, physical therapy, and dietician are consulted. Subsequent workup by the interprofessional team concludes the incident was caused by an accidental overdose of her opioid medication combined with her comorbid conditions.

The family and husband were informed that due to age, diabetes, and kidney disease, the opioid she is taking was cleared less efficiently. With the doubling of her dose, she developed an acute toxic encephalopathy. The family and patient have a limited understanding of the potential side effects of opioids in treating pain, a poor understanding of exercise, and dieting for weight control.The interprofessional team recommends to the family continuing opioids at the prescribed dose without any additional doses, rare NSAIDs for breakthrough pain, monitored physical therapy and exercise, a planned diet, temporary placement of a TENS unit, pain monitored by a pain specialist, and surgical intervention as soon as possible.

At discharge, a written treatment and management plan is presented to the family and patient for discussion and consent. The goals include relief of pain, increased exercise and weight loss, and surgical intervention as soon as possible.

The patient is scheduled for outpatient pain management, physical therapy, and weight management. Before discharge, the pharmacist counsels the family and patient regarding the safe use, dosage regulation, side effects, and proper disposal of opioid medication. An emergency naloxone kit is prescribed, and the family is educated on its use.

**Follow-up**

Three months after discharge, the patient has successfully lost 40 pounds (18 kg) and was cleared for surgery. Following hip replacement, the patient's pain has dramatically diminished, and she is gradually tapered off of her pain medications. She continues to maintain regular exercise and dieting until she is noticeably improved. She reports that she feels better, is enjoying life, and is encouraged by her progress.

An interprofessional approach to diagnosis, treatment, and dispensing provides a positive outcome.

**Interprofessional Case Study #2**

**CC: Request For Increased Pain Medicine**

A 76-year-old patient presents to the pharmacy to fill a prescription for acetaminophen and codeine. The pharmacist asks if this is a new prescription. The patient says she has been on it for months ever since she tripped over her hungry cat between her legs and broke her back. The patient says she recently moved from her own home to live with her daughter just down the street from the pharmacy.

The pharmacist asks if the patient has been having any problems and she states she “has the runs”, “sleeps as much as her cat”, and she “hurts all over”. She also indicates she would like to return to her volunteer job as a librarian but due to her ongoing pain and feeling unhappy all the time, she has not felt she could bend over to put books on the shelves and does not have the energy or drive to do the work. The pharmacist notes she is a bit agitated.

The pharmacist accesses CSAPP and confirms this is the only narcotic the patient has been prescribed for the last six months with a recent drop in frequency from QID to BID. The pharmacist is concerned about chronic pain and long-term treatment with an opioid is a risk factor for opioid use disorder.

The pharmacist calls the orthopedic surgeon prescriber and presents the signs and symptoms and concerns regarding the development of opioid use disorder. The clinician concurs. The dose is increased to TID and the clinician agrees to see the patient in the office the next day.

**Work-up/Treatment**

In the visit, the orthopedic surgeon obtains a follow-up x-ray and is reassured the hairline lower vertebral fracture has healed. She maintains the TID dose of the opioid, adds a low-dose NSAID for another 30-days, and refers the patient for physical therapy. She also instructs the patient to apply hot and cold ice packs to her lower back, get a weekly massage, and start gentle stretching exercises. The patient is instructed to follow up in 2-weeks with the clinician's nurse practitioner.

**Follow-up**

The patient sees the nurse practitioner 14-days later. The patient's pain is under control and her signs and symptoms of opioid use disorder have resolved. The patient is instructed to continue the opioid at a BID dose and is placed on a long-term NSAID with a higher safety profile. She is instructed to return in 14 days.

The orthopedic surgeon sees the patient on the next visit and reviews the report of the physical therapist. The patient feels much better and the opioid is decreased to once per day. For 14-days and then she is instructed to stop the medication and return for a follow-up visit 2-days later.

On this visit, the patient is in minimal pain and has no symptoms of opioid withdrawal or use disorder. She is kept on the NSAID at a once-daily dose and continues to see the physical therapist for another month.

The patient follows up with the nurse practitioner who prescribes a low dose, high-safety profile NSAID. She sees the pharmacist who refills the NSAID and she reports she is back to work at the library, she is feeling much better, and she now feeds the cat on the counter to avoid tripping over it during feeding.

An interprofessional approach to diagnosis, treatment, and dispensing provides a positive outcome.

**Interprofessional Case Study #3**

**CC: Chronic Leg Pain**

**HPI:**60-year-old male presents with a history of progressive neuropathic leg pain with an unclear etiology. Physical therapy, relaxation therapy, massage therapy, and acupuncture have been tried without relief. Gabapentin, SSRIs, NSAIDs, and tramadol controlled the pain for the last year but the pain is now worse and is inhibiting the patient's mobility. The clinician tried a short-acting opiate for the last 2-weeks and the pain was relieved.

**PE:**Vital signs T 98.8 degrees F, Bp 120/80, HR 90, RR 16, and O2 Saturation 98%.

Physical exam reveals a female in no apparent distress. The heart, lung, and extremity exam is normal. A neurologic exam revealed hyperalgesia and hyperpathia of the lower legs.

**Work-up**

Prior EMG studies were consistent with severe neuropathy. Laboratory blood tests reveal no vitamin deficits or toxicities.

Treatment: The clinician, a neurologist, decides to transition the patient from short-acting to long-acting opioids and discusses the risks and benefits. The nurse provides a hand-out and discusses monitoring, understanding and signing required documentation, safe opioid use, safe storage, expectations, addiction risks, and required regular follow-ups. The nurse also discusses the signs and symptoms of opioid overdose and the use of naloxone.

The clinicians write a prescription for a long-acting narcotic at a low dose and for naloxone. The patient is asked to follow up in 7-days.

The pharmacist is familiar with the patient. The pharmacist accesses CSAPP and confirms the prior narcotic order, the new long-acting order, and that no other potentially interactive medications have been prescribed. The pharmacist educates the patient on narcotic and naloxone use.

**Follow-up**

The patient follows up at 7-days and the pain is now under control with no complications. The prescriber completes appropriate documentation and provides for a 30-day course with monthly follow-ups.