**Diet and Activity**

- While there is no specific diet for patients with Paget disease, those who are prescribed bisphosphonates should ensure adequate intake of calcium and vitamin D.

- Aggressive physical activity is not recommended, as the risk of fracture is high. However, muscle-strengthening exercise at a low level is recommended.

**Deterrence**

To date, there is no way to prevent Paget disease since the cause remains unknown. For family members of a patient with Paget disease, some physicians do recommend monitoring levels of alkaline phosphatase levels every 2 years. If the levels are within the normal range, then imaging of the bone may also be performed.

**Guidelines Summary**

Current endocrine guidelines for Paget disease:

- Obtain plain x-rays of the affected body part.

- Determine the extent of bone involvement with a radionuclide scan.

- Measure levels of serum alkaline phosphatase to evaluate bone formation/resorption amd also assess response to treatment or follow untreated patients.

- Patients at risk for complications like fracture should be started on bisphosphonates with Alendronate 40mg daily being the first choice in the oral category.

- Another easy option is a single 5 mg dose of intravenous zoledronate if there are no contraindications.

- If a patient has normal alkaline phosphatase levels, monitor disease with a specific marker for bone formation.

- One can follow patients with serial bone scans to assess the disease if bone markers are all normal.

- Use of bisphosphonates is effective in slowing down the progression of the disease or the hearing loss.

- If patients with Paget disease need surgery, should consider pre-treatment with bisphosphonates.