The imaging modality of choice for evaluating ADEM is MRI. It demonstrates hyperintense lesions on T2-weighted, fluid-attenuated inversion recovery (FLAIR), proton-density, and echo-planar trace diffusion MRI sequences. Lesions are not typically visualized on T1-weighted sequences, though larger lesions may appear as hypointensities. Imaging of ADEM may reveal a single lesion (e.g., large or small, confluent, or solitary) or multiple lesions throughout the white (e.g., periventricular and subcortical) and grey (e.g., basal ganglia, thalamus, cortex) matter of the brain – most characteristically seen as multiple, widespread, asymmetric lesions bilaterally throughout the brain.

ADEM lesions typically present with indistinct margins on imaging. This may help differentiate these lesions from the clear-cut margins typical of the lesions seen in multiple sclerosis.

It is important to note that ADEM may present with a normal MRI, in other words, without any visual evidence of disease (even after multiple scans). In some cases, it is also possible that MRI lesions may appear weeks following the onset of symptoms. Although most MRI lesions resolve within 18 months, repeat imaging is warranted, especially early in the course of the disease, as there may be fluctuations in lesions (e.g., new lesions may appear while older lesions resolve) despite the patient potentially remaining asymptomatic.

Although MRI is the imaging modality of choice, a CT scan may be considered in an urgent setting to rule out any other potentially life-threatening causes of neurological dysfunction. In the case of ADEM, a CT scan is most often unremarkable, especially earlier on in the course of the disease. In later stages, ADEM may appear as focal or multifocal regions of white matter damage on CT. Cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) analysis (e.g., following a lumbar puncture) may reveal abnormalities in 50% to 80% of patients with ADEM. These findings may include lymphocytic pleocytosis (with a white blood cell count of fewer than 100 cells/mL) and a slightly elevated CSF protein (Fewer than 70 mg/dL). More specifically, patients with ADEM are often seen to have an elevated level of cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) myelin basic protein on CSF analysis. This is a sign of demyelination in the CNS.

An EEG done on a patient with ADEM may reveal a disturbed sleep pattern, and either a focal or generalized slowing of electrical activity.

There is no specific biomarker or diagnostic test that establishes a diagnosis of ADEM.  It is, however, considered, when a patient presents with multifocal neurologic deficits without any prior history of neurologic dysfunction. One or more demyelinating lesions (either supra- or infratentorial) on brain MRI will further support a diagnosis of ADEM. These findings, taken together with a history of infection or immunization, as well as abnormal CSF findings, will further support a diagnosis of ADEM (but are not necessary to do so).

Although there are no set diagnostic criteria for ADEM in adults, for children, a diagnosis is made based on the presence of both encephalopathy and multifocal CNS involvement.

Children with ADEM have also been found to have an elevated sedimentation rate and a slightly elevated platelet count.