**Management of the Tumor**

The mainstay of treatment is surgical excision with the aim of complete resection margins while achieving minimal neurological injury. Complete resection is considered curative for the disease. However, the involvement of the brainstem or cranial nerves may prevent complete resection. Resection of only the nodule and not the cyst wall is recommended.

Conventional radiotherapy is not required; instead, follow up with serial imaging is more appropriate. Radiotherapy, particularly in this region of the brain, carries significant sequelae.

**Management of Hydrocephalus**

**Approaches for Neurologically Well Patients**

- CSF diversion at the time of surgery, followed by immediate tumor resection

- Surgical resection without CSF diversion. If hydrocephalus persists postoperatively, then perform CSF diversion

- CSF diversion around two weeks before definitive surgery

If the patient is neurologically unstable due to hydrocephalus or brainstem compression, then urgent intervention is warranted. If the presentation is with hydrocephalus, some authors advocate initial CSF diversion before definitive surgery using an external ventricular drain (EVD), endoscopic third ventriculostomy (ETV), or ventricular-peritoneal shunt (VPS). Some centers will place an EVD or perform an ETV at the time of surgery, followed by immediate definitive tumor resection. However, some advocate that CSF diversion should be around two weeks before resection.

Disapproval for this approach is that placing a VPS generally commits patients to lifelong shunting and complications. Also, tumor seeding may occur into the peritoneum, although this is rare and can be mitigated by the placement of a tumor filter on the shunt system.