**Absolute**

Absolute contraindications to spinal include patient refusal, a congenital or acquired bleeding disorder, ingestion of anticoagulants, antiplatelet or thrombolytic agents, or infection at the needle insertion site. Spinal is also contraindicated in patients with increased intracranial pressure, such as that due to an intracranial mass, as this has the potential to result in brainstem herniation.

Before performing spinal, history should be performed to ask about mucosal bleeding, unusual bleeding after trauma, dental work, or surgery, significant nosebleeds, or heavy menses. If petechiae or ecchymoses, or a history of bleeding are present, hematology consultation should be obtained before performing a spinal. Suppose there is no history of bleeding episodes. In that case, spinal may be performed if prothrombin time (PT), activated partial thromboplastin time (APTT), and platelet count is normal, as these rule out the vast majority of bleeding disorders. However, mild Von Willebrand disease may still be present.

There is no definitive platelet count below which providers will not perform a spinal; it differs between providers, centers, and populations. Older literature recommends a platelet count of at least 100 X 10^9/L. However, many will perform spinal with a lower platelet count, depending upon the indication and the patient. Benefits could be considered to outweigh the risks, for example, in a cancer patient with severe pain or an obstetric patient in whom general anesthesia is considered inadvisable due to morbid obesity and abnormal airway anatomy. It has been proposed that in the absence of other problems, a platelet count of 75 X 10^9/L is sufficient in parturients. Douglas et al. 2001 and Tanaka et al. reported spinal performed with platelet counts less than 75 X 10^9/L in patients with idiopathic thrombocytopenic purpura (ITP) or gestational thrombocytopenia who were not pre-eclamptic. Furthermore, they suggest the lower safe limit of platelet count for non-preeclamptic parturients with no history or signs of bleeding is 50 X 10^9/L.

Choi et al. reviewed 507 neuraxial techniques in patients at risk for bleeding, including patients with ITP with platelet counts less than 50 X 10^9/L.

Assessment of platelet function with viscoelastic tests might help a provider decide whether to perform spinal in the presence of thrombocytopenia and abnormal platelet function documented with viscoelastic tests such as thromboelastogram (TEG), rotational thromboelastogram, or quantra should probably result in a decision not to perform the spinal.

A survey of international practice that includes discussing the risk of subependymal hemorrhage (SEH) in patients undergoing cardiac surgery has been reported.

**Relative**

Relative contraindications should be weighed on a case-by-case basis. Spinal stenosis, prior spinal surgery, and spina bifida are relative contraindications, as a deviation from typical anatomy can make access difficult and spread of local anesthetic unpredictable.

Some consider bacteremia to be a relative contraindication to spinal, due to concern that a needle passing through a vessel might introduce bacteria into the epidural or subarachnoid space. Providers often perform a diagnostic lumbar puncture in patients with fever of unknown origin. Work indicates that the incidence of lumbar puncture-induced meningitis is not greater than that of spontaneous meningitis, and cases that appear to be lumbar puncture-induced meningitis may be due to eventual seeding of the meninges in patients with more severe bacteremia.

**Hemodynamic Considerations**

Hypovolemia, hypertrophic obstructive cardiomyopathy, and mitral stenosis are relative contraindications to spinal anesthesia with a local anesthetic. It may significantly reduce systemic vascular resistance, resulting in significant hypotension in these patients who are preload-dependent. Spinal injection of local anesthetics should be considered contraindicated in patients with severe aortic stenosis. These patients have hypertrophied left ventricles with increased oxygen requirements, and myocardial ischemia may result from decreases in diastolic blood pressure and coronary perfusion pressure. Low-dose injection of spinal opioid alone (without local anesthetic) may be tolerated in patients with mild or moderate valvular heart disease. Low-dose opioid injection alone results in a smaller decrease in blood pressure than local anesthetics. Still, spinal techniques are best avoided in patients with severe aortic stenosis, for if these patients develop ventricular fibrillation, they are difficult or impossible to resuscitate.

In particular, it may be necessary to perform an open-chest cardiac massage to have a chance of successfully resuscitating a patient with severe aortic stenosis who has suffered a cardiac arrest. Some have applied spinal anesthesia to patients with aortic stenosis.