The definitive treatment for marrow disease associated with inherited bone marrow failure syndromes is hematopoietic stem cell transplant (HSCT). Immunosuppressive therapy plays no role. Gene cell therapy may promise a cure in the future.

Before undergoing hematopoietic stem cell transplant, it is important to consider the following: inherited bone marrow failure syndromes are associated with increased mortality using conventional regimens. Patients with FA are highly intolerant of radiation therapy and crosslinking agents in conditioning regimens.

Dyskeratosis congenita and Shwachman-Diamond syndrome individuals suffer excess post-transplant morbidity and mortality, including severe pulmonary and hepatic toxicity. Nonmyeloablative regimens including fludarabine are preferred, though data is sparse. Before the transplant, clinicians must not overlook the diagnosis of inherited bone marrow failure syndromes in siblings who have HLA-matches because the recipient will die. The hematopoietic stem cell transplant will provide no benefit, and the conditioning regimen will be too toxic. Therefore, screen all first-degree relatives of patients with inherited bone marrow failure syndromes upon diagnosis and refer them for genetic counseling as needed.

The exception to treatment is DBA. It is more tolerant of standard conventional treatment and more apt to respond to glucocorticoid treatment (up to 80% of patients). Start with 2 mg/kg/day, then taper after hemoglobin reaches 10 mg/dL and reduce to every other day or discontinue altogether (15% of patients will remain disease-free off steroids).

Supportive care includes infection prophylaxis/treatment and transfusions (leukoreduced red blood cells for Hb less than 7 mg/dL or platelets less than 10,000/microliter or less than 50,000/microliter for active blood loss). Avoid blood products from family members because the risk of alloimmunization increases. Monitor for secondary hemochromatosis and, if needed, administer iron chelators. It is not recommended to use growth factors such as erythropoietin or granulocyte colony-stimulating factors because there are not enough precursor cells to generate satisfactory responses.

For patients wishing to have children, in vitro fertilization is successful and transplanted cord blood from unaffected offspring shows promise in the treatment of Fanconi anemia.