Antiseptic agents in dermatologic surgery commonly include chlorhexidine, povidone-iodine, chloroxylenol, isopropyl alcohol, hexachlorophene, benzalkonium chloride, and hydrogen peroxide. All interprofessional healthcare team members should be familiar with skin antiseptics as essential to preventing SSIs. Cleaning wounds, preparing skin for incisional procedures, dressing wounds, or post-surgical wounds appropriately involves an interprofessional team approach of nurses and clinicians to achieve the best results.

In 2013, FDA requested label changes and single-use packaging for OTC topical antiseptic products to reduce the risk of infection. Topical antiseptics are safe and effective agents for patient preoperative or preinjection skin preparation when appropriately used. To decrease the odds of patient infection, ensure these products are used according to the recommendations on the label. Topical antiseptics packaged in single-use containers intended for preoperative use should only be applied at one time to one patient. Nurses should ensure that applicators and unused solutions must be discarded after an individual use. Topical antiseptic agents must not be diluted after opening. Consider topical antiseptics as a potential source of infection when deciding the cause of postoperative infections.

In 2017 FDA, issued a rule specifying that particular active ingredients used in over-the-counter antiseptics intended for use by healthcare professionals in a hospital environment or other healthcare situations outside the hospital are not commonly recognized as safe and effective (GRAS/GRAE).

When using topical antiseptics, all healthcare professionals should carefully choose the agent based on antiseptic coverage, the expected extent of surgery, the anatomic location of the tumor,  the planned reconstruction, and the patient's clinical needs. Open communication and collaborative work of surgeons, other clinical staff (MDs, DOs, NPs, and PAs), nursing staff, and pharmacists provide the safe and effective use of antiseptic agents for better treatment outcomes.