The position of the levator anguli oris in the medial midface makes it unlikely to be injured iatrogenically, even in major facial surgery, such as rhytidectomy. Lateral rhinotomy or Weber Ferguson approaches to midfacial pathology may place the muscle at risk for injury or, at the very least, edema and inflammation. Primary lesions of the levator anguli oris muscle are rare but reported and might be addressed via an intraoral approach. In 2013, Koltsidopoulos and colleagues described an intramuscular hemangioma within the levator anguli oris muscle in a 26-year-old male who presented with progressive swelling of the right cheek.

Along with the mentalis and buccinator muscles, the levator anguli oris lies deep to the rest of the muscles of facial expression and is therefore innervated from its deep surface. While few surgical approaches involve dissecting between the levator anguli oris and the overlying zygomaticus minor muscle, the relationship of the terminal facial nerve branches to these muscles should be kept in mind when operating in the medial midface to avoid inadvertent denervation of the levator anguli oris muscle.

Because of the role of the levator anguli oris in maintaining the resting position of the oral commissure, it has been proposed as a target for midfacial rejuvenation procedures, namely plication via an intraoral incision to elevate the corner of the mouth.

In another reconstructive application, Denewer et al. have described using the levator anguli oris muscle as a pedicle for regional flap transfer into nasal defects. In their technique, the flap is raised via a nasolabial fold incision, including skin and the inferior aspect of the levator anguli oris muscle and intraoral mucosa from the gingivolabial vestibule if necessary. With the muscle remaining attached to the maxilla superiorly, the flap can be tunneled into an ipsilateral nasal defect.