White cell count is typically elevated with neutrophilia. Inflammatory markers, erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR) and C-reactive protein (CRP), are commonly elevated. When COP is suspected then testing for autoimmune diseases should be undertaken.

**Radiography******

The chest radiograph findings in COP include patchy diffuse consolidations mostly involving bilateral lower zones. Other described findings include migratory, irregular, linear, or nodular opacities. Pleural effusions can also be seen.

**High-Resolution Computed Tomography**(HRCT)

HRCT of the lungs reveals bilateral patchy peripherally located consolidations or ground glass opacities. These are often asymmetric. The classic HRCT sign described in COP is the atoll sign, also known as the reverse halo sign. This sign is characterized by a dense outer rim of consolidation around a focal ground-glass opacity. This sign, seen in about 20% of patients with COP and is non-specific as it can be seen in various other infectious and inflammatory conditions.

Other less common findings include irregular nodular opacities, cavitary lesions, and pleural effusions. Multiple nodules and cavitary lesions should raise suspicion for malignancy.

**Pulmonary Function Testing (PFT)**

PFTs typically reveal a restrictive defect with diffusion impairment. Desaturation with 6-minute walk testing is also commonly noted.

**Bronchoscopy**

Flexible bronchoscopy with bronchoalveolar lavage (BAL) is often performed to rule out infections, pulmonary hemorrhage, and malignancy. BAL fluid characteristically has mixed cellularity with neutrophils, lymphocytes, and eosinophils. Significant lymphocyte elevation (approximately 40%) is typical, and CD4/CD8 ratio reveals CD8 predominance. Lack of lymphocytosis on BAL portends a poor prognosis. Marked elevation of eosinophils (greater than 25%) suggests eosinophilic pneumonia or rarely an overlap phenomenon.

**Lung Biopsy**

Transbronchial lung biopsies may be attempted but are often inadequate to make a definitive diagnosis due to the small amount of lung tissue obtained and loss of tissue architecture from crush artifact. It can help rule out alternative diagnoses. A surgical lung biopsy is often required to make a definitive diagnosis. Wedge biopsies are preferably obtained from at least 2 lobes with distinct radiographic involvement. In patients with a convincing clinical and radiographic presentation, in whom risks of an invasive procedure outweigh benefits, treatment can be started without a lung biopsy, after discussion with the patient.