The cerebral veins function to drain the capillary network that supplies the brain with blood; this removes carbon dioxide and other metabolic wastes, and allows fresh blood to flow in to take its place. The cerebral veins drain the entire brain as well as the eyes, meninges, and part of the face via the pterygoid plexus. The dural sinuses, especially the superior sagittal sinus, also serve to drain the cerebrospinal fluid via the arachnoid granulations and it is by this process that the CSF ultimately returns to the bloodstream. Structurally, the veins of the brain have no muscular layer, and no valves, which differentiates them from their counterparts in the rest of the body and the lack of a muscular layer allows them to expand substantially. The only exceptions are the larger pial veins, which have a circumferential smooth muscle layer. The superficial dural sinuses have the added benefit of being supported by layers of dura mater, preventing them from being easily compressed if the intracranial pressure rises.

The venous anatomy of the brain is complex, and the first major investigation was only done by Okudera et al. in 1999. It divides into two groups: the superficial medullary or subcortical venous system and the deep medullary venous system based on whether blood from a given venule will drain to the superficial veins or the deep cerebral veins and ultimately the vein of Galen. The superficial medullary veins begin with subcortical veins that drain the outer cortex and flow into the pial veins sitting on the surface of the cortex. The pial veins converge and drain into the cerebral veins. These vessels are numerous and lie on the surface of the brain. The largest three are: the superficial middle cerebral vein lies over the Sylvian fissure, the vein of Trolard courses superiorly to the superior sagittal sinus, and the vein of Labbe drains into the transverse sinus. All cerebral veins typically drain to the nearest dural sinus depending on their location. The superiodorsal veins drain to the superior sagittal sinus, the posterior veins, and veins of the cerebellum drain to the transverse sinus, and the anterior veins can drain to the superior sagittal sinus, cavernous sinus, or the superficial middle cerebral vein. Upon reaching a dural sinus, the veins pierce the arachnoid and dura mater as bridging veins, and their contents drain into the dural sinus. The dural sinuses also collect blood from the minor meningeal veins and from the skull and scalp via emissary veins. The superior sagittal sinus travels caudally until it meets the occipital sinus over the cerebellum, forming the confluence of sinuses, blood then continues to the transverse sinuses.

The deep medullary venous system drains the deep cerebrum. The deep medullary veins are more extensive than the superficial medullary veins and the two only rarely anastomose via ‘transcerebral veins,’ relatively large veins traversing the entire cerebral parenchyma. The deep medullary system consists of venules lying in the white matter, roughly perpendicular to the lateral ventricles. They run parallel to each other and meet at three ‘zones of convergence’ in the parenchyma: the ‘hat-rack,’ ‘candelabra,’ and ‘palmate’ zones. They then converge a fourth and final time, forming the subependymal veins on the inner surface of the lateral ventricles.

Interestingly, it is this arrangement of the medullary veins that causes the characteristic periventricular and subcortical lesions in multiple sclerosis; as the leukocytes that cause demyelination extravasate from these veins. The subependymal veins join two additional groups of veins: the choroidal venous plexus and the thalamostriate veins. The latter systems drain the choroid plexus and much of the deep grey nuclei. When they merge with the subependymal veins, they form the internal cerebral veins. The left and right internal cerebral veins unite beneath the selenium of the corpus callosum to form the great vein of Galen. The vein of Galen, therefore, drains most of the cerebral white matter and deep gray nuclei.

The inferior anterior surface of the brain is drained primarily by the cavernous sinuses. These dural sinuses lie on either side of the sella and directly posterior to the orbits. They receive blood from the brain via the local cerebral veins, the eyes via the superior and inferior ophthalmic veins, and the skull and meninges by the sphenoparietal sinus and middle meningeal vein. Since it drains the middle meningeal vein, the cavernous sinus anastomoses with the maxillary vein. The cavernous sinus also drains the pterygoid plexus, which lies inferior to the cavernous sinus and anterior to the temporomandibular joint. The pterygoid plexus communicates with the facial vein and therefore drains the nose and upper lip. The cavernous sinuses also contain segments of the internal carotid artery, the sympathetic plexus, and cranial nerves III, IV, V1, V2, and VI.

The cavernous sinus drain in three directions. Superiorly it can drain to the superficial middle cerebral vein. Laterally they drain via the superior and inferior petrosal veins to the sigmoid sinus. Medially, both cavernous sinuses drain into the basilar plexus. The basilar plexus courses inferior to the brain, draining the anterior brainstem as it travels, then splits around the foramen magnum and joins the vein of Galen.

The great cerebral vein of Galen lies inferior to the splenium of the corpus callosum. Above the corpus callosum lies the inferior sagittal sinus, traveling on the inferior edge of the falx cerebri. The two meet behind to the splenium and form the straight sinus, which travels posteriorly until it joins the confluence of sinuses.

The confluence of sinuses lies midline, on the border of the cerebellum and occipital lobes. It receives the superior sagittal sinus superiorly, the occipital sinus inferiorly, and the straight sinus anteriorly. It then divides laterally into the transverse sinuses. The transverse sinuses travel downwards and become the sigmoid sinuses. The sigmoid sinuses then descend out of the skull through the jugular foramen as the internal jugular veins.