A detailed clinical history regarding the onset and duration of symptoms, travel history, exposure to people with COVID-19 infection, underlying medical comorbidities, and medication history should be obtained by treating providers. Patients with typical clinical signs suspicious of COVID-19, such as fever, cough, sore throat, loss of taste or smell, malaise, and myalgias, should be promptly tested for SARS-CoV-2. Besides symptomatic patients, anyone with known high-risk exposure to SARS-CoV-2 should be tested for SARS-CoV-2 infection even in the absence of symptoms.

The standard diagnostic mode of testing is testing a nasopharyngeal swab for SARS-CoV-2 nucleic acid using a real-time PCR assay. Commercial PCR assays have been validated by the US Food and Drug Administration (FDA) with emergency use authorizations (EUAs) for the qualitative detection of nucleic acid from SARS-CoV-2 from specimens obtained from nasopharyngeal swabs as well as other sites such as oropharyngeal, anterior/mid-turbinate nasal swabs, nasopharyngeal aspirates, bronchoalveolar lavage (BAL) and saliva.

The sensitivity of PCR testing is dependent on multiple factors that include the adequacy of the specimen, technical specimen collection, time from exposure, and specimen source.

Routine laboratory assessment with **complete blood count (CBC)**, a**comprehensive metabolic panel (CMP)**that includes testing for renal and liver function, and a**coagulation panel**should be performed in all hospitalized patients.**Troponin levels**and a**baseline EKG**to rule out cardiac injury should be performed if clinically indicated, especially in patients presenting with chest tightness or shortness of breath.

Additional tests, such as testing for inflammatory markers such as **ESR, C-reactive protein (CRP), ferritin, lactate dehydrogenase, D-dimer,**and**procalcitonin,**can be considered in hospitalized patients. However, their prognostic significance in COVID-19 is not clear. Imaging studies may include**chest x-ray, lung ultrasound,**or**chest computed tomography (CT)**. The American College of Radiology recommends against computed tomography's routine use as an initial imaging study or screening. There are no guidelines available regarding the timing and choice of pulmonary imaging studies in patients with COVID-19, and the type of imaging should be considered based on clinical evaluation.