Vitamin B12 deficiency is a serious disorder, which if not treated can lead to severe neurological symptoms. The ideal way to manage the disorder is with an interprofessional team that includes a primary clinician, gastroenterologist, neurologist, surgeon, pharmacist, dietitian, and a nurse. The primary focus today is to try to prevent the disorder in the first place. The nurse, dietitian, and pharmacist can help educate the patient that there is an increased risk among family members, who should be screened for the disorder. Further, any patient who has undergone gastric resection surgery is also at risk for vitamin B12 deficiency and should be regularly tested. The pharmacist should also recommend testing in patients treated with metformin and proton pump inhibitors. Finally, vitamin B12 deficiency is common in seniors because of poor nutrition, dementia, rigid vegetarian diet or lack of access to care. These individuals should be proactively screened for vitamin B12 deficiency. Once treated, the individuals should be followed by a visiting home care nurse to make sure that the neurological symptoms are improving.

**Outcomes**

For patients who are promptly treated with vitamin B12, the neurological symptoms of subacute combined degeneration partially resolve, and the progression may stop. In general, younger patients have better outcomes compared to older individuals. The best response is obtained in people with the absence of severe neurological deficits. In addition, in patients with magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) showing mild cord swelling or less than 7 spinal segment involvement, the prognosis is good. However, the clinical improvement may take months or even years. [Level 5]