As discussed above, addiction is a very complex condition with multiple episodes of reaching abstinence and falling into relapse; this is why an interprofessional healthcare team is vital in treatment.

Treatment begins with risk factor identification and diagnosis by the physician but quickly grows to involve interprofessional teams to help the patient maintain their abstinence. With comprehensive questioning, primary care physicians can screen patients using criteria such as the Addiction Severity Index and more to identify at-risk patients. These patients should be followed up closely over the years. At the same time, social and familial support can be called upon to prevent the progression to addiction.

Once diagnosed, the swift involvement of a psychiatrist and dietician is essential. The psychiatrist can help uncover root causes for the addiction while the dietician can help maintain the patient's overall health. The positive attitude and self-control required to reach and maintain abstinence find pitfalls in poor nutrition and energy reserves.

During relapses, nurses play pivotal roles. They can help track patient vitals, and proper medication and fluids are provided promptly to manage acute intoxications and aid the patient back towards abstinence.

Pharmacists are also essential members of the interprofessional team dealing with addiction. They may be the first to notice addictive behaviors if the addiction involves prescription drugs. They are also good resources for detoxification, assisting clinicians in treatment and rehab centers, and verifying dosing, and checking for drug interactions.

Also discussed above, 12 step programs that involve peer support are integral to the development and maintenance of abstinence. The mentioned players - primary care physicians, emergency physicians, nurses, 12 step programs, dieticians, psychiatrists - all have well-researched roles in the success of diagnosing and managing addiction patients. [Level I]

The interprofessional team of clinicians, nursing, specialists, psychological professional, pharmacists, dieticians, and social workers must all coordinate their actions and information to achieve the best possible patient outcomes for addiction disorders. [Level 5]