Nursing interventions and patient education play an essential role in reducing the side effects of radiotherapy. Specific strategies that can be useful include:

- Identification of patients at risk of complications and initiation of appropriate therapy (low BMI increases the risk of diarrhea while high BMI patients are at greater risk of skin and mucosal complications).

- Oral hygiene instruction for all patients receiving head and neck irradiation. Consultation with a dentist and treatment of periodontal disease before radiotherapy can minimize the risk of jaw osteoradionecrosis. Use of bland rinses, cryotherapy, mucosal protective agents, antiseptic mouthwashes, topical analgesics, and anti-inflammatory agents or growth factors as necessary. Regular assessment and monitoring of high-risk patients can reduce long-term sequela in these patients and improve the overall quality of life. Dietary modifications that alleviate symptoms include avoiding spicy or acidic foods, caffeine, alcoholic beverages, alcohol-containing mouthwashes, and sharp foods (e.g., chips, popcorn).

- Nutritional assessment and dietary consult can improve the healing of damaged tissues. It is especially important in patients with cancer cachexia compounded by radiotherapy-associated fatigue, loss of appetite, alterations in taste sensations, and mucositis.

- Wound care interventions for skin ulcers with hydrocolloid dressings and regular cleaning and hyperbaric oxygen therapy for refractory cases.

- The use of probiotics reduces radiation enteritis symptoms, and dietary modifications such as a low-residue diet with no grease, spices, and adequate fiber intake can reduce symptoms of proctitis.

- Vaginitis douches with dilute hydrogen peroxide use for cleaning and prevention of infection following pelvic irradiation.

- Smoking cessation is a critical intervention to reduce the risk of secondary lung cancer in patients who receive mediastinal radiotherapy for Hodgkin disease. Some studies suggest up to a 20-fold increase in risk compared to non-smokers.