Smokeless tobacco keratosis will typically self-resolve with cessation of the habit. Patients may be counseled initially on switching the location of tobacco placement and then followed up for evaluation of the area two weeks later. In this time frame, early to moderately-developed lesions should self-resolve, with more advanced lesions either requiring more time to resolve or should be considered potentially malignant. The clinician should counsel the patient on smoking cessation, as switching sides could potentially introduce a risk of dysplastic changes in other sites within the mouth.

Leukoplakia should be treated as a pre-cancerous or pre-malignant lesion, as the frequency of transformation into a malignancy is greater than that of normal unaltered mucosa.

Treatment of erythroplakia is guided by histopathological diagnosis. If any evidence of dysplasia is noted, complete surgical excision and close clinical follow-up are warranted, as recurrence and multifocal involvement are common.

One in five verrucous carcinomas will develop into squamous cell carcinoma, so early treatment is paramount. The treatment of choice for these lesions is surgical excision with clear margins (normal tissue) to reduce the chance of recurrence.

Squamous cell carcinoma should be completely excised to achieve clear margins to reduce the potential for recurrence. In addition, patients should be counseled on their high-risk behaviors to aid in reducing their risk of recurrence or the development of a new primary.