No laboratory or radiographic tests are necessary for this condition. Clinical evaluation of the patient determines the type and grade of rhinophyma. The severity and sub-types of rhinophyma get classified in different ways.

**The first is a division into four clinical variants: glandular, fibrous, fibroangiomatosis, and actinic:**

- Glandular rhinophyma: is primarily due to the expansion of sebaceous glands

- Fibrous rhinophyma is due to hyperplasia of connective tissue

- Fibroangiomatous rhinophyma contains fibrosis, telangiectasias, and inflammatory lesions

- Actinic rhinophyma: elastic fibers grow in nodular masses, producing disfigurement

**An additional severity scale, defined by Freeman et al. in 1970, is also helpful. Beginning with early vascular type, rhinophyma progresses to****:**

- Moderate diffuse enlargement

- Early localized tumor

- Extensive diffuse enlargement

- Extensive with localized tumor diffuse enlargement

**This condition can also be broken down by a grading system into minor, moderate, or major rhinophyma, used by researcher El-Azhary et al. in 1991 - under this system, rhinophyma is****:**

- Minor when presenting with telangiectasias accompanied by minor thickening of the skin

- Moderate if skin thickening is accompanied by lobules

- Major is appropriate when prominent nodules and nasal hypertrophy are appreciated

**The NRS established a standard grading for rosacea and phymatous changes:**

Severity level:

- 0: Absent

- 1: Follicles are patulous, but no contour changes

- 2: contour change without nodularity

- 3: change in contour with the nodular component

Once the rhinophyma has undergone evaluation, a discussion of options is next. Viable choices always include the possibility of not performing any surgical intervention. In the presence of severity levels 1 or 2, the patient may elect to continue to observe. It is wise to follow these patients by taking clinical photographs, including the chin-up position and the lateral views.