The procedure is first fully explained to the patient to relieve any anxiety and make the patient comfortable. The cornea is systemically scanned, and all quadrants should be scanned centrally, superior, inferior, temporal, and nasal. The specular microscope is a light-reflecting microscope.

The slit beam of light is projected onto the cornea and the light reflected from the tissue interface helps form the image. The difference between the refractive index of aqueous humor and endothelial cells gives rise to specular or mirror-like reflection on the posterior surface.

The reflected light is approximately 0.02% of the incident beam of light. If a broad beam of light is used, the reflected beam of light from the stroma and epithelium obscures a clear view of the endothelium. Liang described four distinct zones on specular microscopy using a slit beam of evaluation.

- **Zone 1**- Epithelium/ Coupling fluid of lens

- **Zone 2**- Corneal stroma

- **Zone 3**- Endothelium

- **Zone 4**- Aqueous humor

**Dark Boundary**

The area between zone 3 and 4 is dark and is called a dark boundary.

**Light Boundary**

The area between zone 3 and zone 2 is dark and is called a light boundary.

There are various ways to get quantitative information on the endothelium, such as the corner, comparison, frame, center to center, and flex center. Errors can also occur while evaluating the corneal endothelium.

**Frame Method**

In the frame method, cell density can be assessed by counting the number of cells within a frame.

**Comparison Method**

In the comparison method, cell density is assessed by visually comparing the image of a known set with a hexagonal pattern of various cell densities.

**Corner Method**

In the corner method, the intersecting sides of the endothelial image frame are located.

**Fixed Frame Method**

This method can induce many errors when many border cells are present. This error can be eliminated by the variable frame counting method and is preferable to the fixed-frame method.

**Tracing Analysis**

This means tracing the individual cell areas and other parameters.

**Digested Cell Analysis**

The cells can be digested after tracing outlines using a digested tablet. The analysis can be done by using a photograph- a negative image on a television screen or a videotaped recording.

**Computerized Analysis**

The computerized analysis help to assess the cell density, frequency, size, and shape.

Subjective decision-making can induce errors in the center-to-center method and cell border. The accuracy of endothelial cell morphology depends on the clarity and quality of the endothelial scan obtained. The specular scans are based on the specular reflex. Hence any barrier in the endothelial monolayer's optical pathway will affect the scan quality. The other factors that hamper the scan quality are tear film abnormalities, epithelial haze, stromal scar, guttae, and DM damage. Based on the quality of the endothelial scan, it can be graded as good, fair, poor, or impossible.

**Automated Specular Microscopy**

In this method, automatic analysis of individual cell layers is done which are well delineated. If the cell boundaries are not visible, then the manual method should be used to perform a specular count. The interobserver subjective variability can be around 0 to 6% for the excellent quality of endothelial images and 6-11% for acceptable quality.