Imaging studies such as a computed tomogram (CT) scan comprise the mainstay of diagnosis. Laboratory studies such as INR, partial thromboplastin time (PTT), thromboplastin time (PT), and liver function test (LFT) may be obtained to assess for increased bleeding risk or underlying coagulopathies.

**CT Scan**

CT scan is the most common imaging modality to assess for intracranial bleeding. Its popularity is related to its widespread availability in emergency departments. The majority of EDHs are identifiable on a CT scan. The classic presentation is a biconvex or lens-shaped mass on brain CT scan, due to the limited ability of blood to expand within the fixed attachment of the dura to the cranial sutures. EDHs does not cross suture lines.

Generally, radiologists use a standard formula for estimating the amount of blood present in an EDH.  It is as follows:

ABC/2

A: The maximum hemorrhage diameter on the CT slice with the largest area of hemorrhage

B: The maximum diameter 90 degrees to A on the same CT slice

C: The number of CT slices with hemorrhage multiplied by the slice thickness in centimeters

There are, however, other CT findings that may need to be taken into account when evaluating EDH. For example, continued bleeding may be indicated by areas of low density, or a "swirl-sign." The latter may be used for prognosis, and often indicates the need for surgical intervention. If the EDH abuts brain tissue that is hemorrhagic or contused, it may appear shallow, and thus, may be overlooked if the CT scan is not carefully examined.

Several factors may lead to a non-diagnostic CT scan. These are as follows:

- A low-density blood collection may result from severe anemia (thus leading to misinterpretation).

- Arterial extravasation may be reduced secondary to severe hypotension.

- A positive finding on CT requires that enough blood accumulates for visualization. If the CT is obtained too soon after trauma, there may not be sufficient accumulation for appropriate interpretation.

- If the EDH is secondary to venous bleeding, blood accumulation may be slow. This could potentially result in difficulty with CT interpretation.

**Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI)**

Brain MRI is more sensitive than a CT scan, particularly when assessing for EDH in the vertex. It should be obtained when there is high clinical suspicion for EDH, accompanying a negative initial head CT scan.

In the situation of a suspected spinal EDH, a spinal MRI is the preferred imaging modality, as it affords higher resolution versus a spinal CT.

**Angiography**

When evaluating EDHs located in the vertex, the healthcare professional should evaluate for the presence of a dural arteriovenous (AV) fistula that may have arisen from the middle meningeal artery. Angiography may be required to evaluate the presence of such a lesion fully.