If a patient with a dental emergency presents to a practice setting other than an oral surgery clinic or dentistry office (i.e., primary care physician, urgent care clinic, or emergency department), they must be referred to an oral and maxillofacial surgeon or dentist expeditiously. In ill-appearing patients who are unlikely to do well with outpatient treatment, admission to the hospital with an oral maxillofacial surgeon consultation may be warranted.

**Traumatic Dental Emergencies**

Most dental fractures are safe to treat in the outpatient setting with regular dentistry follow-up. After dental replantation and splinting, tooth luxations and avulsions can also be followed up in the outpatient setting. However, it is not uncommon for patients with these dental emergencies to be admitted to the hospital for other non-dental traumatic injuries.

**Infectious Dental Emergencies**

Complicated dental infections require either an oral and maxillofacial surgeon or endodontist consultation for expedited definitive treatment. Patients experiencing severe disease, infectious complications, or sepsis may require admission to the hospital for both medical and surgical management of their dental infection(s).

**Post-procedural Dental Emergencies**

For patients that have a suspected or known diagnosis of congenital coagulopathy, dental care should be managed in conjunction with a hematologist. In patients with systemic diseases that affect hemostasis, such as cirrhosis or end-stage renal disease, dental care should be managed in conjunction with their primary care physician.

Patients experiencing alveolar osteitis should be referred back to their dentist or oral surgeon for definitive management. Further consultation is not required.