The treatment for craniopharyngiomas is challenging because of their location, invasiveness, and proximity to adjacent neurovascular structures. Multiple modalities can be implemented in the management of craniopharyngioma, including surgery, radiotherapy, and intracystic therapy. The choice of treatment, surgery type, and extent should be individualized for each patient. The patient's age, underlying medical co-morbidities, tumor location, type and invasiveness, and ultimately neurosurgeon experience should be considered while deciding the treatment strategy. There is no consensus on the best treatment regimen.

**Neurosurgery**

Surgical intervention is indicated to confirm the diagnosis, tumors causing neurologic deficits, pituitary dysfunction, and hydrocephalus. The most common surgical approaches are endoscopic endonasal transsphenoidal (EET) or transcranial depending on the location of craniopharyngioma. Extension of resection is a matter of debate. Gross total resection has been associated with an increased incidence of post-surgical deficits, with no change in the recurrence rates.

Several grading systems have been developed based on the location of craniopharyngioma and its relation to surrounding structures to help decide on the best modality for surgery. Kassam et al had a classification system based on the infundibulum to strategize the surgical approach. Type I tumors are pre-infundibular which are sub chiasmatic tumors displacing the optic chiasm superiorly and posteriorly. Type II tumors are trans-infundibular which can extend into the third ventricle. Type III is retro-infundibular which can either extend superiorly into the third ventricle or inferiorly into the pontine cisterns. Type IV tumors are primarily located in the third ventricles. ETT can be done in all types except type IV. The isolated third ventral tumors are better approached with craniotomy and transcallosal, transcortical, or trans-ventricular approaches. ETT should be avoided in very large tumors, mostly solid with calcification and vascular invasiveness.

In cases of cystic tumors, the surgeon can introduce an intracystic catheter into the tumor and connect it to a reservoir, called the Ommaya reservoir. The reservoir then permits frequent aspiration of the cyst thus helping to avoid aggressive surgeries and further radiotherapy in children.

**Radiotherapy**

Radiation therapy includes various modalities: conventional external radiotherapy, proton beam therapy, stereotactic radiotherapy, radiosurgery, and brachytherapy. The goal of radiotherapy is to decrease tumor burden while protecting essential neural structures. Specific Gy doses have been designated for every radiation modality. Multiple reports have suggested decreased mortality with slightly reduced morbidity following radiation therapy. Despite this, radiation therapy has not been proven to reduce the recurrence rate. Therefore, it continues to be an adjuvant modality to neurosurgical intervention.

**Intracystic Therapy**

Inttacystic therapy is primarily used for purely cystic craniopharyngioma. Toxic substances like radioactive isotopes, bleomycin, interferon-alpha are used in intracystic therapy to produce tumor fibrosis and sclerosis.

**Hormonal Treatment**

GH Deficiency: Most children will receive GH replacement after 6 months to 1 year after documenting a cure from craniopharyngioma. Most of the patients requiring GH treatment have persistent GH deficiency and have not achieved their normal height velocity. Interestingly some patients will attain normal height postoperatively without replacement. The period after surgery without any treatment is essential to identify the patients who will benefit from GH treatment. Even though GH treatment is relatively safe, there are some concerns of growth in residual tumors, thus patients should be monitored closely when treating them with growth hormones.

Gonadotropin Deficiency: The hormone replacement should be individualized depending on the age and growth of patients. Earlier treatment with sex steroids can lead to cessation of growth. In girls, a combination of estrogen and progesterone is given to induce puberty. The treatment usually starts with a very low dose of estrogen with a gradual increase over time with periodic progesterone treatment to prevent uterine hyperplasia. In boys, testosterone treatment is started at age 12-15 years depending on their growth. Usually, patients are started on a smaller dose and gradually increased to the full adult dose. The current testosterone replacements available are intramuscular testosterone, given every 2 weeks, and gel preparation that is used daily.

TSH Deficiency: The thyroid function test should be monitored postoperatively as 29-85% of patients can develop hypothyroidism following surgery or radiation treatment. The ideal way of replacement is by giving synthetic LT4, levothyroxine, as an oral tablet daily. It is important to make sure the adrenal axis is intact before starting treatment as thyroid hormone replacement can increase the metabolic clearance of glucocorticoids thus may cause an adrenal crisis.

ACTH Deficiency: Patients should be monitored post-operatively by checking AM cortisol as more than 50% of children can be diagnosed with adrenal insufficiency later after surgery or radiation treatment. Children are usually treated with prednisone or hydrocortisone. The glucocorticoid replacement dose is 6-9 mg/m2 with dose adjustment with increasing age and weight.

Vasopressin Deficiency: Diabetes insipidus (DI) can develop in 70% of craniopharyngioma patients after surgery. Postoperatively it is important to monitor patient urine output and check plasma sodium and urine osmolality and specific gravity. Desmopressin acetate-DDAVP- is the primary treatment in the form of an oral tablet or nasal spray.