The application of positive pressure ventilation most often occurs in intensive care units where patients require a higher acuity of care. Thus, some degree of critical care training and understanding of the physiologic principles behind NIPPV delivery systems and mechanical ventilation are required to take care of patients who require such treatment modalities adequately.

The initial introduction to the ICU and the use of PPV is an overwhelming experience for many junior providers. Mechanical ventilation is an essential topic in the world of medicine, but rarely any information exists as to how its taught among medical and nursing schools. Furthermore, about half of the trainees are dissatisfied with the level of education they receive on mechanical ventilation.

Thus, some level of standardized training should exist among medical curriculum for blossoming medical professionals both in the pre-clinical and clinical years that move beyond basic multiple-choice questions. These healthcare providers should be introduced directly to PPV systems early in their training and be taught to identify and understand basic controls in addition to their physiology education. Continued medical education should continue into the postgraduate years as studies have demonstrated that healthcare providers feel that they receive inadequate continued training and have some degree of discomfort in managing these systems. Boot camp curriculums that span over several days have been implemented and studied, which have demonstrated increased provider competency and confidence.