Potential adverse effects on several organ systems such as the cardiovascular, gastrointestinal, genitourinary, respiratory, neuromuscular, cutaneous, and central nervous systems have been reported.

- The FDA requires a black box warning for baclofen. Abrupt withdrawal of intrathecal baclofen may occur in patients using the drug over two months. It may result in a hypermetabolic state with hyperpyrexia, impaired mental status, muscle rigidity, and severe rebound spasticity, potentially advancing to rhabdomyolysis and multi-organ system failure. The symptoms improve upon recommencing of baclofen by a similar dose as before the interruption. Withdrawal most commonly occurs because of a delivery system problem. The patient and caregiver must understand the importance of monitoring the pump to prevent withdrawal events.

- The most common adverse effects are transient sedation, confusion, muscle weakness, vertigo, and nausea.

- Less common adverse effects are neuropsychiatric impairment, hypotension, peripheral edema, dyspnea, hypoventilation, pneumonia, seizure, insomnia, pain, speech alteration, depression, agitation, constipation, diarrhea, urinary frequency, incontinence, acute urinary retention, impotence, tremor, weakness, amblyopia, urticaria, and pruritus.

- Abrupt discontinuation of oral baclofen therapy might cause seizures and hallucinations. Gradual dose reduction is recommended to prevent withdrawal symptoms.

- Patients with stroke have shown poor tolerability to baclofen, and its use has not greatly benefited this patient population.