# Continuing Education Activity

Electroencephalogram (EEG) is one of the most important tools in the care of patients with epilepsy. EEG plays a significant role in the diagnostician of seizures and psychogenic non-epileptic spells. One of the most important aspects of interpreting EEGs is distinguishing between pathologic activity and similar-appearing normal physiologic findings. Various terminologies are used, such as: "normal variants," "benign variants," "pseudo-epileptiform patterns," or "epileptiform patterns without proven relation to seizures." This activity reviews the benign epileptiform variants in an electroencephalogram (EEG) and highlights the need for identifying these benign variants in the treatment of patients with episodes of altered awareness. The activity reviews the role of the interprofessional team in recognizing this diagnosis.

**Objectives:**
- Identify benign sporadic sleep spikes (BSSS), wicket spikes or wicket rhythms, and 6 Hz spike and wave discharges ("phantom" spike-wave) and their characteristics.
- Review 14 and 6 Hz positive spikes and their characteristics.
- Describe rhythmic mid-temporal theta of drowsiness (RMTDs) and their characteristics.
- Outline the role of the interprofessional team in recognizing benign EEG variants.

# Introduction

Electroencephalogram (EEG) is one of the most important tools in the care of patients with epilepsy. EEG plays a significant role in the diagnosis of seizures and psychogenic non-epileptic spells. One of the most important aspects of interpreting EEGs is distinguishing between pathologic activity and similar-appearing normal physiologic findings. Various terminologies are used, such as: "normal variants," "benign variants," "pseudo-epileptiform patterns," or "epileptiform patterns without proven relation to seizures."

# Function

Benign variants are reported in EEGs with a prevalence of 2.19% to 3.4%.

# Issues of Concern

**Benign Sporadic Sleep Spikes (BSSS)**

Benign sporadic sleep spikes (BSSS), also referred to as small sharp spikes or benign epileptiform transient of sleep (BETS), are low amplitude (<50 mV), brief (<50 ms), sharply contoured monophasic or biphasic electronegative spikes in theta or alpha frequency range (see figure 1). The identifying features of BSSS include their typically widespread horizontal dipole distribution that occurs in the absence of any apparent disruption of the ongoing background activities. However, SSS may occasionally be accompanied by an after-going slow-wave, and this slow-wave usually has a smaller amplitude relative to the spike.

BSSS occur in the broad temporal region and are characteristically difficult to localize precisely. BSSS often appear in both hemispheres either independently or bisynchronously and may have shifting asymmetries. They almost exclusively occur during drowsiness or light non-REM sleep. The appearance of stereotyped, isolated, small-amplitude spikes that do not disrupt the background and appear only in drowsiness or light sleep strongly suggests that the transient may be SSS. BSSS is one of the most common benign variants with a broad range of prevalence ranging from 1.85% up to 24% of scalp EEG recordings.

The clinical significance of BSSS was thought to be a pattern associated with seizures. However, a study conducted by Molaie in 1991 concluded BSSS was likely normal variants.

**Wicket Spikes or Wicket Rhythms**

Wicket spikes or wicket rhythms are medium to high voltage, monophasic wave bursts in the range of theta or alpha range (6-11Hz). Wicket spikes occur in the anterior or middle temporal areas with a negative polarity, which usually evolves from the background as arcuate-shaped, brief (0.5-1 second) rhythmic discharges. Wicket spikes are most commonly seen in adults older than 30 years old during light sleep or in an individual whose background activity contains sharply contoured waveforms (see figure 2). Although wicket spikes were originally described as temporal in location, especially in the left temporal.

The prevalence of wicket spikes is reported around 1% in several large studies. The rarity of this pattern, unilateral distribution, temporal location, and spike-like single-fragment appearance are the common reasons they are most often mistaken for interictal epileptiform discharges. Several features can be helpful to differentiate wicket spikes from interictal epileptiform discharges. Wicket spikes don't disturb the background activity and don't have an after-going slow wave. Wicket spikes tend to appear repetitively in trains of arch-shaped rhythms resembling mu rhythm.

Wicket spikes have no association with epilepsy but are used to be believed to be more frequent in patients with cerebrovascular disease, dizziness or vertigo, and headache.

**6 Hz Spike and Wave Discharges ("Phantom" Spike-wave)**

6 Hz spike and wave discharges consist of a 4 to 7 Hz repetitive spike and wave complex with a mitten-like morphology. It is also called "phantom" spike-wave since it has a relatively low amplitude (less than 40 mV), fast spike (less than 30 ms) followed by a 5 to 7 Hz wave of equal or greater amplitude (figure 3). 6 Hz spike and wave discharges occur in young adult bilaterally, synchronously and predominantly during relaxed wakefulness, drowsiness or light sleep, and occasionally in REM sleep.

Two different forms of the 6 Hz spike and wave discharge have been described. The classical form is FOLD (Female Occipital Low-amplitude Drowsiness), which is relatively low in amplitude and is maximal over the posterior head regions. It is not associated with seizures. The second form is WHAM (Wake High-Amplitude Male), which is frontally dominant, often moderate or high amplitude.

**14 and 6 Hz Positive Spikes**

14 and 6 positive spikes are best appreciated by using long interelectrode distances and ear referential montages. 14 and 6 Hz positive spikes consist of brief runs (less than 1 second) of positive spikes at a rate of 14 Hz or 6 to 7 Hz. The amplitude is variable but rarely exceeds 75 mV (see figure 4). These bursts typically consist of "negative" arciform waveforms located over the posterior temporal head regions, with alternating "positive" spiky components. This pattern occurs either bisynchronously or unilaterally (independent over the two hemispheres at different times). The 14 Hz pattern often looks like a sleep spindle with a sharp positive phase, although it's location is quite different.

This benign variant pattern occurs in 20% to 60% of the normal population, predominantly in adolescents, especially during drowsiness and light non-REM sleep.

**Rhythmic Mid-temporal Theta of Drowsiness (RMTDs)**

Rhythmic mid-temporal theta of drowsiness or rhythmical mid-temporal discharges is also known as "psychomotor variant," which is so-called because they share similarities with epileptiform discharges that may be seen during psychomotor seizures. They are bursts of rhythmical sharp waves at the range of theta, lasting for a few seconds, which often have a top-notched by a small 10 to 12 Hz component. They occur in mid temporal regions, either on one side or on both, either independently or simultaneously. The key features distinguishing RMTDs from abnormal electrographic discharges or other benign normal variants are there is little variability in morphology and frequency during the bursts.

RMTDs are mostly seen in about 0.5% to 0.79% of young adults during their light sleep.

**Subclinical Rhythmic EEG Discharge of Adults (SREDA)**

Subclinical rhythmic EEG discharges of adults are the least common of benign variants with a prevalence of 0.04% to 0.07%.

Like RMTDs, SREDA is likely to be misinterpreted as an ictal epileptiform pattern and become misleading in nonepileptic paroxysmal events. There are several distinctive features

However, SREDA has come to be recognized as a wide spectrum of typical and atypical variants. Atypical features of SREDA consist predominantly of delta frequencies, notched waveforms, frontal or more focal distributions, asymmetric or unilateral, a more prolonged duration, and presence during sleep.

Although SREDA occurs mainly in elderly individuals during wakefulness, there are reports of this pattern seen in the younger adults during REM and non-REM stages of sleep or even children. Several scholars proposed the term SREDAC (subclinical rhythmic EEG discharge of adults and children), but currently, there are only 4 cases reported in total.

The literature indicates that SREDA is difficult to associate with any specific condition or type of individual. Multiple reports concerning the presentation of SREDA in cases of vascular and nonvascular neurologic and non-neurologic diseases, such as migraine, syncope, transient ischemic attack, epilepsy, and the hemolytic uremic syndrome, were subsequently published.

# Clinical Significance

Electroencephalographers may misclassify benign variant EEG patterns as epileptiform discharges, resulting in unnecessary treatment or a delay in the diagnosis and appropriate treatment of other paroxysmal disorders. Cautious interpretation of EEG patterns, a careful review of clinical history, and demographic features usually help distinguish normal variant patterns from interictal epileptiform discharges or seizures. When nonspecific transients occur during an EEG finding, it may not be possible to determine whether a transient is an epileptiform discharge or a benign variant. It is best not to “overcall” a finding as being abnormal, and to place the possible finding in the context of the clinical history.

# Enhancing Healthcare Team Outcomes

Electroencephalogram (EEG) is essential in the diagnosis of seizures and psychogenic non-epileptic spells. It is important to distinguish between pathologic activity and similar-appearing normal physiologic findings. Various terminologies are used, such as: "normal variants," "benign variants," "pseudo-epileptiform patterns," or "epileptiform patterns without proven relation to seizures." Benign epileptiform variants in an electroencephalogram should be identified to assist primary care providers, neurologists, and nurses provide optimal care.

Recognition of these EEG waveforms should be part of an interprofessional team approach to diagnosis and interpretation. While the neurologist has the ultimate say in diagnosis, input from other clinicians, NPS and PAs, and even rad techs can be informative to arrive at an accurate clinical picture, which will improve patient care and outcomes. [Level 5]