**ACIP Recommendation and CDC Immunization Schedule**

A schedule is a tool that helps to shield individuals from disease by vaccinating them when they are the most vulnerable. The ACIP (Advisory Committee on Immunization Practices) gives recommendations on immunization in the United States.

**Annual Updates in the CDC Immunization Schedule**

CDC issues annual updates in immunization schedules.

**2020 CDC Immunization Schedule Updates**

The 2020 immunization schedule includes several updates and additions. The changes in the child immunization schedule are summarized as follows,

- Catch-up vaccination for Haemophilus influenza is not recommended for previously unvaccinated children above five years of age without risk factors.

- The catch-up immunization for Hepatitis A vaccine is recommended for all unvaccinated individuals aged 2 to 18 years.

- CDC 2020 recommends the booster doses for Meningococcal B for persons above ten years with risk factors like asplenia, complement deficiency, and microbiologists.

- Oral Polio Vaccine (OPV) doses may be counted toward the united states vaccination requirements. The OPV administered before April 1, 2016, should be counted.

- The 5th dose of the DTaP vaccine is unnecessary if the fourth dose was given after four years of age and six months after the third dose.

- If a DTaP or Tdap vaccine is given at ten years of age for other reasons, it can be included as the booster dose in the CDC schedule. If the DTaP or Tdap vaccine is given at seven to nine years of age, we should not include it as the booster dose, and Tdap should be readministered at eleven to twelve years of age.

The changes in the Adult immunization schedule are summarized as follows:

- The age group 19 to 21 years and 22 to 26 years are combined as 19 to 26 years in the 2020 CDC schedule due to the change in the recommendation of catch-up HPV vaccination for all individuals aged up to 26.

- A blue color box in the 2020 CDC schedule indicates shared clinical decision-making about vaccination for human papillomavirus vaccine, pneumococcal conjugate vaccine, and meningococcal B vaccine.

- Catch-up vaccination for diphtheria or tetanus after the first dose of Tdap can be given as Tdap or Td. Tdap can be used wherever only Td vaccine is indicated, e.g., tetanus prophylaxis after wound management.

- CDC 2000 schedule recommends HPV vaccine for individuals 11 to 26 years of age irrespective of gender. Catch up HPV vaccination is recommended up to the age of 26 years who are not fully vaccinated. For individuals between 27 to 45 years, shared decision-making for the HPV vaccine is recommended.

- Shared clinical decision making is advised for PCV13 vaccination for healthy elderly individuals above 65 years without risk factors.

- Few changes are made in Hepatitis A indications for adults. HIV infection, persons experiencing homelessness are added to the existing list. Clotting factor disorders are removed from the list.

- CDC recommends shared clinical decision for the following,

- 
              
- Meningococcal B vaccination for 16 to 23 years
              
              
- HPV vaccine for 27 to 45 years 
              
              
- PCV13 for elderly individuals more than 65 years without risk factors.