The healthcare team (nurse practitioner, primary care provider, internist, endocrinologist, bariatric surgeon, pharmacist, and obesity nurse) should implement many strategies to increase physical activity and fitness for individuals living with obesity and includes utilizing “exercise vital signs,” tracking exercise, motivational interviewing, and periodic check-ins. Currently, the following could potentially be implemented into practice to encourage patients living with obesity to exercise:

- Utilizing exercise as a vital sign in individuals with obesity: Obtaining current exercise and physical activity habits from patients could serve as another vital sign and would include understanding the intensity, mode, and duration of the exercise performed weekly by the patient. Providers could have electronic medical records (EMRs) to prompt patients who are living with obesity to have discussions with the patient regarding their physical activity. These prompts on the EMR can be input by the medical assistants who may ask at the beginning of the appointment, just like taking blood pressure and pulse.

- Utilizing exercise trackers: Several devices can track heart rate, motion, exercise, MVPA, and beyond. Providers could potentially use these data to ensure that the patient is exercising, and could point towards potential problems that may arise due to abnormal heart or exercise responses. Examples include smartwatches, cellular smartphones, pedometers, heart rate monitors, etc.

- Motivational Interviewing: To drive the point home further, nurses, CNAs, physicians, and anyone else involved in the healthcare setting for this patient could employ/use motivational interviewing techniques with the patient to reflect, plan, and execute different action plans to ensure that patients are meeting their exercise goals.

- Check-Ins: Technology is allowing individuals to interact now more than ever. Physicians and patients could potentially use these technological advances to develop relationships further. Utilizing technology to have doctor-patient check-ins regarding their exercise may increase adherence of individuals living with obesity to exercise programs. These could include developing an app that alerts patients and/or the doctor when exercise habits are not sufficient, thus prompting a check-in from the physician using motivational interviewing asking why the patient has or hasn’t exercised according to plan.