# Introduction

High-Fidelity Simulation (HFS) is a misunderstood term. Too often, HFS is mistakenly used to refer to a particular simulation modality, namely, the full-body, high-complexity patient simulator. However, modality and fidelity are two distinct components of simulation design, and both impact the overall effectiveness of the activity.high-fidelity simulation is not used consistently throughout simulation literature. Yet, numerous published studies are attempting to measure its influence.

The Healthcare Simulation Dictionary recognizes both fidelity and modality as “potentially controversial” terms; acknowledgment on the part of simulation experts that there is a disparity in the usage of these terms in the literature (Joseph Lopreiato, MD personal communication, May 2020). Modality is the term used to refer to the type(s) of simulation equipment or methodology used in an SBLE, such as a task trainer, standardized or simulated patient (SP), full-body manikin, or screen-based simulation. Continuous advancements in technology explain some of the difficulty in clearly defining this term and the categories found within it.

Fidelity in simulation is a multi-dimensional concept corresponding to the degree of realism created through the selection of simulation equipment, setting, and scenario.Fidelity also refers to the degree of exactness achieved;

# Function

The benefits and limitations of SBLE are well-documented. This article supports the how, when, and why of integrating HFS as a teaching/learning methodology.

# Issues of Concern

When considering the level of fidelity, more is not always better. Simulation educators need to avoid the fidelity trap, assuming students learn in proportion to the level of realism.higher-faster-further attitude espoused by some of today’s learners and educators can lead to using the highest level of fidelity in all instances, which can lead to a misuse of valuable resources and a skewed cost-benefit ratio.

Simulation is resource-intensive, generally requiring a more significant expenditure of resources.

# Curriculum Development

The How of HFS involves every aspect of simulation design from the selection of modality through the determination of type(s) and level(s) of fidelity. It begins with the identification of the desired outcomes based on the stated learning objectives.

The term fidelity must be defined, and the levels and types of fidelity explored, before the use of HFS can be implemented. Along with calculating the appropriate level of fidelity, another essential element of simulation design is determining the type(s) of fidelity involved in achieving the requisite level of realism for the attainment of the stated objectives. The three primary types of fidelity are physical, conceptual, and psychological.

Physical or environmental fidelity is that which can be perceived by the senses. It is concerned with what the participant sees, hears, feels, and smells in the setting. It is vital to note lapses in physical fidelity are better accepted by participants than lapses in conceptual fidelity.

Additional classifications of fidelity occur in the current literature, including functional fidelity and sociological fidelity. Functional fidelity refers to the dynamic interaction between the participant and the assigned task, and it is essential when teaching technical or psychomotor skills. The more precise the skill or procedure, the higher the level of functional fidelity required.

The desired level and type of fidelity will inform the selection of simulation modality.

Task trainers, models representing a part or region of the body designed for practicing specific procedural skills, allow the development of technical skills. These devices focus on functional fidelity and range from low- to high-fidelity. Task trainers represent a simulation modality most often referred to as procedural simulation. They can be very high-tech, which may or may not translate into a higher level of fidelity. Task trainers might employ haptic feedback technology to provide tactile realism, increasing the level of physical fidelity.

Maximizing realism can occur by addressing other elements of the simulation design, in addition to the selected modality. Moulage is a low-tech method for making a situation appear more authentic; it refers to the techniques such as makeup and molds, applied to a manikin or SP to simulate illness or injury. Moulage engages the participant’s sensory perceptions.  Smells, visual & auditory cues, and materials that enhance tactile perceptions are all ways to increase the fidelity of the experience for learners.

The When of HFS involves consideration of both the learner and the desired objective. Conventionally, educators believed the level of fidelity should correspond with the level of the learner, low-fidelity SBLE for novices, and higher levels of fidelity for expert learners.

An understanding of educational principles guides the determination of the fidelity level. HFS is a practical methodology for teaching, assessing, and evaluating both knowledge and skills. It is appropriate at all four levels of Miller’s Pyramid of Clinical Competence (see Figure 1).

The experiential nature of HFS promotes student engagement, impacting knowledge acquisition, retention, and retrieval.

Pairing task trainers with standardized patients or full-body, computerized manikins representing a mixed-modal or multi-modal simulation activity, can add another dimension of realism to the simulation activity. The added features generated by the incorporation of multiple modalities allow the practice of other skills, such as communication, teamwork, and decision-making, alongside the more technical skills.

When repeated exposure to the activity is necessary for the attainment of the expected outcomes, lower-cost, lower-fidelity experiences may be preferred.

The as-if concept is central to effective SBLE; it affords facilitators the freedom to tailor the activity to fit the learner’s needs. It allows for a distorted state or hyper-realism, which can positively impact learning.

# Medical Decision Making and Leadership Development

Clinical reasoning involves pattern recognition developed through repetitive exposure to similar situations.

Deliberate practice with task trainers allows learners to hone skills and build confidence in their abilities. Advancements in technology are enabling task trainers to become very specialized; for instance, cardiology programs can offer learners simulators for transesophageal echocardiography, coronary angiography, electrophysiology, and transcatheter aortic valve replacement. The experience gained through the use of these devices reduces the risk to patients.

Several studies indicate HFS increases the participant’s confidence in their knowledge and skills.

# Clinical Significance

To appreciate the Why of HFS, consider some truths about traditional clinical education and how HFS alleviates some of the burden associated with the apprentice model of healthcare education. Learning in the conventional clinical setting cannot be student-focused or manipulated, as the needs and safety of the patient must always take precedence. It is impossible to provide standardized experiences for all learners. Access to clinical sites can be challenging to secure and schedule.

Simulation activities are planned and predictable. They are learner-centered and can be tailored to the needs and level of the learner and adapted to fit varying learning styles.

The transferability of learning is of prime interest to educators. Simulation activities that closely resemble real-life add a degree of authenticity that allows learners to take the knowledge and skills they develop in the simulated setting and apply them in the clinical arena. The type of fidelity requiring the highest levels of realism is dependent upon the practiced skills where a) proficiency in technical skills require higher functional fidelity, b) clinical reasoning and decision-making skills benefit from conceptual fidelity, and c) sociological fidelity levels impact teamwork, communication, and leadership skill development.

One possible downside to HFS is the potential for students to become overconfident as a result of participating in this type of SBLE activity. Educators need to watch for signs of this adverse effect, as it can lead participants to engage in risk-taking behaviors in the clinical setting.

# Pearls and Other Issues

HFS is an effective strategy for teaching, assessing, and evaluating a wide range of learners from all healthcare disciplines.  Pre-licensure students can benefit from participation in HFS, but educators may want to scaffold simulation activities allowing novice learners to build knowledge, skill, and confidence with low-fidelity stimulation (LFS) activities before HFS.

The level of fidelity employed in any simulation activity should merit careful consideration, along with all other aspects of the experience.  The required level of fidelity for any SBLE is the one that is necessary to achieve the desired participant outcomes. Higher levels of fidelity can increase participants’ level of engagement and acceptability of the simulated experience; this will impact the achievement of the desired learning objectives and the ability to transfer the learning to the clinical setting.

Trained simulation educators, versed in the standards of best practice, provide the expertise to develop and implement high-quality SBLE; they understand that level and type of fidelity are key considerations when designing SBLE. The SBLE must be considered in its entirety, recognizing that fidelity is one aspect of the activity.  Some of the current research that attempts to compare HFS to LFS does not account for variances in other components of the activities.  For instance, the inclusion or omission of a structured debriefing will have a significant impact on the effectiveness of a simulation activity, regardless of the level of fidelity.

The role of fidelity and its impact on learning outcomes requires additional research and clarification of the associated terminology. The terms high-fidelity and high-fidelity simulation are used in such wide and diverse contexts, their meaning is either lost

# Enhancing Healthcare Team Outcomes

One goal of SBLE is to improve patient outcomes, and HFS is an effective strategy for teaching all levels of learners, a range of skills that will realize this goal.

Multidisciplinary or IPE simulations afford participants opportunities to navigate group dynamics, such as hierarchy and authority gradients, and their effect on teamwork.

Conducting in situ HFS activities in the clinical environment allows for system-level evaluation and improvement. Allowing participants to be directly involved in the discovery and addressing of issues can facilitate organizational change. It is also possible for educators to purposefully add mistakes to the simulation activity, providing opportunities to assess adherence to safety protocols and their effectiveness.