Patients with cirrhosis can be asymptomatic or symptomatic, depending on whether their cirrhosis is clinically compensated or decompensated. In compensated cirrhosis, patients are usually asymptomatic, and their disease is detected incidentally by labs, physical exams, or imaging. One of the common findings is mild to moderate elevation in aminotransferases or gamma-glutamyl transpeptidase with possible enlarged liver or spleen on the exam. On the other hand, patients with decompensated cirrhosis usually present with a wide range of signs and symptoms arising from a combination of liver dysfunction and portal hypertension. The diagnosis of ascites, jaundice, hepatic encephalopathy, variceal bleeding, or hepatocellular carcinoma in a patient with cirrhosis signifies the transition from a compensated to a decompensated phase of cirrhosis. Other cirrhosis complications include spontaneous bacterial peritonitis and hepatorenal syndrome, which occur in patients who have ascites.

**Multiple Organs Affected**

**Gastrointestinal**

Portal hypertension can cause ascites, hepatosplenomegaly, and prominence of the periumbilical abdominal veins resulting in caput medusa. Esophageal varices are another complication of cirrhosis secondary to increased blood flow in the collateral circulation, with a mortality rate of at least 20% at six weeks after a bleeding episode.

**Hematologic**

Anemia can occur due to folate deficiency, hemolytic anemia (spur cell anemia in severe alcoholic liver disease), and hypersplenism. There can be pancytopenia due to hypersplenism in portal hypertension, impaired coagulation, disseminated intravascular coagulation, and hemosiderosis in cirrhosis patients due to different causes.

**Renal**
****

Patients with cirrhosis are prone to develop hepatorenal syndrome secondary to systemic hypotension and renal vasoconstriction, causing the underfilling phenomenon. Splanchnic vasodilation in cirrhosis leads to decreased effective blood flow to the kidneys, which activates the RAAS system, leading to retention of sodium and water and renal vascular constriction.

**Pulmonary**
****

Manifestations of cirrhosis include hepatopulmonary syndrome, portopulmonary hypertension, hepatic hydrothorax, decreased oxygen saturation, ventilation-perfusion mismatch, reduced pulmonary diffusion capacity, and hyperventilation.

**Skin**
****

Spider nevi (central arterioles surrounded by multiple smaller vessels that look like a spider, hence the name) are seen in cirrhosis patients secondary to hyperestrogenemia. Liver dysfunction leads to a sex hormone imbalance, causing increased estrogen to free testosterone ratio and the formation of spider nevi.

**Endocrine**
****

Patients with alcoholic liver cirrhosis can develop hypogonadism and gynecomastia. The pathophysiology is multifactorial, mainly due to the hypersensitivity of estrogen and androgen receptors seen in cirrhotic patients. Hypothalamic pituitary dysfunction has also been implicated in the development of these conditions.

**Nail Changes**

Clubbing, hypertrophic osteoarthropathy, and the Dupuytren contracture are seen. Other nail changes include azure lunules (Wilson disease), Terry nails, and Muehrcke nails.

**Others**

Fetor hepaticus (sweet, musty breath smell due to high levels of dimethyl sulfide and ketones in the blood) and asterixis (flapping tremor when the arms are extended and the hands are dorsiflexed) are both features of hepatic encephalopathy that can be seen in cirrhosis.

Physical examination in patients with cirrhosis may reveal stigmata of chronic liver disease (spider telangiectasias, palmar erythema, Dupuytren's contractures, gynecomastia, testicular atrophy), signs of portal hypertension (ascites, splenomegaly, caput medusae, Cruveilhier-Baumgarten murmur- epigastric venous hum), signs of hepatic encephalopathy (confusion, asterixis, and fetor hepaticus), and other features such as jaundice, bilateral parotid enlargement, and scant chest/axillary hair.