Maternal-fetal surgeries are challenging and complex; they demand a ready availability of multidisciplinary teams, including anesthesia, obstetrician, fetal surgeon, radiologist, cardiologist, neonatologist, feto-maternal medicine, nurses, and ancillary staff. Fetal operating suites usually consist of two adjacent operating rooms with multidisciplinary teams ready to resuscitate and carry out neonatal intervention if needed. Anesthesia for fetal surgery is unique and meticulous. It is directed to two patients: first, the parturient who has altered physiology related to pregnancy, and second the fetus needs to be anesthetized and maintained on placental circulation. In recent years because of a better understanding of the maternal and fetal pathophysiology and promising results from the fetal surgeries, it has been expanding in terms of indications and numbers. Broadly it can be divided into:

- Minimally Invasive Fetal Surgery: These are the fetal surgeries done with the help of the fetoscope through the abdominal wall under ultrasound guidance. They are carried out either late into the second trimester or third trimester. These are usually done.

- 
              
- To place stents/shunts: Thoraco-amniotic shunt placement, vesico-amniotic shunt
              
              
- To coagulate vascular structures or the umbilical cord. Twin-twin transfusion syndrome (TTTS), Selective fetal laser procedure, Twin Reverse Arterial Perfusion (TRAP) Syndrome, Radiofrequency ablation of the acardiac/acephalic twin.
              
              
- For Mid-gestation Fetoscopic Procedures: Fetoscopic MMC repair, fetoscopic endoluminal tracheal occlusion (FETO) for Congenital Diaphragmatic Hernia, Ballon valvuloplasty or septoplasty for aortic/pulmonary stenosis

- Mid-gestation Open Procedures: Surgery on the fetus through hysterotomy, part of the fetus is exposed, operated on placental circulation, and replaced in the uterus for the remainder of the pregnancy.

- Myelomeningocele repair
- Resection of congenital cystic adenomatoid malformation (CCAM)
- Resection of other intrathoracic masses compromising heart and lung development
- Congenital diaphragmatic hernia
- Sacrococcygeal tumor resection

- EXIT (Ex-Utero Intrapartum Treatment): This is indicated for the high-risk deliveries, which are not lethal in utero and can wait until term without hampering significant growth of organs but may not be compatible with life immediately after birth. The fetus is delivered through a cesarean section, the fetal airway and circulation are ensured before discontinuing the fetoplacental circulation. This is also called operation on placental support (OOPS).

- Laryngoscopy and intubation +/- bronchoscopy for a cervical neck mass
- ECMO (extracorporeal membrane oxygenation) cannulation for severe lung hypoplasia 
- Congenital high airway obstruction (CHAOS)
- Second stage FETO procedure