According to the FDA, methocarbamol is contraindicated in individuals with a history of drug hypersensitivity to methocarbamol or component products.

Importantly, IV methocarbamol is contraindicated in renal impairment due to the presence of polyethylene glycol, which independently is associated with metabolic acidosis, renal injury, and hyperosmolarity.

There have been multiple studies evaluating the abuse potential of methocarbamol. Animal studies have shown low abuse potential when methocarbamol is compared to benzodiazepines and barbiturates.

Methocarbamol should not be used in patients with myasthenia gravis taking acetylcholinesterase inhibitors. This recommendation is in the package insert and based on a case report of an exacerbation of muscle weakness and fatigue associated with methocarbamol's anticholinergic effects.

SMRs, including methocarbamol, are included in the Beers Criteria as medications that should be avoided in adults older than 65 years of age. They have been associated with a small but statistically significant increase in injury for elderly patients. This theoretical "injury" is based on retrospective case-control analyses evaluating patients who present to urgent care facilities, emergency rooms, and hospitals. The primary diagnoses of concern include fall, non-vertebral fracture, soft-tissue injury, and other cognitive or psycho-motor disruption. The absolute risk increase from methocarbamol calculated from the extant data is approximately 0.2%. All SMRs share anticholinergic properties that may contribute to sedation, falls, confusion, and polypharmacy in elderly patients, and methocarbamol is no exception.

Methocarbamol is classified as Pregnancy Category C, as it has not been systematically studied in pregnant women. In addition, based on animal studies, methocarbamol is known to cross the placenta and is excreted in breast milk. Therefore, it is not recommended for use in women who may become pregnant or who are breastfeeding.