Treatment in the setting of malabsorption syndromes targets correcting deficiencies, treating the underlying cause, avoiding triggers (typically dietary), and treating symptoms (e,g often diarrhea).

Misdiagnosis or missed diagnosis of a malabsorption syndrome could cause harm or have no effect. Therefore, treatment should focus on treating the underlying cause, which depends on the diagnosis since malabsorption syndromes stem from their defects.

Treatment could be as conservative as dietary changes such as food avoidance or supplementation but could be as invasive as surgery (e.g., transplants, resections).

- Treatment for lactose intolerance, regardless of cause, includes avoidance of limiting dairy, lactase supplements, a plan to supplement calcium should calcium deficiency develop.

- Treating rheumatism with disease-modifying antirheumatic drugs (DMARDs), anti-necrosis factor-alpha, or glucocorticoids would spread Tropheryma Whipple infection in Whipple disease, which could prove fatal.

- Endoscopic retrograde cholangiopancreatography (ERCP) could be curative when removing an obstructing stone in pancreatitis, and pancreatic enzyme replacement would be indicated for exocrine pancreatic insufficiency.

- Assessing and improving nutrition status should be included in any treatment plan regardless of diagnosis.

Diagnosis-driven management is also necessary for the relief of patient symptoms. For example, it is important to determine the cause of a patient’s diarrhea because incorrect treatment could exacerbate symptoms.

As can be seen following resection and results from excess bile acids in the colon, secretory diarrhea is treated differently from malabsorption diarrhea. Bile salt binders are indicated in secretory diarrhea to reduce osmotic load but would exacerbate diarrhea if malabsorption due to insufficient bile salts or bile salt dysfunction is the cause. In more transient malabsorption syndromes, antibiotics could cause a patient’s diarrhea or the cure if due to a bacterial infectious process.

Therefore, malabsorption syndromes must be evaluated and diagnosed for successfully managing the patient’s condition and symptoms indicated for the etiology.