**Absorption**

The majority of ingested fructose is absorbed passively via glucose transporter 5 (GLUT5), also known as solute carrier family 2 facilitated glucose transporter member 5 (SLC2A5), which has a high binding affinity for fructose with a Km of 6 mM. Then GLUT 2 or SLC2A2 transports it into the bloodstream. The transport rate of fructose and intestinal GLUT5 mRNA levels is deficient during gestation and rapidly increases after weaning regardless of diet, but they are further enhanced by introducing fructose-rich diets. In addition, high-fructose food enhances the thioredoxin interacting protein (TXNIP) in the intestine, which binds and regulates GLUT5 mediated fructose transport in the intestine. A transcription factor, carbohydrate-responsive element-binding protein (ChREBP), regulates GLUT5 and TXNIP expression, necessary for systemic fructose tolerance.

**Proper Metabolic Pathway**

- In adipose tissue and muscle, hexokinase phosphorylates fructose to synthesize fructose 6-phosphate, which then enters into glycolysis. Hexokinase, on the other hand, phosphorylates the majority of hexoses, including glucose. Furthermore, the Km of hexokinase for fructose is exponentially higher than that of glucose. Therefore, as glucose is a more favorable substrate for hexokinase, it competitively inhibits fructose phosphorylation by hexokinase.

- In the liver, kidney, and intestine, fructokinase (or ketohexokinase) phosphorylates fructose at the first carbon position to synthesize fructose 1-phosphate. Thus, most fructose is incorporated into the metabolic pathway through the fructokinase-catalyzed reaction, as glucokinase has poor substrate specificity for fructose. Fructokinase occurs in two different isoforms, isoform A and isoform C. In addition to having a ubiquitous tissue distribution, Isoform A has a lower affinity for fructose, which seems to diminish the amount of fructose available for metabolism by the liver. However, Isoform C is mainly present in the liver, intestine, and kidney and has a high affinity for fructose, leading to the rapid incorporation of fructose for metabolism. Then, fructose 1-phosphate aldolase or aldolase B degrades fructose 1-phosphate into dihydroxyacetone phosphate and glyceraldehyde. Finally, dihydroxyacetone phosphate enters glycolysis via triosephosphate isomerase, while triose kinase phosphorylates glyceraldehyde to form glyceraldehyde 3-phosphate. Thus, these two triose phosphates degrade by glycolysis or serve as a substrate for gluconeogenesis, the final fate of a considerable proportion of fructose metabolism in the liver.

- In the polyol pathway, glucose converts into sorbitol by aldolase reductase. Sorbitol further oxidizes into fructose by sorbitol dehydrogenase, which accounts for the appearance of fructose in seminal plasma. A seminal vesicle, hepatocytes, and ovarian cells express aldose reductase and sorbitol dehydrogenase, which synthesize fructose from the glucose.

**Regulation**

- **Regulation of fructose metabolism in the liver:**The processing of fructose in the liver is not controlled by hormone or allosteric mechanisms, and fructose bypasses the rate-limiting step of glycolysis catalyzed by phosphofructokinase 1 (PFK 1). Hence, fructose metabolism is less tightly regulated and occurs at a much faster rate than glucose. Furthermore, aldolase-B performs a lysis step distinct from aldolase in glycolysis, producing dihydroxyacetone phosphate and glyceraldehyde due to its activity. The latter, in contrast to the products of aldolase, must be phosphorylated to function.

- **Regulation at fructose uptake and phosphorylation:**Fructose 1-phosphate acts as a positive allosteric modulator of glucokinase. The possible allosteric activity and high Km of glucokinase are due to the attachment of inhibitory glucokinase-regulatory protein inside the nucleus, which decreases the affinity of glucokinase for fructose. The translocation of the glucokinase-regulatory protein complex to the nucleus results in the inhibition of the glucokinase activity. To relieve this inhibition, fructose-1-phosphate binds to the glucokinase-regulatory protein and stabilizes the dissociated protein. Insulin and postprandial glucose stimulate the dissociation of glucokinase-regulatory protein and transport it from the nucleus. Fructose phosphorylation is predominantly dependent on fructose concentration in tissues such as the liver, and a rise in fructose concentration leads to a decrease in cellular ATP.

- Metabolites of fructose enter the triose phosphate pool distal to PFK 1, bypassing the PFK 1 regulatory step. Thus, fructose loads can cause significant, rapid augmentations in the triose and hexose phosphate pools, potentially providing more substrate for all central carbon metabolic pathways, such as glycolysis, gluconeogenesis, glycogenesis, oxidative phosphorylation, and lipogenesis, because hepatic fructolysis is unrestricted.

**Comparison of fructolysis and glycolysis**

Metabolic changes during the fructose-based diet:

Pyruvate, acetyl CoA, ATP, and citrate do not act as feedback inhibitors. So all fructose molecules metabolize through glycolysis only.

Excess pyruvate directs to various metabolic pathways such as fatty acid synthesis, cholesterol, and very-low-density lipoprotein (VLDL) synthesis. In addition, fructose also activates a hepatic transcription factor, ChREBP, which upregulates acetyl CoA carboxylase and fatty acid synthase in the liver.

Additionally, excess fructose leads to hyperuricemia as metabolism uses inorganic phosphate in making fructose 1-phosphate. The depleted inorganic phosphate decreases cellular ATP (adenosine triphosphate). As ATP falls, adenosine monophosphate (AMP) rises. Further degradation of AMP produces hyperuricemia and lactic acidosis.

Glycerol 3-phosphate dehydrogenase converts dihydroxyacetone phosphate into glycerol 3-phosphate, which also enters into gluconeogenesis and synthesizes glucose.

Thus a person on a high fructose diet produces hypercholesterolemia, hypertriglyceridemia, hyperuricemia, and hyperglycemia. In addition, consumption of a high fructose diet correlates with obesity, metabolic syndrome, gout, and diabetes mellitus.

Metabolic changes during the glucose-based diet:

Glucose enters glycolysis and produces pyruvate, acetyl CoA, citrate, and ATP, which inhibit PFK 1 by feedback inhibition and diverts excess glucose towards alternative pathways like glycogen synthesis.