As previously discussed, there are multiple classifications for choledochal cysts; however, Todani’s modified classification implemented in 1977, which includes 5 types of CCs, is the most widely used by clinicians.

**Type I**

Type I cysts represent 50% to 80% of CCs and are characterized by cystic dilation of the common bile duct. It is further divided into three subgroups. Type IA involves cystic dilation of the whole extrahepatic biliary tree, with APBJ. Type IB involves segmental dilation of the extrahepatic biliary tree, without APBJ. Type IC involves diffuse fusiform dilation of the whole extrahepatic biliary tree with APBJ. Todani suggested in 2003 that this dilation could continuously extend into the intrahepatic duct.

**Type II**

Type II cysts represent 2% of CCs. It involves diverticular dilation anywhere along the extrahepatic duct.

**Type III**

Type III cysts, also known as choledochocele, represent 1.4% to 4.5% of CCs. It involves Intraduodenal cystic dilation of the distal common bile duct.

**Type IV**

Type IV cysts represent 15% to 35% of CCs and are multiple. It is further divided into 2 subgroups. Type IVA involves multiple dilations affecting both the intrahepatic and extrahepatic biliary tree. Type IVB involves multiple dilations confined to the extrahepatic biliary tree

**Type V**

Type V cysts, also known as Caroli’s disease, represent 20% of CCs. It involves multiple dilations confined to the intrahepatic biliary tree. Caroli syndrome refers to the presence of type V CC as well as congenital hepatic fibrosis.