The architecture of the supraspinatus muscle has been described in multiple ways, from fusiform to circumpennate. A more detailed analysis of the structure through MRI studies reveals the complexity of the architecture. In 1993, the supraspinatus was described as including anterior and posterior muscle bellies. Further research has demonstrated that the two bellies differ in function. Roh et al. described the structure of the supraspinatus muscle and found that the tendon of the anterior belly as thicker and more tubular in structure, whereas the posterior tendon was flatter and wider in each of the 25 embalmed cadaveric shoulders they examined.

While it is noteworthy that in the literature, there is no agreement regarding the determination of tensile load from the physiologic cross-sectional area, the authors assumed a linear relationship between the two variables utilizing ratios rather than absolute values. Based on the ratios noted, the authors concluded that the anterior tendon would experience as much as 288% more stress than the posterior tendon.

Roh et al. defined the structure of the anterior belly as fusiform with an origin entirely from the supraspinous fossa.

The muscle fibers of the posterior belly inserted directly into the flatter, thicker external posterior tendon comprised 60% of the thickness of the supraspinatus tendon. The authors further calculated the tendon stress attributed to the anterior and posterior muscle bellies indicating the anterior tendon is subjected to 2.88 times greater stress than the posterior tendon. They also noted the histologic intratendinous structural differences between the two portions of the supraspinatus tendon, with the anterior portion of the tendon demonstrating a double-layered interwoven pattern of fibers versus thin, dispersed fibers in the posterior division of the tendon. This finding supported the force calculations of the study.

Fallon et al. examined the histological morphology of the supraspinatus tendon and identified four structural subunits within the tendon: tendon proper, attachment fibrocartilage (approx. 2.8 cm in length), rotator cable (extension of the coracohumeral ligament), and capsule.

The supraspinatus muscle and tendon both pass deep to the acromion process to insert onto the super facet of the greater tuberosity of the humerus — the inferior portion of the tendon blends with the joint capsule about 1 cm before the attachment on the bone. The superior portion of the tendon is contiguous with both the coracohumeral and transverse humeral ligaments. This position and location allow the muscle to perform the function of abduction of the humerus. Along with deltoid, supraspinatus has motor involvement with both the initiation and continuation of abduction throughout the range of motion. The supraspinatus has also been shown to contribute weakly to the lateral rotation of the humerus. Along with the other rotator cuff muscles, supraspinatus stabilizes the humerus head on the glenoid fossa during joint movements and acts with the deltoid to limit inferior displacement of the humeral head.