The pleural space and the neighboring tissues are important to understanding the pathophysiology of traumatic pneumothorax. The potential space between the visceral pleural lining and the parietal pleural lining is normally one that allows for movement of tissue without occupying a large area within the thorax. When this space is violated from trauma, blood and air can enter this potential space. The increasing pressure in this space results in various pathologies. This increased area of pressure then exerts its effects on the surrounding tissues. This interference will lead to changes in normal intrathoracic pressure which can hinder blood flow and ventilation to the thorax.

Three broad classes of traumatic pneumothorax are simple, tension, and communicating. Simple pneumothorax occurs due to the injury to the lining of the lung or pleura that allows for the accumulation of air in that pleural space. The majority of these occur in the setting of blunt trauma. The blunt force results in broken ribs that can injure the pleura or lung tissue itself. This direct injury will allow air to enter into the potential space between the parietal and visceral pleura. The presence of air will not cause effects to the neighboring structures unless a large amount of air and pressure accumulate.

Tension pneumothorax can be thought of as a continuum of the simple pneumothorax. Tension pneumothorax occurs when a large accumulation of air in the pleural space leads to the increased thoracic pressure that results in compression of other thoracic structures. This effect on the pulmonary tissues will lead to the collapse of the lung which causes diminished ventilation and oxygenation as the normal intrathoracic negative pressure used for ventilation becomes compromised. Compression of the vasculature from the displacement by the pneumothorax will cause decreased venous return and a drop in cardiac output. This resistance to blood flow results in obstructive shock with tachycardia and eventual hypotension and, if left untreated, can result in cardiac arrest.

Open or communicating pneumothorax is the result of a penetrating injury through the chest wall which allows for communication of air between the atmosphere and the potential pleural space. This leads to dysfunction when negative pressure forces produced during thoracic cavity expansion allow for air to enter the pleural space. Instead of the normal negative pressure inside the thorax that is essential for ventilation, atmospheric pressure develops and impedes air movement. Unlike the simple pneumothorax, the open pneumothorax cannot lead to tension physiology as the open communication allows for air to escape when pressure builds beyond atmospheric pressure. Due to the effects of inspiration, this injury still can lead to respiratory failure unless corrected