Fibrinogen replacement therapy can be provided intravenously using fresh frozen plasma (FFP), cryoprecipitate and fibrinogen concentrate, and topically using liquid adhesives.

1. Fresh frozen plasma:

Plasma has extensive usage in trauma and massive transfusion to replenish coagulation factors. However, this is not an ideal source for fibrinogen repletion as the concentration is 1 to 3 mg/ml. It also requires larger volumes if only FFP is used to supplement coagulation factors which can cause complications associated with fluid overload.

2. Cryoprecipitate:

It is a concentrate of high-molecular-weight plasma proteins prepared by the thawing of FFP. It contains fibrinogen, factor VIII, VWF, factor XIII, and fibronectin. Each unit of 10-20 ml contains approximately 200-250 mg of fibrinogen.

- Requires ABO compatibility

- Requires thawing before administration which causes delay during massive transfusion

- It carries the risk of pathogen transmission.

- Larger volumes required as compared to fibrinogen concentrate (but lower than FFP)

3. Fibrinogen concentrate:

Commercial fibrinogen concentrates are obtained from pooled human plasma by a cryoprecipitation procedure. It is available as a lyophilized powder at room temperature that can be quickly reconstituted using sterile water. There are four fibrinogen concentrates commercially available; however, only one is available globally. In contrast to FFP and cryoprecipitate, it has the following advantages

- It has a minimal risk of infections because of viral inactivation during the manufacturing process.

- Accurate and consistent dosing because of standardized concentration

- Low volume infusion

- Rapid administration, as it doesn’t require thawing or cross-matching

The initial dose depends on bleeding and initial fibrinogen concentration. Dose calculation uses the following formula:

[Target fibrinogen (mg/dL) - measured fibrinogen (mg/dL)] / correction factor

The correction factor for various commercial products is 1.7 to 1.8; check the package insert for the product to determine which to use.

The subsequent doses can be calculated based on the patient’s trough plasma fibrinogen level. It should never be mixed with other medicinal products or intravenous solutions. It should be administered slowly through a separate injection site.

The extensive use of point-of-care testing using ROTEM/TEG intraoperatively in determining the dose of fibrinogen has been a focus of study in various clinical trials.

4. Liquid adhesives

It is available as liquid fibrin glue and stiff fibrin patch. It contains a freeze-dried concentrate of clotting proteins, mainly fibrinogen, Factor XIII, fibronectin (the sealant), and freeze-dried thrombin (the catalyst). It acts by participating in the formation of a fibrin clot in the coagulation cascade. It is effective and preferred in patients with disorders of the coagulation pathway. The utmost care should be taken to avoid intravascular administration to avoid the risk of thromboembolism. The use of tranexamic acid-containing adhesives should be avoided in cerebrospinal fluid leakage or dural tear to prevent neurotoxicity. It is available as liquid fibrin glue, which controls bleeding from a large and regular raw surface, and stiff fibrin patch, which is usable for irregular or deep raw surfaces.