The talus is an irregular “saddle-shaped” bone composed of the head, neck, and body. Located on the anterior aspect of the talus, the head articulates anteriorly with the navicular to form the talonavicular (TN) joint, inferiorly with the calcaneus at the anterior facet to form the anterior talocalcaneal (TC) joint, and with both the navicular and calcaneus to form the talocalcaneonavicular (TCN) joint. The talar neck connects the head and the body, and the inferior aspect of the neck on the posteromedial aspect forms the narrow tarsal canal, which turns into the wider sinus tarsi on the anterolateral aspect of the talus. Comprising a majority of the talus, the body has three processes (medial, lateral, posterior), two facets (middle and posterior), two tubercles (medial and lateral), and one talar dome. On the medial aspect of the talar body, the medial process serves as a site for ligamentous attachment, and the middle facet articulates with the calcaneal sustentaculum tali. On the lateral aspect of the talar body, the large triangular-shaped lateral process articulates with the fibula superiorly and forms the posterior facet inferiorly, which articulates with the calcaneus to form the posterior TC joint. The posterior aspect of the talar body is made up of the posteromedial posterior process, which splits into the medial and lateral tubercle. The flexor hallicus longus tendon is between the medial and lateral tubercle. Located on the superior aspect of the talar body, the talar dome (also called the talar trochlea), articulates superiorly with the tibia and fibula to form the tibiotalar (talocrural) joint.

The talus has a variable morphology of its articular facets used to articulate with the calcaneus in the subtalar joint (the anterior, middle, and posterior facets). Patients from different backgrounds may have different morphology; a Modified Boyan Classification of talus describes the variable morphology. Type A talus has three articular facets, which are entirely separated and further classified on the distance between the anterior and middle facet; type A1 has less than 2mm, type A2 has 2-5mm, and type A3 has over 5mm. Type B Talus has two articular facets, where type B1 has incomplete separation of the anterior and middle facets, type B2 has no separation of the anterior and middle facets (complete fusion), and type B3 has a fused middle and posterior facet, with a separate anterior facet. Type C talus has one articular facet, where the anterior, middle, and posterior facets are all fused as one continuous facet. Variations in talus morphology contribute to different biomechanics of the subtalar joint, and research has determined that Type A tali provide the most stability.

Acting as a bridge between the leg and foot, the talus distributes body weight to the foot and contributes biomechanically to various movements of the foot and ankle through the subtalar, transverse tarsal (Chopart), and talocrural joints.

- Subtalar Joint: A functional joint consisting of three anatomic components, the TCN joint, tarsal canal/sinus tarsi, and the TC joint, which all contribute to inversion and eversion of the foot. Additionally, the subtalar joint transmits body weight from the talus to the medial and lateral longitudinal arches of the foot, playing an essential role in the maintenance of proper foot alignment. The TCN has been described as a ball-and-socket joint (named the coxa pedis), in which the talar head functions as the “femoral head” and the calcaneus and navicular function as the “acetabulum.” The tarsal canal and sinus tarsi contain a complex “V-shaped” ligamentous structure, composed of the inferior extensor retinaculum, cervical ligament, interosseous TC ligament, and the anterior TC ligament, which provides stability during subtalar motion. The posterior TC joint consists of the biconcave posterior facet of the talus, and the biconvex posterior facet of the calcaneus, and is supported by the interosseous TC ligament (extending from the inferior talus to the superior calcaneus), and numerous other soft-tissue structures. (CITE Subtalar Joint Anatomy).

- Transverse Tarsal (Chopart) Joint: A functional joint consisting of the TN and calcaneocuboid (CC) joints, which facilitates movement between the hindfoot (talus and calcaneus) and midfoot (navicular and cuboid). The transverse tarsal joint functions closely with the subtalar joint and also contributes to inversion and eversion of the foot. (CITE Ankle Biomechanics).

- Tibiotalar (Talocrural) Joint: A syndesmotic hinge-joint composed by the distal tibia, distal fibula, and the talar dome, which facilitates dorsiflexion and plantarflexion of the foot. The medial malleolus of the tibia and lateral malleolus of the fibula project inferiorly, creating a pocket for the talar dome to sit in, making the joint a hinge-joint.

The talus serves as a site of attachment for numerous ligaments that stabilize the medial and lateral ankle and foot. The deltoid complex ligament (DCL) and spring ligament are on the medial side. The DCL is composed of superficial and deep layers, with the superficial layer containing the superficial posterior tibiotalar ligament (SPTL), tibiocalcaneal ligament (TCL), tibiospring ligament (TSL), and tibionavicular ligament (TNL) in a posterior-to-anterior order, and the deep layer containing the posterior tibiotalar ligament (PTT), deep tibiocalcaneal ligament (dTCL), and anterior tibiotalar ligament (ATTL) in the same order. The DCL restricts anterior, posterior, and lateral translation of the talus, as well as talus abduction. Additionally, the superomedial ligament (SML) of the spring ligament attaches to the talus on the medial ankle via fatty tissue, which runs from the calcaneus to the navicular and provides support to the talar head through maintaining the longitudinal arch of the foot. The TSL of the DCL connects to the SML, and anatomists have proposed that the components of the DCL and the spring ligament are all part of one continuous medial ankle joint capsule, which provides support to the ankle and subtalar joint. On the lateral aspect of the ankle, the talus serves as an attachment site for the anterior talofibular ligament (ATFL) and posterior talofibular ligament (PTFL). The ATFL originates on the anteroinferior lateral malleolus and inserts anterior to the lateral process of the talus. The PTFL arises on the posteroinferior lateral malleolus and inserts anterior and superior to the lateral tubercle of the talar posterior process. While the calcaneofibular ligament (CFL) does not have a direct attachment on the talus, it is worth noting that is the third lateral ankle ligament. The lateral ankle ligaments function to resist ankle inversion at the subtalar joint and commonly suffer injury in inversion ankle sprains.