Congestive heart failure is caused by structural abnormalities of the heart, functional abnormalities, and other triggering factors. Historically, an overwhelming majority of the cases were due to coronary artery disease and myocardial infarction. Over time, coronary artery disease and diabetes mellitus have become the predominant predisposing factors for heart failure. Other structural causes of congestive heart failure (CHF) include hypertension, valvular heart disease, uncontrolled arrhythmia, myocarditis, and congenital heart disease. Diastolic heart failure with impaired ventricular filling can be caused by restrictive cardiomyopathies and constrictive pericarditis, in addition to the etiologies identified above.

It is important to identify etiologies of decompensated heart failure, as they contribute to most of the morbidity and mortality associated with the disease. The most common cause of decompensated congestive heart failure is inappropriate drug treatment, dietary sodium restriction, and decreased physical activity. Uncontrolled hypertension is the second most common cause of decompensated heart failure.

Another group of diseases associated with "congestive heart failure" leads to high-output cardiac failure. This, by definition, is not an impairment in cardiac function but a failure of the heart to meet the increased systemic demands due to extracardiac diseases. Common etiologies of this type of congestive heart failure include severe anemia, thyrotoxicosis, obesity, nutritional deficiencies (thiamine deficiency, etc.), and pregnancy.

The above-mentioned list of etiologies is not an all-inclusive list but a broad categorization of various etiologies.