The diagnosis of centralized pain is symptoms of pain lasting at least three months, with widespread allodynia or hyperalgesia, without any apparent cause of pain. Centralized pain can be either generalized or in multiple locations in the body. Upon normal pressure of palpation, if the pain is reproducible, there is likely hyperalgesia or allodynia secondary to mechanical pressure over a joint or muscle.[28] Centralized pain is associated with mood changes, fatigue, cognitive disturbances, sleep changes, catastrophizing, and neuropathic pain symptoms (burning, numbness, tingling, and paraesthesias). Generally, patients with central pain syndrome will have multifocal pain, memory complaints, and often comorbid major depressive disorder or generalized anxiety disorder.

The history of the pain should include its onset, description, location, radiation, quality, and severity. Also, the mechanism of injury, if applicable, and factors contributing to its relief or worsening, its frequency, and whether there is any breakthrough pain. Furthermore, associated symptoms should be addressed, such as muscle spasms or aches, temperature changes, restrictions to range of motion, morning stiffness, weakness, muscle strength, sensation, and hair, skin, or nail changes.

Separately, a detailed neurologic exam should be done on the physical exam and an examination of the area exhibiting pain. When evaluating for central pain syndrome, a full musculoskeletal exam is recommended. Further evaluation for symmetrical tender points, as seen in fibromyalgia, should also be considered. To be diagnosed with central pain syndrome, pain is often widespread on the axial skeleton, both sides of the body, and above and below the diaphragm.