Sinuses function to filter out pollutants, microorganisms, dust, and other antigens. Sinuses drain into the intranasal meatus via small channels called ostia. The maxillary, frontal, and anterior ethmoid sinuses drain into the middle meatus, creating a congested area called the osteomeatal complex. The posterior ethmoid and sphenoid sinuses drain into the superior meatus. Tiny hairs called "cilia" line the mucous membranes of the nasal cavity and nasopharynx, and work in an integrated and coordinated fashion to carry out this function of circulating mucus and filtered debris, ultimately leading them to the nasopharynx and oropharynx, where they are swallowed. Rhinosinusitis occurs when the sinuses and nasal passages cannot effectively clear out these antigens, leading to an inflammatory state. This condition usually results from three key factors: obstruction of the sinus ostia (i.e., anatomic causes such as a tumor or septal deviation), dysfunction of the cilia (i.e., Kartagener syndrome), or thickening of sinus secretions (cystic fibrosis). The most common cause of temporary obstruction of these outflow regions is local edema due to upper respiratory tract infections (URI) or nasal allergy, both of which predispose to rhinosinusitis. When this occurs, bacteria can remain in, gain access to, and proliferate within the usually sterile paranasal sinuses. Severe complications can occur when the sinus infection spreads to surrounding structures, such as the brain and orbit, via the valve-less diploic veins. These are veins located within the inner cancellous bone layer of the skull. This is thankfully a rare phenomenon, but important to remember.

Adults have four developed and paired sinus cavities. The ethmoid, sphenoid, frontal, and maxillary sinuses. In children, only the ethmoid and maxillary sinuses are present at birth. The ethmoid sinus separates from the orbit by only a thin layer of bone (the lamina papyrecia). Thus, orbital infections typically arise from the ethmoid sinus, which occurs more often in younger children. The frontal sinuses do not appear to develop until 5 to 6 years of age and do not reach full development until after puberty. Intracranial complications typically arise from the frontal sinuses and thus occur more often in older children or adults. The sphenoid sinus starts to pneumatize at 5 years of age but does not fully develop until 20 to 30 years of age.