Differentials for the case depend on the involved system and, at times, the gestational age at presentation. A few are discussed below:

**Atypical Pneumonia Due to Other Viruses or Organisms**

Influenza, mycoplasma pneumoniae, and pneumocystis carinii pneumonia (in immunocompromised hosts) may present similarly in a pregnant patient, either clinically or radiologically. An RT-PCR for COVID-19 and Influenza, induced sputum for pneumocystis, and cold agglutinin titers may help establish a diagnosis in times of doubt. Given that the host for pneumocystis is immunocompromised, co-occurrence of severe COVID-19 has also been reported.

**Venous Thromboembolism**

A patient in severe respiratory distress may have a pulmonary embolism as the chief cause of the cardiorespiratory compromise rather than severe pneumonia alone. Assessment with a CTPA (with an abdominal shield) may help differentiate patients from those with severe COVID-19 or COVID-19 associated ARDS.

**Peripartum Cardiomyopathy**

In the last trimester and the immediate postpartum period, patients may present with symptoms of acute respiratory distress, which may be attributed to COVID-19 on the pre-test probability of the same in the times of pandemic. However, a vigilant physician will pick up cases with possible peripartum cardiomyopathy, where the patient may present with signs of left ventricular failure and breathlessness. Certain authors have also published cases suggesting COVID-19 as the cause of cardiomyopathy in their patients.

**Heart Failure of Various Etiologies**

Myocarditis may be attributable to COVID-19, and a patient in distress must be evaluated with an electrocardiogram and cardiac enzymes at the very least. A transthoracic echocardiogram may help identify any ventricular dysfunction that may be present.

**HELLP Syndrome**

Several reports have suggested that COVID-19 could mimic, be associated with, or overlap with the catastrophic HELLP syndrome. Management of the same is similarly challenging and requires systematic efforts to avoid adverse maternal and fetal outcomes.

Other extra-pulmonary symptoms will have their own set of differential diagnoses, as per the involved system. Similarly, several radiological differentials for a patient with COVID-19 are independent of the pregnancy status.