Moulage was once the art of wax model making to depict certain conditions for medical education. In the early 1800s, Franz Martens and Joseph Towne were some of the earliest moulage artists. Years later, Charles Lailler and Jules Pierre Francois Baretta worked in conjunction to develop one of the largest collections of wax models for Hospital Saint Louis in Paris. Johann Nepomuk Hoffmayr is yet another moulage artist who was particularly adept at creating a wide range of ophthalmic conditions for educational purposes.

Moulage can be as simple as a bruise or abrasion, or something as complicated as replicating mass casualty injuries such as impalements and burns. Moulage can also include staging an environment to provide even more immersion into a clinical setting. For example, blood pooling on a floor or bed can represent hypovolemia. Personal articles such as photographs in a simulated clinical room can add emotion to a breaking bad news scenario. Clothing can also be modified to demonstrate tears, dirt, etc. for trauma scenarios. Moulage can be effective on both SPs and mannequins. There are some products, such as grease makeup, that stain the silicone-based skin on mannequins. Therefore due diligence should be made to investigate those products before application. The simulation community is growing, and tips and tricks are abundantly published on the internet and within listservs. Lastly, always inquire whether an SP has allergies before applying products, especially those with adhesives and latex.