Muscle cramps are not life-threatening but they may be indicative of a wide range of systemic disorders./because of the varied causes and no definitive test to make the diagnosis, the condition is best managed by an interprofessional team. Physicians and other healthcare providers need to be aware of the different causes and management. The key is to know which muscle cramp is serious and which is benign. In addition, the pharmacist should be fully aware that there are many medications that can induce muscle cramps. In many cases, managing the primary cause can lead to the resolution of the muscle cramp. The majority of muscle cramps subside on their own and hence medical treatment is unnecessary. Patients with ongoing muscle cramps need to be referred to the relevant specialist to determine the cause and management.

The sports nurse should educate patients on proper hydration and stretching prior to any physical activity. In addition, the patient's electrolyte status should be normal. However, the patient should be informed that despite the availability of a vast number of medications, their efficacy is low and unpredictable.

**Outcomes**

Muscle cramps in most people resolve on their own and medical treatment is unnecessary. Because of the spontaneous resolution, it has been difficult to determine the real effectiveness of medications. To date, the majority of medications used to treat muscle cramps have low efficacy and even their therapeutic action is unreliable or unpredictable. What works in one person may not work in another person. As far as quinine is concerned, studies indicate that the drug may not be effective at all. And the drug is also associated with a number of disturbing adverse effects. At present, quinine should not be considered as the first or even the second drug of choice for muscle cramps.