A careful history and physical exam are needed to recognize any undiagnosed syndromes. Assessment of the tongue should include changes in color and consistency as well as the presence of any masses. Further laboratory and imaging tests should be done based on clinical suspicion of a specific condition, for example, thyroid function tests, isotopic imaging of thyroid gland, chromosomal studies, molecular studies for Beckwith Wiedemann syndrome, metabolic profile, urinary mucopolysaccharide assay, and abdominal ultrasound.

Neoplasia should always be considered during the evaluation. If neoplasia is suspected based on the exam, samples of the tongue lesion obtained via fine needle aspiration technique in the clinic by an experienced professional give diagnosis in most cases, and for large lesions biopsy in operating theatre may be needed. Radiographic and cross-sectional imaging may be needed in selected cases, and it is typically not to identify macroglossia, which is usually diagnosed clinically, but rather to identify other underlying pathologies such as masses or vascular malformations.

Computed tomography and magnetic resonance imaging may be useful to delineate soft tissues and to show the extent of tumors and other masses. For some acquired conditions like amyloidosis, a biopsy of other tissues such as skin, the rectum is indicated for definitive diagnosis. Electrocardiogram, echocardiogram, chest X-ray, arterial blood gas analysis may be needed in patients who present with symptoms of chronic airway obstruction to rule out underlying cardiac complications.