Any athlete who has returned to play after a concussion should be watched carefully, even if they have had an appropriate recovery period and completed a return to play protocol. A concussed patient will report any combination of symptoms including a headache, nausea, memory loss, dizziness, blurry vision, confusion, fatigue, photo- or phonophobia, motor or sensory loss, poor hand-eye coordination, or emotional irritability/labiality. On physical examination, the patient may have an altered level of consciousness, retrograde, or post-traumatic amnesia, but generally, difficulty concentrating and balance seems to be consistently impaired.  Additionally, there may be sensory or motor abnormalities, visual abnormalities. Unless the player has been knocked out, if they remain on the field of play may show signs of ataxia, running in the wrong direction, or slowed reaction time.

As concussions have been more widely recognized and the complications related to insufficient recovery have become better recognized, sideline evaluations have developed. Sideline evaluation of cognitive function is an essential component in the assessment of this injury. Brief neuropsychological (NP) test batteries that assess attention and memory function have been shown to be practical and effective. Such tests include the SCAT5, which incorporates the Maddocks' questions and the Standardised Assessment of Concussion (SAC).

For an athlete who has collapsed with a suspected SIS, a Glasgow coma scale score, pupillary reactivity, deep tendon reflexes, upper/lower extremity clonus, and the presence or absence of a Babinski reflex can be done prior to transport or upon arrival at the emergency room.

Due to the challenges of what constitutes a second impact syndrome, the paucity of research, and the rapidly progressing nature of the condition, it is difficult to provide good guidance on an appropriate history and physical exam. Perhaps clinicians should change their mindset and think every concussion they see, especially in male athletes ages 13-24, could be a second impact syndrome and observe the injured athlete closely for progressing signs or symptoms.