CD4 count depletion is a consequence of HIV infection and leads to devastating opportunistic infections when left untreated. It affects both CD4 helper T cells in the lymphoid tissue as well as T cells circulating in the peripheral blood. In the natural history of HIV infection, there is an abrupt decline in the CD4 count during acute HIV infection that is usually followed by a rebound as a result of CD8 lymphocyte response to viral replication. Without antiretroviral treatment, the CD4 count will then decline over the next several years.

CD4 cell counts are used to monitor the immunologic response to ART. With effective viral suppression, CD4 count should increase by at least 50 cells/microliter after 4 to 8 weeks of treatment and by approximately 100 to 150 cells/microliters increase from baseline at one year. This phase is then followed by an expected increase of 50 to 100 cells/microliter per year. Several factors, such as older age, lower CD4 baseline, and severe immunocompromised status, have been associated with a less than expected improvement in the CD4 count while on treatment.

CD4 count is not a reliable indicator of virologic suppression and medication adherence. In patients who develop virologic resistance while on ART, it may take months for the CD4 count to decline, and it may even initially increase. Several factors may falsely increase or decrease CD4 cell counts that may not necessarily reflect a patient’s actual immunologic status. Inter-laboratory variability must also merit consideration. Thus, any significant but unexpected difference between two CD4 count measurements, defined as a 30% change in absolute CD4 count or 3% change in CD4 percentage, must be confirmed with repeat testing.