**Chemotherapy-Induced Nausea and Vomiting**

Nausea and vomiting affect between 50% and 70% of patients with advanced cancer. Chemotherapy-induced nausea and vomiting (CINV) become triggered by radiation and other chemotherapeutic agents that induce the release of serotonin from the GI wall and, thus, stimulates the 5HT-3 receptors in the CTZ.

**Post-Operative Nausea and Vomiting**

In addition to CINV, the CTZ plays a significant role in opiate-induced post-operative nausea and vomiting (PONV), two of the most unpleasant side effects following surgery.

In addition to stimulating D2 receptors, opioids can stimulate their own receptor sites. Within the CTZ, opioid stimulation at the mu receptor induces emesis, while on mu receptors within the BBB, specifically the NTS, stimulation inhibits emesis. The separation of mu receptors by the BBB, and the opposing effects they have on emesis explains the dose-dependent effects opioids have on nausea and vomiting, such that that low doses of opioids induce emesis, but high doses inhibit it.

For example, with higher concentrations of opioids in the systemic circulation, or with a more lipophilic agent like fentanyl, there will be greater penetration of opioids within the blood-brain barrier, inducing the antiemetic effect of mu receptors at the NTS and thus counteracting the emetic effect of opioids on the mu receptors in the AP.

Studies have shown that the female gender is a risk for PONV. PONV increases during menstruation and the follicular phase of the menstrual cycle from the sensitization of the CTZ to follicle-stimulating hormone (FSH) and estrogen. However, this gender difference does not appear to be present in pediatric or elderly age groups.

**Area Postrema (AP) Syndrome**

The CTZ, as part of the AP, is the pathologic target in AP Syndrome, frequently occurring in both the onset and course of neuromyelitis optica (NMO).