**Laboratory studies**

Myopericarditis can result in elevation of markers of inflammation like erythrocyte sedimentation rate, C-reactive protein, white blood cell and cardiac biomarkers suggesting myocardial involvement. All the patients should also have routine blood work to rule out thyroid pathology, hepatitis, and renal function. Workup with serological markers is undertaken in patients with persistent symptoms or associated with signs of such illness. Routine viral serologies are unlikely to be helpful in the diagnostics process as the results from these studies rarely alter the treatment.

**Electrocardiogram**

Typical ECG findings of pericarditis include diffuse concave ST-segment elevation and PR depression. Depending on the degree of myocardial involvement, these classic changes may or may not be present with diffuse T-wave changes or inversions. Even though ST-segment changes are diffuse in most cases, it is not uncommon to see localized ECG changes (inferolateral or anterolateral) depending on the degree of the involvement. Common arrhythmias include supraventricular or ventricular ectopic beats or non-sustained ventricular arrhythmias.

**Chest Radiography**

Chest x-ray is normal in most of the self-limiting and minor forms of the disease or may reveal an enlarged cardiac silhouette suggesting significant fluid accumulation in the pericardial space in some patients. There may be signs of heart failure as well in some very sick patients.

**Echocardiogram**

An echocardiogram is routinely performed and in most patients may be normal with normal heart function with a trace or no significant pericardial effusion. Researchers have described increased pericardial brightness as a marker of the pericardial inflammation, but this is a non-specific finding with limited specificity.

Some patients may have significant pericardial fluid accumulation with or without hemodynamic compromise (tamponade physiology). An echocardiogram will also assess the left and right ventricular function and associated valvular heart disease abnormalities.

**Coronary Angiography**

Coronary angiography is not indicated in young patients with typical features of myopericarditis, but in patients with risk factors for atherosclerotic cardiovascular disease it may be difficult to differentiate from myocardial ischemia based on non-invasive tests and would need cardiac catheterization to rule out acute coronary syndrome.

**Cardiac Magnetic Resonance Imaging**

Cardiac magnetic resonance imaging (CMR) can be a very good diagnostic test in these patients to assess the degree of myocardial and pericardial involvement.  In patients with myopericarditis, subepicardial or mid-myocardial inflammatory changes are seen along with myocardial edema in different vascular territories, as opposed to subendocardial or transmural myocardial enhancement in one arterial territory in acute coronary syndrome. CMR will also assess the left ventricular function. Pericarditis can be diagnosed on CMR by the presence of noncalcified pericardial thickening with pericardial effusion.

**Endomyocardial Biopsy**

Endomyocardial biopsy may be needed in a few selective sick patients, who exhibit clinical signs of continued deterioration despite standard supportive care. In these patients, endomyocardial biopsy is recommended if it may alter treatment options, for example for giant cell arteritis).

**Diagnosis**

The diagnosis of myopericarditis is suspected based on the history of pleuro-pericarditis chest pain, findings on the clinical exam like pericardial friction rub associated with typical changes of EKG and elevated cardiac biomarkers. Elevated markers of inflammation will support the diagnosis of myopericarditis and echocardiogram is done to assess the left ventricular function and pericardial involvement. In patients with atherosclerotic risk factors, they will need cardiac catheterization to rule out obstructive epicardial coronary artery disease. Cardiac magnetic resonance imaging is a useful test to assess the degree of myocardial involvement especially in patients with hemodynamic instability or symptoms of heart failure or cardiac arrhythmias.

**Diagnostic Criteria**

Acute pericarditis is diagnosed in the presence of 2 or more of the following features: Pleuro-pericarditis chest pain, pericardial friction rub on the exam, ECG changes (diffuse concave ST-segment elevation and PR depression), or pericardial effusion.

Myopericarditis is diagnosed in the presence of one additional feature: Elevated cardiac biomarkers, presumed new Left ventricular systolic dysfunction based on echocardiography or CMR, myocardial inflammation by CMR.