**STEP Therapy for Asthma**

The following discussion will highlight the step therapy proposed by EPR-3.

The preferred treatment option for intermittent asthma, as well as for quick relief of asthma symptoms and the prevention of exercise-induced bronchoconstriction is a short-acting beta-2 agonist. This is referred to as STEP 1. Albuterol and levalbuterol are examples of short-acting bronchodilators. They have a quick onset of action, within 5 to 15 minutes, and a duration of action of 4 to 6 hours. Their administration is most often by nebulizer or inhaler.

STEPS 2-6 refer to options for persistent asthma. In each of these steps, inhaled corticosteroids are a component of the preferred treatment regimen.

The preferred treatment for step 2 is a low-dose inhaled corticosteroid (ICS). Montelukast can be an alternative. Montelukast is a leukotriene receptor antagonist available in 4 mg granules, or 4 mg and 5 mg chewable tablets, as well as in a 10 mg tablet formulation. Single evening dosing prescribing is by age and FDA approved for asthma control from 12 months of age.

The preferred option for step 3 is a medium dose ICS in the 0 to 4-year-old children. In the 5 to 11 year age group, the preferred option is either a medium-dose ICS or a combination ICS + long-acting beta-agonist (LABA) or leukotriene receptor antagonist (LTRA). For those ages 12 years through adulthood, the preferred choice is a low dose of ICS + LABA or medium-dose ICS. There was a black-box warning on LABAs due to concerns about increasing deaths in patients taking LABAs; however, according to more recent studies, LABAs demonstrated safety when combined with inhaled corticosteroids. LABA monotherapy is indeed associated with an increase in asthma-related mortality and serious adverse events.

Step 4 in the 0 to 4-year-old age range is a medium dose ICS + either a LABA or montelukast. In ages, 5 to 11 years and 12 and above, a medium dose ICS + LABA is the preferred option.

Step 5 for 0-4 years is high dose ICS + either LABA or montelukast; in 5-11 years and 12 and above, a high dose ICS + LABA. EPR-3 also recommends consideration of omalizumab for ages 12 and above. Since the publication of these guidelines, Omalizumab has received FDA approval for ages 6 years and above. Omalizumab is a monoclonal antibody indicated for moderate to severe persistent asthma with objective evidence of perennial aeroallergen sensitivity and inadequate control with ICS.

Step 6 for ages 0-4 years is a high dose ICS + either LABA or montelukast or oral corticosteroids; for ages 5-11 years – high dose ICS + LABA + oral systemic corticosteroid; and for ages 12 and up, high dose ICS + LABA + oral corticosteroid are preferred. Omalizumab may be a consideration for appropriate patients with allergy.

Theophylline is a medication that may be an alternative medication in Steps 2 through 6. However, its use requires caution due to its narrow therapeutic range and potential side effects, including diuresis, tremors, and headaches.

Asthma action plans are recommended for all patients with asthma. These are individualized to and developed in partnership with each patient. They include detailed directions on how to manage asthma with instructions for when the patient is well, beginning to feel symptoms, and in an acute exacerbation that necessitates medical evaluation.

EPR 3 provides guidance for referrals to an asthma specialist. While their recommendations are based on step therapy in different age groups, e.g. step 3 for ages 0 to 4 years and step 4 for those 5 years and older with the flexibility to request a consultation for step 2 in 0 to 4 years and step 3 in ages 5 and older, I find the following listing very helpful. Referrals to an asthma specialist should merit consideration whenever the diagnosis is in question, for specialized testing (e.g., PFTs, allergen skin testing, etc.) or specialized treatment is needed (e.g., allergy shots, anti-IgE medication, etc.), when asthma symptoms are not well controlled and when additional education is necessary.