Both conservative and surgical management may be appropriate depending on patient age, desire for future fertility and coital function, symptoms severity, and concomitant medical problems. Treatment is additionally dictated by the compartment of descent. Goals of management include symptomatic relief, maintenance or improvement of sexual function, prevention of new support defects and incontinence, and restoration of adequate pelvic support.

In women with mild, asymptomatic cases, observation and close follow-up are appropriate. Most women do not experience symptoms until the bulge protrudes past the vaginal opening. Pelvic floor muscle training exercise (Kegel exercises) allows a systematic contraction of the levator ani muscles strengthening the pelvic floor. Kegel exercises have been proven to improve symptoms of stress urge and mixed incontinence and can be useful in women with mild POP.

Two-thirds of patients with symptomatic POP choose management with a pessary, and up to 77% will continue use after one year.

When considering surgical intervention for pelvic organ prolapse, patient goals for future fertility goals and expectations must be considered and discussed. A variety of procedures, both abdominal and vaginal, are performed in an attempt to restore the pelvic floor function and relieve symptoms. The procedure with an anatomic success rate of 98% and a subjective success rate of 93% is an obliterative procedure known as colpoclesis in which the vaginal cuff is shortened.

Adequate support of the vaginal apex has been recognized as an essential component of an adequate surgical repair for advanced prolapse. While some approaches focus on women's native tissues and ligaments for suspension, many incorporate biological grafts or mesh. The advantages of transvaginal approaches include shorter operative and recovery times, whereas the advantages of abdominal approaches provide more durable outcomes and decrease the risk of recurrence.

One of the most widely performed transvaginal suspension procedures is the sacrospinous fixation in which the coccygeus sacrospinous ligament is attached to the vaginal apex. Advantages include avoiding the morbidity of an abdominal incision, achieving a functional vagina, and the ability to repair coexisting anterior and posterior compartment defects using a single surgical site.

Another transvaginal approach with an excellent success rate of apical support is the iliococcygeus suspension. This transvaginal procedure attaches the vaginal apex to the fascia of the iliococcygeus muscle.

The uterosacral suspension is an alternative transvaginal approach in which the plication of the uterosacral ligaments across the midline is preformed and attached to the vaginal cuff. Disadvantages to consider in this approach is the proximity of the uterosacral ligaments to the ureters.

In recent years, the procedure of choice has become the abdominal sacrocolpopexy, which can be done by either laparotomy, laparoscopy, or robotic-assisted. Since the initial delineation of the procedure by Lane in 1962, the procedure has gone through many modifications. Birnbaum has advocated anchoring the suspensory mesh to the sacrum. However, there is a high risk of hemorrhage from laceration of the presacral vessels.

Varying suspensory materials have been used, including mesh, non-absorbable suture, fascia, and dura mater. It is generally believed now that abdominal sacrocolpopexy with mesh provides long-term relief of pelvic prolapse symptoms and restores vaginal function.