Muslims, while ethnically diverse, can present common healthcare challenges due to their beliefs. Providers need to be aware of Islamic cultural values and accommodating these values when possible. In a hospital setting, Muslims prioritize gender-concordant care providers, providing food consistent with religious requirements and space for prayer.

Gender-concordant care can often be provided, except in emergencies where rapid life-or-death intervention is required. In regards to food preparation, hospitals have a history of accommodating patient preferences and providing space to meet the spiritual needs of patients. The healthcare administration may consider food services that provide the option of Kosher or vegetarian food and non-denominational hospital chapels with minimal modification.

Enhancing cultural competency by providing patient-centered care is a means by which healthcare challenges are improved. Efforts aimed to improve provider-level cultural enhanced care will go a long way to facilitate cross-cultural communication and respond to patient needs by tailoring healthcare to the Muslim culture.

Understanding the values and reasons for special requests for healthcare will improve cultural competence and provide culturally sensitive health care that is good for the patient and their families.

The culture and religion of Muslims can greatly influence their perspectives about healthcare and healthcare providers. Healthcare providers need knowledge and understanding of these patients’ backgrounds and beliefs to provide culturally sensitive healthcare.

**Recommendations**

- Apologize for cultural mistakes

- Ask the patient and family how you can help make their experience more comfortable

- Avoid being judgmental

- Avoid making assumptions and be patient

- Avoid employees serving as interpreters for other employees

- Be aware of the uniqueness of Muslims and their special needs

- Be respectful

- Consider diverse recruitment and include Muslims in the recruiting effort

- Identify Muslim workers that can assist in the culturally sensitive care of the Muslim patients

- Integrate all holidays, including those of Muslims

- Observe body and facial language

- Recognize how values, behaviors, and beliefs may affect others

- Train staff about cultural competence

- Use medically competent and fluent interpreters with training in cultural competency