Due to the complexity of the development of the aortic arch, a number of congenital abnormalities are possible. Malformations result from the persistence of structures that typically regress or the regression of structures that usually persist.

**Abnormalities of Aortic Arch Vessels**

**Common Origin of Brachiocephalic Trunk and Left Common Carotid Artery**- Instead of arising from the arch of the aorta as distinct branches, the left common carotid artery and the brachiocephalic trunk both arise from a common origin. In this variant, only two vessels (the common trunk and the left subclavian) branch directly off the arch of the aorta. This arrangement is the second most common branching pattern, following the 'normal' pattern detailed above, occurring in approximately 13% of the population.

This pattern is often incorrectly termed the 'bovine aortic arch.' A true bovine arch consists of a single vessel arising from the aortic arch. This vessel then gives rise to the subclavian arteries bilaterally and a common carotid trunk, bifurcating into the right and left common carotid arteries. This vessel pattern is not present in humans.

**Origin of Left Common Carotid Artery from the Brachiocephalic Trunk**- This pattern is very similar to the typical origin pattern detailed above. Two vessels arise from the arch of the aorta, the brachiocephalic trunk and the left common carotid artery. But in this situation, the left common carotid artery originates distally, directly off the brachiocephalic trunk, rather than from a common origin. Typically, the common carotid originates less than 1 cm from the aortic arch.

**Aberrant Right Subclavian Artery (ARSA)**-  Occurring in approximately 1% of the population, the right subclavian artery is the final branch arising off the aortic arch, occurring distal to the takeoff of the left subclavian artery. This formation occurs secondary to abnormal regression of the R fourth aortic arch, causing loss of the normal proximal portion of the right subclavian. The artery arises entirely from the right seventh segmental artery, from the dorsal aorta. To reach the right upper extremity, the aberrant artery most commonly (80% of cases) crosses the midline posterior to the esophagus. The other routes are between the trachea and esophagus (15% of cases) and anterior to the trachea (5%). This condition is generally asymptomatic but can cause esophageal compression or dysphagia, stridor, or recurrent laryngeal nerve compression.

One case report details retro-esophageal ARSA presenting with tracheoesophageal fistula formation, suspected secondary to chronic compression.

**Anomalous Origin of Vertebral Artery**- In approximately 5% of cases, the left vertebral artery arises from the aortic arch, frequently between the left common carotid and subclavian arteries. The proximal portion can be duplicated, arising from the aortic arch and the left subclavian artery, before merging into a single artery.

There have been case reports of bilateral vertebral arteries arising from the aortic arch, both arising between the left common carotid and left subclavian arteries, both arising distal to the left subclavian artery, or the left vertebral originating between the left common carotid and left subclavian artery while the right vertebral artery originates distal to the left subclavian artery.

**Patent Ductus Arteriosus**- The ductus arteriosus arises from the dorsal left sixth aortic arch and connects the pulmonary artery to the aorta. This connection is an important aspect of fetal circulation, allowing oxygenated blood to bypass the fluid-filled lungs that do not participate in gas exchange. The ductus arteriosus typically closes in the first three days of life, forming a fibrous cord called the ligamentum arteriosum. When the ductus fails to close, it creates a left-to-right shunt due to increased resistance in the systemic circulation compared to pulmonary circulation. If the defect is large enough, it can lead to pulmonary hypertension and early-onset heart failure. The risk for a persistent ductus arteriosus increases as the birth age decreases. PDA classically presents with a continuous 'machine-like' murmur radiating to the back.

**Abnormalities of the Arch of the Aorta**

**Truncus Arteriosus**- A rare congenital heart defect presenting with a common ventricular outflow tract and a ventricular septal defect. It occurs secondary to abnormal aorticopulmonary septum formation, frequently attributed to improper neural crest cell migration. It is frequently associated with 22q11 gene deletions or mutations. During early life, pulmonary vascular resistance is relatively high, leading to right-to-left shunting and cyanosis in the infant. These defects require early surgical repair within the first month of life.

**Coarctation of the Aorta**- An area of stenosis in the aorta, most commonly in the thoracic aorta, but it can also occur in the abdominal aorta. This anatomy occurs in less than 0.1% of the population. They are classified into pre-ductal and post-ductal types. Post-ductal lesions are most common and present distally to the ductus arteriosus. Pre-ductal lesions occur less commonly and present proximally to the ductus arteriosus. Traditionally, coarctation classifies as infantile (pre-ductal) and adult (post-ductal), but this classification was abandoned as the age of presentation is more related to the severity of stenosis, as opposed to the location. The most common presentation is a differential between the blood pressure of the upper and lower extremities. Coarctation is repairable with surgical removal of the stenotic segment or transcatheter stenting.

**Interrupted Aortic Arch (IAA)**- A severe version of coarctation of the aorta, which presents with a complete luminal interruption between the ascending and descending aorta. This malformation is incompatible with life without a patent ductus arteriosus to allow for left ventricular outflow and systemic blood delivery. Interrupted arches get classified by the site of disruption, with type A occurring distal to the left subclavian (13% of cases), type B between the left subclavian and left common carotid (84% of cases), and type C occurring proximal to the left common carotid artery. IAA most commonly presents in infancy due to absent blood flow to the extremities. PGE1 is necessary to maintain a patent ductus arteriosus, which requires surgical repair.

One case report details a case of isolated Type B IAA discovered in a 70-year-old patient who had never undergone intervention. CTA demonstrated extensive collateral blood flow, and conservative therapy followed.

**Right-Sided Aortic Arch**- An uncommon anomaly (presenting in less than 0.1% of the population) where the aortic arch traverses the right bronchus instead of the left bronchus. This condition occurs due to the persistence of the right dorsal aorta with the regression of the left dorsal aorta. The most common presentation (approximately 60%) is the 'mirror-type,' with a right-sided arch and a left brachiocephalic trunk, right common carotid, and right subclavian arteries. The 'mirror type' is strongly associated with other congenital heart defects. The next most common presentation (approximately 40%) is a right-sided aortic arch with an aberrant left subclavian artery; this mimics the ARSA pattern, with the left common carotid arising first, followed by the right common carotid, right subclavian, and then left subclavian arteries. As with traditional ARSA, this leads to the formation of a vascular ring and symptoms of tracheal or esophageal compression. Patients with a right-sided arch but a left-sided ligamentum arteriosum can also demonstrate symptoms of vascular ring.

**Double Aortic Arch**- A rare malformation of the aorta, with a division of the ascending aorta into two arches. These arches generally surround the trachea/esophagus, forming a vascular ring, which most commonly occurs secondary to the persistence of the right fourth aortic arch. Generally, the arches are asymmetric, with 70% presenting as right-side dominant and 25% as left-side dominant. Balanced arches occur only 5% of the time, and the typical presentation in the neonate with symptoms of esophageal or tracheal compression (swallowing disorders, expiratory stridor). Swallowing difficulty can present with respiratory symptoms secondary to recurrent aspiration. Surgical division of the vascular ring is indicated for symptomatic patients, but persistent respiratory symptoms are common due to improper development of the trachea.

**Persistent Fifth Aortic Arch (PFAA)**- This is a rare congenital condition where the fifth aortic arch fails to degenerate unilaterally.

In the second type, the persistent fifth arch merges with a portion of the sixth aortic arch, leading to a systemic-pulmonary shunt. It most commonly occurs in conjunction with other congenital heart defects, including pulmonary atresia and truncus arteriosus. Thus, the shunt is beneficial, as it allows for increased blood delivery to the pulmonary system in these conditions. In patients without an associated defect, this shunt can lead to heart failure in patients as young as two months.

There have been suggestions that rare cases of the left pulmonary artery arising from the ascending aorta can be attributed to PFAA. The belief is that the sixth aortic arch fails to develop, and the left fifth aortic arch persists, creating the anomalous pulmonary artery.

**Cervical Aortic Arch**- A rare aortic arch anomaly with a very high location of the aortic arch; this occurs due to the persistence of the third aortic arch, with regression of the fourth aortic arch during development. The arch is typically located in the mid-neck and commonly presents with a right-sided aortic arch. These are frequently asymptomatic but can present with tracheal compression symptoms, esophageal compression, or a pulsatile mass in the neck.