Cheyne-Stokes respiration is initiated and maintained due to changes in the apnea threshold and the fluctuating PCO2 levels around this threshold in patients with heart failure or stroke who are at risk of unstable central respiratory control. Under normal awake conditions, ventilation is under both cortical and metabolic control. Normal respiration is maintained through the negative feedback mechanism. Peripheral and central chemoreceptors will sense PCO2 levels and trigger either positive with negative reciprocal feedback signals. Normal PCO2 levels are around 45 millimeters of mercury. The highest PCO2 levels to suppress respiration, called apnea threshold, is usually around 4 mm to 6 mm lower than the normal PCO2 levels.  The sleep apnea threshold is equal or marginally lower than the aware threshold levels. The difference between these two levels is called carbon dioxide reserve. Patients with heart failure are normally tachypneic and maintain lower PCO2 levels, both awake and during sleep. Also, the carbon dioxide reserve in these patients is reduced to 1.3 mm to 3 mm of mercury lower than the resting levels.

During transition from awake to non-rapid eye movement (NREM) sleep, cortical control of respiration is progressively diminished, and respiration is dependent on metabolic control based on PCO2 levels. During REM sleep, ventilation is predominately under central control by pontomedullary inspiratory neurons. During the N1 or N2 NREM stage, any unstable respiratory state like arousal or sudden change in sleep stage will result in hyperventilation and a decrease in PCO2 levels. If the PCO2 levels decrease below the already increased apnea threshold levels, central apnea ensues. This slow rise in PCO2 levels will stimulate chemoreceptors and will result in the hyperventilation phase. Due to unstable central control and imprecise feedback support in patients with heart failure and stroke, the PCO2 levels during hyperventilation will fall below the apnea threshold levels,  resulting in apnea again. These cycles of apnea and hypercapnia continue, resulting in Cheyne-Stokes respiration.