Immediate treatment of the patient is required and can be done in either the inpatient or outpatient setting. The goal is to decrease the incidence in the fellow eye. One study showed that 75% of the patients treated with acyclovir remained disease-free in the fellow eye at 2 years versus 35% of patients not treated with acyclovir.

Acyclovir should be started at 10-13 mg/kg every 8 hours or 1500mg/m2/day intravenously (IV) for 5-10 days.

Other options include:

- Valacyclovir can be given 1000-2000 mg orally every 8 hours. This has good bioavailability and avoids the need for intravenous access.

- Famciclovir should be given at 500 mg orally every 8 hours.

- Valganciclovir started at 900 mg twice daily orally for 3 weeks induction, followed by 900mg once daily orally for maintenance. Valganciclovir has been successfully used for CMV retinitis. It has activity against HSV, VZV, and CMV.

Initial intravenous antiviral or oral antiviral is effective in the treatment of ARN in terms of time taken for regression of retinitis and involvement of the fellow eye.

If there is sight-threatening retinitis or there is the involvement of the optic disc or macula (zone 1), intravitreal injections should be performed. Ganciclovir can be given at 2 mg per 0.1 mL, and foscarnet can be given 1.2 mg to 2.4 mg per 0.1 mL.

Prednisone 0.5-2.0 mg/kg/day orally for up to 6 to 8 weeks should be started 24-48 hours after the start of antiviral therapy or once regression of necrosis is demonstrated on physical exam. Oral steroids should be considered particularly when the optic nerve is involved. A sub-tenon injection of triamcinolone 40 mg/1 mL can be considered after antiviral therapy has been loaded. Periocular or oral steroids should not be started in active retinitis before the initiation of antiviral therapy, as it may worsen the retinitis.

In the presence of an anterior chamber reaction, topical cycloplegic agents and steroids should be considered.

The physician may consider antiplatelet therapy (aspirin 81 mg to 650 mg daily) or coumadin to prevent ischemic damage to the optic nerve and retina, though the exact role in ARN is unknown.

Lastly, prophylactic barrier laser photocoagulation posterior to active retinitis may be considered to wall off or prevent subsequent retinal detachment. The laser, if applied should be placed behind the area of active retinitis in the apparently normal retina, as laser directly over the area of retinitis may cause an iatrogenic break. The prophylactic laser may be difficult because of the inflamed painful eye, poor dilation of the pupil, and media haze. The prophylactic laser is controversial and is not always practiced, as it might not prevent the development of retinal detachment in up to 58% of lasered eyes.

Early pars plana vitrectomy before a retinal detachment has been tried in ARN. In a large series of 104 patients,

For retinal detachment, early vitreoretinal surgery should be planned. The surgery is difficult due to media haze due to aggressive anterior segment inflammation, cataract, posterior synechia causing a poorly dilating pupil, and extensive vitreous membrane. The breaks are multiple and may be posterior. The proliferative vitreoretinopathy may be severe. Aggressive postoperative inflammation including fibrinous reaction may be noted. Despite retinal reattachment visual gain may be limited by optic atrophy and epiretinal membrane. Proliferative vitreoretinopathy may lead to retinal redetachment after vitreoretinal surgery. In a series of 12 eyes of 10 patients with ARN with retinal detachment that underwent vitrectomy, at final follow up of mean 4.4 years, all cases had successful retinal reattachment.