Naproxen can be administered orally, in both immediate and extended-release tablets or suspension forms, or topically. Naproxen may be taken orally with food, milk, antacids (preferably aluminum and magnesium hydroxide-containing antacids), proton pump inhibitors (PPI), or misoprostol to decrease the incidence of GI adverse effects.

As a rule, treatment with naproxen, as well as all NSAIDs, begins with the lowest effective dose for the shortest possible duration. Also, consider starting with a lower dose in geriatric patients due to the likelihood that the patient has comorbidities such as cardiovascular disease, chronic kidney disease, or history of GI ulcer/bleeding that increase the risk of adverse effects from NSAID therapy.

Specific dosing recommendations and treatment durations:

**Mild to Moderate Arthritis (osteoarthritis, rheumatoid arthritis, and ankylosing spondylitis)**

- 220 to 550 mg PO every 12 hours

- Take with food if GI upset occurs

- Max: 1650 mg daily for up to 6 months

**Acute Gouty Arthritis**

- 825 mg PO once, followed by 275 mg PO every 8 hours until symptom resolution

- Take with food if GI upset occurs

**Acute Severe Headache or Migraine**

- Controversial concerning isolated naproxen sodium use in patients suffering from acute migraines.

- Naproxen sodium has a longer half-life compared to other NSAID options, but headache relief rates at 2 hours after initial treatment are lower than ibuprofen.

- Naproxen sodium dosing recommendations: 550 mg every 12 hours; can increase the dosage to 825mg PO if needed; do not exceed the max of 1375 mg daily.

**Maximum Recommended Daily Doses for Children**

- 12 years and older - 20 mg/kg/day by mouth, not to exceed 1000 mg/day by mouth; for non-prescription use, 660 mg/day by mouth

- 2 to 12 years - 20 mg/kg/day by mouth, not to exceed 1000 mg/day by mouth. Non-prescription use is not recommended

- Less than 2 years - Safety and efficacy remain not established

**Patients with Hepatic Impairment Dosing**

- Although specific guidelines are not available, caution is advised with respect to dosing; utilize the lowest recommended dosing regimen initially.

**Patients with Renal Impairment Dosing**

- If creatinine clearance (CrCl) is greater than or equal to 30 mL/minute, no dosage adjustment is needed.

- Naproxen is not recommended for patients with CrCl less than 30 mL/min.