Vitamin A is a general term encompassing various fat-soluble substances such as retinol, retinyl palmitate, and beta-carotene. Its various metabolites are essential for vision, cellular differentiation, epithelial barrier function, and immune function.

Vitamin A is obtained through the diet in two forms. Preformed vitamin A (retinol and retinyl ester) is derived from animal sources such as meat, dairy products, and fish. Provitamin A (beta-carotenoid) is derived from colorful fruits and vegetables. Both ingested forms of vitamin A must be converted to retinal and retinoic acid after absorption to support biological processes.

Deprivation of vitamin A replaces normal epithelium with stratified, keratinizing epithelium in the eyes, periocular glands, respiratory tract, alimentary tract, and genitourinary tract.

Globally, vitamin A deficiency is an important public health problem. Supplementation is considered a key intervention to greatly reducing the rate of child morbidity and mortality due to preventable diseases in countries with high under-five mortality. It is recognized as one of the most cost-effective interventions to improve childhood survival rates.

Vitamin A supplementation is offered for the treatment of measles, xerophthalmia, severe malnutrition and to prevent deficiency in pregnant women living in areas endemic to vitamin A deficiency. Treatment of xerophthalmia is of special interest because it is one of the only diseases due to a vitamin deficiency to have reached epidemic levels. Its response to vitamin A supplementation to the eye has been well established and can prevent night blindness, a major problem in developing countries.

Vitamin A's involvement in cell morphogenesis, differentiation, and proliferation is essential to gene regulation. Additionally, its function as an antioxidant decreases free radical damage to DNA.

Studies thus far have not revealed sufficient data to indicate a strong correlation between vitamin A and cancer prevention in all populations. Supplementation in vitamin A-sufficient populations has not suggested any added benefit for cancer prevention. However, supplementation in vitamin A deficient populations, such as malnourished or tobacco-dependent groups, may reduce the incidence of cancer.

Vitamin A also modulates a broad range of immune processes. It is involved in helper T cell and B cell development, thereby important for adaptive immunity. Its contribution to mucosal epithelial regeneration and neutrophil, macrophage, and natural killer cell functioning make it important for innate immunity, as well. Vitamin A deficiency and infectious diseases that transiently suppress serum retinol concentrations impair normal immune function. In particular, vitamin A deficiency is recognized as a risk factor for the measles virus, a major cause of childhood morbidity and mortality. Megadoses (200,000 IU for two days) of vitamin A have been shown to lower the overall incidence of death related to measles.