**Toxoplasmosis:**

Diagnosing a patient with congenital toxoplasmosis requires proving the presence of either the parasite itself, through PCR, microscopy or inoculation, or by identifying the toxoplasma gondii specific IgG, IgM or IgA humoral response. Brain imaging (calcifications, hydrocephaly, and microcephaly) and retinal exams (chorioretinitis) can be used to determine the severity of symptoms but are not considered diagnostic.

**Other:**

The mother’s history of chickenpox clinically confirms congenital varicella syndrome (CVS) during the pregnancy and the presence of congenital skin lesions following dermatomes in the infant. It is also diagnosable by detecting VZV DNA in either amniotic fluid or fetal blood.

Congenital syphilis diagnosis is by a combination of serology and the presence of clinical symptoms. Often this diagnosis is presumptive, and an infant will need to be periodically checked by a physician if it is at risk for congenital syphilis.

Congenital parvovirus B19 is most accurately diagnosed using a PCR assay to isolate parvovirus B19 DNA in the amniotic fluid or fetal blood. Clinicians can measure it with IgM antibody serology.

**Rubella:**

To diagnose a patient with congenital rubella, the virus itself can be isolated, through PCR or culture, or the virus’ RNA can be isolated through reverse transcriptase PCR of bodily fluids. The presence of rubella specific IgM and IgG is also enough to base a diagnosis of congenital rubella.

**CMV:**

Despite the high disease burden, there are still no screening programs for mothers or infants to detect CMV infections. In infants, clinical symptoms can go absent or can be ambiguous enough not to suspect congenital CMV. In the past, testing for congenital cytomegalovirus involved using urine or saliva samples to isolate the virus in tissue cultures.

**HSV:**

Congenital HSV is detected by either HSV isolation on culture or by PCR. Today, PCR is becoming a more common test due to its more accurate and precise ability to diagnose an HSV infection. Screening for HSV antibodies is problematic as it is not type-specific, and oral HSV-1 infections are prevalent and do not pose the same risk as a genital HSV-2 infection.

**TORCH IgG or IgM Panel Testing:**

There are lab panels collectively performed to look for specific IgM or rising IgG titers in fetal, cord, or infant blood. The panel will include antibody testing for Toxoplasmosis, Rubella, CMV, HSV 1/2, and VZV. Positive tests will indicate congenital infection by one of these agents. These are more straightforward and easier tests to be performed collectively for any neonate suspected clinically to be suffering from the above named congenital infections.