**Interpretation of Automated Perimetry**

The automated perimetry report for Humphrey can be divided into eight zones for ease of understanding (**Figure**).

**Zone 1:**This section consists of the patient's information like the patient's name, date of birth, visual acuity, the refractive correction used for the patient for doing the test, and the patient's pupil size.

The date of birth should be accurately entered; otherwise, the patient's data will be compared to the normative database of the wrong age group. The patient's pupil size should be at least 2.5 or 3 mm or the same as in the previous field test.

It is essential to use the recent most refractive correction of the patient with the appropriate near addition when performing the test.

Conditions requiring a complete near addition of 3.0 diopters include elderly individuals with an age of more than 60 years, pseudophakic or aphakic individuals, individuals with dilated pupils, and individuals with myopia of more than three diopters. Refractive error of even one diopter causes generalized depression in sensitivity which may become a cause for misdiagnosis.

The fixation target may be a central dot which is the default target for Humphrey visual field Analyzer, or a large diamond that is present below the central dot (**Figure**). The larger diamond is used for patients with a large central scotoma. A small diamond fixation target within the large diamond is also used for evaluating the foveal threshold.

**Zone 2:**This zone mentions the foveal threshold and the reliability indices. The foveal threshold should correspond to the visual acuity of the patient. A good visual acuity with a less foveal threshold would indicate damage to the fovea, and a poor visual acuity with a good foveal threshold would indicate a refractive error that has not been corrected before performing the test.

Reliability indices like fixation losses, false positives, and false negatives are also mentioned in this zone.

After localizing the blind spot once in the test, the machine randomly presents a stimulus to that point later on during the test. Response to this stimulus would mean that the patient has moved the fixation. This is measured as fixation loss. The machine checks this multiple times during a test. The presence of more than 20% fixation losses indicates poor reliability of the field report,  per the manufacturer. However, before looking at the fixation losses, the location of the blind spot should be confirmed on the printout.

The other two methods of fixation monitoring are gaze tracking and video monitoring of fixation. The gaze tracker is printed at the bottom of the report. The upward deflection denotes eye movement, and the downward graph tracing indicates a blink. This tracks the eye movement throughout the test, and the examiner can instruct the patient to re-fixate upon noticing this tracing. The video eye monitor displays the eye of the patient on the monitor of the machine. It is also a good tool for an observant examiner. The examiner can instruct the patient to focus on noticing any screen movement.

False positives are recorded when the patient responds without a presented stimulus. False positives up to 33% are acceptable, as per the manufacturer. Excess false positives mask the underlying visual field defects.

False negatives are recorded when the patient does not respond to a stimulus of higher intensity presented at the same location where previously the patient has responded to a lower intensity stimulus. False negatives of more than 33% suggest poor reliability of the fields, per the manufacturer.

A study evaluating 10262 visual fields noted that fixations losses did not meaningfully affect the reliability (difference between predicted and observed mean deviation) of perimetry in patients with suspected or manifest glaucoma who have been taking multiple field tests. The study also noted that false positives had the maximum impact on the reliability of the visual field at any level of false positives. Special precautions should be taken if false positives occur in advanced disease or are noted in more than 20% of catch trials.

False negatives affect the reliability less than false positives. A value of more than 35% in advanced disease and more than 25% in early disease may affect the reliability significantly. Increased time duration of the test (more than 2 or 3 minutes) may also affect the reliability.

**Zone 3:**The greyscale graph is a color-coded representation of the retinal sensitivity of the patient. It is not used for the final interpretation of the field test but is important for patient education. The values closer to 0 dB are illustrated as black points of varying shades, whereas points close to 50 dB are illustrated as white points. The points with sensitivity greater than 40 dB are seen as white scotomas on the greyscale and require careful interpretation. They usually indicate a "trigger happy" patient who has responded without seeing the stimulus (false positive).

The greyscale is useful when comparing the fields of a patient on follow-up. It indicates the progression of the visual field both in extent and in-depth over time at a glance, given the reliability indices are within normal limits.

**Zone 4:**This zone****comprises the total deviation numerical plot and total deviation probability plot.

This comparison gives the amount of deviation of the retinal sensitivity from normal at each point tested. Zero on the total deviation numerical plot indicates no deviation from normal; a negative value indicates a decrease in retinal sensitivity, with higher negative values indicating worse retinal sensitivity. A numerical with no sign on the total deviation numerical plot indicates better retinal sensitivity.

This data is also used to calculate the mean deviation index and the pattern standard deviation index.

Since the lower 5% of the data collected from the normal population is considered abnormal, all the abnormal data on the printout does not imply a disease state. The numerical in the total deviation numerical plot are statistically analyzed and represented as a total deviation probability plot. The probability plot is color-coded with lighter to darker shades representing p values from less than 5% to p values lesser than 0.5%. The probability plot demonstrates the extent or the pattern of the field defect.

**Zone 5:**This zone comprises the pattern deviation numerical plot and the pattern deviation probability plot.

An amount in the range of this value is deducted from all the values on the total deviation numerical plot. This gives the pattern deviation plot corrected for generalized depression in retinal sensitivity to highlight an underlying localized depression in the field.

A generalized decrease in retinal sensitivity would mean a uniform decrease in the height of the hill of vision compared to the normative database. A localized defect or decrease in retinal sensitivity would mean an irregularity or localized depression in the hill of vision with a normal height of the remaining hill of vision. A combined localized with a generalized decrease in retinal sensitivity indicates a decrease in the height of the hill of vision along with a localized depression.

**Zone 6:**This zone consists of the global indices, which are the mean deviation, pattern standard deviation, the visual field index, and p-value.

**Mean Deviation**: It is the average of all the values of the total deviation numerical plot. It usually has a negative value.

Generalized field defects or advanced glaucoma will have a higher absolute mean deviation index. Localized field defects are, however, masked and have a low mean deviation index. A positive mean deviation index should be evaluated with caution as that would mean a higher than normal retinal sensitivity. The false positives should be assessed in these cases.

**Pattern Standard Deviation (PSD)**: This indicates a deviation in the shape of the hill of vision. It has a positive sign. A low value indicates a normal shape of the hill of vision, whereas a higher value indicates an irregular hill of vision. It is a useful index to diagnose cases with early glaucoma. In patients with advanced field defects, the shape of the hill of vision has deviated overall, so the PSD value is low; hence, this indicator loses its value in patients with advanced field defects.

**Short-term fluctuation (SF):**This is a feature of a field test using the full threshold strategy. Selective ten retinal points are checked for threshold twice, and the variability in the threshold value is indicated as SF. A value of more than 3 indicates low reliability.

**Corrected Pattern Standard Deviation (CPSD):**This is the PSD value achieved after correcting for SF.****

**p-value:**All the indices have a p-value that indicates the probability of that particular finding in a normal population. A p-value of less than 5% indicates a 5% or lesser chance for the index to be of that specific value in a normal population. No p-value in front of the index would mean a normal value of that global index.

**Visual field index:**This index is calculated from the pattern deviation numerical plot. It was designed to indicate the amount of ganglion cell loss. It gives more weightage to the retinal points in the central field. It indicates the percentage of retinal sensitivity of the patient compared to the normal retinal sensitivity for that age. A decrease in this index on follow-up perimetry scans indicates the progression of the field defect. Because it is derived from the pattern deviation graph values, cataract and refractive errors do not affect this index.****

**Zone 7:**This consists of the glaucoma hemifield test (GHT). Glaucoma affects the retinal ganglion cells on either side of the horizontal meridian.

**Zone 8:**It is the raw data collected by the machine and consists of the retinal sensitivity (dB values) of each point tested for that program. Absolute scotoma is indicated by a zero dB value.

After assessing the visual field printout, Anderson criteria help to diagnose and identify the field defects due to glaucoma.

**Anderson and Patella Criteria**

The following findings should be looked for in the visual field printout:

- Abnormal GHT

- Three or more contiguous non-edge points of the 30-2 field, or three or more contiguous points of the 24-2 field with a p-value of less than 5%, out of which at least one point has a p-value of less than 1%.

- The corrected pattern standard deviation should be abnormal with a p-value of less than 5%.

All these findings should be reproducible in two successive 30-2 full threshold fields to classify a particular field defect to glaucoma.

For the SITA strategy, modified Anderson criteria are applied where CPSD is replaced with PSD.