# Continuing Education Activity

A hordeolum is an acute, common bacterial infection of the eyelid. Patients with this condition often present to their primary care provider with painful, erythematous inflammation of the eyelid. This activity illustrates the evaluation and treatment of hordeolum and reviews the role of the interprofessional team in managing patients with this condition.

**Objectives:**
- Describe the typical clinical presentation of a hordeolum.
- Review the pathophysiology of hordeolum.
- Summarize the use of warm compresses, lid massage, and lid scrubs in the management of hordeolum.
- Identify the importance of improving care coordination among the interprofessional team to improve outcomes for patients affected with hordeolum.

# Introduction

A hordeolum is an acute bacterial infection found in the lid of the eye.

# Etiology

It is usually caused by Staphylococcus that infects the eyelash hair follicle. The external hordeolum is caused by a blockage of the sebaceous (Zeis) glands or sweat (Moll) glands.

# Epidemiology

Hordeolum is a common presentation in family practice and acute care settings.

# Pathophysiology

The infection occurs due to thickening, drying, or stasis of the Zeis, Moll, or Meibomian gland secretions. The Zeis and Moll glands are the ciliary glands of the eye. The Zeis gland secretes sebum with antiseptic properties that may prevent the growth of bacteria.Staphylococcus aureus being the most common pathogen.

# History and Physical

A careful history of and physical exam is essential. The patient will usually relay a slow and insidious onset of a painful, red, and swollen eyelid without a history of foreign body or trauma. Visual acuity may be affected if the size of the hordeolum is pressing on the cornea. The patient should not report ocular pain, and their extraocular movements should be intact and painless. The erythema is localized to the lid of the affected eye. The provider should try to locate a pustule, and the eyelids may need to be everted, especially to locate an internal hordeolum. The provider should inquire about any of the predisposing conditions for hordeolum, and these conditions should be addressed and managed in treatment. Any pain in ocular movements with periorbital swelling and erythema is indicative of orbital cellulitis and requires additional and more aggressive management and treatment. Persistent or recurrent painful lumps in the eye may be indicative of carcinoma and require biopsy. Ophthalmology referral is indicated in these situations.

# Evaluation

Typically, there is no diagnostic testing associated with a hordeolum, and it is a clinical diagnosis. Rarely, additional testing and imaging will be required if complications occur, and the infection spreads and causes periorbital or orbital cellulitis. Occasionally, an internal hordeolum can cause corneal irritation, in which case the provider may stain the eye with fluorescein to ensure there is no corneal abrasion.

# Treatment / Management

In many cases, the lesions can spontaneously drain without any treatment. Warm compresses are also of benefit, as is massage to the area. These are often seen as the gold standard. Warm compresses are aimed at softening the granulomatous tissue and facilitating drainage. There are no conclusive studies to date, showing that this method alone causes any shortened durations or improved outcomes. Lid massage is intended to help express the purulent drainage from the infected gland. Lid scrubs with saline or mild shampoo (e.g., baby shampoo) that is tear-free and ph-balanced, may promote drainage by clearing debris from the clogged duct. Soap may also help to remove bacteria by breaking down cell membranes, and it may also treat an underlying cause of the external hordeolum, blepharitis.

Persistent lesions or larger lesions may require antibiotic therapy. This treatment may help to shorten duration and severity. A macrolide antibiotic ointment such as erythromycin ophthalmic ointment is often used and has the added benefit of lubrication. If the swelling is significant and causing pressure on the cornea, topical steroids can be used for a short duration.

# Differential Diagnosis

- Basal cell carcinoma

- Chalazion

- Pneumo-Orbita(rare)

- Preseptal cellulitis

- Sebaceous gland carcinoma

- Squamous cell carcinoma

# Pearls and Other Issues

While hordeolum is a common presentation, the practitioner should ensure that other manifestations of a painful red eyelid are considered and ruled out during evaluation and treatment. Other diagnoses that should be considered are periorbital and orbital cellulitis, chalazion, sebaceous gland carcinoma, and squamous cell carcinoma.

A chalazion can mimic an internal hordeolum, and it may be difficult to distinguish between the two at first. The chalazion forms around the sebaceous gland in the middle of the eyelid. It forms from the breakdown of the secretions in the gland that leak into the surrounding tissues. Initially, the inflammation may produce pain and may present as an internal hordeolum. However, the chalazion develops into a painless granulomatous nodule and is considered an aseptic, chronic inflammation.

# Enhancing Healthcare Team Outcomes

Hordeolum is often encountered by the emergency physician, nurse practitioner, or primary care provider. In most cases, the infection can be managed with conservative treatment. Warm compresses are aimed at softening the granulomatous tissue and facilitating drainage. Persistent lesions or larger lesions may require antibiotic therapy. This treatment may help to shorten duration and severity. However, if the infection is large or the cause is not known, the patient should be referred to an ophthalmologist.

The outcomes for most patients with hordeolum is excellent.