If a complete history and physical examination (including examination of the pharynx) suggest possible foreign body ingestion, the provider must decide whether imaging is indicated.  If so, usually plain radiographs suffice initially. Healthy children with recent, low-risk ingestions may be simply observed.  Metallic swallowed foreign bodies, such as coins and batteries, will show up readily on a plain radiograph. Metal detectors are occasionally used, especially in the setting of known coin ingestion.

Button/disc batteries may cause serious injury if lodged in the esophagus, nose, ear, or other orifice for even a brief period.  The highest risk is associated with larger lithium-based batteries, but all models carry some risk. Children with suspected button/disc battery ingestion should be managed urgently; a battery lodged in the esophagus should be removed without delay. Treatment algorithms for button/disc battery ingestions are widely available.

Small, powerful magnets, such as those found in some toys and games, may cause serious injury to the intestines, as the strong attraction between two or more magnets may cause them to erode through intervening tissues.

Preexisting GI tract abnormalities, such as previous surgery, strictures, fistulas, diverticula, or functional abnormalities, increases the risk of a swallowed foreign body becoming lodged at the site of the abnormality.

Unusual or recurrent foreign body ingestion should prompt consideration of psychosocial concerns. Foreign body ingestion may be risk-taking or attention-seeking behavior. Abuse or neglect may be present. Mental illness may lead some children to swallow foreign bodies. This may be inadvertent, such as the patient with bulimia who loses grip on a toothbrush used to induce vomiting and swallows it.  Packets of drugs may be swallowed to avoid detection by police.

Prevention of foreign body ingestion in children is a high priority. Caregivers should be educated about preventing small children from contact with small objects that may be harmful if swallowed, especially button/disc batteries, small magnets, and other high-risk objects. This includes items placed into a trash container that may be accessible to children.