The differential diagnosis often includes prevailing mood or anxiety disorders. Often persons with grandiose narcissism can present with heightened mood and more energy when excited by a new idea, which may initially point to a hypomanic/manic presentation; however, the personality aspect would be prominent in their interaction with others. On the other extreme, persons with vulnerable narcissism may present with salient features of dysthymia, depression, and anhedonia. However, the grandiosity and need for admiration would be prominent despite the affective symptoms, which would differentiate it from a major depressive disorder.

The closest differentials continue to remain other cluster B personality disorders, including antisocial personality disorder, histrionic personality disorder, and borderline personality disorder. It bears mention that persons with NPD do not show overt signs of impulsivity and self-destructiveness associated with borderline personality disorder. Similarly, apparent emotional responses are associated with histrionic personality disorder. NPD is most similar to antisocial personality disorder with a lack of empathy and superficial charm. However, persons with an antisocial personality disorder would show a lack of morals compared to persons with NPD and have a past diagnosis of conduct disorder.

- Antisocial personality disorder

- Borderline personality disorder

- Histrionic personality disorder

- Major depressive disorder

- Obsessive-compulsive disorder

- Substance-induced mood disorder