Complete comprehension of the anatomy of the corrugator supercilii muscles and its associated nerves and blood supply is essential for corrugator supercilii muscles resections during forehead rejuvenation and supraorbital nerve/supratrochlear nerve decompression in migraine headache treatment. With regards to forehead rejuvenation, cosmetic physicians may inject neurotoxins into the glabellar complex to maintain an aesthetically pleasing brow position and shape. Precise toxin injection is vital for retaining an aesthetically pleasing brow appearance. When treating the corrugator supercilii muscles near the origin, an injection with greater depth is necessary to grasp the depressor supercilii and the corrugator supercilii muscles fully. When treating the corrugator supercilii muscles more laterally, however, the injection should be more superficial because the corrugator supercilii muscles are at a more superficial surface. The glabellar complex needs 15 to 20 units of onabotulinum or incobotulinum or 38 to 50 units of abobotulinum at the procerus, which requires one location for injection, and the corrugator supercilii muscles, which require two locations for injection.

Details regarding the physiological variations of the corrugator supercilii muscles also deserve consideration to reduce the risk of undesirable postoperative outcomes, such as forehead irregularities, asymmetries, and unequal muscle reactivation. Further, discrepancies in the location of the corrugator supercilii muscles and supratrochlear nerve among patients from different cultural groups require investigation as previous studies have demonstrated the positions of the corrugator supercilii muscles, and supratrochlear nerve between people of White race and Asians are different.