**Hysteroscopes**

There are several types of hysteroscopes available for diagnostic and operative purposes that deserve further explanation. The two main types of hysteroscopes are flexible and rigid. Hysteroscopes are available at viewing angles ranging from 0 to 70 degrees. They all easily connect to fluid channels, a light source, and a video monitoring system. A continuous flow of distending media is needed for optimal visualization of the endometrial cavity. Most hysteroscopes have an operative channel that permits the passage of surgical instruments such as small hysteroscopic graspers, scissors, or a tenaculum.

- STORZ Bettocchi integrated in-office hysteroscope: this hysteroscope has a small diameter of 4mm (Bettocchi 4) or 5 mm (Bettocchi 5) with an oval tip that permits easy passage through the cervix, which is especially important when used in an office setting with conscious patients. It features 2.1 mm (Bettocchi 4) and 2.9 mm (Bettochi 5) 12 and 30 degrees optics and a working channel for 5 French semi-rigid operative instruments.

- STORZ Campo Trophyscope: this hysteroscope has an outer diameter of 2.9 mm, permitting even easier passage through the cervix due to the smaller diameter of the scope. However, with the Trophyscope, the intraoperative changeover is necessary to a continuous flow examination sheath is necessary. This sheath is 3.7 mm in diameter. It features a 30-degree scope with a working operative channel that allows for the introduction of 5 French semi-rigid instruments and bipolar electrodes.

- Olympus Flexible Hysteroscope: this hysteroscope has a flexible outer tip with a wide 100-degree tip angulation range that the operator may adjust. It is 3.1 mm in diameter. It features a wide field of view and an instrument channel.

There are other types of rigid diagnostic and operative hysteroscopes that range in diameter and degree of viewing angulation. In addition, the resectoscope and mini-resectoscope offer easy manipulation of electrocautery monopolar and bipolar loop devices that can be loaded into the scope, providing an easier dissection through dense tissue.

**Distension Medium**

Adequate distention of the uterus is imperative to performing hysteroscopy. Fluid or gas (carbon dioxide) may be used. However, carbon dioxide is only used during diagnostic hysteroscopies because visibility is lost with bleeding.

**Other Instruments**

The traditional hysteroscopic entry technique requires a tray with instruments for cervical dilation. These instruments and materials include a metal speculum, cervical tenaculum, sound, cervical dilators, ring forceps, and raytecs. Local anesthesia, if needed, might be selected based on operator preference. Preferred options include 1% or 2% lidocaine with or without epinephrine. A long 25 or 27-gauge needle is needed for the administration of anesthetic into the cervix.