The treatment of pediatric dyslipidemias in children over ten years is warranted because evidence has shown an increased risk of premature atherosclerotic cardiovascular disease in children with dyslipidemia, especially with elevated LDL-C. This results in a reduced risk of cardiovascular events and mortality in adulthood. The following are treatment guidelines:

**Risk qualification:**The American Heart Association (AHA) has developed a risk stratification system for children to identify the intensity of atherosclerotic risk. The three categories are High risk, moderate risk, or at risk, as summarised in the table.

Family history of premature CVD*

BP: blood pressure; NAFLD: nonalcoholic fatty liver disease; PCOS: polycystic ovary syndrome; CVD: cardiovascular disease; TC: total cholesterol; SLE: systemic lupus erythematosus; JIA: juvenile idiopathic arthritis; HCM: hypertrophic cardiomyopathy; TGA: transposition of the great arteries.* Family history of premature CVD is generally defined as heart attack, treated angina, interventions for coronary artery disease, sudden cardiac death, or ischemic stroke in a first-degree relative (parent or sibling) before age 55 (males) or 65 (females).

- For a high-risk or moderate-risk condition and greater than or equal to 2 cardiovascular risk factors, lifestyle changes like diet, weight loss, and physical activity should be tried in addition to statin therapy. LDL Goal is under 100 mg/dl.

- For patients with moderate risk conditions with less than two cardiovascular risk factors and patients who are at-risk, dietary and lifestyle changes should be tried first, and if not successful, statin therapy should be initiated with an LDL goal of less than 130 mg//dl.

- For patients with no risk factors and over the age of 10 years, statin therapy can be initiated if dietary, and lifestyle changes are not successful, with a goal LDL over less than 190 mg/dl.

Pharmacotherapy should only be started after confirming lipid abnormalities with two fasting samples at least two weeks apart.

**Dietary Management**

All patients with dyslipidemia should be counseled about dietary and lifestyle changes. Consultation with a nutritionist is beneficial. The Cardiovascular Health Integrated Lifestyle Diet (CHILD-1) is intended to lower LDL-C levels. It involves restricting saturated fat intake to under 10% of daily calorie intake and reducing cholesterol consumption to under 300 mg/day.

**Birth to 6 Months**

- All babies should be exclusively breastfed until 6 months of age. Donor breast milk or iron-fortified infant formula may be utilized if maternal breastmilk is unavailable or contraindicated. No supplemental food is recommended.

**6 to 12 Months**

- Breastfeeding should be continued until at least 12 months of age while gradually adding solids; transition to iron-fortified infant formula until 12 months if maternal breastmilk is unavailable or contraindicated.

- Fat intake should not be restricted unless medically indicated.

- No sweetened beverages should be offered; Limit other beverages to 100% fruit juice (less than 4oz/day); encourage water.

**12 to 24 Months**

- Transition to unflavored, reduced-fat cow’s milk. Fat content (2% to fat-free) should be based on the child’s growth, intake of other nutrient-dense foods, total fat intake, and family history of obesity or cardiovascular disease

- Avoid sugar-sweetened beverages; Limit 100% fruit juice to less than 4oz/day; Encourage water

- Offer table foods with:Total fat 30% of daily kcal intakeSaturated fat 8 to 10% daily kcal intakeAvoid trans fatsMono- and polyunsaturated fat up to 20% daily kcal intakeCholesterol under 300mg/day

- Limit sodium intake

**2 to 10 Years**

- The primary beverage should be unflavored, fat-free milk

- Limit/avoid sugar-sweetened beverages; Limit 100% fruit juice to less than 4oz/day; Encourage waterDietary fat:Total fat 25 to 30% of daily kcal intakeSaturated fat 8 to 10% daily kcal intakeAvoid trans fatsMono- and polyunsaturated fat up to 20% daily kcal intakeCholesterol under 300mg/day

- Encourage high dietary fiber intake

- Encourage at least 1 hour of moderate-to-vigorous physical activity daily for children over 5 years

**11 to 21 Years**

- Primary beverages should be fat-free unflavored milk and water

- Limit/avoid sugar-sweetened beverages; Limit 100% fruit juice to less than 4oz/day

- Dietary fat:Total fat 25 to 30% of daily kcal intakeSaturated fat 8 to 10% daily kcal intakeAvoid trans fatsMono- and polyunsaturated fat up to 20% daily kcal intakeCholesterol under 300mg/day

- Encourage high dietary fiber intake

- Encourage at least 1 hour of moderate-to-vigorous physical activity daily

- Encourage healthy eating habits such as daily breakfast, limiting fast foods, and eating meals as a family.

If LDL cholesterol is greater than or equal to 130 mg/dL after 3 to 6 months- then the diet plan should be escalated to CHILD-2, which is composed of saturated fat less than 7% of total calories and cholesterol under 200 mg/day. Eliminating simple sugars from processed foods and sweetened beverages is also helpful.****

**Dietary Supplements**

Plant sterols and stanols are present in various fruits, vegetables, and nuts and added to dressings such as margarine, salad dressings, juice, and yogurts. Plant sterols and stanols work by reducing cholesterol absorption from the intestine. Plant sterols of 2 grams/day have been shown to reduce LDL-C by 5 to 15%; however, no effects were seen on endothelial function.

Plant sterols can prevent the absorption of fat-soluble vitamins, and the levels of these vitamins should be monitored. A study with psyllium fiber (6 grams/day) added to cereal vs. placebo showed a modest reduction of 7% in LDL-C compared to placebo.

**Physical Activity**

Physical activity and reduced sedentary behavior have been shown to improve lipid profiles and reduce the risk of cardiovascular events. Limiting screen time and age-appropriate physical activity should be encouraged.

**Weight Loss**

For overweight children with BMI over 85%, weight reduction is the primary goal, and weight loss can help improve dyslipidemia.

**Avoiding Nicotine Exposure**

Children and adolescents should be counseled regarding smoking and secondhand exposure.

**Pharmacological Management**

Although the first line of treatment for dyslipidemia is dietary and lifestyle intervention, this alone is insufficient for many children to lower their LDL cholesterol, and many children will require pharmacological intervention. Pharmacotherapy options are as follows (summarised in Table below):

**HMG Coenzyme A reductase inhibitors (Statins**): Statins are the first line of therapy for treating pediatric hypercholesterolemia. They work by blocking the enzyme HMG-CoA reductase, which is the rate-limiting enzyme in cholesterol synthesis. This causes reduced intracellular cholesterol pool and upregulation of LDL receptors leading to reduced serum cholesterol. There are many different types of statins - simvastatin, pravastatin, lovastatin, rosuvastatin, and atorvastatin are FDA-approved in children.

Adverse effects: Adverse effects of statin therapy are rare and include GI complaints, the elevation of transaminases, myopathy (muscle cramping and soreness), and new-onset type 2 diabetes. Statins have a potential teratogenic agent and should not be used during pregnancy. If adolescent females are sexually active, contraceptive techniques such as oral contraceptives should be prescribed. The use of statins should be avoided in breastfeeding mothers.

Baseline labs prior to statin initiation:

- fasting lipid panel

- creatine kinase

- Liver function tests, especially ALT

- fasting plasma blood glucose, and hemoglobin a1c

- pregnancy test (if indicated)

Statins are initiated at the lowest starting dose and given once daily, typically at bedtime, because most LDL-C synthesis occurs at nighttime hours. They are used in doses between 5 to 40 mg/day.  After initiation of statins, lipid panel, a1c, CK, fasting plasma glucose, and LFTs should be checked at 4 to 6 weeks and with statin dose titration by 10 to 20 mg until LDL levels are under 130 mg/dl for moderate and at-risk and under 100 mg/dl for high-risk patients.

If there are signs of toxicity, statins should be discontinued, and laboratory function should be rechecked. Once laboratory function is normalized, statins can potentially be restarted at a lower dose.

Once the LDL goals are met, ALT, hemoglobin a1c and CK should be monitored every six months along with a fasting lipid panel.

Laboratory evaluation should then be done every six months.

If LDL goals are not met, the statin dose should be increased until the maximum amount is reached or evidence of toxicity. The clinician can add a second agent if the LDL target is not achieved. Caution must be used if adding fibrates given compounded risk of adverse effects, especially myopathy.

**Bile acid-binding agents:**Bile acid binding agents work to lower serum cholesterol by binding with bile acids in the intestine and preventing their reabsorption. Bile-acid binding agents include colestipol, Cholestyramine, and Colesevelam. Reduced hepatic cholesterol, in turn, induces hepatic cholesterol biosynthesis causing increased LDL receptor synthesis and reduced serum cholesterol.

**Fabric acid derivatives:**Fibrates such as gemfibrozil and fenofibrate are primarily utilized in states of hypertriglyceridemia with TG levels of over 1000 mg/dl. They can also be used in cases where TG levels are between 400-1000 mg/dl. Fibrates work by increasing the breakdown of TG and reducing hepatic VLDL production; hence they lower TG and increase HDL-C.

Adult data shows that fibrates lower triglycerides by 40 to 60%. Fibrates are usually well-tolerated, and side effects include elevation of transaminases, dyspepsia, diarrhea, cholelithiasis, risk of myopathy, and rhabdomyolysis. The risk of side effects is increased when combined with statins; hence, therapy is not commonly combined in children. Fibrates are currently not FDA-approved for the pediatric age group.

**Niacin:**Niacin or nicotinic acid is rarely used as a primary or adjunct therapy for pediatric dyslipidemia. It is available in regular and slow-release forms, with doses between 100 and 2250 mg/day. In children with heterozygous familial hypercholesterolemia, niacin in doses of 1000 to 2250 mg caused a reduction in LDL cholesterol by 23 to 30%. It is not FDA approved and has multiple side effects affecting up to 76% of children, including nausea, vomiting, abdominal pain, headache, flushing, elevated liver enzymes, and impaired glucose tolerance.

**Inhibitors of cholesterol absorption:**Ezetimibe is an inhibitor of cholesterol absorption which works by inhibiting the absorption of cholesterol from diet and plant sterols at the level of the brush border of the intestine by inhibiting Niemann-Pick C1 like 1 protein. It is the second most common lipid-lowering agent prescribed after statins.

Reduced cholesterol absorption from the intestine leads to reduced availability of cholesterol at the level of the liver and a compensatory increased biosynthesis of hepatic cholesterol, which in turn causes increased LDL receptor expression and reduced serum cholesterol. Currently, Ezetimibe is not FDA-approved for the pediatric age group.

In children, ezetimibe of 10 mg daily was shown to reduce LDL-C levels by 28% compared to placebo.

**Omega 3 fatty acids:**High-dose omega 3 fatty acids found in fish oils are used primarily for the management of TG levels, given the risk of pancreatitis. Omega 3 fish oils at a dose of 2-4 grams per day are used in patients with severely high TG levels in the 600 to 1000 mg/dl range. TG lowering effect depends on the eicosapentaenoic acid (EPA) and docosahexaenoic acid (DHA) content. In adults, data have shown a reduction in TG levels by 20 to 30%, but data in pediatrics has not demonstrated a statistically significant difference compared to placebo in reduction of TG levels.

**Apheresis:**Lipoprotein apheresis is the process of physically removing lipoproteins from blood using methods such as extracorporeal precipitation. Apheresis is used for patients with significant LDL-C elevation that is not responsive to standard dietary and pharmacological measures. This process is used in patients with homozygous hypercholesterolemia (LDL over 500 mg/dl), patients with coronary artery disease and LDL over 200 mg/dl, and patients with LDL over 300 mg/dl despite dietary and pharmacological intervention.

With the advent of PCCK9 inhibitors, the use of apheresis has reduced. It is performed once or twice a week. A significant reduction in LDL-C levels of up to 60 to 70% has been reported in the pediatric age group. Although there is data on the reduction of LDL levels, data regarding reduction in cardiovascular events are lacking. The procedure is well tolerated with limited side effects such as hypotension, iron deficiency anemia, nausea, and headaches.

**Proprotein convertase subtilisin/Kexin type 9 (PCSK9) inhibitors:**PCSK9 is encoded by the PCSK9 gene and is produced in the liver. PCSK9 binds to the LDL receptor (LDL-R) on the surface of hepatocytes, leading to the degradation of the LDL-R and subsequently higher plasma LDL-C levels.****

PCSK9 monoclonal antibody binds to free plasma PCSK9, thereby leading to degradation of PCSK9. This leads to less PCSK9 available to bind to the LDL-R and, therefore, higher hepatic LDL-R expression and lower serum LDL levels. They have been shown to reduce LDL cholesterol by 60-70%. PCSK9 inhibitors were approved in 2015.

Commercially available PCSK9 monoclonal antibodies are Evolocumab and alirocumab. Although highly effective, this treatment modality is expensive and only available as a subcutaneous injection that can be given once or twice a month.

**Lomitapide:**Lomitapide is FDA-approved for homozygous FH. It binds to and inhibits microsomal triglyceride transfer protein (MTP), which ultimately causes reduced levels of chylomicrons and VLDL causing a reduction in LDL-C levels. It carries a risk of teratogenicity and liver toxicity, along with severe diarrhea. It is typically started at 5 mg and taken 2 or 3 hours after the evening meal, and the dose can be increased to a maximum of 60 mg daily.

Table summarising lipid-lowering agents

10 mg (over 10 yrs)

5 mg(10 yrs)

**Bile acid Binding Agents**











































Cholestyramine

Colestipol

Colesevelam



1.25 g









**Fibrates**

























Constipation, myositis, anemia

Fenofibrate





40 mg



130-200 mg



Gemfibrozil

1200 mg

1200 mg

Data lacking in pediatrics