Serotonin syndrome may occur as a consequence of therapeutic medication use, drug interactions, or intentional overdose. Multiple drugs may precipitate serotonin toxicity by a variety of mechanisms. SSRIs such as citalopram, escitalopram, fluoxetine, fluoxetine, paroxetine, and sertraline inhibit the reuptake of serotonin from the synaptic cleft into the presynaptic neuron. Many other drugs also inhibit serotonin reuptake including meperidine, tramadol, pentazocine, metoclopramide, valproate, carbamazepine, dextromethorphan, and cyclobenzaprine. Serotonin modulators, such as trazodone, and dopamine-norepinephrine reuptake inhibitors, such as bupropion, also increase synaptic serotonin availability. Tri-cyclic antidepressants and St. John’s wort, a popular supplement, also inhibit serotonin reuptake. Monoamine oxidase inhibitors (MAOIs) inhibit serotonin metabolism and tend to produce the most severe and prolonged cases. MAOIs include phenelzine, tranylcypromine, isocarboxazid, selegiline, the antibiotic, linezolid, and methylene blue. Tryptophan, as a supplement or dietary source, increases serotonin formation and can be particularly dangerous in patients on other serotonergic drugs, especially MAOIs. Amphetamines, cocaine, MDMA (Ecstacy) and levodopa all increase serotonin release. Serotonin syndrome is often precipitated by the addition of one or more of these medications in patients who were previously stable on a serotonergic agent. Since there are so many drugs that may cause serotonin syndrome, it is important for providers to take a careful medication history when adding new medications.