Cannulation for peripheral ECMO can be accomplished via Seldinger’s technique, open cut-down Seldinger, or open cut-down with end to side anastomosis of a graft. Central ECMO cannulation is achieved by surgical cannulation of the right atrium and aorta after sternotomy.

When blood is exposed to ECMO surfaces, including the oxygenator, an inflammatory response is unleashed, activating platelets, neutrophils, fibrinolytic, complement, intrinsic, and extrinsic coagulation pathways.

Neutrophils produce cytokines as part of the inflammatory response.

**Unfractionated Heparin**

One of the most widely used anticoagulants is unfractionated heparin (UFH). UFH exerts its effects by binding to antithrombin. Once UFH binds antithrombin, it impairs thrombin by 1000 to 2000 fold, thus preventing thromboembolism formation.

- Unfractionated Heparin (UFH): 50 to 100 units/kg bolus then 20 to 50 units/kg/hr titrated to an ACT of 180-220.

- It is also important to monitor antithrombin levels. Neonates typically have lower levels of antithrombin III and require ATIII supplementation due to heparin resistance. Also, patients with high losses of AT3, such as in nephrotic syndrome, large ongoing pleural drainage such as chylothorax, may develop heparin resistance due to ATIII deficiency and require ATIII replacement. Replacement can be done with FFP or with ATIII concentrate. Typically the ATIII deficiency is suspected if heparin gtt is needing frequent escalation. Thus, an ATIII level is checked. If the level is <50-60% of normal activity, then ATIII is replaced. This is typically done with a reduction of heparin gtt at the same time to prevent supratherapeutic heparin response and bleeding complications.

**Direct thrombin inhibitors (DTIs)**

The direct thrombin inhibitors bind directly to thrombin, and their effects are thus independent of antithrombin levels resulting in a more predictable response. One of the disadvantages of using DTIs is the lack of a reversal agent should life-threatening bleeding occur.

- Bivalirudin: Initial bolus of 0.5 mg/kg then a continuous infusion of 0.5 to 2.5 mcg/kg/min, monitor via aPPT 2 hours after initiation and then every 4 hours after that. Titrate to a goal aPPT 1.5 to 2 times normal.

- Argatroban: Initial 25 mcg/kg/min and a bolus of 350 mcg/kg over 3 to 5 minutes. Check an aPPT 2 hours after initiation, then every 4 hours after. May increase infusion rate 0.05 mcg/kg/min to titrate to an aPPT 1.5 to 3 times baseline.

**Methods for Monitoring**

- Activated clotting time (ACT): The most predominant method for monitoring heparin's anticoagulant effect is the activated clotting time (ACT). The ACT uses whole blood to measure the time for initial fibrin formation. Several factors may affect the ACT, including hemodilution, coagulation factor deficiencies, hypothermia, and platelet function. ACT has been shown to correlate poorly to the gold standard, which is the anti-factor Xa level. ACT is more likely to overestimate the heparin effect in the pediatric population, leading to inadequate anticoagulation.

- Activated partial thromboplastin time (aPPT): This test utilizes plasma or whole blood to measure fibrin formation. The target aPPT time is 60-90 seconds for patients on ECMO.

- Anti-factor Xa: Monitoring of anti-factor Xa is a direct measurement of heparin inhibition. Target ranges between 0.25-0.7IU/mL are recommended while on ECMO.

- Thromboelastography (TEG) and rotational thromboelastography (ROTEM): A TEG or ROTEM can inform practitioners of time to initial fibrin formation, clot strength, speed of fibrin crosslinking, and the onset of fibrinolysis. During the administration of UFH, the TEG allows for interpretation of UFH efficacy by measuring the difference in clotting time. This test can be beneficial if concerned about heparin resistance.

**Daily Parameters**

- Unfractionated heparin level. Goal 0.25 to 0.5 mainly but frequently up to 0.7

- ATIII levels with goal activity > 50%

- Hematocrit level >35% goal

- Platelet count goal > 100,000. The threshold would be lowered in the presence of ongoing bleeding or recent intracranial hemorrhage.

- PT INR. If >2, then FFP is given.

- Fibrinogen level. Goal > 100. If less, then cryoprecipitate is given.