Stature is a hereditary trait and controlled by both genetic as well as environmental factors.

- **Genetics**: The height of a person is determined by their genetic makeup. If any of the parents have short stature or recorded it in their family history, then there is a greater possibility that they will also have short stature. But genetic short stature is applicable only if there is no underlying medical reason. This has also been categorized as familial short stature (FSS).

- **Constitutional growth delay**: Constitutional growth delay deals with the tempo of growth or growth velocity. The tempo of growth throughout the growth process of these individuals may be slow or normal. Some children develop later than others, i.e., they have delayed bone age. They are small for their age and enter puberty at later ages than others. However, they usually catch up at adulthood, having short stature during their childhood but the relatively normal height at adulthood. The reasons for this may include malnutrition during the gestational period and early childhood or could be genetic. Malnutrition is one factor affecting the tempo of growth and bone development, which may further aggravate short stature in a genetically predisposed individual.

- **Early puberty:**Short stature may also result from precocious puberty of the child.

- **Medical reasons**: Several medical reasons can cause short stature. These include diseases and disorders, the most significant being hormonal deficiencies.
- **Endocrine disorder:**The major medical cause of short stature is growth hormone deficiency (GHD). This may be categorized as an endocrine disorder. Growth hormones regulate human growth. The growth hormone-releasing hormone (GHRH) released by the hypothalamus stimulates the production and secretion of growth hormone (GH) from the anterior pituitary. These growth hormones act on the liver and other tissue and stimulate the secretion of insulin-like growth factor-1 (IGF-1), which further acts on the bones and promotes endochondral ossification. Pagani et al. (2017) found a positive correlation between IGF-1 and stature, demonstrating lower levels of IGF-1 in individuals with short stature.
- **Genetic disorders:**Various genetic disorders affect growth, including Down syndrome, Turner syndrome, 3M syndrome, Noonan syndrome, Prader-Willi syndrome, Aarskog syndrome, Silver-Russell syndrome, short stature homeobox gene deficiency, etc.
- **Bone diseases:**Bone diseases affect bone growth, thus affecting the stature of the person. These diseases include achondroplasia (short-limbed dwarfism), diastrophic dysplasia (short-limbed dwarfism), spondyloepiphyseal dysplasias (short-trunk dwarfism), rickets, etc.
- **Chronic disorders:**Chronic disorders also affect the overall growth of a person, including stature. These disorders include cystic fibrosis, Crohn disease, juvenile idiopathic arthritis (JIA), anemia, chronic renal insufficiency, inflammatory bowel disorder, etc.
- **Environmental pollutants:**Studies have shown that exposure to environmental pollutants such as lead, cadmium, hexachlorobenzene (HCB), polychlorinated biphenyl (PCB), etc., has been associated with reduced height.