**Nasal Endoscopy**

Nasal endoscopy utilizes fiber optic cables and a light source to visualize the nasal and sinus cavities that otherwise would be impossible to see. Visualization is minimally invasive and the preferred method for evaluating a wide variety of medical problems affecting the nose and sinuses.

**Rhinomanometry**

Rhinomanometry is used to evaluate the respiratory function of the nose by measuring pressure and flow during normal respiration. Obstruction will lead to higher than expected pressures and decreased flow. Two primary methods are used:  anterior or posterior. Anterior rhinomanometry takes unilateral measurements of one nostril at a time, whereas posterior rhinomanometry evaluates both simultaneously. Anterior rhinomanometry is more commonly used, and primarily evaluates on which side of the septum the obstruction arises.

**Acoustic Rhinometry**

Acoustic rhinometry is primarily to measure the cross-sectional area and length of the nose and nasal cavity. It uses sound waves and measures reflection in the nasal cavity. Evaluation of nasal cavity geometry and abnormalities is possible.

**CT/MRI**

CT is the modality of choice for evaluating congenital, inflammatory, benign, and malignant pathologies in the sinonasal region.

**Saccharin Test**

The saccharin test is primarily for measuring the nasal mucociliary clearance time.

**UPSIT**

Many smell identification tests are available, but the University of Pennsylvania Smell Identification Test (UPSIT) is the gold standard due to its reliability. The test consists of 40 questions, each with a different odor released upon scratching. The examiner asks the patient to identify the odor released. This test can assist in the diagnosis of many conditions, such as Alzheimer's disease, Parkinson's disease, Huntington disease, and others.