TEG is a non-invasive test that quantitatively measures the ability of whole blood to form a clot. The principle of this in vitro test is to detect and quantify dynamic changes of the viscoelastic properties of a blood sample during clotting under low shear stress. The test is performed in a specially designed system called a thromboelastograph. The system consists of 2 chambers simultaneously examining a blood sample in duplicate to reduce the risk of sampling and measurement errors. Each chamber consists of a platform with a disposable cup where a blood sample is placed and a detection pin suspended in its center. The cup oscillates around the detection pin in a limited arc of plus or minus (+/-) 4 degrees 45' every 5 seconds. Induced pin movement is recorded, and changes are measured as a function of time. Initially, there is little movement of the pin since liquid blood possesses minimal viscosity, and the oscillations of the cup are not transmitted to the pin.

As the blood coagulates, it begins to adhere to both the cup and the pin, and movement of the cup induces motion on the pin. These gradually increasing viscoelastic mechanical properties of the blood reflect the developing 3-dimensional fibrin mesh and platelet components of the clot. The greater the viscoelasticity of the clot, the higher the amplitude of the pin motion. As fibrinolysis starts, the fibrin-platelet structure begins to dissolve gradually, and the clot loses its contact with the detection pin, which has less induced motion. The thromboelastogram (Figure 1) is a graphical image of the recorded amplitude of movement of the pin as a function of time. Analytical software measures and quantifies these changes. Therefore, TEG measures the functional ability of the blood to make a hemostatic plug. A newer version replaces the cup rotation method with a resonance technique wherein the blood sample is subjected to vibration, and the vertical movement of the blood meniscus is measured under LED illumination. The system uses pre-measured cartridges that do not require pipetting and allows the simultaneous performance of four blood tests.