Carbamazepine is often prescribed by primary care providers, neurologists, and pain specialists. When prescribing this medication, it is essential to inform the patient of the potential adverse effects. Therefore, patients require the attention of an entire interprofessional healthcare team that includes clinicians, nurses, and pharmacists, all coordinating their activities and engaging in open information-sharing regarding developments in the patient's case. This interprofessional teamwork will improve therapeutic outcomes and minimize adverse effects for patients receiving carbamazepine therapy. [Level 5]

The most common side effects of carbamazepine include dizziness, drowsiness, ataxia, nausea, and vomiting. Although rarer in occurrence, this comes with a black box warning for several severe dermatologic reactions. In patients of Han Chinese ancestry, studies have indicated a strong association between the HLA-B*1502 gene and Steven Johnson syndrome/toxic epidermal necrolysis (SJS/TEN).

If the drug has been prescribed for seizures, then the primary care providers should not alter the dose without first consulting with the patient's neurologist. Patients should be warned not to combine this agent with other antiseizure medications, alcohol, or illicit drugs.

Due to CYP activities, co-administering carbamazepine with oral contraceptive hormone, warfarin, nefazodone, etc., can affect plasma levels. Carbamazepine can auto-induce its metabolism, thus reducing the half-life on repeated doses.

Carbamazepine is one of the first anticonvulsants used to treat bipolar disorder. It is usually well-tolerated in comparison to Lithium and valproic acid. The new extended-release capsule approved by the FDA in 2004 is developed to decrease the fluctuation of plasma levels and lower the incidence of adverse effects.