Capsaicin was first isolated in 1816 by Christian Bucholz. Capsaicin is a chili pepper extract, genus Capsicum, with analgesic properties. Its chemical composition was first determined in 1919. They explained the biosynthetic pathway in the 1960s. Since its discovery, it is used as a homeopathic remedy to treat burning pain using the concept of "treating like with like" or counter-irritant. The first reports of its pain-relieving properties appeared in the mid-1850s as a recommendation to use it for parts of the body that burn or itch. Since the first reports, one uses various preparations of capsaicin to treat a variety of chronic painful conditions. Systematic reviews have shown that capsaicin is efficacious in treating a variety of conditions, including:

- Nondiabetic neuropathic pain

- Postherpetic neuralgia

- Osteoarthritis

- Chronic musculoskeletal pain

- Post-mastectomy pain syndrome

- Burning mouth syndrome

- Overactive bladder

- Gastropathy

- Postoperative nausea and vomiting

- Pruritus

- Pruritus ani

- Postoperative sore throat

- Improving cough reflex sensitivity in patients with a history of dysphagia and other swallowing related disorders

- Chemotherapy- and radiotherapy-induced mucositis.

It is important to note that manufacturers have sponsored many of the studies examining the benefits of capsaicin. They often prescribe the agent for many other disorders with little to no supporting evidence. There is little scientific proof it works as a weight-loss agent or lowers blood sugar although more studies need to be done to evaluate its total effect on delaying obesity-related metabolic syndrome.