The long head of the biceps (LHB) brachii tendon originates at the supraglenoid tubercle and superior glenoid labrum. Its labral origin is mostly posterior in over half of cases, and the tendon, on average, is 9 cm in length. Inside the joint, the tendon is extrasynovial and passes obliquely, heading toward the bicipital groove. As it exits the distal bicipital groove in the upper arm, the long head of the biceps tendon joins the short head of the biceps tendon (SHBT) as both transition into their respective muscle bellies in the central third of the upper arm. After crossing the volar aspect of the elbow, the biceps brachii inserts on the radial tuberosity and medial forearm fascia. The latter occurs via the bicipital aponeurosis.

The distal insertion point has become a relevant yet a controversial topic of interest. Over the last decade, there has been a renewed interest in investigating the insertional anatomy of the distal biceps tendon, specifically concerning its relevance in the evolution of distal biceps reconstruction techniques. Historically, the insertion site was described as one homogenous tendon that inserts on the radial tuberosity. More recent studies have reported its distal attachment as two distinct tendons. More specifically, recent studies have demonstrated the presence of an entirely bifurcated distal biceps tendon insertion. The studies found that the short head of the distal biceps tendon commonly inserts more distally than the long head and typically inserts at the apex of the tuberosity. The long head passes deep to the distal tendon of the short head before inserting proximal to the tendinous footprint of the short head.

**Biomechanics**

The biceps brachii muscle primarily is a strong forearm supinator but a weak elbow flexor.

**Pain Generation**

The long head of the biceps tendon is a well-recognized source of anterior shoulder pain. Mechanical causes include repetitive traction, friction, and glenohumeral rotation. The bicipital sheath itself is vulnerable to tenosynovial inflammation by association as it is contiguous with the synovial lining of the glenohumeral joint. The upper one-third of the long head of the biceps tendon demonstrates a rich sympathetic innervation network, including neuropeptides such as substance P and Calcitonin gene-related peptide. These factors are present in the sensory nerves in this region of the tendon. This sympathetic network is known to exhibit vasodilatory changes as part of the neurogenic inflammatory process in the long head of the biceps tendon, which may play a critical role in at least the chronic phase of pathophysiology affecting the long head of the biceps tendon.