Atrial myxoma can have many manifestations through a number of mechanisms.

**1) Obstructive Symptoms**

Left-sided atrial myxomas

Patients with left-sided myxomas usually develop signs and symptoms associated with mitral valve obstruction or regurgitation, left-sided heart failure, and secondary pulmonary hypertension. The most common symptom is dyspnea with exertion followed by orthopnea, paroxysmal nocturnal dyspnea, and pulmonary edema.

Right-sided atrial myxomas

Similarly, cardiovascular manifestations of right-sided myxomas are those of tricuspid stenosis and right heart failure. Common symptoms include exertional dyspnea, pedal edema, hepatomegaly, and ascites. On physical exam, a  diastolic murmur, similar to the "tumor flop," can sometimes be appreciated at the tricuspid region; in addition, prominent "a wave" in the jugular veins can also be observed occasionally.

Both left-sided and right-sided atrial myxomas penetrate the myocardium and cause cardiac arrhythmias.

**2) Thromboembolic Symptoms**

Due to the high systolic pressure and the location, left atrial myxomas were highly associated with increased risk of systemic embolization, particularly in the central nervous system, retinal arteries as well as viscera, spleen, kidneys, adrenals, abdominal aorta, iliac and femoropopliteal arteries.

Right atrial myxomas can result in pulmonary arterial embolism or systemic embolism if either an atrial septal defect or a patent foramen ovale also coexist.

**3) Constitutional Symptoms**

Constitutional symptoms of atrial myxoma include fever, malaise, anorexia, arthralgia, weight loss. The release of cytokine IL-6, which plays a major role in the proliferation of myxoma cells and the release of acute-phase reactants, is highly associated with the systematic manifestations.

**4) Other Symptoms**

Atrial myxoma can present as part of Carney's complex. Patients with Carney's complex have unusual skin pigmentation and tend to develop tumors in endocrine tissues, including adrenal glands, thyroid, testes, and ovaries. Patients with a pituitary adenoma can also develop acromegaly. Patients with Carney's complex tend to develop recurrent atrial myxomas despite resections.