The release of cortisol is under the feed-back control of the hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal (HPA) axis. Corticotrophin-releasing hormone (CRH) is released from the hypothalamus and stimulates the adrenocorticotropic hormone (ACTH). ACTH acts by binding to a G protein-coupled receptor (the melanocortin two receptor- MC2R). This binding results in the activation of adenylyl cyclase, cAMP production, and activation of protein kinase A (PKA). PKA modifies the activity of specific transcription factors via phosphorylation.

ACTH actions include, the activation of HMG CoA reductase (the rate-limiting enzyme in cholesterol synthesis), increased LDL-C esters uptake (that are either stored or converted into cholesterol), activation of hormone-sensitive lipase (HSL) and lastly inhibition of acyl-coenzyme A (CoA): cholesterol acyltransferase (ACAT). The above actions of ACTH increased the available cholesterol pool for steroidogenesis. The first step in the steroidogenesis pathway occurs in mitochondria; StAR (induced by ACTH) moves cholesterol to the inner mitochondrial membrane. Desmolase, a CYP450 enzyme, exerts its action by catalyzing a break in the cholesterol side chain.

Glucocorticoid production in zona fasciculata involves cholesterol desmolase, 17a-hydroxylase, 21-hydroxylase, 11β-hydroxylase. The end product of this pathway is Cortisone. Cortisone (the inactive form of cortisol) is converted by type 1 hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase in the liver to its active form cortisol. Cortisol is released in the blood bound to cortisol binding protein (CBP), which is a globulin protein.

Upon binding to an intracellular cytoplasmic glucocorticoid receptor (GR), the Cortisol-GR complex is translocated inside the nucleus. The compound acts at the DNA level, affecting the expression in a variety of genes and inducing various effects on different cells of the body like fibroblasts, white blood cells, etc.

Cortisol half-life is 66 minutes, under normal conditions. The enzymatic system for cortisol metabolism is primarily in the liver. Corticosteroid metabolites are excreted in the urine—the primary urinary metabolite of cortisol Tetrahydrocortisol. A small amount of free/ unbound serum cortisol is not reabsorbed in the distal tubule of the kidney and is excreted into the urine. This small amount of cortisol is of diagnostic importance.