Inflammation is generally reversible, while joint destruction is not. Early and appropriate treatment may prevent disease persistence/progression, joint damage, and disability.

Prompt diagnosis and treatment of septic arthritis are of utmost importance as untreated septic arthritis or delay in treatment invariably leads to permanent joint destruction and other complications such as sepsis. After the synovial fluid analysis is performed, intravenous antibiotics with broad coverage should be initiated, which can later be targeted based on sensitivity analysis from the synovial fluid analysis. Joint lavage and orthopedic evaluation may be necessary in some cases. Prosthetic joint infections can be difficult to manage. Removing hardware followed by a spacer and a long course of antibiotics before repeat surgery to replace the hardware is usually indicated in prosthetic joint infections.

Gout and pseudogout can mimic septic arthritis. In patients with acute monoarthritis, once septic arthritis has been ruled out by synovial fluid analysis, and the diagnosis of gout or pseudogout has been confirmed by synovial fluid analysis, treatment with anti-inflammatory agents such as oral, systemic or intra-articular corticosteroids, NSAIDs, or colchicine shall be pursued. The choice of agent depends on the severity of inflammatory arthritis as well as patient comorbidities.

In patients with autoimmune inflammatory arthritis, early treatment to suppress inflammation and prevent recurrent inflammation, disease progression, and joint damage are crucial. The choice of treatment depends on the underlying etiology. Conventional disease-modifying antirheumatic drugs such as methotrexate, leflunomide, sulfasalazine, and hydroxychloroquine are usually first-line agents, and if lack of response, treatment with biologic disease-modifying antirheumatic drugs shall be pursued as appropriate.

Surgery is rarely needed in the early stages of inflammatory arthritis but can be considered in patients with chronic deformities due to underlying chronic autoimmune inflammatory arthropathies such as rheumatoid arthritis. An interprofessional team approach, including patient education, physical and occupational therapy, diet, and lifestyle modification, can significantly improve patient outcomes.