Hematoxylin and eosin stains of atypical fibroxanthoma lesions show a dermally-based tumor with pleomorphism, atypical mitotic figures, and a spindly architecture. Atypical fibroxanthoma lesions occasionally extend to the subcutaneous tissue. Note that atypical fibroxanthoma is a dermal-based process, while spindle cell squamous cell carcinoma variants (on the differential diagnosis) connect with the epidermis and show signs of keratinization. Multinucleated giant cells and solar elastosis are often present in atypical fibroxanthoma biopsy specimens, while a mixed inflammatory infiltrate may be found at the edge of the tumor. Immunohistochemistry is required to rule out other neoplasms, including spindloid squamous cell carcinoma, melanoma, and undifferentiated pleomorphic sarcoma.

Since atypical fibroxanthoma stains positive for several non-specific stains, including CD10, p53, S100A6, vimentin, and procollagen-1, it is considered a diagnosis of exclusion histologically. Of note, atypical fibroxanthoma stains negative for HMB-45, p40 (often positive in squamous cell carcinoma), desmin, pan-cytokeratin stains, CD31, and has sparse staining for S100, which may help differentiate it from melanoma. Since poorly differentiated sarcomatoid carcinomas may lose cytokeratin expression, a variety of cytokeratin stains should be used. Severe variants of atypical fibroxanthoma have been described based on various histologic findings, including pigmented atypical fibroxanthoma due to hemosiderin deposit and not actual melanin pigment, granular cell atypical fibroxanthoma, sclerotic atypical fibroxanthoma, spindle cell nonpleomorphic atypical fibroxanthoma, osteoid atypical fibroxanthoma, chondroid atypical fibroxanthoma, myxoid atypical fibroxanthoma, keloidal atypical fibroxanthoma, osteoclast-like giant-cell rich atypical fibroxanthoma, and clear cell atypical fibroxanthoma.