Sinus node dysfunction results from the abnormal automaticity, conduction, or both of the sinoatrial node and surrounding tissues. Both could result from abnormal mechanisms, including fibrosis, atherosclerosis, and inflammatory/infiltrative processes.

**Sinus Node Fibrosis:**Replacement of the sinus node tissue by fibrous tissue is the most common cause of sinus node dysfunction, the replacement can also include other parts of the conduction system, including the AV node.

**Medication:**Prescription medications can depress the sinus node function, potentially resulting in sinus node dysfunction include: beta blocker, non-dihydropyridine calcium channel blockers, digoxin, antiarrhythmic medications, and acetylcholinesterase inhibitors.

**Infiltrative disease:**The SA node tissue can be affected during the disease process of some of the infiltrative diseases such as amyloidosis, sarcoidosis, scleroderma, hemochromatosis, and pericarditis leading to sinus node dysfunction.

**Ischemia:**The sinus node is perfused by the sinoatrial nodal artery, which arises from the right coronary artery in 60 % of the time and from the left circumflex artery in 40 % of the time. Narrowing of this artery can lead to impairment of the sinus node function leading to sinus node dysfunction that can be potentially reversible. Almost all such cases are present in inferior myocardial infarction.

**Familial:**Sinus node dysfunction in rare cases can be the result of cardiac sodium channel mutations of SCN5A and HCN4 genes.

**Miscellaneous:**Other disorders that can rarely cause sinus node dysfunction to include hypothyroidism, hypothermia, and hypoxia.