Patients with ASAS develop multiple complications associated with the condition. Complications arise due to the highly incapacitating injury to the spinal cord. The complications and presenting symptoms are dependant on the level in the spinal cord that the insults occur. The majority of life-threatening complications in ASAS show shortly after the ischemic insult or during the hospitalization period:

- Hypotension: involvement of lateral horns (T1-L2) may lead to shock with fatal consequences if not treated/corrected.

- Respiratory failure: high cervical-level injury will involve the phrenic nerve (C3-C5), which may lead to prolonged mechanical ventilation.

- Bradycardia: this may lead to cardiac arrest for which patients may require atropine or even permanent electrical pacing.

- Infections (urinary tract infections, pneumonia, bacteremia)

- Electrolyte imbalances

- Renal failure

- Depression

ASAS prognosis for recovery is dismal with poor outcomes. Many complications develop as most patients do not recover their motor and sensory dysfunction and have prolonged immobilization.

- Permanent para or quadra paresis or plegia

- Deep venous thrombosis

- Pulmonary embolism

- Pressure ulcers with a 50% lifetime risk

- Neurogenic bowel/bladder

- Sexual dysfunction

- Neuropathic pain

- Gastrointestinal stress ulcers

- Gastrointestinal dysmotility

- Chronic pain in 79% of the patients

- Increased risk of osteoporosis due to prolonged immobilization

- Spasticity

- Psychological depression and other conditions

- Economic issues

- Dependency on others in activities of daily living