**Antibiotics**

Empirical antibiotic therapy should be started in patients with suspected infections after sending appropriate cultures. The antibiotics must be initiated at the earliest possible in all suspected sepsis cases, especially in septic shock. The antibiotics/antimicrobials are selected based on the pathogen's suspected nature, the source of sepsis, the local antibiogram, and the risk of encountering drug resistance in a particular patient. Antibiotics need to be given in the correct dose for the appropriate duration. Deescalation involves substituting the ongoing antibiotic with a narrower spectrum antibiotic as per the culture report, converting IV antibiotics to oral ones, and finally stopping the ongoing antibiotic once the course is over. Deescalation is expected to combat the increasing antibiotic resistance in ICUs all over the globe.

**Source Control**

The source of infection should be identified, and source control should be enacted immediately. This includes removing intravascular devices, urinary catheters, and drainage of empyema/abscesses.

**Role of Antipyretics**

Antipyretics reduce the threshold of body temperature control in the hypothalamus and hence reduce the body temperature. Fever is said to have a protective role in patients with infection by reducing bacterial growth, increasing the synthesis of cytokines, and activating neutrophils, macrophages, and T cells.

The REACTOR study randomly evaluated 184 ICU patients with fever who did not have any acute CNS pathology. They studied the difference between systematic active and ordinary temperature management and observed no difference in ICU-free days or 90-day survival.

So if the question is, "should the fever be treated in all the patients?" A fever >40 C is associated with increased mortality in patients without evidence of infection and should be controlled aggressively.

Most experts prefer acetaminophen over aspirin for temperature control in the ICU. The bioavailability of enteral acetaminophen is excellent, and the enteral/oral route is preferred over intravenous preparation unless the enteral route is contraindicated. Many studies reported incidence of fall in systolic blood pressure ≤90 mmHg or ≥20% from baseline were higher with intravenous acetaminophen than with oral preparations.