In a patient presentation of acute scrotal pain, the differential includes ischemia (testicular torsion, torsion of a testicular appendage), infection (acute epididymo-orchitis), or trauma (scrotal contusion, testis rupture). However, the acute scrotum should be considered a surgical emergency until a testicular torsion is ruled out due to the potential catastrophic loss of a testicle. Testicular salvage is time-dependent, and most testicles remain viable if they are surgically detorsed within 6 hours of the onset of symptoms.

Testicular torsion usually has a more acute onset than torsion of an appendage, but this is variable. The cremasteric reflex is almost always absent on the affected side, and on physical exam, an abnormal transverse lie of the unaffected testicle may present. Lifting the affected testicle does not usually relieve pain (negative Prehn sign), but this is not considered a reliable indicator. Doppler ultrasound will show arterial flow to the affected testicle to be absent or minimal. Interestingly, onset during sleep has been found to be an indicator of testicular torsion.

Epididymo-orchitis, like torsion of a testicular appendage, will show hyperemia to the affected epididymis on color Doppler ultrasound but is likely to be more pronounced. They will often be associated with voiding symptoms such as dysuria, frequency and urgency, and possibly a history of urinary tract infections. Patients may also present with systemic signs and symptoms of fever, nausea, or vomiting. On physical exam, the epididymis and/or testis on the affected side will usually be enlarged and diffusely tender. Occasionally, elevating the affected testicle will relieve pain (positive Prehn sign). No "angel wing or bell clapper deformity" will be present.

In doubtful cases, it is essential to perform an emergency scrotal exploration rather than wait and risk losing the testicle.