**Laboratory Testing**

Laboratory testing and biochemical markers are often nonspecific. Serum pancreatic enzymes (lipase, amylase, and elastase) are mildly elevated, and hepatic enzyme levels are sometimes elevated.

**Imaging**

**Abdominal Ultrasound**

Ultrasonography usually demonstrates a hyperechoic mass along with duodenal wall thickening.

Inflammation is more prominent in the initial stages of the disease. However, as the disease progresses, fibrosis is predominant over inflammation. During the early stages of the disease process, the inflammation causes a hypoechoic bandlike thickening in the pancreaticoduodenal groove, moderate duodenal wall thickening, and heterogenicity of the pancreatic head. In the later stages, hyperechoic thickening of the duodenum is seen. During the later stages, myeloid cell proliferation and fibrosis lead to the characteristic finding of the hyperechoic pancreatic head with anechoic ductal structures.

**CT Scan of the Abdomen**

CT scan of the abdomen is helpful in the diagnosis and correlates with the histological features of the disease.

There is also delayed uptake of contrast due to reduce blood flow in the fibrotic tissue. The scan also shows cysts of varying sizes in the groove or wall of the duodenum or even a multilocular cystic mass.

In the segmental form, a hypodense lesion may be observed in the pancreatic head near the wall of the duodenum.

**ERCP**

ERCP is challenging and potentially risky to perform due to the inability to pass the scope secondary to duodenal stenosis.

**EUS**

According to studies, EUS can help determine the disease's exact location and extent. EUS shows the thickening of the second part of the duodenum along with duodenal stenosis, smooth stricturing of the common bile duct, and cysts in the duodenal wall.

**EUS with Biopsy**

If the sampled area shows extensive spindle cells, giant cells, or hyperplasia of Brunner's gland, it can mimic malignancy.

**MRI**

Multiple studies have shown MRI to be the preferred diagnostic method.

Grooves are seen as hypointense areas on T1-weighted imaging, whereas cysts in the duodenum are more appreciated on T2-weighted imaging.

Also seen are increased thickening and stenosis of the duodenal wall.

Although several radiological modalities are available, differentiating groove pancreatitis from pancreatic head adenocarcinoma is often challenging. CT and MRI are unreliable due to a large amount of scarring and fibrosis.

The study by Kalb et al. in 2013 reported diagnostic accuracy of 87.2% for diagnosing groove pancreatitis utilizing MRI.