The most common form of auditory rehabilitation in patients with sensorineural hearing loss and select patients with conductive hearing loss is with hearing aids. With advancements in technology over time, hearing aids have become more effective, comfortable, and conspicuous; however, some limitations persist, which limit their effectiveness for certain subgroups of patients. Some limitations include medical conditions comprising of a chronic draining ear, anatomic limitations, insufficient amplification, acoustic feedback, occlusion effect, and discomfort.

In addition, patients with severe to profound hearing loss receive limited benefits from traditional hearing aids; however technological advancements in implantable hearing devices provide viable treatment options that may significantly improve patient quality of life. However, these newer devices are more expensive than traditional aids and carry the risks of surgery. Therefore, clinicians must carefully select the most appropriate hearing devices for individual patients.

Bone-conduction hearing prostheses stimulate the cochlea by vibrations of the skull, thus bypassing the external and middle ear. These may be considered for treatment of hearing loss in the setting of a chronically draining hearing, rehabilitation of conductive or mixed hearing loss that is not amenable to traditional hearing aids, for patients that are not surgical candidates and are unable to tolerate conventional hearing aids, anatomic limitations such as atresia or postoperative canal changes, as well as single-sided deafness.

Surgical and non-surgical systems exist for bone conduction. Non-surgical systems generally include steady pressure to the mastoid cortex via an elastic band or eyeglasses. Compared to surgical implanted bone-conduction systems, these systems are limited by soft tissue attenuation and chronic pressure from the device. Thus, these devices are most commonly used to provide bone-anchored aid before surgical implantation, especially in young children with conductive or mixed hearing loss or in patients who are not surgical candidates with conductive or mixed hearing loss. In surgical bone-conduction hearing devices, an osseointegrated screw is placed into the skull coupled with the external device via either a transcutaneous abutment or a magnet.

Newer to the medical scene, middle ear implants have been developed which couple external sound to an implanted device within the middle ear. This device transmits mechanical energy from the middle ear to the inner ear fluids via the oval or round windows. These devices are alternatives to traditional hearing aids, traditional middle ear reconstruction, and bone-anchored devices. Partially implanted (devices with an external component) and completely implanted (devices with no external component) are available. Some advantages of middle ear implants over traditional hearing aids include results of direct vibration of the ossicular chain, which results in an increased functional gain and improved audiometric outcomes.

Middle ear implants may be chosen in lieu of bone-conducting systems in patients with an air-bone gap of less than 30dB with mild to moderately severe hearing loss to avoid skin-related complications of abutment or magnetic systems or due to aesthetic concerns. Although middle ear implanted devices currently have widespread application worldwide, their use in the United States is limited due to economic and insurance constraints.

William House first introduced Cochlear implants in 1963 to treat severe to profound sensorineural hearing loss. The initial device was a single-channel device that, when implanted, resulted in patients with previous severe to profound hearing loss to perceive sound. Advances in technology and surgical technique have continued to evolve, improving patient outcomes, reducing complications, and expanding indications. These devices consist of an external component with a speech processor and transmitter and an internal component with a receiver/stimulator, which is coupled to the electrode array and ground electrode. These implants are generally placed below the subperiosteum in the postauricular area.

A cortical mastoidectomy with a facial recess approach is performed, and the electrode ray is carefully advanced into the scala vestibuli of the cochlea, most commonly via a round window or extended round window cochleostomy. The most common indication for cochlear implantation is severe to profound sensorineural hearing loss. Please reference the dedicated StatPearls chapter on Cochlear Implants for more information regarding cochlear implants.

In addition to surgical fitness and otologic surgical risks, limitations of all surgical devices include the cost of devices and the requirement of anesthesia (most often general anesthesia) to place or replace the devices. In addition, some implants are not MRI compatible, and manufacturing guidelines regarding MRI compatibility must be considered with the patient's needs.

**Osseointegrated Bone-Conduction Prosthesis**

The concept of osseointegration was pioneered by PI Branemark, which described the formation of a natural bond between titanium and bone.

These devices became available in Europe in the early 1980s and were FDA approved for use in patients five years or older in the United States in 1996. Since that time, the indications of bone-anchored hearing devices have continued to expand. The results of bone conduction implanted devices are effective with a pure tone audiometry (PTA) in free field 18.3 +/- 1.3 dB with an estimated gain of 38 +/- 5.5 dB.