After undergoing biochemical reactions in the mitochondria with nicotinamide and tryptophan, niacin forms nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide (NAD) and NAD phosphate (NADP). NAD and NADP are the active forms of niacin which, when reduced to NAD(H) and NADP(H) respectively, participate in catabolic redox reactions and are cofactors in anabolic redox reactions.

Although niacin has been in use for many years, its beneficial pleiotropic effects make it challenging to fully grasp its mechanism of action. However, a targeted mechanism of action based on certain effects niacin has in the human body are:

- Lipid metabolism: Lipid-lowering ability of niacin is very diverse and still under investigation. One proposed mechanism is the action of niacin's antilipolytic effect, thought to be mediated via nicotinic acid receptors. An alternate mechanism recently uncovered is the ability of niacin to speed up the intracellular degradation of Apolipoprotein B (ApoB) containing lipoproteins, such as VLDL and LDL, by inhibiting triglyceride synthesis. Also, niacin inhibits diacylglycerol acyltransferase 2 (DGAT2), thereby decreasing hepatic triglyceride synthesis. A suggested mechanism for increasing HDL-cholesterol levels is that niacin decreases the degradation of ApoA-I-containing lipoproteins and increases peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor γ (PPARγ) expression and enhances PPARγ transcriptional activity in macrophages.

- Increased fasting glycemia: This is thought to be through the roles of niacin-responsive G protein-coupled receptor (GPR109a) and plasma-free fatty acids (FFAs). Though details of the mechanism are yet to be fully uncovered, research has observed a direct relationship has between insulin resistance in muscles and high FFA (in the form of lipid overload) concentrations in non-adipose tissues. Also, intestinal cells in vivo are shown to increase their local glucose uptake when GPR109a gets stimulated by niacin, which may contribute to loss of glycemic control.

- Aging-related process and pathologies: Though yet fully uncovered, the mechanism of action through current research may be the inverse relation between nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide (NAD) concentrations and dietary niacin intake. Researchers have demonstrated that reduced intracellular NAD concentrations lead to the loss of a cell's power to undergo division and growth, leading to cell aging and death. NAD-dependent enzymes such as sirtuin proteins and poly(ADP-ribose) polymerase (PARP) provide continuous protection of the genome and are also necessary for the repair of damaged DNA. Researchers observed increased cancer incidence and reactive oxygen species with decreased PARP. Also, lifespan-extending effects of caloric restriction, mediated by sirtuins, have been associated with premature aging and disorders like Huntington and other age-associated neurological disorders in cells with defective sirtuins.

- Malignant glioma: Niacin may inhibit glioma cell invasion in vivo and in vitro. Epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) is involved in the process of cell migration, adhesion, and polarity; it also has involvement in the downregulation of E-cadherin, an epithelial marker, and upregulation of Snail1, a mesenchymal marker, both processes which are important to the normal developmental of mesoderm and neural crest migration. Research has found tumor cells to have EMT-like processes, which give them the ability to recur and cause immunosuppression and cell invasion. The degradation of Snail1, an EMT-promoting transcription factor that leads to invasion of U251 glioblastoma multiforme cells, was found to be facilitated in cells with niacin treatment, thus leading to a decrease in tumor invasion.