In NO-CEU, early surgical management is needed in the form of trabeculotomy and trabeculectomy.

Trabeculectomy with mitomycin C in a three-year-old girl with CEU resulted in good control of IOP and reversal of cupping of the optic nerve. Singh et al. reported good anatomical and visual outcomes in a 10-year-old boy with CEU and glaucoma with trabeculotomy and trabeculectomy with mitomycin C. They advocated early surgical management of glaucoma in patients with CEU. Similarly, early trabeculotomy in a three-month-old infant resulted in good control of IOP in the case reported by Leaks et al.

Trabeculectomy with mitomycin C resulted in bleb failure in a seven-year-old boy with CEU and glaucoma along with ptosis and facial asymmetry necessitating shunt surgery.

The management of acquired ectropion uveae should be directed to the cause. Most commonly, posterior segment ischemia and retinal capillary nonperfusion are the causes. The management of peripheral retinal capillary nonperfusion with multiple settings of scatter laser (pan-retinal photocoagulation) usually cause regression of the NVI. Anti-vascular endothelial growth factor (anti-VEGF) agents injected in the vitreous cavity, or the anterior chamber may cause regression of fine NVI though larger vessels usually remain. Neovascular glaucoma is a challenge to treat.

Preoperative anti-VEGF agents may increase the success rate and reduce ocular hemorrhage in eyes with NVG undergoing filtration surgery. Filtration surgery usually has poor success rates, and many cases eventually require glaucoma drainage devices. In eyes with painful blind eye due to NVG, the management options include diode laser cyclophotocoagulation, cyclocryotherapy, retrobulbar injection of absolute alcohol, and in extreme cases with very disturbing pain and enucleation. Many eyes with acquired iris ectropion also have macular edema, which is treated with intravitreal anti-VEGF agents, steroids, or even pars plana vitrectomy.

Management of carotid artery occlusive disease includes removing carotid plaque and stenting the carotid artery, which can cause a reversal of the ocular ischemic features.