The pharmacist is in the prime position to educate the patient on prevention. Patients should be told to avoid wearing nickel-containing jewelry, use latex-free gloves, avoid hair dyes and fragrances which trigger dermatitis. Patients should receive education about reading labels on products to ensure that they do not contain the trigger chemicals. Nurses are also in a strong position to provide counsel on these avoidance strategies.

For those who have ACD of the hands, the use of latex-free gloves may help. Also, patients should use mild cleansing agents on the skin and use protective agents like emollients to help minimize symptoms.

Enhancing patient outcomes is the interprofessional healthcare team's number one priority. Physicians will prescribe treatment when necessary and would do well to verify agent selection and strength with the pharmacist. Nurses should monitor for compliance and also spot adverse events from treatments like topical steroids. Patients with allergic contact dermatitis must have strict return precautions and information on the natural progression of the disease. Patients should not simply receive treatment and sent out the door with a prescription. It is crucial to tailor the treatment to the patient, and the body part affected. Patients also need to have a follow-up with a specialist and continued education. It is vital to utilize nurses and ancillary staff to help communicate in a way that the patient understands. Patients should also have continuous monitoring and follow up with their primary care physician who can help coordinate care. In this collaborative environment, the entire interprofessional healthcare team can direct therapy to its optimal result. [Level V]