A comprehensive history should be obtained by clinicians evaluating patients presenting with acute or chronic shoulder pain. Characteristics of proximal biceps tendinitis include the following:

- Atraumatic, insidious onset of anterior shoulder pain

- Symptom exacerbation with overhead activities

- Pain radiating down the anterior arm from the shoulder

- Clicking or audible popping can be reported in the setting of proximal biceps instability

- Pain at rest, pain at night

- History or current sports, especially baseball, volleyball, and other overhead sports

- History or current manual/physical laborer occupations

In addition, a thorough history includes a detailed account of the patient’s occupational history and current status of employment, hand dominance, history of injury/trauma to the shoulder(s) and/or neck, and any relevant surgical history.

**C-Spine /Neck Exam**

Coexisting cervical radiculopathy should be ruled out in any situation where the neck and/or shoulder pathology is in consideration. Observation of neck posturing, muscular symmetry, palpable tenderness, and active/passive ROM should be evaluated. Special tests that are helpful in this regard include the Spurling maneuver, myelopathic testing, reflex testing, and a comprehensive neurovascular exam.

**Shoulder Exam**

Clinicians must observe the overall shoulder girdle to assess symmetry, shoulder posturing, and overall muscle bulk and symmetry. Scapular winging should also be ruled out. The skin should be observed for the presence of any previous surgical incisions, lacerations, scars, erythema, or induration. In the setting of proximal biceps pathology, especially in traumatic or spontaneous LHB tendon ruptures, patients will typically exhibit significant ecchymosis in the upper arm over the area of the biceps brachii muscle itself, and an associated “Popeye” deformity is characteristic for a complete rupture. The latter is more readily appreciated in fit or thin patients and can be a more subtle finding in patients with large body habitus. Thus, a comparison to the contralateral extremity is helpful.

After the observational component of the physical examination, active and passive ROM are documented. In the setting of both primary and secondary proximal biceps tendinitis cases, full ROM should be observed. In the absence of advanced glenohumeral arthritic changes, limited passive ROM is considered diagnostic for adhesive capsulitis.

The clinician can assess motor strength grading for C5 to T1 nerve roots in addition to specific RC muscle strength testing. Specifically, RC strength and/or pathology can be assessed via the following examinations:

**Proximal Biceps Provocative Testing**

There is a multitude of focused physical examination maneuvers reported in the literature. Specific physical examination maneuvers target either LHB pathology localized to the bicipital groove or more proximally near the tendons origin at the supraglenoid tubercle. It is important to differentiate LHBT associated pain from other associated shoulder pathologies, including pain secondary to AC joint pathologies

**Bicipital groove palpation**

Direct palpation over the patient’s bicipital groove elicits a painful response in the setting of pathology.

**Speed test**

A positive test consists of pain elicited in the bicipital groove when the patient attempts to forward elevate the shoulder against examiner resistance; the elbow is slightly flexed, and the forearm is supinated.

**Uppercut test **

The involved shoulder is positioned at neutral, the elbow is flexed to 90 degrees, the forearm is supinated, and the patient makes a fist. The examiner instructs the patient to perform a boxing “uppercut” punch while placing his or her hand over the patient’s fist to resist the upward motion. A positive test is when the patient experiences pain or a painful pop over the anterior shoulder near the bicipital groove region.

**Yergason test**

The arm is stabilized against the patient’s trunk, and the elbow is flexed to 90 degrees with the forearm pronated. The examiner manually resists supination while the patient also externally rotated the arm against resistance. A positive test is noted if the patient reports pain over the bicipital groove and/or subluxation of the LHB tendon.

In addition to eliciting bicipital groove pathology, the clinician should also attempt to examine for possible associated labral and/or rotator cuff pathologies.

**AC Joint Provocative Testing**

**Observation and direct palpation**

Patients presenting with chronic AC joint pain and/or arthritic pathology often will have clinically obvious AC joint hypertrophy that can be appreciated solely with observation and/or direct palpation over the joint.

**Crossbody adduction**

The examiner may find it helpful to localize the AC joint with direct palpation directly. Subsequently, the examiner brings the shoulder into about 90 degrees of flexion in front of the plane of the scapula, and a positive test includes patient-reported symptom reproduction as the arm is brought into cross-body adduction positions. The physician should be able to discern the exact location of pain reproduction with the cross-body adduction maneuvers.

**Superior Labrum Anterior-Posterior (SLAP) lesions**

**O’Brien test/Active Compression test**

The patient is standing, and the arm of interest is positioned at 90 degrees of forward flexion, 10 degrees of adduction, and internally rotated so the thumb points toward the floor. The examiner places his or her hand over the patient’s elbow while instructing the patient to resist the examiner’s downward force applied to the arm. This maneuver is repeated with the patient’s arm rotated, so the palm faces the ceiling. A positive test is denoted by pain located at the joint line during the initial maneuver (thumb down/internal rotation) in conjunction with reported improvement or elimination of the pain during the subsequent maneuver (palm up/external rotation).

**Anterior slide test**

The patient stands with the hand of the involved arm on the ipsilateral hip with the thumb pointing posteriorly. The examiner places one hand on the joint line of the shoulder and the other hand on the elbow. The examiner then applies an axial load in an anterosuperior direction from the elbow to the shoulder. A positive test includes pain or a painful click on the anterior or posterior joint line.

**Modified O’Driscoll test /Modified dynamic labral shear test**

The patient stands with his or her involved arm flexed 90 degrees at the elbow and the shoulder abducted in the scapular plane to above 120 degrees. The examiner then applies terminal external rotation until resistance is appreciated. Next, the examiner applies a shear force through the shoulder joint by maintaining external rotation and horizontal abduction and lowering the arm from 120 to 60 degrees abduction. A positive test includes a reproduction of the pain and/or a painful click or catch in the joint line along the posterior joint line between 120 degrees and 90 degrees of abduction.

**Rotator Cuff Muscle Testing**

**Supraspinatus (SS)**

- **Jobe test**: A positive test is pain/weakness with resisted downward pressure while the patient’s shoulder is at 90 degrees of forward flexion and abduction in the scapular plane with the thumb pointing toward the floor.

- **Drop arm test**: the patient’s shoulder is brought into a position of 90 degrees of shoulder abduction in the scapular plane. The examiner initially supports the limb and then instructs the patient to adduct the arm to the side of the body slowly. A positive test includes the patient’s inability to maintain the abducted position of the shoulder and/or an inability to adduct the arm to the side of the trunk in a controlled manner.

**Infraspinatus (IS)**

- **Strength testing:**This is performed while the shoulder is positioned against the side of the trunk, the elbow is flexed to 90 degrees, and the patient is asked to externally rotate (ER) the arm while the examiner resists this movement.

- **External rotation lag sign**: The examiner positions the patient’s shoulder in the same position, and while holding the wrist, the arm is brought into maximum ER. The test is positive if the patient’s shoulder drifts into internal rotation (IR) once the examiner removes the supportive ER force at the wrist.

**Teres Minor (TM)**

- **Strength testing:**This is performed while the shoulder positioned at 90 degrees of abduction, and the elbow is also flexed to 90 degrees. Teres minor (TM) is best isolated for strength testing in this position while ER is resisted by the examiner.

- **Hornblower sign**: The examiner positions the shoulder in the same position and maximally ERs the shoulder under support. A positive test occurs when the patient is unable to hold this position, and the arm drifts into IR once the examiner removes the supportive ER force.

**Subscapularis (SubSc)**

- **IR lag sign**: The examiner passively brings the patient’s shoulder behind the trunk (about 20 degrees of extension) with the elbow flexed to 90 degrees. The examiner passively IRs the shoulder by lifting the dorsum of the handoff of the patient’s back while supporting the elbow and wrist. A positive test occurs when the patient is unable to maintain this position once the examiner releases support at the wrist (i.e., the arm is not maintained in IR, and the dorsum of the hand drifts toward the back)

- **Passive ER ROM**: A partial or complete tear of the subscapularis (SubSc) can manifest as an increase in passive ER compared to the contralateral shoulder.

- **Lift-off test**: This test is more sensitive/specific for lower SubSc pathology.  In the same position as the IR lag sign position, the examiner places the patient’s dorsum of the hand against the lower back and then resists the patient’s ability to lift the dorsum of the hand away from the lower back.

- **Belly press**: This test is more sensitive/specific for upper subscapularis pathology. The examiner has the patient’s arm at 90 degrees of elbow flexion, and IR testing is performed by the patient pressing the palm of his/her hand against the belly, bringing the elbow in front of the plane of the trunk. The examiner initially supports the elbow, and a positive test occurs if the elbow is not maintained in this position upon the examiner removing the supportive force.

**External impingement/SIS**

- **Neer impingement sign**: Positive test occurs if the patient reports pain with passive shoulder forward flexion beyond 90 degrees.

- **Neer impingement test**: Positive test occurs after a subacromial injection is given by the examiner and the patient reports improved symptoms upon repeating the forced passive forward flexion beyond 90 degrees.

- **Hawkins test**: Positive test occurs with the examiner passively positioning the shoulder and elbow at 90 degrees of flexion in front of the body – the patient will report pain when the examiner passively IR’s the shoulder.

**Internal impingement**

- **Internal impingement test**: The patient is placed in a supine position, and the shoulder is brought into terminal abduction and external rotation. A positive test consists of the reproduction of the patient’s pain.