The evaluation of increased ICP should include detailed history taking, physical examination, and ancillary studies.

It is extremely important to identify increased ICP as early as possible to prevent herniation and death. For example malignant middle cerebral artery stroke presenting with increased ICP. Malignant middle cerebral artery stroke is seen more commonly in the younger population. Usually, these patients are admitted to the ICU setting. Following the neurological exam closely is very important. Usually, there is an altered mental status and development of a fixed and dilated pupil. Patients presenting with findings suggestive of cerebral insult should undergo computed tomography (CT) scan of the brain; this can show the edema, which is visible as areas of low density and loss of gray/white matter differentiation, on an unenhanced image. There can also be an obliteration of the cisterns and sulcal spaces. A CT scan can also reveal the cause in some cases. If flattened gyri or narrowed sulci, or compression of the ventricles, is seen, this suggests increased ICP. Serial CT scans are used to monitor the progression or improvement of the edema.

A funduscopic exam can reveal papilledema which is a tell-tale sign of raised ICP as the cerebrospinal fluid is in continuity with the fluid around the optic nerve.

Imaging- a computed tomography (CT) of the head or magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) can reveal signs of raised ICP such as enlarged ventricles, herniation, or mass effect from causes such as tumors, abscesses, and hematomas, among others.

**Measurement of Opening Pressure with a Lumbar Puncture**

In this procedure, a needle is introduced in the subarachnoid space. This can be connected to a manometer to give the pressure of the CSF prior to drainage. A measurement greater than 20 mm Hg is suggestive of raised ICP. Brain imaging should precede an LP because LP can cause a sudden and rapid decrease in ICP and the sudden change in volume can lead to herniation.

**ICP Monitoring**

Several devices can be used for ICP monitoring.

The procedure involves the placement of a fiber optic catheter into the brain parenchyma to measure the pressure transmitted to the brain tissue.

**External Ventricular Drain (EVD)**

A drain placed directly into the lateral ventricles can be connected to a manometer to give a reading for the pressure in the ventricles.

**Optic Nerve Sheath Diameter (ONSD)**

The use of ultrasound to measure the diameter of the optic nerve sheath has been recently identified as a method to indicate raised ICP. This is usually measured 3 mm behind the globe with 2–3 measurements taken in each eye. The threshold for denoting elevated ICP usually ranges from 0.48 cm to 0.63 cm.