Melanocytes are derived from neural crest ectoderm during embryonic development and migrate into the skin, eyes, hair, and inner ear. They represent about 5% to 10% of the cell population in the epidermal basal layer, and this number remains unaffected in albinism.  Melanocytes contain specialized melanin-producing organelles (melanosomes) that usually develop by week seven embryonically.  The only other tissue capable of synthesizing melanin are retinal pigment epithelium, and it is not of neural crest origin. Melanin is most known for its role in ultraviolet (UV) protection, but it also has roles in both embryologic development of the ocular structures and oculoneural pathways. The two most common forms of melanin are eumelanin and pheomelanin. Eumelanin imbues skin with black or brown coloration and plays a role in protecting the skin against ultraviolet radiation B (UVB) damage by absorbing and dissipating the rays and their carcinogenic DNA cross-linking effects. Pheomelanin is not UV protective, and people who predominantly have pheomelanin are Fitzpatrick scale 1, with red or blond hair and light-colored, ruddy skin. The synthesis of eumelanin over pheomelanin is stimulated by activation of melanocortin one receptors (coded by the MC1R gene) on melanocytes.

The first (and rate-limiting) step in eumelanin synthesis involves the oxidation of L-tyrosine to DOPA by tyrosinase. Mutations in the tyrosinase gene, as seen in OCA1A, leads to complete loss of the ability to produce eumelanin. The loss-of-function mutations in any type of OCA, however, impair eumelanin synthesis directly or affect melanosome maturation but may leave pheomelanin levels unaffected. Most of the non-OCA1A pigmentation that accounts for the varied phenotypes is pheomelanin, which imbues the skin, hair, and iris with color. Syndromic albinism does not always affect melanin synthesis so much as it does the production or distribution of melanosomes through the basal layer into keratinocytes from melanocytes.

The two significant results of hypomelanosis can be divided into dermatological and ophthalmologic consequences. Since eumelanin is photo-protective, albinism leads to increased risk of sun-damage (solar lentigines, actinic keratoses, solar erythema) and UV-associated malignancies (especially squamous cell carcinomas). Melanin acts as an inducer and organizer of formation of the fovea, optic nerves, optic tracts, and visual cortex, in utero. In albinism, the fovea fails to develop as robustly as normal and is hypoplastic or even absent. Melanin in utero cues the migration of developing optic nerve fibers. Some crossover of nerve fibers from each eye at the optic chiasm to the contralateral occipital lobe is necessary for binocular vision. In albinism, however, some axons that originate in the retinal ganglion cells project mistakenly to the contralateral hemisphere dorsal lateral geniculate nucleus. This means an increase in optic fiber crossover. Nerve fibers misrouted from the organ or reception (the eye) to the organ of perception (the brain) further contributes to binocular vision deficits, manifesting as strabismus. The occipital lobe in albinism also shows decreased gyrification (theorized to be due to a dearth of foveal input), and localized increases in cortical thickness. The latter finding has also been found in congenitally blind subjects. In summary, complete absence or even partial melanin deficiency in utero leads to ocular structure malformation and optic tract misrouting and creates a multitude of irreversible intraocular (refractive) and extraocular (oculomotor or nonrefractive) problems. Visual acuity usually ranges from 20/60 to 20/400.

The genetic aberrations specific to each form of OCA, syndromic albinisms, and selected albinism-associated disorders are included below:

- OCA1: Autosomal recessive. The TYR gene product tyrosinase normally hydroxylates L-tyrosine to L-DOPA and oxidates L-DOPA to DOPAquinone. This serves as the rate-limiting/ step in melanin synthesis. Loss of this function leads to an inability to synthesize melanin.

- OCA2: Autosomal recessive. The OCA2 gene product is the OCA2 melanosome transmembrane protein P, with unknown function.

- OCA3: Autosomal recessive. The TYRP1 gene product is tyrosinase-related protein 1, which is thought to stabilize and modulate the activity of tyrosinase and contribute to melanosome integrity

- OCA4: Autosomal recessive. The SLC45A2 gene codes for a solute carrier family 45, member 2 membrane-associated transport protein (MATP) that is thought to transport substances required for melanin biosynthesis into the melanosome.

- OCA5: Autosomal recessive. Gene not yet identified.

- OCA6: Autosomal recessive. The SLC24A5 gene (solute carrier family 24, member 5) codes for a Na/K/Ca cation exchange protein with a similar structure to that seen in OCA4.  Its function is also thought to be similar.

- OCA7: Autosomal recessive. The LRMDA gene (leucine-rich melanocyte differentiation associated protein) codes for a protein thought to play a role in melanocyte differentiation.

- Hermansky-Pudlak syndrome (HPS): Autosomal recessive. Ten different genotypes have been identified, thus far. The genes corresponding to the subtype of HPS. HPS1 gene (HPS1), AP3B1 gene (HPS2), HPS3 gene (HPS3), HPS4 gene (HPS4), HPS5 gene (HPS5), HPS6 gene (HPS6), DTNBP1 gene (HPS7), BLOC1S3 gene (HPS8), BLOC1S6 gene (PLDN), AP3D1 gene (HPS10). Not all subtypes of the syndrome are identical, but similarities exist. Subjects have oculocutaneous albinism, accumulation of a wax-like fat-protein compound (ceroid lipofuscin) in tissues, especially kidneys and lungs, and bleeding diathesis due to a lack of dense platelet granules leading to abnormal aggregation. Some forms have immunodeficiency (neutropenia) and a hemophagocytic syndrome with AP gene involvement (HPS2, HPS10) due to lysosomal dysfunction. The most severe forms (HPS1, HPS4) are both BLOC-3 protein mutations and associated with pulmonary fibrosis by the thirties and granulomatous colitis.

- Chediak-Higashi syndrome (CHS): Autosomal recessive. The LYST gene codes for a protein that directs delivery of material into lysosomes. Mutations lead to giant cytoplasmic granules (lysosomes) with diminished chemotaxis in leukocytes and platelets.  This causes the characteristic increased susceptibility to pyogenic infections, neutropenia, peripheral neuropathy, mild coagulopathy, and hypomelanosis.

- Angelman syndrome (AS) and Prader-Willi syndrome (PWS): Both due to spontaneous (not inherited) partial deletions of chromosome 15q. Albinism occurs because the OCA2 allele located on one Chromosome 15q, making subjects haploinsufficient for OCA2 gene product, protein P. The complete mechanism by which this happens is unexplained since heterozygotes for OCA2 gene mutations producing one nonfunctional copy of protein P still are phenotypically normal. AS is the result of deletion on maternal chromosome 15q or uniparental disomy of chromosome 15 with both copies being of paternal origin. PWS is due to the deletion of paternal chromosome 15q or through uniparental disomy of chromosome 15 with both copies being of maternal origin.

- Ocular albinism (OA1): X-linked. The GPR143 gene product is a G-protein coupled receptor, a mutation in which yields dysfunctional melanosome biogenesis with resultant "macromelanosomes."