As mentioned earlier, the larynx is a multifaceted assembly made up of components that systematically work together to provide vital physiologic functions. The developing larynx arises from branchial structures around the fourth week of gestation. Arising from both the endoderm and mesoderm, several pharyngeal arches give rise to the larynx and its associated structures. More specifically these pharyngeal arches are the third (develops into cranial nerve IX and greater horn of hyoid), fourth (superior laryngeal nerve, thyroid cartilage, cuneiform cartilage, cricopharyngeus muscle, and cricothyroid muscle) and sixth (recurrent laryngeal nerve, cricoid cartilage, arytenoid cartilages, corniculate cartilages, intrinsic laryngeal muscles).

The larynx develops from an outgrowth opening around the fourth week of gestation, termed the laryngotracheal groove. As this groove continues to elongate and progress, the epiglottis and laryngeal inlet begin to appear. Eventually, a septum develops and begins to fuse around the twenty-fifth day of gestation which separates the laryngeal inlet into two distinct compartments, this is the esophagotracheal septum or laryngotracheal septum and arises from the fusion of the tracheoesophageal fold.

The final arrangement following this separation results in a tubular structure (the esophagus) that lies posteriorly, while another tubular structure (the developing respiratory tract) sits anteriorly. Subsequently, there is an additional outpouching, known as the laryngotracheal diverticulum, from the anterior tubular structure which becomes the future larynx, trachea, and lungs.