# Introduction

Helicobacter pylori (H. pylori) is a ubiquitous, microaerophilic, gram-negative, bacillus.H. pylori in the year 1983.H. pylori is variable between 19 and 88% and depends on various factors such as geographical location, patient's age, sanitation, and socioeconomic status.H. pylori infections during childhood, and if untreated, persist throughout life.

H. pylori have strong associations with many non-neoplastic (peptic ulcer disease, chronic atrophic gastritis) and neoplastic (adenocarcinoma of the stomach, gastric lymphoma arising from mucosa-associated lymphoid tissue or MALT) conditions of the gastrointestinal (GI) tract.H. pylori as a class I (definite) carcinogen in 1994.H. pylori and successful eradication cures chronic gastritis and can reduce the progression to the long-term complications.H. pylori gastritis is also implicated in non-ulcer dyspepsia.H. pylori, but the exact pathogenic mechanisms are unclear.

Tests for H pylori include both invasive and non-invasive methods.H. pylori is esophagogastroduodenoscopy (EGD) with histopathological examination of the biopsy.H. pylori..H. pylori stool antigen test (SAT), and serological tests.

Reliable non-invasive methods include UBT and SAT.H. pylori IgG serology is not recommended in places with lower prevalence rates of less than 30%.H. pylori, the pretest probability of diagnosing a true infection is lower.H. pylori persist for an indefinite period and does not differentiate past from present infections.H. pylori is useful for epidemiological studies and for screening larger populations in places with a higher prevalence rate.

UBT is useful for both the initial diagnosis of H. pylori (test-and-treat strategy) and also in the evaluation of post-treatment status.H. pylori utilize urease to breakdown urea into ammonia and carbon dioxide (CO2).H. pylori in the neutralization of gastric acidity and helps in its colonization.H. pylori are usually not present in the stomach with few exceptions such as in patients with achlorhydria.H. pylori to promptly hydrolyze urea into ammonia and carbon dioxide (CO2).H. pylori. Testing commonly uses two isotopes of carbon for UBT - 14C (a radioactive isotope) and 13C (naturally occurring, stable non-radioactive isotope). The performance of both UBTs is almost similar, with sensitivities above 95% and specificities above 93%.

# Procedures

Before the UBT testing, patients should discontinue antibiotics, and bismuth compounds for at least four weeks and proton pump inhibitors (PPIs) and sucralfate for at least two weeks.H. pylori and can generate a false negative result.H. pylori treatment, UBT should be performed to evaluate eradication only four weeks after the completion of the treatment.

14C-UBT: The commercial brand available for 14C-UBT in the U.S is PYtest. Current testing dose exposes patients to a small dose of 1 microcurie, which is equivalent to natural environmental background radiation received in about 24 hours.H. pylori, there will be no hydrolysis of 14C-urea. The unhydrolyzed 14C-urea is absorbed in the stomach, enters the bloodstream and excreted by the kidneys. Appropriate safety precautions are necessary for the storage, handling, and disposal of the radioactive test ingredients.

13C-UBT: Even though 14C-UBT is safe, the current preference is for 13C isotope as it is non-radioactive, especially in children, women of childbearing age and during pregnancy.H. pylori. A post-urea ratio of 13CO2/12CO2 is noted. The difference in the ratios between the post-urea and the baseline is referred to as delta over baseline (DOB). There is no agreed consensus on the cut-off value for DOB to differentiate between H. pylori positive and negative results.

# Indications

The urea breath test is useful for both initial diagnosis and eradication of infection.H. pylori are asymptomatic.H. pylori.H. pylori such as patients with a history of peptic ulcer disease (PUD), either with a history of active PUD or past medical history of PUD with no documented eradication. H. pylori test could be offered in the absence of alarming symptoms (GI bleeding, anemia, significant weight loss, loss of appetite, dysphagia, significant emesis, family history of GI malignancy, and history of GI cancer) and if the test result is positive, H. pylori treatment could be offered.H. pylori and more importantly, to evaluate also other causes such as malignancy.H. pylori infections are also associated with other conditions such as unexplained iron-deficiency anemia (after a thorough negative evaluation), and immune thrombocytopenia in adults and testing for H. pylori can be a consideration. H. pylori due to increased chances of development of PUD and its complications.

# Interfering Factors

**False positive test results:**

1. Helicobacter heilmannii also has urease activity and can produce positive results in UBT.

2. Patients with achlorhydria can also have false-positive UBT results.Proteus mirabilis, Citrobacter freunii, and Staphylococcus aureus has been reported to cause false positive UBT.

3. Some of the oral flora have urease activity, and contamination with oral flora could also result in false positive results.

**False negative test results:**

1. Recent use of medications which interfere with H. pylori such as antibiotics, bismuth compounds, and, PPIs.

2. Similarly, following the H. pylori eradication, the UBT should be done at least four weeks after the completion of treatment. If done earlier, the result could be falsely negative.

3. In patients with H. pylori infection predominantly in the body (corpus) of the stomach, data shows a higher proportion of false negative results with 13C-UBT.

# Clinical Significance

**Advantages of UBT:**

- Noninvasive, safer, and cost-effective when compared to endoscopic evaluation.H. pylori, EGD evaluation could be negative. UBT has less tendency for sampling errors and more sensitive than EGD in these circumstances.

- UBT is convenient and preferred by many patients when compared to stool collection for SAT.

- UBT is more accurate than the SAT and serological tests.

- UBT is helpful for initial diagnosis (test-and-treat strategy) and also to confirm the eradication of infection.

- 13C-UBT can be easily repeated and also could be administered safely in children (above three years of age), and in pregnant women.

- 13C-UBTs are useful in the epidemiological evaluation of H. pylori in both children and adults.H. pylori and but unlike UBT, serological tests cannot differentiate past and present infections.

**Limitations of UBT:**

- Helicobacter heilmannii, another urease containing bacteria can also cause false positive testing.

- False positive test results in achlorhydria and also in oral contamination of bacteria with urease activity.

- Recent history of upper GI bleeding could affect the accuracy of UBT.

- 13C-UBT is less accurate in the pediatric population with sensitivity and specificity in the range of 75 to 100%.

- Low sensitivity in patients with a history of gastric surgery.