**Non-infectious**

**Benign**

- **Biliary Hamartomas:**also known as von Meyenburg complexes are rare benign congenital lesions consisting of small-sized dilated bile ducts surrounded by fibrous tissue. Patients are usually asymptomatic. Ultrasound findings show hypoechoic, hyperechoic, or mixed heterogenic echoic structures. They require no treatment. Unlike Caroli disease, they do not communicate with the biliary system.

- **Caroli Disease:**is a rare benign autosomal recessive condition that manifests with multifocal cystic dilatation of segmental intrahepatic bile ducts. Patients present with frequent or recurrent bouts of cholangitis or those with portal hypertension and biliary cirrhosis. Ultrasound shows saccular dilatation of intrahepatic bile ducts, intraductal bridging, echogenic septa traversing the dilated bile duct lumen, and small portal venous branches partially or fully surrounded by dilated bile ducts. If the disease is localized, segmentectomy, or lobectomy may be done. In diffuse disease management, usually, with conservative measures, liver transplantation may be an option.

- **An Intrahepatic Pseudocyst:**is a rare condition that may occur in the setting of alcoholic pancreatitis. It may require prompt percutaneous or endoscopic drainage or surgical resection if it is large or symptomatic to prevent complications.

- **Cavernous Hemangioma:**are benign tumors of the liver consisting of clusters of blood-filled cavities lined by endothelial cells, supplied by branches of the hepatic artery. On ultrasound, it appears as a hyperechoic homogenous nodule with well-defined margins. it is mostly asymptomatic and requires regular imaging studies.

**Neoplastic**

- **Cystic Liver Metastases:**These are the most important concerns to be excluded when multiple cystic lesions are found within the liver. Clinical history of a primary mass and multiplicity of the lesions are classic features of hepatic metastases. The most common primary sources are colon, kidney, prostate, testis, ovary, lung, sarcomas, and neuroendocrine tumors. Colon cancer comprises 50% of cases of metastatic cancer.  The radiological findings will vary depending on the primary cause. On Ultrasound, it usually shows hypoechoic, thick septations and may demonstrate increased vascularity on color doppler imaging.

- **Undifferentiated Embryonal Sarcoma:**is a highly malignant hepatic neoplasm (typical presents at age 6-10 years), rarely seen in late childhood and early adulthood. The pediatric population is considered the third most common liver tumor in pediatrics, accounting for approximately 10%. On ultrasound, it appears as a large mass with mixed solid and cystic components. Hence some authors suggest that UES arises from mesenchymal tissue. Management includes surgical resection and chemotherapy. it is known to have a poor prognosis.

- **Intraductal Papillary Neoplasms of the Bile Duct:**are rare tumors due to papillary growth within the bile duct lumen. It is usually associated with mucin secretion, and cystic biliary dilatation is characteristic. It does not consider to be premalignant lesions. However, Patients usually present with bouts of recurrent cholangitis and obstructive jaundice and should be considered for resection.

**Traumatic**

- **Biloma:**is an intra-or extra-hepatic bile collection outside the biliary tree. It usually occurs due to iatrogenic injury, following cholecystectomy, or by a blunt abdominal injury.

- **Hematoma:**mostly followed a blunt abdominal trauma. It considered being the second most frequent abdominal organ injured during blunt trauma after the spleen.

******Infectious**

- **Hydatid Cyst:**Patients are most often asymptomatic, but pain may develop as the cyst grows. Patients generally have a palpable mass in the right upper quadrant of the abdomen. The most serious complication of hydatid cysts is rupture. They may rupture into the adjacent biliary tree causing jaundice or cholangitis, through the diaphragm into the chest, or into the peritoneal cavity causing anaphylactic shock. Usually diagnosed incidentally. Can cause compression of surrounding tissue. Imaging shows eggshell calcification of liver cyst, which is highly suggestive of hydatid cyst. Treatment usually through surgical resection under cover of albendazole. In a few cases, aspiration may be done, but there is a risk of anaphylactic shock due to cyst content spillage.

- **Hepatic Abscesses:**patients usually present with abdominal pain, extreme fever, and leukocytosis. In amoebiasis, patients usually describe a history of diarrhea, weight loss, and travel history to an endemic region. Metronidazole is the drug of choice with more than 90% cure with oral metronidazole. Paromomycin is used for the eradication of intestinal amoebiasis. While Pyogenic abscesses often present with cholangitis, abdominal infections, following surgery, or sepsis. Rarely, abscesses may rupture present as peritonitis. It is more common in the elderly with other comorbid conditions like diabetes, hepatobiliary disease, or following peritonitis. a liver abscess will appear on imaging and treated with IV antibiotics and drainage.