Body image distortion is central to several serious diseases, including eating disorders and body dysmorphic disorder. Although the former assumption was that body image in healthy individuals is highly accurate, recent researches have shown that systematic distortions of body representation are also a normal part of healthy cognitive life. These distortions in healthy people might indicate weak forms of body image distortions seen in various diseases. Understanding of these neurotypical distortions may help to understand the perceptual distortions in clinical settings.

Body image is the term that predominantly implies a visual representation of body shape and size, similar to a 2D photograph that shows what we look like as a physical object and how other people see us from the outside. However, besides our ability to assess the body as if viewed from the outside, we are also able to perceive it from the inside. This internal way of body image perception is obviously unavailable for other physical objects, and it provides us with additional sources of information, including touch, proprioception, and interoception. While most of both behavioral and functional neuroimaging studies have primarily concentrated on body misperception/dissatisfaction as a unisensory concept related to the visual domain, new studies have pointed that the combination of the visual and somatosensory body representations affect the perceptual assessment of body image.

Additionally, biased information processing may contribute to the misperception of body size and shape. Memory biases, attentional biases, and interpretation biases are different kinds of cognitive biases that have been found to be partly responsible for the distorted body image in individuals with eating disorders.

Memory biases refer to the facilitated/impaired encoding and remembering of disorder salient information such as words or sentences related to weight and shape, compared to neutral information.

Attentional biases include three components of attention:

1-Facilitated attentional capture: disorder salient information is detected faster than non-salient information.

2- Difficulty in disengagement: disorder salient information is more difficult to disengage, e.g., stronger attention towards unattractive parts of one’s own body compared to attractive parts.

3- Attentional avoidance: keeping attention away from disorder salient information.

Interpretation biases refer to the biased information-processing and tendency to inappropriately analyze ambiguous information, e.g., everyday scenarios, according to disorder-specific cognitive schemata.

One particularly interesting point is that recent studies have found links between body image distortions in healthy individuals and homuncular distortions in primary somatosensory cortex (SI). Research has shown that healthy individuals tend to overestimate their body part in length while underestimating them in volume. This pattern of body representation shows some resemblance to a well-known depiction of a somatosensory homunculus.

Moreover, body dissatisfaction and body image distortions in patients with anorexia nervosa appear to have links to the parietal lobe function. Neuroimaging studies have found sub-optimal visual and tactile performance in anorexia nervosa that suggests indirect associations of body image distortion with parietal lobe dysfunction.

**Factors Affecting Body Image and Body Image Disorders**

To date, various factors that influence body image have been studied such as BMI, family, peers, society, media, culture, self-esteem, psychopathology, gender, age, marital status, education level, smoking status, alcohol consumption, physical activity, weight control behavior, religiosity, and spirituality.

- 
**Body Mass Index (BMI)**

One of the most important factors influencing body image and body satisfaction is BMI, a continuous variable using the standard formula of kilograms over height squared. As a biological component, BMI has been found to contribute to body image and fear of negative evaluation (fear that one will be evaluated unfavorably because of one’s appearance). Overweight individuals are more likely to report the sense of fear associated with being negatively evaluated while engaging in social situations compare to their normal-weight counterparts. They also tend to show negative affective attitudes toward their body.

- 
**Family**

Family plays an important role in the development of children’s body image, body size attitudes, and eating patterns, as they form in early childhood. Family is a prominent and continuing influence, as children develop the need for parental admiration and approval. Parents may increase or decrease the risk of the development of body image and eating concerns in their children, directly or indirectly. Parents with particular attention toward weight control behaviors have significant influences on children’s body satisfaction. Direct parental attitudes can include commenting to a child about their weight or appearance, teasing about a child’s weight, pressuring a child to lose weight, or encouraging a child to diet. Indirect parental behaviors are actions or attitudes that are not necessarily planned to influence the child, including parents’ negative comments about their bodies and parental engagement in excessive exercise or dieting. These behaviors may model self-criticism and inspire children to judge themselves or others based on appearance and highlight the importance of adhering to social and cultural body size ideals. Some other family features may also contribute to body satisfaction, such as the socioeconomic status of the family and living in large cities.

- 
**Social Pressures**

Although body image is a mental concept, it is observable as a social phenomenon. Both women and men attempt to present and maintain themselves in socially desirable body shape. Social acceptance is a critical component of the lifecycle and is central to well being. In response to the need for social acceptance, individuals develop behavioral responses that enhance their social desirability. Through the social learning process, individuals observe, imitate, and reinforce their behavior to increase the likelihood of social acceptance; this is particularly important in adolescents for attaining acceptance in peer groups.

- 
**Media**

Children and adolescents today grow up in a world flooded with different types of mass media such as television, movies, videos, billboards, magazines, music, newspapers, and the internet. Newer forms of media (e.g., internet, social media, computer games) is being more popular than traditional forms (e.g., printed materials and TV) as time goes on. Several studies suggest a link between the muscular male body ideal and the thin female beauty ideal represented in the media with a variety of psychological conditions including body image misperception, body dissatisfaction, and eating disorders. This link has been explained mostly by sociocognitive processes such as social comparison.

- 
**Social Media**

Social media is a more recent form of media that has become increasingly popular worldwide, and nowadays, messages regarding appearance ideals delivered through social media. Due to its continuous availability (e.g., on smartphones), the influences of social media may be more potent than traditional forms of media. Several studies have suggested that active social media engagement may negatively influence body image and appears to be associated with body dissatisfaction and eating disorders. Different theoretical mechanisms have been proposed, such as body appearance comparisons and self-objectification.

- 
**Self-esteem**

Body image is highly related to an individual’s self-esteem and self-concept. Self-esteem can be a potential factor reducing the adverse association of BMI, body image, and fear of negative evaluation. Higher self-esteem may serve as a protective factor, decreasing the negative association between BMI and feelings of individuals about their body, also reducing the level of anxiety caused by others’ unfavorable judgments.

- 
**Other Factors**

Chronic illnesses may have a negative influence on the self-concept. The social stigma due to serious illnesses such as endocrine disorders and cancers can affect self-esteem and body image.

Many studies have investigated the association between experiences of abuse and body image concerns. Physical and sexual abuse strongly influences the physical and mental health of victims. Research has demonstrated that such abuse is associated with more severe symptoms of depression, more negative body image and low self-esteem, and a higher propensity for eating disorders.

Depression and obesity are public health problems that have a bidirectional association, and both can affect the perception of body image and improve or complicate comorbid clinical conditions. Individuals with depression tend to distort their body image negatively, while those with obesity are generally more dissatisfied with their body.

Early reports indicates that social distancing and other lockdown measures associated with the COVID-19 pandemic have been associated with an increase in maladaptive eating habits and body dissatisfaction, particularly, in certain groups with a current or past diagnosis of eating disorders.