It is important to always consider opiate overdose or toxicity in a lethargic patient with no other identifiable cause. Many of the individuals who abuse opiates also tend to use other illicit agents like cocaine and prescription drugs like the antidepressants and benzodiazepines at the same time. Suspicion of coingestants should be raised when the usual clinical signs and symptoms of opiate toxicity differ, and the patient fails to respond to the opiate antagonist, naloxone.

**Laboratory Studies**

Patients with drug overdose usually undergo several investigations. Drug screens are readily available but often do not change initial management of straightforward cases. Drug screens when performed on urine and are quite sensitive. In most cases, a positive opiate result will show up even 48 hours post exposure.

In patients with opiate toxicity or overdose the following blood work is usually performed:

- Complete blood cell count

- Comprehensive metabolic panel

- Creatine kinase level

- Arterial blood gas determinations

**Imaging Studies**

- If any lung injury is suspected, a chest x-ray should be obtained.

- If the patient is suspected of being a body packer, then an abdominal x-ray should be obtained. In some cases, a person may swallow packages in order to hide the evidence from law enforcement. In such cases, the packages are not well prepared, and these individuals are at risk for severe toxicity if leakage inside the intestine occurs.

**Electrocardiography**

An ECG is recommended in all patients with suspected opioid overdose. Coingestants like the tricyclics have the potential to cause arrhythmias.