An important aspect of diarrhea management is replenishing fluid and electrolyte loss.

The treatment of chronic diarrhea is specific to the etiology.

In 2003 the recommendations were put forward by the Center for Disease Control (CDC) for the treatment of acute diarrhea in children on both the outpatient and inpatient basis including indications for referral.

Indications for referral and further medical evaluation of children include the following:

- Under 3 months old

- Weighs less than 8 kg (17.6 lbs)

- History of premature birth, chronic illnesses, or concurrent medical conditions

- Fever of 38ºC (100.4 F) or higher in children less than 3 months old or 39ºC (102.2 F) or higher in children between 3 and 36 months of age

- Grossly bloody stool

- High-output diarrhea

- Persistent vomiting

- Signs of dehydration, such as sunken eyes, decreased tear film, dry mucous membranes, and oliguria/anuria

- Mental status alterations

- Inadequate response to oral rehydration or the caregiver is unable to administer oral rehydration

Treatment of dehydration is summarized in the following table:

- Less than 10 kg bodyweight - give 60-120 mL of oral rehydration solution for each episode of loose stool or vomiting

- More than 10 kg bodyweight - give 120-140 mL of oral rehydration solution for each episode of loose stool and vomiting

- Less than 10 kg bodyweight - give 60-120 mL of oral rehydration solution for each episode of loose stool or vomiting

- More than 10 kg bodyweight - give 120-140 mL of oral rehydration solution for each episode of loose stool and vomiting

- Less than 10 kg bodyweight - give 60-120 mL of oral rehydration solution for each episode of loose stool or vomiting

- More than 10 kg bodyweight - give 120-140 mL of oral rehydration solution for each episode of loose stool and vomiting

- If unable to drink, give through nasogastric tube or IV 5% dextrose (one-fourth normal saline) along with 20 mEq/L potassium chloride

Therapies advised for some nonviral causes of diarrhea include the following:

- E coli - Trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole (TMP-SMX). Parenteral second- or third-generation cephalosporins are indicated for systemic complications.

- Aeromonas species - Third-generation and fourth-generation cephalosporins (cefixime).

- Campylobacter species - Erythromycin

- C difficile - Discontinue causative antibiotics. Use oral metronidazole or vancomycin. Vancomycin is reserved for the child who is seriously ill.

- C perfringens - Antibiotics are not recommended for treatment.

- Cryptosporidium parvum - paromomycin and nitazoxanide.

- Entamoeba histolytica - Metronidazole followed by paromomycin or iodoquinol.

- G lamblia - Metronidazole or nitazoxanide.

- Plesiomonas species - TMP-SMX or any other cephalosporin.

- Salmonella species - Treatment prolongs carrier state. TMP-SMX is the first-line medication but there is resistance. Use ceftriaxone and cefotaxime for invasive disease.

- Shigella species - Treatment shortens illness duration. TMP-SMX is the first-line medication but there is resistance. For invasive disease, cefixime, ceftriaxone, and cefotaxime are recommended.

- V cholerae - Doxycycline is the first-line and erythromycin is the second-line antibiotic.

- Yersinia species: TMP-SMX, cefixime, cefotaxime, and ceftriaxone are used.