Microscopic exam of normal cervix shows the following:

- The endocervix is typically lined by the single-layered mucus-secreting columnar cells, both ciliated and nonciliated. The cervix does not contain true glandular units; instead, the epithelium is thrown into longitudinal folds that invaginate, forming crypts off the central canal. The nonciliated cells secrete mucin in granular form through exocytosis, and the ciliated cells propel the secreted mucin. The epithelium has undifferentiated reserve cells. Being single-layered, it is a thin epithelium that easily penetrates the stromal vascularity, thus giving it a red appearance.

- The ectocervix is typically lined by a multilayered stratified squamous, non keratinized epithelium. The epithelium is formed by four cell types, including basal cells (the deepest layer of cells), parabasal cells, intermediate cells, and superficial cells.

- The transformation zone is formed by the endocervical reserve cell layer differentiating toward the squamous cell lineage. Its appearance is similar to the parabasal cells but with relatively less cytoplasm and dense nuclei. Nonspecific inflammatory infiltrates consisting of lymphocytes, plasma cells, and even neutrophils are common and are not necessarily associated with infection.

In cervical ectropion, the glandular endocervical cells are found on the ectocervix; thus, the area around the cervical os now appears red. Also, since the endocervical cells are more fragile and now exposed to the vaginal environment, they are more vulnerable to injury, for example, during sexual intercourse.

However, with time, the undifferentiated reserve cells of the endocervix multiply and differentiate. This is initially seen as a single (non-stratified) layer of small, round cells with darkly staining nuclei situated very close to the nuclei of columnar cells, which further proliferate to produce a reserve cell hyperplasia**.**With the progression of the metaplastic process, the reserve cells of the endocervix proliferate and differentiate to form a thin epithelium of immature squamous cells without stratification. This newly formed epithelium is known as the immature squamous metaplastic epithelium. Over time, the immature metaplastic squamous cells differentiate into the mature stratified metaplastic epithelium.