Testing strategies for syphilis consist of dark-field microscopy and serological tests. Darkfield examination by microscope allows for direct examination of spirochetes from the mucosal lesion and thus offers an immediate diagnosis if positive but can miss 20% of positive cases, especially if the patient has applied topical antibiotics. The sensitivity of darkfield microscopy tends to decrease over time and

The serological tests are classified as nontreponemal and treponemal. The nontreponemal tests (venereal disease research laboratory test (VDRL) and rapid plasma reagin test (RPR) are screening tests that detect antibodies to cardiolipin in blood and are therefore not specific for syphilis. The VDRL and RPR tests are only positive after the development of the primary chancre. These tests are inexpensive, simple to perform, and are the usual initial screening tests for syphilis. Test results can be quantified and used for tracking the progress of the infection, as a fourfold change in titer would be considered significant. Unfortunately, false-positive tests are relatively common, and nontreponemal tests are not specific for syphilis, so a confirmatory treponemal test is required for a definitive diagnosis.

Positive nontreponemal tests must be confirmed with a treponemal test (fluorescent treponemal antibody absorption assay (FTA-ABS), T. pallidum particle agglutination assay (TP-PA)) that detects specific serum antibodies to T. pallidum. While they turn positive early and are specific, treponemal tests do not match the stage, progression, or severity of the infection. They also are positive for life and, therefore, cannot be used for disease tracking.

Patients with neurologic symptoms should undergo a cerebrospinal (CSF) examination. VDRL testing of the CSF is highly sensitive but not very specific for neurosyphilis, while treponemal testing is highly specific but not very sensitive. Therefore, both tests are frequently needed to confirm the diagnosis.

All patients with syphilis should be tested for other STDs, particularly HIV. Syphilis is also routinely tested during the first trimester of pregnancy. Benzathine penicillin G is administered if the testing is positive, and follow-up testing is scheduled.

Imaging studies depend on the organ involved. A chest X-ray may be the first clue to the presence of an aortic aneurysm. A CT scan can confirm this. An echocardiogram is needed to rule out aortic regurgitation. Long-bone x-rays may be useful in neonates.

Reverse sequence screening is an increasingly used algorithm across US laboratories that use treponemal tests as the initial screening to identify those patients with treated, untreated, or incompletely treated syphilis.

Syphilis is a reportable disease.

**Summary**

A definitive diagnosis of syphilis generally requires at least one positive nontreponemal assay (VDRL, RPR) and a positive treponemal test (FTA-ABS, TP-PA). Only the nontreponemal tests can be used for disease tracking as the treponemal tests are usually positive for life and do not correlate well with disease status or severity. CSF testing may be needed in some cases.