Understanding the sensory system and the ascending pathways to the brain provides the foundation for understanding certain clinical conditions. The conditions listed below are not described extensively; their relation to the sensory system is highlighted.

Lateral hemisection of the spinal cord (Brown-Sequard injury) results in the ipsilateral loss of all sensations at the dermatome corresponding to the level of the injury. Damage to the ascending sensory tracts causes the loss of ipsilateral proprioception, tactical sensation, and vibration below the level of the injury (dorsal columns) and loss of contralateral nociception and temperature sensation below the level of the injury (spinothalamic tract).

Demyelination of the dorsal columns due to vitamin B12 deficiency or traumatic injury to the posterior spinal cord, thereby affecting the dorsal columns, results in bilateral impairment of proprioception and vibration below the level of the injury. Because the spinothalamic tract is not involved, pain and temperature sensations are intact.

Trauma to the central cord or compression of the central cord from an expanding syrinx impacts the anterior white commissure where the second-order neurons of the spinothalamic tract cross. Clinically, this can include bilateral loss of pain and temperature sensation.

Tabes dorsals is a manifestation of tertiary syphilis in which demyelination of the dorsal columns and dorsal root ganglion lead to impaired proprioception and sensation, resulting in ataxia.

The symptoms of a parietal brain lesion (due to trauma, neoplasm, infarct, infection, etc.) within the somatosensory cortex can provide clues to its location due to the somatotopic organization of the somatosensory cortex.