Massive emboli can lodge in the bifurcation of the pulmonary arteries, leading to a condition known as a saddle embolus, which results in significantly decreased blood flow through the pulmonary circuit. This condition creates rapid and severe hypoxia, as well as significant right heart strain that can lead to cardiovascular collapse. This represents a potential medical emergency, requiring immediate intra-arterial tPA and possible embolectomy.

The presence of a rapid bleed into the trachea found during a tracheostomy might represent a trachea-innominate fistula. This condition results from a connection between the brachiocephalic vein and the trachea and is an absolute surgical emergency associated with a high mortality rate.

Lymphomas are also known to occur in the superior mediastinum. These tumors present in young adults between the second and the fourth decade of life. While most mediastinal lymphomas are B-cell lymphomas, which typically have an indolent course, about 5% will be very aggressive lesions. Most patients with lymphoma of the superior mediastinum present with vague chest pain, dysphagia, dyspnea, night sweats, hoarseness, or weight loss. The symptoms typically depend on the size of the lesion. Imaging procedures are essential in determining the size and location of these lesions. A mediastinal lymph node biopsy is usually necessary to confirm the diagnosis. Most patients with mediastinal lymphomas will have their condition managed with chemotherapy and/or radiation. Lymphomas may spread via the lymphatic system, which includes the mediastinal and peri-aortic nodes. If this occurs, any attempt at surgical resection will necessitate extreme caution for the great vessels. While surgical resection is often not indicated, awareness of surrounding vessels is of the utmost importance.