Patients with DJS have hyperbilirubinemia, and it is predominantly conjugated hyperbilirubinemia. Total bilirubin concentrations are typically between 2 and 5 mg/dL but on occasion may rise to 20-25 mg/dL, but this distinctly unusual. Laboratory tests including complete blood count, serum albumin, alanine aminotransferase, aspartate aminotransferase, alkaline phosphatase, cholesterol, and prothrombin time are normal. There is no evidence of hemolysis. Patients with DJS have a diagnostic abnormality in urinary coproporphyrin excretion, and abnormal distribution of the coproporphyrin isomers I and III in the urine is a characteristic feature of DJS. There are two naturally occurring coproporphyrin isomers, I and III. Normally about 75% of the coproporphyrin in urine is isomer III. In patients with DJS, the total coproporphyrin content of the urine is normal, but >80% is isomer I.

Studies such as the hepatobiliary iminodiacetic acid (HIDA) scan and computerized tomography (CT) of the abdomen are performed in patients with hyperbilirubinemia. In the patients with DJS, the HIDA scan shows a characteristic pattern of delayed visualization or no visualization of the gallbladder and bile ducts in the presence of intense, homogenous, and prolonged visualization of the liver. Similarly, oral cholecystography will fail to visualize the gallbladder- subjecting many patients to unnecessary laparoscopic surgery because of a false positive result suggesting the presence of gallstones. Computed tomography scans in patients with DJS show a significantly higher attenuation than those seen in normal subjects. Therefore, these studies generally are not needed or done if DJS is suspected.

Bromosulphthaleine (BSP) clearance test is no longer used in clinical practice. If done in patients with DJS, DSP clearance is normal at 45 minutes, with a second (biphasic) peak occurring at 90 minutes, indicating an excretory defect. The second rise is related to the reflux of conjugated BSP from the liver to plasma. BSP clearance test is not specific for DJS, and similar findings may present in other cholestatic hepatobiliary disorders.

On liver biopsy in DJS, one can see the accumulation of dark, coarsely granular melanin-like pigment in centrilobular hepatocytes in a liver that otherwise looks normal. However, liver biopsy is not a recommendation for making a diagnosis.

Diagnosis of DJS can be made based on the presence of conjugated hyperbilirubinemia with no other abnormality of liver function tests and elevated urine coproporphyrin I fraction. Invasive diagnostic tests should be avoided. Genotyping of the ABCC2 gene is possible but used for scientific studies and not the clinical purpose.