Thirst stimulation, antidiuretic hormone (ADH) secretion, and handling of filtered sodium by kidneys maintain serum sodium and osmolality. Normal****plasma osmolality is around 275 mOsm/kg to 290 mOsm/kg. To maintain normal osmolality, water intake should be equal to water excretion. The imbalance of water intake and excretion causes hyponatremia or hypernatremia. Water intake is regulated by the thirst mechanism where osmoreceptors in the hypothalamus trigger thirst when body osmolality reaches 295 mOsm/kg. Water excretion is tightly regulated by antidiuretic hormone (ADH), synthesized in the hypothalamus, and stored in the posterior pituitary gland. Changes in tonicity lead to either enhancement or suppression of ADH secretion. Increased ADH secretion causes reabsorption of water in the kidney, and suppression causes the opposite effect. Baroreceptors in the carotid sinus can also stimulate ADH secretion, but it is less sensitive than the osmoreceptors. Baroreceptors trigger ADH secretion due to decreased effective circulating volume, nausea, pain, stress, and drugs.

**Hypertonic Hyponatremia (Serum osmolality of greater than 290 mOsm/kg)**

- Hyperglycemia

- Mannitol

**Isotonic Hyponatremia (Serum osmolality between 275 mOsm/kg and 290 mOsm/kg)**

- Pseudo-hyponatremia is a laboratory artifact. It is usually caused by hypertriglyceridemia, cholestasis (lipoprotein X), and hyperproteinemia (monoclonal gammopathy, intravenous immunoglobulin [IVIG]). Two-thirds of clinical labs in use still use indirect ion-selective electrode technology, and therefore this problem is still present.

- Nonconductive irrigant solutions: these solutions contain mannitol, glycine, or sorbitol, and are used in urological and gynecological procedures such as transurethral resection of the prostate (TURP).

**Hypotonic Hyponatremia (Serum osmolality of less than 275 mOsm/kg)**

Hypotonic hyponatremia represents an excess of free water. This excess free water can be caused by two mechanisms:

- Increased free water intake: The patient drinks a large volume of free water (greater than 18 L/day or greater than 750 mL/h) that overwhelms kidney capacity to excrete free water. Examples of this are psychogenic polydipsia, marathon runners, water drinking competitions, and ecstasy.

- Decreased free water excretion: Patients drink a normal volume of free water, but the kidneys cannot excrete the water for some reason.

There are three mechanisms involved in the inability of kidneys to excrete water:

1. High ADH activity: Three different mechanisms can cause high ADH:

- Decreased effective arterial blood volume (EABV): antidiuretic hormone (ADH) is released when there is a reduction of 15% or more of the EABV. This occurs with hypovolemia (e.g., vomiting, diarrhea), decreased cardiac output (e.g., heart failure), or vasodilation (e.g., cirrhosis).

- SIADH: ADH is secreted autonomously. Four general causes of this are brain disorders, lung disorders, drugs (e.g., SSRI), and miscellanea (e.g., nausea and pain).

- Cortisol deficiency: Cortisol exerts an inhibitory effect on ADH release. When cortisol is decreased, ADH is released in large amounts. Adrenal insufficiency is the cause of this mechanism.

2. Low glomerular filtration rate (GFR): a low glomerular filtration rate would impair the kidney's ability to get rid of water. Typical examples are acute kidney injury (AKI), chronic kidney disease (CKD), and end-stage renal disease (ESRD).

3. Low solute intake: Patients on a regular diet consume 600 mOsm to 900 mOsm of solute per day. Solutes are defined as substances that are freely filtered by the glomeruli but have a relative or absolute difficulty in being reabsorbed by the tubules in relationship to water. The main solutes are urea (which comes from the metabolism of proteins) and electrolytes (e.g., salt). Carbohydrates do not contribute to solute load. In steady-state conditions, solute intake is equal to urine solute load. Therefore, it is expected that these patients also excrete 600 mOsm to 900 mOsm of solute in the urine. Urine volume, and hence water excretion, is dependent on the urine solute load. The more solute one needs to excrete, the larger the urine volume one needs to produce. The less solute one needs to excrete, the smaller the urine volume one needs to produce. Patients who eat a low amount of solute per day (e.g., 200 mOsm/day), on steady-state conditions, will also excrete a low amount of solute in the urine, and therefore they will do it in a smaller volume of urine. This decreased urine volume will limit the capacity of the kidneys to excrete water. Typical examples of this are beer potomania and the tea-and-toast diet.

**SIADH (Syndrome of inappropriate antidiuretic hormone secretion)**

This is a condition where inappropriate secretion of ADH despite normal or increased plasma volume causes impaired water excretion by the kidney leading to hyponatremia. SIADH is a diagnosis of exclusion, as there is no single test to confirm the diagnosis. Patients are hyponatremic and euvolemic.

Causes of SIADH include

- Any central nervous system (CNS) disorder,

- Ectopic production of ADH (most commonly small cell carcinoma of the lung),

- Drugs (carbamazepine, oxcarbazepine, chlorpropamide, and multiple other drugs),

- HIV,

- Pulmonary diseases (pneumonia, tuberculosis),

- Postoperative patients (pain medicated)

Treatment includes fluid restriction and the use of vasopressin 2 receptor inhibitors.