- Studies about the course and outcome of eating disorders have generally noted that approximately 50% of patients do well with time, approximately 30% improve but continue to have symptoms, and approximately 20% remain unwell. The prognosis in adolescents is moderately better than adults, particularly with a longer duration of follow-up.

- Medical morbidity and mortality associated with the starvation state in eating disorders are significant risks in affected individuals.

- Eating disorders represent the highest mortality rate of adolescents among all other psychiatric conditions.

- Eating disorders are associated with increased suicide risk and self-harming behaviors.

- Both anorexia nervosa and bulimia nervosa are characterized by a serious course and outcome in many of the affected individuals.

- Moderating factors of the outcome in AN and BN include the onset of the disease during adolescence and longer duration of follow-up. Unfavorable prognostic factors include chronicity, vomiting, bulimia, and purgative abuse, and obsessive-compulsive features.

- Anorexia nervosa is associated with poor prognosis. Treatment of AN is challenging, no medication has been approved for its treatment, and it often persists after treatment.

- For females at age 15 to 24, anorexia nervosa has a mortality rate 12 times higher than the all other causes of death.

- AN has the highest risk of mortality among all other psychiatric disorders.

- The long-term outcome of BN is slightly better than AN; however, the mortality rate is low.

- Individuals with BDD are less apt to be married, more likely to be divorced, and more likely to be unemployed compared to the general population.

- Treatment of BDD is challenging due to the poor insight associated with BDD. Patients are generally unwilling to adhere to the treatment, particularly in the presence of comorbidities such as suicidality and depressive symptoms.

- To decrease the likelihood of relapse following symptom remission, patients with BDD should remain on medication for a relatively long time.

- BDD is a chronic disorder that requires long-term therapy. Pharmacotherapy and CBT-derived interventions have proven beneficial in the treatment of BDD; however, a significant number of patients remain unresponsive to therapy.

- Approximately 80% of patients with body dysmorphic disorder report past or current suicidal ideation, 24 to 28% attempt suicide during their lifetime and the suicide-related mortality rate is approximately 0.3% per year.