Most patients with dextromethorphan toxicity are successfully managed with supportive care. Airway, breathing, circulation, and hemodynamic monitoring are essential to the care of patients with dextromethorphan toxicity. Intubation with ventilator support may be necessary for airway protection.  A medical toxicologist consult should also take place.

Sedation with medication and physical restraints may be required to control agitation, violent behavior, and psychosis due to dextromethorphan toxicity. Placing the patient in a calm environment such as a quiet room with the light dimmed may be helpful. Benzodiazepines are the preferred medication for chemical sedation in patients with dextromethorphan toxicity. Lorazepam 2 mg to 4 mg intravenous or intramuscular is recommended for chemical sedation. Repeated doses every 10 minutes may be required for adequate sedation.

Gastrointestinal decontamination with activated charcoal is most efficacious for dextromethorphan overdose when given within one hour of ingestion.  Activated charcoal (1 g/kg, max 50g) by mouth or nasogastric tube is recommended if there are no contraindications to activated charcoal. Gastric lavage or induced emesis is not recommended.

Naloxone can treat respiratory depression and central nervous system depression due to dextromethorphan toxicity. Naloxone 0.1mg/kg with a maximum dose of 2mg IV is the recommendation.

Hyperthermia induced by dextromethorphan toxicity should be treated with active cooling measures such as evaporative cooling, cold IV fluids, and cold inspired oxygen.

It is important to consider that dextromethorphan is routinely combined with acetaminophen, decongestants, and antihistamines in many cough and cold medications, evaluating and treating acetaminophen toxicity decongestant toxicity and anticholinergic toxicity should be considered.

Patients with dextromethorphan toxicity can be discharged home if they are asymptomatic for six hours after ingestion if they are not suicidal and have a negative acetaminophen level. Symptomatic patients and patients with complications such as hyperthermia, serotonin syndrome, hypertensive crisis, or rhabdomyolysis should be admitted to the ICU. Patients who are suicidal should have a psychiatric consultation.