The clinician can confirm the diagnosis is through an elevated fasting serum gastrin concentration associated with increased basal gastric acid secretion and or low gastric PH. A normal fasting serum gastrin level excludes ZES. Hypergastrinemia also can be seen in patients with PPI therapy, hypercalcemia, atrophic gastritis, or gastric outlet obstruction; therefore, analysis of gastric acid secretion is useful. The majority of patients with gastrinomas have elevations in gastrin less than 10-fold above the upper limit of normal and may need confirmatory testing. A secretion stimulation test can help to differentiate from other causes of gastrinomas, but access to secretin is limited.

Chromogranin A is a non-specific serum biomarker of neuroendocrine tumors that correlates with tumor volume and may provide prognostic information and be useful for follow-up. Chromogranin A should be measured fasting, and exercise should be avoided before testing. Multiphasic CT, MRI, nuclear medicine imaging: somatostatin receptor scintigraphy with SPECT/CT, gallium-somatostatin analog PET-CT imaging are non-invasive imaging modalities that can localize the tumor and help to evaluate the extent of metastatic spread. The presence of enlarged peripancreatic lymph nodes or liver metastases suggests malignancy. CT is relatively insensitive for small liver lesions for which MRI is better. Endoscopy with endoscopic ultrasound is useful for small tumors that may be missed and has the added benefit of obtaining fine needle aspiration for histology. Due to low proliferative activity, the FDG-PET scan is not useful. In some patients, tumor localization can only be achieved during laparotomy by direct palpation by the surgeon or intra-operative ultrasound.

All patients with ZES will require evaluated for MEN 1 syndrome by history (hypercalcemia, nephrolithiasis, pituitary tumors), including family history and biochemical assessment, including serum ionized calcium, parathyroid hormone levels, and prolactin. Patients can also have non-endocrine findings, including angiofibromas and collagenomas.