Once malaria is considered a possible diagnosis, it is important to facilitate immediate laboratory testing.

A full blood count, urea, creatinine and electrolytes, blood glucose level, and liver function tests should be routinely performed. Thrombocytopenia suggests both non-falciparum and falciparum malaria infections in non-immune adults and children. In severely ill patients, additional studies such as blood gases, blood culture, lactate, and clotting studies are appropriate. In patients with fever and impaired consciousness, one should consider a lumbar puncture to exclude meningitis.

The golden standard for diagnosis is a**microscopic analysis of thick and thin blood smears.**Thick smears allow for a sensitive parasitemia quantification, as parasitemias as low as 30-50/microL can be detected, while thin smears enable a determination of thePlasmodium species, prognostic assessment based on the staging of parasite development and estimation of the proportion of neutrophils containing malaria pigment.

Perceived peripheral blood parasitemia varies greatly in patients with severe malaria, due to the sequestration of the infected red blood cells in tissues.

**Rapid diagnostic tests**are commonly used in addition to blood slides and are useful alternatives in settings where a microscopic diagnosis is non-reliable or infeasible.P. falciparum histidine-rich-protein 2 (PfHRP2)) or enzyme called Plasmodium lactate dehydrogenase (pLDH). Tests have several downfalls as they cannot provide quantitative results, can stay positive months after infection with P. falciparum, or are, if testing for pLDH, positive only while there are living parasites in the blood.

Polymerase chain reaction (PCR) is one of the possible diagnostic modalities but is, even if promptly available, too timely to use for initial diagnosis and prompt treatment of acute malaria. It should, however, be used for research and epidemiologic purposes in any malaria infection in the USA, to determine and confirm the infecting species.