**Barriers to Use EC**

ACOG Committee Opinion 707, published in 2017, examined the barriers to EC use and made their recommendations to improve the access and use of EC in the US. The main barriers are due to:

- Confusion of EC with medication-induced abortion

- The misconception that ready availability of EC increases risky sexual behavior

- Lack of knowledge among providers about safety, efficacy, and choice of EC to recommend for the women in need

- The financial barriers limiting access to EC

Surveys in the US and many countries have clearly documented no increased risk of sexual behavior or unintended pregnancy. One survey reported that one in five providers were reluctant to discuss EC with adolescents. Only 21% to 50% of sexual assault victims treated in emergency departments received EC, while only 17 states have laws enforcing the provision of EC to sexual assault victims irrespective of religious or restrictive affiliation. One study noted that up to one-third of newly arrested women are eligible for EC, but very few jails screen and offer the EC method, missing the opportunity to avoid unintended pregnancy in incarcerated women. Both clinicians and women are unaware that they could ask and get a prescription for EC in advance. In many underserved communities, there are few facilities or clinicians who could provide EC, and some are even unwilling to provide the method due to religious affiliation. Pharmacies may fail to stock due to low demand and provide inaccurate information to poor and young adolescents who lack awareness, have concerns about confidentiality, and lack access to healthcare.