There are numerous descriptions in the literature of approaches to the vidian nerve, including transantral via Caldwell-Luc approach, transpalatal, transseptal mucoperichondrial, and endonasal route. With advancements in endoscopic sinus surgery in the last three decades, the most preferred route for vidian neurectomy is the endoscopic endonasal route, using either transsphenoidal or transnasal approach. The transsphenoidal approach is preferable in cases with a prominent vidian canal in the sphenoid sinus floor. However, both techniques could be combined in varying degrees to trace the vidian nerve anatomy from sphenoid sinus to pterygopalatine ganglion.

**Surgical Steps of Transnasal or Retrograde Approaches**

- The lateral wall of the nasal cavity anterior to the posterior end of the middle turbinate is infiltrated with lignocaine mixed with adrenaline.

- Posterior to the posterior fontanelle of the maxillary sinus, a U shaped posteriorly based flap is raised over the palatine bone.

- The surgeon identifies the ethmoidal crest of the palatine bone, and it serves as a useful landmark for sphenopalatine foramen (SPF).

- Sphenopalatine artery (SPA) is identified and coagulated or clipped with Ligar clips.

- The mucosal flap is raised behind the foramen into the face of the sphenoid sinus.

- There is confirmation of the sphenoid sinus with a minimal widening of the sphenoid ostium.

- The posteroinferior margin of the SPF (the sphenoidal process of the palatine bone) is removed, thereby taking off the medial wall of the pterygopalatine fossa.

- Contents of the pterygopalatine fossa are pushed laterally to expose the vidian canal.

- After clear visualization and positive identification of the vidian nerve, 2 to 3 mm of the vidian nerve is removed with a sickle knife or scissors.

- The mucosal flap is reposited and supported with a small piece of Gelfoam.

**Surgical Steps of Transsphenoidal or Anterograde Approaches**

- The sphenoid sinus ostium is identified 1.2 to 1.5 cm above the choana

- Wide sphenoidotomy preserves sphenopalatine artery branches inferolaterally, and the sphenoid rostrum is removed.

- The sphenoid sinus floor is thinned out.

- Using a 70-degree endoscope, the vidian nerve is identified on the lateral aspect of the floor of the sphenoid sinus. If not easily visible, the canal is deroofed with a pricking probe, Kerrison's rongeur, or drill.

- Using an angled probe, the nerve is transected, and a segment of the nerve is removed.

- Nasal packing is necessary in case of significant intraoperative bleeding.

**Pitfalls in Surgery**

- Palatovaginal canal: This structure can be mistaken for the vidian canal. It runs along the floor of the sphenoid sinus, transmits nerves, and their anterior openings are separated by only a few millimeters. The PVC opening is just medial to the vidian canal, much smaller in size, and transmits a smaller nerve (posterior pharyngeal nerve)

- Posterior pharyngeal nerve: Exits the PVC to run across the vidian canal in a lateral direction to join the pterygopalatine ganglion (PPG) in the PPF, while the vidian nerve, much bigger in thickness, has a slight lateral course before it joins the PPG.

- Incomplete resection of vidian nerve