The diagnosis of GERD is imprecise as there is no gold standard test available. The diagnosis of GERD is made solely based on presenting symptoms or in combination with other factors such as responsiveness to antisecretory therapy, esophagogastroduodenoscopy, and ambulatory reflux monitoring.

**Proton pump inhibitor (PPI) trial**

GERD can be presumptively diagnosed in most patients presenting with typical symptoms of heartburn and regurgitation

**Esophagogastroduodenoscopy (EGD)**

Patients presenting with typical GERD symptoms associated with any one of the alarm symptoms should be evaluated with an EGD to rule out complications of GERD. These include erosive esophagitis, Barrett's esophagus, esophageal stricture, and esophageal adenocarcinoma or rule out peptic ulcer disease. Distal esophageal biopsies are not routinely recommended to make a diagnosis of GERD as per the current American College of Gastroenterology (ACG) guidelines

**Radiographic studies**

Radiographic studies like barium radiographs can detect moderate to severe esophagitis, esophageal strictures, hiatal hernia, and tumors. However, their role in the evaluation of GERD is limited and should not be performed to diagnose GERD

**Ambulatory esophageal reflux monitoring**

Medically refractory GERD is increasingly common, and patients often have normal endoscopy evaluation as PPIs are incredibly effective in healing esophagitis caused by the refluxate. Ambulatory esophageal reflux monitoring can assess the correlation of symptoms with abnormal acid exposure. It is indicated in medically refractory GERD and in patients with extraesophageal symptoms suspicious for GERD. Ambulatory reflux (pH or in combination with impedance) monitoring employs the utility of a telemetry pH capsule or a transnasal catheter. It is the only available test that detects pathological acid exposure, frequency of reflux episodes, and correlation of symptoms with reflux episodes