Having standardized cognitive assessments help create a universal way of diagnosing, but these particular tests are not perfect. Scoring can be subjective, conclusions may be drawn based on assumptions, and screening tests have statistical limitations.

If not done correctly, the scoring of these exams can be very subjective. Each result is administrator specific and accordingly introduces the possibility of human error. Some studies show that scoring leniency can negatively affect the sensitivity of the test. In an effort to control this variable, many of the assessment websites give clear instructions and provide tutorials on how to administer and score their assessment properly.

Some of the cognitive assessment screens are undergoing development with limited testing within a cognitive domain. For example, the Mini-Cog tests for memory; it does not test the semantic of long-term procedural memory. Understanding that most of the available assessments are just screening tests is integral to the assessment’s use.

It is also important to remember the statistics when using screening tests. One must be cognizant of false positives and false negatives that are inevitable when the sensitivity and specificity are not 100%.

Some tests may be better at identifying certain impairments over others—for example, some identifying mild cognitive impairment versus major cognitive impairment. The clinician must understand each test, what the test measures, and the limitations of the test. Lastly, cognitive assessments done in the clinical setting are screening tests and must be used along with clinical judgment as well as in the context of each patient presentation.