**Cardiac Valves**

Anatomy:

There are four chambers of the heart: the right atrium, the right ventricle, the left atrium, and the left ventricle. The atrioventricular valves are located on the floor of the atria and empty into the ventricles. These valves are composed of leaflets attached to papillary muscles in the ventricle via thin cord-like structures called chordae tendineae. The leaflets also attach to a fibrous ring, known as the valve annulus, that supports the valve between the atria and ventricles. The tricuspid valve separates the right atrium from the right ventricle, and the mitral valve separates the left atrium from the left ventricle. The tricuspid valve consists of three leaflets, while the mitral valve consists of two leaflets.

The semilunar valves separate the ventricles from the great arteries. These valves are composed of three sinus-like leaflets also attached to a valve annulus. The pulmonic valve separates the right ventricle from the pulmonary artery, and the aortic valve separates the left ventricle from the aorta. The superior aspects of the right and left aortic valve leaflets contain the origins of the coronary arteries. The aortic valve on average opens and closes 100000 times a day.

Cellular:

A single layer of endothelial cells called the endocardium lines the surface of the heart valves. The subendocardium contains a vast population of cells types. It contains fibroblasts, myofibroblasts, smooth muscle cells, nerves, elastic and collagenous fibers. The connective tissue of the subendocardium is continuous with the connective tissue of the myocardial layer.

The endothelial cells of the valves are genotypically and phenotypically unique from other endothelial cells found in the body. Research has shown these cells are very functionally active and can alter the mechanical properties of the aortic valve, which in turn alters its function. They modulate the elastic modulus of the valve, which is the valve’s strain for a given amount of stress. Endothelial cells accomplish this via communication with myofibroblast and smooth muscle cells in the subendocardial layer.

Function:

The heart valves permit forward flow of blood while preventing backward regurgitant flow.