Common adverse effects associated with finasteride include loss of libido, erectile dysfunction (2% to 4%), decreased ejaculatory volume, and gynecomastia. It also correlates with orthostatic hypotension. This adverse event can be additive in patients who are taking concomitant alpha-blockers. Finasteride reportedly causes orthostatic hypotension in approximately 9% of users as monotherapy and as high as 18% with combined therapy. Therefore, appropriate patient counseling is necessary. In some patients, persistent sexual dysfunction may lead to suicidality and adverse psychological events.

Post-finasteride syndrome (PFS) has been a recently reported issue. This term refers to the continuation of adverse effects despite the discontinuation of therapy. Further investigational studies to better understand post-finasteride syndrome are currently underway.

The impact of finasteride on fertility has also been examined by the urologic and dermatologic practitioners that utilize the medication using different doses for various indications. Thus far, there is minimal data to support the association of permanent infertility using a low dose of 1 mg finasteride. The effects of low-dose finasteride on fertility appear to be reversible as various studies have demonstrated improved fertility and sperm parameters in those who discontinued therapy. However, fertility may suffer a negative impact from the use of the higher 5-mg dose. Not all users experience fertility issues, and many users of the medication are still able to conceive.

Additionally, finasteride has correlations to symptoms of dizziness, weakness, dyspnea, rhinitis, and skin rash.