Twelve intercostal nerves supply the sensory innervation for much of the back, trunk, and upper abdomen, as well as the muscular innervation for the intercostal muscles. Each intercostal nerve originates from spinal nerve roots at the same vertebral level as the rib they travel with. As each spinal nerve emerges from the spinal cord, it immediately divides into dorsal and ventral branches. The dorsal nerve branch supplies the motor and sensory innervation of the paravertebral musculature and overlying skin and subcutaneous tissue. The ventral branch continues anterolaterally and becomes the intercostal nerve. Immediately on exiting the intervertebral foramen, the nerve lies between the parietal pleura and the innermost intercostal muscle. Within a few centimeters, the nerve dives between the internal and innermost intercostal muscles, where it remains until it terminates in the anterior chest wall or abdomen.

Each intercostal nerve travels in a neurovascular bundle with an intercostal artery and vein with the nerve running inferior to both blood vessels. This neurovascular bundle accounts for the high levels of local anesthetic uptake into the blood noted after intercostal nerve blocks. The bundle travels inferior to the accompanying rib in the costal groove. Near the midaxillary line, the intercostal nerve sends an offshoot called the lateral cutaneous branch, which travels laterally through the internal and external intercostal muscles where it then divides into a dorsal and ventral branch. Together these innervate the skin and subcutaneous tissue of the lateral trunk and upper abdomen. Just before the individual intercostal nerves terminate, they send another branch called the anterior cutaneous branch, which divides into a lateral and medial branch. These supply the skin and subcutaneous tissue of the anterior trunk and abdomen, including the skin over both the sternum and rectus abdominis.