Treatment aims at eliminating inflammation and pain with steroids and topical cycloplegics. Any additional therapies depend on associated processes. For example, anti-viral medications are necessary in herpetic uveitis, while bactrim can be used in toxoplasmic chorioretinitis. Antimetabolite, biologics, and other immunosuppressive medications (e.g., methotrexate, azathioprine, mycophenolate, cyclosporine, adalimumab, and infliximab) are often necessary for chronic, non-infectious cases, especially in cases associated with systemic inflammatory diseases.  However, these agents should only be prescribed by providers specifically trained in their use and attuned to their side effect profile.

For anterior uveitis, the most common, therapy consists of topical corticosteroids and cycloplegics.  Steroids should be tapered according to clinical response to minimize rebound inflammation.  Subsequent follow up should be established to monitor for resolution of inflammation and monitor IOP due to the potential of a precipitous rise in IOP with prolonged topical steroid use.

Cycloplegics, typically atropine or cyclogyl, are used to minimize pain by reducing spasm of the ciliary body and prevent and/or lyse posterior synechiae (adhesions of the iris to the lens capsule).  These medications are typically applied twice daily until inflammation has resolved or has significantly decreased before cessation.

Intermediate, posterior, and panuveitis treatment is much more complex and should be guided by ophthalmologists, specifically uveitis specialists, when possible.