IgM is the initial antibody produced by the adaptive immune system in response to a foreign pathogen. IgM is also the primary constituent of natural antibodies that represent a branch of the innate immune system.  There are many disorders associated with IgM; a description of some of the most pertinent disorders appears below:

**X-linked Hyper-IgM Syndrome**

Hyper-IgM syndrome is predominantly a rare X-linked inherited disease that occurs in approximately 2 out of 1,000,000 million males.

Individuals with X-linked hyper-IgM syndrome are susceptible to recurrent sinopulmonary and pyogenic infections (e.g., H. influenzae, S. pyogenes) due to their inability to form IgG that can enter tissues from the blood to fight extracellular bacteria. Since cellular immunity is also compromised, defects in CD40L-CD40 signaling result in combined immunodeficiency. The inability to activate macrophages results in a significantly increased susceptibility to the opportunistic fungal pathogen Pneumocystis jirovecii, and pneumonia caused by P. jirovecii in a child often is the symptom of the disease. Diarrhea occurs in approximately one-third of patients due to infections by parasites such as Cryptosporidium parvum. Uncontrolled cytomegalovirus infection may lead to liver disease, and individuals with CD40L deficiencies are also at a greater risk for developing malignancies, presumably due to defective cellular immunity. Individuals with hyper-IgM syndrome caused by mutations in loci other than CD40L or CD40 will only experience humoral defects and will not experience compromised cellular immunity.

The initial diagnosis of X-linked hyper-IgM syndrome is made predominantly on the clinical symptoms of a patient with an uncontrolled infection that exhibits normal or elevated IgM levels, with very low or undetectable IgG and IgA levels. Flow cytometry can be conducted for the presence of CD40L on T-cells activated in vitro, although identification of the relevant mutation (e.g., CD40L in a male patient) by genetic testing is useful for definitive analysis. Patients with hyper-IgM syndromes r administered intravenous gammaglobulin (IVIG) regardless of the genetic cause of the disease. X-linked hyper-IgM patients also receive trimethoprim-cotrimoxazole as a prophylactic treatment against P. jirovecii infection. Protective measures against exposure to Cryptosporidium sp. are also advised, for example, by avoiding swimming in lakes to avoid exposure to C. parvum cysts, as an active C. parvum infection is challenging to treat. GM-CSF can be administered to patients to treat sores and blisters that result from neutropenia caused by defective macrophage activation.

**Selective IgM Deficiency**

Selective IgM deficiency (SIGMD) is a rare disorder with fewer than 300 cases reported. SIGMD is associated with an isolated deficiency in IgM in the presence of normal levels of other immunoglobulins such as IgG and IgA and normal levels of T cells and other leukocytes.S. pneumoniae and H. influenzae) in addition to viral infections. Additionally, SIGMD can be associated with malignancy, autoimmunity, or allergy. SIGMD may occur as a secondary effect of another disease, such as malignancy or bacteremia. Yet, primary causes of SIGMD have also been described, as some are associated with deletions on chromosome 22, for example.**Cold Agglutinin Disease**

Cold agglutinin disease (CAD) is a form of autoimmune hemolytic anemia (AHA) mediated predominantly by IgM antibodies. As the name of the disease implies, IgM recognizing these erythrocyte antigens can agglutinate erythrocytes at colder temperatures. IgG or IgM antibodies that bind to erythrocytes can lead to red blood cell destruction by either promoting opsonization and clearance of erythrocytes by phagocytes in the spleen or liver or by activating complement leading to erythrocyte lysis as a result of MAC formation. Autoantibodies can cause AHA, can be induced by an infection, or can be drug-induced, in which case antibodies recognize complexes of drugs bound to erythrocytes. CAD is a rare disease affecting approximately 16 per million and is predominantly associated with IgM autoantibodies directed against the blood group antigens large I and small i.M. pneumoniae, the primary cause of atypical pneumonia.  For patients that suffer debilitating symptoms due to CAD, avoidance of cold temperatures is paramount, including drinking cold liquids or being in cold rooms. Severe anemia can be treated with transfusions and plasmapheresis to remove the IgM molecules serving as cold agglutinins. It bears mentioning that all intravenous solutions should be warmed to body temperature yet must not exceed 40 degrees centigrade before infusion. Patients with CAD should undergo evaluation for an underlying disorder; antimicrobial therapy, for example, is warranted if an infection is associated with the condition. CAD may also occur from other primary causes such as non-Hodgkin lymphoma, and therefore flow cytometry of leukocytes biopsied from the bone marrow is useful in this regard. Rituximab is very useful for the treatment of debilitating CAD that is not associated with a malignancy, and the ability to treat CAD with inhibitors of complement is an area of active investigation. **Monoclonal Gammopathies**

Monoclonal gammopathies are characterized by the proliferation of single clones of plasma cells. Several monoclonal gammopathies are associated with the overproduction of IgM, a condition that can be referred to as macroglobulinemia, as the letter designation of IgM derived from its original description as macroglobulin, due to its much larger size in comparison to IgG. Waldenström macroglobulinemia (WM) is a rare example of such a disorder that most commonly presents in the seventh decade of life. In addition to elevated serum IgM, WM results in the infiltration of the bone marrow by a lymphoplasmacytic lymphoma, a low-grade and slow-growing form of non-Hodgkin's lymphoma. Patients with WM most commonly present with a pale appearance, oronasal bleeding, organomegaly, and other systemic complaints such as weakness and fatigue. The absence of involvement of the bone or kidneys is useful in distinguishing WM from multiple myeloma. An increased hyperviscosity of the blood due to increased IgM secretion can lead to CNS effects, such as headache, loss of vision, ataxia, weakness, deafness, and dilated retinal veins. Such symptoms associated with WM hyperviscosity are a potential medical emergency and should receive treatment with plasmapheresis. The criteria for diagnosing a patient with WM require a demonstration of monoclonal IgM in the blood and at least 10 percent of the bone marrow biopsy demonstrating infiltration of small lymphoplasmacytic cells. Many patients are asymptomatic and will receive a diagnosis of WM after receiving lab tests for another reason. Asymptomatic patients can be monitored with regular office visits to assess complete blood counts and monoclonal IgM levels. Symptomatic WM treatment is with a regimen that includes rituximab. As noted, plasmapheresis is necessary if symptoms of hyperviscosity are present, followed by chemotherapy to slow the growth of the malignant clone. A mutation in the gene encoding for MYD88 (MYD88 L265P) is present in over 90% of patients diagnosed with WM, and the identification of this mutation can help distinguish WM from other disorders.