**Measuring Pulsus Paradoxus**

For patients without indwelling arterial access, pulsus paradoxus is best measured with a manual sphygmomanometer and stethoscope. Automatic blood pressure cuffs cannot accurately measure for pulsus paradoxus. Assessment is made by inflating the cuff until all Korotkoff are absent, then very slowly releasing pressure from the cuff. The first sounds auscultated will be heard only during expiration, and this pressure should be noted. Next, as cuff pressure is dropped further, the pressure should be noted when Korotkoff sounds are heard during both inspiration and expiration. The variation between these 2 systolic pressures is what quantifies pulsus paradoxus. Severe pulsus paradoxus may be able to be appreciated as a weakening or disappearance of the palpated pulse during inspiration. Under certain circumstances, pulsus paradoxus may be able to be seen with respirophasic variations in the patient’s pulse oximetry waveform as well.

An important tip when assessing for pulsus paradoxus is to ensure normal tidal volume breathing in the patient. Do not instruct them to change their breathing pattern as the depth of respiration influences the magnitude of pulsus paradoxus and will be amplified in patients with pulmonary disease.

For patients with indwelling arterial access, measuring pulsus paradoxus is as simple as watching the waveform and noting the difference in systolic pressure during the respiratory cycle. Because the drop in blood pressure is secondary to a drop in left ventricular stroke volume, the change in pressure noted during pulsus paradoxus will primarily reflect a decrease in both systolic and pulse pressure; diastolic pressure is usually minimally affected.

Further evaluation of patients with pulsus paradoxus will depend on the etiology. Importantly, if there is known or suspected pericardial effusion, then a diagnosis of cardiac tamponade should be considered, and an ECG, chest radiography, and trans-thoracic echocardiography should be obtained in the absence of hemodynamic compromise. If hemodynamic instability is present, emergent drainage of pericardial fluid should be considered.