# Continuing Education Activity

Cholera is a well-known disease caused by intestinal infection with the toxin-producing bacteria Vibrio cholerae. This potentially fatal diarrheal disease results in large volumes of watery stool, causing rapid dehydration that can progress to hypovolemic shock and metabolic acidosis. The case-fatality ratio is up to half in vulnerable groups during outbreaks, but can be under 1 percent if properly treated. Today, cholera persists in regions of the world with unsatisfactory hygienic conditions and regions afflicted by natural disasters and/or humanitarian crises. The development of oral rehydration therapy, antibiotic treatment, and new oral vaccines have led to increased survival and excellent prognosis with appropriate treatment. This activity outlines the evaluation, management, and prevention of cholera and underscores the role of the interprofessional team in improving care for patients with this disease.

**Objectives:**
- Identify the epidemiology of Vibrio cholerae infection.
- Review the risk factors that predispose patients to Vibrio cholerae infection.
- Summarize the role of oral rehydration for the treatment of patients affected by Vibrio cholerae infection.
- Explain the importance of improving care coordination among interprofessional team members to improve outcomes for patients affected by Vibrio cholerae infection.

# Introduction

Cholera is a well-known disease caused by intestinal infection with the toxin-producing bacteria Vibrio cholerae. This potentially fatal diarrheal disease results in large volumes of watery stool, causing rapid dehydration that can progress to hypovolemic shock and metabolic acidosis. The case-fatality ratio is up to half in vulnerable groups during outbreaks but can be under 1% if properly treated.V. cholerae have reached the pandemic level 7 times. Unlike many other infectious diseases, cholera continues to be a worldwide public health concern. Today, cholera persists in regions of the world with unsatisfactory hygienic conditions and regions afflicted by natural disasters and/or humanitarian crises. Research has led to the development of oral rehydration therapy, antibiotic treatment, and new oral vaccines that have saved millions of lives.

# Etiology

Toxin-producing strains of V. cholerae cause the disease process. V. cholerae is a highly motile, comma-shaped gram-negative bacteria with a single polar flagellum. It has hundreds of serogroups that include pathogenic and non-pathogenic strains. Until recently, the disease was caused by only 2 of these serotypes, Inaba and Ogawa, and 2 biotypes, classical and El Tor, of toxigenic serogroup O1. In 1992, serogroup O139, or Bengal, emerged as another epidemic variant of V. cholerae.

Cholera is transmitted through contaminated water and/or food especially in vulnerable communities affected by natural disasters, war, and famines. Humans are the only natural host for V. cholerae, and transmission is by the fecal-oral route. However, V. cholerae is also found as a free-living organism in brackish water and can survive in fresh or saltwater, which explains the occasional infections via shellfish.

# Epidemiology

Cholera is endemic to world regions with poor water, sanitation, and hygiene infrastructures, such as Sub-Saharan Africa and regions of the Middle East. In developed countries, it is seen sporadically. Currently, it is endemic in 69 countries including Asia, Africa, and the Americas with 1.3 billion people at risk, Sub-Sahara Africa being the worst.V. cholerae originated in the Indian subcontinent and caused six pandemics from 1827 through 1923. The seventh pandemic has been ongoing since 1961, reaching South America and most of the Western Hemisphere in 1991.V. cholerae strains, ease of travel and constant migration of possibly infected individuals have raised serious public health concerns.

# Pathophysiology

Small intestine colonization is highlighted by V. cholerae's highly effective motility and ease of attachment to the intestinal wall. V. cholerae requires a comparatively high infectious dose (10^8).V. cholerae is how host susceptibility affects a patient's risk. For example, individuals with blood group O have been found to be more likely to develop severe cholera than other blood types, while individuals previously infected with cholera or vaccinated against it have often been found to gain temporary acquired immunity.V. cholerae infections presenting as self-limited gastroenteritis after bathing in contaminated recreational waters or ingestion of raw and undercooked seafood.

# Histopathology

V. cholerae is a comma-shaped, gram-negative rod with a single polar flagellum that is highly motile. It exists in aquatic environments, infects the small intestine, and produces cholera toxins. These bacteria have specialized adherence factors that allow them to attach to the hostile microvilli surface. Once attached, Vibrio export 1 of 2 antigenically related but distinct forms of cholera enterotoxin (CT-1 or CT-2) into the intestinal epithelial cell. The cholera toxin causes adenylate cyclase to be locked on the “on mode,” leading to an excess in cAMP and subsequent hypersecretion of chloride and bicarbonate followed by water.

# History and Physical

Cholera is characterized mainly by profuse painless diarrhea, abdominal discomfort, borborygmi, and vomiting in the absence of fever. Severe cases may present with hypovolemic shock due to the massive volume and electrolyte loss. Although initial diarrhea may include fecal material, the classic diarrhea presentation consists of watery foul-smelling mucous described as "rice-water" stools. The rate of fluid loss (up to 1 liter per hour) and high stool sodium concentrations characterize cholera from other diarrheal diseases.

# Evaluation

V. cholerae is mainly diagnosed clinically in the setting of a diarrheal illness outbreak. Various factors differentiate it from other diarrheal diseases. Given the pathophysiology of cholera and its effects on the secretion of chloride via apical channels and inhibition of sodium chloride absorption, laboratory results usually evidence hypokalemia, hypocalcemia, metabolic acidosis, and isonatremic dehydration.

Confirmatory diagnosis of V. cholerae today consists of isolation of the bacteria in stool cultures, polymerase chain reaction (PCR), and rapid tests. Nonetheless, given the morbidity and mortality associated with the disease, treatment is never to be delayed for diagnostic testing given adequate diagnosis can be achieved clinically.V. cholerae and susceptibilities using selective media. Nonetheless, this technique is inadequate for rapid diagnosis.

# Treatment / Management

Oral rehydration therapy (ORT) is the mainstay treatment for acute cholera infection and has had a dramatic global impact, not only for V. cholerae but for all dehydrating diarrheal infections.

In order to respond to the severe electrolyte and fluid losses of the small intestine, equimolar oral rehydration solutions rich in sodium and glucose were produced in the 1960s.

Regardless of volume deficit, special considerations must be taken with patients who present with profound vomiting. Often, ORS is not sufficient and intravenous rehydration must be started to avoid the progression of dehydration. Subsequently, it is paramount to assess for ongoing fluid losses in order to keep up with fluid replacement and reassess for volume status periodically. For this purpose, litters, where patients defecate directly into a measuring collection bucket, were developed and named cholera cots.

It has been found that the most common errors in the treatment of patients with cholera are underestimating the fluid needs. This is due to errors in estimating initial dehydration and not reassessing the patient to be aware of increased fluid losses.

Antibiotics are considered as an adjunctive treatment for V. cholerae and are typically administered once the initial volume deficit is corrected and vomiting has ceased. Antibiotics result in substantial improvements in clinical and microbiological outcomes by shortening the mean duration of diarrhea by a day and a half, reducing the total stool volume by 50%, reducing the amount of rehydration fluids required by 40%, and reduction of excretion of hyperinfective bacteria by 3 days.

For infants, breastfeeding in conjunction with ORS and zinc supplementation has been recommended.

Anti-emetics and anti-motility agents have been found to have no benefit and may actually impede ORS therapy, hence producing worse outcomes.

# Differential Diagnosis

Given the non-specific finding of acute watery diarrhea associated with V. cholerae, special considerations must be taken into account when determining a differential diagnosis. The differential diagnosis should be informed by geography and history. Although the most common cause of diarrhea worldwide is infectious, the setting of the infection or recent travel to endemic countries may make some infections more likely. Viral causes include norovirus, rotavirus, adenoviruses, and astrovirus, among others. Bacterial causes include Campylobacter, Shigella, Clostridium difficile, Salmonella, and different strains of Escherichia coli. Protozoa infections include Cryptosporidium, Giardia, Cyclospora, Entamoeba, among others.

# Pertinent Studies and Ongoing Trials

The best choice for long-term cholera infection and outbreak control is improving water and sanitation. This is highlighted by the fact that cholera continues to be a potentially fatal epidemic illness in developing countries, while only occurring sporadically or as limited outbreaks in the developed world.

# Prognosis

As mentioned above, the case-fatality rate (CFR) in most affected countries is less than 5%, while in other countries the CFR can reach up to 50% during outbreaks.

# Complications

The most common and life-threatening complication of V. cholerae is severe volume depletion leading to hypovolemic shock and metabolic acidosis. Cholera is characterized by extensive fluid loss via diarrhea, reaching as high as 1 liter per hour in adults and 20 mL/kg per hour in children.

# Deterrence and Patient Education

Cholera is an infectious disease caused by the ingestion of food or water contaminated by the bacteria Vibrio cholerae. Patients living in endemic areas and travelers to these regions should be educated on the importance of hand hygiene. Additionally, boiling water before it is consumed or used to rinse food is imperative. As stated above there are vaccines that can be used in endemic areas as well. Patients that live or have traveled to endemic countries should be encouraged to seek medical attention immediately if they develop signs of cholera infection.

# Pearls and Other Issues

- Cholera is an acute secretory diarrheal illness caused by the toxins of the comma-shaped gram-negative Vibrio cholerae bacterium that is known worldwide for its pandemic potential.

- Cholera affects resource-poor and developing countries where water, sanitation, and hygiene infrastructure are lacking. Historically, it has been responsible for 7 pandemics. Currently, it is endemic in 69 countries with particular severity in Sub-Saharan Africa and the Middle East.

- Infection begins with ingestion of food or water contaminated with V. cholerae that goes on to colonize the small intestine and produce toxins. These toxins produce changes in the electrolyte channels causing massive fluid and electrolyte losses in the form of watery diarrhea.

- The clinical presentation consists of painless severe watery diarrhea that often resembles rice water and can rapidly lead to hypovolemic shock from massive volume depletion in the first 6 hours if not treated.

- Diagnosis is clinical, but confirmation using stool cultures on special selective media is recognized as the gold standard. Given stool cultures are impractical for use in the field, the use of rapid diagnostic tests (RDTs) such as dipsticks has been favored for outbreak surveillance and control.

- Oral rehydration solution (ORS) is the mainstay treatment for cholera and consists of aggressive volume repletion depending on the initial level of volume depletion and ongoing fluid losses.

- Patients with cholera must be front-loaded with fluids by replacing the initial volume deficit in the first 4 to 6 hours and as much as 350 ml/kg in the first 24 hours. Close monitoring of ongoing fluid losses is essential to preventing mortality.

- Isotonic oral fluids are favored except in severe cases and in patients who are actively vomiting when intravenous (IV) hydration may be needed.

- Other treatment modalities such as antibiotics and nutritional supplements have been proven to help with symptom duration and severity. Tetracyclines and macrolides are considered respective first- and second-line therapy.

- Although adequate water, sanitation, and hygiene infrastructure is the main preventive measure, oral cholera vaccines (OCVs) have been found to be effective, comparably inexpensive, and safe for outbreak control in high-risk endemic areas.

# Enhancing Healthcare Team Outcomes

Healthcare outcomes involving cholera in resource-poor and developing countries have been a public health concern and a hot topic for research during the last decades. Cholera infection rates and outbreaks have been closely linked to the socio-economic characteristics of the region. [Level 4]