One must consider how buprenorphine, a partial agonist, behaves when administered with other opioid receptor agonists. When in the presence of a full agonist, buprenorphine use results in a blockade effect and doesn’t allow the high of the full opioid agonist to occur. If taken too soon after a full agonist, the patient may enter into withdrawals, which is why it is important to perform a simple assessment, such as the Clinical Opiate Withdrawal Scale, or COWS, before giving buprenorphine. Suggestions are that the patient is in at least mild to moderate withdrawal, which translates to a score of at least 5 to 24 on the COWS. This step ensures that a patient with opioid intoxication will not receive a partial agonist that may push them into withdrawal.

Before prescribing buprenorphine, one should closely examine all the medications; the patient is taking because serious drug interactions can occur. Combining buprenorphine with CNS depressants like benzodiazepines, alcohol, certain antidepressants, antihistamines, hypnotics, or sedatives, can lead to life-threatening respiratory depression, coma, and even death. The patient should be warned not to combine buprenorphine with other opioids or alcohol.

Buprenorphine is broken down in the liver by the CYP3A4 microsomal enzymes. Hence if the patient is on medications that induce these enzymes (e.g., carbamazepine, phenytoin, or rifampin), therapeutic levels of buprenorphine may not be reached. On the other hand, if the patient is on inhibitors of CYP3A4 (e.g., fluvoxamine, ketoconazole, indinavir, erythromycin, saquinavir), levels of buprenorphine will remain elevated, and there is potential for toxicity.

At each clinic visit, there should be a reconciliation of the patient’s drug list to ensure no new drug additions.

**Managing Missed Doses**

When dealing with opioid-dependent patients and their treatment, one must prepare to deal with missed doses. Today most pharmacists who dispense buprenorphine keep track of the drug, the dosage, time, and day. This information is vital as it helps with compliance. Anytime the individual misses a dose of buprenorphine, the healthcare provider must receive notification since it may be the first sign of instability in the patient. To prevent loss of compliance, the clinician must develop a new treatment plan.

**Follow up**

As with patients treated with methadone, patients prescribed buprenorphine also need close monitoring from an interprofessional group of healthcare professionals as part of a comprehensive opioid dependence treatment protocol. In some parts of the country, pharmacists have also taken an active role in the supervision and monitoring of patients treated with buprenorphine. The pharmacist further communicates with the healthcare providers and plays an active role in dispensing take-home doses (carries).

**Cost and Availability of Buprenorphine**

The average cost for a 30-day supply of buprenorphine (two 2 or 8 mg tablets per day) is about $300 to $350. Formulas that contain naloxone are slightly more expensive, retailing at $400 to $450 a month.