Different types of umbilical cord abnormalities may be potentially fatal or pose a severe threat to fetal health. Thus, it is of great clinical significance to have early detection of these malformations to be able to provide a proper diagnosis and plan of care.

**Velamentous Insertion**

The incidence of velamentous insertion of the umbilical cord is significantly high for in vitro fertilization(IVF)-induced pregnancies compared to naturally-conceived pregnancies. It happens in about 10% of pregnancies and 20% of IVF pregnancies.

**Four-Vessel Umbilical Cord**

Normal umbilical cord anatomy consists of three vessels represented by two umbilical arteries and one umbilical vein. By the seventh week of gestation, the right umbilical vein usually obliterates, leaving a single (left) umbilical vein patent. However, there have been documented cases of umbilical cords containing four-vessels. The persistence of two umbilical veins and two umbilical arteries within the umbilical cord is associated with multiple cardiovascular and gastrointestinal anomalies.

**True Knots of the Umbilical Cord**

These are real tangling nodules of the umbilical vessels along the length of the umbilical cord. They usually occur early in pregnancy as a result of various predisposing factors. Most commonly, the development of true knots is associated with the presence of excessive amniotic fluid, causing high pressure on the umbilical cord vessels, increasing their torsional force, causing deep knots of those vessels. Also, an increase in the movement of the fetus in utero plays a vital role in creating that teratogenic deformity as supercoils of the umbilical cord can cause it to knot over itself. True knot deformities of the umbilical cord are very dangerous because they may obstruct the blood flow in the umbilical vessels, which may eventually lead to fetal demise.

**Very Short Umbilical Cord**

An umbilical cord is considered significantly short when its length is less than approximately 40 cm. A short umbilical cord can lead to premature separation from the placenta resulting in an interruption in fetal circulation and, as a result, intrauterine bleeding followed by fetal death.

**Very Long Umbilical Cord**

If an umbilical cord is longer than 65 to 70 cm, it is clinically considered long. An abnormally long umbilical cord has the greater potential wind around the neck of the fetus multiple times contribute to fetal death, or it may also protrude from the mother's cervix.

**Omphalocele**

Also referred to as exomphalos, an omphalocele is an abdominal wall defect that causes the herniation of bowel and sometimes other organs into the umbilical cord. The pathophysiology behind this condition is due to the failure of the reduction of the physiological umbilical hernia.

**Abnormal attachment of the umbilical cord to the placenta**

Sometimes, the umbilical cord may have an abnormal attachment site on the placenta. For example, the umbilical cord may attach to the placenta significantly off-center, giving rise to eccentric attachment deformity. The placenta may take a deformed shape called battledore placenta. This deformity results from the marginal attachment of the umbilical cord to the placenta.

**Delayed Umbilical Cord Separation**

Normal separation of the umbilical cord can occur anytime after delivery with no reliable, constant timeline. However, generally speaking, separation of the umbilical cord is considered delayed if it happens later than the first three weeks after delivery. There are many factors and pathological conditions associated with the incidence of delayed cord separation. For instance, the topical application of antibiotics, alcohol, and triple dye after delivery has a significant contribution to delayed cord separation. Moreover, pathological conditions such as; infections, immune disorders, and the presence of urachal remnants can also delay umbilical cord separation. Interestingly, researchers found a correlation between each low birth weight, cesarian delivery, and prematurity and the increased risk of delayed umbilical cord separation. It is clinically significant to consider further workup in newborns with delayed umbilical cord separation and skin infections or those with persistent urachal remnants. These infants most likely have an underlying immunologic disorder.

**Umbilical Cysts**

Cysts classify into two main categories: true cysts and pseudocysts. They usually occur near or around the insertion of the cord into the fetal umbilicus. Umbilical cord cysts generally develop during the first trimester with a standard resolution by the end of the twelfth week of gestation. Umbilical cysts have an incidence of 3.4% of all pregnancies. The exact etiology of umbilical cysts is not defined clinically. However, they appear to be closely related to chromosomal abnormalities, including trisomies of chromosomes 13 and 18, imperforate anus, and angiomyxoma of the cord.

On the contrary, true cysts of the umbilical cord develop commonly from the omphalomesenteric duct or other primitive embryonic structures, including the allantois. True cysts have a distinct epithelial lining; hence they are known as true cysts.

**Umbilical Granuloma**

An umbilical granuloma is a red nodule that may develop after the umbilical cord has separated from the naval of a newborn. On average, the diameter of a granuloma is about five mm.