Informed consent must be obtained from the patient before laceration repair commences. The consent process must include a discussion of shared goals and expectations for the procedure, particularly if it is to be performed under local anesthesia, immediate postoperative period, and long-term recovery. Wound care instructions should be provided in written format and reviewed verbally, ideally before and after the repair, with the patient and a caregiver or escort. Modifiable and non-modifiable risk factors for poor wound healing should be discussed. Patients who are immunocompromised, chronically ill, or malnourished are predisposed to poor wound healing. Additionally, tobacco use or inadequate diabetes management can complicate wound healing. Preoperative counseling represents an opportunity to encourage patients to consider smoking cessation or improved glucose control to improve outcomes.

A comprehensive medical history should be obtained, and a thorough physical examination should be conducted. In addition, other concomitant injuries should be identified, evaluated, or ruled out. Finally, photographs should be taken before and after laceration repair for medical documentation and potential legal purposes. These photographs also allow the patient, in the future, to look back at the injury and appreciate the fact that even if there is scarring and asymmetry in the long term, the repaired state typically appears and functions substantially better than the acutely injured state.

Additionally, limitations to patient participation in follow-up should be assessed. Patients with limited access to care or lacking reliable means to return to the clinic should have dissolvable sutures placed rather than non-dissolvable sutures that require removal.

Optimal laceration repair requires appropriate instrumentation and adequate lighting. Evaluation of the wound and associated injuries will determine if a bedside repair under local anesthesia or repair in the operating room under general anesthesia is preferable. Sensory and motor function must be evaluated before injecting local anesthetic to document baseline function and ensure that postoperative nerve deficits are only considered iatrogenic if they genuinely are.

Additionally, the need for any infection prophylaxis should be determined before beginning the repair. For example, bite wounds require prophylactic antibiotics and may require rabies vaccination. Amoxicillin-clavulanate is recommended for dog, cat, and human bites; other agents may be administered if patients are allergic to penicillins. In addition, tetanus toxoid injections, such as Td or TDaP, or human tetanus immunoglobulin may be required.

Regardless of the mechanism of injury, the wound should be thoroughly irrigated and any foreign debris removed. If the wounds are deeper than they are wide, as in puncture wounds, especially from animal bites, or the laceration occurred more than 24 hours before patient presentation, the wound should be irrigated, foreign bodies removed, and any infection prophylaxis provided. The wounds should undergo reassessment, and a decision should be made whether to close them in a delayed fashion or allow them to heal by secondary intention.