**Markings**

The upper eyelid skin crease should be marked either where it is or where the desired skin crease should be. It should be remembered that the final skin crease often ends up higher than the marked skin crease. Symmetry is important. The degree of skin excision is variable and is marked with a lateral raise in the incision. The amount of orbicularis muscle resection again has to be determined based upon numerous factors and the same applies to fat removal. More conservative blepharoplasty with tissue preservation (fat and muscle) has become more popular to retain or recreate normal periorbital fullness.

The medial extent of the markings are no more medial than the punctum, and the lateral markings are kept within the lateral orbital rim. A medial “W” plasty may be necessary if there is a more profound degree of skin removal necessary. The degree of skin removal will be judged depending upon the position of the brow and with consideration of any brow elevation. Some surgeons mark the amount of skin to be removed by pinching the skin with the patient lying down. This can be a useful technique to ensure that not too much skin is removed. We generally prefer to mark the removal of the skin with the patient sitting up. Adjustment can then be made during the surgery. Certainly, at least 10 mm should be left between the upper incision and the inferior border of the brow. The normal distance between the lid margin and the inferior border of the brow is more than 25 mm in the unoperated adult face. Although guidelines have been given (leave at least 20 mm between the upper lid margin and the inferior border of the brow, for example), we find that this amount varies and depends upon numerous factors, including whether a concurrent brow repositioning is being performed, history of prior surgery, orbicularis strength, Bell’s phenomenon, any underlying eye dryness, among others.

The shape of the excision is such that more tissue is resected laterally with the maximal resection being at the lateral canthus. Modifications in the incision designs have been made with even more tissue being removed laterally in some patients with brow ptosis where no brow elevation is being performed but the temporal hooding needs to be improved. Surgeons have shown acceptable results using this technique.

**Volume Augmentation**

Attention, of late, has quite correctly turned to volume augmentation rather than just subtractive surgery.

**Anesthesia**

Upper blepharoplasty may be performed with straight local anesthesia or under conscious sedation. Local anesthesia injection with lidocaine and epinephrine subcutaneously with care being taken not to inject too deeply so the levator muscle is not affected. Patients may move suddenly when injections are being performed. Therefore, steadying the head and injecting with the needle pointing away from the globe are two techniques that can help prevent this. We usually inject 1.5 mL per side and top up the anesthetic through the procedure. Most patients will need additional injections when operating upon the medial fat pad and along the incision lines when closing the wounds.

**Incisions**

Incisions may be made with a 15 Bard-Parker blade, an electrocautery, a CO2 laser or a radiofrequency needle.

**Removal of Orbicularis**

Stretching of the skin can cause some degree of redundancy of the orbicularis oculi muscle but care must be taken to remove conservative amounts of orbicularis muscle. Pretarsal orbicularis must always be preserved. A variable amount of orbicularis over the preseptal region is removed, depending upon the patient’s age, the degree of redundancy and whether any brow lifting is being performed. Removal of a small strip of orbicularis, together with work on the septum and fat (see below) can create a more defined crease.

**The Orbital Septum**

In some cases, the orbital septum may not need to be opened. Simple cautery to the surface of the septum does not give long-term tightening as there is tissue restitution over time. In most cases, the orbital septum is opened and planned fat removal is performed.

**Fat**

Unsatisfactory blepharoplasty results may be seen if the medial fat pad is not adequately debulked.

Closure can be with interrupted 6-0 catgut sutures which allow for a good wound but 6-0 nylon or prolene may also be used.

**Postoperative Care**

We put patients on topical erythromycin eye ointment twice a day to the sutures and use of artificial tears as needed. Most patients do not need prescription analgesics. Anticoagulants are usually recommenced by day 2. We have patients ice their eyelids on-and-off for the first 24 hours and have them sleep with the head up for two nights. Patients may wash/bathe/shower and get their sutures wet in the shower the next day.