Treatment is dependent on the strain, as well as the illness. Care of the patient with an intestinal disease caused by E. coli begins with symptomatic management.

Antibiotics are not recommended as first-line treatment for diarrheal illness caused by E. coli for most patients due to the harmful side effects and association with antibiotic resistance. For patients with severe disease (e.g., more than six stools per day, fever, dehydration necessitating hospitalization, diarrhea lasting more than seven days, or bloody diarrhea), antibiotics may be reasonable. Rifaximin, azithromycin, and ciprofloxacin are currently recommended by the Infectious Diseases Society of America (IDSA) and the International Society of Travel Medicine (ISTM) to treat E. coli diarrheal illness. For patients suspected of having EHEC/STEC, antibiotics are not recommended, especially in children and older adults, due to the increased risk of hemolytic uremic syndrome.

**Summary of Treatment**

**Watery Diarrhea**

- Rehydration

- Oral fluids, if tolerated
- IV fluids if oral fluids not tolerated

- Antimotility agents

- Bismuth salicylate

- Adults: 524 mg every 30 min for up to 8 doses
- Children

- 12-18 years: 524 mg every 30 min up to 8 doses
- <12 years: limited data available




- Loperamide:

- 4 mg, then 2 mg following each unformed stool.
- Max dose 16 mg per day (prescription), 8 mg (OTC).
- Duration: no more than two days
- Children: Not recommended for infectious diarrhea

- Antibiotics

- May be prescribed when >2 unformed stools per day
- Adults

- Fluoroquinolones

- Ciprofloxacin: 750 mg once; or 500 mg BID for three days
- Levofloxacin: 500 mg once; or 500 mg daily for three days


- Azithromycin: 1,000 mg once; or 500 mg daily for three days
- Rifaximin: 400 mg BID or 200 mg TID for three days


- Children

- Azithromycin: 10 mg/kg on day 1, 5 mg/kg on days 2 and 3

**Bloody Diarrhea**

- Rehydration

- Oral fluids, if tolerated
- IV fluids if oral fluids not tolerated or clinically indicated

- Antimotility agents

- Not recommended for patients with dysentery as these may prolong illness

- Antibiotics

- Not recommended for patients with presumed EHEC/STEC
- Adults

- Fluoroquinolones

- Ciprofloxacin: 750 mg once; or 500 mg BID for three days
- Levofloxacin: 500 mg once; or 500 mg daily for three days


- Azithromycin: 1,000 mg once; or 500 mg daily for three days
- Rifaximin: 400 mg BID or 200 mg TID for three days


- Children

- Azithromycin: 10 mg/kg on day 1, 5 mg/kg on days 2 and 3

**EHEC/STEC**

Patients identified as having EHEC/STEC, particularly children less than 12 years of age, should be hospitalized. Hospitalization reduces the risk of community spread and allows for aggressive therapy and close monitoring.

**Extraintestinal Illness**

Antimicrobial therapy directed against E. coli should be based on local antibiograms demonstrating susceptibility and resistance patterns. Choosing between oral and intravenous formulations is disease-specific and should be guided by clinical presentation. In general, extraintestinal infections caused by E. coli are susceptible to a variety of antibiotics, as listed below. E. coli can harbor genes for antibiotic resistance, and antibiotic therapy targeting these organisms must be tailored.

- Antibiotics suitable for E. coli infections

- Beta-lactam antibiotics

- Cephalosporins
- Carbapenems
- Monobactams


- Nitrofurantoin
- Trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole
- Fosfomycin
- Fluoroquinolones

- ESBL-producing E. coli (Antibiotic choice is dependent on local resistance patterns)

- Cefepime
- Ceftazidime
- Imipenem
- Ertapenem
- Meropenem

- Carbapenemase-producing E. coli

- Ceftazidime-avibactam
- Colistin
- Polymyxin B