Treat underlying cirrhotic comorbidities.

Hepatic encephalopathy and infection often complicate variceal bleeding.

Active bleeding:

- Intravenous (IV) access, hemodynamic resuscitation

- Overtransfusion increases portal pressure and increases rebleeding risk

- Treat coagulopathy as necessary. Fresh frozen plasma may increase blood volume and increase rebleeding risk

- Monitor mental status. Avoid sedation, nephrotoxic drugs, and beta-blockers acutely.

- IV octreotide to lower portal venous pressure as adjuvant to endoscopic management. IV bolus of 50 micrograms followed by a drip of 50 micrograms/hr.

- Terlipressin (alternative): 2 mg q4h IV for 24 to 48 hours, then 1 mg q4h

- Erythromycin 250 mg IV 30 to 120 minutes before endoscopy

- Urgent upper GI endoscopy for diagnosis and treatment

- If no contraindication, start beta-blocker (nitrates are an alternative)

Variceal band ligation is preferred to sclerotherapy for bleeding varices and for nonbleeding medium-to-large varices to decrease bleeding risk. Ligation has lower rates of rebleeding, fewer complications, more rapid cessation of bleeding and a higher rate of variceal eradication.

Repeat ligation/sclerosant for rebleeding.

If endoscopic treatment fails, consider self-expanding esophageal metal stents or peroral placement of Sengstaken-Blakemore-type tube up to 24 hours to stabilize the patient for TIPS.

As many as two-thirds of patients with variceal bleeding develop an infection, most commonly spontaneous bacterial peritonitis, UTI, or pneumonia. Antibiotic prophylaxis with oral norfloxacin 400 mg or IV ceftriaxone, 1 g q24h for up to a week, is indicated.

With active bleeding, avoid beta-blockers, which decrease blood pressure and blunt the physiologic increase in heart rate during acute hemorrhage.

Prevent recurrence of acute bleeding:

- Vasoconstrictors: terlipressin, octreotide (reduce portal pressure)

- Endoscopic band ligation (EBL): if bleeding recurs/portal pressure measurement shows portal pressure remains greater than 12 mmHg

- TIPS: Second-line therapy if the above methods fail; TIPS decreases portal pressure by creating communication between hepatic vein and an intrahepatic portal vein branch.

**Medications**

**First-Line**

- NSBB reduce portal pressure and decrease the risk of the first bleed from 25% to 15% in primary prophylaxis

- Carvedilol: 6.25 mg daily is more effective than NSBB (Propranolol and Nadolol) in dropping HVPG

- Chronic prevention of rebleeding (secondary prevention): NSBBs and EBL reduce the rate of rebleeding to a similar extent, but beta-blockers reduce mortality, whereas ligation does not.

**Second-Line**

- Obliterate varices with esophageal banding for patients not tolerant of medication prophylaxis.

- During ligation, proton pump inhibitors are used, such as lansoprazole 30 mg/day, until varices are obliterated.

- Management of Budd-Chiari syndrome: anticoagulation, angioplasty/thrombolysis, TIPS, and orthotopic liver transplantation

- Management of extrahepatic portal vein obstruction: anticoagulation; mesenteric-left portal vein bypass (Meso-Rex procedure).

Refer for endoscopy, liver transplant, and interventional radiology for TIPS.

Pneumococcal and hepatitis A/B (HAV/HBV) vaccine need to be considered.

**Surgery/Other Procedure**

- Esophageal transection: in rare cases of uncontrollable, exsanguinating bleeding

- Liver transplantation

- Portosystemic shunt

- Inpatient admission to the intensive care unit to stabilize acute bleeding and hemodynamic status, therapeutic endoscopy.

- Discharge criteria: bleeding cessation; hemodynamic stability and appropriate plan for treating comorbidities.

Radiology

Percutaneous transhepatic embolization has been used to stop variceal bleeding. However, its effectiveness remains questionable. It is generally reserved for patients who are not candidates for surgery.

TIPS is a salvage procedure to stop acute variceal bleeding. However, the procedure is also associated with serious complications including encephalopathy and occlusion of the shunt within 12 months. TIPS may be a bridge to a liver transplant.