Surgeons operating on the lumbosacral joint have several approaches from which to choose and must consider the goals of the procedure versus the risks of complications and contraindications to specific approaches. Approaches to access the lumbar spine include posterior, transforaminal, minimally invasive transforaminal, lateral, oblique, and anterior approaches. Some approaches are preferable for certain lumbar fusion levels over others. Additionally, successful fusion rates associated with restoration of disc height, segmental lordosis, and total lumbar lordosis vary with the approach. Risks of complications such as dural injury, blood vessel injury, or muscular injury also differ.

Surgeons operating in proximity to the pelvis must consider numerous potential anatomic surgical or postoperative complications. The surgeon must consider the anatomy of the gastrointestinal tract, urinary tract, nerves, blood vessels, and reproductive organs, particularly in females. Additionally, considerations regarding risks of infection, hemorrhage, and thromboembolism are critical. The risk of these complications depends upon the surgical approach and co-morbidities of the individual patient.

Serious urinary tract complications may occur, and the ureters are most often involved. There are several important locations along the course of the ureter to be considered: (1) pelvic brim, (2) base of the broad ligament, and (3) ureterovesical junction. What is possibly most important to the orthopedic or trauma surgeon operating on the pelvis or its related joints is the ureter at the pelvic brim. At this location, the ureter courses over the external iliac artery and accompanying vein approximately 1 cm lateral to the origin of the hypogastric artery. The hypogastric artery may be the single most crucial vessel to identify and avoid mistaking for the ureter.

Anatomical complications involving the small and large intestines or appendix are usually incidental. However, intestinal involvement in neoplasm, pelvic inflammatory disease, endometriosis, or congenital anomalies increases the risk. Often the bowel is prepared pre-operatively in anticipation of these potential complications.