The majority of patients with viral conjunctivitis are first managed by the primary care giver, pediatrician or nurse practitioner. Even though viral conjunctivitis is a benign condition, it is contagious can be easily transmitted to others. The key is patient education.

Patients need to be educated that the condition is harmless and will resolve spontaneously. Hand washing should be emphasized since the infection is highly contagious. Parents and teachers should be educated on the importance of isolation in school to prevent epidemics. All patients with viral conjunctivitis who wear contact lenses should be told to refrain from wearing them until the symptoms have subsided.

The emergency department should have a special room for patients presenting with conjunctivitis to prevent spread to other patients. signs should be placed on the doors about not shaking hands and washing hands at every opportunity. Once the patient has been seen, he or she must be individually escorted out of the clinic to avoid contact with other patients. Many lawsuits have resulted in the past after patients in the emergency room acquired conjunctivitis from infected individuals, sitting in the same location.

While long-term sequelae are rare, chronic viral conjunctivitis can lead to a poor quality of life. Most cases take 1-4 weeks to recover without treatment. The morbidity is rare but can include corneal ulceration and punctate keratitis.  Follow up with an ophthalmologist is recommended to ensure that no complications have occurred.