In general, the decision to treat tics or coprolalia depends on the level of impairment and how much distress it may cause to the child, and requires the cooperation of the family. After education about the condition peer-reviewed, sometimes, the decision may be to monitor it clinically, without the need for active intervention, which can be non-pharmacological or pharmacological.

**Non-Pharmacologic Intervention**

Behavioral therapy has demonstrated success in helping the patient manage their compulsive behaviors and is thought to help patients with coprolalia.

The treatment with the most robust empirical support that exists is habit reversal therapy (HRT), in which the patient can learn to recognize the signs that the urge is coming and become aware of it, as well as creating a response to these signs or the tic. Other behavioral treatments that have been found efficacious in clinical trials include comprehensive behavioral intervention for tics (CBIT), and exposure-response prevention (ERP).

**Pharmacologic Interventions**

The pharmacologic treatment of coprolalia in itself is rarely addressed directly in the literature. It is almost always found together with the treatment of tics (whether motor or phonatory), obsessive-compulsive disorder, impulsivity, and other conditions, including Tourette syndrome.

- Pimozide was found to decrease symptoms by 90% after one year of treatment in a series of 34 patients in which 50% had coprolalia, but coprolalia per se was not the addressed symptom.

- Haloperidol was found to provide 79% improvement of symptoms when talking about tic frequency, but non-specific to coprolalia.

- In these two medications, the side effects (e.g., extrapyramidal symptoms) have put a limit to their use as 1st-line treatment.

- Clonidine and clomipramine have been found to affect behavioral symptoms but again without specifically mentioning coprolalia.

- Risperidone, and more recently, aripiprazole, is often chosen before other agents because of a safer profile and fewer side-effect. They have been approved by the Food and Drug Administration (FDA) for the treatment of tics.

- In the cases of comorbid OCD, anxiety, or depressive disorders, it appears that children with tic disorders could benefit from selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors (SSRIs).

- There have been attempts made with botulinum toxin injections in the vocal cords, but the benefits remain unclear.