The management is supportive and should include hydration, suction of the upper airway and close monitoring for signs of respiratory failure and the need for intubation and mechanical ventilation. Hypertonic saline nebulizations have been helpful. Supplemental oxygen is not routinely used unless the oxygen saturations are consistently less than 90%. Continuous pulse oximetry is not recommended either since it might increase the length of stay. Antipyretics are indicated if fever develops. Bronchodilators do not shorten the days of symptoms, admission rates or length of stay. As a result, trials are no longer recommended. Systemic steroids and racemic epinephrine are also not recommended. Antibiotics should only be used if there is a superimposed infection present in addition to the bronchiolitis.

When patients test positive for influenza A they can be managed with oseltamivir especially if administered within 2 days of the onset of illness. When this antiviral medication is given to patients at the start of the illness, it increases its effectiveness and improves the course of illness.

Palivizumab prophylaxis was developed in an effort to prevent bronchiolitis caused by RSV in patients that were identified to be particularly vulnerable.  There are strict criteria outlined by the American Academy of Pediatrics (AAP) for identifying those patients that are eligible to receive palivizumab.  These patients include infants born before 29 weeks who are younger than 12 months at the start of the RSV season, patients who are less than 32 weeks gestation who have chronic lung disease, hemodynamically significant congenital heart disease who are less than 12-months old, children that are 12 months or younger with anatomic pulmonary disorders and neuromuscular disorders that inhibit their airway clearance, patients that are 12 months and younger that are immunocompromised, and patients with other comorbid genetic diseases who also have the conditions mentioned should also be considered for prophylaxis