Earlier diagnosis of KS (often in utero) has permitted earlier developmental evaluation and intervention services to assist with neuropsychological development. Speech-language delays and motor skills delays are present in 50% to 75% of cases; therefore, proactive measures to screen for and address these delays are recommended. Speech delays that are not addressed may limit self-expression, impact tolerance for frustration, and contribute to behavioral issues. In addition, Hypotonia with hypermobility, pes planus, and genu valgum can affect motor development, including handwriting and self-care; therefore, physical, occupational therapy, and adaptive treatments such as orthotics may be needed.

Supplemental testosterone treatment under the supervision of a pediatric endocrinologist may prevent some of the physical manifestations of the "classic KS phenotype." Hypogonadism in KS may start early in the fetus. It plays a role in underdeveloped genitalia, cryptorchidism, reduced germ-cell number, small testicular size, and blunted "mini-puberty" of infancy. Some providers give supplemental testosterone during the first few months of life for treatment of microphallus, though limited retrospective data suggests possible cognitive and behavioral benefits; prospective studies are ongoing.

In adolescence, most boys with KS will enter puberty normally, and endogenous testosterone usually supports virilization with penile enlargement and pubic hair development. However, these individuals may not have as much facial or body hair as expected. Supplemental testosterone may help minimize gynecomastia that often develops during adolescence. Other treatments for gynecomastia either have not been effective (aromatase inhibitors), have limited published data in KS (tamoxifen), or are invasive (surgery) and are at risk of recurrence. To be properly educated about these issues, to build rapport, and to outline future monitoring and treatment plans, boys and their parents should establish care with a pediatric endocrinologist around the onset of puberty. The age at which to start androgen replacement is not standard and should be individualized. It may start at the time of pubertal onset or be delayed until there is clear evidence of hypogonadism which may be late adolescence or early adulthood. Guidelines for hormone replacement for men with hypogonadism are available from the Endocrine Society.

Advanced reproductive technology such as testicular sperm extraction (micro-TESE) has been successful in allowing up to half of the men with KS deemed "infertile" to have an opportunity to have a biological child. Small pockets of gonadal tissue producing sperm may be identified, extracted, and then injected by intracytoplasmic sperm injection into an ovum for fertilization.

Long-term, men with KS are more likely to develop disorders related to insulin resistance such as type-2 diabetes, dyslipidemia, fatty liver disease, peripheral vascular disease, and thromboembolic disease. Careful screening and aggressive preventive measures are recommended. Bone mineral density may also be negatively affected, likely related to hypogonadism, so attention to bone health is important. Some studies have documented higher rates of autoimmune disorders.