# Continuing Education Activity

Selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors (SSRIs) are commonly prescribed antidepressants. Other clinical indications for SSRI use include anxiety disorders, obsessive-compulsive disorder, panic disorders, and eating disorders. Compared to their predecessors, the monoamine oxidase inhibitors and tricyclic antidepressants, SSRIs are associated with fewer toxic effects. This activity describes the uses, mode of action and adverse effects of SSRIs and highlights the role of the interprofessional team in the management of these patients.

**Objectives:**
- Identify the mode of action of the SSRIs.
- Review the toxic effects of SSRIs.
- Summarize the treatment options of SSRI toxicity.
- Outline interprofessional team strategies for improving care coordination and outcomes in patients with SSRI toxicity.

# Introduction

Selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors (SSRIs) are commonly prescribed antidepressants. Other clinical indications for SSRI use include anxiety disorders, obsessive-compulsive disorder, panic disorders, and eating disorders. Compared to their predecessors, the monoamine oxidase inhibitors and tricyclic antidepressants, SSRIs are associated with fewer toxic effects.

Individual SSRIs differ from each other regarding structure and pharmacokinetics but, as a group, they act by potentiating the action of serotonin. SSRIs are less cardiotoxic than many first-generation antidepressants, but there is still evidence that they inhibit sodium, calcium, and potassium ion channels at concentrations near therapeutic levels.

Adverse effects of SSRIs are vague and nonspecific but include hyponatremia, anorgasmia, sedation, stimulation, and gastric irritation.

Patients with adverse effects from SSRIs will present with a range of symptoms, and some researchers have advocated for the term “serotonin toxicity” rather than “serotonin syndrome” to highlight that this condition is a spectrum of symptoms rather than a single clinical entity.

# Etiology

Serotonin toxicity is the most serious drug reaction from inadvertent or intentional SSRI overdose and can be iatrogenic, caused by the introduction of a serotonergic agent, increased dosing of an established serotonergic agent or after coadministration with another agent that increases serotonin activity.

Many medications affect serotonin levels by different overlapping mechanisms. In addition to SSRIs, ondansetron, methadone, clomipramine, amitriptyline, dextromethorphan, fentanyl, meperidine, tramadol, trazodone, venlafaxine, and pentazocine increase serotonin levels by blocking reuptake. Medications that can increase serotonin levels by inhibiting serotonin metabolism include linezolid, methylene blue, St. John's wort, or monoamine oxidase inhibitors like phenelzine, selegiline, and isocarboxazid. Methylenedioxymethamphetamine (MDMA) and mirtazapine enhance serotonin release. Tryptophan is a serotonin precursor. Cocaine increases serotonin synthesis. Buspirone, fentanyl, dihydroergotamine, lithium, lysergic acid diethylamide (LSD), metoclopramide and triptans stimulate serotonin receptors.

# Epidemiology

The American Association of Poison Control Centers reported over 50,000 overdose cases in 2016 where SSRIs were mentioned; of these reported cases, 102 were fatal, but in all but one of these fatalities co-ingestants were involved.

# History and Physical

Serotonin toxicity is a clinical diagnosis initially defined by the Sternbach criteria. Generally, these symptoms include neuromuscular excitation, autonomic stimulation and altered level of consciousness. The presence of generalized clonus indicates serotonin toxicity.

Due to the nonspecific nature of the Sternbach criteria, the Hunt serotonin toxicity criteria were developed. The Hunt serotonin toxicity criteria decision rule describes 5 constellations of symptoms that define serotonin toxicity

- Spontaneous clonus

- Inducible clonus and agitation or diaphoresis

- Ocular clonus with agitation or diaphoresis

- Tremor and hyperreflexia

- Ocular clonus, hypertonicity, and temperature greater than 38 C

Besides signs and symptoms, a history suggestive of serotonin exposure or overdose is required to diagnose serotonin toxicity.

Minor symptoms of serotonin toxicity include vomiting, somnolence, mydriasis, or diaphoresis. Someone can see severe symptoms (decreased level of consciousness, ECG changes, and seizures with overdoses greater than 75 times the recommended daily dose.

# Evaluation

Initial evaluation and treatment of a patient with serotonin toxicity are similar to any overdose, altered mental status, or poisoning patient with the establishment of intravenous access, initiation of cardiac monitoring, stabilization of vital signs, and fluid resuscitation. Diagnosis of serotonin toxicity is not only clinical but also a diagnosis of exclusion, therefore, even though diagnosis does not rely on any specific laboratory value, thorough testing to rule out other causes of altered mental status is essential.

# Treatment / Management

Nelson et al.

Treatment is largely supportive and involves discontinuation of all serotonergic therapies, control of agitation with benzodiazepines and defervescence.

In severe cases of serotonin toxicity where patients required endotracheal intubation and ventilatory support, hypertonicity, rigidity, and high-grade fever were evident.

Muscular rigidity is thought to be the primary cause of hyperthermia and death so patients with severe symptoms should be rapidly cooled. If benzodiazepines do not sufficiently control muscle spasm or temperature is greater than 41.1 C, intubation with neuromuscular blockade and paralysis can be considered.

# Differential Diagnosis

Serotonin toxicity should not be confused with the neuroleptic malignant syndrome (NMS) which usually has an insidious onset of bradykinesia, "lead pipe" rigidity and other extrapyramidal symptoms.

# Prognosis

Prognosis is good, and full recovery is expected.

Patients with severe symptoms should be dispositioned to the intensive care unit.

# Enhancing Healthcare Team Outcomes

SSRIs are prescribed by many healthcare workers including the primary care provider, psychiatrist, pain specialist, and the nurse practitioner. Unlike their predecessors, the monoamine oxidase inhibitors and tricyclic antidepressants, SSRIs are much safer in overdose.

Clear, closed-loop communication between pre-hospital, regional poison control center, emergency department, and intensive care staff is essential to make sure that patients prescribed SSRI receive the appropriate level of care while safely allocating resources.