When permitted, evaluation of headaches in the emergency department should begin with a thorough history and physical exam. Most headaches can be attributed to primary benign headache subtypes deduced through the primary survey; however, sometimes, further evaluation will be warranted.

**Laboratory Studies**

Routine laboratory testing is typically not helpful in headache diagnosis. However, if a life-threatening cause of headache is suspected, specific tests may be helpful. Female patients with headaches and elevated blood pressure should be screened for pregnancy. Patients with headaches, altered mental status, or focal neurologic deficits require a serum glucose level. A carboxyhemoglobin level should be obtained if there is suspicion of carbon monoxide poisoning.

If there is suspicion of giant cell arteritis (GCA), erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR) and C-reactive protein (CRP) should be obtained. However, if normal and suspicion remain high, patients should be treated for GCA pending temporal artery biopsy results.

Coagulation studies may be abnormal in patients with suspected cerebral venous thrombosis (CVT). D-dimer may be useful to exclude CVT in low-risk patients (defined as patients with a normal neurologic exam, normal head CT, and absence of risk factors such as current or recent pregnancy), but high-risk patients should proceed to MRV regardless of level.

Abnormalities in white blood cell (WBC) levels are associated with infective or inflammatory etiologies but are non-specific.

**Radiographic Imaging**

The 2019 ACEP clinical policy on headache recommends neuro-imaging in patients with headaches and any new neurologic deficits, new and sudden-onset severe headaches, HIV-positive patients with a new type of headache, and patients greater than 50 with a new headache. This policy is helpful but does not include every scenario where imaging is warranted. Generally, the positive predictive value of pathology on neuroimaging increases with specific parameters.

- Age greater than 50

- Recent head trauma

- Altered mental status

- Nausea and vomiting

- Headache is sudden and maximal at onset

- Papilledema

- Immunocompromised state

- Focal neurological deficits

- Headache is worse in the morning or wakes the patient up from sleep.

In the subset of patients suspected of an emergent headache, non-contrast head CT is the screening test of choice. However, alternative and/or additional imaging choices should be directed toward the specific emergent diagnosis in question. For example, cerebral CT angiography (CTA) can be useful in identifying nontraumatic subarachnoid hemorrhage, arterial dissections, dural sinus thrombosis, and posterior circulation pathologies.

Lumbar puncture (LP) and cerebrospinal fluid studies should be considered in some patients with headaches. Indications include fever with altered mental status, meningeal signs, focal neurological deficits, and a history of HIV or another immunocompromised state. Additionally, LP is indicated in a patient whose history and physical exam are suspicious for idiopathic intracranial hypertension, as elevated opening pressure would be diagnostic. Of note, CT is estimated to be negative in up to 5% of patients with subarachnoid hemorrhage; thus, CSF examination for red blood cells or xanthochromia can be useful if the index of suspicion for hemorrhage is high.

More recent studies have suggested that in patients who arrive within 6 hours of headache onset, CT (without LP) is sufficient to rule out subarachnoid hemorrhage.

Often clinicians will pursue these modalities to avoid missing potentially fatal or debilitating conditions. It is not uncommon for these exams to reveal no abnormalities. Clinicians should use these modalities as tools, along with clinical judgment, to decide if the patient should be further observed and examined or if the next step is to follow up with primary care for possible primary headache syndromes.