The relative safety of folic acid allows healthcare providers to administer it to patients with little concern for adverse effects. However, specific best practice techniques should be kept in mind to ensure positive outcomes. To increase folate levels, the primary care provider should counsel patients to consume a healthy diet, including vegetables, eggs, and milk. Dietary teams can consult on the case to ensure inpatients receive appropriate food selection to enhance folate delivery. Pregnant women should be made aware of folate deficiency risks and take supplements. Healthcare providers should refer to the American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists for prepregnancy counseling for women of childbearing age and recommend folic acid supplements based on the patient's health condition. All these practitioners comprise the interprofessional healthcare team.

In contrast, pregnant women should be prescribed antiepileptic drugs for only epilepsy in the smallest dose possible to prevent low folic acid level complications. Nurses and pharmacists can alert clinicians that anti-epilepsy medications are on the pregnant patient's list of medicines if no dosage changes start immediately. The source of macrocytic megaloblastic anemia must be determined before supplement administration begins, as folate and vitamin B12 deficiency can both present similarly in patients. Therefore, healthcare providers should consider verifying the vitamin B12 level of the patients to optimize treatment plans and improve patient outcomes when prescribing folic acid. As depicted above, all MDs, NPs, PAs, pharmacists, and dieticians should work collaboratively as an interprofessional team and communicate when dealing with patients that can benefit from folic acid supplementation.