Hyperbaric Oxygen Therapy subjects a patient to 100% oxygen at increased pressures; typically between 2-3 ata, although some conditions may require higher pressures.  The mechanism of action of hyperbaric therapy has been extensively studied, and includes the gas laws described above.

It is essential to understand the 14 conditions that are approved for hyperbaric medical therapy because many conditions rely on different aspects of hyperbaric medicine to be effective. The currently approved conditions include:

- Decompression sickness

- Air, gas embolism

- Carbon monoxide poisoning

- Crush injury, compartment syndrome

- Selective cases for wound healing

- Acute blood loss anemia

- Intracranial abscess

- Refractory osteomyelitis

- Delayed radiation injury, radiation bone necrosis

- Compromised flaps and skin grafts

- Thermal burns

- Necrotizing fasciitis

- Gas gangrene

- Idiopathic sudden sensorineural hearing loss

The complete explanation of the functions of hyperbaric medicine is complex. The Primary effect of HBOT is due to the increased ambient pressure itself.

- It decreases the size of gas bubbles in liquid (blood) and/or enhances the return of gas into solution. As per Boyle’s law, the volume of gas within a bubble will decrease under pressure, and per Henry’s law, more gas will be dissolved in solution under higher pressures. This is the basis for using hyperbaric medicine in the treatment of DCS and AGE where the treatment goal is to prevent the formation of further nitrogen bubbles, or to cause them to decrease in size and return into solution.

- Produces favourable gradients: by breathing 100% oxygen under pressure, favourable gradients enhance off-gassing of unwanted gas while promoting the diffusion of oxygen from an oxygen-rich environment (lungs) to an oxygen-poor environment (hypoxic tissues). This plays roles in AGE, DCS, CO poisoning, as well as ischemic conditions.

- It increases the oxygen-carrying capacity of blood by increasing the oxygen concentration of the plasma. As per Henry’s law, more gas will be dissolved in solution under higher pressures; this describes the effect of delivering more oxygen to tissues with HBOT. At rest, tissues need approximately 60mL/L of oxygen. At 1 ata, plasma oxygen levels are approximately 3ml/L, however, with HBOT at 3 ata this will increase to 60mL/L. This is in addition the oxygen-carrying capacity of the hemoglobin present. HBOT will promote further diffusion of oxygen in tissues across a distance of approximately four times the normal perfusion distance. This is vital for the treatment of numerous conditions including select wounds, burns, CO poisoning, acute anemia, and ischemia.