Patients tolerate most mesalamine (5-ASA) formulations well. However, adverse effects may include nausea, GI upset, abdominal pain, headaches, nasopharyngitis, rash, arthralgias, agranulocytosis, aplastic anemia, myalgias, bone marrow suppression, oligospermia, hematuria, and cholestatic hepatitis. Renal impairment, including interstitial nephritis, nephrotic syndrome, and renal failure, can be seen and must be carefully monitored before initiating treatment and during treatment for these reasons.

Hypersensitivity reactions are also common, and there have been reports of pericarditis, myocarditis, hepatitis, nephritis, pneumonitis, and hematology-associated reactions. Patients may also be intolerant to mesalamine, which causes symptoms such as cramping, headache, fever, malaise, pruritis, rash, and abdominal pain. Treatment must discontinue if such issues occur.

**Drug Interactions**

- Antacids: May disrupt the pH-dependent formulations of mesalamine. This condition can result in the premature release and a decrease in the therapeutic effect of mesalamine.

- Heparin: 5-ASA can enhance the pharmacologic effects of heparin and can subsequently increase the risk of bleeding or bruising.

- Cardiac glycosides: 5-ASA may decrease the concentration of cardiac glycosides in the blood.

- Myelosuppressive agents (e.g., mercaptopurine): Increase bone marrow suppression risk.

- H2 receptor blocker: May increase gastrointestinal pH and cause premature release of mesalamine, and decrease its therapeutic effect.

- NSAIDs: Increases the risk of nephrotoxicity.

- Thiopurine analogs (e.g., mercaptopurine): Interaction with 5-ASA may decrease the metabolism of thiopurine analogs.

- Proton pump inhibitors: May increase gastrointestinal pH and cause premature release of mesalamine, and decrease the therapeutic effect.

- Varicella vaccine: Increases risk of Reye syndrome and may enhance the toxic effects of these vaccines.