There are several techniques for performing a brachioplasty, specifically concerning scar placement and the extent of tissue resection. The patient is positioned supine, with the arms abducted and elbow flexed to 90 degrees. Pressure points are protected with gel pads, and SCDs are placed on calves to mitigate the risk of VTE.

Patient exposure is limited to the arms, axilla, and lateral chest, and the patient is warmed during the operation. A single dose of amoxicillin-clavulanate (or similar medication per local protocol) at least 30 minutes before skin incision is often routine antibiotic prophylaxis. No further antibiotic prophylaxis is employed unless the procedure is prolonged beyond 4 hours or there is >10% volume of blood loss.

The preferred approach is to assess and offer excision site liposuction before proceeding with a brachioplasty. The scar can be placed medially in the bicipital groove with cross-hatch marks to guide accurate wound closure later; this is the conventional approach. Surgeons have employed different scar designs when performing brachioplasty, including straight, "W," "S," "L" shapes, and a Z-plasty in the axilla to mitigate skin contracture.

A short-scar brachioplasty, where the incision is limited to the axilla, has also been reported. For the limited scar, or minimally invasive brachioplasty (MIB), the patients selected should have skin ptosis of < 12 cm from the mid-humerus to the most dependent part of the hanging skin with arms abducted. Reed reported a 12% revision rate utilizing this technique in a series of 1,200 patients at one year, with scar revision being the most common revision procedure required.

Other authors prefer a posterior incision brachioplasty, such that the scar sits in the brachial sulcus; some authors prefer this because the scar is less perceptible anteriorly with arms abducted, although it can be seen posteriorly with arms adducted (at rest).

Following the skin incision, the subcutaneous fat resection is limited to the superficial fat, leaving a layer of fat over the brachial fascia of the arm.

The same approach using tailor tacking can be employed to determine the extent of skin resection. Following hemostasis, meticulous wound closure is performed in layers. The superficial fascial system layers along each wound edge are approximated by the inclusion of the floor of the brachial fascia in a 3-point closure technique.

Multimodal analgesia in the form of local anesthetic in the wound site during infiltration before liposuction and postoperative oral analgesia (paracetamol, codeine, or equivalent) is recommended.

Postoperatively, patients are discouraged from any strenuous activity for a minimum of 2 weeks and refrain from driving for this period. The use of compression garments is recommended for four weeks. Nearly all patients are discharged on the same day and followed up in the clinic in 1 week, and patients are encouraged to wet the wounds as desired, provided there is no evidence of wound dehiscence or infection in the 1st outpatient clinic review.