**Hyponatremia**is the most common initial laboratory finding and can be attributed to low cortisol and aldosterone levels. There is hypersecretion of ADH seen in cortisol deficiency triggers hypersecretion of ADH (due to hypovolemia). There may be enhanced hypothalamic secretion of corticotropin-releasing hormone (CRH), which contributes to ADH hypersecretion. Furthermore, the relative lack of cortisol removes the negative feedback for CRH and ADH production. Loss of aldosterone activity leads to natriuresis and potassium retention, thus further confounding electrolyte abnormalities, including life-threatening hyperkalemia.

**Hypoglycemia**is multifactorial, including decreased oral intake and lack of glucocorticoids, which are needed for gluconeogenesis.

Typically, **low random and stimulated cortisol and aldosterone levels**are seen. A cortisol level less than 18 microgram/dL to 20 microgram/dL is considered diagnostic.

High ACTH level is diagnostic of primary adrenal destruction in the absence of ACTH resistance.

-  Primary adrenal insufficiency: elevated ACTH

-  Central adrenal insufficiency: abnormally normal or low ACTH

Increased plasma renin activity (PRA) can be seen, often late in the course of the disease (due to mineralocorticoid deficiency).

Anti-adrenal antibodies (such as 21-hydroxylase antibodies) serve as the markers of autoimmune destruction of the adrenal gland.

In suspected cases of adrenal hemorrhages, an abdominal CT scan may provide useful information.

A chest radiograph may reveal a small heart.

PPD should be performed to evaluate for tuberculosis.

Plasma very-long-chain fatty acid profile should be checked in cases where adrenal leukodystrophy is suspected based on family history or etiology is unclear after evaluation.