**Ascending Pathways**

The sensory system follows two ascending pathways from the periphery to the central nervous system. Primary somatosensory neurons in both pathways are pseudounipolar. Sensory cell bodies are located in the dorsal root ganglion, with one peripheral axon that receives sensory input and one central axon that travels to the spinal cord.

**1) Spinothalamic Pathway**

The spinothalamic tract (STT) is further divided into the lateral spinothalamic tract, which transmits pain and temperature, and the anterior spinothalamic tract, which transmits touch and pressure. Primary neurons of the STT have a peripheral axon with either A-delta or C-fibers, a cell body in the dorsal root ganglion, and a central axon that enters the ipsilateral spinal cord. The primary synapse in the gray matter of the ipsilateral spinal cord transmits the action potential to a second-order neuron that crosses (decussates) at the anterior white commissure approximately two vertebral levels above the level of the sensory input. The STT ascends along the contralateral spinal cord until synapsing in the thalamus in the ventral posterolateral nucleus (VPL) to a third-order neuron in the sensory cortex.

**2) Dorsal Column Pathway**

The dorsal column medial lemniscus (DCML) pathway transmits pressure, vibration, fine touch, and proprioception. Primary neurons have a peripheral axon with specialized sensory endings such as mechanoreceptors discussed previously, a cell body in the dorsal root ganglion, and a central axon that enters the ipsilateral dorsal columns of the spinal cord and ascends to the brainstem where the action potential is transmitted to a second order neuron in the nucleus cuneatus (for the upper body) or nucleus gracilis (for the lower body) of the medulla. The second-order neuron crosses (decussates) in the medulla and continues to ascend along the contralateral medial lemniscus until synapsing in the thalamus in the VPL to a third-order neuron in the sensory cortex.

**Thalamus**

Although the functions of thalamic nuclei may not be as discrete as previously thought, the general consensus regarding sensory processing holds that sensations other than olfaction are primarily relayed through particular thalamic nuclei. The ventral posterolateral nucleus (VPL) and ventral posteromedial nucleus (VPM) relay bodily sensation, facial sensation, and taste to the parietal lobe's somatosensory cortex. The lateral geniculate nucleus (LGN) relays visual input to the calcarine sulcus. The medial geniculate nucleus (MGN) relays auditory input to the auditory cortex of the temporal lobe.

**Sensory Cortex**

The second-order neurons of both the STT and DCML synapse at the VPL of the thalamus. From the thalamus, third-order neurons from the internal capsule travel to the somatosensory cortex. The somatosensory cortex is in the post-central gyrus of the parietal lobe of the brain and processes sensory input from the contralateral body with a somatotopic organization in which the foot, leg, trunk, forelimbs, and face are sequentially represented from medial to lateral.

The somatosensory cortex is subdivided into Brodmann areas 1, 2, 3a, and 3b with seemingly reciprocal connections. Area 3b is considered the primary somatosensory cortex in which cutaneous tactile stimuli are processed. Area 1 also responds to cutaneous tactile stimuli but is thought to be more specific to texture perception. Area 3a mostly processes proprioception from joint and muscle stretch and potentially heat-induced pain. Area 2 processes deep cutaneous stimuli and proprioception.

**Additional Processing of Pain**

While the somatosensory cortex processes the type, location, and intensity of painful stimuli, painful stimuli also have an affective component (fear and aversion). Pain is also processed through the brainstem parabrachial nucleus and amygdala and transmitted to the cingulate gyrus and insular cortex.