In PNH, most symptoms that the patients experience results due to intravascular hemolysis. On lab work, anemia is a common finding and leads to nonspecific complaints such as fatigue and shortness of breath.

Under normal circumstances, free hemoglobin released by hemolysis is removed by haptoglobin and other clearing mechanisms. However, in PNH, these cleaning mechanism pathways are overburdened resulting in free hemoglobin in the intravascular system. The body tries to compensate by irreversibly binding nitric oxide to produce methemoglobin and nitrate, but this ends up depleting the nitric oxide supply.

Nitric oxide has multiple essential functions, including vasodilation and relaxation of smooth muscle. When nitric oxide is depleted, smooth muscle dystonia can occur. In PNH, dystonia of the gastrointestinal tract is most common. This is why, in PNH, many patients will present with complaints of dysphagia, esophageal spasm, and abdominal pain. Another consequence of depleted nitric oxide is the inability to vasodilate. For instance, nitric oxide plays a role in the vascular dilatation of the corpora cavernosa. As a result, many male patients present with erectile dysfunction.

Nitric oxide depletion may also play a role in producing shortness of breath by promoting pulmonary hypertension, though this is not a common occurrence. Echocardiographic studies have indicated that pulmonary artery pressures are elevated in some patients with PNH.

About 40% of PNH patients experience thrombosis during the course of their disease. Thrombosis is the leading cause of significant morbidity and the most common cause of death in this condition. Venous thromboembolism is more common than arterial thrombosis. Cerebral and intraabdominal venous thrombosis is commonly seen. The hepatic vein is the most common site for thrombosis in PNH patients.

Multiple factors play a role in thrombosis. The GPI anchor protein defect created by a PIGA gene mutation enhances platelet activation and aggregation in addition to causing hemolysis of red cells. Nitric oxide depletion and complement activation also promote thrombosis by enhancing platelet aggregation and inflammatory cytokine release, respectively. Finally, the thrombophilia found in PNH is enhanced by defective fibrinolysis. Deficiency or absence of a GPI anchored protein responsible for plasminogen activation is suspected.