The OCR arc consists of an afferent and efferent limb. The trigeminal nerve, otherwise known as cranial nerve V, serves as the sensory afferent limb. The vagus nerve, known as cranial nerve X, comprises the efferent limb of the OCR. This pathway is initiated by the activation of stretch receptors in the ocular and periorbital tissues. The short and long ciliary nerves conduct impulses that carry the sensory message to the ciliary ganglion. From there the impulses are transported by way of the ophthalmic division of the trigeminal nerve to the Gasserian ganglion, followed by the trigeminal nucleus, where the afferent limb then terminates in the central nervous system (CNS). The CNS processes this sensory information and internuclear communication will occur between the trigeminal sensory nucleus and the visceral motor nucleus of the vagus nerve. This stimulates the efferent limb, causing impulses to exit the brainstem, transmit to the myocardium to synapse as the sinoatrial node, and activate the vagal motor response. The resultant effects include negative chronotropy, leading to bradycardia.

**Risk Factors**

The OCR has been associated with various triggering stimuli with the most common being traction to the extraocular muscles. Multiple studies have reported an increased incidence with medial rectus traction when compared to other ocular muscles. However, there have also been studies reporting no increased association with traction to a specific extraocular muscle.

Additional stimuli that have been linked to triggering the OCR include direct pressure to the globe, ocular manipulation, and ocular pain. Secondary to increased pressure, retrobulbar blocks, ocular hematomas, and facial or orbital trauma may induce activation of the reflex as well. As a fatigable reflex, the OCR’s intensity will decrease with multiple, repeated stimuli.