Tracheostomy can be done via open surgery or percutaneously. Understanding anatomy is essential as it provides the basis for tracheostomy tube insertion, change, and removal. It would be good to imagine the path into the trachea as a tract beginning from the skin to the inner lining of the trachea.

**Surgical Tracheostomy**

A  transverse skin incision ( avoiding anterior jugular venous ) is preferred for cosmetic reasons,  is made between the cricoid cartilage and suprasternal notch ( approximately over the second or third tracheal rings). In gaining access to the tracheal lumen, the clinician exposes the following anatomical structures in layers: (I) skin, (II) subcutaneous fat, (III) platysma, (IV) superficial or investing layer of deep cervical fascia, (V) midline raphe of strap muscles( the sternohyoid and sternothyroid ), (VI) pre-tracheal fascial, (VII) thyroid isthmus, and finally, (VIII) trachea. An incision into the tracheal lumen between the second and third tracheal cartilage rings. There are several variations on the tracheal incision itself; some surgeons advocate for a longitudinal “horizontal H” incision spanning the first through third rings, whereas an alternative approach involves three careful incisions to raise a flap.

Bedside percutaneous tracheostomy (ultrasound or fiberoptic) has become an alternative to operative (open) tracheostomy performed either at the bedside or in the operating room, a technique introduced in the 1980s that has gained popularity as it is seen to be an effective alternative with comparable outcomes to surgical dissection while avoiding transfer to the operating theatre.

In the pediatric population, the tract is significantly smaller, thereby requiring short tubes and posing a risk of puncturing the tracheoesophageal wall if tube change is not performed carefully. Watters found that more than ninety percent of complications occurred more than one week after surgery, with 15% to 19% experiencing a tracheostomy-related complication.