Prescribers need to be cautious when prescribing a Schedule III controlled substance such as sodium oxybate due to the high potential for abuse. Sodium oxybate is usually prescribed for narcolepsy by a board-certified sleep medicine physician or neurologist. Pharmacists should ensure proper dosing and step-by-step instruction on taking sodium oxybate to minimize adverse events. Pharmacists should also counsel in detail regarding the potential adverse drug reactions. Specially trained nurses can monitor for the signs of improvement and should inform the prescriber of any discrepancies. Furthermore, nurses can reinforce the importance of strict adherence to the treatment regimen.

A 2009 forensic multi-drug intoxication fatality involving sodium oxybate presented a sleep apnea patient who had mistakenly received prescriptions for various CNS depressants, including sodium oxybate. Concomitant use of CNS depressant and the patient’s health history resulted in an unintentional overdose.

In overdose, emergency department physicians and triage nurses should stabilize the vitals. Critical care physicians ensure proper care of intubated patients. The medical toxicologist can assist if multiple drug ingestions are suspected. If the poisoning was deliberate, referral to a psychiatrist is required. As depicted above, it is the responsibility of the entire healthcare team, such as clinicians (MDs, DOs, NPs, PAs), nurses, specialists, and pharmacists, to work in close collaboration. This kind of interprofessional team approach would maximize efficacy and minimize adverse drug reactions of sodium oxybate, translating to enhanced patient outcomes.[Level 5]