**Lateral and Medial Rectus Muscles**

As discussed above, the lateral and medial rectus muscles are associated with the motor neurons and interneurons of CN VI, respectively. The lateral rectus is responsible for the ipsilateral abduction of the eye, whereas the medial rectus is responsible for the contralateral adduction of the eye. Together they contract and coordinate horizontal eye movements.

**Facial Muscles**

There exist unpaired orbicularis oris and 23 paired muscles that are innervated by the extratemporal facial nerve branches.

**Muscles of Facial Expression**

Frontalis: The temporal branch, which is the uppermost branch of the extratemporal facial nerve, supplies the frontalis muscle on the forehead. The primary function of the frontalis muscle is to raise the eyebrows and wrinkle the forehead.

Orbicularis Oculi: The upper portion of the orbicularis oculi muscle is innervated by the temporal branch, whereas the lower portion receives innervation from the zygomatic branch of the facial nerve. The orbicularis oculi muscle is located around each eye and helps close the eyelid and drain tears into the nasolacrimal duct.

Zygomaticus Major: The zygomatic branch innervates the muscle. It is one of the major muscles for lifting the angle of the mouth and smiling.

Buccinator: The buccal branch of CN VII innervates the muscle. It is responsible for pulling the cheek against teeth and puckering.

Orbicularis Oris: The superior portion of the muscle is innervated by the buccal division, whereas the inferior portion's innervation comes from the mandibular branch of the facial nerve. The orbicularis oris muscle helps close the mouth and lips.

Platysma: The nerve supply of the platysma muscle comes from the cervical branch of the facial nerve. The platysma attaches to the neck and the mandible and helps open the mouth and pull down the corners of the lips. It is known as the "fright" muscle.

Stapedius: The stapedius muscle, which is attached to the neck of the stapes bone, is known as the smallest skeletal muscle in the body. The nerve to stapedius supplies it, which branches off from the facial nerve. The primary function of this muscle is to reduce ossicular vibrations and protect the inner ear from getting damaged by loud noises. Damage to the muscle or its nerve can result in hyperacusis (hypersensitivity to normal sounds).

Posterior belly of Digastric: The posterior belly of the digastric muscle attaches to the hyoid bone and mastoid process of the temporal bone and receives innervation from the digastric branch of CN VII. Coordinating with the anterior belly of the digastric muscle, it lowers the jaw to open the mouth and elevates the hyoid bone for swallowing.

Stylohyoid: The stylohyoid muscle, which extends from the styloid process of the temporal bone to the hyoid bone, is innervated by the styloid branch of the facial nerve. The stylohyoid muscle is responsible for pushing the hyoid bone backward and elevating the tongue.