Patients should receive counsel on the proper management of early-stage rosacea as well as phymatous rosacea. While progression to rhinophyma is not preventable, adequate management can lessen symptoms to reduce the psychological burden. More pertinent to the earlier stages of rosacea, patients should learn to avoid certain stimuli to decrease vasodilatory skin flushing and persistent erythema. Patients should avoid the following: environmental stimuli such as extreme hot and cold temperatures and sunburns, emotional stimuli from excessive stress and anxiety, physiological stimuli such as caffeine and alcohol in addition to spicy foods and heavy exercise, and exogenous stimuli including chemical peels and other facial irritants. Due to increased transient epidermal water loss, moisturizer use is increasingly important in these patients.

Regular sunscreen application is also essential to avoid disease exacerbation from sunburns and prevent increased production of free oxygenated radicals that can lead to rosacea aggravation. Patients with progressing rosacea can additionally start a topical metronidazole treatment that has proved effective in moderate-severe rosacea to help reduce papules and pustules. Additionally, oral tetracyclines, or erythromycin in intolerant patients, provide anti-inflammatory benefits. Patients with phymatous rosacea should be advised on the utility of oral isotretinoin to ameliorate the growth of sebaceous gland hypertrophy and reduce superficial blood flow. Patients should understand that surgical treatment is necessary for tissue debulking, and there is a possibility of disease recurrence after tissue removal.