Prevention makes up a large part of the treatment of lower back pain. Prevention itself can be separated into five separate categories – primordial prevention, primary prevention, secondary prevention, tertiary prevention, and quaternary prevention

**Primordial Prevention -**This is focused on reducing risk factors for the entire population, in order to reduce the incidence of disease. It is targeted towards adapting lifestyle behaviors and social conditions that can go on to cause disease. With regard to low back pain, primordial prevention techniques involve providing walkways, cycle pathways, open spaces for recreational activities, gyms to exercise, and health education about diet, weight, alcohol, and tobacco control.

**Primary Prevention -**This is focused on reducing incidence among a population who are deemed susceptible to the disease, and the aim is to prevent the disease occurring in the first place. The target population is otherwise healthy individuals, and the methods are specific to each disease. With regard to low back pain, primary prevention techniques in vulnerable groups like health workers involve risk assessment, provision of lifting aids, training in manual handling, and provision of dedicated lifting teams.

**Secondary Prevention**– This is concentrated on early diagnoses in those members of the population who appear well, when they are actually displaying very early signs of the disease. Methods are primarily focused on screening, as screening often picks up those who have subclinical signs rather than those who display more obvious symptoms. With regards to low back pain, secondary prevention involves analysis and action following adverse incidents like lifting accidents, provision of early rehabilitation for injuries or symptoms, and prevention of presenteeism. Absenteeism is a sickness absence due to disease. Presenteeism is attendance even in the presence of disease. Some studies show that presenteeism is more costlier than absenteeism.

**Tertiary Prevention**– This has an emphasis on reducing the symptoms of disease once the disease has progressed. The aim is to reduce the effects of disease on a person’s lifestyle and productivity. With regard to low back pain, the tertiary prevention techniques involve the provision of physical rehabilitation, cognitive behavior therapy, and modification of job roles to prevent recurrence.

**Quaternary Prevention******– This is a fairly new category, with a focus on preventing harm from medical interventions. With regards to low back pain, quaternary prevention involves avoiding needless investigations and harmful procedures in persons who do not have the disease but are worried (the worried well) or who have early self-limiting disease. These individuals need protection from interventions that may have more negative outcomes than positive ones. MRI scanning and many corticosteroid injections have negative outcomes on back pain. MRI scans may just identify age-related changes and may cause psychological distress

There is considerable overlap between the interventions listed above. The interventions can be further split into those which can be enforced by the individual and those which can be brought about by the administration of the health facility.

**INTERVENTIONS THAT CAN BE SET UP BY THE ADMINISTRATION OF THE HEALTH FACILITY**

**TRAINING IN****MANU****AL HANDLING –**The aim here is to educate healthcare professionals on how to reduce the chance of injury whilst at work. Theis and Finkelstein established that a program focused on safe patient handling resulted in a significant reduction in the incidence of injuries. They went onto conclude that every dollar spent on training, resulted in a $3.71 profit

**PROVISION OF LIFTING E****QUIP****MENT –**There has been a lot of evidence to suggest that the use of technical equipment to assist with patient handling, can decrease the incidence of physical injuries in the healthcare environment. Anyan and co-workers found that the installation of overheard lifting systems resulted in a significant reduction in the number of claims made by healthcare professionals as well as the rate of absenteeism and staff injuries

**LIFTING****TEAM****–**A lift team consists of a group of people specially trained in lifting techniques. The lift team spends their time rotating around the healthcare setting in order to aid the lifting of patients. A lift-assist team was welcomed by nursing personnel and decreased the injury among direct care providers but what is not known is whether the risk of handling has been transferred to members of the lift assist team

**WORKPLACE EDUCATION -**An education program directed at healthcare professionals to improve their own body awareness and enhance communication with patients decreased injuries. Instructing patients to participate in transfers is a skill that needs to be acquired. The educational intervention enhanced the competence of health professionals in guiding patients to move independently and thereby helped to reduce strain on themselves and on their patients

**ERGONOMIC ASSESSMENT AND IMPLEMENTATION -**Work by Garg and co-workers shows that a comprehensive ergonomic program and patient devices decreased patient handling injuries by 59.8%, lost workdays by 86.7%, and workers compensation costs by 90.6%

**INDIVIDUAL**

**LIFESTYLE HEALTH PROMOTION –**Nurses are in the frontline of medical care but may not be able to practice the principles of healthy living which they understand and want to promote. Work schedules, social eating practices, staff shortages, workload, stress at work, and shift patterns all interfere with practicing healthy lifestyle choices

**DIET -**The national guidelines in the United Kingdom suggest eating five portions of fruit and vegetables each day as part of a healthy diet. A survey in a pediatric unit identified that 79% of the nurses did not consume five portions of fruit and vegetables every day. The nurses felt that their lack of adherence to national guidelines was a barrier in promoting a healthy diet to their patients

**WEIGHT REDUCTION -**A national survey in the United Kingdom identified that 25% of English nurses were obese (BMI> 30). Obesity in nurses was significantly higher than among other healthcare professionals but the highest prevalence of obesity was in unregistered care workers

**SMOKING -**A cross-sectional study in Italy conducted across seven hospitals identified a high proportion of smokers among health professionals. The prevalence of smoking among health professionals was higher than among other professions. 44% of the 1082 healthcare workers were smokers. Among them 33.9% were physicians, 49.8% were nurses 41.1% were technicians and 50.4% were auxiliary employees

**STRETCHING / PHYSICAL EXERCISE -**Chen and co-workers reported that 127 nurses who had been experiencing low back pain for a period of six months were randomized into an experimental group and control group. The experimental group performed a stretching exercise program for 50 minutes three times a week. The control group was instructed to continue with usual activities for 50 minutes three times a week. The visual analog scale of pain showed statistically significant improvement in the experimental group at two, four, and six months. The authors concluded that a stretching exercise program was an effective and safe intervention for treating low back pain in nursing personnel

**CBT -**A small randomized control trial showed a weekly stress and pain management therapy for 6 weeks decreased pain intensity scores