Patients who have aspirin toxicity can have a myriad of symptoms. Symptoms of mild toxicity can be but are not limited to tinnitus, dizziness, lethargy, nausea, and vomiting.

Treatment for salicylate toxicity is based on salicylate concentration, acid-base status, volume status, electrolytes, GI decontamination, airway protection and respiratory status, and enhanced elimination.

The acuity of exposure, type of formulations, co-ingestions, comorbidities, and clinical status of the patient can affect salicylate levels in serum. Of all of these, particularly acid-base status can influence how the drug is handled by the body the most. Hence, initial and subsequent levels are recommended to assess trajectory. Different laboratories may report salicylate levels differently. One must pay attention to salicylate concentration units. The conversion is as follows:

- 100 milligrams per deciliter (mg/dL) equals

- 1000 milligrams per liter (mg/L), or

- 7.24 millimoles per liter (mmol/L)

One must draw serial salicylate levels to show that the levels are declining and thus also establishing a reduction in absorption.

Aspirin causes high anion gap metabolic acidosis and respiratory alkalosis. The high anion gap comes from the addition of salicylic acid as well as the generation of lactic acid (due to uncoupling of oxidative phosphorylation causing anaerobic respiration). The respiratory alkalosis is due to direct stimulation of the respiratory center. Acidemia worsens symptomology. Salicylate exists in the blood in both ionized as well as uncharged forms. Acidemia shifts salicylate from its ionized to unionized forms making it more lipophilic and allowing increased penetration into the central nervous system (CNS). Volume status and electrolyte monitoring are paramount as brain glucose utilization increases in the setting of aspirin toxicity, even when serum glucose levels are normal. Hypokalemia worsens acidemia, and hence, supplementation may be required.

Alkalization of the urine can be achieved via a bicarbonate drip (3 ampules of 50 meq/50 ml for a total of 150 meq in 1000 ml of D5W). However, this may worsen hypokalemia, and hence, special attention to potassium supplementation is required.

Activated charcoal and/or bowel irrigation are recommended in both acute and chronic ingestion because of extended-release preparations available on the market. In the setting of worsening mental status, one must exercise caution to avoid aspiration pneumonia.

Airway protection might be required in the setting of worsening mental status or acute injury to the lung.

Maintaining an alkaline pH is important to avoid CNS toxicity. This can be achieved by increasing the minute ventilation to avoid carbon dioxide (CO2) retention. Bicarbonate drips can be used to achieve a pH of no greater than 7.5 during the intubation process.

Hemodialysis is an efficient treatment of salicylate toxicity. Once the protein-bound fraction is saturated, removal of the free fraction is effective through dialysis. Due to this efficiency, the clearance of salicylate is reduced to hours rather than days.

Peritoneal dialysis does not efficiently remove salicylate.

Indications for hemodialysis are as follows:

- Aspirin levels in acute ingestions of 100 mg/dL with or without symptoms

- Aspirin levels in chronic ingestions 40 mg/dL with or without symptoms

- Any neurotoxicity (tinnitus, coma, seizures) with any level

- Renal failure (as the drug needs to be cleared by the kidney)

- Acute pulmonary edema

- Cardiovascular compromise including volume overload

Hemodialysis does not only clear the drug from circulation but also restores the internal acid-base and electrolyte balance.