First-line therapy should address any immediate, life-threatening conditions, for example, endobronchial contamination, pulmonary flooding, and tension pneumothorax. Since most bronchopleural fistulas (BPFs) occur early in the postoperative period and are not infected, patients can undergo surgical repair with excellent success. Bronchoscopic approaches have variable success rates and are appropriate for those who are not suitable for surgical intervention.

The patient should be placed with the affected side dependent, and adequate pleural drainage is performed. The first intervention for BPF should be drainage of air and fluid from the pleural space by chest tube thoracostomy. Pleural fluid should be sent for complete blood cell count (CBC), pH, total protein, lactate dehydrogenase, glucose, cytology, triglycerides, gram stain, and culture to assess for pleural infection. Although integral for drainage, the chest tube itself can function as a foreign body and predispose to infection at the insertion site and in the pleural space. In patients who are mechanically ventilated, the chest tube can be used to add positive intrapleural pressure during the expiratory phase or occlusion during the inspiratory phase. These interventions aim to decrease the air leak during expiration to maintain positive end-expiratory pressure (PEEP) and to decrease BPF flow during inspiration. The chest tube can also be used to apply sclerosing agents, such as talc and bleomycin, to promote pleurodesis. Broad-spectrum intravenous antibiotics against gram-positive, gram-negative, and anaerobic microorganisms should be given to all patients until gram stain, cultures, and sensitivities are available. Postural drainage can be initiated after specimens have been obtained, as long as a patient can expectorate, chest cavity, and chest tube drainage is less than 30 mL per day, and there is concomitant pleural irrigation.

Suture reclosure of the bronchial stump with vascularized flap coverage is curative for the fistula presenting acutely, normally less than two weeks after surgery.

The disease course is more complicated for patients with BPF who are mechanically ventilated. Maintaining airway pressures at or below the critical opening pressure of the fistula to promote healing, but yet provide adequate alveolar ventilation for sufficient gas exchange can present a significant challenge. Air-leaks through bronchopleural fistulae may range from less than 1 to 16 L per minute. Adverse effects of BPF in mechanically-ventilated patients include incomplete lung expansion, loss of effective tidal volume, or positive end-expiratory pressure, inability to remove carbon dioxide, and prolonged ventilatory support. The large air leak via BPF can also result in auto-triggering of the ventilator, leading to severe hyperventilation and inappropriately large doses of sedatives and/or neuromuscular blockers administered to reduce spontaneous respiration.

Other techniques described to decrease an air leak include independent lung ventilation with two ventilators, differential lung ventilation, and high-frequency jet ventilation (HFJV).

Methods to limit airflow across BPFs include direct closure, decortication, thoracoplasty, omental or muscle transposition, and completion pneumonectomy.

Patients with BPF from causes other than lung resection, including malignancy and infection, are treated with bronchoscopic methods because the bronchial stump is affected by disease, and stump revision is not feasible. Bronchoscopic management is primarily useful for temporary fistula closure but can be used as a bridge to curative surgery if the underlying cause is reversible. A flexible bronchoscope provides superior and precise access to a greater portion of the bronchial tree than the rigid bronchoscope. Outcomes are variable with rates of successful closure ranging from 30% to 80%.

In patients with BPFs equal to 8 mm, fistula closure with airway stents, coils, or Amplatzer devices is a viable option. The largest case series of 31 patients with BPF reported that the Amplatzer device was effective in 96% of cases, lasting for up to 18 months.

There are several case series and reports of patients with BPF who were treated with occlusive materials, none of which have been compared. Bronchoscopic placement of glutaraldehyde sterilized lead shot, gel foam and tetracycline, autologous blood patch, fibrin glue, gelatin-resorcinol mixture, oxidized regenerated cellulose, albumin-glutaraldehyde tissue adhesive, cryoprecipitate fibrin glue and NN-butyl 2-cyanoacrylate has been attempted at the fistula site.

The 2 component fibrin cryoprecipitate glue (calcium gluconate and cryoprecipitate along with topical thrombin [1000 IU/mL]) is delivered at the fistula site through a double lumen catheter inserted into the operative channel of the bronchoscope, creating a fibrin clot that occludes the fistula. Small BPFs can be occluded using an endobronchial injection of ethanol, polidocanol, and tetracycline followed by autologous blood.

Although not often utilized, argon plasma coagulation and neodymium-doped yttrium aluminum garnet (Nd:YAG) laser have been described for patients with small BPFs. Transplanted bone marrow-derived mesenchymal stem cells and dehydrated amniotic membrane allograft have been reported as successful in BPF closure.

Patients should be monitored after fistula closure for clinical symptoms of recurrence, chest tube output of air, and with imaging of the chest. Patients with a sealed fistula should not have an air leak, and imaging should demonstrate stability or resolution of air in the pleural space. Repeat bronchoscopy is not routine and only performed if fistula recurrence or a complication is suspected. If valves or stents are used, a chest CT scan and bronchoscopy are repeated at six weeks to assess for complications. For patients who fail surgical or bronchoscopic intervention, options include repeat surgery, an alternate bronchoscopic method, or in rare cases, an open window thoracostomy such as Eloesser flap thoracostomy or a Claggett window.