The appendix is a thin pouch hanging down from the large intestine. When it gets infected and inflamed, it causes a condition called appendicitis. This condition can be very painful, and if left untreated, very serious, as the appendix can burst, causing a life-threatening infection. Fortunately, appendicitis, when caught on time, can be easily treatable.

Appendicitis usually first presents as severe abdominal pain. This pain can start near the belly button and then move to the lower right side. Other usual symptoms include loss of appetite, nausea and vomiting, and elevated fever. However, a wide variety of symptoms can be present, including an upset stomach, irregular bowel movements (constipation or diarrhea). During pregnancy, identification of the picture and its diagnosis might be challenging as many of these symptoms are present during a normal pregnancy.

A clinician or clinician team will make the diagnosis of appendicitis through a thorough interview and physical examination. If necessary, they will order special tests such as an ultrasound or MRI to provide more precise information as to the source of the abdominal pain. It is crucial that during this time, a gynecologist should examine the pregnant patient.

When any of the symptoms listed above are present, it is imperative to seek medical care. The risk for the appendix to burst rises after the first 24 hours of the onset of the symptoms; therefore, early identification and treatment are of great importance and will directly impact the results of the patient's health and pregnancy.

The treatment for appendicitis is surgery to remove the appendix that can be done in two ways: open surgery during which the appendix will be removed through a single incision that is large enough through which to pull the appendix or laparoscopic surgery in which thin instruments and a camera are introduced to the abdomen through a few small cuts to perform the surgery, and appendix removal occurs through one of the small openings.

Treatment for a complicated or a "burst" appendix will probably be more complicated than it would be if it had not burst, as all the material spilled out of the appendix needs to be washed away. If an appendix did burst but a few days have passed, it is likely that the body already formed a pocket around the appendix blocking the infection. In this case, treatment consists of antibiotic therapy and close monitoring, and not having surgery right away. However, surgery will eventually be needed.

Treatment for simple appendicitis without surgery is not the standard of care, but it is conceivable to do so. However, the chances of appendicitis returning are high. Patients and their physicians should discuss alternatives, including risks for both the patient and the pregnancy itself.