The human body is made of a complex system of ascending and descending pathways that permit communication between the brain and spinal cord. There are also pathways connecting different areas of the brain. These pathways are called white matter tracts in the central nervous system (CNS). These are all nerve fibers covered with myelin sheaths which are derived from oligodendrocytes. The corticospinal tract belongs to one of the most important descending tracts of the CNS. It contains fibers from the upper motor neurons to synapse on the lower motor neurons. Upper motor neurons (UMN) can be described as the nerve fibers responsible for the communication between the brain to the spinal cord. Lower motor neurons (LMN) are the nerve fibers responsible for the communication between the spinal cord to muscle.

Although damage to both UMN and LMN result in muscle weakness, damage to upper motor neurons may result in increased reflexes, increased tone, positive Babinski, and spastic paresis. On the other hand, damage to lower motor neurons is usually accompanied by muscle atrophy, fasciculations, and flaccid paralysis.

Descending tracts are responsible for relaying information from cortical regions to the periphery to initiate and modulate movement. The corticospinal tract is the largest descending tract present in humans and is divided into anterior and lateral components. The lateral corticospinal tract sends fibers predominantly to the extremity muscles, and the cortical innervation is contralateral, in other words, the left motor cortex controls the right extremities. The anterior corticospinal tract sends fibers mainly to the trunk or axial muscles. The control is both ipsilateral and contralateral. Therefore, trunk muscles are generally bilaterally cortically innervated.