The core treatment options for osteopenic patients involve early education on how to achieve and maintain healthy bone mass levels and extensive education and counseling on the relevant social, environmental, and lifestyle risk factors that compromise bone health.

**Lifestyle Modifications**

All patients can benefit from lifestyle modifications. Chronic alcohol use has been identified as a significant risk factor for decreased BMD. Clinicians should also routinely encourage smoking cessation and promote weight-bearing physical activities and regular exercise regimens. Yoga and tai chi can help reduce stress and improve balance and agility.

Patients should be educated on the recommended daily intake for calcium and vitamin D. The National Osteoporosis Foundation (NOF) recommends 1,200 to 1500 mg of calcium per day and 800 to 1,000 IUs of daily vitamin D for adults over the age of 50.

**Fall Prevention**

Falls, mostly in-house, cause over 90% of hip fractures and all distal radius fractures.  While the role of exercise programs and physical therapy intervention for the elderly is reported with mixed results on outcomes of fall reduction and reduced rates of subsequent hip and other fragility fractures, some studies advocate multimodal combinations to benefit the elderly. Regular exercise combined with prophylactic measures to remove loose carpets, reduce the use of sleep medicine and other tranquilizers, and correct visual impairment in elderly populations living in the community results in reduced rates of falls.

**Risk Stratification of Osteopenic Patients**

While the recommendations for pharmacologic intervention in patients diagnosed with osteoporosis are universally accepted, the pharmacologic treatment of osteopenic patients is much more controversial secondary to the much higher number needed to treat (NNT) threshold reported in the literature. Compared to osteoporosis (NNT = 10 to 20 patients), the NNT for osteopenia exceeds 100 patients.

Current guidelines advocate for risk stratification by the ten-year probability of future hip or other fragility fracture risk and reserving pharmacologic intervention to the subgroup of patients most at risk of developing a major osteoporotic fracture. The primary risk factor for subsequent fracture is a prevalent, low energy fracture, irrespective of whether it is clinically apparent or not.

**Fragility Fracture Considerations**

A major clinical hurdle is ensuring timely patient follow-up after fragility fractures. The re-fracture risk is highest during the first 1 to 2 years after the inciting fragility fracture, and ultimately, about 50% of subsequent fractures occur within 3 to 5 years from the first event. These patients warrant rapid intervention and follow-up to determine the patient’s FRAX score and complete a DXA scan to establish a baseline BMD level and t-score value.

Special consideration is given to the detection of current or prior history of vertebral fractures as they represent the most frequent fractures in both men and women over age 50 years. However, many vertebral fractures are initially missed or not diagnosed by a clinician because the patient is relatively asymptomatic. Estimates report 85% of vertebral fractures are due to an underlying bone density that is already diagnostic for osteoporosis. Furthermore, they are associated with significant morbidity, including a five-fold increased risk of subsequent vertebral fracture regardless of an individual’s BMD at the time of the index fracture. When symptomatic, vertebral fractures will present with back pain that can last up to 2 to 3 months. Depending on the severity and degree of collapse associated with the fracture(s), the patient classically may develop a progressive kyphotic deformity and complain of loss of height over time.

**Pharmacotherapy Recommendations**

Consensus favors pharmacologic treatment in a patient with spine or hip fractures in addition to a documented low BMD. Treatment recommendations vary for other nonvertebral fractures and include the following:

- The National Osteoporosis Society (NOS) recommends starting treatment in all postmenopausal women with a history of any fragility fracture

- The National Osteoporosis Foundation (NOF) recommends performing DXA scans on patients sustaining nonvertebral fragility fractures, and the decision to treat or not with pharmacotherapy is based on the patient’s t-score; patients considered to be osteopenic (t-score between -1 and -2.5) are not started on drugs.

**Pharmacotherapy Options**

Pharmacotherapy agents work through either antiresorptive or anabolic means. Bisphosphonates are the most commonly prescribed medication class. These drugs are divided into non-nitrogen and nitrogen-containing compounds. The latter are considered first-line therapy. The nitrogen-containing compounds inhibit farnesyl pyrophosphate synthase and ultimately inhibit osteoclast resorption and induce osteocyte apoptosis. Common agents include:

- Alendronate may reduce the rate of hip, spine, and wrist fractures by 50%

- Risedronate may reduce vertebral and nonvertebral fractures by 40% over three years

- IV zoledronic acid reduces the rate of spine fractures by 70% and hip fractures by 40% over three years

**Other Medication Classes**

- Conjugated estrogen-progestin hormone replacement (HRT)

- Estrogen-only replacement (ERT)

- Salmon calcitonin

- Selective estrogen receptor modulators (Raloxifene) - Raloxifene is an agonist to estrogen receptors on bone and reduces osteoclast resorption

- Anabolic - Teriparatide is a recombinant form of parathyroid hormone (PTH) that stimulates osteoblasts to produce more bone. Teriparatide is now FDA approved for osteoporosis treatment in males and females

- RANKL inhibitors (Denosumab) - Denosumab is a monoclonal Ig2 that targets RANKL and inhibits its ability to bind to RANK and results in the inhibition of osteoclast activation

**Treatment and Follow-up Considerations**

Treatment duration varies depending on the class of medication utilized. Agents such as teriparatide and hormonal-based therapy require immediate follow-up treatment with another agent upon stopping the medication; otherwise, bone mass is rapidly lost. Clinicians also must remain cautious against the prolonged use of uninterrupted bisphosphonate therapy beyond a 3- to 5-year period. Patients should also be made aware of these potentially morbid adverse events, and they should be counseled to seek immediate care if they are experiencing any symptoms of thigh discomfort.

Any patient on bisphosphonates for any given period and presenting with mild thigh discomfort should have the following treatment workup:

- Educate on the risks of and immediately stop all weight-bearing activity.

- Obtain full-length femur and hip radiographs. Thigh pain may be indicative of an impending pathologic, atypical femur fracture. Attention should be directed to the subtrochanteric and diaphyseal regions of the femur, particularly the lateral cortex, which often demonstrates evidence of periosteal reaction.

- Immediately discontinue bisphosphonate use.

- Refer to an orthopedic surgeon for prophylactic surgical fixation.