The pelvic outlet is an opening bounded by coccyx, the ischial tuberosities, and the pubis symphysis. The pelvic diaphragm borders the pelvic outlet. From anterior to posterior the pelvic floor muscles (PFM) of the pelvic diaphragm include:

- Piriformis

- Coccygeus

- Levator ani (iliococcygeus, pubococcygeus, and puborectalis)

Five main ligaments are relevant when discussing the pelvic outlet, four of which exist in pairs. These ligaments, amongst others, provide structural support and connection of various tissues in and around the pelvis. During pregnancy, these ligaments will soften to allow movement between the bones to accommodate the passage of the fetus. However, if the ligaments become too elastic or become overstretched, this may lead to pelvis girdle instability.

- Interpubic ligament (also called the arcuate ligament or inferior pubic ligament) at the pubic symphysis joins the left and right superior rami.

- Sacroiliac ligaments connect the sacrum and the ilium. This ligament is essential for the effective load transfer between the spine and lower extremities.

- Sacrococcygeal ligaments consist of ventral and dorsal parts that limit the movement between the sacrum and coccyx.

- Sacrotuberous ligaments are fan-shaped ligaments that course from the sacrum and the upper coccyx to the ischial tuberosity. These ligaments form the posterolateral border of the pelvic outlet.

- Sacrospinous ligaments are triangular bands of fibrous tissue that attaches the ischial spine to the sacrum and coccyx. This ligament divides the greater sciatic notch into the greater and lesser sciatic foramen.