Clinicians should suspect acute intermittent porphyria should in patients with abdominal pain, and symptoms or signs suggestive of neuropsychiatric morbidity. A patient with a purely medical ailment often ends up with the surgeons due to recurrent acute abdomen and may undergo unnecessary surgeries. Thus, the surgical team should be aware of this non-surgical cause of severe acute abdomen and maintain a high index of suspicion in a patient with recurrent attacks or one who presents with additional neuropsychiatric symptoms.

Interprofessional involvement of the primary care physician, nurse practitioner, metabolic/genetic disease expert, hematologist, biochemist, pharmacist, nursing, and the surgeon is essential to diagnose the disease early to limit the long-term complications of the patient. Lastly, the involvement of clinical geneticists for genetic counseling regarding the conception of a child by a patient with AIP is paramount to discuss the risk of acquisition, prenatal testing, and other aspects of prevention and/or early identification of AIP carrier state in the offspring. Nursing will be responsible for heme therapy administration and should monitor therapy progress as well as any adverse reactions, and inform the clinician should there be an issue. Pharmacists should verify dosing, as well as perform medication review to scan both for drug interactions, as well as drugs that can precipitate porphyria attacks, reporting any concerns to the team physicians managing the case. Open communication and collaboration between interprofessional members of the team are essential if one wants to avoid the high morbidity of this disorder. [Level V]