# Continuing Education Activity

Porokeratosis is an uncommon diagnosis that presents with keratotic papules or annular plaques with an elevated border. It usually occurs on sun-exposed skin, most commonly in the fifth decade of life, but can occur at any age and with similar frequencies in males and females. The increased occurrence of disseminated superficial actinic porokeratosis on sun-exposed skin likely indicates that ultraviolet light is a risk factor. While porokeratosis is usually an acquired disease, there is often a familial predisposition that could signify a hereditary component. This activity illustrates the evaluation, treatment, and complications of porokeratosis and the importance of a team approach to managing and surveillance of affected patients.

**Objectives:**
- Describe the physical exam of a patient with porokeratosis.
- Describe the evaluation of porokeratosis.
- Review the management of porokeratosis.
- Explain the importance of an interprofessional approach to managing and surveillance patients with porokeratosis.

# Introduction

Porokeratosis is an uncommon dermatologic disorder. It is a disorder of keratinization that presents with keratotic papules or annular plaques with an elevated border.

Additionally, rare variants include genitogluteal porokeratosis, facial porokeratosis, giant porokeratosis, porokeratosis ptychotropica, hypertrophic verrucous porokeratosis, eruptive pruritic papular porokeratosis, follicular porokeratosis, and reticulate porokeratosis.

# Etiology

Despite being first described over a century ago, the etiology and pathology of porokeratosis are unclear, complex, and multi-factorial.

# Epidemiology

Porokeratosis is an uncommon diagnosis. It usually occurs on sun-exposed skin, most commonly in the fifth decade of life, but can occur at any age and has similar frequencies in males and females.

The eruptive form of porokeratosis correlates with immune suppression, transplantation patients, inflammatory states, and malignancy.

Porokeratosis will progress to nonmelanoma skin cancer in 6.9% to 30% of cases, most frequently squamous cell carcinoma and less frequently basal cell carcinoma.

While porokeratosis is usually an acquired disease, there is often a familial predisposition that could signify a hereditary component.

# Pathophysiology

Porokeratosis is an entity that results from the disordered progression of epidermal cells.

There is a reported association with overexpression of p53, and occasionally there can be an expansion of a clone of abnormal epidermal keratinocytes.

# Histopathology

The distinctive histopathologic feature of porokeratosis is a cornoid lamella, which is a column of tightly fitted parakeratotic cells.

# History and Physical

Porokeratosis presents as keratotic papules or annular plaques that expand centrifugally with an elevated keratotic border.

# Evaluation

Evaluation of porokeratosis is best with a biopsy of the elevated border.

Despite the relative rarity of porokeratosis, especially some subtypes like genitourinary porokeratosis, one should keep the diagnosis in mind due to the risk of malignant degeneration.

# Treatment / Management

Multiple therapies are described for porokeratosis, including topical, systemic, and surgical. However, there have been no randomized controlled trials, so there are no international guidelines on treatment standards.

- Classical porokeratosis of Mibelli is most successfully treated with imiquimod cream.

- Linear porokeratosis responds well to topical or systemic retinoids.

- Disseminated porokeratosis can be treated successfully with topical vitamin D acid derivatives.

- Surgical interventions or cryotherapy are options for treatment in areas where topical agents are challenging to use or contraindicated.

- Topical steroids, retinoids, and topical diclofenac may provide symptomatic relief even if no lasting benefit occurs.

- In a small study, topical lovastatin was used to improve porokeratosis symptoms.

# Differential Diagnosis

Clinically porokeratosis can resemble psoriasis, lichen simplex chronicus, hypertrophic lichen planus, tuberculosis of the skin, Bowen disease, candidiasis, irritants, and allergic contact dermatitis.

# Prognosis

Porokeratosis is a premalignant condition

Linear porokeratosis and giant porokeratosis are the variants that are most susceptible to malignant transformation. Malignant transformation is rare in disseminated superficial actinic porokeratosis.

# Complications

Complications are based on treatment selection. General complications of surgical excision include infection, bleeding, and scarring. Topical treatments can irritate the skin or cause skin atrophy, pruritus, xerosis, or pigmentation changes. Complications can also be related to a lack of early diagnosis with a biopsy and a lack of treatment leading to the potential for malignant transformation.

# Deterrence and Patient Education

Patients should use sun protection, avoid excessive sunlight exposure, and go for periodic examinations by a dermatologist to monitor for recurrence or malignant transformation.

# Pearls and Other Issues

- The hallmark of porokeratosis histologically is a cornoid lamella, which is a column of tightly fitted parakeratotic cells.

- Porokeratosis presents as keratotic papules or annular plaques that expand centrifugally with an elevated keratotic border.

- There are many variants of porokeratosis.

- Porokeratosis can undergo malignant transformation to squamous cell carcinoma and basal cell carcinoma.

- Evaluation of porokeratosis is best done with a biopsy of the elevated border.

- Multiple therapies are described for porokeratosis, including topical, systemic, and surgical. However, there have been no randomized controlled trials, so there are no international guidelines on treatment standards.

- Patients treated for porokeratosis should be advised to use sun protection, avoid excessive sunlight exposure, and go for periodic examinations by a dermatologist to monitor for recurrence or malignant transformation.

# Enhancing Healthcare Team Outcomes

Dermatologists and other clinicians should work closely with pathologists to ensure lesions receive an evaluation for the presence of malignant transformation.

Dermatologists and dermatology specialty nurses should periodically follow up with patients to monitor for recurrence.