There is no cure for panic disorder, and it can present in a number of ways, thus making the diagnosis difficult. The majority of patients with panic disorder present to the emergency department and hence the role of the nurse and emergency clinician cannot be overemphasized. The patient needs a thorough education on the disorder and understands that the symptoms are not life-threatening. The patient needs to be told about the different treatments available and the need for compliance. Plus, the pharmacist should caution the patient against the use of alcohol or recreational drugs. The patient should be taught to recognize the triggers and avoid them. Before starting any drug therapy, the patient should be informed about the side effects and benefits. In addition, the family should be educated by the nurse and clinician in helping the patient overcome unrealistic fears and other behaviors. Finally, the patient should be educated on a healthy lifestyle by adopting good sleep hygiene, exercise, and a healthy diet. The patient should be advised against any herbal supplements without first speaking to the primary care provider.

**Outcomes**

Panic disorder has no cure, and its course is unpredictable. The currently available pharmacological therapy and cognitive behavior therapy do work in about 80% of patients, but relapses are common. About 20% of patients continue to have symptoms that lead to poor quality of life. About two-thirds of treated patients have a good prognosis, achieving remissions for about six months at a time. If the trigger factors like stress, alcohol, financial problems, divorce are not controlled, the symptoms can create havoc. More important, there is a high risk of coronary artery disease in patients with panic disorder, and the risk of sudden death is increased compared to the general population. Finally, the suicide rate is much higher in patients with panic disorder. There is a high association of social, occupational, and physical disability caused by panic disorder.