At the end of the wound assessment, a wound management plan should be formulated, including the possible need for specialist input. This management plan's main goals should focus on optimizing the patient's general condition, infection control, cleaning of the wound, debridement of any necrotic tissues, pain management, and pressure relief measures in cases of pressure ulcers.

All wounds must be managed with an aseptic, non-touch technique using personal protective equipment to prevent contamination and subsequent infection, delaying wound healing. The use of warmed saline usually does a cleansing of the wound. Use of antiseptic solution is highly recommended if there are excessive exudate or signs of infection. Debridement of debris and non-viable tissue can be done by many methods, either autolytic, larval therapy, chemical (through antiseptic use such as hydrogen peroxide or prontosan), hydrosurgery (versajet), conservative bedside sharp debridement (by scalpel or scissor), or surgical debridement.

**Dressing**

Wounds heal quicker in a moist and clean environment as this facilitates the migration of numerous growth factors and epithelial cells to the wound bed along with wound edge contraction.

Dressing choice must be based on a holistic assessment of the patient's general condition, the wound bed, and an understanding of the advantage and disadvantages of each dressing type. The ideal dressing should create a moist and clean environment, prevent desiccation, remove excess exudate, be impermeable to microorganisms but allow gas exchange, be free of toxic materials, conform to the wound with minimal pain on application and removal, and be cost-effective. Regarding the frequency of dressing change, infected wounds and wounds with high exudate should be monitored closely daily and should be changed more frequently. While non-infected wounds should be changed less frequently to keep a moist wound environment and facilitate the effect of biological dressings. Continuous wound evaluation with each dressing change is essential to check the suitability of the dressing regime and the potential need for shifting to another dressing type.

All dressing materials can manipulate the wound environment. There are three broad dressing categories. The first category induces autolytic debridement in the wound bed by activation of the host's proteolytic enzymes.****The second category ameliorates the moisture level of the wound. The third category suppresses bacterial growth. There is a lack of evidence on clinical effectiveness when comparing different types of dressing. Most of the reports are anecdotal and lack proper randomization. Different types include:

**Gauze:**is available in all hospitals. It is highly permeable, non-occlusive, and can be used as a primary or secondary dressing. The only drawback is that it can adhere to the bed and lead to wound trauma when removed, though this can be useful as a built-in form of debridement of any devitalized tissue in the wound bed. Its woven type can initiate granuloma formation from the remaining particles**.**

**Iodine dressings:**It was first described in 1882. Iodophors such as povidone-iodine were developed in the 1960s to overcome the side effects of iodine, such as skin irritation and pain. The mechanism of action of iodine is unclear. Several studies suggested that low-dose, slow-release iodine can kill floating bacteria by rapidly penetrating their cells, hence its efficacy as an antiseptic solution**.**There are some speculations that iodine may delay wound healing as being cytotoxic, especially in high doses.

**Transparent film dressing:**These are thin, flexible sheets that are composed of polyurethane. They provide a moist environment, but they do not have any absorptive capacity. They can be used for dressing surgical wounds or the donor site of skin graft.

**Foam dressing:**This is made of a polyurethane base and is permeable to both water vapor and gases. It can be used in wounds with moderate to high exudate, diabetic foot, and minor burns. It is not recommended in dry eschar or arterial ulcers as it can impair the healing process. It can be left in place for up to a week, and it should be changed when full of exudate.

**Hydrogel:**It is a complex hydrophilic polymer consist of around 90% water base. This high-water content limits its capacity to absorb excess exudate. Its main application is to soften necrotic wound beds like pressure sores and vascular ulcers and dress low-exudate wounds. The surrounding skin should be protected from maceration.

**Hydrocolloid:**It is formed of the inner layer of self-adhesive gel-forming hydrophilic colloid particles such as carboxymethylcellulose (CMC). This layer can absorb exudate, allow for a moisture healing environment, and provide thermal insulation. The outer protective layer is formed of polyurethane which acts as a mechanical barrier for bacteria and foreign bodies. It is available in many forms, including paste, granules, and powder. It can be used in low to moderate exudating wounds such as minor burns and pressure ulcers. It should be avoided in clinically infected wounds.

**Alginate:**Manufactured from seaweed and covered with calcium/sodium salts. It is a highly absorbent, non-adherent, and biodegradable dressing. When applied to a wound, calcium and sodium salts interact with the host's serum to form a hydrophilic gel. It can absorb up to 20 times its original weight. It is highly effective in managing highly exudating wounds, abdominal dehiscence, pressure ulcers, sinus tract, wounds with exposed tendons, and infected wounds. In clean wounds, it can be kept in place for a week, while in infected wounds, it should be changed daily.

**Hydrofiber:**It is made of 100% CMC fiber. They have similar properties and usage of alginates, so they are also suitable for use in highly exudative wounds. They can be used in partial-thickness burn and graft donor sites.

**Hydro conductive dressings:**These are relatively new dressings first introduced at the Symposium on Advanced Wound Care in 2011. Data suggest that hydro conductive dressings can absorb bacteria and harmful cytokines from the wound to the dressing. This is done through the capillary action of the dressing, which moves the exudates from the wound and moves it to a second layer. It can be left in place for 3 to 7 days until it is fully saturated.

**Silicone dressing:**These dressings are used in cases of abnormal wound healing such as hypertrophic and keloid scar. Several studies showed that they soften the scar and prevent progression to hypertrophic scars. The exact mechanism of action is unknown. The most popular theory is an improvement of scar hydration by decreasing vapor loss. Unfortunately, most studies have been done with small sample size, short-term follow-up, and without a control group.

**Silver dressing:**Silver is a broad-spectrum antimicrobial agent that is effective against bacteria, viruses, fungi, and yeast. It has also been reported to be effective against methicillin-resistantStaphylococcus aureus (MRSA) and vancomycin-resistant enterococci (VRE).****They are indicated in mild wound infections as they can not penetrate deep tissues.****A Cochrane review in 2007 stated that there is no sufficient evidence to recommend silver dressings for infected or contaminated wounds.

**Polyhexamethylene biguanide and honey dressings:**Manuka honey was first recognized as a topical antibacterial dressing in 1892. It is found to be effective against broad spectrum bacteria, fungi, yeast, molds, MRSA, and VRE. Its antibacterial properties are linked to its high viscosity, which forms a mechanical barrier from the environment, as well as its high sugar concentration leading to osmotic pressure changes, the production of H2O2 by peroxidase, low PH, and the presence of bioflavinoid.

**Negative pressure wound therapy (NPWT):**First described in the 1990s, since then has been widely used in all wound types. NPWT applies subatmospheric pressure to the wound bed through a unit attached to a sponge and semi-occlusive dressing. The exact mechanism of action is unknown. However, it was shown to remove excess exudate, debris, enhance circulation and promote granulation tissue formation. NPWT was found to be more effective and promote faster healing of chronic wounds compared with conventional dressing.****Contraindications include the presence of malignancy, unexplored fistula, untreated osteomyelitis, and the presence of necrotic tissue in the wound bed.

**Larval therapy:**Sterile larva (maggots) of the common green-bottle fly (Lucilia sericata) are used for debridement of slough and necrotic wounds and debridement of hematoma when surgical management is deemed inappropriate. It produces proteolytic enzymes that liquefy the necrotic tissue. It can be either obtained as a free-range larva or contained in a dressing named "Biobag." It can be left for 2 to 4 days according to the treatment regimen. The use of maggots should stop if the patient finds them painful, causing uncontrolled bleeding, and maggots are no longer alive or secured in the dressing.

**Leech therapy:**In cases of venous congestion of a reconstructive flap, leeches may be used to augment venous egress from the flap. If a venous outflow problem is suspected, re-exploration should be considered first to rule out hematoma or thrombosis of the vascular supply of the flap. Leech saliva performs its action through several compounds. These include hirudin that inhibits the conversion of fibrinogen to fibrin, a histamine-like substance that causes vasodilatation, proteases like collagenase to spread the anticoagulation effect, and anesthetic. Leeches mouth and digestive tract contain Aeromonas spp., a microorganism that aids in the digestion of blood. As this bacterium can be pathogenic in humans, antibiotic prophylaxis (ciprofloxacin) should be initiated an hour before the application of leeches and continue for a day after removing the last leech. In cases of ciprofloxacin allergy, doxycycline can be used. Leeches should be applied every 4 to 6 hours to allow time for passive bleeding and feeding.

**Skin Substitutes**

Skin substitutes can be either biological such as skin graft, or synthetic, such as Integra. Skin grafts can be either autografts from the same individual, allografts (homografts) where the skin is transferred from a different individual from the same species (from human to human), and xenografts in which skin is transferred between different species (from animal to human). The human amniotic membrane is another form of biological dressing that can be used in especially in low-resource countries. Synthetic semi-biological dressings are produced by tissue engineering technology. Some of them can be incorporated permanently into the wound. In general, they can be used to dress a superficial wound until re-epithelization occurs, optimization of the wound bed of deep wounds until grafting, and when the patient is not a candidate for surgery either due to multiple comorbidities or other factors. They are of great use when treating composite wound defects, especially in cases of high total body surface area burn due to sparsity of autologous skin graft.

**Hyperbaric Oxygen**

Hyperbaric oxygen (HBO) showed good promising results in managing complex wounds. The patient is placed in a special pressurized sealed room, with 100% oxygen at 1.5 to 3atm for around 3 hours. This can be repeated on several occasions according to the wound depth. Most chronic wounds will need between 20 and 40 sessions. The exact mechanism of action is unknown. It is suggested that it is mainly related to increasing the overall oxygen-carrying capacity, which helps with angiogenesis and local tissue perfusion.

**Future Research**

Understanding the wound healing process at the cellular level and its different modulators are the basis for future research in wound healing. Mediators such as Eicosanoid, leukotrienes, and prostaglandins can modulate the inflammatory phase, and their use showed promising results in decreasing wound size and healing time.****Recombinant platelet-derived growth factor (PDGF) is approved by the FDA to treat diabetic foot, and there is some anecdotal evidence of its use in chronic wounds in general. Biopsy of the wound bed, especially in previously irradiated areas, may be beneficial to exclude the presence of malignancy or dysplasia. However, the potential risk of growth factors to induce malignancy is the main limitation of their wider use.