**ABCs**

The initial step in the evaluation of an unconscious patient is to evaluate for the basic signs of life. The American Heart Association recommends examining for a pulse, followed by assessing airway patency and breathing pattern. If the patient does not have a pulse or does not have a regular breathing pattern, basic life support/advanced cardiovascular life support is indicated.

For patients with a pulse, who are breathing adequately, the evaluation shifts to a detailed neurological examination. The neurologic examination would serve to determine the location and nature of the neurological lesion and to determine prognosis. The examination is considered most useful if the patient is well perfused, normothermic, normoglycemic, and without the effects of neurologically active toxins or medications.

**Responsiveness**

The initial step is to evaluate for reactivity using objective measures. Address the patient verbally, progress to light shaking, then progress to more intense mechanical stimulation. Sufficient stimulus to the supraorbital ridge, nail beds, or temporomandibular joint can be painful without risk of tissue injury. Response to these painful stimuli should be graded bilaterally in case of a focal spinal cord lesion. If these measures do not produce a response, vigorously pressing the examiner's knuckles up and down the sternum should arouse any patient who is not deeply comatose.

The best practice for reporting level of responsiveness is to document specifically how the patient reacted to the external stimulus provided for testing.

**Pupils**

Initial eye position and movements should be noted. Nystagmus is uncommonly seen in unconscious patients but may indicate an irritating brain lesion or even occult seizure activity. The size of the pupils (using a pupilometer) and reaction to light should be documented. A strong light should be used, as pupillary responses may be sluggish in unconscious patients.

**Cranial Nerves**

If available, a funduscopic exam may reveal essential findings such as papilledema or subhyaloid hemorrhage.

Examination of eye movement with oculocephalic or oculovestibular testing can provide information regarding cranial nerves III, IV, VI, and VIII.  In general terms, patients with intact brainstem functioning should have a normal response to these maneuvers. Oculovestibular testing via caloric stimulation should be performed in patients who do not have a cleared cervical spine.

The corneal reflex can be established by stimulating the cornea and observing for blinking. Stimulation should elicit both a direct and consensual response and suggests the normal function of CN V and VII nuclei in the brainstem. It is recommended to stimulate the cornea with drops of normal saline to prevent corneal damage. Contact lenses will markedly reduce this reflex.

The gag and cough reflexes suggest normal function of cranial nerves IX and X nuclei in the brainstem.

**Motor Function**

Motor function is tested by examining muscular tone, movement patterns, and peripheral tendon reflexes. Decerebrate or decorticate postures carry a bad prognosis.

**Neuroimaging**

Neuroimaging is extremely valuable in evaluating the unconscious patient as an intracranial insult is important to define as soon as possible. Computed tomographic (CT) scan of the brain is commonly the first study performed and can reveal several key findings, including hemorrhage, infarction, space-occupying lesion, herniation, edema, and hydrocephalus. Magnetic resonance imaging is a worthwhile study in cases that are still unclear after initial neuroimaging.

**Lab Testing**

Serum testing usually includes complete blood counts, serum electrolytes including calcium and glucose, renal/hepatic functions, coagulation panel, and toxicology studies.

**Lumbar Puncture**

Lumbar puncture should be considered if the diagnosis remains unclear after the above testing or if a cerebral infection is suspected.

**Glasgow Coma Scale**

**Eye Response**

- 4 = eyes open spontaneously

- 3 = eye-opening to verbal command

- 2 = eye-opening to pain

- 1 = no eye-opening

**Motor Response**

- 6 = obey commands

- 5 = localizing pain

- 4 = withdrawal from pain

- 3 = flexion response to pain

- 2 = extension response to pain

- 1 = no motor response

**Verbal Response**

- 5 = oriented

- 4 = confused

- 3 = inappropriate words

- 2 = incomprehensible sounds

- 1 = no verbal response

**Four SCORE**

**Eye Response**

- 4 = eyelids open or opened, tracking, or blinking to command

- 3 = eyelids open but not tracking

- 2 = eyelids closed but open to a loud voice

- 1 = eyelids closed but open to pain

- 0 = eyelids remain closed with pain

**Motor Response**

- 4 = thumbs-up, fist, or peace sign

- 3 = localizing to pain

- 2 = flexion response to pain

- 1 = extension response to pain

- 0 = no response to pain or generalized myoclonic status

**Brainstem Reflexes**

- 4 = pupil and corneal reflexes present

- 3 = one pupil wide and fixed

- 2 = pupil or corneal reflexes absent

- 1 = pupil and corneal reflexes absent

- 0 = absent pupil, corneal, and cough reflex

**Respiration**

- 4 = not intubated, regular breathing pattern

- 3 = not intubated, Cheyne-Stokes breathing pattern

- 2 = not intubated, irregular breathing

- 1 = breaths above the ventilator rate

- 0 = breaths at ventilator rate or below