Ubiquitination plays a crucial role in virtually every aspect of cellular functions. One of the best understood functions of ubiquitination is protein degradation. This pathway targets proteins to the proteasome, which degrades and recycles the proteins. As noted previously, it has a wide range of functions, including cell signaling, apoptosis, protein processing, immune response, and DNA repair.

The ubiquitination pathway is key in many cellular signaling pathways. For example, polyubiquitin of IkB-alpha plays a central role in the signal activation of IkB-alpha. The nuclear factor-kappa B (NF-κB) signaling pathway regulates various biological functions in the body. Its aberrant activation can lead to the pathogenesis of diseases, such as respiratory diseases and cancers. IκBα ubiquitination occurs when IκBα is phosphorylated at Ser32/Ser36. Phosphorylation of Ser32/Ser36 allows certain ubiquitin E3 ligases to recognize IκBα. Ubiquitinated IκBα is then recognized by the proteasome complex, which leads to its degradation. Degradation of IkB-alpha results in the release of the transcription factor NFkB to the nucleus, which causes an inflammatory response. As mentioned above, protein ubiquitination also plays a role in protein trafficking (e.g., endocytosis). For instance, proteins modified by monoubiquitination and K63-linked polyubiquitination can control the activity, interactions, and subcellular distribution of proteins.

These types of ubiquitination reactions act as a signal for endocytosis and transporting of cellular vesicles to lysosomes. Disruptions in this pathway have implications in many oncogenic formations. Ubiquitination of membrane protein trafficking has also shown associations with various viruses, such as Ebola and HIV, that make their way to the cell surface after replicating within the cell.