After the patient's airway, breathing and circulation have been stabilized, a timeframe of the patient's symptoms is obtained. Vitals and fluid status must be stabilized. Hypo or hyperglycemia must be corrected. Fever, if present, should be managed accordingly. Blood pressure must not be aggressively controlled to allow permissive hypertension only in the case of ischemic injury. Patients with last known normal within 4.5 hours can be considered as candidates for thrombolysis, whereas a 24 hour last known normal can be candidates for mechanical thrombectomy. If it is a case presenting earlier than 4.5 hours of onset, thrombolysis with intravenous recombinant tissue plasminogen activator significantly improves the clinical outcome.

Tissue plasminogen activator (tPA)

Inclusion criteria for tPA:

- Clinical diagnosis of ischemic stroke

- <4.5 hours of the onset of symptoms

- Age >18 and <80 years

- Symptoms of stroke presenting for more than 30 minutes

Excision criteria for tPA:

- Unknown timeline of onset of patient symptoms

- Intracranial hemorrhage or any active bleeding

- Persistently elevated blood pressure ≥ 185 mmHg systolic and ≥ 110 mmHg diastolic

- Low platelets <100,000/mm3, altered INR >1.7, PT >15 sec or aPTT >40sec

- Current use of anti-coagulant

- Severe hypoglycemia <50mg/dL

- History of previous intracranial hemorrhage

- History of gastrointestinal bleeding in the past 21 days

- History of intracranial or intraspinal surgery in the past 90 days

- History of intra-axial intracranial neoplasm or gastrointestinal malignancy

**Intravenous alteplase**(recombinant tissue plasminogen activator) should be given at the dose of 0.9 mg/kg (maximum dose of 90 mg/kg) with 10% as the loading dose in the first minute. The patient must be under continuous observation. Anti-platelet therapy must be withheld for at least 24 hours post thrombolysis and restarted after a head CT scan without evidence of bleeding.

**Mechanical endovascular thrombectomy**in patients with large anterior circulation occlusion is well documented; however, most strokes affecting the brainstem arises from posterior circulation perforating branches. For those cases where the occlusion is at the main vertebral or basilar artery, endovascular thrombectomy is recommended for successful revascularization and favorable outcome.

**Antiplatelet therapy:**The usage of acetylsalicylic acid as monotherapy or dual therapy along with clopidogrel within 24 – 48 hours after the onset of symptoms significantly improved patient outcomes.

**Management of risk factors**like hypertension, diabetes mellitus, dyslipidemia, atrial fibrillation, thyroid abnormalities, sleep apnea, malignancies, and hypercoagulable states should be treated accordingly.  Dietary and lifestyle modification must be explained and discussed. Supplementation with vitamin B12 and vitamin D3 should also be considered. Physiotherapy, along with speech therapy, can be used if physical deficits arise due to infarct. Treatments must start at the earliest and must be aggressively pursued as the brain losses its plasticity within 90 days.