Nasopharyngeal angiofibromas are nonencapsulated, well-circumscribed polypoid masses made up of both vascular and fibrous stromal tissue.  The intervening vessels vary in size, ranging from slit-like to ectatic with a staghorn configuration. Poorly developed myoid-type cells surround the endothelial-lined vascular channels, giving the appearance of a smooth muscle layer. A true muscular coat or elastic lamina is not present, helping explain the propensity to bleed with minor trauma or manipulation. The fibrous stroma tends to be collagenous and made up of fibroblasts, with a variety of cell shapes, including spindle, plump, stellate, or angular. Commonly they contain single small nucleoli, but documented cases of multinucleated cells exist. The cell types vary between tumors but can also vary within the same tumor.  Even with this variability, atypia is uncommon. Mitotic activity is also atypical. And though nonencapsulated, the mass is surrounded by an overlying epithelial layer, often respiratory epithelium. This epithelial layer can demonstrate various reactive changes such as inflammatory cell infiltration, granulation tissue formation, ulceration, and squamous cell metaplasia. Nervous and glandular tissue can be seen within the examined section, though believed to be secondary to entrapment during tumor growth.

Electron microscopy further emphasizes the propensity for hemorrhage and classification as a vascular malformation. This concept has support from the discontinuous basement membrane, irregular surrounding smooth muscle layer, and lack of pericytes. The single-layer endothelium of the vascular channels expresses many of the expected vascular markers such as CD34, CD31, von Willebrand factor, and endoglin.