CLL prognosis is largely determined by the Rai and Binet staging systems and other etiologies causing cytopenia, including marrow failure, autoimmune cytopenias, or prior therapy. A large retrospective study found that CLL patients with autoimmune cytopenias have an overall better prognosis when compared to bone marrow-induced cytopenias.

A published series from 1975 showed that Rai low-risk stage 0 comprised 18% of cases and had a historical median overall survival (OS) of over 150 months.

As previously illustrated, the Binet staging system also risk stratifies patients into low, intermediate, and high-risk categories. Published data from 1981 showed that Binet stage A had a comparable median OS to age-matched controls, while stage B and stage C had a median OS of 84 and 24 months, respectively.

Following the established Rai and Binet staging systems, other prognostic scores/indexes on further CLL variant genetics include the CLL international prognostic index (CLL-IPI), CLL1 prognostic model (CLL1-PM), International Prognostic Score for Early-stage CLL (IPS-E), and Four Factor Prognostic Model for Ibrutinib.

**CLL-IPI**

CLL-IPI's system parameter consists of 4 points for TP53 mutations or Del(17p), 2 points for >3.5 mg/L of serum beta-2 immunoglobulin, 2 points for unmutated IGHV, 1 point for intermediate or high-risk Binet or Rai staging, and 1 point for age greater than 65 years. The point score system divides into four different groups, with 0 to 1 point being low risk, 2 to 3 points being intermediate risk, 4 to 6 points being high risk, and 7 to 10 points being very high risk. The scoring system was established and validated from extensive studies, which showed the 5 to 10-year OS of low risk at 91 to 87%, intermediate risk at 80 to 40%, high risk at 53 to 16%, and very high risk at 19 to 0%.

**CLL1-PM**

CLL1-PM and IPS-E are scores used for prognosis evaluation of early-stage CLL. CLL1-PM is a scoring system consisting of 14 points comprised of Del(17p) at 3.5 points, unmutated IGHV at 2.5 points, Del(11q) at 2.5 points, >3.5 mg/L of serum beta-2 microglobulin at 2.5 points, less than 12 months of lymphocyte doubling time at 1.5 points, and age greater than 60 years at 1.5 points. They are divided into very low risk at 0 to 1.5 points, low risk at 2 to 4 points, high risk at 4.5 to 6.5 points, and very high risk at 7 to 14 points, with their 5 to 10 year OS being 86 to 67%, 52 to 26%, 28 to 3%, and 11 to 0%, respectively.

**IPS-E**

The IPS-E stratifies CLL patients by three risk factors: palpable lymph nodes, lymphocytosis (>15,000/microL), and unmutated IGHV. Those with no risk factors are low risk, those with one risk factor are intermediate risk, and those with 2-3 risk factors are high risk. The three risk groups have shown that the 1-year likelihood percent of requiring treatment is less than 1%, 3%, and 14% for low risk, intermediate-risk, and high risk, respectively. For the 5-year likelihood percent of requiring treatment, data shows 8%, 28%, and 61% for low risk, intermediate-risk, and high risk, respectively.

**Four Factor Prognostic Model**

The Four Factor Prognostic Model for Ibrutinib is a 4-point system consisting of 1-point variables of>250 units/L of lactate dehydrogenase, Del(17p) or TP53 mutations, ≥5 mg/L serum beta-2 microglobulin, and refractory or relapsed disease. Those with 0-1 points are low-risk, 2 points are intermediate-risk, and 3-4 points are high-risk. Data shows the 3-year OS is 93%, 83%, and 63% for low-risk, intermediate-risk, and high-risk groups, respectively.

Relating to CLL variant genetics, recent advancements in technology and science have provided markers that aid in predicting disease course and assessing disease prognosis, some aiding in both.

IGHV mutations are also important predictive markers, occurring in close to 50% of CLL tumors.

Additionally, the CLL14 trial in 2020 showed that unmutated IGHV was a predictive marker for treatment benefits when comparing venetoclax with obinutuzumab to obinutuzumab with chlorambucil.

The last predictive markers discussed include BLC2, BTK, and PLCg2 mutations, which can predict treatment efficacy and are often tested after initiating treatment. Specifically, studies have shown worse predicted clinical outcomes in those with BTK and PLCg2 mutations and status post-treatment with BCR inhibitors. Regarding BCL2 mutations, studies have shown that those with the mutation and treated with venetoclax have worse predicted clinical outcomes when treated with venetoclax therapy again.

Lastly, two other factors associated with worsening prognosis include lymphocyte doubling time, particularly in less than 12 months, and Beta-2 microglobulin.