Rickettsiae have one of the smallest genomes in the bacterial world and seem to have evolved with genomic reduction and adaptation for intracellular life. The rickettsial genome can code for effective transport systems for ATP, amino acids, and phosphorylated sugars as well as metabolic enzymes. The R. akari genome is unique when compared to other rickettsiae as the genome is highly conserved. The protein profiles of isolates from the United States, Ukraine, and Croatia are identical. The R. akari isolates from the 1940s are identical to the strains isolated in 2001 through 2003. There is likely a single ancestral strain circulating globally.

The adult male and female mites obtain multiple blood meals, whereas nymphal stages feed only once before molting. Since mites do not defecate during a blood meal, researchers hypothesize that the rickettsiae are introduced into the host by inoculation, at the time of the feeding via infected salivary secretions. R. akari can be transmitted vertically, and therefore it is present in all stages of the mite’s life cycle, namely egg, larva, protonymph, deutonymph, and adult. The bites of a house mouse mite are painless and, therefore, go unnoticed.

After entry into the host, R. akari targets the CD68 macrophages. This is a unique feature among the rickettsiae, which usually target the vascular endothelial cells. The interactions that lead to infection of the macrophages are unknown. R. akari causes self-phagocytosis like other rickettsiae and escapes the phagosome before fusion with lysosomes can occur. R. akari multiplies by binary fission without initially disrupting the cellular architecture.

R. akari shows actin-based motility inside the cells and can propel themselves into the nucleus, adjacent cells, or invaginate into the cell membrane, ultimately bursting into the extracellular space. Once in the extracellular space, motility is due to Brownian motion only. This actin-based directed mobility inside the cell and tissues is a common feature of SFG of rickettsia and is not present in TG.

Experimental data suggest that T-cell mediated activation of macrophages is key to controlling and clearing the infection due to R. akari. The kinetics of cytokine release is different from that due to R. typhi infection. Elevated levels of tumor necrosis factor-alpha (TNF-alpha) but not interferon-gamma have been identified with R. akari infections. Overall, the immune response to R. akari infection in humans has not fully been characterized.