Recent evidence from research studies suggests that reproductive hormone release patterns are normal in women with PMS/PMDD, but they have a heightened sensitivity to cyclical variations in levels of reproductive hormones, which predisposes them to experience mood, behavioral, and somatic symptoms.

**Role of Sex Steroids**

**Progesterone**

Many scientists have postulated that PMS/PMDD symptoms develop because of a decline of progesterone in the late luteal phase that causes CNS changes in gamma-aminobutyric acid (GABA) and progesterone metabolites that interact with the GABA-A receptor complex. However, there are other sets of scientists who argue against this hypothesis by stating that many symptoms can begin at ovulation and the early luteal phase before the fall in the level of progesterone. To further corroborate, some studies showed that the hormonal cyclicity was suppressed by treatment with Gonadotropin-releasing hormone, and re-exposure to progesterone reproduced symptoms even when the hormone concentrations were stable. Also, if the above theory of decline in the late luteal phase indicating progesterone as the precipitating factor were to be believed, then administration of progesterone during this phase would have been an effective treatment which is not.

**Allopregnanolone**

Allopregnanolone is a metabolite of progesterone, and like progesterone, levels of this metabolite also fluctuate during the menstrual cycle. As mentioned, progesterone metabolites interact with the GABA-A receptor complex and allopregnanolone specifically potentiates inhibitory responses to GABA-A receptor agonists. Some studies suggest that women with PMS/PMDD have diminished functional sensitivity of the GABA-A receptor due to deficient allopregnanolone response to stress.

**Estrogen**

An alternative hypothesis suggests that preovulatory peak in estradiol, postovulatory increase in progesterone, or both trigger symptoms of PMS/PMDD

**Testosterone**

Transgender men experience improvements in social functioning and reduced anxiety and depression once testosterone therapy is begun.

**Role of Central Neurotransmitters**

**Serotonin**

Serotonin is a central neurotransmitter that is well-proven to be involved in mood and behavior regulation. Sex steroids may affect behavior by exerting their effects on serotonergic transmission. Three proofs authenticate this theory. First, premenstrual symptoms are diminished by selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors (SSRIs) and other treatments that boost serotonin levels, like serotonin-releasing agents.

**Gamma-aminobutyric acid**

GABA is an inhibitory neurotransmitter, and some imaging studies suggest the possible role of GABA in the pathophysiology of PMS/PMDD based on the fact that some progesterone metabolites interact with GABA A receptors

**Glutamate**

Glutamate is an excitatory neurotransmitter, and there is a cyclical fluctuation in its levels during the menstrual cycle for all women (symptomatic and asymptomatic), but symptomatic women seem to have an increased sensitivity to these cyclical changes.

**Beta Endorphins**

Studies have shown that women with PMDD have lower levels of cortisol and beta-endorphins during both the follicular and luteal phases.