Opisthotonus frequently poses a diagnostic dilemma. The patients may exhibit non-specific signs and symptoms. The cause of opisthotonus may be due to a myriad of diagnoses, including infectious, metabolic, developmental, degenerative, neurologic, environmental etiologies. While the physical exam may reveal that the patient has generalized stiffness and spasms, the cause is difficult to know without proper imaging studies and metabolic and hematological studies. Due to wide variations in presentation, diagnosis may be delayed if patients are not specifically screened for specific diseases.

It is extremely important to make an early and correct diagnosis of the etiology producing opisthotonus. Delay in the diagnosis can produce devastating outcomes and even death. It is important to attempt the prevention of causative agents. Collaboration in care is an integral component of delivering efficient and effective health care. While the responsibility for screening rests mainly among primary care providers, most do not consistently assess metabolic problems due to various barriers such as lack of time and more pressing health issues.

Tests to confirm the underlying cause, complications and for monitoring the disease activity are performed. They include complete blood counts, metabolic profile, renal and hepatic functions. Brain magnetic resonance imaging and/or computed tomography scan is performed to confirm the presence of lesions causing raised intracranial pressure. A lumbar puncture can be performed after a normal neuroimaging study and is likely to reveal a raised opening pressure. The fluid obtained undergoes relevant tests like glucose, protein, cell count to rule out infections.