The kidneys are located bilaterally at the upper lumbar vertebra with the left kidney typically slightly superior in location than the right kidney.

Each kidney can be divided into renal parenchyma and renal sinus.

Renal parenchyma consists of the peripheral renal cortex and the more central renal medulla. The outer cortex contains the glomeruli, peritubular capillaries, renal tubules, and cortical portions of the collecting ducts that form urine. The renal medulla contains the medullary portion of the collecting ducts which completes urine concentration begun at the glomeruli. Urine drains into the renal calyces.

The renal sinus consists of calyces, the renal pelvis, and the renal arteries and veins. The renal pelvis is a funnel-shaped structure, which connects the renal calyces to the ureter(s) which descend to the bladder.

The kidney's blood supply is derived from the renal arteries, originating laterally off the abdominal aorta. The renal arteries divide into smaller and smaller branches, progressing into segmental, interlobar, arcuate, and interlobular arteries. The interlobular arteries eventually become the even smaller afferent arterioles and then the glomerular capillaries, that supply the glomeruli. The glomerular capillaries act as semi-permeable membranes that help produce 20% of the urine via passive filtration of the plasma. The renal tubules produce the remaining 80% of the urine via active tubular secretion. The glomerular capillaries beyond the glomeruli become efferent arterioles leading to peritubular capillaries that surround renal tubules and help reabsorb and concentrate urine while retaining various electrolytes.

Nuclear scintigraphy and its various agents take advantage of the aforementioned renal anatomy and physiology. Injected radiopharmaceuticals enter the renal artery and eventually enter renal glomeruli. Radiotracers primarily filtered by glomeruli are useful to evaluate glomerular filtration rates, which is a way to evaluate renal function. Radiotracer secreted by the tubules is used to assess the estimated renal plasma flow. Renal cortical agents predominantly bind to renal tubules within the kidney cortex and allow renal anatomic evaluation (see discussion below).