# Introduction

A ryanodine receptor is a homotetrameric channel with a molecular mass of more than 2.2 megadaltons.Ryania speciosa.

# Issues of Concern

One issue of concern when studying these proteins is the size. Ryanodine receptors are the largest known ion channels that are capable of creating a rapid and transient increase in the cytosolic calcium levels within the cell.

# Cellular Level

A ryanodine receptor is comprised of four polypeptides, each consisting of around 5000 amino acids, and four FK506-binding proteins, each consisting of approximately 110 amino acids.

In skeletal muscle, calcium release units arrange themselves in triads composed of three different elements: two terminal expansions of the sarcoplasmic reticulum on either side that form a junction with the third component, the t-tubule.

In cardiac muscle, calcium release units arrange themselves in dyads, containing only two elements, a single terminal sarcoplasmic reticulum expansion forming a junction with the surface of the t-tubule membrane.

# Development

The functional ryanodine receptor ion channel is formed by four monomers, each having more than 5000 residues that constitute the largest ion channel protein so far identified.

# Organ Systems Involved

There are three different isoforms of ryanodine receptors found in mammals.

The type 1 ryanodine receptor is primarily found in skeletal muscles and is at the junctional region of the terminal sarcoplasmic reticulum.

# Function

The ryanodine receptor serves as a conduit for calcium to flow through to produce a contraction in striated muscle.

In skeletal muscle, the depolarization from the action potential leads to a protein to protein interaction across the junctional cleft between the dihydropyridine receptor and the ryanodine receptor type 1 to release calcium from the sarcoplasmic reticulum to produce a muscle contraction.

In cardiac muscle during systole, calcium is released from the sarcoplasmic reticulum by directly activating the type 2 ryanodine receptors by an inward current of calcium via the L-type calcium channels during excitation produced from the action potential.

# Mechanism

Historically it has been shown that there are three properties essential for a muscle contraction: sensitivity level to ryanodine, how rapidity of calcium release from the sarcoplasmic reticulum, and the ryanodine receptor.

The skeletal muscle excitation-contraction coupling appears to depend on the conformational change denoted through the protein to protein interactions that link dihydropyridine subunits to the type 1 ryanodine receptors.

In cardiac excitation-contraction coupling, calcium ions enter the dyadic junction through the dihydropyridine receptor and activate the type 2 ryanodine receptors via calcium-induced calcium release.

# Related Testing

One area of testing that has proven beneficial has been the use of fluorescence resonance energy transfer.

# Pathophysiology

Mutations in ryanodine receptors primarily correlate with a range of myopathies and cardiac arrhythmia disorders. The Human Gene Mutation Database contains 563 mutations in the type 1 ryanodine receptors and 287 mutations in the type 2 ryanodine receptors known to cause inherited disease.

For example, in malignant hyperthermia, findings indicate that disruption of the N-terminus and central domain interaction within the ryanodine receptor becomes disrupted, leading to increased activity of the channel.

# Clinical Significance

More than 100 type-1 ryanodine receptor channel mutations potentially present in skeletal muscle, including malignant hyperthermia, central core disease, and multi/minicore disease.

Malignant hyperthermia is a hypermetabolic syndrome that appears in susceptible patients after exposure to specific pharmacologic agents that induces abnormal regulation of the ryanodine receptors, producing a massive release of calcium from the sarcoplasmic reticulum in striated muscle.

Catecholaminergic polymorphic ventricular tachycardia is characterized by a polymorphic ventricular tachycardia in the setting of a high adrenergic tone, as in exercise.