While subacromial impingement syndrome (SIS) is the most common cause of shoulder pain, rotator cuff (RC) tendonitis is often seen in association with shoulder impingement. Rotator cuff tendonitis can present in the acute setting following injury or, chronically, as a result of repetitive overuse activities or sport-related demands.

**Acute Rotator Cuff Tendonitis**

Acutely, rotator cuff tendonitis afflicts athletes at all levels of competition. Acute injuries often occur secondary to direct trauma to the shoulder in contact sports, poor throwing mechanics in overhead sports (i.e., baseball, javelin throwers), or from falls on an outstretched arm.

**Chronic Rotator Cuff Tendinopathy**

Chronically, rotator cuff tendinopathy can occur secondary to a variety of proposed mechanisms:

**Extrinsic compression**

The extrinsic theory of mechanical impingement and pathologic contact between the undersurface of the acromion and the rotator cuff results in repetitive injury to the cuff. Rotator cuff tendinopathy results in weakened areas of the cuff, eventually resulting in PTTs and/or FTTs. The mechanical compression can occur secondary to a degenerative bursa, acromial spurring, and predisposing acromial morphologies (i.e., the hooked-type acromion). Theories were popularized and modified by Watson-Jones, Neer, and Bigliani.

**Intrinsic mechanisms**

Several theories exist to support intrinsic degeneration of the cuff as the primary source of shoulder impingement. In general, the intrinsic degenerative theories cite that cuff degeneration eventually compromises the overall stability of the glenohumeral joint. Once compromised, the humeral head migrates superiorly, and the subacromial space decreases in size. Thus, the cuff becomes susceptible to secondary extrinsic compressive forces, ultimately leading to cuff degeneration, tendinopathy, and tearing.

- Vascular changes - Advocates for intrinsic degenerative theories cite focal vascular adaptations that occur secondary to age-related changes and intrinsic cuff failure from repetitive eccentric forces directly experienced by the cuff itself. Lohr et al. initially demonstrated a distal area of the supraspinatous tendon on the articular side that lacks blood vessel supply 1 cm proximal to its insertional footprint.

- Age, sex, and genetics - Histologically, age-related rotator cuff changes include collagen fiber disorientation and myxoid degeneration.

- Tensile forces - A study by Budoff et al. proposed that the primary mode of failure of the cuff occurs intrinsically within the cuff itself as it repeatedly withstands significant eccentric tensile forces during physical activity.