For postpubertal women who receive a new diagnosis of malignancy, their fertility preservation options include controlled ovarian stimulation with embryo or oocyte cryopreservation. Embryo cryopreservation may offer a prognosis on a live birth rate based on the patient's age, along with the number and quality of embryos with or without preimplantation genetic test results. Oocyte cryopreservation may be the preferred method if a patient does not have a committed male partner or does not wish to use donor sperm. Predictors for success with the use of mature oocytes include the age of the patient at vitrification and the number of oocytes cryopreserved.

Women with a cancer diagnosis who desire future fertility should immediately undergo controlled ovarian stimulation with a gonadotropin-releasing hormone (GnRH) antagonist protocol regardless of the phase of the menstrual cycle to prevent a delay in treatment.

It is also recommended to cryopreserve the gametes before initiation of cancer therapy as there have not been any human studies examining the quality of embryos and oocytes following treatment with chemotherapy.

In prepubertal girls with a new cancer diagnosis, the only option for fertility preservation is ovarian tissue cryopreservation, which is no longer considered experimental.

Additionally, if a patient underwent a bilateral salpingo-oophorectomy due to being a carrier of a BRCA mutation, it is not recommended that they have ovarian tissue transplantation given the increased possibility of having ovarian cancer.