Dysfunction of the corneal “blink” reflex can occur from damage at any point in the pathway (i.e., central or peripheral nervous system). Peripherally damage causes ipsilateral reflex deficits while central dysfunctions have bilateral deficits.

Peripherally, damage to either the trigeminal nerve (V) or facial nerve (VII) nerve will disrupt the corneal blink circuit. Physicians diagnose damage to peripheral nerves by examining either the early and late stages of the blink reflex or secondary symptoms of the nerve damage.

When examining secondary symptoms of nerve damage, physicians perform tests for motor and sensory function. The trigeminal nerve (V1) causes a lack of sensation for the forehead. To test V1 function, have the patient close their eyes and indicate when they feel a touch to different regions of the face. Patients with V1 damage do not feel or identify touch on the affected side of the forehead.

Facial nerve damage causes ipsilateral paresis of the muscles of facial expression. This results in drooping of the mouth and flattening of the forehead and nasolabial fold on the ipsilateral side.

Central nervous system dysfunction will cause deficits in the blink reflex bilaterally. Symptoms will present as dysfunction in the late stage but not the early stage of the blink reflex. A common lesion that influences the blink response is Wallenberg syndrome (i.e., lateral medulla lesion). The spinal trigeminal nucleus is located within the lateral medulla. Disruption of this area region interrupts the blink reflex pathway and results in a lack of late-stage reflexes bilaterally with corneal stimulation on the affected side.

Damage to the reticular activating system, red nucleus, or cerebellum will also influence the corneal blink reflex.