The goal of surgery is to prevent further damage and restore the ocular anatomy as far as possible. Functional restoration or visual gain is the secondary goal. The visual prognosis is usually guarded if retinal detachment or endophthalmitis is present. The IOFB should be localized on the CT scan, whether it is intraocular or extraocular or impacting the visual pathway or not.

The injured eye should be protected with a shield. During the examination, the eye should be gently handled. External pressure should be avoided as it may expel the intraocular contents. Tetanus toxoid (intramuscular) injection should be given. The contaminated part should be cleaned with a sterile solution, and small superficial foreign bodies should be removed in the absence of an open globe. Broad-spectrum intravenous antibiotics may be considered as prophylaxis against endophthalmitis. Endophthalmitis is a dreaded complication and is associated with 7 to 13% of IOFB cases.

The position of the IOFB should be preoperatively localized in the anterior or posterior segment. The first step is the primary repair of the ocular coats (cornea and/or sclera) of the open globe. Meticulous closure of the perforation site is done first.

**IOFB in the anterior chamber:**The IOFB might be located in the anterior chamber. The perforation site should be inspected. Its extent should be noted. Iris or uveal tissue prolapse is ascertained. The corneal perforation should be repaired with 10-0 monofilament nylon sutures. Scleral perforation is repaired with a 6-0 or 7-0 polyglactin 910 suture. The anterior chamber should be formed with viscoelastic solutions. Any exudates or hyphema in the anterior chamber should be washed first. Small and mobile IOFB can be removed with viscoexpression or an intraocular magnet. If it is immobile due to surrounding fibrosis, then the IOFB should be removed with forceps.

The IOFB should not be removed through the entry wound.

**Intralenticular foreign body:**IOFB might be impacted in the crystalline lens. The cataractous lens should be evaluated for the position of IOFB and posterior capsule tear.

**Foreign body in the anterior chamber angle:**A foreign body must be ruled out in the angle when not observed on initial examination. Gonioscopy should be done gently.

**Posterior segment IOFB:**Accurate localization is necessary preoperatively. CT scan accurately localizes it in the ocular coat, anterior segment, posterior segment, or extraocular location.

The site of impaction should be laser barraged. The retinal periphery should be inspected for additional breaks. If retinal detachment is present, a complete vitrectomy should be done, followed by fluid air exchange, endolaser photocoagulation, and silicone oil tamponade. If the retina is attached, then the retinal break should be laser barraged. The scleral ports are closed tightly.