The finding of hypercalcemia together with hypophosphatemia is highly suggestive of hyperparathyroidism.

Patients with primary hyperparathyroidism and other causes of PTH-dependent hypercalcemia often have frankly elevated levels of PTH, while some will have values that fall within the reference range for the general population. A normal PTH in the presence of significant hypercalcemia is considered inappropriate and still consistent with PTH-dependent hypercalcemia.

Patients on known hypercalcemic drugs, such as lithium and thiazide, should have these medications stopped for 3 to 6 months, if possible, and their serum calcium & parathyroid hormone levels retested. Patients with low vitamin D levels should receive supplements to maintain at least 30 mg/mL. If parathyroid hormone levels are still elevated, this suggests hyperparathyroidism. Familial hypocalciuric hypercalcemia can be excluded by a 24-hour urine calcium determination (<100 mg calcium/24  hours) or by a low calcium/creatinine excretion ratio [(urinary calcium x serum creatinine) / (serum calcium x urinary creatinine)] typically <0.02.

Biotin (also known as vitamin B-7) is a nutritional supplement that helps produce energy from food. It is significant here because biotin supplementation can interfere with parathyroid hormone assays.

Recommended serum intact parathyroid tests include immunochemiluminometric or immunoradiometric assays, which readily discriminate between primary hyperparathyroidism and malignancy-related hypercalcemia. (Parathyroid hormone-related protein, which causes malignancy-related hypercalcemia, does not react with parathyroid hormone assays.)

A comprehensive clinical evaluation complemented by routine laboratory and radiologic studies should be sufficient to establish a diagnosis of primary hyperparathyroidism in a patient with persistent hypercalcemia and a concomitant elevated serum level of parathyroid hormone. It is uncommon for clinically occult malignancies to cause hypercalcemia. Most patients with malignancy-associated hypercalcemia are known to have cancer, or their cancer is readily detectable on initial evaluation, and PTH levels will be suppressed.

A review of previous medical records can often be of significant value in establishing the cause of hypercalcemia. Most patients with hyperparathyroidism have persistent or intermittent hypercalcemia for many years before a definitive diagnosis is established. Very few diseases, other than hyperparathyroidism, will allow a healthy-appearing individual to be hypercalcemic for more than a few years without any clinical signs or symptoms.

List of tests for primary hyperparathyroidism:

- Total serum calcium

- Calculation of the "corrected" serum calcium; approximately 50% of total serum calcium is protein-bound, principally to albumin, and only the free or ionized fraction is biologically active. Corrected calcium = Measured calcium + 0.8 x (4.0 - albumin) (calcium measured in mg/dL; albumin measured in g/dL)

- Ionized calcium in selected cases when there are questions about the accuracy of the corrected calcium

- Parathyroid hormone

- Phosphate (hypercalcemia with hypophosphatemia is highly suggestive of hyperparathyroidism)

- BUN and creatinine

- Alkaline phosphatase and osteocalcin (usually elevated)

- Sclerostin (a bone formation regulator) is usually suppressed in primary hyperparathyroidism

- 25-hydroxyvitamin D

- Serum albumin

- Urine calcium and creatinine

- Imaging to screen for renal calcifications or urolithiasis (KUB, renal ultrasound, or non-contrast CT scan)

- Bone densitometry (DEXA) scans, including measurement at the distal 1/3 radius (which is preferentially affected in hyperparathyroid patients)

- Localization studies for potential surgical patients (see below)

- EKG

- Genetic testing in selected individuals if there is suspicion of a genetic syndrome

- The need for other studies such as PTHrP levels, serum or urine protein electrophoresis, 1,25-dihydroxyvitamin D levels, thyroid tests, or mammography can be individualized and are usually only needed in those with PTH-independent hypercalcemia.

**Parathyroid Localization (Imaging) Studies**

Neck ultrasonography and parathyroid nuclear medicine (Tc-Sestamibi) scans are standard imaging tests for the localization of hyperfunctioning parathyroid glands. Neck ultrasonography is highly operator-dependent but can be very successful in centers with experience and expertise.

Parathyroid four-dimensional multiphase (4D) CT should be considered when surgery is planned, particularly when the abnormal parathyroid glands cannot be localized with Sestamibi scans or neck ultrasound imaging.

F-18-Fluorocholine positron emission tomography/CT (F-18-choline PET/CT) has shown promising results in parathyroid adenoma localization in difficult or equivocal cases, suggesting superiority over Sestamibi scanning, ultrasound, or CT scans alone.

When non-invasive preoperative localization studies (ultrasound, Tc-Sestamibi single-photon emission computed tomography (SPECT), and 4D CT imaging) are negative, selective parathyroid venous sampling can help identify the anatomical location of abnormal hyper-functioning parathyroid glands.

The need for other studies such as PTHrP levels, serum or urine protein electrophoresis, 1,25-dihydroxyvitamin D levels, thyroid tests, bone scans, fine needle parathyroid aspiration, or mammography can be individualized and are usually only needed in those with PTH-independent hypercalcemia. DEXA scans will typically show a loss of bone density, particularly in the distal third of the radius, although any pattern may be present.

**Specific Hyperparathyroid and Hypercalcemic Disorders**

**Acute primary hyperparathyroidism**(parathyroid crisis, parathyroid storm) is a rare condition in which there is a sudden episode of potentially life-threatening hypercalcemia in a patient with known primary hyperparathyroidism. Laboratory studies indicate very high serum calcium levels, >14 mg/dL,  with parathyroid hormone readings up to twenty times normal.

**Familial hypocalciuric hypercalcemia**(FHH) is an autosomal dominant inherited disorder that is sometimes easily confused with primary hyperparathyroidism. It is characterized by hypercalcemia, hypocalciuria, and high-normal to mildly increased parathyroid hormone secretion.

**Normocalcemic hyperparathyroidism**can be primary or secondary and is defined as the presence of persistently elevated parathyroid hormone levels over at least six months despite normal readings of corrected serum calcium or ionized calcium with 25 (OH) levels of 30 ng/ml or more and a GFR of at least 60 mL/min. An increased serum calcium/phosphate ratio is also suggestive of this diagnosis.

**Malignancy-related hypercalcemia**can be found in as many as 30% of all cancer patients.

In the absence of known cancer, physicians should be suspicious of a hidden malignancy, especially in patients with paraneoplastic-like symptoms such as unexplained fatigue, weight loss, skin rashes, or muscle weakness. Bone scans are useful for osteolytic metastases as they are quite sensitive but relatively non-specific. Bone marrow biopsy examinations can be useful in patients with unexplained anemia or abnormal blood smears. Treatment would be directed to the specific malignancy. When this is not possible, the hypercalcemia can be severe and relatively resistant to standard hypercalcemia therapy (hydration with normal saline or increased salt intake, diuresis with furosemide, bisphosphonates, denosumab (rank ligand inhibitors), oral phosphates, calcitonin, glucocorticoids, cinacalcet, and dialysis).

**Parathyromatosis**has also been reported as an exceedingly rare cause of primary hyperparathyroidism. In this condition, scattered non-malignant but hyperfunctioning islands of parathyroid tissue are found in the superior mediastinum and/or the neck.

**Evaluation Summary**

- Hyperparathyroidism should be suspected when there are unexplained elevated serum calcium levels.

- Hypercalcemia with hypophosphatemia is also suggestive of primary hyperparathyroidism.

- Patients at risk are more likely to be female and older.

- All potential causes of secondary hyperparathyroidism must be ruled out.

- Familial hypocalcemic hypercalcemia can be differentiated from primary hyperparathyroidism by calcium/creatinine excretion ratio and 24-hour urine testing for calcium excretion.

- Patients with low vitamin D levels may need supplementation and a retest of calcium and PTH levels after three months.

- Primary hyperparathyroidism can be confirmed with an ionized calcium (or a corrected serum calcium) determination together with a parathyroid hormone test.

- Imaging for possible nephrocalcinosis and nephrolithiasis is recommended.

- A baseline DEXA bone scan is recommended in all patients with confirmed primary hyperparathyroidism, including the lumbar spine, hip, and distal third of the radius.

- Localization studies are not diagnostic; they are unnecessary except for patients considering possible parathyroid surgery.

- A diagnosis of normocalcemic primary hyperparathyroidism requires persistent parathyroid levels with normal serum calcium determinations at least six months apart.

- The treatment of normocalcemic primary hyperparathyroidism is similar to classic primary hyperparathyroidism.