**Insulator System of the Body**

- Heat insulator of the body composed of the skin, the subcutaneous tissues, and the adipose tissues.

- The subcutaneous fat is important because it conducts heat poorly.

- Insulator properties of the female body are better than the male body.

**Blood Flow to the Skin from the Body Core Imparts Heat Transfer**

- Blood vessels are profusely distributed under the skin.

- The presence of continuous venous plexus that is supplied by an inflow of blood from the skin capillaries is significant for thermoregulation.

- Also, blood is supplied to the plexus directly from the small arteries through highly muscular arteriovenous anastomoses in hands, feet, and ears.

**Effect of the environmental temperature on heat conductance from the body core to the skin**

- The skin is an efficient, controlled “heat radiator” system.

- The flow of blood to the skin is the most effective mechanism for heat transfer from the body core to the environment.

**Basic Physics the Loss of Heat from the Skin Surface**

Heat dissipated by radiation, evaporation, and conduction.

Evaporation and conduction of the air are accelerated by convection.

**Evaporation Is a Necessary Cooling Mechanism at High Air Temperatures**

- When the temperature of the environment becomes greater than that of the skin, the body gains heat by both conduction and radiation.

- So, the evaporation is the only way by which the body can rid itself of heat under these conditions.

- Therefore, anything that prevents adequate evaporation when the surrounding temperature is higher than the skin temperature will result in a rise of the internal body temperature.

- Inadequate perspiration occurs in patients who are born with congenital absence or malfunctioning of sweat glands (Ectodermal dysplasia). These patients are in danger of overheating in hot environments.

**Clothing Reduces Conductive and Convective Heat Loss**

- Clothing entraps air next to the skin, thereby increasing the thickness of the so-called private zone of air adjacent to the skin and also decreasing the flow of convection air currents.

- When clothing becomes wet, the effectiveness of clothing in maintaining body temperature is almost completely lost, because the high conductivity of water increases the rate of heat transmission through a cloth.