A thorough history and physical exam should be obtained and performed in all patients with suspected HF, as the entire basis of the diagnosis is on clinical symptoms and signs. It also should include assessment of risk factors and possible etiologies of the HF. Symptoms of HF are similar regardless of the EF. Symptoms are more severe with exertion and either secondary to fluid accumulation (dyspnea, orthopnea, edema, and abdominal discomfort from hepatic congestion and ascites in the setting of right heart failure) or due to decreased cardiac output (fatigue, anorexia, and weakness). Other less typical symptoms include nocturnal cough, loss of appetite, wheezing, palpitations, depression, syncope, bendopnea (shortness of breath while bending forward), and dizziness. In advanced HF, patients may have resting sinus tachycardia, diaphoresis, narrow pulse pressure (less than 25 mmHg due to decreased cardiac output), and peripheral vasoconstriction (cool and pale extremities due to decreased perfusion). Volume overload manifests as peripheral edema (extremities edema, ascites, scrotal edema, and hepatosplenomegaly), elevated jugular venous pressure (JVP), and pulmonary congestion (rales on the exam and pleural effusions). Displaced apical impulse (laterally past the midclavicular line, which is a sign of LV enlargement), parasternal lift (right ventricular enlargement), and an S3 gallop. At each clinic visit, symptoms and signs of HF require assessment to monitor response to therapy and stability over time. It is also important to check vital signs and assess volume status during each clinic visit.