**Factors Affecting Wound Healing**

The WHP is very complex and involves high levels of coordination between multiple tissues and cell types

**Diabetes**

There is no doubt that diabetes plays a detrimental role in wound healing. It does so by affecting the WHP at multiple steps. Wound hypoxia, through a combination of impaired angiogenesis, inadequate tissue perfusion, and pressure-related ischemia, is a major driver of chronic diabetic wounds

**Tobacco Abuse**

Cigarette smoking leads to numerous adverse health consequences, including various types of cancer, primary lung disease, and cardiovascular disease, among others

**Malnutrition**

The nutritional needs of the healing wound are very complex. Wounds require a myriad of different micro and macronutrients to heal properly

Several micronutrients are worth mentioning because they play a particularly important role in wound healing

**Obesity**

Obesity is a significant factor in surgical wound healing. Abdominal obesity is correlated with oxidative stress, a phenomenon associated with deficiency of adiponectin (e.g., adipose-derived cytokine with antioxidant and anti-inflammatory properties). Adiponectin-deficient state leads to impaired perfusion and reepithelialization of the wound. Moreover, hypovolemia combined with relative hypoperfusion and reduction in oxygen delivery lead to further tissue injury. Consequently, wound complications, including surgical site infections and fat necrosis are more prevalent in obese patients. Various combinations of the same factors may be associated with impaired secondary healing following primary wound-related morbidity

Pressure ulcers are more likely to develop in obese patients through pressure-related ischemia and hypovascularity, as well as decreased mobility. Contact between the skin and various hospital surfaces (e.g., stretchers, operating room tables) may result in friction, leading to ulceration and wound formation. Systemic effects of obesity, such as hypertension, hyperglycemia, and upregulation of the stress hormones in response to the physiologic burden of surgery and acute illness, all work to impair further wound healing. Additional factors involved in this complex process include blunting of the immune and inflammatory responses. Interestingly, these ill-effects of obesity are largely reversible through weight loss

**Stress**

Stress has been demonstrated to be a major contributor to a broad range of health conditions and illnesses, including cardiovascular disease, cancer, and obesity. Stress states lead to upregulation of stress hormones via the hypothalamic-pituitary axis and the release of adrenocortical hormones. Resultant changes include elevated levels of cortisol, glucocorticoids, and catecholamines. Cortisol works to blunt the immune response by blocking the production of important cytokines such as IL-1beta, IL-6, and TNF-alpha. The impairment of immune response ultimately leads to deficient wound healing