When observing a specimen of the ear under light microscopy, several elements are identifiable. A cross-sectional preparation of the external ear will show keratinized stratified squamous epithelium with underlying cartilaginous structure, and cerumen-producing glands may be visible. The middle ear will show non-keratinized stratified squamous epithelium.

The most complex structure seen with a microscope will be the inner ear. The bony labyrinth, membranous labyrinth, kinocilium, stereocilia, semicircular canals, cochlea, and the organ of Corti may undergo a histological examination. A simple cross-section of the cochlea will show two fluid-filled channels, the spiral ganglion, the organ of Corti, and bone. Highly specialized inner ear cells include hair cells, pillar cells, Boettcher cells, Claudius cells, spiral ganglion neurons, and Deiters cells (phalangeal cells).

The external ear has a pinna, external auditory canal, cerumen, and tympanic cavity. The pinna is keratinized, stratified squamous epithelium skin on it. It is made of subcutaneous fibroconnective tissue, elastic fibrocartilage, and fat.

The external auditory canal also has keratinized stratified squamous epithelium that covers the external tympanic membrane as well. Cerumen is wax produced by the sebaceous glands.

The middle ear has a Eustachian tube, which has a ciliated columnar epithelium, and it changes to pseudostratified, ciliated columnar with goblet cells closer to the pharynx. The tympanic membrane is lined by a flat, single layer of cuboidal epithelium.

The inner ear has a columnar epithelium overlying vascular stroma in the vestibular labyrinth.