The current screening recommendation is to use CANRISK (Canadian Diabetes Risk Score) or FINDRISK (Finnish Diabetic Risk Score) scores to evaluate for the risk of prediabetes and diabetes mellitus type 2 in people of age 45-74 years of age, although it may be in high-risk younger age individuals. CANRISK is adapted from a similar tool called FINDRISK, a part of Finland's national diabetes prevention program. The CANRISK is specifically modified to suit the Canadian population and includes additional ethnicity, education, and gestational diabetes questions. The CANRISK scores utilize a questionnaire that consists of 12 questions, each with points for patient characteristics. The points are then added and compared with threshold scores for three risk categories, i.e., low (<21), moderate (21 to 32), and high (>32) risk. The BMI risk assessment is also recommended every 3 to 5 years in individuals at high risk of developing diabetes mellitus in 10 years.

If BMI is more than 25 kg/m^2 or WC is above the cutoff point, advise regular clinical visits to conduct clinical examinations and laboratory investigations to assess for comorbidities.

In the initial visit, the clinician needs to pay attention to aspects of history and examination in detail, conduct an obesity-focused review of systems looking for potential symptoms of obesity-related complications, and perform laboratory testing. It is also essential to involve a psychiatrist or psychologist and screen for depression and other mood disorders and psychological problems.

- Check blood pressure, heart rate, fasting glucose, lipid profile that includes total cholesterol, triglycerides, LDL (low-density cholesterol), HDL (high-density cholesterol), and the ratio of total cholesterol to HDL cholesterol.

- Examine for hyperlipidemia signs such as xanthelasmata (cholesterol deposit underneath the skin or around eyelid), tendinous xanthoma (lipid deposit in tendon), eruptive xanthoma (painful reddish yellow and pruritic rash), lipemia retinalis (atheromata in retinal blood vessels), and corneal arcus (lipid deposit in the cornea).

- Screen and evaluate for psychiatric illnesses like depression, binge eating and other eating disorders, and mood disorders.

- Manage associated comorbidities to reduce health risk factors.

- Assess for personal habits and barriers to weight loss.

- Counsel the patient and evaluate readiness for weight loss.

Table 3: Key clinical data to be obtained at initial evaluation

Evaluation

System and Findings

Complications

Physical examination

Anthropometrics: Weight, BMI, WC, neck circumference

General Examination: Physical activity

Vital signs: Blood pressure

Skin: Acanthosis nigricans, hirsutism

Respiratory: Wheezing, prolonged expiratory phase

Extremity: Edema

Musculoskeletal: High muscle mass, weakness, decreased range of motion in joints, swelling, tenderness, and crepitance in joints

Liver: Enlargement, firm

Endocrine: Hyper/hypothyroid findings, signs of hypercortisolism



Metabolic syndrome (WC), OSA

Disability resulting from excess weight

Hypertension

Insulin resistance, polycystic ovarian syndrome (hormonal testing)

Asthma

Interpretation of BMI

Interpretation of BMI, osteoarthritis, sarcopenia



Non-Alcoholic fatty liver disease

Hypo/hyperthyroidism (TSH), Cushing disease (salivary and 24-hr urine cortisol)

Drug history

Cardiovascular: Chest pain, orthopnea, dyspnea, syncope, palpitations, stroke, transient ischemic attack, claudication

Respiratory: Shortness of breath, wheezing, allergy, snoring, daytime fatigue

Gastrointestinal: Heartburn, indigestion

Musculoskeletal: Pain in joints, limited range of motion

Genitourinary: Incontinence, menstrual history, fertility

Psychological: Depression, eating disorders

Metabolic: Symptoms of hyperglycemia (polyuria, polydipsia)



Cardiovascular disease

Asthma (chest x-ray, respirometry)

OSA (polysomnography)

GERD (endoscopy)

Osteoarthritis (Joint x-ray, MRI)

Urinary incontinence (urodynamic testing, urine culture)

Consider referral

Iatrogenic obesity, diabetes



Laboratory investigation

Diabetes Mellitus: Fasting glucose, HbA1C, 2hrs OGTT

- Prediabetes: Fasting 100-125 mg/dl (Impaired Fasting Glucose/ IFG)

- 2 hrs: 140-199 mg/dl

- HbA1C: 5.7 to 6.4%

Lipid Profile: Total cholesterol, triglycerides, HDL, LDL, non-HDL

- Triglycerides ≥ 150mg/dl

- HDL-c: < 40 mg/dl (male) and <50 mg/dl (female)

- LDL-c: ≥ 100 mg/dl

- Non-HDL-c: ≥ 130 mg/dl

Liver function tests: Transamines (AST, ALT)

Thyroid Function Tests: TSH, T3, T4



Prediabetes

Metabolic syndrome (IFG)

Diabetes

Dyslipidemia

Metabolic syndrome (HDL-c and triglycerides)

LDL-C target for the decrease in CVD risk

Non-alcoholic fatty liver disease (hepatic imaging, biopsy)

Hypo/hyperthyroidism

**Disease Staging**

Both the anthropometric and clinical component of diagnosis leads to the staging of the disease that acts as a guide to management to target aggressive interventions to those patients who would benefit from weight loss therapy the most. Out of many staging systems, the AACE obesity guidelines advocate a clinically helpful tool. Every complication is assessed for its severity and impact on the patient's health. The disease is classified as stage 0, with no complications, Stage 1, when complications are mild-moderate, and stage 2, when at least one of the complications is moderate-severe using specific criteria.

In stage 0 (uncomplicated overweight/obesity), secondary prevention strategies to prevent further weight gain and emergence of complications are executed. Structured lifestyle intervention is appropriate at this stage. Once complications arise, it becomes evident that the excess adipose tissue mass is adversely affecting the patient's health regardless of the BMI class, and a more rigorous management plan is warranted. Tertiary prevention is then needed to lose enough weight to treat the complications. For patients categorized as Stage 1 (mild-moderate complications), combined lifestyle change and anti-obesity medications are employed, and in cases of moderate-severe complications (stage 2), additional pharmacological therapy is appropriate. Bariatric surgery is considered in only selected patients.

The Edmonton protocol proposes five stages ranging from no effect to severe impairment. It evaluates the medical, psychological, and functional impact of obesity.

CMDS uses quantitative clinical values to stratify the risk of progression to type 2 diabetes mellitus in cardiometabolic disease patients on weight loss therapy and formulates that the risk is 40 times more in overweight/obese patients. For high-risk patients, weight loss effectively prevents progression to diabetes and has a lower 'number-needed-to-treat' but a superior benefit/risk ratio.