Oseltamivir is an antiviral neuraminidase inhibitor with potent and selective competitive inhibition of the influenza virus neuraminidase, an enzyme necessary for viral replication. Oseltamivir phosphate is an inactive prodrug that exerts pharmacologic activity when hydrolyzed in vivo to the active form, oseltamivir carboxylate. This activated form interferes with the release of progeny influenza virus from infected host cells and thus halts the spread of infection to new host cells. Oseltamivir reduces the duration of shedding and the viral titer and can shorten the length of symptoms by 0.5 to 3 days.

**Mechanism of Resistance:******The mechanism of resistance of influenza virus is antigenic drift and shift in their surface glycoproteins. Antigenic drift is the process in which minor modifications occur in key viral epitopes through point mutations; antigenic shift results in a complete exchange of hemagglutinin (HA) or neuraminidase (NA) genes. Antigenic shift emerges mainly in influenza A viruses due to their vast animal reservoirs. The consequence of the antigenic shift frequently leads to a pandemic.

**Pharmacokinetics**

**Absorption:**Oseltamivir is an orally administrated prodrug. The oral bioavailability of oseltamivir is approximately 80%. Oral intake does not seem to impact the pharmacokinetics of oseltamivir significantly.

**Distribution:**The volume of distribution is approximately 23 to 26 liters. Oseltamivir is moderately bound to plasma proteins (42%), while oseltamivir carboxylate has poor plasma protein binding.

**Metabolism:**Hepatic carboxylesterases extensively hydrolyze oseltamivir to the active drug oseltamivir carboxylate (OC). The active metabolite, oseltamivir, is a major circulating component (95%) in plasma, and the prodrug oseltamivir accounts for only 5% of the circulating component.

**Excretion:**Osaletmevir carboxylate is eliminated (>99%) through renal excretion by glomerular filtration and active tubular secretion. The half-life of oseltamivir carboxylate is 6–10 hours, while the half-life of oseltamivir is approximately 3 hours.