**Central Control of Hunger**

The main center for hunger control is within the hypothalamus, particularly in the arcuate nucleus, also known as the infundibular nucleus. The arcuate nucleus communicates with the brainstem and paraventricular nuclei. The latter has communicating pathways both to the brainstem and limbic system. Together they regulate the metabolism, as well as emotional and behavioral changes associated with hunger and satiety.

**Hormonal Control**

**Insulin**

- The main hormone involved in maintaining blood sugar homeostasis and has a critical role in obesity.

- Insulin is secreted in the pancreas, specifically the beta cells of the Islets of Langerhans. They are secreted in response to elevated blood sugar levels in addition to other nutrients.

- Besides maintaining blood sugar, insulin has a direct effect in inducing satiety. This has been demonstrated in a study conducted in 1983, where insulin was injected into the cerebral ventricles and induced satiety. Further research revealed insulin signaling receptors in the hypothalamus allow insulin to have a direct role in inducing satiety and suppressing hunger.

**Leptin**

- This hormone is produced by adipose tissue, and its primary mode of action is in the hypothalamus, where it decreases neuropeptide Y to down-regulate hunger.

- Increased lipid levels in the blood stimulate the secretion of leptin. However, leptin levels are directly proportional to the amount of adipose tissue in the body.

- Meals trigger the secretion of leptin, but the degree of stimulation is relative to total body adipose tissue stores. Hence, the suppression of hunger drive is present in individuals with normal or low body weight, but the effects are not pronounced in individuals that are overweight or obese. The reason for this is the chronically elevated levels of leptin and de-sensitization in the hypothalamus.

- This is evident when subjects with normal weight are exposed to exogenous leptin, there is weight loss, but this response is not seen in obese individuals.

**Ghrelin**

- This peptide hormone is predominantly produced in the stomach and duodenum.

- Levels are higher in the fasting state, and when there is a cephalic response, i.e., shortly before the ingestion of food, there is a spike in the serum concentration of ghrelin.

- Ghrelin acts within the hypothalamus by stimulating neuropeptide Y, which results in hunger and increases calorie intake.

- Food ingestion downregulates ghrelin levels. This is more pronounced when ingesting carbohydrates compared to protein and fat.

**Glucagon-like peptide 1 (GLP-1)**

- This peptide hormone is produced by L cells in the small intestine.

- It is secreted in response to the detection of nutrients in the intestinal lumen and released into the bloodstream.

- Within the hypothalamus, GLP-1 binds to the GLP-1 receptors and causes downregulation of neuropeptide Y, which downregulates hunger.

Other polypeptides secreted in the gut, such as cholecystokinin (CCK), pancreatic polypeptide, and polypeptide YY, affect increasing satiety; however, the mechanisms are not currently well understood.