First-generation vaccines were vaccinia derived from calf-lymph. The next generation was cultured in kidney epithelial cells (Vero cells) from an African green monkey. Vaccination or the further attenuated vaccine - Modified Vaccinia Ankara (MVA) within 3 days of exposure is believed to drastically reduce or halt the progression of the disease, and if given within 7 days may also modify disease progression.

Tecovirimat is the only approved therapeutic drug to treat orthopoxvirus infection and has shown promising activity against every Orthopoxviridae (including variola) - impeding viral progression in vitro as well as in several animal models with their respective poxviruses. It has shown to be well tolerated and very specific to the orthopoxvirus clade. It is a potent inhibitor of p37, a highly conserved and unique protein required for the formation and egress of the poxvirus extracellular virion envelope, an essential component for poxvirus spread.

Because poxviruses use a viral variant of DNA-dependent RNA polymerase, cidofovir (an anti-viral inhibitor of the aforementioned) and its oral prodrug - brincidofovir have been discussed as viable treatments. Although nephrotoxic and might require a baseline and following kidney function, it has shown efficacy in at least one animal model to reduce mortality in a dose-dependent fashion.

Because smallpox has mortality linked to hemorrhagic and hemodynamic instability, septicemic superinfection, and cardiogenic shock, regular interval vitals, blood counts, and coagulation profiles should be taken.

Molluscum contagiosum infections are often self-limited and spontaneously resolving in all but immunocompromised hosts. Management is limited to reassurance, topical podophyllotoxin, imiquimod, cryotherapy, and curettage, and instilling habits to avoid autoinoculation.