Regarding eclampsia, the drug of choice for prevention and management is magnesium sulfate. This drug reduces the risk of seizures in patients with severe preeclampsia.

Magnesium sulfate is the drug of choice for reducing the rate of eclampsia developing intrapartum and immediately postpartum.

The goal of treatment is to prevent significant cerebrovascular and cardiovascular events in the mother without compromising fetal well-being.

If a woman is at greater than 34 weeks gestation and develops severe preeclampsia, delivery is still the treatment of choice, while expectant management may be reasonable in those with mild preeclampsia. At greater than 36 to 37 weeks gestation, the induction of labor should be pursued.

The primary objective of magnesium sulfate prophylaxis in women with preeclampsia is to prevent or reduce the rate of eclampsia and complications associated with eclampsia.

The overall management of preeclampsia includes supportive treatment with antihypertensives and anti-epileptics until definitive treatment - delivery. In preeclampsia without severe features, patients are often induced after 37 weeks gestation after with or without corticosteroids to accelerate lung maturity. These patients are monitored more closely with antenatal testing twice a week. If severe features are present, induction is considered as early as 34 weeks, although the benefits must outweigh the risks of preterm delivery. Patients with severe features are admitted and monitored on bed rest until delivery.First-line antihypertensives for preeclampsia/eclampsia include hydralazine, labetalol, and nicardipine.

- Hydralazine: The recommended dose of hydralazine hydrochloride is 5-10 mg (IV/IM) given every 15 minutes up to a dose of 20 mg IV (or 30 mg IM). If no change in pressure after 20 minutes, should think about another agent.

- Labetalol: Recommended initial dose of labetalol hydrochloride is 20 mg, slow injection. May be preferred because of a lack of reflex tachycardia and hypotension (if pushed slow), or increased intracranial pressure. Be cautious if a patient has a history of a previous myocardial disease or preexisting congestive heart failure or asthma.

- Nicardipine: Nicardipine can cause less reflex tachycardia than nifedipine. Recommended initial rate is 5mg/hour and can be adjusted by 2.5 mg/hour every 5 minutes until the reduction of MAP of 15% has been achieved, or a maximum dose of 15 mg/hour has been reached. (*)

Medications are titrated to an average BP of 140/90. Seizures are treated with IV magnesium as a loading dose of 4 g over 5 to 10 minutes, followed by an infusion of 1g/hr maintained for 24 hours after the last seizure. Lorazepam and phenytoin may be used as second-line agents but are avoided due to fetal effects. Other supportive measures include sparing use of diuretics and fluid restriction to avoid pulmonary and cerebral edema.