Metabolic alkalosis is a relatively common diagnosis in medicine. The biological effects of metabolic alkalosis are directly resultant to associated problems such as hypovolemia and potassium and chloride depletion. These changes lead to decreased myocardial contractility, arrhythmias, decreased cerebral blood flow, confusion, increased neuromuscular excitability, and impaired peripheral oxygen unloading secondary to the shift of the oxygen dissociation curve to left.  Additionally, there is a compensatory increase in arterial pCO through hypoventilation. Overall there is a net effect on the body resulting in hypoxia.

Clinically it is important to understand the relationships between carbon dioxide and bicarbonate in the buffering system and to understand the interactions of how these components are regulated. Additionally, it is essential to understand the mechanism through which sodium, potassium, and hydrogen function to modulate pH when these ion channels are altered with medications. Therefore, the treatment of chloride resistant metabolic alkalosis is focused on treating the underlying condition that triggered the alkalotic event. Since many of these pathologies are resultant to the effect on the renin-angiotensin-aldosterone system, treatment includes inhibiting the effect of aldosterone on the nephron using potassium-sparing diuretics such as amiloride and triamterene. Additionally, an investigation for a malignant source should be considered, such as with primary hyperaldosteronism and Conn syndrome. In chloride responsive metabolic alkalosis, this includes repletion of electrolytes, specifically chloride and potassium along with the replenishment of fluid. In scenarios, such as congestive heart failure (CHF) or edematous states, diuresis is essential using potassium-sparing diuretics.