The tentorium cerebelli is very rigid due to its multiple tethering points. Anteriorly the petrous ridge and posterior clinoid processes secure the sheet-like tentorium. Laterally it forms the transverse sinus and attaches to the inner table of the occipital bone. The tentorium contains an oval-shaped opening through which the midbrain passes and is continuous with the diencephalon.

- The Monro - Kellie doctrine dictates that the cranial vault contains a fixed volume of brain parenchyma, CSF, and blood.

There are three particular ways by which herniation can occur through the tentorial notch:

- Uncal herniation

- Central herniation

- Upward herniation

**Uncal Herniation**

Uncal herniation, as the name suggests, involves the uncal portion of the temporal lobe. The uncus is present in the medial aspect of the temporal lobe. MacEwen first described uncal herniation in the 1880s by freezing and dissecting heads of patients who had died of temporal lobe abscesses.

Due to the proximity of the uncus to the diencephalon and midbrain, loss of consciousness is a key component of uncal herniation. The distortion of the ascending arousal system that originates in the upper pons and midbrain and ascends through the diencephalon to stimulate the cerebral hemispheres causes changes in arousal. Loss of arousal is a key component of uncal herniation, and therefore pupillary dilatation with preserved consciousness should alert the examiner to search for a different cause.

Hemiparesis is also encountered in these cases and can occur via a few mechanisms. Firstly, a hemispheric lesion can interrupt the corticospinal tracts within that hemisphere, causing contralateral hemiplegia. Secondly, direct compression onto the ipsilateral cerebral peduncle within the midbrain can cause contralateral hemiparesis, again due to the involvement of the corticospinal tract. Lastly, in 1928 Kernohan noted that a supratentorial tumor could cause a lateral shift of the midbrain resulting in compression of the contralateral cerebral peduncle on the edge of the tentorial notch. Due to the decussation of the corticospinal tracts below this level, this 'notching' resulted in ipsilateral hemiparesis. This is an example of a false lateralizing sign as a lesion in the right hemisphere can cause weakness on the right side of the body due to compression of the left cerebral peduncle on the tentorium. Therefore, it is important to acknowledge that hemiparesis cannot be reliable in the localization, and the whole clinical picture should be taken into perspective for an accurate diagnosis of the side of the lesion.

With any supratentorial mass causing tentorial herniation, the posterior cerebral arteries (PCA) can be compressed against the tentorium. The basilar artery ends in two posterior cerebral arteries (PCAs) that travel around the midbrain and along the undersurface of the occipital lobes.

**Central Herniation**

Whereas in uncal herniation, the pressure shift causes medial and downward herniation of the uncus, which inevitably compresses the ascending arousal system of the midbrain and diencephalon, central herniation is due to direct pressure on the diencephalon and midbrain itself. Small perforating end arteries are easily stretched and compressed, leading to ischemia and, ultimately, loss of arousal supply the diencephalon. Pupils, due to bilateral compression of the diencephalon, become small but remain reactive. Central herniation can also compress the pituitary stalk, causing a lack of antidiuretic hormone (ADH) and diabetes insipidus.

**Upward Herniation**

Like supratentorial lesions cause descending herniation through the tentorial notch, though uncommon, posterior fossa lesions can cause upward herniation of the brainstem through the tentorial notch into the supratentorial compartment. Due to the compression of the ascending arousal system, there is a loss of consciousness. There can also be compression of the dorsal midbrain leading to up gaze palsy. If the cerebral aqueduct, which passes through the midbrain, is compressed, then obstructive hydrocephalus will develop.

**Dorsal Midbrain Compression**

Pressure directly upon the dorsal midbrain, also called the tectal plate, can lead to Parinaud syndrome with a distinctive upgaze palsy, pseudo-Argyle Robertson pupil, convergence-retraction nystagmus and, in children, the phenomenon of sun-setting eyes. A pseudo-Argyl Robertson pupil is one that does not react to light due to loss of the reflex arch but still constricts on visual accommodation. Convergence-retraction nystagmus is typified by simultaneous spasmodic contractions of all ocular motility muscles upon the convergence of gaze. This retracts the globes into the orbits. Sun-setting eyes is an exaggerated phenomenon of upgaze palsy, causing the eyes to be in extreme downgaze at rest.

**Autonomic Supply to the Eye**

Sympathetic outflow descends through the brainstem and cervical spine, joining the sympathetic chain at the upper thoracic level. This then ascends in the neck along the carotid artery to innervate the face via the external carotid and the eye via the internal carotid. It is worth noting that in isolated pontine injury, such as a pontine hemorrhage, sympathetic innervation as it descends through the pons is lost. However, parasympathetic innervation from the Edinger-Westphal nucleus within the midbrain continues to supply the eye via the oculomotor nerve. This leads to unopposed parasympathetic innervation and thus pinpoint pupils.