The current standard of therapy is to control the bleeding by endovascular transarterial catheter embolization or by the placement of a covered stent. Patients in whom arterial embolization is unsuccessful, or there is rebleeding after embolization surgery is the only option. The surgical procedure can be either direct ligation of the bleeding vessel or resection of the pancreas along with the pseudoaneurysm.

The percutaneous intervention does have a success rate of 70% to 90%. Embolization is often the choice of treatment in very ill unstable patients and in patients in whom the bleeding is diffuse. Embolization may also be an option when bleeding occurs following unsuccessful surgery or a complication of the surgery. Despite the wide use of percutaneous techniques to stop bleeding, the long-term history of the pseudoaneurysm is not well understood. There are limited data on whether these patients develop recurrent complications. Thrombin can also be injected percutaneously but this requires a pseudoaneurysm with a narrow neck.

A bleeding pseudoaneurysm communicating to a pseudocyst situated at the tail of the pancreas can be an indication for surgical intervention. Surgery carries a higher risk when compared to angiographic vascular intervention.

Sometimes surgery is undertaken to debride an abscess combined with hemostatic control. In patients who have had bleeding from pseudocysts, endoscopic drainage is not recommended. If surgery is undertaken, every effort should be made to stabilize the patient first. Once the abdomen is opened, packing of all four quadrants is necessary, and then removing the packs from the least suspicious area to the most suspicious area of bleeding. Often the bleeding is arrested initially by tamponade, digital compression, or cross-clamping of the supra celiac aorta. Gaining access to the site of bleeding may require a duodenotomy, gastronomy, or gastrectomy. Often ligation of the bleeding vessel is not recommended as the tissues are friable. One should ligate away from the area without jeopardizing blood perfusion to the adjacent organs.