The vestibular system is a highly integrated system consisting of the vestibular apparatus within each inner ear functioning in conjunction with the central nervous system (CNS), ocular system, and musculoskeletal system (postural control) to maintain balance.

Motion is perceived within each vestibular apparatus, which consists of two otolithic organs (utricle and saccule) and three semicircular canals. Otolithic organs detect linear acceleration, while the semicircular canals (anterior, posterior, and horizontal) detect rotational (or angular) acceleration within their respective plane of orientation. Semicircular canals terminate at an ampulla on one end and the utricle at the other. Motion is detected within each canal via endolymph hydrodynamics and its influence on each ampullary cupula located at one end of each canal.

The sensation of motion within each canal is translated by hair cells (or stereocilia), which extend into a gelatinous region known as the cupula. Displacement of the cupula (and thus hair cells) caused by movement of the endolymphatic fluid within the canal causes the sensory apparatus to discharge. The otolithic organs also depend on stereocilia for motion detection depending on location, with the saccule detecting vertical motion and the utricle detecting horizontal motion. Afferent nerves from the otoliths and semicircular canals transmit impulses to the vestibular nuclei and pontomedullary reticular formation via the vestibulocochlear nerve and disynaptic/polysynaptic pathways, where they are processed further with additional sensory input to provide orientation and modulate postural reflexes.

The vestibular system works in conjunction with the visual and somatosensory systems to provide information to the CNS to orient the body relative to itself as well as the external environment. This information is highly integrated on multiple levels of the CNS, allowing the system to modify the output based on the reliability of the input received.