The diagnosis of torsion or GV remains a challenge to the surgeon and radiologist despite the availability of advanced laboratory investigations and imaging. Laboratory tests of liver function are often equivocal in incomplete volvulus. White cell count and C-reactive protein level could be raised. Ultrasonography is commonly the first imaging that is performed. Three features are recognized as indicative of gallbladder torsion: (1) a diffusely thickened and hypoechoic gallbladder wall that displays gangrene and inflammation, (2) a floating gallbladder, in which the major part of the organ does not adhere to the liver bed, and (3) a conical structure at the gallbladder neck, consisting of multiple linear echoes converging toward the tip of the “cone."

Ultrasonography and CT are the primary imaging approaches used for diagnosis. A CT scan can reveal a "floating gallbladder" with gallbladder wall thickening. An accurate interpretation of imaging findings is crucial in diagnosing gallbladder torsion. A magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) can help with the imaging of a twisted cystic duct, and T2 weighted images are beneficial for evaluating necrosis of the gallbladder wall. A HIDA scan, if performed, shows a bullseye image due to the subsequent accumulation of the radio isotope in the gallbladder. Early diagnosis of gallbladder torsion can help to prevent life-threatening complications, such as gallbladder gangrene, perforations causing bilious peritonitis, and other infections. For preventing this sequela, ultrasonography and CT are the primary imaging approaches. Early use of appropriate imaging prevents complications, reduces mortality and morbidity rates, and decreases hospitalization costs.

Upper GI endoscopy may also help with the diagnosis. The diagnosis is often made when there is distortion of the proximal gastric anatomy and difficulty with intubation of the stomach and pylorus. During the later stages, one may observe frank mucosal sloughing, ulceration or even necrosis.