The differential diagnosis includes but is not limited to epidermoid cysts, hibernomas, angiolipomas, angiomyolipomas, and liposarcomas. Epidermoid cysts typically feature a punctum at their surface; however, lesions lacking this feature may be indistinguishable from lipomas. Hibernomas are benign, rare, slow-growing masses of brown fat that typically occur in the mediastinum or interscapular region of the back and present as a 3 to 12 centimeter, slow-growing mass in an adult. Angiolipomas are often painful, less than 2 centimeters in width, well-circumscribed, and typically appearing on the forearm of teens or young adults. Angiomyolipomas often present in acral locations of adult males. Liposarcomas most commonly present as deep-seated tumors in the retroperitoneum or, classically, on the thighs.

Multiple lipomas can be a manifestation of the following syndromes:

- **Proteus syndrome**due to activating mutations in AKT1 oncogene (or occasionally PTEN mutations). It consists of lipomas, epidermal nevi, hemangiomas, palmoplantar cerebriform connective tissue nevi, hyperostoses of the epiphyses and skull, and scoliosis.

- **Dercum disease (adiposis dolorosa)**consists of multiple painful lipomas on the trunk and extremities, which often have overlying paresthesias of the skin. It is often seen in postmenopausal women. Some patients with this diagnosis also have psychiatric disorders.

- **Familial multiple lipomatosis**- patients typically present in the '30s with hundreds of encapsulated and noninfiltrating lipomas. It can be inherited in an autosomal dominant pattern.

- **Benign symmetric lipomatosis (Madelung disease)**involves diffuse, infiltrative, symmetric painless lipomatous growths affecting the head, neck, and shoulder region. Middle-aged alcoholic men are usually present with this syndrome. Mutations in the mitochondrial tRNA lysine gene have been identified in a few of the affected patients.

- **Gardner syndrome**is due to autosomal dominant mutations in the adenomatous polyposis coli (APC) gene. Almost all patients develop adenocarcinomas of the gastrointestinal tract. Cutaneous changes include multiple lipomas or fibromas. Other associated findings include congenital hypertrophy of pigment epithelium of the retina, osteomas of the skull, maxilla and mandible, supernumerary teeth, and various malignancies, including papillary thyroid carcinomas, adrenal adenomas, and hepatoblastomas.

- **Multiple endocrine neoplasia (MEN) type 1**is due to autosomal dominant mutations in the MEN1 gene. It consists of parathyroid, pituitary, and pancreatic tumors. Dermatologic changes include multiple lipomas (which may also occur in visceral sites), collagenomas, angiofibromas, and cafe au lait macules.

- **Cowden syndrome**is due to mutations in the PTEN gene. It is associated with multiple lipomas, oral papillomas, facial trichilemmomas, punctate palmoplantar keratoses, and malignancies, including breast adenocarcinoma, thyroid follicular carcinoma (TFC), endometrial carcinomas, and hamartomatous polyps of the gastrointestinal tract.

- **Bannayan-Riley-Ruvalcaba syndrome (BRRS)**is also due to PTEN gene mutations and may represent a pediatric form of Cowden syndrome. Clinical findings include multiple lipomas, intestinal hamartomas, genital lentigines, macrocephaly, and mental retardation.