**Inflammatory Markers**

Increasing evidence is supporting the role of inflammation in determining prognosis in renal cell carcinoma. Local immune responses and systemic inflammation have been shown to play a central role in the initiation, maintenance, and progression of the cancer process. The pathogenic role of neutrophils, lymphocytes, and monocytes in promoting intravasation of tumor cells, thereby promoting angiogenesis and allowing the propagation of distant metastasis, associated with a poorer outcome, has also been recognized. The degree of systemic inflammation can be assessed by measuring the C – reactive protein levels (which has the drawback of not having a specific cut off value) and ratios involving various blood components, including the neutrophil/lymphocyte ratio (NLR), platelet/ lymphocyte ratio (PLR) and measures such as the prognostic nutritional index (PNI), systemic immune inflammation index (SIII) and systemic inflammation response index (SIRI). An NLR more than equal to 4 has been associated with poor outcomes.

**Laboratory Parameters**

Variables that have been used to determine response to targeted therapy include hematological (serum hemoglobin, absolute neutrophil count, platelet count), biochemical (serum corrected calcium), functional parameters (Karnofsky performance status), and time from time of diagnosis to beginning of treatment. Morphological features that are known to predict survival include the size of the tumor, stage at presentation, degree of vascular invasion, the extent of tumoral necrosis, and grade. Biomarkers proposed to guide individualized treatment include clinical parameters such as blood pressure, endogenous substances such as proteins present in the plasma, and pathobiological features such as specific mutations.****Failure to obtain a clinically beneficial response with radiotherapy, metastasis at multiple sites, sarcomatoid differentiation, neutrophilia, thrombocytosis, and elevated alkaline phosphatase has also been identified as potential prognostic factors from various studies. High serum interleukin 6 levels above 35 pg/ml and adverse prognosis on the modified Glasgow prognostic score also correlates with poor survival.

**Nomograms**

Among the various nomograms which have been used to decide upon the modality of treatment, the following deserve mention – the university of California Los Angeles (UCLA) integrated staging system and stage, size, grade, necrosis (SSGN) score which integrate the clinical TNM stage and Fuhrmann grade, among other variables. The Memorial Sloane – Kettering cancer center score, which comprises of the following parameters – Karnofsky performance status, history of prior nephrectomy, lactate dehydrogenase levels, hemoglobin level, and serum calcium levels has been used to predict survival in those with advanced disease who have undergone treatment with immunotherapy or chemotherapy.

**Motzer Score**

Prognostic assessment in metastatic RCC includes the Motzer score, which requires estimation of laboratory parameters such as hemoglobin, total leucocytes, platelet counts, lactate dehydrogenase, and corrected calcium levels. While the survival for those with a favorable risk profile has been estimated to be 43.2 months, those with intermediate and unfavorable risk profiles have a survival corresponding to 22.5 and 7.8 months, respectively.

**Clinical Features**

Hypertension is associated with improved progression-free survival and overall survival in those receiving targeted therapy with multi-target tyrosine kinase inhibitors.

**Histopathological Features**

The histopathological prognostic features which have been validated by the International Society of urological pathology and WHO classification of RCC include histological subtype of the tumor, the ISUP nucleolar grade (in preference to the Fuhrmann grade), sarcomatoid or rhabdoid differentiation that defines a stage 4 tumor (nonclear cell RCC), presence of necrosis, presence of microscopic vascular invasion, pathological tumor, node, metastasis staging, and description of the nonneoplastic renal tissue. Among morphological features, large size, intralesional necrosis, renal vein thrombosis, retroperitoneal collateral vessels, and interruption of the tumor capsule have been associated with high tumor grade.

The presence of sarcomatoid change and extensive necrosis is usually associated with a poor prognosis. While most clear cell carcinomas are not associated with an intense inflammatory response, those that show a dense lymphocytic or neutrophil rich infiltrate are usually associated with a poor prognosis**.**Cystic change in clear cell RCC has been associated with a favorable prognosis.

Multilocular clear cell RCC has been associated with an indolent course and uniformly excellent survival. Nodal invasion usually points towards a poor cancer-specific survival, nearing 20 to 30 percent after three years of surgery.

**Radiological Features**

CT perfusion might also be useful in prognosticating the tumor as a higher microvascular density has been associated with a better outcome.

**Genetic Markers**

There has been a move towards studying genetic markers, with the potential to impact treatment in the metastatic setting. RECORD 3 trial, a randomized phase 2 trial in the metastatic setting, which compared sunitinib with everolimus in the showed that BAP 1 mutations have the potential to impact progression-free survival. Molecular profiling based upon BAP1 and PBRM1 or KDM5C has been advised, with the potential to impact clinical outcomes. Activation mutations of m TOR and biallelic inactivation of TSC1 and TSC2 have been identified as potential biomarkers for assessing long term response in case-based mTOR inhibitor outlier studies.

**Immune Markers**

PD-L1 expression, which has been associated with increased aggressiveness and increased lymphocyte density in the tumor microenvironment, have also been identified with potential prognostic factors that might be used to determine responses to immune checkpoint inhibitor therapy.

The potential disadvantage with the use of PD-L1 lies in the heterogeneous expression of this biomarker between the primary tumor and the metastatic sites.