The epiphysis cerebri is the main producer of 5-methoxyindole. Two that are of importance are melatonin and 5-methoxytryptophol. Both of these hormones are shown to be antigonadotrophic; yet, it is unknown whether these hormones directly suppress other hormones that are gonadotrophic or the gonadotropin hormones of the adenohypophysis. One of the most important functions of melatonin is to help modulate the circadian rhythm of sleep. Melatonin production is upregulated by darkness and has a decrease in production when exposed to light. Light would be perceived in the retina by the nerve cells (rods and cones) that are sensitive to light. Specialized ganglia take the impulses generated by the light to the suprachiasmatic nucleus of the hypothalamus. The fibers from the hypothalamus then give fibers off to the superior cervical ganglia in the spinal cord. From the spinal cord, relays are sent back to the pineal gland via the post-ganglionic neurons.

**Functions Studied in Other Mammals**

Studies in rodents have attempted to demonstrate other roles for pineal gland involvement.

- **Drug Metabolism:**It was demonstrated that the gland might influence the actions of some drugs, such as antidepressants and cocaine. Melatonin also protects against neurodegeneration.

- **Bone Metabolism:**In mice, melatonin helps regulate new bone deposition. Its action is mediated through the MT2 receptors.

- **Pituitary Gland Regulation:**It was suggested that there is an influence of the pineal gland on follicle-stimulating hormone (FSH) and luteinizing hormone (LH). When the pineal gland is removed in these rodents, it was found that there was an increase in concentrations of FSH and LH.