BP is the most common cause of unilateral facial paralysis. While benign, the condition does have moderate morbidity and can lead to loss of vision. Thus, the disorder is best managed by an interprofessional team.

The cause of BP remains unknown, and its treatment remains controversial. While steroids and/or antiviral medications are often prescribed, there are no randomized clinical trials to determine which is better or effective. The problem is compounded by the fact that the majority of cases resolve spontaneously. However, in individuals with long-standing facial paralysis accompanied by poor speech, incomplete eyelid closure or poor aesthetics, treatment needs to be addressed by an interprofessional team. Because the disorder affects different organ systems, an interprofessional team of clinicians, nurses, and technologists have proven effective. The most important feature of the treatment is to be patient-focused rather than symptom focus.

In any case, all clinicians including the pharmacist and nurse practitioner must educate the patient on eye protection and lubrication. Eye dryness should be prevented at all costs using tears and other liquid preparations. If there is evidence of non-compliance or evidence that the eye is becoming dry and irritated, the nurse or pharmacist should report back to the clinical team leader.

The neurology nurse must educate the patient on facial exercises that can help improve muscle strength and facial coordination. These exercises can reduce poor aesthetics and improve the functionality of the facial muscles. If the patient is non-compliant, the nurse should report to the clinical team leader and assist with further education of the patient.

The availability of botulinum toxin has helped reduce the long-term burden of this disorder. Surgery is the last resort treatment and may be required in chronic cases. The facial muscles do remain viable for several years, and in these cases, complex reconstructions are available. However, rather than subjecting the patient to complex surgery with no guarantee of improvement, early recognition and initiation of steroidal therapy are recommended.

**Outcomes**

Evidence-based medicine is lacking when it comes to treatment and outcomes for BP. The problem is made more difficult because many cases resolve spontaneously. The majority of outcomes have been from case reports or small case series. While recovery does occur in most patients, it often takes months or even years for a full recovery. Because there are several types of treatments available besides medications, an interprofessional team should be involved in the management since not everyone responds to the same treatment.