IgA nephropathy usually has a protracted course during which the patient may undergo management by an interprofessional team of healthcare providers. Ideally, a nephrologist (or pediatric nephrologist) plays a vital role in managing the patient. Coexisting autoimmune diseases may require management by a nurse practitioner, physician assistant, physician, endocrinologist, or gastroenterologist. The primary care team should be continuously updated about diagnosis and steroid therapy. A "steroid card" should be given to the patients.

The pharmacist should educate the patient regarding steroid therapy and promote compliance with communication as necessary to the clinical team. Laboratory staff should ensure the correct sample collection to avoid false positives for proteinuria. A dietitian should plan a low-salt, low-protein, and low-fat diet for the patient. Nurses are essential at every step of the way, assisting in patient assessment, offering patient counsel, and coordinating the activities of the various specialties on the case. All interprofessional team members must maintain accurate patient records and communicate with the rest of the team if they have any concerns regarding the patient's progress.

Fluid intake must be adjusted considering the fluid balance and renal function. If progression to ESRD is anticipated, the patient should be informed early in the course and be prepared for renal replacement therapy. A social worker would be a helpful team member at this stage. Due to the complexity of this disease, an interprofessional team of clinicians, pharmacists, nurses, and allied health professionals educating and assisting the patient and family will result in the best outcomes. [Level 5]