Toxic doses of pentobarbital occur at approximately 1 gram in most adults, with death occurring at 2 to 10 grams. The therapeutic values for pentobarbital depend on the intended therapeutic effect. For sedation, it is 1 to 5 mcg/mL. For intracranial pressure therapy, it is 30 to 40 mcg/mL, and for therapeutic coma, it is 20 to 50 mcg/mL. Toxic values for sedation are greater than 10 mcg/mL. The time to steady-state in adults is 3 to 6 days. Monitoring parameters include EEG and serum drug levels. Other things to consider when assessing for toxicity are a complete blood count (CBC),  liver function tests (LFTs), and a blood urea nitrogen (BUN) to creatinine ratio if on continuous treatment. Clinicians need to be aware that pentobarbital is often confused with phenobarbital, a different drug with varying dosage differences.

Pentobarbital is a high-risk habit-forming drug categorized by the Federal Controlled Substances Act under DEA schedule II. Tolerance, physical dependence, and psychological effects can occur in patients with long-term use. Estimates are that beyond 400 mg daily for greater than 90 days is the threshold for developing a dependence. Doses of 600 to 800 mg daily for greater than 35 days correlate with withdrawal seizures. Symptoms of acute intoxication include gait and speech alterations and neurological manifestations. Chronic intoxication demonstrates confusion, agitation, insomnia, and generalized myalgias. Minor withdrawal is seen within 8 to 12 hours and major withdrawal within 16 hours, lasting for up to one week following cessation of the drug. Treatment of dependence includes close monitoring and gradual withdrawal of the drug by small dosage decreases over many weeks—infants with physical dependence commonly present with hyperactivity, sleep disturbances, and hyperreflexia. Treatment of withdrawal in this population usually spans over two weeks.