The sciatic nerve branches into the tibial and common peroneal nerve just anterior to the popliteal fossa. The tibial nerve then enters the posterior legs between the heads of the gastrocnemius. The common peroneal nerve passes around the neck of the fibula.

**Tibial Nerve**

The tibial nerve is a branch of the sciatic nerve consisting of nerve roots L4-S3. It is superficial to the popliteal vessels and travels laterally to medially from the superior angle to the inferior angle of the popliteal fossa, respectively.  The tibial nerve contains muscular, articular, and cutaneous branches. Muscular branches in the distal portion of the fossa supply the medial and lateral heads of the gastrocnemius, soleus, plantaris, and popliteal muscles.

The sural nerve is the cutaneous branch of the tibial nerve and extends from the middle of the popliteal fossa, providing innervation of the lower posterior half of the lower leg and lateral foot. The three articular branches arise from the superior portion of the fossa. The superior medial genicular is found at the medial femoral condyle, and the middle genicular nerve pierces the posterior capsule of the knee joint innervating intercondylar structures and the inferior genicular nerve which travels to the medial tibial condyle.

**Common Peroneal Nerve**

The common peroneal nerve also referred to as the common fibular nerve, consists of nerve roots L4-S2 and arises from the sciatic nerve as well. It branches approximately at the superior angle of the popliteal fossa and travels to the lateral angle where it wraps around the fibular head, splitting off into the deep and superficial peroneal nerves and innervating the anterior and lateral compartments of the lower leg, respectively. It also has cutaneous and articulating branches but no direct motor branches as these are provided by the deep and superficial peroneal nerves. The cutaneous nerves are the lateral sural cutaneous, which provides sensation to the lateral proximal two-thirds of the calf, and the peroneal communicating nerve, which joins with the sural nerve providing sensation to the posterolateral calf. The articulating branches are the superior lateral genicular, inferior lateral genicular, and recurrent genicular nerves. The superior lateral genicular nerve lies over the lateral femoral condyle, and the inferior lateral genicular nerve lies over the fibular head. The recurrent genicular nerve ascends anteriorly close to the division of the common fibular nerve and supplies the knee joint as well as the tibialis anterior muscle.