Typhoid fever predominantly results from Salmonella enterica serotype Typhi (Salmonella Typhi), gram-negative bacteria that only cause disease in man. The organism is ingested in contaminated food or water and survives the stomach acid. It penetrates the small bowel epithelium and enters the lymphoid tissue. It then spreads by lymphatic and hematogenous routes. Typhoid fever is a progressive "stepwise" fever in the first week of the illness. The fever increases as the bacteremia increases; however, the heart rate may be lower than expected for the corresponding fever. The second week of the disease is characterized by abdominal pain, constipation, and a faint macular rash on the trunk and abdomen. During the third week of illness, when there has been no treatment, enlargement of the liver and spleen may develop, along with ileocecal perforation, peritonitis, and septic shock in up to 30% of people. Death can result in 12% to 30% of untreated illness.

The diagnosis of Salmonella enterica serotype Typhi is confirmed by culture. Cultures are obtainable from blood, stool, urine, bone marrow, duodenal contents, or skin rash. Those who recover have a protracted illness over weeks to months. Typhoid fever results in a carrier state in 5% of people with high levels of excretion of Salmonella Typhi in the stool for over a year. Relapse of fever can occur in about 10% of untreated people. Typhoid fever is most common in low and middle-income countries, with rates greater than 100 per 100,000 person-years in parts of Asia and Africa. Outbreaks in the United States occur every year. While 80% of these 5700 cases are in people who have traveled to regions with endemic Typhoid fever, many with the illness have not traveled at all. Salmonella Typhi usually spreads through the ingestion of contaminated food or water. Fewer organisms are required for infection from water than from food.

Treatment with antibiotics is recommended with empiric treatment until cultures are available. The initial treatment for severe illness is a third-generation cephalosporin, while milder illness may be treated with a fluoroquinolone antibiotic or azithromycin. Drug resistance to many antibiotics has rapidly developed worldwide, making antibiotic therapy challenging.

Prevention of Typhoid fever focuses on food and water safety. Washing hands before eating, eating foods that have been thoroughly cooked and served hot, or fruits that have been personally peeled are essential safeguards. Water should come from bottled water personally opened or water that has been boiled or chemically sterilized. Typhoid vaccination is indicated for travelers to endemic areas; however, it is not entirely protective.

The first typhoid vaccines were initially developed in the late 19th century. Presently, there are two United States FDA-approved vaccines available for Salmonella Typhi, an oral attenuated live virus and an injectable polysaccharide vaccine. The FDA indicates both vaccines for individuals traveling to an endemic are from a non-endemic area. They are also FDA-recommended for individuals with household exposure to a chronic Salmonella Typhi carrier or are working in a laboratory setting with potentially contaminated specimens.Salmonella Perityphi, which also causes illness. The oral attenuated live virus vaccine should not be used in immunocompromised individuals. Immunocompromised individuals include those with HIV/AIDS, those taking steroids for longer than two weeks, or anyone with cancer or taking cancer treatment or radiation treatment. Neither vaccine is indicated for children under the age of two years old. The oral vaccine should not be used in children under six years old. Vaccination is indicated for individuals who have had previous Salmonella Typhi infections if they live in non-endemic areas or travel to an endemic area. Vaccination should be completed two weeks before travel for the injected vaccine and one week before they travel for the oral vaccine. The FDA does not recommend the typhoid vaccine for routine immunization of individuals in the United States.