Complications of intracerebral hemorrhage secondary to rupture of Charcot-Bouchard aneurysms are as follows,

**Hematoma E****xpansion**

Hematoma expansion also referred to as a rebleed, is an independent predictor of early neurological deterioration and mortality. Maximal hematoma expansion occurs in the first 3 hours and can occur up to 24 hours from symptom onset. The "spot sign" or contrast extravasation into the hematoma is seen on the CT angiogram and is an indication of the expansion of the hematoma. The spot sign has been described as a heterogeneous marker due to its different shapes and sizes, depending on the timing of imaging relative to the onset of symptoms. Management of hematoma expansion includes administering hemostatic therapy with recombinant factor VIIa, cautious lowering of blood pressure, and craniotomy with surgical evacuation.

**Perihematomal Edema**

Perihematomal edema develops secondary to vasogenic and cytotoxic effects due to the hematoma formation and exerts a mass effect on surrounding structures. It is maximal at two weeks from the onset of symptoms. The management goal is to minimize any increase in the intracranial pressure by elevating the head to 20 to 30 degrees, analgesics for pain, infection control, sedatives, osmotic diuretics such as mannitol, and hyperventilation.

**Seizures**

Seizures can be either a presenting symptom or complication of intracerebral hemorrhage. Treatment includes antiepileptic drugs based on the patient's medication regimen and contraindications.

**Intraventricular Hemorrhage (IVH) With Hydrocephalus**

IVH is also an independent predictor of early neurological deterioration and mortality due to IVH-induced inflammation and damage to periventricular structures, the brain stem, and leading to hydrocephalus with subsequent herniation. Relieving the IVH with external ventricular drainage is a life-saving procedure. For stable clots, intraventricular fibrinolytic (low-dose alteplase) can be administered. Lumbar drainage is less invasive, with a lower complication rate for communicating hydrocephalus.

Other complications include:

- Venous thromboembolism presenting as deep vein thrombosis or pulmonary embolisms

- Hyperglycemia due to stress

- Hyperpyrexia due to brain damage or infections

- Hypertension due to activation of the neuroendocrine systems