As with any other condition, a thorough history and physical examination are most helpful in determining the diagnosis.

While taking the history, it is vital to know if there is any family history of abnormal head shapes, in utero exposure to teratogenic drugs, intrauterine restrains, or an abnormal fetal position, as well as any complications during pregnancy and any delayed milestones.

The physical examination allows the clinician to evaluate whether a suture fusion is present and whether any concomitant features would make the craniosynostosis part of a syndrome, like any congenital anomalies and dysmorphic features.

Assessing the skull is critical. Looking at it from all directions and measuring the head circumference to calculate the cephalic index (maximum breadth of the skull multiplied by 100 divided by the maximum length of the skull). The examiner should also note and touch the scalp to feel any sutural ridging, prominent vessels over the skull, and examine and measure the fontanelles.

Besides these, depending on the severity of the condition, the patient might present with other clinical manifestations as consequences of the craniosynostosis, which must be kept in mind and monitored. Therefore an ophthalmologic examination should be done if any signs of intracranial pressure (ICP) are present which will show papilledema. Examine possible airway obstructions and feeding difficulties.

The different non-syndromic craniosynostoses are described below:

- Scaphocephaly or dolichocephaly (premature fusion of the sagittal suture). These patients have a long, narrow-shaped head with a higher anteroposterior diameter. Frontal bossing is often present.

- Anterior plagiocephaly (premature fusion of 1 coronal suture). The forehead appears flat on the affected side, Harlequin sign (high supraorbital margins seen in radiographs), frontal bossing on the unaffected side, and nasal deviation towards the normal side.

- Posterior plagiocephaly (premature fusion of 1 lambdoid suture). Frontal and occipital bossing, ipsilateral ear moved downward, from above the head looks like a trapeze.

- Trigonocephaly (premature fusion of the metopic suture). The forehead is narrow and pointed; the head has a triangular shape viewed from above, hypotelorism.

- Brachycephaly (bi-coronal premature fusion). Short skull, forehead, and occiput flattened but the frontal bone in long (vertically) and prominent, hypertelorism, and Harlequin malformation.

- Oxycephaly (turricephaly). The fusion of all or most of the cranial sutures.

The different syndrome presenting with craniosynostoses are described below:

- Apert: affects coronal suture. Presenting with midface hypoplasia, hypertelorism (bulging and wide-set eyes), beaked nose, underdeveloped jaw (that leads to crowded teeth), syndactyly of hands and feet, hearing loss. They can have mild to moderate intellectual disabilities.

- Crouzon: affects coronal, sagittal, and/or lambdoid sutures; features midface hypoplasia, beaked nose, exophthalmos, hypertelorism, cervical vertebral fusion, and hearing loss. Some can present with cleft lip and/or palate. They usually have normal intelligence.

- Pfeiffer: features brachycephaly (bi-coronal sutures), hypertelorism, maxillary hypoplasia, broad thumbs, great toe, syndactyly, brachydactyly, hearing loss.

- Muenke: affecting coronal suture (uni or bilateral); features midface hypoplasia, hypertelorism, macrocephaly, and hearing loss.

- Kleeblattschadel (cloverleaf deformity, synostosis of the coronal and lambdoid sutures producing a tri-lobar-shaped head): featuring “beak-shaped” nose, maxillary hypoplasia with proptosis, ears displaced inferiorly. This craniosynostosis is associated with hydrocephalus.