Renal agenesis or hypoplasia is the most common cause of oligohydramnios due to the inability of urine production that determines the amniotic fluid volume. Continuous swallowing of amniotic fluid by the fetus and the absence of urinary excretion leads to decreased amniotic fluid volume corresponding to the gestational age is called oligohydramnios. Urine contribution of amniotic fluid is most prominent in the second and third trimesters. Oligohydramnios causes fetal compression in the uterus by limiting movements of the fetus that leads to deformities of the fetal physical structures. Other mechanisms of Potter syndrome are congenital polycystic kidney disease, urinary obstruction, and premature membrane rupture. So the focal point of Potter syndrome lies in renal agenesis.

Sufficient chest expansion is required for lung development. Also, amniotic fluids provide proline for lung development. Fetal compression by the uterus and fetal intraabdominal organ pressure on diaphragm cause failure of thorax expansion, which keeps alveoli and airways collapsed. Thus the lungs become hypoplastic.

**Genetics**

Understanding the mechanism of renal agenesis is important to elaborate on the pathophysiology of Potter syndrome. Induction of ureteric buds from mesonephric mesenchymal tissue is required for nephrogenesis, which involves interactions of different genes, transcription factors, and growth factors. Defects of these genes, transcription factors, and growth factors during nephrogenesis cause renal agenesis due to lack of interaction of mesonephros and ureteric bud, and thus mesonephros undergoes apoptosis.

The absence of these transcription factors in mice demonstrated renal agenesis. Similarly, the absence of another transcription factor EYA1 required for ureteric bud formation from mesonephros leads to brachio-oto-renal syndrome. Fibroblast growth factor 7, epithelial growth factor receptor, retinoic acid receptor alpha, and beta-2, glial cell line-derived neurotrophic factor is essential for ureteric branching. The involvement of the GREB1L gene is an autosomally dominant mutation in both bilateral and unilateral renal agenesis is found in some cases.

Defects in these growth factors and transcription factors result in hypoplasia or dysplasia but not aplasia. Renal tubular dysgenesis occurs due to the autosomal recessive mutation of renin, angiotensin, type 1 angiotensin II receptor, and angiotensin-converting enzyme.