# Introduction

The interstitial nucleus of Cajal is a prominent group of cells within the medial longitudinal fasciculus of the brainstem that is responsible for maintaining oculomotor control, head posture, and vertical eye movement. The interstitial nucleus of Cajal is essential in integrating velocity signals from the gaze control system into position signals when maintaining eye and head posture.

# Structure and Function

The interstitial nucleus of Cajal is lateral to the Edinger-Westphal nucleus and ventrolateral to the periaqueductal gray in the rostral part of the midbrain.

# Embryology

Previous studies have demonstrated that in the growth of the central nervous system in vertebrates, axons from the interstitial nucleus of Cajal along with the mesencephalic trigeminal nucleus contribute to the formation of the trajectories of the medial longitudinal fasciculus and the lateral longitudinal fasciculus.

# Blood Supply and Lymphatics

The medial longitudinal fasciculus and the interstitial nucleus of Cajal both receive blood supply from the basilar artery. The basilar artery supplies the brainstem and cerebellum and provides circulation to the posterior part of the brain via the posterior cerebral arteries.

# Nerves

The medial longitudinal fasciculus, the tract which ascends to the interstitial nucleus of Cajal, is closely associated with the oculomotor nerve, trochlear nerve, and abducens nerve. These nerves form the extraocular muscle system because they help move the eyes in parallel to have normal conjugate gaze. For the horizontal portion of the oculomotor system, rightward movements get generated by stimulating nuclei of the interstitial nucleus of Cajal to the right of the midline and leftward movements are generated by stimulating nuclei of the interstitial nucleus of Cajal to the left of the midline.

Several projection systems originate from the interstitial nucleus of Cajal. The first projection system goes past the posterior commissure that later transmits many terminal fields in the interstitial nucleus of Cajal on the opposite side of the body, the oculomotor nucleus, and the trochlear nucleus.

# Surgical Considerations

Previous studies suggested stimulation of the interstitial nucleus of Cajal and its cerebellar inputs may function as a future strategy to treat cervical dystonia (also known as spasmodic torticollis).

# Clinical Significance

As stated previously, the interstitial nucleus of Cajal is essential in the vertical eye movement during saccades, the vestibulo-ocular reflex, smooth pursuit, and optokinetic eye movements.