Heart disease can manifest in different ways such as electrocardiogram (ECG) abnormalities, palpitations, wall motion abnormalities, or a change in chamber geometry. For example, heart failure is a clinical diagnosis that can be the result of a multitude of different structural and functional cardiac disorders that affect intrinsic myocardial contractility. It is largely a clinical diagnosis and is characterized by the inability of the ventricle to fill with blood or eject blood properly. A patient might exhibit systolic as well as diastolic dysfunction, and present with dyspnea, fatigue, and fluid retention. ECGs may be used to assess heart electrical activity and can unearth findings that may be resulting in heart failure like ventricular tachycardia, ventricular fibrillation, left ventricular hypertrophy, and myocardial infarctions. Stress testing and echocardiograms are noninvasive diagnostic exam methods used to assess for cardiac lesions and monitor myocardial functionality and may reveal chamber size abnormalities, wall motion abnormalities, or improper valve function. It has been shown that stress echocardiography in combination with various stressors can detect significant coronary stenosis with accuracy ranging from 80 to 90%, making it a powerful prognostic tool in those with chronic coronary artery disease.

Important to the diagnosis of heart failure is left ventricular ejection fraction (LVEF), which is evaluated with an echocardiogram. It is a load-dependent test and indicator of left ventricular performance. The fraction percentage identifies the different categories of heart failure: preserved ejection fraction greater than or equal to 50%, mid-range left ventricular ejection fraction 41-49%, and reduced ejection fraction less than or equal to 40%.

The circumferential fiber shortening (MCVFc) is another measurement that can aid in determining ventricular performance as a direct relation to muscle function. It is an index of myocardial performance relative to wall stress. There is an inverse linear relationship between end-systolic wall stress and the velocity of circumferential fiber shortening, the index of which is a sensitive measure of the cardiac contractile state independent of preload and accounting for afterload.

Tissue Doppler is another noninvasive method of testing the systolic and diastolic function and performance of the left ventricle. It is used to assess for changes in the myocardium due to strain, twists, rotations that are distinct from previous tests.