Eighty-five percent to 90% of children have self-limited lymphadenopathy accompanied by high fever. Patients with disseminated illness may have a spectrum of complications, especially in the very young, elderly, and immunocompromised hosts such as transplant or patients with HIV. Involved systems may include the cutaneous, lymphatic, and visceral organs. More uncommonly, there may be ocular and neurologic involvement.

Cutaneous manifestations begin as an erythematous papule, vesicle, or nodule, which is known as the primary inoculation lesion. This lesion usually persists from one to three weeks but can last for months. The primary inoculation site may be a mucous membrane such as the conjunctiva that heals without scarring and is not detected. Examination of intertriginous areas, other skin creases as well as the scalp may help demonstrate the primary lesion.

Lymphatic system involvement presents as tender lymphadenopathy, regional, and may be solitary or multiple nodes 1 to 5 cm in diameter. There is overlying erythema. Ten percent may suppurate. The lymph nodes are enlarged proximal to the inoculation site. Common sites are the axillary, epitrochlear, cervical, supraclavicular, or submandibular lymph nodes. The lymphadenopathy may last from 1 to 4 months.

Visceral organ involvement may include the liver, spleen, or both and present with fever, weight loss, and abdominal pain. There may be elevated acute phase reactants and liver function tests. Cat scratch disease may be the cause of up to one-third of children with fever of unknown origin.

Ophthalmic complications include neuroretinitis, papillitis, optic neuritis, and most commonly Parinaud Oculoglandular syndrome. This is an atypical presentation found in 2% to 8% percent of children, which involves an inoculation site in the conjunctiva. There is local adenopathy, typically preauricular, upper cervical, or submandibular, with severe conjunctival infection. The conjunctival infection resolves in several weeks, but the lymphadenopathy may persist for months. Cat scratch may also cause focal or multifocal retinochoroiditis, panuveitis, branch retinal artery, and vein occlusion, leading to retinal detachment.

Neurologic complications of cat scratch include ataxia, cranial nerve palsies, and a dementia-like picture in older patients. Children typically present with encephalitis or aseptic meningitis. However, status epilepticus has been reported.

A myriad of musculoskeletal complaints has been associated with cat scratch disease, including arthralgias, myalgias, and frank arthritis.