**External features**

The pons has an approximate height of about 27 mm, transverse and anteroposterior width of 38 mm and 25 mm, respectively. Anteriorly it is limited by pontomesencephalic sulcus and pontomedullary sulcus below. Whereas its posterior surface is limited superiorly by an imaginary line running immediately below the inferior colliculi and inferiorly by an imaginary line crossing the lateral angles of the fourth ventricle.

**Surfaces**

The anterior surface rests on the anterior part of the clivus and is mostly convex that continues with the middle cerebellar peduncle bilaterally. The basilar groove for the basilar artery runs along its midline of the anterior pons, and the pyramidal tracts course through either side of the basilar groove. Trigeminal nerve roots emerge from the ventral pons by a larger sensory root and smaller motor root. The posterior surface forms the cranial portion of the rhomboid fossa and is covered posteriorly by the cerebellum. Critical anatomical landmarks in the dorsal pons include medial eminence, facial colliculus, and stria medullaris.

The medial eminence denotes the midline of the floor. The facial colliculus is an elevated area formed by the axons from the facial motor nucleus (cranial nerve VII) looping around the abducens nucleus (cranial nerve VI). The stria medullaris is transversely crossing a bundle of nerve fibers that distinct pons from medulla oblongata posteriorly. It is a part of the epithalamus that contains afferent fibers projecting to the habenula from septal nuclei, anterior thalamic nuclei, and lateral preoptic-hypothalamic region.

**Internal Morphology**

Morphologically and physiologically, the pons subdivides into two segments: the anterior basilar pons and the posterior tegmentum. A bundle of transverse myelinated fibers, also known as the trapezoid body, is situated between these two segments. The base or crus of the pons is the extension of the middle cerebral peduncles and continues caudally as the pyramid of the medulla oblongata. Internal structures of the base of pons include longitudinal bundles of corticospinal tracts, transverse fibers of pontocerebellar tracts and acoustic pathway, and by the pontine nuclei, adjacent to the other fibers. Among the two transverse fibers, axons of acoustic pathways arise from the cochlear nuclei and cross contralateral side constituting the trapezoid body.

Pontocerebellar fibers arise from the pontine nuclei and project into the cerebellum through the middle cerebellar peduncles. They divide into three layers 1) the superficial layer that rests anteriorly to the pyramidal tract and pontine nuclei; 2) the intermediate layer separating the bundles of the pyramidal tract and the deep layer 3) the deep layer that courses ventral to the medial lemniscus.

The longitudinal fibers within the pons are mainly corticospinal, corticonuclear, and cortico-pontine tracts. The corticospinal tract courses through the base of the pons, as several separated bundles and not as a compact structure observed in the pyramids of the medulla. The corticonuclear tract represents cortical axons projecting to the facial, trigeminal, and abducens nerve nuclei. Finally, the corticopontine fibers connect the cerebral cortex and the pontine nuclei. The dorsal portion of the pons is called the tegmentum, a similar structure in the medulla oblongata and midbrain. The reticular formation, descending and transverse fibers, cranial nerve nuclei are the main constituents of the tegmentum of pons.

**Gray Matter******

The gray matter of pons can be homologous to the spinal cord, such as cranial nerve nuclei, or the gray matter of its own. Pontine gray matter includes pontine nuclei, the gray matter of reticular formation, the superior olivary nucleus, trapezoid body nucleus, and nucleus of the lateral lemniscus. The superior salivary nucleus is a part of the parasympathetic nervous system that provides parasympathetic innervation to sublingual and submandibular glands. The lacrimal nucleus, also located within the pons and considered as a part of the superior olivary nucleus, provides parasympathetic supply to the nasal, lacrimal, and palatine glands.

The nuclei of cranial nerves are homologous to the gray matter of the spinal cord. Motor nuclei represent the anterior horn, while sensory nuclei represent the posterior horn. The facial and trigeminal nuclei are mixed, having both sensory and motor components. The motor nucleus of the facial nerve is located almost at the pontomedullary junction, dorsal the trapezoid body, and approximately 4 mm away from the fourth ventricular floor. It innervates the muscles of the facial expression, and injury to this nucleus manifests as a lower motor neuron type of facial paralysis.

The fibers of the motor nucleus form the inner genu and facial colliculus on the rhomboid fossa while encircling the abducens nucleus. Whereas the sensory root of the facial nerve is also called the intermediate nerve, carries the taste sensation from the ventral two-thirds of the tongue and terminates at the solitary tract nucleus. The abducens nerve nucleus is purely motor located deep to the facial colliculus. It provides motor innervation to the lateral rectus of the eyeball, and the lesson to it manifests as ipsilateral paralysis of eye abduction.

Trigeminal nerve nuclei located in the pons include the sensory nucleus, mesencephalic nucleus, and main motor nucleus. The sensory nucleus, mesencephalic tract nucleus, and motor nucleus of the trigeminal nerve are situated at the pons. The main sensory nucleus is the cranial continuation of the trigeminal nerve's spinal nucleus and is located lateral to the main motor nucleus. It receives afferent axons conveying tactile and pressure sensations from the scalp, dura, face, oral cavity, and nasal cavity. Cranial extension of the main sensory nucleus toward the midbrain is called the mesencephalic nucleus. It receives proprioception from extraocular muscles, muscles of mastication, joints, teeth, and the periodontium and is responsible for monosynaptic jaw jerk reflex.

The spinal nucleus of the trigeminal nerve corresponds to the dorsal horn of the spinal cord. Afferents of trigeminal ganglion carrying pain and temperature sensations from the face enter in the rostral pons, then synapse on the spinal nucleus after descending along the spinal tract of the trigeminal nerve. This spinal tract of the trigeminal nerve is lateral to the spinal nucleus, extending from the fifth cranial nerve's entry to the upper cervical cord (C2). The main motor nucleus of the trigeminal nerve is located medially to the main sensory nucleus and adjacent to the point of trigeminal nerve fibers attachment. It provides motor supply to the muscles of mastication.

The tegmentum of the pons harbors the ventral and dorsal cochlear nuclei. The dorsal nucleus forms an elevation called the acoustic tubercle at the lateral angle of the rhomboid fossa, and its axons are recognizable as acoustic striae. The axons of the ventral nucleus undergo a horizontal course and decussate to form the trapezoid body, then ascend as the lateral lemniscus around the superior olivary nucleus. These cochlear nuclei and their corresponding axons aid the hearing process by receiving afferents from the organ of Corti. Four vestibular nuclei named superior, inferior, medial, and lateral are located in the vestibular area of the rhomboid fossa and receive afferent vestibular nerve fibers from semicircular ducts, utricle, and saccule of the inner ear. A lesson to these nuclei causes postural instability, vertigo, and nystagmus.

**White Matter**

For description purposes, nerve fibers within the pons group together as transverse and longitudinal fibers. The transverse fibers comprise the fibers of the cochlear nucleus and pontocerebellar tracts. Whereas longitudinal fibers subgrouped as ascending, descending, and associative fibers. The ascending fibers include the medial, lateral, spinal, and trigeminal lemnisci and the superior cerebellar peduncle. The medial lemniscus is located posterior to the pyramidal tract and near to the raphe. It forms by sensory fibers from the gracile and cuneate nuclei projecting to the thalamus. It carries the spinal cord's dorsal column sensation (conscious proprioception, discriminative touch, vibratory sensation). The lateral lemniscus forms from fibers of the trapezoid body that ascend toward the inferior colliculus. This lateral lemniscus is part of the acoustic pathway and is located lateral to the spinothalamic tract in the ventral portion of the tegmentum.

The spinal lemniscus is a combined form of anterior and lateral spinothalamic tracts. It ascends along the ventral tegmentum, in between the lateral and medial lemniscus, and carries pain and temperature sensation from the contralateral side of the body. The trigeminal lemniscus carries the fibers from the spinal and main sensory trigeminal nucleus and relays on the ventral posteromedial nucleus (VPM) of the thalamus. The superior cerebellar peduncle principally carries efferents of the cerebellum, including the dentatorubral tract, projecting from the dentate nucleus to the contralateral red nucleus at the midbrain.