**Microsporidia in Animals**

Infection with Microsporidia also known as microsporidiosis occurs worldwide. Infection occurs via commonly known pathogens in agriculture and leads to lost resources. The classic species include Nosema
apis and Nosema ceranae that infect honeybees. Studies have shown that the mortality rate of honeybees infected with N. ceranae is nearly 94%, and infected populations usually die within 8 days. Three days post-infection, the observed mature spores inside host cells signal that the lifecycle of the parasite is complete. The parasite invades both the tip of folds and the basal cells of the bee’s epithelium, and the infection spreads between epithelial cells rapidly.

Other examples of infection with microsporidia is Loma salmonae which infects salmon and Thelohania species which infects shrimp. Infection with Loma salmonae can induce systemic symptoms including significant changes in the gills. The parasite also infects the heart, spleen, kidney, and pseudo-branch of infected marine or freshwater fish.

**Microsporidia in Humans**

In humans, infection with this opportunistic pathogen was not highly recognized at the beginning of the century. In 1924, researchers first suggested that Microsporidia infected humans, and until 1985, only a few reports of human microsporidiosis were published. After this, Microsporidia became increasingly recognized worldwide as opportunistic infectious agents, and presently, Microsporidia are recognized as emerging organisms in many areas of both developed and developing countries.Microsporidia are widely distributed worldwide among children, travelers, organ recipients, elderly, patients with malignant disease and diabetes, and HIV patients.

Among the nearly 1500 species described, only 17 are pathogenic to human, and some of them include Enterocytozoon bieneusi, Encephalitozoon, Anncaliia, Enterocytozoon, Tubulinosema, Microsporidium
africanum, and Trachipleistophora
hominis. In the majority of cases, E. bieneusi and Encephalitozoon
intestinalis have been the 2 species detected most often in infected humans.

In developed countries, the prevalence rates for Microsporidia infection in HIV-seropositive persons with diarrhea range from 2% to 78% varying by degree of immunosuppression and treatment. In HIV-seropositive persons without diarrhea, infections range from 1.4% to 4.3%.Microsporidia infection).