The semilunar ganglion is a crescent-shaped structure located at the anterior, inferior, and lateral borders of Meckel’s cave, a dural recess formed between the dura propria and periosteal dura of the middle cranial fossa.

The convex border of the semilunar ganglion is located at the antero-infero-lateral walls of Meckel’s cave, while the concave border, which is also known as the sinus ganglion, is located postero-supero-medially in the direction of the trigeminal cistern and the ostium of Meckel’s cave. A layer of dura propria and arachnoid surrounds the semilunar ganglion. The posteromedial portion of the semilunar ganglion is situated in the trigeminal cistern while the anteroinferior portion is located outside of the trigeminal cistern as it adheres closely to the dura of the Meckel’s cavity medially, and the dura of the temporal fossa laterally.

The semilunar ganglion segregates into three divisions: the ophthalmic (V1), which is the dorsal division, maxillary (V2), which is the intermediate portion, and the mandibular (V3), which is the ventral division. The ophthalmic portion exits the semilunar ganglion and enters the orbit via the superior orbital fissure. It separates into the supraorbital, supratrochlear, and nasociliary nerves that provide innervation to the nose and forehead. The maxillary portion leaves the middle cranial fossa by passing through the foramen rotundum before branching multiple times to provide innervation via the infraorbital, palatine, zygomatic, and superior alveolar nerves.

The cellular composition of the semilunar ganglion is between 20,000 to 35,000 pseudo-unipolar neurons, with non-neuronal cells, such as glia and fibroblasts, outnumbering them by approximately 100 times.

The semilunar ganglion is essential for releasing many neuropeptides and signaling molecules. As a potent vasodilator, calcitonin gene-related peptide is the most prevalent among these neuropeptides and plays a vital role in the pathophysiology of cluster and migraine headaches.