Patients with fatal familial insomnia (FFI) most commonly present between the ages of 20 and 61 years with a mean of 50 years. The disease leads to death eventually, and the course can range from 7 to 36 months, with a mean of 18 months. Patients with the homozygous Met-Met variant exhibit a shorter mean survival time in comparison to heterozygous Met-Val.

A detailed history and neurological examination are of paramount importance as FFI is largely a clinical diagnosis. When interviewing and examining a patient with possible FFI, the following points need to be considered:

- Patients can initially present with insomnia (total sleep time decreased), which increases in severity as the disease progresses. However, vivid dreaming is common during the limited amount of sleep time. Daytime sleepiness is not uncommon. History should be formulated to rule out different causes of insomnia.

- The patient may present with varying degrees of autonomic dysfunction in the form of high blood pressure, episodes of tachypnea, increased lacrimation and/or sweating, constipation, sexual dysfunction, and/or variabilities in body temperature.

- Common involvement of the brainstem warrants a detailed examination of cranial nerves. Patients can present with double vision (early disease), dysarthria (late disease), swallowing difficulties, and/or gaze abnormalities.

- Cortical involvement can manifest as slowing of thought processing, attentional disturbances, and short-term memory loss. As the disease progresses, a delirium-like state will eventually prevail. Behavioral and intellectual capacity tends to remain largely intact even in the late stages of the disease.

- An examination of gait can reveal ataxia, which worsens as the disease progresses.

- Weight loss is seen in most patients.

- Mood changes are common as patients may become depressed and/or apathetic as insomnia worsens.

- Changes in muscle tone coupled with weakness and abnormal movements may be seen, which tend to worsen with the duration of the disease.

- Detailed family history is important due to the heritable nature of the disease.

A diagnostic criterion following the analysis of the frequency of presenting symptoms has been proposed.

- Obligatory organic sleep disturbances: If not yet clinically apparent, polysomnography (PSG) must be performed.

**At least two**of the following “CJD-like" symptoms/signs:

- Psychiatric symptoms including visual hallucinations, personality changes, depression, anxiety, aggressiveness, disinhibition, listlessness

- Ataxia

- Visual

- Myoclonus

- Cognitive deficits

**At least one**of the following “relatively disease-specific" symptoms/signs:

- Loss of weight with a cutoff point of greater than 10 kg during the last six months

- Vegetative symptoms including hyperhidrosis, tachycardia, obstipation, hyperthermia