**First generation (classic lenses):**These double-aspheric lenses were designed for small pupil examination and high magnification imaging.

**+90D:**It is the most popular lens for examination at the slit lamp and is excellent for small pupils. The static field of view is 74 degrees, and the dynamic field of view is 89 degrees. A static or instantaneous field of view is the maximum field visible without tilting the lens.

The working field of view is also limited by pupillary dilation, which is 7 mm in most calculations. The working distance is 7 mm. The image magnification is 0.76x, and the laser spot magnification is 1/0.76 or 1.32x. The image magnification factor is used for the calculation of optic disc size.

**+78D**: It complements the +90D but with higher magnification for central retinal examination.

**+60D:**It gives a highly magnified view of the posterior pole.

**Second generation (super series):**These Super Series lenses have advanced double-aspheric lens designs with high-quality glass for enhanced clarity.

**Super field lens**: It has a 30% wider field of view than the 90D lens.

**Super 66 lens**: It has a higher magnification (compared to a +90D lens) for posterior pole examination. The image magnification and laser spot magnification factor is one that simplifies the calculation of optic disc size.

**Third generation:**This includes the lenses of digital series.

**Digital wide field (digital series)**: The lens has a 40% wider field of view than the 90D.

**Digital high mag lens**: It has a very high magnification (1.30x) and provides high resolution for detailed posterior pole examination.

The details of commonly used lenses are given below:

**90D lens**: It is a widely used and the most popular slit lamp fundus examination lens. Its image magnification is 0.76x. Though the lens actually minifies the retinal image, a magnified image of the retina may be visualized using the magnification system of the slit lamp. The magnification of the fundus image is markedly influenced by axial ametropia and the distance of the lens from the examined eye. Therefore, a correction factor (p) is used to estimate the actual optic disc size.

**78D lens**: This lens offers a higher magnification than the 90D lens without cutting down on the field of view. Thus it's an ideal balance of magnification and field of view. The double aspheric design offers a clear and large view of the optic disc and posterior pole. It is used for diagnosing glaucoma and other posterior pole abnormalities. Dilation is required to obtain optimum retinal imaging. The working distance is 8 mm.

**60D lens:**It is a high-magnification fundoscopy lens. It is used for detailed examination of the macula and optic nerve head. It requires a fully dilated pupil and a longer working distance of 18 mm to obtain clear retinal imaging. The double aspheric design provides excellent detail for detecting subtle details of retinal abnormalities. It is a good choice for assessing capillary hemorrhages, age-related macular degeneration, and cup-to-disc ratios.

**The Digital Series lens**: This series incorporates advanced optical lens design and low-dispersion glass to reduce chromatic aberrations and enhance stereopsis. They have advanced antireflecting coatings to reduce reflections and glare up to 50% more than traditional coatings. These features may provide high-resolution imaging & superior optical clarity.

**The Digital Wide Field**allows a clear view of the posterior pole up to the retinal periphery through a small, undilated pupil. With dynamic maneuvers, ora Serrata can also be visualized. It has a similar magnification (0.72x) as a 90 D lens (0.76x) but provides a 40% greater field of view (static field of view 103 degrees). The anti-reflective coating gives a glare-free image. The lens is made of glass with a high refractive index, providing precise and distortion-free imaging.

**Digital high mag:**It is also known as the 3rd generation 78D. It has the highest magnification among all the slit lamp lenses. This enables a highly detailed examination of the posterior pole. In addition, it provides high-resolution imaging of the macula and the optic disc with an enhanced stereoscopic view. This lens is a perfect choice for examining the optic nerve head, retinal nerve fiber layer, and macula.

**Super 66**: This lens is similar to 78 D.  However, it has 1.0x magnification, simplifying measurements of the optic disc without needing conversion.

**The digital 1.0x**:  This lens has a similar magnification as of Super 66 lens. But it has a unique glass surface curvature and coating, which minimize photographic distortion and reflections. In addition, the high-index, high-resolution glass provides greater stereopsis and image clarity. Thus it is a good lens for slit lamp photography.

**Super field**: It is also known as 'Super 90D'. It provides wide-field imaging up to the mid-periphery and dynamic viewing up to the ora Serrata. It is suitable for pan-retinal examination. This lens has the magnification of a 90D lens. This combination of magnification and wide-field imaging allows quick and detailed examination of the retina. It has a 30 mm lens ring which provides a comfortable grip and easy manipulation. It can be used on small pupils too.

**Super pupil XL**: Its main application is in small pupil pan retinal examination. It can be used in a 2 mm pupil and may help in quick undilated screening exams.

**Super vitreo fundus**: It is another wide-field imaging lens. It is ideal for examining the peripheral retina for tears and detachments. It has a closer working distance of 4 to 5 mm. It is suitable to get through pupils of 3 to 4 mm, thus enabling a quick, undilated retinal screening.

In the COVID era wearing a mask is mandatory. However, it leads to fogging of the lens and hinders visualization of the retina. A new shield with a wing and a flange to direct warm air currents away from the optical path may be used to avoid this issue. Other potential solutions include using tape at the upper portion of the mask, an antifogging noseband, pressing the upper part of the mask with the examiner's fingers, a fan, antifogging spray, and a polyvinyl chloride deflector attached to the lens.