Invasive monitoring is generally recommended on the recognition of post-MI VSR. The measurement of right and left ventricular filling pressures is important to guide the fluid administration and the use of diuretics. Additionally, the measurements of cardiac output and mean arterial pressure permit calculation of systemic vascular resistance to direct vasodilator therapy. If systolic blood pressure is above 90 mm Hg, vasodilator therapy involving nitroglycerine or nitroprusside should be started as soon as possible, preferably once hemodynamic monitoring is available. Inotropes may also be needed to support adequate cardiac output. These interventions may be critically important for stabilizing the patient’s condition in preparation for further diagnostic studies and repair. If pharmacological therapy is not tolerated or if it fails to achieve hemodynamic stability, intra-aortic balloon counterpulsation (IABP) should be considered.

An urgent surgical closure is the treatment of choice. Some authors believe surgery may be delayed to allow healing of friable tissue and improve surgical mortality. However, the lower surgical mortality was probably a result of selection bias. Among medically treated patients with VSR, the mortality is 24% at 72 hours and increases to 75% at three weeks. Surgical mortality is high among patients with inferior MI (70%) when compared to patients with anterior infarcts (30%). This is because of greater technical difficulty and the need for concomitant mitral valve repair in patients with basal septal rupture since they often have coexisting mitral regurgitation.

Although surgery remains the gold standard treatment for post-MI VSR, percutaneous closure is increasingly attempted, especially in patients with high surgical risk.