Rifaximin is administered orally and is typically available in 200 mg and 550 mg tablets. Since it is poorly absorbed in the gastrointestinal system, there are very low systemic blood levels. Most of the medication passes through the gastrointestinal tract and is excreted in the feces. The dose regimens vary depending on the disease process the patient is receiving treatment.

- For Irritable Bowel Syndrome with Diarrhea(IBS-D), the suggested dose of rifaximin is 400 mg three times or 550 mg twice daily for two weeks. IBS-D may require intermittent rifaximin treatment. Typically, 200 mg three times daily is given for three days in traveler's diarrhea. The recommended dosage for preventing traveler's diarrhea is rifaximin 200 mg twice daily or 600 mg daily.

- Hepatic encephalopathy requires a dose of 550 mg twice or three times daily and is usually continued for an extended period to prevent its recurrence. Rifaximin is generally used in combination with lactulose to treat hepatic encephalopathy. For small intestinal bacterial overgrowth, the typical dose of rifaximin is 400 mg three times daily for two weeks. For patients with hepatic encephalopathy, recurrent treatment is warranted.

- Studies show that rifaximin at a dose of 400 mg twice daily for seven days every month improves diverticular disease symptoms and prevents their recurrence. Pouchitis patients may need doses of 400 to even 800 mg twice daily for 12 weeks; they may need periodic retreatment. Recurrent Clostridium difficile treatment in retrospective studies and case series was 400 mg twice daily for two weeks. Spontaneous bacterial peritonitis prophylaxis should use rifaximin three times daily indefinitely.

**Use in Specific Patient Population**

- **Hepatic Impairment:**According to manufacturer labeling, following administration of rifaximin in the patients with hepatic encephalopathy, the systemic exposure (i.e., AUC) of rifaximin is proportionately increased in patients with mild, moderate, and severe hepatic impairment. No dose modification is generally necessary for patients with mild or moderate hepatic impairment. However, caution should be exercised when rifaximin is administered to patients with severe hepatic impairment (Child-Pugh Class C).

- **Renal Impairment:**According to manufacturer labeling, the pharmacokinetics of rifaximin in patients with impaired renal function have not been investigated. However, no dosage adjustment is typically necessary as the absorption of rifaximin is minimal.

- **Pregnancy Considerations:**There is no data on the use of rifaximin in pregnant women to inform a drug-associated risk. However, teratogenic effects were observed in preclinical animal studies after the administration of rifaximin to pregnant rats and rabbits. In rabbits, maxillofacial, cardiac, ocular, and spine malformations were observed. In addition, ocular malformations were reported in both rats and rabbits. Consequently, pregnant patients should be advised of the potential harm to the fetus.

- **Breastfeeding Considerations:**According to the manufacturer, the clinician should evaluate the developmental and health benefits of breastfeeding and the mother's clinical need for rifaximin, and any adverse effects on the breastfed infant from rifaximin. Rifaximin has poor oral absorption; therefore, it is not likely to reach the breastmilk or bloodstream of the infant and cause any adverse drug reactions in breastfed infants. Nevertheless, no published experience exists with rifaximin during breastfeeding; therefore, an alternate drug may be preferred, particularly while nursing a newborn or preterm infant.