# Introduction

Simulation has become a standard educational practice across medical training programs. Traditionally, the scenario is run one time with a subsequent debriefing of the learners by faculty. The post-simulation debrief is a facilitated discussion and reflection where the majority of the learning takes place. Typically, learners are expected to be able to apply the knowledge learned during the debrief to the next real patient scenario that they encounter. However, the timing of the encounter with an actual patient with the same clinical scenario can be unpredictable. Knowledge attrition over time could impact the learner’s ability to apply knowledge learned during the simulation. Traditional post-simulation feedback methods may not be the strongest model for giving the learner a timely opportunity to apply their knowledge.

Rapid Cycle Deliberate Practice (RCDP), on the other hand, is a simulation-based technique that differs from traditional simulation practices. It involves learners repetitiously performing a simulation with micro-debriefs interjected by the faculty. Compared to traditional post-simulation feedback, the provided feedback sessions are more frequent and can be more succinct.

# Function

The purpose of the RCDP technique is to be an effective learning model in simulation-based medical education. In some studies, when compared to traditionally-run simulations, RCDP integrated scenarios have shown to be more effective in improving learning.

# Procedural Skills Assessment

RCDP has also demonstrated usefulness for teaching procedural skills. One study compared RCDP to post-simulation feedback in teaching the skill of pediatric intubations to pediatric residents.

# Medical Decision Making and Leadership Development

Critically ill patients are among the most vulnerable subset of patients in the hospital — effective education in resuscitation where seconds to minutes matter can make a significant difference. In one study, learners who had undergone a modified Basic Life Support course taught with RCDP demonstrated the performance of higher quality cardiopulmonary resuscitation techniques in areas such as chest compression fraction and optimization and initiation of compressions.

# Clinical Significance

Rapid Cycle Deliberate Practice has the potential to revolutionize simulation-based healthcare education. The broad impact of effective training models, such as RCDP, is significant. Through effective training of multiple levels of medical professionals, patients may ultimately receive higher quality medical care. Also, simulation allows learners to make mistakes in a controlled setting; this creates a safer clinical environment. The resuscitation and procedural skills are shown to be beneficial with teaching by RCDP are a vital piece of any medical professional's skillset.

RCDP represents an integration of several key educational principles. Mastery learning is a concept whereby the emphasis on comprehensive learning is on the individual. This concept involves an iterative process until the learner achieves mastery. An individual may take as long as they need to fulfill the prescribed mastery learning objectives. Unlike traditional learning methods, in which the time devoted to learning is more proscribed, time becomes the independent variable in mastery learning. RCDP adopts a similar approach with more time-variable learning.

Additionally, RCDP is also influenced by the concept of deliberate practice. Deliberate practice involves focusing on a specific area of weakness. Through this intentional approach, the learners can address particular areas of weakness, and learning of the overall skill is improved. RCDP repetitively applies deliberate practice. Repetitive learning has shown to be valuable in improving muscle memory and long-term memory development.

Overall, RCDP has been well-received by learners. In one study, qualitative statements reflected that learners "gained more confidence" as the exercise went on and improved teamwork. This method of teaching did meet with some criticism in the same study, however. Some participants commented upon their challenges with the exercise, including feeling "overwhelmed" with the numerous pauses.

A pre-briefing is another opportunity to normalize the change in simulation format for learners. Because there are often prescribed learning points, learners can expect stops and feedback, regardless of their performance; this alleviates the pressure for them to perform perfectly and allows them to make errors. Learners then have a unique opportunity to fix the errors as the simulation is re-performed and have a chance to apply instructor feedback immediately to the scenario. Thus, in the RCDP model, the faculty enters a role more similar to a coach than an instructor. These compound to potentially create a more psychologically safe environment for the learner.

# Pearls and Other Issues

RCDP is a technique integrating the concepts of deliberate practice and derived from the principles of mastery learning. The process differs from traditional simulation teaching. In RCDP, micro-debriefs take place in interrupted segments in a repetitious fashion allowing the learner to apply learned skills immediately.

# Enhancing Healthcare Team Outcomes

Simulation is an integral educational strategy endorsed to teach undergraduate and graduate medical students. RCDP is a valuable tool for simulation-based education. RCDP has been applied to teaching and improving team-based resuscitation to enhance team performance and procedural skills.