The internal carotid artery provides most of the levator palpebrae superioris blood supply via branches of the ophthalmic artery. Four arterial systems direct blood to the levator palpebrae muscle: the lacrimal, supratrochlear, and supraorbital arteries and muscular branches of the ophthalmic artery.

The internal carotid artery supplies the majority of the blood to the superior peripheral arcade via the branches previously stated. The external carotid artery provides additional blood to the superior peripheral arcade medially via the angular artery (a branch of the facial artery) and laterally via the superficial temporal artery. This complex anastomosis maintains a rich blood supply to the lateral palpebrae superioris.

The venous drainage of the muscles of the orbit is via the superior and inferior ophthalmic veins. The superior ophthalmic vein will eventually drain into the cavernous sinus, and the inferior ophthalmic vein will drain into the pterygoid venous plexus.

It was previously thought that the lymphatic drainage of the medial upper eyelid drained medially along the angular artery, and the lateral upper eyelid lymph drained laterally to the preauricular and parotid nodes. There is a recent change regarding eyelid lymphatic drainage based on lymphoscintigraphy in human subjects. The upper eyelid lymphatics, including the levator palpebrae superioris muscles, are believed to drain entirely laterally to the preauricular/parotid lymph nodes, then to the deep cervical lymph nodes (level II). From here, lymph drainage follows conventional drainage patterns.