Chest wall deformities are a set of congenital diseases; these can manifest as; an isolated feature, with other congenital anomalies, or as part of a genetic syndrome. Deleterious effects can occur from birth to adolescence, ranging from life-threatening conditions to psychosocial cosmetic concerns. There is no global accepted general classification for chest wall deformities. This article aims to review from the point of view of general thoracic surgery the most common congenital chest wall deformities that have been described. These are pectus excavatum, pectus carinatum, Poland syndrome, sterna clefts, ectopia cordis, Jeunes syndrome, and Jarcho Levin syndrome, to summarize the essential points of this complex spectrum of diseases. The activity will also describe the role of the interprofessional team in the diagnosis and evaluation of this condition.

**Objectives:**
- Summarize the etiology of pectus excavatum, pectus carinatum, Poland syndrome, sternal clefts, ectopia cordis, Jeunes syndrome, and Jarcho Levin syndrome.
- Review the evaluation of pectus excavatum, pectus carinatum, Poland syndrome, sterna clefts, ectopia cordis, Jeunes syndrome, and Jarcho Levin syndrome.

- Outline the prognosis, follow-up management and outcomes of pectus excavatum, pectus carinatum, Poland syndrome, sterna clefts, ectopia cordis, Jeunes syndrome, and Jarcho Levin syndrome.
- Identify some strategies that the interprofessional healthcare team can undertake to improve the management and outcomes of chest wall deformities.