The complications of tracheobronchial tear depend upon the type and the severity of the injury. Almost 80% of patients with tracheobronchial injuries with blunt trauma dies either at the site or on the way to the hospital. The mortality is compounded by concomitant severe injuries the patient sustains in blunt trauma. Post-traumatic tracheobronchial injuries could present with subtle asymptomatic lesions to severe respiratory distress and respiratory failure. The tracheal injury could result in sudden airway collapse. Subcutaneous emphysema, pneumomediastinum, and pneumothorax are common presentations and complications—infections and sepsis with multiorgan dysfunction compound the mortality risk. Long-standing collapse or bronchiectasis following airway injuries could substantially reduce the pulmonary reserve.

Iatrogenic tracheal injuries could cause esophageal and mediastinal injuries, including life-threatening mediastinitis. Untreated airway injuries often result in late stenosis. Cuff pressure-related injuries could vary from simple mucosal lacerations, which could progress to tracheal stenosis or tracheoesophageal fistula. Complications of surgically corrected tracheobronchial injury include anastomotic separation, brachial artery fistula with sudden life-threatening bleeding. Strictures, fistula, and hoarseness of voice due to recurrent laryngeal nerve palsy could also complicate the treatment. Few known complications of endoscopic management with stenting include infections, migration of stent, tracheal stenosis secondary to granulation tissue, metal fatigue, and mucous formation with blockage.

Almost 50% to 70% of the tracheobronchial tears are missed initially and could present later on with breathing difficulty, stridor, and recurrent infections. The mortality in initially missed injuries with subsequent need for surgery is high.