During patient history, questions about family history, autoimmune diseases, and insulin-resistant are critical to making the diagnosis of DM. It often presents asymptomatically, but when symptoms develop, patients usually present with polyuria, polydipsia, and weight loss. On physical examination of someone with hyperglycemia, poor skin turgor (from dehydration) and a distinctive fruity odor of their breath (in patients with ketosis) may be present. In the setting of diabetic ketoacidosis (DKA), clinicians may note Kussmaul respirations, fatigue, nausea, and vomiting. Funduscopic examination in a patient with DM may show hemorrhages or exudates on the macula. In frank diabetic retinopathy, retinal venules may appear dilated or occluded. The proliferation of new blood vessels is also a concern for ophthalmologists and can hasten retinal hemorrhages and macular edema, ultimately resulting in blindness. While T1DM and T2DM can present similarly, they can be distinguished based on clinical history and examination. T2DM patients are typically overweight/obese and present with signs of insulin resistance, including acanthosis nigricans, which are hyperpigmented, velvety patches on the skin of the neck, axillary, or inguinal folds. Patients with a longer course of hyperglycemia may have blurry vision, frequent yeast infections, numbness, or neuropathic pain. The clinicians must ask the patient bout any recent skin changes in their feet during each visit. The diabetic foot exam, including the monofilament test, should be a part of the routine physical exam.