A history and physical examinations are the cornerstones of time and cost-effective diagnosis of adenopathy. The depth and the extent of the H&P conducted are proportional to the obscurity of the etiology of the adenopathy. The obvious presence of strep pharyngitis and its related localized anterior cervical adenopathy requires far less clinical brainpower than generalized adenopathy secondary to sarcoidosis or a Gaucher disease.

The history itself involves gathering 5 important components: chronicity, localization, concomitant symptoms, patient epidemiology, and pharmacological exposure.

- Chronicity: The accepted definition of "chronic adenopathy" is a duration of greater than 3 weeks and the observation that duration of fewer than 2 weeks or greater than 1 year is usually associated with benign causality.

- Localization: The first determination is if the adenopathy can be viewed as localized or generalized. The accepted definition of generalized lymphadenopathy is clinical lymphadenopathy in 2 or more non-contiguous areas. Generalized adenopathy may be indicative of systemic illness, and the workup is typically more laboratory and imaging-intensive and pursued more rapidly. Localized beds of enlarged nodes reflect possible localized pathology in the areas in which they drain.

- Physical characterization of the node itself

- Concomitant symptoms: The presence or absence of constitutional symptoms is a major cue in the determination of the pace and depth of the workup in lymphadenopathy when taken in the clinical context. For example fever, chills, night sweats, weight loss, and fatigue are worrisome in the setting of generalized lymphadenopathy. However, similar symptoms are acceptable in the setting of localized cervical lymphadenopathy and a concomitant Flu or Strep.

- Epidemiology: Included in the epidemiological search for lymphadenopathy, will be questions pertaining to Dietary exposure, pet exposure, insect bite, recent blood exposure, high-risk sexual behavior or intravenous drug use, occupational exposure to animals, and travel-related epidemiology especially attention to travel to third world or the Southwest in the United States.

- Pharmacological exposure: A thorough medical history is necessary including prescription medications, over-the-counter medications, supplements, and herbal medicines.

The physical examination can be quite revealing, especially with the location of the adenopathy and consideration of the lymphatic drainage of the related areas. Once the determination has been made that the lymphadenopathy is either localized or general, strict attention to the localized area must be paid. For example:

- Submandibular nodes typically drain the tongue the lips and the mouth and the conjunctiva

- Submental nodes typically drain the lower lip portions of the oropharynx and the cheek

- Jugular lymphadenopathy typically drains the tongue, the tonsils, the pinna, and the parotid gland

- Posterior cervical adenopathy typically is indicative of scalp, neck, skin of the arms and legs

- Pectoral thoracic cervical and axillary drainage

- Suboccipital nodes reflect drainage of the scalp in the head, and preauricular nodes reflect drainage of the eyelids, conjunctiva temporal region, and pinna.

- Postauricular nodes reflect drainage at the scalp in the external auditory meatus.

- The right supraclavicular node represents drainage of the mediastinum the lungs in the esophagus

- Axillary nodes typically create the arm at the thoracic wall and the breast.

- The epitrochlear nerve roots typically drain the ulnar aspect of the forearm and the hand.

- Inguinal nodes drain the penis, the scrotum, the vulva, vagina, the perineum, the gluteal region, and the lower abdominal wall and portions of the lower anal canal

Characterization of the node morphology itself:

- Tenderness or pain may result from an inflammatory process or perforation and also may result from hemorrhage into the necrotic center of a malignant node. (Presence or absence of pain is not a reliable differentiating factor for malignant nodes though.)

- Consistently firm rubbery nodes may suggest lymphoma; softer nodes are usually the result of infection or inflammatory conditions; hard stonelike nodes are typically a sign of cancer more commonly metastatic than primary.

- "Shotty" nodes refer to very small, scattered nodes that feel like shotgun pellets under the skin. This configuration is typically is found in cervical nodes of children with viral illnesses

- The designation of a "matting" configuration of nodes describes the pattern of clustered, seemingly conjoined lymph nodes. This is indicative of, but not pathognomonic, malignancy.