Aortic stenosis is defined as the narrowing of the aortic valve to impair blood flow out of the left ventricle and can be confirmed by an echocardiogram. This condition can occur in up to 10% of the 80+ population. Clinical exam findings typically include a crescendo decrescendo murmur that peaks during systole. This murmur is also known as a systolic ejection murmur and can be auscultated in the right sternal border at the second intercostal space. Typically, the murmur will peak later during systole as the stenosis progresses. Additional clinical findings can include symptoms of heart failure, angina, and left ventricular concentric hypertrophy due to excessive ejection pressures.

The most common cause of aortic stenosis is due to age-related reasons such as a calcified aortic valve. A bicuspid valve can present with stenosis secondary to calcification much earlier.

A history of rheumatic fever can elevate a patient's lifetime risk of stenosis. The aortic stenosis, if left untreated, can lead to left ventricular hypertrophy. Severe aortic stenosis is a serious medical condition, and valve replacement is usually indicated in eligible patients.

Aortic regurgitation is the retrograde blood flow from the aorta into the left ventricle. The net effect is left ventricular volume overload and subsequent chamber dilation. Because of the heart's ability to compensate, it can maintain this hypertrophy for a prolonged period. The prevalence of aortic regurgitation is estimated at 4.9% and increases with age until the sixth decade. Aortic regurgitation is a common finding in patients with aortic stenosis. On physical exam, aortic regurgitation can be suspected due to wide pulse pressure and an early diastolic murmur (over the right sternal border at the second intercostal space.)

The murmur associated with aortic regurgitation is usually referred to as a diastolic decrescendo murmur. The duration of the murmur positively correlates with the severity of the disease. Other physical exam findings and complaints can be a bounding pulse, headbobbing (Corrigan pulse), pulsing fingernails (Quincke's sign) as well as uvular pulsing (Muller's sign). Aortic regurgitation can be auscultated as an early diastolic murmur. An Austin Flint murmur may be auscultated in some cases of aortic regurgitation. Like aortic stenosis, aortic regurgitation can present with symptoms of heart failure as well.

Similar to aortic stenosis, the etiology of aortic regurgitation is most impacted by age and congenital abnormalities, such as a bicuspid valve. Rheumatic fever is a common risk factor for aortic regurgitation.

The acuity and severity of the regurgitation are the primary drivers for management. Management includes medical therapy or valve replacement.