The kidney develops between weeks 6 and 8 after conception, and the embryologic kidney rises from the pelvis into the lumbar region in the 9th week. If the kidney fails to pass above the fork of the umbilical arteries, the blood supply degenerates, or there are other factors inhibiting renal migration, then the kidney fails to rise to its normal anatomical location and instead becomes ectopic.

The exact location can be varied, with most cases being in the contralateral pelvis, but in the cases of crossed renal ectopia, both kidneys can be on the same side of the spine or, more rarely, the kidney can be outside the pelvis or retroperitoneal space entirely and even become located within the thorax.

There are 6 anatomical subtypes of crossed fused ectopic kidneys that have been described.

- Superior ectopia, the anatomically normal kidney's superior pole, is fused with the inferior pole of the ectopic kidney.

- Inferior ectopia, the ectopic kidney, is positioned inferiorly to the anatomically normal kidney.

- Sigmoid, also known as S-shaped

- Pancake, also known as lump

- Disk

Zhuo Yin et al. (2014) also report an additional subtype they termed "Y type" with a fusion of the ureters.

Ectopic renal units are usually a unilateral condition, but there are documented cases of bilateral ectopic kidneys.

As a rare subset of fused ectopic kidneys, a pancake kidney occurs when there is a fusion of the kidneys along their respective medial aspects leading to a round, discoid renal mass. There may be a central hole (donut kidney), or the medial aspect can fuse entirely.