Treatment of hypocalcemia depends on the presence and severity of symptoms, degree of hypocalcemia, and etiology of hypocalcemia. Management of hypocalcemia can be divided into different categories:

- Intravenous (IV) calcium is recommended for use in patients with severe symptoms, prolonged QTC intervals, or in asymptomatic patients who develop acute hypocalcemia in a short period. This can be given as calcium gluconate 1 to 2 g (equivalent to 90 to 180 mg elemental calcium) or 1 g of calcium chloride (equivalent to 270 mg elemental calcium) as a short infusion over 10 to 20 minutes. This should be followed by a continuous infusion if hypocalcemia persists. Calcium gluconate is generally preferred over calcium chloride as it is less likely to cause tissue necrosis if extravasation occurs. An alkaline solution like bicarbonate and phosphorus-containing solution needs to be avoided through the same IV to avoid precipitation of calcium salts.

- If the symptoms are mild such as paresthesias, or in asymptomatic patients, oral calcium can be given. Calcium carbonate (40% elemental calcium) or calcium citrate (21% elemental calcium) are the most commonly used calcium preparations. The goal is to administer 1500 to 2000 mg elemental calcium per day divided into 2 to 3 doses. Calcium carbonate needs an acidic medium to be absorbed, so this should be avoided in patients taking proton pump inhibitors (PPI). Vitamin D supplementation is often recommended with calcium to promote better absorption and because vitamin D deficiency is commonly encountered in most clinical scenarios leading to hypocalcemia.

- Disease-specific treatment:

- 
              
- **Postsurgical hypoparathyroidism:**Most patients will develop hypocalcemia after thyroidectomy or parathyroidectomy due to hypoparathyroidism, which is usually transient. Prophylactic treatment with calcium after surgery is recommended. This usually prevents severe symptomatic hypocalcemia in most cases.
              
              
- **Hypomagnesemia:**It should be corrected first as hypocalcemia will be difficult to correct without correcting serum magnesium.
              
              
- **CKD:**Hypocalcemia in CKD is usually a result of vitamin D deficiency. This can be corrected with vitamin D or its active metabolite, calcitriol. Patients with significant vitamin D deficiency should be given ergocalciferol 50,000 units weekly for 8 to 12 weeks followed by cholecalciferol at lower doses of 1000 to 5000 units daily.
              
              
- **Vitamin D deficiency:**Hypocalcemia due to vitamin D deficiency cannot be corrected unless vitamin D is repleted first.