Ultrasound is the most commonly used diagnostic procedure in obstetrics. The use of ultrasound is a convenient, painless procedure that yields immediate results and is considered widely safe.

Fetal viability is confirmed by the presence of an embryo that has cardiac activity. Cardiac activity is often present when the embryo itself measures 2 mm or greater during the 6th week of gestation.

The yolk sac size and shape can be used to predict viability. The yolk sac can be evaluated as early as 5 weeks. Abnormal yolk sac shape (non-round or oval) predicts poor pregnancy outcomes with a sensitivity of 29% and a specificity of 95%.

Subchorionic hemorrhage is another condition associated with poor pregnancy outcomes that can be assessed with ultrasound. The overall spontaneous abortion rate is doubled in pregnancy cases in which the separation between the uterine wall and the chorionic membrane is considered large compared to small or moderate. A large separation is found to be associated with an approximate 3 fold increase in spontaneous abortion rates.

Fetal bradycardia during the first trimester is another important predictor for potential fetal demise. Fetal bradycardia in the early first trimester below 80 bpm is an ominous sign, and physicians should prepare their patients for likely poor outcomes such as spontaneous abortion and potential intrauterine fetal demise. Follow-up scans are done weekly until the heart rate is no longer present or until it becomes normal.

It is recommended that all pregnant women undergo a routine ultrasound at 10 to 13 weeks of gestation to determine an accurate gestational age. Getting an accurate gestational age is highly important and pertinent for the optimal assessment of fetal growth later in pregnancy. Ultrasound is the most reliable method for establishing a true gestational age by measurement of crown-rump length, which can be measured either transabdominally or transvaginally. CRL allows for an accurate determination of the day of conception +/- 5 days in 95% of pregnancies.****Between 11 and 13.6 weeks gestation, it is recommended that CRL be used to determine gestational age unless it is >84 mm, then head circumference (HC) should be used as it is slightly more precise when compared to biparietal diameter (BPD). Head circumference is measured around the outer table of the fetal skull. The technique of BPD measurement depends on the nomogram used. If the nomogram uses outer-to-outer measurements of the fetal skull, then the same should be done during a fetal ultrasound. However, the outer edge of the skull to the inner edge of the skull nomograms are available as well. In order to obtain reliable information, the largest symmetric axial view of the fetal head must be used to visualize the choroid plexus, the third ventricle, or thalamus.

Towards the end of the first trimester, a routine scan offers the opportunity to detect any visible gross fetal abnormalities. Measuring nuchal translucency in the first trimester has been associated with having both high sensitivity and specificity for identifying pregnancies that are at risk for chromosomal anomalies, the cut-off being 3 mm or greater.

Another important goal of the routine obstetric ultrasound at 10 to 13 weeks of gestation is the determination of the number of fetuses as well as amnionicity and chorionicity in twin gestations. Amnionicity is determined by the absence or presence of the intertwin membrane (ITM). If no ITM is identified, pregnancy is described as "mono-amniotic and mono-chorionic," and it implies the highest potential rate of complications (cord entanglement and fetal death).

In the second trimester, the goal of routine ultrasound examination, typically performed between 18 and 22 weeks, is to assess the fetal anatomy and further evaluate the placenta.

As opposed to asymptomatic pregnant patients undergoing routine obstetric ultrasound imaging, pregnant patients with concerning symptoms must be evaluated on an emergent basis. In cases in which a stable patient presents for an evaluation of pelvic pain, abdominal pain, or vaginal bleeding early in suspected pregnancy, it is important first to establish a diagnosis of an IUP. If pelvic ultrasound reveals an IUP, it can be assumed that the cause of symptoms is unlikely to be secondary to an ectopic pregnancy.

Trauma in pregnancy is the leading cause of non-obstetric maternal mortality. Non-lethal injuries during pregnancy most commonly occur from motor vehicle accidents and domestic/intimate partner violence. Although most injuries during pregnancy are classified as minor, fetal losses that are associated with minor trauma range from 60 to 70%. Importantly, any female of reproductive age with minor or major injury should be assumed pregnant until proven otherwise. The immediate focus is always on stabilizing the patient. Once successfully stabilized, all female patients of reproductive age should undergo a definitive pregnancy test or an ultrasound scan. In the setting of trauma, the patient may not be conscious or able to report their pregnancy status or gestational age; thus, estimating gestational age with bedside ultrasound can be a useful tool. Identifying pregnancy and estimating gestational age can help anticipate the need for prompt delivery. Ultrasound can assist in the evaluation of fetal cardiac rate and rhythm, amniotic fluid volume, placental localization, exclusion of previa, delineating possible fetal injury, and confirming fetal demise. If a patient is estimated to be >20 weeks gestation, fetal monitoring should be initiated as soon as possible in a stable patient. In the setting of trauma in pregnancy, a critical concern is placental abruption, a condition that occurs most commonly in trauma in which the patient experiences intense and severe uterine pain, in addition to uterine contractions and vaginal bleeding. It is important to note that the use of ultrasound for detecting placental abruption has a poor sensitivity; however, it is very specific if identified; resulting in a positive predictive value of 88% if seen and a negative predictive value of 53% if not identified. Thus fetal prolonged monitoring is advised in pregnant patients with trauma. A follow-up obstetric ultrasound and examination should be done 2 weeks after any hospital admission for either maternal or fetal factors (regardless of the gestational age) to document and assess normalcy after the traumatic event.