Most cGMP action on vascular function gets mediated through its activation of PKGs balanced by the inactivating PDEs. The effects of cGMP on vascular proliferation are unclear, with studies suggesting both pro and anti-proliferative effects depending on activation (pGC vs. sGC), location, and quantity of intracellular cGMP. cGMP has different, but complementary, effects on inflammatory modulators depending on the activating source. NP induction of pGC appears to reduce both immune cell activation and chemokine release, while NO stimulation of sGC inhibits P-selectin expression, reducing both leukocyte recruitment and thrombosis.

Metabolic homeostasis is another potential area of interest for cGMP research. Generally, cGMP induces positive changes in energy expenditure. In brown adipose tissue where NO induces cGMP, it increases the quantity, size, and activity of mitochondria. Thus it serves to increase energy expenditure in the brown fat cells. cGMP may also induce the browning of white adipose cells and exert similar effects on mitochondria in other cells throughout the body. cGMP potentially improves insulin sensitivity in white adipose cells, regulates glucagon release in the endocrine pancreas, exerts antioxidant and anti-inflammatory effects in the liver, and regulates food and water intake through interactions in the hypothalamus.

cGMP also plays a role in neurological function, most notably regarding synaptic plasticity and memory formation and retrieval. In hippocampal synapses, stimulation of postsynaptic NMDA-receptors can lead to the release of NO into the synaptic cleft, with subsequent binding to the presynaptic neuron and production of cGMP. cGMP appears to increase the presynaptic neuron activity of PKGI, which enhances long-term potentiation (LTP) of the synapse. Supporting this finding, direct injection of cGMP into presynaptic neurons enhances LTP, while injection of a PKG inhibitor blocks LTP. Overall, cGMP may help to facilitate both memory formation and retrieval through its effects on LTP in the hippocampus.

cGMP activity has also shown links to synaptic changes in other brain regions. In the amygdala, cGMP-mediated activity may aid in the LTP of fear-associated memory formation. Conversely, in Purkinje cells of the cerebellum, cGMP has been implicated in synaptic long-term depression (LTD), which underlies motor learning. Less understood are the effects of cGMP on other brain regions. cGMP may mediate cognition, psychosis, depression, and neurodegeneration, likely through PDE activity. Through presynaptic and postsynaptic modulations, as well as effects on neuronal gene expression, cGMP potentially modulates multiple behavioral and learning functions in the CNS.