Treatment and management of the floating knee injury and each fracture is dependent upon multiple variables and factors.  It depends on whether the fracture is open or closed, the type of fracture pattern, the location of the fracture, comminution of fracture, as well as skeletal maturity. Skeletally immature patients are more likely to be treated non-operatively with a long leg cast than skeletally mature patients with minimally displaced fractures.

Other, more complicated fractures may require more invasive procedures.  Femur fractures are typically treated surgically using one of three options. These are intramedullary nailing (IMN), compression plate screws, or dynamic condylar screws (DCS). IMN is typically the choice for diaphyseal fractures where a functional reduction is more indicated. This approach allows for stability of the fracture while still allowing for callus formation that occurs with secondary bone healing. Compression plate screws may are useful for femoral shaft fractures that require a more anatomic reduction and primary bone healing; this would occur in areas where concern for joint mobility post-operatively exists. Dynamic condylar screws were the choice in intra-articular fractures where an anatomic reduction is a must for maintaining joint mobilization.

Tibial fractures are also treated based on the above variables. External fixation is the most common option with open tibial fractures.  Plate screws or locked intramedullary nails are a possible choice for most other tibial fractures.  The tibia typically only requires a functional reduction unless the fracture is intra-articular (the tibial plateau). Intramedullary nailing of both bones, when possible, is the best surgical management associated with good outcomes.