Early and rapid ECG testing should be employed in all patients presenting with chest pain. Women often have atypical symptoms such as abdominal pain or dizziness and may present without chest pain at all. Elderly patients more often have shortness of breath as their presenting symptom for myocardial infarction. All of these presentations should prompt ECG testing, as well.

The ECG is highly specific for MI (95% to 97%), yet not sensitive (approximately 30%). Right-sided, posterior lead placement, and repeat ECG testing can increase ECG sensitivity. For example, peaked T-waves on ECG, known as “hyperacute T waves,” often indicate early ischemia and will progress to ST elevation. When present, findings of  ST-elevations greater than 2 mm in two contiguous leads on ECG (inferior: leads II, III, aVF; septal equal V1, V2; anterior: V3, V4; lateral: I, aVL, V5, V6) are indicative of an ST-elevation myocardial infarction. Often, there are ST depressions that are visualized in opposite anatomical regions of the myocardium.

ECG diagnosis of STEMI can be difficult, particularly in patients with a left bundle branch block and pacemakers. Sgarbosa described criteria that can assist the physician or practitioner in diagnosing STEMI in these patients. Isolated ST-elevations in aVR are indicative of left main coronary artery occlusion in the appropriate clinical setting. Wellens noted deeply biphasic T waves in V2, V3 and found they are often predictive of an impending proximal left anterior descending artery occlusion, which may lead to devastating anterior wall myocardial infarction.

Patients that present with myocardial infarction may not have diagnostic ST-elevation ECG abnormalities. Patients with typical chest pain should be investigated for NSTEMI with subtle abnormalities on ECG, including ST-depressions and T wave changes. Serial ECGs can be helpful here as well to look for dynamic changes. ECG without acute changes or any abnormalities is common in NSTEMI.

There are diagnostic guidelines that can assist the practitioner in determining whether further testing is useful in identifying patients with NSTEMI. Given the poor sensitivity of ECG for STEMI, troponins are almost universally used for patients with a suspicious clinical history. The HEART score has been validated and popularized. It utilizes the clinician’s suspicion, patient risk factors, ECG diagnostics, and troponin level to determine the “risk level.”

**Laboratory Features**

- Cardiac troponins should be the only marker ordered

- CBC

- Lipid profile

- Renal function

- Metabolic panel

B-type natriuretic peptide (BNP) should not be ordered as a marker for MI, but it is better used to stratify risk, especially in patients with MI who develop heart failure.

**Cardiac Imaging**

Cardiac angiography is used to perform percutaneous coronary intervention (PCI) or determine obstructions in the coronary vessels.

An echocardiogram is used to assess wall motion, degree of valve abnormality, ischemic mitral regurgitation (MR), and presence of cardiac tamponade.