The presence of symptoms depends on collateralization. Upper limb symptoms comprise arm claudication or muscle fatigue, rest pain, and finger necrosis from embolic debris. Characteristic neurologic symptoms include vertebrobasilar hypoperfusion, including visual abnormalities (diplopia), drop attacks, syncope, ataxia, vertigo, dysphasia, dysarthria, dizziness, nystagmus, tinnitus, hearing loss, facial sensory deficits. Vertebrobasilar insufficiency develops when subclavian artery thrombosis is distal to the origin of the vertebral artery; thus, during conditions of increased flow distal to the stenosis like exercise, results in retrograde flow in the vertebral artery, followed by decreased flow in the basilar artery.

One of the rare complications of subclavian stenosis that develops in a patient who has had coronary artery bypass surgery with the internal mammary artery (IMA) graft is angina pectoris. The internal mammary artery arises from the subclavian artery and can be affected by stenosis. If there is subclavian artery thrombosis proximal to the IMA graft, flow impairment to the IMA may occur. In severe stenosis, retrograde flow from the grafted coronary artery to the brachial artery may lead to angina, a phenomenon called coronary steal syndrome.

Physical examination, particularly cardiovascular examination, may reveal unequal blood pressure in arms, absent or diminished pulses (axillary, brachial, and radial/ulnar) compared to the contralateral arm, and cervical or supraclavicular bruits. Ischemic findings such as gangrenous skin changes of the fingers or splinter hemorrhages of the nail bed may also be present. The examination should also focus on cerebral circulation, including palpation of carotid pulses and auscultation for vertebral (suboccipital region) and carotid bruits.

The inter-arm systolic blood pressure difference of less than 10mm Hg has a negative predictive value of 99%.