Patients with a solitary pulmonary nodule (SPN) are typically asymptomatic when they are diagnosed. Those that are symptomatic usually present with signs and symptoms of the underlying cause of the SPN. An interprofessional approach is required to evaluate and manage an SPN, whether found incidentally or during a screening process due to the myriad of differential diagnoses, which include infection, malignancy, autoimmune diseases, vasculitis, and intrapulmonary lymph nodes. [Level 5]

Pulmonologists are usually the main decision-makers when taking care of patients with an SPN, but they need help from other members of the interprofessional healthcare team, including surgeons, hospitalists, radiologists, oncologists, primary care physicians (PCPs), pharmacists, psychiatrists, nurses, and family members. Everybody plays a vital role in the overall care of any patient. The surgeon is needed to help biopsy or surgically remove the nodule, which is both diagnostic and therapeutic. Radiologists help aid in the diagnosis of the SPN. Oncologists will help in management and treatment if the nodule is found to be malignant. Pharmacists aid in managing patient's medications to ensure the greatest efficacy with the lowest side effect profile. Psychiatrists may help any patient who has increased stress, anxiety, or depression due to the finding of an SPN. Primary care providers help coordinate care between all different specialties while also managing other medical conditions. Nurses are also vital to the care as they usually spend the most time with the patient. They are able to tell if a patient starts to have any new symptoms like cough, chest pain, or respiratory distress, which helps determine which direction the medical management will take. The main strategy for diagnosing and managing an SPN is dictated by the Brock University risk model 2013, the Mayo Clinic model 1997, and the Fleischner Society Guidelines 2017.

The cause of the SPN and how promptly diagnosis and management are utilized ultimately determines the patient's outcome. It takes an entire interprofessional team working together effectively to decrease morbidity and mortality for these patients.