# Continuing Education Activity

Tinea cruris, also known as jock itch, is an infection involving the genital, pubic, perineal, and perianal skin caused by pathogenic fungi known as dermatophytes. The evaluation and treatment of tinea cruris are discussed in the activity. This activity reviews the role of the healthcare team in improving care for patients with this condition. The activity will also highlight evidence-based therapeutics and lifestyle modifications to avoid common mistakes and mistreatments associated with the management of dermatophyte infections.

**Objectives:**
- Identify the etiology of tinea cruris.
- Outline the evaluation of tinea cruris.
- Review the treatment options available for tinea cruris.
- Describe interprofessional team strategies to improve the management of patients affected by tinea cruris.

# Introduction

Tinea cruris, also known as jock itch, is an infection involving the genital, pubic, perineal, and perianal skin caused by pathogenic fungi known as dermatophytes.

While tinea infections are often classified by the location of the body affected, they are also organized according to the responsible organism's primary source and mode of transmission.

# Etiology

Tinea cruris is caused by dermatophytes belonging to three genera, Trichophyton, Epidermophyton, and Microsporum.Trichophyton rubrum has been isolated most commonly and remains the most frequent cause of tinea cruris worldwide; however, most studies do recognize the increasing prevalence of Trichophyton mentagrophytes and other organisms in certain regions.

Athletes, especially those involved in contact sports, may be more likely to contract tinea infections.

# Epidemiology

Cutaneous mycoses, including tinea cruris, affect 20 to 25 percent of the world's population.

# Pathophysiology

A simplified explanation of the complex and not well-understood pathophysiology of dermatophytes includes the organism's use of proteinases to digest keratin found in the skin's stratum corneum.

# Histopathology

While not always necessary for diagnosis, a potassium hydroxide (KOH) preparation may reveal histology consistent with dermatophyte infections.

# History and Physical

Patients with tinea cruris present complaining of a pruritic rash involving the groin.

On physical examination, an erythematous, scaly, annular plaque with a raised leading edge and central clearing can be visualized, extending anywhere from the groin, upper thigh, and perineum to the perianal region.

# Evaluation

In most cases, tinea cruris can be diagnosed clinically; however, several tests exist to investigate a rash of the groin with unknown etiology.

In general, the sample should be obtained from the leading edge of the lesion to ensure an adequate collection of infected scales.

# Treatment / Management

Antifungals utilized in treating dermatophytoses, including tinea cruris, target the synthesis of ergosterol, a vital component of fungal plasma membranes.

Deciding which agent to use should be based on patient compliance, cost, and medication accessibility, as there is insufficient data to directly compare the effectiveness of individual drugs and classes.

Oral preparations exist to manage tinea cruris and are indicated for chronic, recurrent, and recalcitrant disease.

A commonly used alternative treatment known as Whitfield's ointment has insufficient evidence of benefit.

# Differential Diagnosis

The differential diagnosis for tinea cruris includes several other dermatologic conditions affecting the groin with similar presentations. Candidiasis, erythrasma, psoriasis, and seborrheic dermatitis exhibit comparable signs and symptoms and are most commonly confused with the fungal groin infection. Unlike tinea cruris, candidal intertrigo frequently affects women, and the rash may involve the scrotum and penis in males.

# Prognosis

Patients with tinea cruris who undergo an appropriate treatment course experience cure rates ranging from 80 to 90 percent.

# Complications

Failure of therapy and recurrence are the most likely complications of tinea cruris. They have been attributed to reinfection from close contacts, autoinfection from separate body locations, infection by uncommon species such as zoonoses, misdiagnosis, drug resistance, and non-adherence to the management plan.

# Consultations

Consultation with dermatology or infectious disease may be warranted in recurrent or recalcitrant cases.

# Deterrence and Patient Education

Patient education should focus on non-pharmacologic measures to treat and prevent recurrences of tinea cruris. Loose-fitting, non-restrictive garments should be encouraged, and clothing should not be donned until the underlying skin is completely dried.

# Enhancing Healthcare Team Outcomes

Tinea cruris is a prevalent pathology with a worldwide distribution and an extensive history of affecting human populations. Despite our familiarity with the condition, there has been limited research specific to this subset of dermatophyte infections. Renewed interest has emerged with the development of recalcitrant infections and concern over fungal resistance. Self-treatment with easy-to-access over-the-counter topical antifungal and steroid preparations have been implicated as a probable cause of the observed decrease in treatment efficacy. In the context of fungal resistance, newly developed formulations such as luliconazole and underutilized, older agents like ciclopirox may be beneficial.

With regard to corticosteroids, there is conflicting data on the appropriateness of their use for tinea cruris. Current management principles and guidelines label them as mistreatment; however, continued investigations of their utility are underway. If a practitioner believes topical steroids may benefit a patient, close supervision should be maintained throughout the treatment course with continued consideration of known adverse event potential for the individual and public health outcomes.

With an understanding of the changing landscape of this common condition, and by implementing an interprofessional healthcare team approach including primary care clinicians (including PAs and NPs), dermatologists, infectious disease specialists, pharmacists, and nursing, patient care and public health may be improved through targeted, conscientious mycological treatment, patient education, and antifungal stewardship. [Level 2] This interprofessional paradigm should lead to the best outcomes with minimal to no adverse events. [Level 5]