All major contraindications are according to the manufacturer's labeling.

Amiodarone, one of the most commonly used antiarrhythmic drugs, has boxed warnings for pulmonary, hepatic, and cardiac toxicity. Amiodarone is contraindicated in cardiogenic shock, sick sinus syndrome, second or third-degree atrioventricular block, and known hypersensitivity to the amiodarone or iodine. Ivabradine is contraindicated in severe hepatic impairment, significant bradycardia, sick sinus syndrome, sinoatrial block, and acute decompensated heart failure. Lidocaine is contraindicated in patients with a history of hypersensitivity amide-type anesthetics. Procainamide is contraindicated in complete heart block, idiosyncratic hypersensitivity, and established diagnosis of systemic lupus erythematosus. Quinidine is contraindicated in patients with a history of immune thrombocytopenia in patients in the complete AV block whose cardiac rhythm is dependent upon a pacemaker.

Similarly, mexiletine is contraindicated in patients with cardiogenic shock or second or third-degree AV block without a functioning pacemaker. Propafenone has a boxed warning for proarrhythmic in patients with structural heart disease. Propafenone is also contraindicated in cardiogenic shock, sick sinus node syndrome/AV block without an artificial pacemaker, and Brugada syndrome. In the CAST trial patients with asymptomatic non-life-threatening ventricular arrhythmias who had a MI more than six days but lesser than two years previously, increased mortality was observed in subjects treated with encainide or flecainide.

Non-selective beta-blockers are contraindicated in bronchial asthma, sinus bradycardia, and greater than first-degree AV block, cardiogenic shock, and acute decompensated heart failure.