Treponema pallidum pallidum invades the body through abrasions in the skin and intact mucous membranes and then travels via the lymphatics and blood within a few hours. Bacteria may invade the CNS in early syphilis with asymptomatic CNS involvement demonstrable in up to 40% of patients with early syphilis. Many exposures resolve in people with an intact immune system. The incubation period of syphilis is inversely proportional to the number of inoculated organisms. Average inoculation of 500 to 1000 organisms is required for disease occurrence. The stages of syphilis, based on clinical findings and time, and not always clinically apparent, are early (2 to 6 weeks after infection, with ulcers and chancres), secondary (1 to 2 months after primary, with skin and mucocutaneous lesions that are contagious) latent (early and late) and tertiary, 2 to 50 years after infection, which consists of cardiovascular (e.g., aortic dissection), ocular syphilis, otic syphilis, gummatous disease and late neurosyphilis (general paresis and tabes dorsalis and meningovascular disease and meningomyelitis).

The pathogenesis of tabes dorsalis involves an inflammatory response against the treponeme with perivascular infiltrates of lymphocytes and histiocytes and plasma cells and gummas (caseous necrosis in granulomata). Some studies suggest that the invasion of the large myelinated nerve fibers by Treponema pallidum pallidum results in the degeneration of nerves. The result is a neurodegenerative process with demyelination of sensory nerve fibers in the dorsal roots and posterior columns of the spinal cord leading to an ataxic gait and sometimes undetected mechanical trauma. The cellular infiltration in the spinal cord displays T-helper cells, macrophages that produce cytokines that intensify the inflammatory process. Some studies demonstrated that Treponema pallidum pallidum disrupts iron metabolism and homeostasis with the formation of reactive oxidative agents that ultimately lead to neurodegeneration.