The Society for Simulation in healthcare additionally provides certification for professionals dedicated to the delivery of healthcare education through simulation. Opportunities for certification include Certified Healthcare Simulation Educator (CHSE), Certified Healthcare Simulation Operations Specialist (CHSOS), Certified Healthcare Simulation Educator- Advanced (CHSE-A), and Certified Healthcare Simulation Operations Specialist-Advanced (CHSOS-A). Professionals who desire to become certified as either CHSE, CHSOS, or CHSOS-A are required to apply through SSH as well as complete a standardized examination. A Bachelor's degree or equivalent combination of education and experience is necessary for eligibility. Applicants are eligible for CHSE if they serve a role in healthcare simulation education and can verify two years of involvement with healthcare simulation education, research, or administration.  Similarly, CHSOS applicants must demonstrate two years of continuous involvement in the role of healthcare simulation operations.

Applications are accepted year-round. If the applicant is eligible upon review of their application, they will be allowed to sit for the standardized examination, which can be completed at an approved testing center or the annual International Meeting of Simulation in Healthcare. The examination for CSHE consists of 115 multiple choice questions regarding the topics of professional values and capabilities, healthcare and simulation knowledge and principles, educational principles applied to simulation and simulation resources and environments. The examination for CHSOS also has 115 multiple choice questions under the topics of Concepts in Healthcare as Applied to Simulation, Simulation Technology Operations, Healthcare Simulation Practices/Principles/Procedures, Professional Role: Behavior and Capabilities, and Concepts in Instructional Design as Applied to Simulation. More information on the content covered in the examinations and how to prepare are on the SSH website. Certification is granted for a three-year period. After that time, applicants may apply for renewal by completing professional development requirements or retaking the examination.

CHSE-A is reserved for educators that have proven to be experts in healthcare simulation education as well as leaders and mentors to others in the simulation community. The application is portfolio-based and awarded to high-performing leaders in healthcare simulation. Requirements include current CHSE status, a minimum of five years of experience in healthcare simulation, and a Master's degree or equivalent experience. This certification is also granted for a three-year period and requires renewal after that time. Additional information regarding the application process appears on the SSH website.

There are additional options for individuals involved in healthcare simulation to obtain certificates in simulation through a university or college. These certificates show an individual has had advanced education and training in healthcare simulation. They are an option for those involved in simulation, not meeting the requirements for certification through SSH. The courses for certificates in simulation are also a great option for those applying for SSH credentialing to prepare for the examination.