**Complications of UVB Therapy**

**Acute effects:**The commonest side effects are erythema and burning. Erythema peaks at 12–24 hours and can be associated with pain, swelling, and blistering, more so in skin phenotype I or II, in obese or taking phototoxic drugs. Mild erythema can be managed with topical emollients and steroids. Another complication is Herpes simplex virus reactivation, which commonly affects the lip and occurs more frequently in those with a past history of such outbreaks. Blistering of psoriatic plaques is an uncommon side effect of phototherapy and is usually asymptomatic.

**Chronic effects:**Chronic complications of UVB therapy include photoaging that clinically appears as leathery appearance, xerosis, wrinkling, pigmentary changes, loss of elasticity, and increased fragility. Broad-band UVB has a carcinogenic risk that is not well defined. The carcinogenic risk of NB-UVB, which is being increasingly used for delivering phototherapy, is not fully defined in humans but is less than that of PUVA. Extrapolation from animal studies suggested that NB-UVB is 2–3 times per MED more carcinogenic than BB-UVB. Genital protection during phototherapy is highly recommended.

**Complications of PUVA Therapy**

**Acute effects****:**Acute PUVA phototoxicity can range from mild erythema to severe pain with edema, blistering, and systemic upset, including malaise and fever.PUVA erythema also lasts longer. A rarer form of phototoxic reaction to PUVA is nail damage with photo-onycholysis or subungual hemorrhage. Nausea is a common side effect in patients treated with oral 8-MOP PUVA. This can be decreased by taking antiemetics or taking the psoralen. Like UVB, PUVA  can also cause the reactivation of Herpes Simplex.

**Chronic effects:******PUVA lentigines and PUVA keratoses manifest as multiple hyperkeratotic papules on non-sun-exposed sites, for example, the legs, trunk, and sides of the hands, feet, and digits. There is now substantial evidence for the carcinogenic risk of PUVA therapy in large cohorts of patients followed up for prolonged periods of time. There is a marked and dose-dependent increase in Squamous Cell Carcinoma. PUVA can stimulate the growth of melanoma cells and induce melanocytic tumors in animal experiments. As PUVA alters immune function and surveillance, there is a concern that the risk of internal malignancy, particularly of lymphoproliferative neoplasms, may be increased. Psoralens can penetrate the ocular lens, where 8-MOP has been detected in humans. Cataract development following PUVA has been reported in some animal experiments. It is recommended that protective eyewear be worn in individuals with pre-existing cataracts or who may be at increased risk of cataract (e.g., children and patients with atopic eczema.