About 1 to 10% will develop a dry, nonproductive paroxysmal cough, and there is no treatment for the cough.

Angioedema is the most significant adverse effect of ACEi. It can affect any part of the body, including the intestine, but the most concerning is edema of the tongue, glottis, and/or larynx, causing airway obstruction.

Life-threatening anaphylactoid reactions have occurred in patients receiving Hymenoptera venom desensitization treatment and patients receiving dialysis with high-flux membranes. Treatment includes diphenhydramine, epinephrine, and blood pressure support with fluids and catecholamines.

Angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitors have been reported to cause a reversible decline in renal function. Those with heart failure who depend on the renin-angiotensin-aldosterone system may develop changes in renal function with the use of ACE inhibitors.

As with any medication that lowers blood pressure, hypotension is an adverse reaction. Those at risk for this side effect: heart failure with systolic blood pressure below 100 mmHg, ischemic heart disease, cerebrovascular disease, hyponatremia, high dose diuretic therapy, renal dialysis, or severe volume and/or sodium depletion.

ACE inhibitors may cause hyperkalemia. Those at risk for this side effect: prior history of renal impairment and/or diabetes, simultaneous use of potassium-sparing diuretics, and/or potassium supplements.

Cholestatic jaundice or hepatitis is another rare but serious adverse effect that can progress to hepatic necrosis and sometimes death. The clinician needs to discontinue the drug, and the patient managed appropriately.