The numerous clinical uses of plasma can be best explained when considering the various forms and components of blood plasma:

- **Whole Plasma:**Fresh frozen plasma is indicated in the treatment of massive bleeds resulting in shock, in disseminated intravascular coagulation, burns, and liver disease—the coagulants found in plasma aid in decreasing bleeding time and stabilizes the patient. Fresh frozen plasma also plays an important role as an immediate and effective antidote for warfarin reversal. The first-line treatment of thrombotic thrombocytopenic purpura (TTP) and hemolytic uremic syndrome (HUS) is plasma exchange with 40 mL of plasma per kg body weight. In neonates, plasma plays a role in the exchange transfusion of plasma of neonates with severe hemolysis or hyperbilirubinemia. Plasma is also utilized in filling the oxygenator in extracorporeal membrane oxygenation in neonates.

- **Clotting factors:**Clotting factors and von Willebrand factor (vWF) found in plasma play an essential role in blood clotting and are activated by damage to the endothelium resulting in exposure of collagen found beneath the endothelium of the blood vessel. People with blood clotting deficiencies such as hemophilia and von Willebrand disease can suffer massive internal bleeds with a minor injury. Such patients benefit greatly from plasma protein derivatives such as factor VIII concentrate and factor IX concentrate.

- **Immunoglobulins:**Immunoglobulins protect the body against invading bacteria and viruses and play a key role in the body’s defense. Certain immunological disorders like congenital or acquired primary immune deficiency occur when the body cannot produce antibodies or experience the adverse effects of cancer treatments that harm the antibodies. Both disorders benefit greatly from immunoglobulin infusions. Immunoglobulins also play a major role in passive immunization. Antidotes to diseases such as chickenpox, rabies, hepatitis, and tetanus are the initial treatment after suspected exposure to limit disease progression. Such specific immunoglobulins are derived when patients who have been previously affected by a disease donate plasma, for example, chickenpox. This plasma contains high amounts of circulating antibodies against chickenpox that can be collected and stored after fractionation for use as post-exposure vaccines for varicella.

- **Albumin:**Albumin is the main protein that controls oncotic pressure and serves as the transporter of multiple endogenous and exogenous substances (e.g., drugs) throughout the body. Infusion of albumin is used in the treatment of burns and hemorrhagic shock. Studies have also shown marked improvement in the prognosis of cirrhotic patients.

- **Alpha-1 antitrypsin: **Alpha-1 antitrypsin is produced in the liver and plays an important role in the lungs by increasing proteases which counteract the effect of elastases produced by the neutrophils in response to inflammation such as smoking. Alpha-1 antitrypsin deficiency is an inherited disorder that could result in emphysema and cirrhosis in early adulthood. Recent advances in treatment have shown success in decreasing the mortality and frequency of exacerbations when human plasma-derived alpha-1 antitrypsin is given intravenously once a week.

- **Plasma as a laboratory test:**Plasma testing can diagnose and confirm diseases like diabetes based on serum glucose levels or von Willebrand disease. Monitoring of international normalized ratio (INR) in patients on anticoagulants requires serial measurements of plasma prothrombin levels.

- **Plasmapheresis:**Plasmapheresis is an effective temporary treatment in many autoimmune diseases. In therapeutic plasmapheresis, the patient’s venous blood is withdrawn, blood cells are separated, and a replacement colloid solution and blood cells are infused in its place.

- Myasthenia gravis

- Chronic inflammatory demyelinating polyneuropathy

- Hyperviscosity in monoclonal gammopathies

- Thrombotic thrombocytopenic purpura

- Guillain-Barre syndrome

- Lambert-Eaton syndrome

- Multiple sclerosis

****8.**Platelet-rich Plasma (PRP):**PRP is defined as autologous blood with a concentration of platelets above baseline reference values. Traditionally, PRP injections have been used over the last three decades in maxillofacial and plastic surgery. More recently, its use throughout orthopedics and sports medicine has been well-established and heavily controversial.