While evaluating a case of pterygium, the following conditions should be ruled out:

**Pseudo-pterygium**

It is a fold of bulbar conjunctiva which is attached to the cornea. It is an inflammatory reaction where adhesions are formed between bulbar conjunctiva and cornea. A 'probe' test can be performed where the probe can be passed beneath the tissue in pseudo-pterygium but not in pterygium. It can appear in any quadrant of the eye and is non-progressive in nature.

**Pinguecula**

It is a yellowish colored growth on bulbar conjunctiva close to the limbus. It is said to be a deposit of fat, protein or calcium. It is commonly found nasally. The patient is usually asymptomatic but may present with mild redness and foreign body sensation when inflamed.

**Nodular Episcleritis**

A discrete area of inflammation in episcleral tissue is seen, which is elevated. Only vascular congestion may be present in cases of simple episcleritis. If phenylephrine 2.5% is instilled, there will be blanching of the superficial episcleral vascular network. Usually, this condition is mildly painful, unlike pterygium.

**Marginal Keratitis**

It is an inflammatory disease of the peripheral cornea. Stromal infiltrates with the breakdown of the epithelium, and ulceration is seen. Infiltrate on the corneal surface is separated from limbus by a clear zone.

**Phlycten**

It is a result of delayed-type immune reaction leading to nodular inflammation of the conjunctiva.

**Conjunctival carcinoma in situ/ Bowen epithelioma**

It is a rare presentation. It presents as a gelatinous-appearing mass.

**Ocular surface squamous neoplasia (OSSN)**