Classically, there are three main opioid receptors, although there are other subtypes. These are all G-protein coupled and originally named mu, delta, and kappa. When opioids bind to these receptors, a series of intracellular events occur, resulting in a decreased intracellular cAMP, hyperpolarization of the cell and neuronal cells, and decreased neurotransmitter release. Within the nervous system, activation of mu receptors in the midbrain is the dominant mechanism of opioid-induced analgesia. The cough reflex is primarily mediated through the opioid receptors in the medulla.

**Pharmacokinetics**(according to manufacturer's product labeling)

**Absorption**: Codeine sulfate is absorbed from the gastrointestinal tract and maximum plasma concentration (Cmax) after one hour. Administration of codeine every four hours for five days resulted in steady-state concentrations in 48 hours. Food does not significantly affect the absorption of codeine.

**Distribution:**Codeine has an apparent volume of distribution of 3 to 6 L/kg, suggesting extensive tissue distribution.

**Metabolism:**Codeine is metabolized by conjugation to morphine (5% to 10%) and N-demethylation to norcodeine (~10%). Cytochrome P450 2D6 is the principal enzyme responsible for the transformation of codeine to morphine, and P450 3A4 is the major enzyme for converting codeine to norcodeine.

**Excretion:**Approximately 90% of codeine is excreted by the kidney, of which approximately 10% is unchanged codeine. The t½ of codeine and its metabolites are 3 hours.