Mesalamine can be taken orally as a capsule or a tablet with or without food. Depending on the formulation, mesalamine can get released at different sites along the GI tract. For example, the 5-ASA delayed-release capsules can be released anywhere from the jejunum to the rectum, the 5-ASA pH-dependent release can be released anywhere from the ileum to the rectum, Sulfasalazine (prodrug) can be released anywhere from the proximal colon to the rectum, 5-ASA enemas get released in the distal colon and rectum, and 5-ASA suppositories are released only in the rectum.

Mesalamine can also be administered rectally as an enema, foam, or suppository. Topical formulations such as the suppository and the enema are preferable for treating ulcerative colitis.

**Dosage Formulation**

- The oral formulation of mesalamine is available as delayed-release capsules (400 mg), extended-release capsules (250 mg, 375 mg, 500 mg),  and delayed-release tablets (800 mg, 1200 mg). Mesalamine delayed-release capsules and delayed-release tablets are not therapeutically equivalent (not AB-rated); hence clinicians should carefully consider the dosage formulation and dose for mesalamine. In addition, it is recommended not to cut, chew or crush mesalamine extended-release products.

- The rectal formulation of mesalamine is available as an enema (4 gm) and a suppository (1000 mg).

**Mild/Moderate Active Ulcerative Colitis**

**Adult Patients:**The recommended daily dosage of delayed-release mesalamine capsules is 800 mg three times daily to administer a total daily dosage of 2.4 grams for six weeks.** **

**Pediatric Population:**For patients five years or older, the recommended daily dosage of mesalamine delayed-release capsules is based on body weight to the maximum of 2.4 grams per day which can be divided into two daily doses for six weeks.** **

**Weight****(kg)**

**Daily Dosage (mg/kg/day)**

**Morning Dosage  (400 mg capsules)**

**Afternoon Dosage  (400 mg capsule)**

**Maximum Daily Dosage****(gm per day)**

17 to 32

36 to 71

two capsules

one capsule

1.2

33 to 53

37 to 61

three capsules

two capsules

2

54 to 90

27 to 44

three capsules

three capsules

2.4

**Maintenance of Remission of Ulcerative Colitis**

The recommended daily dosage of delayed-release mesalamine capsules in adults is 1.6 grams (four 400 mg capsules) in two to four divided doses.

**Special Patient Population**

**Patients with Renal Impairment:**No information is available in product labeling for patients with renal impairment. Evaluate the benefits and risks of administering mesalamine in patients with a history of renal disease or known renal impairment and/or taking concomitant nephrotoxic drugs.

**Patients with liver impairment:**Mesalamine should be prescribed with caution. There are reports of hepatic failure in patients with pre-existing hepatic diseases treated with mesalamine. Evaluate the benefits and risks of using mesalamine in patients with known liver impairment.

**Pregnancy Considerations**: Mesalamine is considered pregnancy category B medicine. There are inadequate well-controlled studies of its use in pregnant women. Limited published human data on mesalamine show no increase in the overall rate of congenital malformations. It should be used during pregnancy only if clearly needed. Mesalamine crosses the placenta. In retrospective and prospective clinical studies of more than 600 women exposed to mesalamine during pregnancy, the rate of congenital malformations was not higher than the background rate in the general population.

**Breastfeeding Women:**Mesalamine and its N-acetyl metabolite are present in human milk. Breastfeeding is not contraindicated using mesalamine, but the infant should be monitored for diarrhea or other side effects.