Initial management of patients with D-TGA centers on ensuring adequate oxygenation. Prostaglandin E1 administration stabilizes patients by attempting to keep the ductus arteriosus patent and performing a balloon atrial septostomy (BAS). Once the patient is hemodynamically stable, corrective surgery can be performed.

Surgical repair of D-TGA is usually undertaken within the first week of life. There are currently two commonly used surgical procedures for D-TGA:

- **Arterial switch operation (ASO):**The arterial switch operation is the standard procedure for patients with D-TGA without major pulmonic stenosis. During the ASO, the surgeon will transect both the pulmonary trunk and aorta then translocate them to their anatomically correct positions. The coronary arteries are mobilized and reimplanted into the aortic trunk. If a VSD is present., it is also repaired during this time.

- **Rastelli procedure:**The Rastelli procedure is indicated in patients presenting with D-TGA, a large VSD, and pulmonary stenosis. During this procedure, the VSD is closed using a baffle. By doing so, oxygenated blood from the left ventricle is directed into the aorta. A conduit is then placed from the right ventricle to the pulmonary artery thus shunting deoxygenated blood into the pulmonary artery.

Other corrective procedures exist including the Mustard and Senning procedure, Nakaidoh procedure, Réparation à l'Etage ventriculaire (REV) procedure, and Yasui procedure however these are less commonly performed.