The etiology and pathogenesis of synucleinopathies are complex with proposed interactions between gene transcription and expression and environmental insults that lead to cellular dysfunction in vulnerable neurons in the central nervous system. Dysfunctional regulation, processing, cleavage, and degradation of abnormal cytoskeletal and endovesical (Golgi and endovascular reticulum) proteins within the cells are thought to interfere with mitochondrial dynamics, membrane integrity, proteosome, and lysosomal pathways. Genetic susceptibility may determine susceptibility, for example, free radicals generated through disruption of complex I activity, increasing the nuclear or mitochondrial genomic deficit. Environmental interactions factors such as the metabolism of exogenous drugs can generate endogenous neurotoxins that can also trigger the generation of reactive oxygen species that disrupt calcium homeostasis and trigger cell death.  Neuronal pathways are susceptible to oxidative processes, and therefore, become a prime target to these insults. Specifically, reactive oxygen species can trigger excitotoxicity by increasing glutamate in the synapses, triggering neuroinflammatory microglial processes, and most likely, a combination of all these complex processes. Interestingly, Lewy bodies are like other aggregated proteins such as neurofibrillary tangles (NFT) in AD and/or Pick bodies in terms of being present as markers of neurodegenerative processes. What exact analogous mechanism they have in common to disturb cellular activity is complex and is currently under investigation.