Radioactive iodine plays a significant diagnostic and therapeutic role in managing patients with thyroid cancer depending on histopathology. Ninety percent of thyroid cancers are well-differentiated and can take up radioactive iodine. Papillary thyroid carcinoma, the most common type, is twice common in females than in males.

Papillary carcinoma commonly shows lymphomatous spread to the cervical lymph nodes. The common route of spread of follicular carcinoma is hematogenous and can metastasize to lungs and bones and less frequently to the liver and brain. Patients with differentiated thyroid cancer usually have a good prognosis if appropriately treated. Among the differentiated thyroid cancers, the occurrence of metastases is more in Hurthle cell cancer and may not take up radioactive iodine.

After 6 to 8 weeks of total thyroidectomy, which is the definitive treatment for thyroid cancer, the patient may or may not be treated with radioactive iodine depending on the histopathology report for risk of recurrence. Patients may undergo a low dose whole body radioactive iodine scan approximately two months after thyroidectomy to see for any residual thyroid tissue, lymph node metastases, or distal metastases. The physician can determine the dose for the treatment depending on the distribution of radioactive iodine on the scan.

Depending on individual cases, follow-up radioactive iodine scans and repeated I-131 treatments could be performed. Three to ten days following radioactive iodine treatment, a whole-body scan is performed, which is more sensitive for disease detection than a low-dose whole-body scan due to the high dose the patient received.

Follow-up of thyroid cancer patients is usually done with serum thyroglobulin levels testing. Multiple repeat treatments at six months to 1-year intervals can be done to achieve complete response keeping in mind the probable side effects and adjusting the dose. Since I-131 emits high-energy gamma radiation and has a long physical half-life, it imparts the risk of radiation exposure to the treating staff and household members. Hence, radiation protection regulations should be strictly followed.