The prognosis of healthcare-associated infection (HAI) varies on the type of HAI, the severity of illness, and the implicated pathogen. Worldwide morbidity and mortality are not well established due to limited surveillance and analysis. However, multiple studies over the years allow for estimates of the global burden of HAI. The mortality, length of stay, and associated costs associated with HAI are discussed below.

**Mortality**

The exact mortality attributed to HAI worldwide is not known, but some studies show 30-day mortality around 10% in patients who acquired HAI.

An international study showed that the ICU mortality rate of patients with HAI versus those without was 25% and 11%, respectively.

In 2002 the estimated deaths among US hospitals that were associated with HAI were 98,987 and varied by the type of infection: pneumonia (35,967), bloodstream infections (30,665), UTI (13,088), SSI (8,205), and other sites of infection (11,062).

**Length of Hospital Stay**

Analysis of surveillance models in a German hospital showed that additional length of hospital stay (LOS) was sensitive to the location of acquisition and the type of HAI. The extra LOS due to all HAI was 12 days for all units but differed on the type of HAI such that CAUTI, SSI, and primary bloodstream infections were responsible for 3.3, 12.9, and 12.5 additional days, respectively.

**Associated Costs**

The annual costs of the five major types of HAI occurring in acute care hospitals are estimated to be $9.8 billion in US adult inpatient populations alone.