EMS providers frequently encounter patients who wish to refuse care or refuse certain procedures or treatments. All EMS providers should determine the patient's medical decision-making capacity for such refusals. The provider also must obtain informed refusals and informed consent, whenever possible. The signature on a release form alone does not guarantee that the provider's ethical or legal obligations are met. Careful documentation of patient education and the discussion of risks and benefits is required. Although a patient has the right to autonomy (deciding their course of actions even if this will result in harm), EMS providers must always, to the best of their ability, provide each patient with the risks, benefits, and alternatives available. The information should always be conveyed in a language and style that is readily understood by the patient. Some instances may require the use of a translator, in some situations, and in most instances will require the use of common (nonmedical) language, while retaining the accuracy of the information delivered. If the patient requires further information, additional personnel, or medical direction, should be consulted.

For emergency medical services, criteria for medical decision-making capacity include:

- Patient must have sufficient information from the provider regarding the medical condition and the associated risks to his health and person.

- Patient must understand that a decision must be made.

- Patient must understand the risks, burdens, and benefits of all options, including that of doing nothing.

- Patient must be able to use the information to make a decision in the setting of his values and belief systems.

- Patient must be able to communicate his choice to the provider.

- Patient must be acting without coercion or undue influence, including from family, friends, and providers.

- It is the responsibility of the emergency management service provider to identify loss of capacity for medical decision making. It is not the patient's responsibility to prove they retain such capacity.

If the EMS provider believes that a patient does not have the decision-making capacity, the patient's best interest and overall safety must be protected based on the best judgment of the provider.  The decision to act in the patient's best interest, in situations where the capacity for medical decision is suspect, is termed beneficence. In some instances, such as acute hypoglycemia, the goal should be to restore the individuals decision-making capacity (by correcting the low blood sugar) and then completing an informed consent/refusal discussion regarding further care. When the patient is unable to do so, or unable to do it quickly enough to make the needed critical decisions, a surrogate decision-maker may be enlisted to assist.  The use of surrogates raises additional ethical issues.  The "next of kin" is often relied upon to make surrogate treatment decisions, but this may not always be helpful. A legal relationship does not automatically establish appropriate surrogacy, nor can EMS personnel always verify these relationships. The best surrogate is one who knows the patient and knows their wishes and values and makes a "substituted judgment." This is often not available in the EMS setting so providers must default to interpreted beneficence. This makes the EMS provider functionally the surrogate for medical decision making for the patient.