Gamma-secretase is crucial in regulating intracellular signaling pathways, cell differentiation, membrane protein metabolism, and potentially even autophagy. Issues with this complex, especially in protein clearance in lysosomes and during autophagy, are believed to contribute to neurodegeneration.

Gamma-secretase also appears to cleave substrates to excrete them from the cell membrane. This cleavage process typically does not work with substrates with large ectodomains. After the initial shedding of a portion of the substrate's ectodomain, gamma-secretase can cleave the remaining substrate into two products. The shorter product can be secreted, and the intracellular domain remains within the cell.

An example of this process is observed in studies that have linked presenilin proteins to Notch cell-surface receptors. Notch signaling is especially vital during embryogenesis. The gamma-secretase complex is involved in the cleaving and releasing of the Notch1 intracellular domain. The Notch1 intracellular domain can then be sent to regulate transcription in the cell nucleus. While the functions of various other proteins' extracellular fragments are not yet fully understood, researchers reported that the extracellular domain of the B-cell maturation antigen could facilitate activated B-cell survival.

Another function with potential links to the gamma-secretase complex is autophagy, when cellular material is marked for degradation and recycling via lysosome or vacuole activity. This process is fundamental in neural cells, where the loss of autophagy correlates with neurodegenerative diseases. Researchers have reported presenilin mutations in familial Alzheimer disease that impair autophagy and lysosomal activity.