Systemic sclerosis is a clinical diagnosis. Several diseases can mimic SSc and shall be considered in the differential diagnosis.

**Eosinophilic Fasciitis (EF)**

EF is characterized by eosinophilic inflammation of the deep fascia that leads to thickening and a woody induration of the upper and lower extremities sparing the hands and feet. Raynaud phenomenon is not associated with EF, and the nail fold capillary exam is usually normal. ANA and more specific autoantibodies are negative. Patients may develop contractures similar to SSc. It may be associated with underlying malignancies. Skin biopsy usually reveals eosinophilic infiltrate in the deep fascia.

**Scleromyxedema**

Scleromyxedema is usually seen in patients with monoclonal gammopathy or multiple myeloma and is characterized by papular waxy lesions on the face, neck, extremities, and fingers. Patients may have associated seizures and dementia. Raynaud phenomenon is not associated with scleromyxedema, and the nail fold capillary exam is usually normal. ANA and more specific autoantibodies are negative. Skin biopsy usually reveals dermal fibrosis with perivascular inflammation along with deposition of mucin and fibrocytes, which are not usually seen in SSc.

**Scleredema**

Scleredema can be associated with diabetes mellitus, monoclonal, fatigue, infections, and malignancies and is characterized by the doughy, indurated appearance of the skin on the neck, back, and face. Digits are usually spared. Raynaud phenomenon is not associated with scleredema, and the nail fold capillary exam is usually normal. ANA and more specific autoantibodies are negative. Skin biopsy usually reveals dermal fibrosis without perivascular inflammation along with the deposition of mucin.

**Nephrogenic Systemic Fibrosis (NSF)**

This is a rare phenomenon seen in patients with end-stage renal disease on exposure to gadolinium contrast. It is characterized by cobblestone-like nodular plaques on the extremities, trunk, hands, and feet with sparing of the face. Raynaud phenomenon is not associated with NSF, and the nail fold capillary exam is usually normal. ANA and more specific autoantibodies are negative. Skin biopsy usually reveals dermal and epidermal fibrosis without perivascular inflammation along with the deposition of mucin and fibrocytes.

**Eosinophilia Myalgia Syndrome**

This syndrome was an epidemic associated with the use of L-Tryptophan, leading to severe myalgias, visceral involvement, and elevated CK.

**Toxic Oil Syndrome**

This syndrome was also an epidemic in Spain associated with the intake of adulterated rapeseed oil, leading to livedo reticularis, pulmonary infiltrates, and elevated CK.