Due to its invasive nature, the use of PACs is limited to conditions where the hemodynamic status of a critically ill patient cannot be assessed accurately by other means.

Informed consent should be taken prior to the PAC insertion. The equipment should be calibrated, set up, and checked before insertion. Sterile technique and barrier precautions must be maintained during the procedure. Once the patient is appropriately positioned, the PAC is inserted into one of the central veins, such as the subclavian, internal jugular, or femoral veins. This is done under either ultrasound or fluoroscopic guidance. The PAC is passed through the superior or inferior vena cava into the right heart and advanced into the pulmonary artery (PA). Once the required position is reached, a chest radiograph is obtained for confirmation and to rule out any adverse events.

Hemodynamic parameters measured by a PAC includes pressures in the right atrium (RA), right ventricle (RV), PA, pulmonary capillary wedge pressure (PCWP), as well as the cardiac output (CO). SmvO2 is measured by slow aspiration of a mixed venous blood sample drawn from a distal port of the PAC leading into the PA.

In contrast to PAC, CVCs are more commonly used, associated with lesser complications, and cost-effective.

As with the placement of PAC, informed consent is obtained before the procedure, and the technique is carried out under sterile conditions. The equipment and devices needed are obtained, and the patient is placed in an anatomically advantageous position (Trendelenberg position for subclavian/internal jugular vein access). Pre and peri-procedural ultrasound is used to define anatomy, to reduce the time for venous access and the risk of complications. The CVC is introduced into one of the central veins (decided based on the patient condition and comfort of the practitioner), and the tip is positioned to lie in the lower superior vena cava or outside the right atrium.

**Continuous vs. Intermittent Measurement of Venous Saturation**

ScvO2 or SmvO2 can be measured by drawing blood from the distal line of CVC or PAC for blood gas analysis. It can also be measured continuously using a fibreoptic catheter that uses reflection spectrophotometry. The saturation value is displayed on an oximetry monitor and updated every 2 seconds. Thus, this provides up-to-date real-time measurement of the venous oxygen saturation, and fluctuations can be closely monitored in critically ill patients. While the continuous venous oximetry is more expensive, repeated blood draws for blood gas analysis in unstable patients leads to blood loss and adds up to the cost. A pilot study comparing the two in sepsis concluded that intermittent measurement was not inferior to continuous monitoring when delivered with the first 6 hours of treatment.