**Concepts for Enabling Effective Communication About Risk vs. Benefits with Focus on Ionizing Radiation**

Communicating probability concepts well with patients and other HCPs necessitates familiarity with a detailed set of mathematical, epidemiological, and psychological principles. For example, HCPs should understand that patients are less likely to choose a potential therapy that has a low total chance of benefit and less likely to avoid an activity that has a low total chance of (even lethal) harm when probabilities that result from their behavioral options are framed in absolute terms rather than in relative terms.

This section discusses concepts that enable HCP assessment and communication of absolute risk. It focuses on examples pertaining to the risk of cancer associated with ionizing radiation, although the concepts can be applied to communicating any probability (risk or benefit) for which data is available (e.g., contrast extravasation-related nerve injury).

Although a given XR, fluoroscopic, or NM exam can result in more ionizing radiation per exam than a given CT scan, CT scans overall account for the majority of medical radiation, and this high relative amount from CT compared to other imaging modalities continues to increase according to the 2019 USNCRP report. As such, the discussion below will primarily use CT to illustrate how the clinical significance of risk can be identified and communicated. Discussion of cancer risk is limited to the general concept of "solid organ" cancer. Solid-organ cancer subtypes resulting from radiation exposure have different rates of development, as do lymphomas and leukemias.

Epidemiological studies establishing the increased risk of cancer from the individual or repeated low dose diagnostic imaging radiation exposures are not available. This is due to several reasons. First, the relationship between exposure to low doses of radiation and cancer development is stochastic, meaning that the probability distribution of persons who develop cancer based on receiving low dose radiation exposures is observed to be random. Second, the lag time between low-level radiation exposure and cancer diagnosis is thought to be years and sometimes decades, which involves incompletely understood cellular mechanisms, as mentioned above. Therefore, it is currently impossible to demonstrate that any particular malignancy stems from a single low dose radiation exposure (i.e., below the dose threshold used in modern medical imaging), such as from a single X-ray or sun-bathing episode, although data exists to support that this phenomenon does occur in humans, as reviewed elsewhere.

Nevertheless, several important concepts are to be emphasized for real-life applications. First, similar to identifiable cause-and-effect relationships, the probability of cancer from smaller doses and fewer events is relatively low, and the probability from larger doses and more events is relatively high.

As with other risk prediction calculations involving multiple variables that independently affect the outcome, the way to estimate hypothetical risks of radiation on future cancer development for a given person is to use a mathematical model that incorporates the independent patient parameters (e.g., gender, age of exposure, dose) from previously obtained samples. Risk calculators available for public use (as mentioned below) are typically based on the BEIR VII committee's model, derived from data from the Life Span Study on the Hiroshima and Nagasaki atomic bomb survivor cohort and a control cohort of citizens living nearby in the subsequent decades. However, the BEIR VII committee also applied data from studies on medical (mostly therapeutic), occupational, and environmental radiation exposures. Models of cancer risk from one or cumulative radiological exams exemplify the principles discussed above, such as the linear no-threshold hypothesis and increased rate of adverse outcome based on the age of the patient exposed.

The relationship between radiation exposure and estimated solid organ cancer risk can be expressed in general epidemiological terms such as relative risk and absolute risk, as well as in more specialized terms such as excess relative risk (ERR), excess absolute risk (EAR), and lifetime attributable risk (LAR).

ERR represents the excess risk per unit of exposure relative to (divided by) the background risk. Preston et al.

Also "relative" are the number and types of scans necessary to reach 100 mSv, which has been shown to vary widely from scanner to scanner and which in general has decreased slightly per scan since 2006, according to the most recent USNCRP report. Therefore, although relying on generic reported doses from other institutions or times may be necessary when no other information is available, patient doses used for risk calculations should be determined using up-to-date institution-specific parameters when possible. Another comment to put things in "relative" perspective: Title 10, Part 20, of the US Code of Federal Regulations directs American companies to restrict individual employees' maximum whole-body radiation limits to 50 mSv per year (5 mSv during pregnancy). As stated earlier, emphasizing relative risks of any kind is less likely to enable people in the process of deciding to correctly express understanding of their true (actual or total) risk than informing people about their estimated absolute risk.

In contrast to ERR, EAR is the excess risk per unit of exposure expressed as the difference from (subtracting) the background risk. In other words, adding the EAR to the background risk yields the total risk. Although the absolute risk is a more useful measure of risk, it can be more challenging to obtain and can still be challenged by others concerning its legitimate application to a given clinical scenario.

Regarding the former challenge: obtaining the absolute risk may require some mathematical manipulation of the available data. When identifying risk in medical literature, it is more common to find reported relative risks than absolute risks. Studies calculate how a particular independent variable increases risk by comparing cases (subjects having adverse outcomes) and controls. In general, such studies do not also measure the prevalence of particular adverse outcomes in the general population. Prevalence can be thought of as the "natural risk" of an adverse outcome from any possible independent variables in addition to whichever variables may have been investigated in a particular study. If an HCP can locate only a relative risk estimate of an adverse outcome (such as developing fatal cancer), they can calculate an estimate of absolute risk by multiplying the relative risk by the disease prevalence. The HCP faced with this task can choose to locate the prevalence from another study designed to determine prevalence (one that can be assessed as relevant to the HCP's environment). Alternatively, the HCP can estimate absolute risk using the event rate in the control group of whatever randomized trial or cohort study is available and is most similar to the real-life environment at the time. We return to the previous example of the generic White race man who, as a result of a 100 mSv exposure at age 40, experiences an ERR of 4%. Based on data obtained from the population in which he lives, his background risk (prevalence) of developing a fatal solid organ cancer of 22.8% by age 75. His EAR of developing fatal cancer by age 75 due to a 100 mSv exposure at age 40 is calculated to be 0.04 x 0.228, which is 0.009 or 0.9%. His absolute risk at age 75 from the 100 mS exposure at age 40 can be estimated to have increased from 22.8% to 23.7% (0.228 + 0.009).

Regarding the latter challenge: on philosophical grounds, one can argue that absolute risks calculated from research experiments do not apply to a particular patient who exists outside of those experimental conditions. Also, combining data from two or more studies of two different populations increases margins of error in calculations. Nevertheless, operating outside of philosophically and mathematically pure conditions is still necessary for all applied sciences, including medicine, when no better options exist. Engineers make engines that function in the real world from calculations obtained in the laboratory. When possible, a real person's risk should be performed by incorporating multiple factors specific to that person that has been shown in prior studies to affect a person's overall final risk. These covariables can be identified in published multivariable regression prediction models (several of which are cited above) or by using a Bayesian approach to decision-making. An example of the latter with respect to a common and potentially life-saving medical decision is using Wells' criteria for determining whether or not to advise a patient to undergo pulmonary embolism imaging.

When communicating with others about the effect size of radiation on cancer risk, it is also most appropriate to share information about the levels of uncertainty that exist in the estimates. Such uncertainty should be reported using an equation's statistically derived confidence intervals when possible. When determining confidence intervals is not a practical option, then uncertainty can be expressed using other less accurate "rules of thumb," such as using a "factor of three of the estimate in adult patients," which assumes that the estimated cancer risk might be three times higher or lower than estimated.

A second effective way of expressing absolute risk to patients and other HCPs is reporting it as a number needed to harm (NNH). This represents the number of events (radiological investigations) that would be expected to cause one harmful outcome (radiation-induced cancer). Because NNH is simply the mathematical inverse of the absolute risk increase discussed above, it says the same information only in different terms. In theory, persons who visualize numbers better as proportions or odds than as percentages can better grasp risks when presented as NNH. Research on actual outcomes of statistical framing in communicating healthcare-related probabilities is reviewed elsewhere.

A third way of expressing absolute cancer risk from ionizing radiation is using the lifetime attributable risk (LAR), which has similarities and differences with respect to the EAR. Like EAR, LAR can be defined as the additional cancer risk from undergoing a single radiation exposure compared to cancer risk in a control group scenario. It can be converted into NNH. In contrast to the EAR, LAR focuses on risk accumulated over a "lifetime" instead of risk at a particular point in time. LAR can be estimated for individual cancers and "cancers as a whole." In a study that applied CT radiation doses in California in 2009 to the BEIR VII radiation risk model to obtain LAR estimates, NNH for solid organ cancer from a single-phase non-contrast abdomen-pelvis CT in men aged 40 was estimated at 1002, whereas for a multiphase abdomen-pelvis CT scan it was estimated at 636. NNH for one radiation-induced cancer from a multiphase abdominal CT scan was estimated at 250 if exposed at age 20 and 700 if exposed at age 60.

In addition to the risks discussed above, medical imaging carries many other statistically measurable potential harms, including rates of false-positive diagnoses (a rate equivalent to 100% - specificity); non-diagnostic surveillance imaging; benign, non-diagnostic, and/or complication-inducing invasive medical interventions; and negative economic and psychological effects related to lead-time bias. Furthermore, some patients' self-determined quality or quantity of life values make obtaining additional information about their condition from imaging tests have no benefit for them when doing so will not lead to interventions that they would choose to undergo anyway.

Despite the hazards of medical imaging, which are the foci of this paper, the real benefits of imaging for patients do exist. These benefits can be quantified in terms of number needed to treat, the number needed to screen, absolute risk reduction, life-years gained, quality-adjusted life years (QALY) gained, cost per QALY saved, days of lost work saved, and positive predictive value, among others.

HCPs can communicate risks and benefits using a standardized approach while also making adjustments to enable each patient to exercise their own values and standards. Whereas one person may decide that a probability is "low" or that risk is worth taking, another person may determine that the same probability is "high" or that the risk is not worth taking. Ethical considerations, legal precedents, societal guidelines, and other strategies for reducing and communicating risks are discussed below.