Contraction works to bring the two attachment points of a muscle closer together. For example, the sternocleidomastoid muscle originates from the manubrium and head of clavicle and inserts on the ipsilateral mastoid process of our skull. Contraction here causes ipsilateral side-bending and contralateral rotation because the muscle works to bring these two bony processes closer together.

The sternocleidomastoid muscle is voluntarily controlled and thus a striated skeletal muscle. As mentioned above, the primary mechanism by which muscles operate is by overlapping of the thick and thin filaments. The proteins that predominately make up the thin and thick filaments are actin and myosin, respectively. Myosin is like a person climbing a rope where the rope is actin. Myosin continuously grabs actin, pulls it, releases, reaches, and repeats. Myosin in skeletal muscle cells activates by a rapid increase in calcium concentration released from the muscle cell’s intracellular store, the sarcoplasmic reticulum. Calcium works by binding to a protein called troponin which moves tropomyosin. Tropomyosin is the protein that wraps around actin and prevents spontaneous binding of myosin to actin; only when calcium is at high enough concentrations can myosin bind to actin. Without calcium, myosin binds to ADP and inorganic phosphate (Pi). With calcium, this complex of myosin, ADP, and Pi binds to actin forming a cross-bridge. Releasing ADP and Pi causes the power stroke (the pull in the rope analogy). ATP binds myosin, which allows it to release from actin (the letting go). ATP bound to myosin is split into ADP, and Pi and in the process, myosin is cocked back to start the cycle again (the reaching). Smooth and cardiac muscle work similarly to cause shortening; however their activation is by different processes.