Planning is essential to good disaster response and begins long before an event and continues through the event. When the threat of a disaster event is imminent (such as a hurricane), planning begins immediately. The first step is to understand the situation and what resources will be required, what resources that will be available and the possible scale of the event. Next incident objectives will be established based on the overall big picture of the event. These objectives will be fleshed out into an overall plan that will elucidate the tactics to be used as well as how the resources are allocated. After the plan is finished, then it is distributed and activated. After this, the plan is constantly evaluated and revised. This is referred to as the planning “P.”

When no disaster event is imminent, it is still very important for planning to occur. The first step in long-term planning for your local community is performing a hazard vulnerability analysis. First, specific hazards are to be noted. Consider geographical features such as damns, fault lines and features of your community that could cause limited access to a portion of your coverage area. Climate is also a consideration. Seasonal variations and weather conditions that would have an impact on ems operations must be considered. Other factors to consider are the economic environment in the community and the local crime statistics. For all of the hazards describe any history of the incident, possible impacts on the vulnerable areas of the community and the probability of it happening. All these factors together form a community hazard vulnerability analysis.

Each agency develops an emergency operations plan (EOP). The EOP should reference NIMS and use the principles of ICS. The EOP will outline the agencies disaster response framework and should be flexible and scalable for the event encountered. There are multiple elements contained in an EOP.  The EOP contains a clear list of circumstances under which to consider implementing the plan. A person/position responsible for activating the plan is also named, usually the highest ranking staff person on duty. A command chain is laid out as well as how actions will be coordinated with other agencies. How to protect people and property is also included in the EOP. This includes vulnerable populations such as special needs children and adults. A plan to address the needs of uninjured children, especially those separated from their parents, should also be included. In Identify resources such as personnel, supplies, facilities, equipment, and other resources from within your area and also from outside your area that you have established agreements for use. This includes federal resources. Requirements of your agency or other agencies/areas are settled through agreements. Mitigation concerns during the event and recovery should be included.

The EOP specifies the requirements to effectively manage a disaster response. These requirements are then used to understand the type of training and exercises needed to prepare. Therefore, the EOP sets the preparedness training needed for your agency. Exercises can take this a step further allowing you to confirm plans and response procedures as well as gauging the personnel’s skills. Divergence in the in the performance of the staff can be discovered and addressed through additional training or addition of equipment found lacking. Other response problems can also be discovered and remedied through technology and boosting current agreements or forging new ones. The EOP can also be adjusted to correct for response problems stemming from the EOP itself.