# Definition/Introduction

Codman triangle is a radiologic sign seen most commonly on musculoskeletal plain films. It is the name given to a periosteal reaction that occurs when bone lesions grow so aggressively that they lift the periosteum off the bone and do not allow the periosteum to lay down new bone. It is a pattern of interrupted periosteal reaction where the periosteum gets lifted at either end of the aggressive lesion, and the central aspect of the lesion does not have any overlying ossification. This state gives the appearance on plain films of a raised triangle of periosteum along the edges of the lesion. In this reaction, the periosteum may become lifted by the leading edge of the tumor, pus, or hemorrhage.

This radiologic sign classically presents with aggressive primary bone tumors, including osteosarcoma (most common), Ewing sarcoma, chondrosarcoma, metastasis, undifferentiated pleomorphic sarcoma, and malignant giant cell tumor. It may rarely appear with non-malignant lesions such as osteomyelitis, active aneurysmal bone cysts, trauma, and hematoma.

The reaction derives its name from Ernest Amory Codman, a surgeon who first described the finding in an article in 1926 when discussing malignant bone sarcomas.

# Issues of Concern

Codman triangle, along with other aggressive periosteal reactions such as lamellated and sunburst patterns, is clinically concerning as it most commonly signals an aggressive lesion within the bone.

# Clinical Significance

As discussed previously, the Codman triangle sign is clinically significant as it often signals an underlying aggressive bone lesion. Radiologists need to recognize this finding as it can carry substantial clinical weight. Additionally, a clinical physician needs to correlate this finding with other clinical features to arrive at the appropriate diagnosis and ultimately provide the correct treatment.

If there is a suspicion of a malignant primary bone tumor, the clinical course will be much different than a suspected case of acute osteomyelitis, for example. An aggressive bone tumor may require further imaging tests, staging, and a carefully planned biopsy.

# Nursing, Allied Health, and Interprofessional Team Interventions

This is a radiologic sign and does not require nursing actions or interventions. However, all interprofessional team members who read radiographs must be able to recognize this sign.

# Nursing, Allied Health, and Interprofessional Team Monitoring

This is a radiologic sign and does not require nursing monitoring.