**History**

A thorough history should document the mechanism of the injury as well as the vector in which the force was applied and determine whether there have been any prior nasal traumas or surgeries. It is also important to elucidate whether the patient experiences any nasal obstruction after the injury.

In the acute phase, the simple application of ice and analgesia may be very helpful for reducing edema and discomfort. More severe facial trauma may require assessment and stabilization of the airway, using appropriate Advanced Trauma Life Support or Pediatric Advanced Life Support protocols.

**Physical Examination**

A general examination is always performed to rule out severe, life-threatening conditions. Additionally, the following examinations should be performed:

**Inspection of the Nose and Face**

- Deformity and swelling

- Ecchymosis

- Epistaxis

- The shape of the nose: loss of anterior projection of nose with increased intercanthal distance suggests the presence of a naso-orbital-ethmoid fracture

- Eye movements: orbital blowout fractures may cause extraocular muscle entrapment and resulting gaze restriction

**Palpation**

- Tenderness: widening of the tip of the nose and nasal obstruction may represent a septal hematoma

- Mobility of the nasal bones

- Deformity

- Crepitus

- Bony step-offs

- Infraorbital paresthesia

**Examination of the Nasal Cavities**

- Elevate the tip of the nose in order to visualize the anterior aspect of the nasal cavities.

- Use a headlight and a nasal speculum or an otoscope.

- Ecchymosis and edema of the nasal septum likely indicate a septal hematoma, which will require emergency drainage.

- The presence of clear nasal fluid may indicate a cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) leak from an associated basal skull fracture; a halo test can raise or lower suspicion for this diagnosis, as can detection of glucose in the fluid.

- Mid-face instability or dental malocclusion may be indicative of a Le Fort fracture.

**Imaging**

Imaging for isolated nasal fractures is rarely needed, and plain films are of dubious value; the diagnosis of a nasal fracture is typically made based on clinical observation alone.

**Management**

**Soft Tissue Injury**

Nasal wounds are cleaned and foreign bodies removed. Small lacerations can be closed with porous surgical tape strips, skin glue, or fine sutures.

**Nasal Fractures**

Reduction of nasal fractures is not always required. No further intervention is needed if there is no deformity or the patient is unconcerned about the aesthetic appearance. However, it is worth counseling patients that the wear of spectacles may be affected by a change in nasal shape. If swelling interferes with an adequate examination, a reassessment should occur 5 to 7 days later, after the patient has had a chance to apply ice and keep their head elevated. For particularly severe edema, a short course of oral steroids may be helpful. Reduction of displaced bone fragments should occur within two weeks of injury, as the nasal bones will heal and fixate; manipulation after this point will be challenging and may require osteotomies to mobilize the bones once more. Some authors even recommend CT guidance for the procedure to improve precision and optimize patient outcomes.

**Septal Hematoma**

An accumulation of blood underneath the mucoperichondrial layer of the nasal septum normally presents as pain and nasal obstruction with boggy swelling of the septum. If not drained, a hematoma can lead to septal abscess formation, cartilage necrosis, and even a nasal saddle deformity. Aspiration with a syringe and needle may suffice, but the patient should be followed closely to ensure no more blood collects within the septum. Some cases may require formal drainage in the operating theatre with insertion of a small drain or the use of quilting sutures to obliterate the dead space and prevent reaccumulation.

**Cerebrospinal Fluid Leaks**

Clear rhinorrhoea following nasal trauma should raise suspicion for a CSF leak. The cribriform plate of the ethmoid bone that lies at the top of the bony nasal septum is thin and perforated and therefore prone to fracture with sufficient force applied in the correct vector. Confirmation of the diagnosis is obtained by sending a sample of the clear fluid for β-2 transferrin or β-trace protein. A high-resolution CT scan may help detail the exact pattern of the skull base fracture if present.