Patients with tularemia present with a variety of symptoms and physical exam findings, depending on the route of infection. It is important to obtain a detailed travel history, including any game or ground water ingestion, and participation in outdoor activities such as handling carcasses while hunting or potential tick bites. Importantly, lack of a history of tick bite or other definitive exposure does not exclude the diagnosis of tularemia as the tick or insect bite may be brief and unnoticed. Among all syndromes, fever, headache, and malaise are common. The most common syndromes are ulceroglandular, in which an ulcer forms at the site of inoculation in association with tender regional lymphadenopathy, and glandular tularemia, in which regional lymphadenopathy occurs in the area of inoculation, but no ulcer is identified. Tularemia may also present as an oculoglandular disease, with exudative conjunctivitis and regional lymphadenopathy, oropharyngeal tularemia, with exudative pharyngitis and regional lymphadenopathy, gastrointestinal tularemia, with abdominal pain, diarrhea, and vomiting, or pneumonic tularemia, a severe bilateral pneumonia with a mortality rate of 30% to 60% in some series. In all presentations with associated lymphadenopathy, the lymph node may develop fluctuance as the disease progresses even after the resolution of systemic symptoms. Systemic or typhoidal tularemia, with fever, septic shock, and hepatosplenomegaly can occur following any route of inoculation. While these are the most commonly reported clinical syndromes associated with tularemia, it has also been associated with meningitis, osteomyelitis and other infectious syndromes.