Management of patients with HCCR is multidisciplinary and mainly stems from patients' specific findings.

**Chemotherapy:**Depending on their genetic mutation, hereditary CRCs may respond differently to traditional chemotherapy regimens. The microsatellite instability in many cases reflects a difference in the biological characteristics of the tumor, possibly with a unique susceptibility to immunotherapy.

- Current ASCO, NCCN, and ESMO guidelines strongly recommend adjuvant therapy for selected stage II with high-risk/pMMR/MSI-S disease and all stage III (node-positive). The guidelines advocate administering adjuvant chemotherapy (FOLFOX or CAPOX) within 6 to 8 weeks after surgical resection, pending recovery of the patient's health.

- FOLFOX (5-fluorouracil plus + leucovorin plus +oxaliplatin) is the first-line modern chemotherapy for metastatic disease more effective than the obsolete single-agent chemotherapy (5-fluorouracil) (HR for SLP: 0.59, 95% CI 0.49 to 0.73, 2 RCT),  (HR for OS: 0.69, 95% CI 0.51 to 0.94, 1 RCT).

- FOLFIRI (5-fluorouracil plus + leucovorin plus + irinotecan) is the second most effective chemotherapy in metastatic CRC and is either first or second line. (HR for OS: 0.58, 95% CI 0.43 to 0.80, 1 RCT).

- Combinations based on irinotecan were more effective than irinotecan alone (HR for PFS: 0.68, 95% CI 0.60 to 0.76, 6 RCT) [Level II]. Targeted agents increased the efficacy of conventional chemotherapy when considered together (HR for OS: 0.84, 95% CI 0.77 to 0.91, 6 RCT) and when bevacizumab alone (HR for PFS: 0.67, 95% CI 0.60 to 0.75, 4 RCT).

- In metastatic colorectal cancer, monoclonal antibodies are used (bevacizumab, cetuximab, and panitumumab)  in combination with chemotherapy. There is a distinct benefit in the addition of bevacizumab to chemotherapy for tumors on the right side of cetuximab to chemotherapy for tumors on the left side (for RAS wild-type tumors) to oxaliplatin- and irinotecan-based regimens which can be a consideration for first-line therapy.

- A meta-analysis including the TAILOR and the PRIME study suggests that primary tumor location predicted a survival benefit when adding the anti-epidermal growth factor receptor antibody to FOLFOX regimen in RAS & NRAS-wild metastatic CRC patients (OS, HR for left-sided: 0.71; 95% CI: 0.59-0.85; P=.0002 and HR for right-sided: 0.90; 95% CI: 0.65-1.25; P=.53). The efficacy was similar in patients with wild molecular characteristics RAS / BRAF.

**Radiotherapy:**Preoperative radiotherapy (hypofractionated) with chemotherapy is recommended in patients with stage II and III rectal cancer or unresectable residual tumor (positive margins), according to the report of anatomopathological findings of the surgical specimen.

**Surgery:**The appropriate surgical option for patients with colon cancer and LS (total abdominal colectomy or segmental colectomy with ileorectal anastomosis) will depend on the risk factors. The surgical preferences of the patient, with special emphasis on the age of the patient and the capacity of the patient to follow intensive surveillance,

In FAP, prophylactic colectomy is an important option to prevent CRC.