Antihistamine, corticosteroids, and epinephrine are treatments of **histaminergic angioedema**.

Treatment of **Bradykinin-mediated angioedema**is often resistant to standard therapies such as epinephrine, glucocorticoids or antihistamines.

**Hereditary angioedema****(On-demand treatment)**

- Treat airway via intubation or surgical airway intervention. Treatment should be as early as possible. Hereditary angioedema attacks should be treated with C1 Inhibitor concentrate,

**Pre-procedural**(**short-term) prophylaxis**

Short-term prophylaxis before high-risk procedures in high-risk individuals.

**Long-term prophylaxis**

C1 Inhibitor is the first-line long-term prophylaxis, while the androgens are used as second-line agents.

**Hereditary angioedema with mutations in the F12 gene is**treated as follows:

- Discontinuing trigger factors (estrogen-containing oral contraceptives, hormonal replacement therapy, angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitors)

- Treating with plasma-derived C1 inhibitor for acute attacks.  Preventing attacks with progestins, tranexamic acid, and danazol.

**Acquired angioedema related to angiotensin-converting enzyme (ACE) inhibitor**

Treatment is with antihistamines, epinephrine, and glucocorticoids.

**Acquired C1 inhibitor deficiency angioedema**

Majority cases are asymptomatic and respond to immunochemotherapy

**Special considerations:**

- In pregnancy, the recommended therapy is plasma-derived nano-filtered C1-inhibitor,

- In the pediatric population, the doses include 500 units (10-25 kg weighed patients), 1000 units and 1500 Units in patients weighing more than 25kg.

- Plasma-derived C1 esterase inhibitor is safe and efficacious in pediatric patients below 12 years.

- Icatibant is a well-tolerated medication in the pediatric group and might have a role in treating angiotensin II receptor blocker induced angioedema.

- Recombinant human C1 esterase inhibitor for acute hereditary angioedema treatment has a persistent response for three days.

- C1 inhibitor is used in the acute management of hereditary angioedema associated pancreatitis.

- Patients with life-threatening orolingual angioedema who are treated with recombinant tissue plasminogen activator infusion, have a rapid response after using icatibant treatment.

- Concurrent use of angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitors with, dipeptidyl peptidase-4 inhibitors should be monitored closely as dipeptidyl peptidase-4 is also a major enzyme in the degradation pathway of bradykinin like an angiotensin-converting enzyme.

- Use of liquid steroids in patients with severe urticaria associated angioedema in a setting of severe dysphagia secondary to anaphylaxis.

- Use of omalizumab (Anti-immunoglobulin-E antibody) in Idiopathic non-histaminergic acquired angioedema, which is a rare disease resistant to antihistamines.