Genetic disorders with high LDL-C are most commonly caused by autosomal dominant conditions and rarely inherited as a recessive trait. Mutations in the LDL receptor (LDLR; “classic FH”) cause 80% to 90% of cases of clinical FH and have an autosomal dominant inheritance. Rarely, mutations in APOB and PCSK9 can cause autosomal dominant hypercholesterolemia. However, the clinical phenotype cannot distinguish between these three mutations.

APOB synthesizes the major protein in LDL, which is the ligand for LDLR. A mutation resulting in defective ApoB-100 results in impaired binding of LDL particles to LDLR and thus impaired clearance.

PCSK9 synthesizes a circulatory protein that limits LDL receptor lifespan. Therefore, gain-of-function mutation results in FH.

Over 1600 mutations in the LDLR causing classic FH have been identified. Mutations can be homozygous or heterozygous. True homozygotes have the same mutation in both alleles, whereas compound heterozygotes have different mutations in each allele. Compound heterozygotes have a similar phenotype to homozygous FH.

Patients with less than 2% of LDLR activity are classified as receptor-negative, and patients with two to 5% of regular LDLR activity are classified as receptor defective.

It is important to note that about 30 to 50% of patients with FH phenotype do not have an identifiable gene defect. Thus, gene testing is not a requisite for the diagnosis, which is, in most cases, clinical.FH caused by a de novo mutation is very rare, and therefore, documenting detailed family history is very important.