With Brown-Sequard syndrome, a clean-cut hemisection is usually not visible. However, partial hemisection is evident, and it often includes all the nerve tracts lying along the path in the injured area involved. If the lesion is involved in the cervical region, for example, C5 to T1, that hemisection would create deficits in the following manner:

All sensory sensations would be lost ipsilaterally.

- Dorsal columns: sensations which are responsible for fine touch, vibration, two-point discrimination, and conscious proprioception would be affected on the same side of the lesion because dorsal columns ascend ipsilaterally carrying the information from the lower half of body in the gracile fasciculus and the upper half of body in the cuneate fasciculus before they decussate in the lower medulla.

- Spinothalamic tracts that are responsible for pain, temperature, and crude touch would be affected contralateral to the lesion because they ascend a level up and then cross to the opposite side of the cord.

- Dorsal and ventral spinocerebellar tracts: carrying sensations of unconscious proprioception, lesion affecting dorsal spinocerebellar tracts cause ipsilateral dystaxia and involvement of ventral spinocerebellar would cause contralateral dystaxia since these fibers ascend and cross to the opposite side.

- Horner's syndrome: if the lesion is at or above T1, this will cause ipsilateral loss of sympathetic fibers resulting in ptosis, miosis, and anhydrosis. There might also be redness of face due to vasodilation.

- Corticospinal tracts: there would be an ipsilateral loss of movements at the site of the lesion which presents with flaccid paralysis, lower motor neuron lesion like loss of muscle mass, fasciculations, and decreased power and tone. Below the level of lesion, there would be upper motor neurons lesion signs like paralysis with hypertonia clasp knife type, hyperreflexia, and positive Babinski sign. There is no significant motor deficit on the contralateral side.