History and physicals vary vastly depending on the substance ingested, time since ingestion, and route of ingestion. For example, most forms of alcohol intoxication present with slurred speech, ataxia, and impaired judgment. This process, depending on the dose and time frame of ingestion, can quickly spiral towards CNS depression, coma, and multiorgan failure. This progression applies to ethanol, methanol, isopropanol, and ethylene glycol.

In terms of cocaine and other stimulants, expect an acute patient with anxiety, potential psychosis, and sympathetically-driven vital signs (tachycardia, tachypnea, high blood pressure, etc.). Management begins with decreasing anxiety, stabilizing vitals, and preparing rapid response teams for deteriorating patients.

Also, significant variations are seen based on the stage of addiction and addicted substances. The five stages of addiction are as follows:

- **First use**
- These are naïve patients in the sense that they have not yet felt the effects of their substance. It could be a new pain medication prescription or peer-pressure imposed experimentation.

- **Continued use**
- Individuals begin to return to a medication they no longer “need” but want as well as they notice the post-high sensation does not clear as quickly.

- **Tolerance**
- Patients in this stage realize they need large doses of the drug to feel prior levels of high.

- **Dependence**
- Patients begin to show physical signs of withdrawal from discontinuing use. Worse, patients no longer feel “normal” without their drink or substance.

- **Addiction**
- These patients can be on one of two sides of the coin. They may be distressed by their continued use but require it despite serious life problems that have resulted, or they may be in denial of the addiction and continue to spiral further into their addiction.

The above descriptions of stages reveal the expected presentation of the addicted patient. History and physical examination will vary based on which the stage of the condition. A first-use patient will likely not be in acute distress (barring active trauma/chronic pain) or have physical signs of withdrawal when they present to your clinic or emergency room. The tolerant patient will typically present with a story that necessitates increasing the dose of their medication or unexpected refill. The addicted patient can present in acute withdrawal with symptoms that vary based on the substance. Alcohol withdrawal will present with signs of autonomic dysregulation to the most worrisome, delirium tremens, and seizures.