Various complications and problems can be encountered during surgery and postoperatively. Perforated buccal or lingual plates can be seen during the procedure. In case of an elliptical /eccentric preparation, a wider implant can be used if possible. If not, pack the osteotomy with autogenous graft, compress it, and place implant again. Bleeding in the floor of the mouth can occur from the lingual artery or facial artery injury. So absolute care has to be taken during osteotomy preparation.  Nerve injury can lead to altered nerve sensation in the form of anesthesia, paresthesia or hyperesthesia. Consequently, the surgical landmark is often set conservatively 2mm above the mandibular canal.

The most common postoperative complication is incision line opening. The design of the removable interim prosthesis is involved, it is corrected. The patient is instructed to rinse 2-3 times daily with chlorhexidine. If granulation process extends for more than two weeks, epithelial margin trimming can be done. If implants become exposed during the healing period, no attempt should be made to cover them with tissue. Rather denture is relieved aggressively over the area with implant exposure. The mobility of the implant during healing is unusual but may occur, mostly accompanied by a radiolucent zone around the implant. Whatever may be the cause, the implant should be removed. Signs and symptoms of failure for an implant are horizontal mobility  greater than 0.5 mm, rapid progressive bone loss, pain during percussion, uncontrolled exudate, generalized radiolucency around the implant, more than one half of the bone is lost around the implant and last the implants inserted in poor position, making them useless for prosthetic support. A success rate of 85%at the end of 5 year period and 80% at the end of 10 year period are minimum criteria for success.