Interdisciplinary teams are essential to healthcare. Each member of the healthcare team should cooperate, and the team should operate seamlessly with each member knowing their role and working together to provide the best and highest level of care for each patient.

In many healthcare settings, nurses have the most face to face contact with the patient from triage/introduction to discharge. They can ensure that informed consent was obtained before any procedure. Nurses are often the first to notice abnormal vital signs, allergic reactions and medication side effects including rashes or changes in mental status and can take proactive action by placing them on appropriate monitors (i.e., cardiac or pulse oxygenation), double-checking the patient’s known allergies as well as whether the medication ordered was ordered with the appropriate dose. Their assistance before, during, and after nerve blocks is imperative to minimize adverse effects and complications from any procedure.

Likewise, pharmacy staff can be crucial to provide aid in the selection of alternative agents due to allergies and dosing of less commonly used medications or treatments, such as lipid emulsion, especially in the case of adverse events such as local anesthetic systemic toxicity (LAST). The amount of local anesthetic used, particularly in small regional nerve blocks like the supratrochlear nerve, is so little that concern for LAST is quite minimal.

Nurse practitioners and provider assistants are usually the members of the healthcare team who will perform the supratrochlear nerve block and any related procedures (i.e., laceration repair) if necessary depending on the indication. They are ones who will be held primarily responsible for any significant complications or adverse events. Good communication practices between providers, team members, patients, and the patients’ families are essential for optimal patient outcomes and promote a culture and commitment to patient and provider safety.