# Continuing Education Activity

An acute ST-elevation myocardial infarction occurs due to occlusion of one or more coronary arteries, causing transmural myocardial ischemia which in turn results in myocardial injury or necrosis. This activity reviews the presentation, evaluation, and management of patients with with ST-elevation myocardial infarctions and highlights the role of the interprofessional team in caring for these patients.

**Objectives:**
- Describe the evaluation of a patient with a suspected myocardial infarction.
- Describe EKG findings in a patient with an ST-elevation myocardial infarction.
- List the treatment and management options available for an acute ST-elevation myocardial infarction. 
- Employ interprofessional team strategies to improve outcomes for patients with ST-elevation myocardial infarctions.

# Introduction

An acute ST-elevation myocardial infarction (STEMI) is an event in which transmural myocardial ischemia results in myocardial injury or necrosis.

# Etiology

An ST-elevation myocardial infarction occurs from occlusion of one or more of the coronary arteries that supply the heart with blood. The cause of this abrupt disruption of blood flow is usually plaque rupture, erosion, fissuring or dissection of coronary arteries that results in an obstructing thrombus. The major risk factors for ST-elevation myocardial infarction are dyslipidemia, diabetes mellitus, hypertension, smoking, and family history of coronary artery disease.

Myocardial infarction in general can be classified

# Epidemiology

The estimated annual incidence of myocardial infarction (MI) in the United States is 550,000 new and 200,000 recurrent.

# Pathophysiology

For an acute thrombotic coronary event to cause ST-segment elevation on a surface ECG, there needs to be a complete and persistent occlusion of blood flow. Coronary athersclerosis and presence of high risk thin cap fibroatheroma (TCFA) can result in sudden onset plaque rupture

Coronary artery occlusion in animal models shows a "wave-front" of myocardial injury that spreads from the sub-endocardial myocardium to the sub-epicardial myocardium resulting in a transmural infarction that appears as an ST elevation on surface ECG.

# History and Physical

Prior to performing an ECG and collecting troponins the history and physical provide the only clues that lead to a diagnosis of myocardial infarction. Initial evaluation should include a focused physical examination and a brief history. Patients should be asked about the characteristics of the pain and associated symptoms, risk factors or history of cardiovascular disease, and recent drug use.

# Evaluation

Evaluation of patients with acute onset of chest pain should begin with an electrocardiogram (ECG) and troponin level. The American College of Cardiology, American Heart Association, European Society of Cardiology, and the World Heart Federation committee established the following ECG criteria for ST-elevation myocardial infarction (STEMI)

- New ST-segment elevation at the J point in 2 contiguous leads with the cutoff point as greater than 0.1 mV in all leads other than V2 or V3

- In leads V2-V3 the cutoff point is greater than 0.2 mV in men older than 40 years old and greater than 0.25 in men younger than 40 years old, or greater than 0.15 mV in women

Patients with a pre-existing left bundle branch block can be further evaluated using Sgarbossa's criteria

- ST-segment elevation of 1 mm or more that is concordant with (in the same direction as) the QRS complex

- ST-segment depression of 1 mm or more in lead V1, V2, or V3

- ST-segment elevation of 5 mm or more that is discordant with (in the opposite direction) the QRS complex

# Treatment / Management

After making the diagnosis of acute ST-elevation myocardial infarction, intravenous access should be obtained, and cardiac monitoring started.  Patients that are hypoxemic or at risk for hypoxemia benefit from oxygen therapy; however, recent studies show possible deleterious effects in normoxic patients.

All patients with an acute myocardial infarction should be started on a beta blocker, high intensity statin, aspirin, and a P2Y12 inhibitor as soon as possible, with certain exceptions.  Nitroglycerin administration can reduce anginal pain however it should be avoided in patients who have used phosphodiesterase inhibiting medication within the last 24 hours and in cases of right ventricular infarction. Further pain relief with morphine can be given for patients that continue report discomfort after nitroglycerin administration however judicious use is not recommended as it may adversely affect outcomes.

Anticoagulation should also be started aongside with unfractionated heparin, low-molecular-weight heparin, bivalirudin, or fondaparinux

# Differential Diagnosis

Other pathologies that can cause ST-segment elevations include: myocarditis, pericarditis, stress cardiomyopathy (Takotsubo), benign early repolarization, Acute vasospasm, spontaneous coronary artery dissection, left bundle branch block, various channelopathies, and electrolyte abnormalities.

# Prognosis

Mortality rates at 30 days for patients presenting with ST-elevation myocardial infarction are between 2.5% to 10%.

- Age older than 75 years (3 points); Age 64 to 74 (2 points)

- Diabetes, hypertension, or history of angina (1 point)

- Systolic blood pressure less than 100 mm Hg (3 points)

- Heart rate greater than 100 beats per minute (2 points)

- Killip class II to IV (2 points)

- Body weight less than 150 lbs (1 point)

# Complications

There are 3 life-threatening mechanical complications of myocardial infarction: ventricular free wall rupture, interventricular septum rupture, and acute mitral regurgitation. Ventricular free wall rupture occurs within 5 days in half the cases and within 2 weeks in 90% of cases with an overall mortality rate of greater than 80%.

# Enhancing Healthcare Team Outcomes

A door-to-balloon time of fewer than 90 minutes is the goal of a PCI capable facility and is one of the core measures of the Joint Commission on Accreditation of Healthcare Organizations.