Vitamin D administration can be oral, or the skin can make it via UV exposure. A serum level of 25-hydroxyvitamin D (25 OH D) of at least 30 ng/ml (78 nmoL/L) is required to maintain the physiologic function of vitamin D. Recommendations are to use 25-hydroxyvitamin D (25 OH D) as a measure of vitamin D status as it has a half-life of 2 weeks; whereas, 1,25-dihydroxy vitamin D (1,25 (OH)), the biologically active form, has a serum half-life of < 4 hours and should not be used to measure vitamin D status.

Factors that alter the amount of UVB radiation reaching the skin change the cutaneous production of vitamin D. Melanin in the skin absorbs UVB radiation and prevents the conversion of 7-dehydrocholesterol to vitamin D. Hence, individuals with increased skin pigmentation have decreased cutaneous production of vitamin D and require a longer duration of exposure to UVB radiation to produce vitamin D. Sunscreen, which also absorbs UVB radiation, decreases cutaneous production of vitamin D. A sunscreen with a sun protection factor (SPF) of 8 reduces cutaneous production of UVB  by > 95% and a sunscreen with an SPF of 15 will reduce this to > 98%.

During winter, sun rays enter at a more oblique angle, and the ozone layer absorbs a higher amount of UVB radiation. Hence, less UVB radiation reaches the skin. For this reason, during the winter months, there is a decrease in the production of vitamin D. Similarly, at latitudes greater than 37 degrees, there is a decrease in the UVB radiation reaching the skin, which reduces vitamin D production. In the early morning and the evening, the sun's rays enter at an oblique angle, and the skin produces very little UVB.

Vitamin D is fat-soluble and stored in body fat. In obese individuals,  a greater amount of vitamin D is stored in fat, and less is available for biological functions. Hence obese people require larger units of vitamin D supplementation to maintain an adequate serum level of vitamin D.

Very few foods are a natural source of vitamin D. These include oily fish such as salmon, mackerel, and sardines. Foods fortified with vitamin D are milk and orange juice (100 units per 8 ounce serving) and some bread and cereals. An important source of oral vitamin D is vitamin D supplements, which are available both over the counter and through prescription. These are available in strengths of 1000 IU, 2000 IU, 5000 IU, and 50,000 IU, which are available only through prescription.