**Macroscopic findings:**

Chondrosarcomas are large tumors, usually greater than 4 cm in size

**Microscopic findings:**

Chondrosarcomas show abundant blue-grey cartilage matrix-production. Irregularly shaped lobules of cartilage varying in size and shape are present. Fibrous bands separate these lobules or permeate bony trabeculae. Calcified areas suggesting the presence of a pre-existing enchondroma can often be found. The chondrocytes are atypical, with variable size and shape and contain enlarged hyperchromatic nuclei. Binucleation is frequently seen. Chondroid matrix liquefaction or myxoid changes are a common feature of chondrosarcomas. Necrosis and mitoses can be seen. There is often permeation into the cortical bone and the marrow space with entrapment of bony trabeculae

Grading of chondrosarcomas is essential and is useful in predicting histological behavior. Chondrosarcomas are divided into three grades based upon their histopathology:

- **Grade I**: considered to be low-grade (locally aggressive), also called atypical cartilaginous tumor

- **Grade II**tumors contain a greater degree of nuclear atypia hyperchromasia, and nuclear size and are more cellular. Mitoses can be found.

- **Grade III**tumors are more pleomorphic and atypical than grade II chondrosarcomas. Mitoses are more easily detected. The cells at the periphery of the lobules are less differentiated and become spindled.

- The fourth group of chondrosarcomas, considered as grade IV; is called dedifferentiated chondrosarcoma and makes up 10% of all chondrosarcomas

Other less common types of chondrosarcomas are mesenchymal and clear cell chondrosarcomas

**Immunophenotype:**

Only a small percentage of the IDH1 mutations (20%) can be identified using a specific IDH1 R132H antibody.