Genetic and environmental factors exert a significant impact on the disruption of neurulation. Failure of neural folding or neuropores closure may be due to genetic changes, environmental factors, or lack of nutritional constituents. These insults cause neural tube defects in different ways, but the ultimate result is abnormal neurulation. The pathophysiology of NTDs based on the different etiologies is summarized here.

**Folic Acid, Antagonists, and its Genetic Correlation**

Following several research studies, researchers concluded that folic acid supplementation in a multivitamin regimen decreases the incidence rate of neural tube defects by 71%.

Folic acid has a major contribution to the pathophysiology of neural tube disorders. Folic acid helps synthesize deoxyribonucleic acid (DNA) and ribonucleic acid (RNA) precursors. Folic acid is converted into tetrahydrofolate by dihydrofolate reductase enzymes. Methylation of folic acid is essential to take the folic acid functional.

In some cases, even pregnant women who receive sufficient folic supplementation acid give birth to a child with neural tube disorders. Research has shown that genetic alterations in folate metabolism, folate receptors, and transport proteins render these women susceptible. Neural folds express the folate receptors. Genetic defects in these receptors, particularly folate alpha and beta receptors, which take up folate derivatives inside neural cells required for replication, lead to failure of neurulation.

Meta-analysis performed to rule out the relation between MTHFR C677T polymorphism, and neural tube defects demonstrated that this mutation decreases the activity of enzymes required for folate metabolism, thus reducing the serum folate concentration.

Folate antagonists such as phenytoin, valproic acid, and carbamazepine have a direct effect on NTDs by inhibiting the activity of folate.

Methotrexate inhibits dihydrofolate reductase. The use of methotrexate increases the apoptosis of neural tissue contributing to NTDs.

Mutation in homeobox genes and fibroblast growth factor (FGF) dysfunction has some roles in the pathogenesis of NTDs.

**Vitamin B12, Homocysteine and Folate Receptor Autoantibodies**

Vitamin B12 helps convert homocysteine formed from folate metabolism into methionines with the help of methionine synthase o reducing the toxicity of homocysteine. The deficiency of vitamin B12 increases the homocysteine level in the serum. One hypothesis suggests that high homocysteine level causes posttranslational modification of folate receptors (homocysteinylation) which forms folate receptors a self-antigen. Antibodies are formed against these auto-antigens, and therefore the activity of folates declines.

**Diabetes and Immune Modulation**

Gestational diabetes increases the Central nervous system malformations by 2-10 folds. Exposure of elevated glucose is teratogenic to embryos less than seven weeks with the undeveloped pancreas. A study conducted in Xenopus frogs concluded the necessity of chemokines and complement factors in the central nervous system (CNS) development. So absence or reduced level of C3a and C5a has some roles in NTDs.