A patient's primary care provider will most often manage medications prescribed to treat hypertension; however, various specialties, including cardiology and nephrology, are often consulted to manage the treatment-resistant disease.****Patients undergoing treatment for hypertension frequently have concomitant pathologies, including obesity, diabetes, and coronary artery disease.****The clinician may refer a patient to cardiology to manage severe hypertension for a more suitable alternative in those patients with a significant cardiac health history. Similarly, in patients with impaired renal function, nephrology may contribute by suggesting different medications to improve kidney health and patient outcomes. Nurse practitioners, physician assistants, nurses, and medical assistants can perform medication reviews to determine if the patient has been experiencing any harmful or unwanted side effects while taking olmesartan.

Communication between specialties and different providers can ensure that patients can safely take olmesartan or more appropriate medication. For example, nursing can monitor blood pressure and other monitoring parameters to evaluate treatment effectiveness and check for any adverse reactions, reporting these to the healthcare team. Pharmacists shall verify dosing and check for drug-drug interactions, particularly with other RAAS-targeting medications. There was a school thought that ACE-inhibitors and ARBs could be prescribed together, but that is no longer the case based on more recent data. The pharmacist shall communicate any findings to the treating physician or nursing staff. These examples of interprofessional team collaboration and communication can drive better patient outcomes.

Though its use remains controversial based on current literature and more effective alternatives exist within the ARB class at this time, olmesartan remains a useful medication to consider in the treatment of hypertension.