Early visual rehabilitation of children with pediatric cataracts is as crucial as early diagnosis and treatment. This reduces the incidence of amblyopia, strabismus, and poor fusion.

There are some options available for visual rehabilitation in these children, namely spectacles, Contact lenses, intraocular lenses, epikeratophakia, low vision aids, and amblyopia therapy. Parents should be counseled about the need for regular follow-up and routine refraction due to frequent refractive changes as the eyeball grows with age.

Children less than 2 years need aphakic glasses or contact lens for visual rehabilitation after cataract surgery till the secondary IOL implantation is planned. Aphakic glasses are usually used for bilateral aphakic patients. Due to improved surgical technique and increased number of primary IOL implantation, the use of aphakic glasses has reduced. Aphakia treatment aims to achieve the correct optical correction as soon as cataract extraction is done to permit the early symmetrical stimulation of the visual system in the critical period of development.

- **Spectacles**are the earliest form of aphakia treatment. Aphakic glasses with bifocal addition remain the primary mode of visual rehabilitation in bilateral aphakic children owing to their low cost and easy availability, no ocular discomfort, or direct contact with the ocular surface. There are a few notable disadvantages, too, like the weight, large size, restriction of the field of vision, increasing nystagmus, jack in the box phenomenon, pin cushion phenomenon, and ring scotoma. In cases of unilateral cataract, anisometropia, and anisokenia lead to diplopia and amblyopia, which further causes permanent suppression and anomalous retinal correspondence (ARC).

- **Contact lenses (CL)**are the best optical device to correct postoperative aphakia. These lenses should be worn during the daytime and removed during the night. It is superior to spectacles in both unilateral and bilateral cases. It offers a larger visual field, decreases glare, minimizes spherical aberrations, better binocularity, and cosmetic appearance. Intolerability, cost, and noncompliance pose significant problems among the children and their parents. A few notable contraindications to its use are chronic eye disease and ocular surface disorders. Three types of CL are available for pediatric patients, namely PMMA or Rigid gas permeable lenses, Silicon elastomer lenses, and Hydrogel lenses.

Children more than 2 years of age with primary IOL implantation also require adequate visual rehabilitation post-surgery. Spectacles or contact lenses may be prescribed after refraction.

**Amblyopia Treatment**

As mentioned earlier, deprivational amblyopia is more common in pediatric cataracts. Amblyopia developed due to unequal visual input in two eyes during the critical period of development i,e within 2 months. Therefore a unilateral cataract leads to denser amblyopia than a bilateral cataract, hence need earlier surgical intervention. Amblyopia therapy remains the most important part of visual rehabilitation. Treatment should commence as soon as possible. Occlusion therapy remains the mainstay of amblyopia therapy. However, compliance remains the main drawback of amblyopia therapy. Therefore proper counseling of parents is essential for successful visual outcomes.

Patients are reviewed every 2 weeks for visual improvement or reversal of amblyopia.

**Low Vision Aids**

These devices enable the children to improve their visual performance and helped them to reach their full capacity. There are many devices available according to patient age and affordability of parents. Convex lenses are used in various forms as primary optical assistance. Other devices are standard additional bifocals, hand magnifier, stand magnifier, electronic magnifier, telescopes, and computer adaptation closed-circuit televisions.