The process of electron transfer from NADH to protein complexes and finally to oxygen is intricate. There are four protein complexes involved in electron transfer that function as enzymes in the electron transport chain (ETC). These enzymes carry out oxidation and reduction reactions, permitting the transfer of electrons from one complex to the next in series. The complexes are named: Complex **I**,**II**,**III,**and**IV**. Complex V (ATP synthase) isfunctionally different, as it facilitates the generation of ATP (rather than electron transfer). Of the four complexes, complex I, III, and IV, all pump 4 protons into the intermembrane space. The mechanism of proton pumping involves conformational changes of the protein complex; however, the exact mechanism is still a topic of research. Each complex consists of several molecules, including iron-sulfur clusters (Fe-S), cytochromes, and prosthetic groups that all aid in the transfer of electrons.

The ETC shuttle electrons from one complex to the next, utilizing hydrophilic electron carriers, such as cytochrome C (that can travel freely through the intermembrane space) and hydrophobic, such as coenzyme Q10 (that can diffuse through the phospholipid bilayer of the inner membrane). The genetic information for the four complexes and the free electron carriers gets housed in both mitochondrial DNA (mDNA) and nuclear DNA.

- Coenzyme Q10 (Co Q10) has a hydrophobic benzoquinone structure that allows it to travel freely through the phospholipid bilayer. The oxidized form is referred to as ubiquinone (or Q). When reduced, Co Q10 simultaneously carries two hydrogen ions and an electron pair in the form of Ubiquinol (QH2). Upon arrival at the next protein complex in the ETC, ubiquinol once again oxidizes to ubiquinone.

- Cytochrome C is referred to as a cytochrome for its heme group structure. Cytochrome C contains an iron atom surrounded by a porphyrin ring. The reduction and oxidation of the iron atom (between Fe 2+ to Fe 3+ oxidation states) allow the cytochrome to carry individual electrons from one complex to another in the ETC.