Long term complications of adequately treated VTE are few. The most commonly reported long-term complication is post-thrombotic syndrome in patients diagnosed with DVT, which characteristically presents as pain and swelling of the limb with chronic venous insufficiency.

Longterm sequelae of recurrent PE include pulmonary hypertension and cor pulmonale, as described above.

**Bleeding**

Bleeding remains the most pertinent and feared complication of the treatment of VTE. Patients with advanced age and underlying hepatic or renal dysfunction are at a higher risk of bleeding. Despite this risk, most guidelines recommend against routine use of laboratory monitoring in patients receiving the newer anticoagulants. For patients receiving vitamin K antagonist therapy and having INR levels monitored, who have a level above 4.5 but under 10 without clinically relevant bleeding, the recommendation is to hold the drug temporarily. Reversal therapy is not a recommendation in this scenario.

If, however, a patient develops life-threatening bleeding with vitamin K antagonist therapy, treatment with intravenous vitamin K along with four-factor prothrombin complex concentrates (PCC) transfusion is the recommended appraoch. For patients receiving newer oral anticoagulant therapy and a life-threatening bleed, transfusion of four-factor PCC transfusion, the clinician can trial recombinant factor Xa infusion or inactivated-zhzo infusion. In some cases where the risk of life-threatening bleeding is high, clinicians may prefer dabigatran of the newer oral anticoagulation agents as idarucizumab is now available for the reversal of this agent. It is important to note that the reocmmendation is for resumption of anticoagulation after a major bleeding episode within 90 days.

**Heparin-Induced Thrombocytopenia**

Immune-mediated heparin-induced thrombocytopenia (HIT) typically occurs 5 to 10 days after exposure to heparin; this clinically manifests as thrombosis with thrombocytopenia and can be life-threatening. If a patient on heparin therapy has a decline of 50% of more after exposure to heparin, then HIT merits consideration, and antibodies to platelet factor 4 should be checked to make the diagnosis. All heparin containing products should be stopped immediately and should not be given to the patient again. It is important to note that anti-platelet factor 4 is a highly sensitive assay and is used to rule out the disease. If this test is positive, the diagnosis of HIT should be confirmed using the serotonin release assay or the heparin-induced platelet aggregation assay. Treatment for HIT associated thrombosis includes argatroban, bivalirudin, danaparoid, fondaparinux, or a non–vitamin K antagonist oral anticoagulant (such as rivaroxaban).

**Warfarin-Induced Skin Necrosis**

Warfarin induced skin necrosis is a rare complication of warfarin therapy and occurs in less than 0.1% of the population. Protein C deficiency is a risk factor for the development of this disorder. In patients with hereditary protein C deficiency, there is a rapid decrease in the concentration of protein C as compared to the other vitamin K-dependent procoagulant factors; this results in a temporary hypercoagulable state which can lead to thrombotic occlusions particularly of the microvasculature. These will clinically manifest as skin necrosis after initiation of warfarin therapy.