Stimulants make up a broad range of drugs; many find a use for recreational and performance enhancement reasons. Primary care clinicians (including MDs, DOs, NPOs, and PAs) can significantly improve healthcare outcomes by educating their patients on the short-term and long-term effects of stimulant use. While caffeine is a relatively safe stimulant, other stimulants used by athletes, students, and recreational users can pose a significant health threat. It is essential not to overlook them in the patient's social history gathering process. Furthermore, pharmacists are readily accessible by patients and hence can carry out a critical role in educating the public; this is especially true on pre-workout supplements containing various stimulants. When a patient is prescribed a stimulant, the pharmacist can verify that no drug-drug interactions exist that can lead to an adverse event. This again emphasizes the point already made about collecting an accurate patient social and medication/supplement history.

Monitoring patient stimulant usage is not confined to illicit, recreational, or non-prescribed use of these agents. When prescribing stimulant medications for legitimate purposes (ADHD, narcolepsy, etc.), the onus remains on the entire interprofessional team to monitor the patient's progress and condition and openly share information among all interprofessional team members. All healthcare team members, including clinicians, nurses, and pharmacists, must coordinate their activities and exercise open communication to help patients not misuse stimulant drugs. [Level 5]