Treatment aims to reduce hair loss, control the symptoms, and stop the scarring process. Regrowth should not be expected since the complete elimination of inflammation is unlikely. As there are no consistent markers to measure the progress of the disorder, therapy is based on perceived severity and patient tolerance to treatment. The duration of treatment should be guided by clinical response and relapse rates. General measures include avoiding chemical or physical insults to the hair (coloring or perming). Contrary to many patients' beliefs, the frequency of shampooing does not make a difference in the total number of hairs lost. Potent corticosteroids and topical tacrolimus are commonly used in all forms of primary cicatricial alopecia and are frequently considered first-line treatments. Antimalarial drugs are commonly used to treat lichen planopilaris. Hydroxychloroquine 200 mg twice daily is generally used and is often considered first-line systemic therapy. Improvement is usually seen within 6 months. Minoxidil helps maximize the hair growth of the remaining follicles. A new scoring system to assess response to treatment (lichen planopilaris activity index) has been proposed to document the course and response to treatment. It assigns numeric values to subjective and objective markers of the disease: symptoms (pruritus, pain, burning) and signs (erythema, perifollicular erythema, perifollicular scale), a measure of the activity (anagen pull test), and spreading of the condition. It intends to allow statistical comparison of pretreatment and posttreatment response.