Wrist arthrocentesis is a procedure that can be performed by an emergency physician, primary care physician, orthopedic surgeon, or nurse practitioner. Complications can be limited by understanding anatomy, using a sterile technique, and appropriate post-procedural care.

The procedure is usually performed in the emergency department or outpatient setting; further management is determined by the results of the synovial fluid analysis. Delaying the start of antibiotic therapy for suspicion of septic arthritis can be harmful. While many organisms can be the cause, an increased likelihood of Staphylococcus aureus as the most common cause should guide antibiotic choice.

Management of confirmed septic arthritis includes orthopedic consultation for joint aspiration and/or surgical drainage with antibiotics and temporary immobilization. Recovery has been shown to be good to excellent when surgical drainage has been performed within 10 hours of diagnosis. The standard surgical management involves open arthrotomy. Arthroscopic drainage has been shown to be beneficial as well due to shorter hospital stays, better joint visualization, and smaller incision sites. Needle aspiration is also a viable option; however, some surgeons suggest it should be used if the patient cannot undergo surgical intervention. Others have found serial needle aspiration with medical management to be a more beneficial management strategy for the patient. The procedure can be done bedside, require decreased staff and equipment, and shorter hospital stays without a difference in long-term outcomes.

Nurses are critical members of the interprofessional team. Nurses will provide post-procedural/post-operative care by monitoring vital signs, assessing for evidence of wound infection, or worsening pain, and are vital for patient education.

Interprofessional collaboration has shown to be cost-effective as well as increase staff satisfaction and provide a better understanding of patient care.