Aberrant function of the pulmonary system will inherently manifest in the form of hypoxia. There are four main classifications regarding the etiology of hypoxia: hypoventilation, right-to-left shunt, diffusion limitations, and ventilation/perfusion mismatching (V/Q mismatch).

**Hypoventilation**

Essentially, any pathology that decreases ventilation of the alveoli will lead to a hypoventilation defect. These can include central nervous system depression or malformation from neurologic deficit, Guillaine-Barre,  amyotrophic lateral sclerosis, or drug overdose where respiratory drive is decreased, obesity hypoventilation (excess weight of the chest prevents proper inflation), muscular weakness, or poor chest elasticity secondary to rib fracture or kyphoscoliosis.

**V/Q mismatch**

A ventilation-perfusion mismatch is as the name states, an imbalance between available ventilation and available arteriolar perfusion for oxygen to diffuse into circulation. Within a normal lung, there is variation throughout the tissue in response to oxygen and capillary demand. In the base of the lung, perfusion is relatively greater than ventilation leading to a V/Q which is lesser than in the apices. Bronchoconstriction in lung tissue normally occurs to reduce ventilation to poorly perfused lung regions, and likewise, vasoconstriction in capillary arterioles normally occurs in poorly ventilated regions of the lung. Combined, these mechanisms work to balance the V/Q ratio so that the net effect is heterogeneous ventilation and perfusion with minimal pathological dead space or shunting. In disease states such as pulmonary vascular diseases, interstitial disease, or obstructive lung disease, the ratio of available lung ventilation to capillary perfusion is skewed, netting hypoxic environments.

**Right-to-left shunt**

A right-to-left shunt is a pathological alternate pathway of circulation that allows deoxygentated blood to bypass the lungs from the right side of the heart to the left side of the heart. Subsequently, oxygenation does not occur. Shunting is an example of extreme V/Q mismatching. Two main types of shunt exist: anatomical and physiological.  Anatomical shunts include intracardiac shunts, pulmonary arteriovenous malformations (AVMs), and hepatopulmonary syndrome. A physiological shunt exists when nonventilated alveoli remain perfused, thus functioning as a shunt even though there is not an anatomic anomaly. Examples include pneumonia and acute respiratory distress syndroime.

**Diffusion limitation**

Diffusion limitation exists when movement of oxygen from alveoli to pulmonary vasculature is impaired. This etiology is characterized by fibrosis of the lung and parenchymal destruction of alveoli leading to a decreased surface area of alveoli tissue. Often diffusion abnormalities are coexistant with V/Q mismatching and are most prevelant undxer exercise conditions. During rest, blood flow through the lung arterioles is slow enough to allow for proper diffusion, regardless of an increased A-a gradient. However, under exercise conditions, cardiac output increases. When this occurs, there is less time for oxygenation to occur in the lung which leads to transient hypoxia. Examples of limited diffusion disease include lung fibrosis and chronic obstructive pulmonary disease.