The number of systemic agents available for use in low-grade gliomas is quite limited. This is at least partly due to the blood-brain barrier, which prevents higher concentrations of these agents in the CNS. Targeted therapies also have a role in treating some of these malignancies.

Procarbazine, lomustine, and vincristine, typically delivered adjuvant after radiotherapy or surgery, is one of the original treatment regimens investigated prospectively. RTOG 9802 investigated the use of adjuvant PCV after radiotherapy in patients with high-risk low-grade gliomas.

Temozolomide (TMZ) is an oral alkylating agent that has been used in the treatment of both low- and high-grade gliomas. It typically alkylated guanine residues at the N-7 or O-6 positions. It can be delivered alone, in conjunction with radiotherapy, or as adjuvant treatment after radiotherapy. The efficacy of this medication is thought to be impacted by the expression or silencing O-6-methylguanine-DNA methyltransferase (MGMT) gene. When the gene is expressed in tumor cells, it removes methyl groups from the O-6 position, thus reversing the effect of the drug. Regardless, NCCN guidelines still recommend its use irrespective of MGMT methylation status.

On further follow-up, the 5 and 10-year overall survival was 60.9% and 34.6%.

Targeted therapies such as BRAF/MEK inhibitors may be appropriate in certain gliomas, such as pilocytic astrocytomas, pleomorphic xanthoastrocytoma (PXA), and ganglioneuromas. Patients that are incompletely resected or have progression with a BRAF V600E activating mutations may be eligible for Dabrafenib/trametinib or vemurafenib/cobimetinib. These drugs arrest cell growth by inhibiting B-Raf (dabrafenib and vemurafenib) and MEK (trametinib and cobimetinib), which are part of the Ras-Raf-MEK-ERK pathway that stimulates cell proliferation. For subependymal giant cell astrocytomas, an mTOR inhibitor such as everolimus may be considered.

In the setting of recurrent disease, systemic treatments for recurrent LGG can be considered alone, concurrent with radiotherapy, or adjuvantly. PCV, TMZ, or lomustine alone can be considered. PCV or TMZ can be considered after radiotherapy as well. Platinum-based therapies may also be used in cases of progression through other first-line treatments. The TAVAVEC trial investigating the combination of bevacizumab with TMZ in recurrent WHO Grade II and III gliomas failed to demonstrate any improvement in overall or progression-free survival. Another phase 3 trial is conducted to compare RT with adjuvant temozolomide versus RT with adjuvant PCV in anaplastic or low-grade co-deleted gliomas. (NCT00887146) Clinical trials targeting the mutant IDH protein are also underway.

Regardless of the initial management, low-grade gliomas ultimately regrow. Increasing enhancement might develop, and when operated on, the tissue might have transformed into a high-grade glioma by histopathology. This phenomenon is called malignant transformation. Management of patients at this stage would be to treat the alternative treatment, which they did not receive previously.