A highly illustrative example of the importance of active transport is the use of cardiac glycosides like digoxin, which inhibit sodium-potassium ATPase on cardiac cells. Employing primary active transport, this protein normally acts to extrude sodium out of myocytes in exchange for potassium into the cells. In the presence of cardiac glycoside, the intracellular sodium will be higher. This indirectly inhibits the sodium-calcium exchanger, which normally brings sodium into the cell in exchange for calcium leaving. As such, more calcium is unable to leave the cell, so more calcium can act intracellularly to stimulate cardiac contractility or positive inotropy, implicating its usage in diseases that have decreased inotropy like heart failure. Because potassium is kept in the extracellular space, it can build up and cause hyperkalemia.

The above mentioned renal tubular defects, like Bartter syndrome, share similar cellular mechanisms as many diuretics, which may target the very same channels. Similar to Bartter syndrome, loop diuretics also block the sodium-potassium-chloride-chloride channels of the kidneys, preventing reabsorption of salts and the water that follows along with it to aid in treating edema and hypertension. Thiazide diuretics similarly work by blocking the kidney's sodium-chloride channels.

Active transport may also be necessary for the effectiveness of certain drugs. Aminoglycosides get transported into cells via oxygen-dependent active transport, so they cannot work on anaerobic bacteria.