# Continuing Education Activity

Darier disease, also known as keratosis follicularis, is a genodermatosis that is inherited in an autosomal dominant fashion. The disease classically features keratotic papules and longitudinal eyrthronychia. It is rare and distributed worldwide. Mutations in the ATP2A2 gene cause Darier disease. This gene encodes a calcium pump in the endoplasmic reticulum. The condition has a high penetrance but has variable expressivity. That means that every person that inherits the genotype will have some manifestation of the disease, but its severity and features will not be the same across all affected persons. Because of this, patients with the disease cannot always recall a family history. Thus, it is important not to exclude Darier disease based solely on a negative family history of the disease. Sunlight, heat, infections, and friction can exacerbate the condition. This activity reviews the evaluation and treatment of Darier disease and the role of the interprofessional team in managing this rare condition.

**Objectives:**
- Review the frequency of Darier disease.
- Outline the presentation of patients with Darier disease.
- Describe the management of Darier disease.
- Summarize the role of the interprofessional team in managing this rare condition.

# Introduction

Darier disease, also known as keratosis follicularis, is a genodermatosis inherited in an autosomal dominant fashion.

# Etiology

Mutations in the ATP2A2 gene cause Darier disease.

# Epidemiology

Darier disease is rare, with a prevalence of 1 per 100,000.

# Pathophysiology

A mutation in the ATP2A2 gene causes Darier disease. This gene encodes a calcium pump in the endoplasmic reticulum called SERCA2.

In addition to aberrant junctional protein processing, a decrease in calcium stores in the endoplasmic reticulum activates a cellular stress response. The cellular stress response may explain two critical features of the disease: dyskeratosis seen on pathology and disease triggers. On histology, Darier disease is characterized by corps ronds, which are rounded keratinocytes. These keratinocytes likely represent dyskeratotic and/or apoptotic cells. This dyskeratosis/apoptosis is thought to result from the cellular stress response induced by depleted calcium stores in the endoplasmic reticulum.

Expanding on this concept can help differentiate the pathogenesis and histopathology of Darier disease from those of a related entity, Hailey-Hailey disease. On histology, both conditions have some level of dyskeratosis/apoptosis and acantholysis. Darier disease usually shows more dyskeratosis than Hailey-Hailey disease. Hailey-Hailey disease is caused by a mutation in the ATP2C1 gene, which encodes a calcium pump in the Golgi apparatus.

There are two segmentally distributed clinical variants in Darier disease. To understand these variants, one must first understand mosaicism. Autosomal dominant disorders display two types of mosaicism. A post-zygotic mutation causes type 1 mosaicism, meaning that some cells have the change and others do not. In dermatology, type 1 mosaicism presents with areas of diseased skin intermixed with areas of healthy skin reflecting the cells with and without the mutation, respectively. The affected skin often follows lines of Blaschko, reflecting an embryonic migration of skin cells. Type 2 mosaicism arises from a postzygotic mutation in a patient that already has a "prezygotic" mutation. This patient starts with one mutation, or disease allele, in all cells. Then another mutation happens farther into the cell division process that only some of the cells will have. These cells will have two mutations or two dominant alleles for the disease.

# Histopathology

Dyskeratosis and acantholysis on histopathology characterize Darier disease. Dyskeratosis is premature keratinization of keratinocytes and is related to apoptosis. In Darier disease, this is seen as corps ronds.

# History and Physical

The skin manifestations of Darier disease consist of hyperkeratotic papules and plaques. These lesions develop in seborrheic and intertriginous areas.

Nail findings include red and white lines oriented longitudinally over the nail. Patients can also have V-shaped notches at the distal end of the nail plate along with nail fragility. In 50% of patients with Darier disease, the oral mucosa is involved.

# Evaluation

Clinical and histopathologic correlation diagnose Darier disease. Family history may be helpful in the diagnosis. However, due to its variable expressivity, affected patients cannot always recall a family history of the illness.

# Treatment / Management

The avoidance of triggers is paramount in preventing exacerbations of Darier disease. Triggers can include sunlight, heat, occlusive clothing, and friction.

Keratolytic moisturizers containing lactic acid or urea can treat the hyperkeratosis/scale.

# Differential Diagnosis

The differential diagnosis includes acanthosis nigricans, confluent and reticulated papillomatosis, seborrheic dermatitis, and acrokeratosis verruciformis of Hopf.

This histological differential diagnosis includes Hailey-Hailey disease, pemphigus vulgaris, and Grover disease.

# Prognosis

The disease persists for life in a relapsing-remitting manner. Avoiding triggers and using the appropriate treatments can allow for at least partial control of the disease.

# Complications

One serious complication for patients with Darier disease is susceptibility to serious bacterial and viral cutaneous infections, including human papillomavirus, herpes simplex virus,  and poxvirus infections.

# Deterrence and Patient Education

Environmental factors influence the appearance of plaques and papules in Darier disease. Most patients will experience an increase in these lesions during summer when exposed to heat and humidity. Exposure to UV light, friction (e.g., tight-fitting clothing), minor injury or friction such as occurs with rubbing or scratching, and ingesting certain medications can also increase the appearance of lesions. Therefore patient s need to receive counsel on these precipitating factors so they can practice appropriate preventative measures.

# Enhancing Healthcare Team Outcomes

Darier disease is a rare genetic skin disorder that has no cure. The disorder is treated symptomatically. The avoidance of triggers is paramount in preventing exacerbations of Darier disease. The primary care provider, internist, dermatologist, nurse practitioner/PA, nursing staff, and pharmacist should function as an interprofessional team to educate the patient on avoiding triggers like sunlight, heat, occlusive clothing, and friction.

Because the disorder has a profound effect on cosmesis, a mental health consult may be necessary to manage depression and anxiety.