Hematoma: 0.9%. Meticulous hemostasis is the key to prevention, and surgical reintervention to control bleeders.

Facial paralysis: when anatomically identified and branches are known to be intact, the most probable cause of the paralysis is stretching. This is also supported by the significantly more common incidence of paresis/paralysis in total parotidectomy when compared to superficial parotidectomy. The incidence of transient paralysis is somewhere between 16.6% to 34%, and 90% will recover within 1 month; however, it could last as long as 18 months. The ability to close the eye without any corneal exposure needs to be assessed and preventive measures should be taken to prevent exposure keratitis: ophthalmic drops and ointments, ophthalmologist consultation, gold weights, and botulinum toxin are all potential treatment options in this interim.

Seroma: managed by needle aspiration and compression dressing.

Surgical site infection: prophylactic antibiotics are controversial. Extensive procedures with neck dissection +/- free flap reconstruction are at higher risk of infection and benefit from perioperative antibiotics. In more standard parotidectomy, intraoperative antibiotics are sufficient in most patients.

Frey’s syndrome: more accurately referred to as gustatory sweating. Patients report facial swelling and sweating at the site of the parotidectomy in occurrence with meals. Etiology is believed to be aberrant innervation of the sweat glands with branches emerging from the auriculotemporal nerve after their division during surgery. This provides parasympathetic innervation to the normally sympathetic-innervated sweat glands

First bite syndrome (FBS): painful spasm in the parotid region occurring at the first bite during mastication and decreasing afterward. This pain accompanies each meal usually. It is a unique complication of surgeries targeting the deep lobe of the parotid gland, the parapharyngeal space, and the infratemporal fossa. Presumed etiology is the loss of sympathetic innervation of the parotid gland, which will lead to relative parasympathetic overstimulation, resulting in the contraction of parotid myoepithelial cells. This is supported by the fact that Linkov, et al., only had one case of FBS when the entire parotid gland was removed. This case had ectopic parotid tissue left in place. Leaving the superficial lobe in place was found to carry a higher risk of FBS. Treatment is often challenging and begins with carbamazepine, which must be titrated. Most patients report improvement with time but never complete recovery. This is thankfully exceedingly rare, and really only encountered in extensive parotidectomy and extended neck dissections that violate the deep fascia of the floor of the neck, traumatizing the superior cervical ganglion.

Loss of sensation around the ear, especially the lobule, occurs frequently. Significant but incomplete improvement is expected within one year. Preservation of the posterior branch of the great auricular nerve will hasten recovery.

Amputation neuroma might occur when the GAN is transected; treatment is by simple excision.

Surgical site depression occurs proportionally to the amount of tissue resected. Reconstruction with an SCM flap is helpful, but it has the drawback of creating a defect in the neck. An autologous fat graft can also be used.

Trismus: inflammation of the master muscle, transient, and mild.

Sialocele, or salivary fistula, is the result of the communication of a salivary duct or the gland with the skin. Saliva will be excreted through the wound. The incidence of this complication is between 4% and 14%. Treatment is by applying frequent drainage and compressive dressing. Sometimes decreasing oral intake is necessary; even completion parotidectomy has been suggested. Botulinum toxin injection offers a good therapeutic outcome by blocking the salivary flow.