According to the CDC, approximately 60 million, or 1 in 5, Americans live in rural or underserved areas of the United States. Every rural and underserved area is as unique as the residents that inhabit those areas, and unfortunately, no blanket strategy can be applied to every situation or community. Continued innovation, modernization, and original thought will be needed to confront the challenges in delivering effective, goal-directed healthcare to vulnerable populations. Many times, communities have disaster plans in place, and reference to these plans would be the first step in developing a rural public health referral network. Reference to the local disaster plan will answer many initial questions posed. However, existing disaster plans are usually designed with a focus on natural disasters or infrastructure breakdowns.

The COVID-19 pandemic has highlighted that these plans should be reviewed to include public health crises as well. As has been established objectively, the current pandemic has caused more cumulative death and economic damage than the entirety of the last decade of natural disasters. Each community will have its own disaster plan review frequency; however, an annual review would be prudent as technology advances rapidly, and systems are changing at a torrid pace. Population shifts across the country have been common since the outset of the current COVID-19 pandemic, and plan review should consider the shifting local demographics and population density.

The following are some basic yet broad ideas to assist in establishing referral systems in rural and underserved areas. These suggestions are the authors' opinion and are not comprehensive nor exclusive to this article and are meant as a starting point in assessing local referral networks and, in particular, referrals for monoclonal antibody treatments.

A first step would be to assess existing local facilities with the ability to provide monoclonal antibody treatment that is adequately staffed with trained nurses and medical professionals. If no such facility exists, what is the next closest facility? Then, a plan can be developed to refer and, if needed, mobilize local residents to these facilities. The following is a suggested framework to develop a logical, sensible plan to establish a referral system for high-risk residents of rural or underserved to get monoclonal antibody treatment.

- **Look at the local public health problem from a broad lens with respect to the local community.**

- 
              
- Each local community is different. Consider the unique challenges of the local community, including basic infrastructure.
              
              
- Work to identify why the community is facing challenges. 
              
              
- Is public transit available?  

- Is local ride-sharing available? Would partnership with a ride-sharing system make sense?

- 
**Compile a database of available resources and projected needs.**

- 
              
- Human resource needs.
              
              
- 
                  
- Who are the local subject matter experts?
                  
                  
- 
                      
- Local clinicians
                      
                      
- Local engineers
                      
                      
- Others with expertise in respect to the issue at hand
                      
                    

                  
                  
- Who will keep medical records? How will the integrity and confidentiality of the records be ensured?
                  
                  
- Will the private sector be involved? If so, who? Have these stakeholders been contacted and brought into decision-making?
                  
                

              
              
- Resident needs 
              
              
- 
                  
- Educational content for residents to promote understanding of COVID-19 disease, vaccinations for COVID-19, and monoclonal antibody therapy
                  
                  
- Responsible social media and local municipal informational webpages
                  
                  
- Engagement with local civic and religious leaders with reach to assist with education and information distribution
                  
                

              
              
- Operational Needs

- With the COVID-19 Pandemic, PPE was an early need. Should stockpiles be considered for future use? How might another public health crisis occur, and in what form will it appear?
- Will food, transportation, water, etc., be needed?
- Storage facilities? Mobile operating centers? Mobile resource delivery?

- **Prioritization of goals**.

- 
              
- What is the overall goal of the plan? Focus on a few specific overall goals rather than a broad array of ideas.
              
              
- Align goals with resources availability.

- Is setting up telehealth access sensible if there is no or limited broadband available to the residents.
- Would setting up testing centers for COVID-19 be practical just because tests are available, but no treatment facility exists?

- **Implementation policies that make sense for the local community**
- Establishing public trust at the outset of any plan will increase the chances of public buy-in and successful implementation. A strong argument can be made that establishing public trust should be a continual and primary objective of all local civic organizations.

As always, an interprofessional team will likely be most effective in solving the community's unique challenges as each member will bring a different perspective to the table. This team could include local civic leaders and members of larger organizations with reach, connection, and established trust within the community residents. Local clinicians, allied health providers, and nurses should be included in the problem-solving process concerning public health. Efforts should also be explicitly made to ensure those residents that are the targets of the policy and all vulnerable populations are included in the decision-making process. Thorough, nonjudgemental, and collaborative communication will be key in not only meeting the challenges faced but also in making effective changes in a timely manner so that the local residents may benefit dynamically rather than at some non-explicit point in the future as well as making changes that are sensible and reflect actual needs rather than theoretical ideas of needs.

Change in how healthcare is delivered will be met with skepticism, not all of which is unfounded. A large component of telehealth concern centers around the medicolegal and ethical aspects of healthcare delivery in this way. Practitioners cite concern with malpractice when practicing from "afar." While there are models for teleradiology and tele-neurology that are widely practiced, one of the comforts of these subspecialties is that an actual practitioner is physically present with the patient to ensure the reliability of information gathering and physical exam findings. With the continued rollout of telehealth, safety measures will need to be considered to alleviate practitioner fears of malpractice and ensure the integrity of care.

Basic ethical tenants to consider are:

- Beneficence - providing services that generally promote good for the individual and community

- Non-Maleficence - doing no harm to the individual or community

- Justice - treating every situation/resident equally

- Autonomy - allowing residents their own choice in care

Consider for a moment an elderly patient who has been contacted via telehealth. The practitioner determines that this patient would benefit from monoclonal antibody therapy. The patient has agreed that treatment may be helpful and wishes to proceed. However, the patient has no transportation. In another scenario, a known more remote part of the community has poor cellphone service and minimal high-speed internet. Yet, a few miles closer, these issues do not exist, and cell phone service is excellent. How would the gap be closed to provide services to both groups? Even more, would residents who are not adequately informed and educated about COVID-19 disease, vaccinations, and monoclonal antibody therapy, really be able to make a truly autonomous decision?

**COVID-19 Community Vulnerability Index (CCVI) Tool**

Objectively, the COVID-19 Community Vulnerability Index (CCVI) tool is designed after the CDC's Social Vulnerability index.

- Socioeconomic status

- Minority status and transportation

- Household and transportation

- Epidemiological factors

- Healthcare system factors

- High-risk environments

- Population density

Each of the above themes has its own score of zero, the lowest vulnerability, and 1, the highest vulnerability. Based on these indicators, CCVI can predict why and where there would be worse health, social, and economic outcomes after COVID 19. CCVI offers information for local and state leaders to help understand where there are limited resources. This scoring system helps them identify these areas in need and where to focus interventions such as equipment for healthcare systems, quarantine accommodation, or support for rent payments depending on the community's vulnerability index.

The action-oriented solution that CCVI offers allows one to identify the area of deficit, prepare a plan and address the gaps identified, respond with target-specific interventions and resources, and finally monitor the outcome of the response and how it impacts the vulnerability of the community. Each of the seven indicators incorporated into CCVI has associated interventions that help reduce the community's vulnerability. Below are some listed interventions that could be taken when a deficit is identified in each underlying driver of vulnerability.

- Socioeconomic Status

- Financial relief for lower-income bracket individuals
- Free or low-cost testing and vaccines

- Minority Status and Transportation

- Tailor communication and channels for specific populations if needed

- Household and Transportation

- Public-private partnerships for access to transportation for testing or healthcare
- Mobile testing and vaccine sites

- Epidemiological Factors

- Support stay at home with financial and food support of those at most risk
- Allow highly vulnerable individuals to avoid contaminated workspaces

- Healthcare System Factors

- Enact mobile or temporary emergency response facilities
- Local nonprofit and other community organizations to help fill gaps

- High-risk environments

- Prisons, Nursing homes
- Resources for testing, tracing, and isolation of cases
- Frequent Health inspections of conditions and employment conditions to avoid outbreaks
- Support self-isolation
- Continue rapid testing within these high-risk environments
- Limit capacities within these facilities.

- Population Density

- Mask mandates

- Public area capacity limits

- Minimize non-essential indoor events

Lastly, the CCVI tool allows local and state leaders to identify areas of need and where to delegate resources. This tool also allows these leaders to continue to monitor and see how these changes and resources affect the community's vulnerability. Ultimately, each community is vested in itself and will be the most likely to affect positive change locally; this is especially true for rural areas as these communities are smaller, closer-knit, and not as subject to the bureaucracy known to bog down effective change in larger communities.

In conclusion, the questions and ideas posed are not intended to be answers for any single community. Simply these questions and ideas are posed to generate thought and assist in starting the necessary conversations to develop a plan that will best suit each local communities needs. As demonstrated, rural and underserved communities face a multitude of challenges, and no one-size-fits-all solution is available.