For the emergency contraceptive, the timing of when patients ingest the drug plays a significant role in its efficacy in preventing pregnancy; this means the adverse effect of pregnancy occurring become greater when the patient waits over 48 to 72 hours or longer to take the drug as well as taking the medication during an ovulation cycle. Many studies have shown an efficacy reduction in women whose BMI is greater than 30 kg/m^2, but not significant enough to restrict this subset of patients from using levonorgestrel, which appears to be due to the lower bioavailability of a standard 1.5 mg dose given of levonorgestrel, free plus albumin-bound, in these patients. The most common side effects are menstrual abnormalities, amenorrhea, dysmenorrhea, oligomenorrhea, headaches, and acne.  Other side effects that can occur are nausea and vomiting. Importantly, this drug does not protect any patient from sexually transmitted infections and diseases, and the advice to patients is to use condoms for protection from such.

For the intrauterine device, there is 0.1% of pregnancy occurring within the first year of use. The intrauterine device most commonly causes menstrual irregularities, including amenorrhea and oligomenorrhea. Other side effects of the intrauterine device are similar to those of the combined oral contraceptive pill route, such as ovarian cysts, weight gain, depression, acne, and low libido.

Drug-Drug Interactions:

The following may diminish the therapeutic effect of progestins: acitretin, anticoagulants, antidiabetic agents, barbiturates, carbamazepine, fosphenytoin, griseofulvin, mifepristone, phenytoin, primidone, retinoic acid derivatives, and St. John's wort.

The following may decrease the serum concentration of progestins: aprepitant, artemether, bexarotene, bile acid sequestrants, bosentan, brigatinib, clobazam, CYP3A4 inducers, dabrafenib, darunavir, efavirenz, encorafenib, eslicarbazepine, exenatide, felbamate, fosaprepitant,  ixazomib, lamotrigine, lesinurad, lixisenatide, lopinavir, lorlatinib, lumacaftor, metreleptin, mycophenolate, nelfinavir, nevirapine, oxcarbazepine, perampanel, rifamycin derivatives, saquinavir, sugammadex, and topiramate.

The following may increase the serum concentration of progestins: atazanavir, cobicistat, tipranavir, and voriconazole.

The following may enhance the thrombogenic effect of progestins: C1-inhibitors and carfilzomib.