Femoral artery aneurysm is generally repaired using the open surgical technique. Endovascular placement of stent-grafts across the inguinal ligament is currently not considered the standard of care. It has been described in the management of femoral pseudoaneurysms in hemodynamically unstable patients. Some authors have also described a hybrid approach to the repair of femoral artery aneurysms whereby endografts were used with limited open dissection.

In a patient with multiple other aneurysms (such as aortic or popliteal), the symptomatic aneurysm should be addressed first. If multiple coexisting aneurysms are all asymptomatic, they should be addressed in s staged manner. Ultrasound can be helpful in planning the extent of the surgical incision. Also, if there is a preoperative CT scan or MRI, they can guide the surgeon in this regard as well. We usually perform a vertical incision in the groin for repairing femoral artery aneurysms instead of a transverse incision. An aneurysm may involve the proximal portions of the profunda and superficial femoral arteries. A vertical or longitudinal incision provides better exposure in case one encounters such a scenario. Once normal proximal and distal arterial segments are dissected out, the patient is systemically heparinized. Once the heparin has circulated for an adequate amount of time, vascular clamps are placed proximally and distally. An aneurysmectomy is performed, followed by the placement of an end-to-end interposition graft. If the proximal portions of the profunda and superficial femoral arteries are involved, a graft with a Y configuration may be used. Other configurations, depending on the aneurysm anatomy, maybe fashioned with combined use of a bovine pericardial patch or venous patch or re-implantation of superficial femoral or deep femoral artery as needed. Completion angiography can be performed if the patient had any preoperative evidence of distal embolization.