By keeping the feet warm, dry, and clean, trench foot can be avoided. During World War I, the institution of regular foot inspections was found to decrease the incidence of the disease. The soldiers were paired up and were instructed to watch the feet of their partner. It was found that a soldier was more likely to remove his boots and dry his socks and feet if he was reminded to do so by his fellow soldier. After thousands of cases were seen, soldiers were ordered to have 3 pairs of socks with them at all times and were told to change rotate the pairs at least twice a day.   Whale oil was also provided to the soldiers to rub on their feet after they were dry to help prevent trench foot. Historically, a battalion (up to 1000 men) at the front in World War I, could use up to 10 gallons of whale oil on any given day. To help prevent trench foot, wooden boards, known as duckboards, were used to cover the wet, muddy, cold ground in the trenches. Troop rotation was also used to limit an individual soldier’s exposure. As World War I progressed, the incidence of the disease declined due to the measures mentioned above.

The best treatment for trench foot is prevention. Some of these methods are outlined above. It was critical that soldiers changed their socks frequently and made sure their feet were dry to avoid the condition. During World War I, as the understanding of the disease progressed, the treatment of trench foot also evolved. Early on, bedrest was recommended, and the application of numerous different agents was tried at one time or another. Among these included a mixture of lead and opium, alcohol of different types, mercuric chloride in alcohol, tincture of iodine, oil of wintergreen, picric acid, and chloral hydrate mixed with camphor. Some powders were also used including boric acid, starch, zinc, and salicylic acid. Radiant heat, complex methods of massage, and even different types of electrical stimulation were tried in treating trench foot when the initial treatments failed. However, once the disease progressed to a severe case, the mainstay of treatment was surgical, similar to the treatment of gangrene. Many times, the patient ended up with an amputation.

Current treatment recommendations are with slow passive rewarming of the affected extremity with adequate pain control with amitryptiline or other modalities for neuropathic pain.