Sunscreen should be applied topically. Correct administration is key to the effectiveness of use. A liberal uniform film of sunscreen should be applied, and the application should be 15 minutes before sun exposure. The adequate amount to apply is 2 mg/cm^2, equivalent to 30 mL/ body application. Sunscreen should be reapplied every 2 hours and after sweating or swimming.

Clothing is a form of photoprotection, which can be measured using the UV protection factor.

Hats are a variable form of photoprotection dependent on the brim width, material, and weaving. A hat with a brim width of more than 7.5 cm has an SPF of 7 for the nose, 5 for the neck, 3 for the cheeks, and 2 for the chin. A hat with a brim width of 2.5 to 7.5 cm has an SPF of 3 for the nose, 2 for the neck and cheek, and 0 for the chin. A hat with a brim of less than 2.5 cm has an SPF of 1.5 for the nose and a minimal amount for the chin and neck.

The pigment content of makeup provides an SPF of 3 to 4, even if there is no sunscreen included; however, this photoprotective effect is lost 4 hours after application. Many foundations now include UV filters to provide photoprotection.

Sunglasses are a form of photoprotection for the eyes. Sun exposure can result in many eye conditions, such as cataracts, which direct result from sun exposure, specifically UVB radiation. Chronic exposure results in the formation of cataracts and eye cancer. Sunglasses should absorb 99% to 100% of the full UV spectrum. Contact lenses can also provide photoprotection for the ocular lens; however, they do not protect the anterior portion of the eye.

Car windshields offer UV protection. The Federal Motor Vehicle Safety Standard No. 205 mandates that the tinted glass in cars provide no less than 70% transmission of visible radiation. The windshields of cars contain zinc, chrome, nickel, and other metals which block UV radiation. The windshield of the vehicle is more photoprotective than the side window glass of the automobile.