- The most common adverse effect in healthy individuals is dysgeusia, particularly with the nasal spray, which is most likely due to the route of the drug's administration. Other minor adverse events that have been documented with intranasal zolmitriptan use are nasal passage irritation, dizziness, throat irritation, and fatigue. Additionally, Phase 1 trials of the Real Life Intranasal Zolmitriptan Exposure (REALIZE) study demonstrated that side effects did not cause participants to discontinue the medication.****The Treatment of Acute Migraine Headache in Adolescents (TEENZ) was a double-blind, randomized control trial composed of over 700 pediatric participants. Its results further substantiate the trend in adverse events reported in the REALIZE trial, with dysgeusia being the most frequent adverse event**.**

- Cardiovascular adverse drug reactions include increased systolic blood pressure in the elderly and increased diastolic blood pressure in both the elderly and young people. Additionally, there is the side effect of a dose-related increase in sedation.

- There is a risk of headaches caused by medication withdrawal or medication overuse.

- Zolmitriptan has a weak affinity for 5-HT 1A receptors; these receptors have implications for the development of serotonin syndrome. The constellation of autonomic and neuromuscular symptoms that comprise the serotonin syndrome can occur in response to the activation of central and peripheral 5-hydroxytryptamine receptors—mainly the 5-HT 1A and 2A receptors subtypes.

- Risk in patients with phenylketonuria: Zolmitriptan orally disintegrating tablets contain phenylalanine (a component of aspartame). Phenylalanine is harmful to patients with phenylketonuria (PKU). However, zolmitriptan tablets do not contain phenylalanine. (manufacturer's labeling)

- Postmarketing case report of transient myopia and increased intraocular pressures in a woman who had been using increasing amounts of zolmitriptan for over a year.

- Hepatotoxicity: Rare individual reports of cholestatic hepatitis after using zolmitriptan. Typically, the onset of injury was within 1 to 2 weeks of taking several doses of the zolmitriptan for a long and severe migraine attack.

**Drug-Drug Interactions**

- Cimetidine, a CYP1A2 inhibitor, increases zolmitriptan and 183C91 in the systemic circulation, therefore increasing the body's exposure to its vasoconstrictive action; this indicates the need to reduce the total daily dose of zolmitriptan in those taking such inhibitors.

- Zolmitriptan did not demonstrate significant interactions with acetaminophen or metoclopramide, which are often part of a regimen to treat headache symptoms.

- Oral contraceptive use in female study participants did not significantly impact the efficacy or tolerability of the medicine.