Western Equine encephalitis has been reported in the western United States and Canada. There is a sub-type that has been reported in Argentina with an endemic reservoir in South America.

Most cases have occurred west of the Mississippi River, west of the Rocky Mountains, and in California. The annual incidence of reported infections is highly variable due to periods of inactivity punctuated by outbreaks. Warm weather and heavy rainfall tend to increase vector populations leading to epidemics. Transmission is most common in rural areas. The most significant outbreak occurred in 1941, with over 3000 confirmed human cases. Since 1964 there have been fewer than 700 confirmed cases in the United States. Cases are more commonly reported in males, about twice the rate as females, possibly due to an increased likelihood of outdoor occupations and activities. Transmission is most likely between April and September, with peaks in July and August. During epidemics, a large portion of the population seroconverts but infectivity rates vary with age. Infants are most commonly infected as they have the greatest likelihood of contracting the virus after a mosquito bite. Adults are more commonly targeted by the vector but have lower infectivity rates. However, when they are infected, older adults are more likely to develop more severe, neuroinvasive disease or to die. Infants and very young children are also more likely to develop neurologic manifestations of the disease and seizures. They are more likely than adults to develop permanent disability after infection. Reported infectivity rates are 1:1000 for adults, 1:58 for children aged 1-4, and 1:1 in infants.