Pemphigus vulgaris is caused by autoantibodies that target keratinocyte proteins (desmogleins). Acantholysis wherein there is a loss of keratinocyte to keratinocyte adhesion induced by the binding of circulating immunoglobulin G (IgG) autoantibodies to intercellular adhesion molecules.

Murine studies have shown that enzymatic inactivation of Dsg 1 and gene deletion of Dsg 3 results in pathology that is similar to PV. Also, the addition of IgG from patients with PV to mice results in pathology that is similar to PV. This phenomenon was observed to be dose-dependent and suggests that reducing the circulating levels of IgG against Dsg 1 and Dsg 3 can improve patient outcomes. In patients with the mucocutaneous disease, it was found that they have autoantibodies against Dsg 1 and Dsg 3, whereas patients with disease localized to their mucous membranes were only found to have autoantibodies against Dsg 3. This can be explained by the desmoglein compensation model in which there are Dsg 1 and Dsg 3 in the cutaneous epidermis and that having autoantibodies against just one of the desmogleins will not cause disease. However, due to the normal lack of Dsg 1 in mucous membranes, autoantibodies against only Dsg 3 will result in disease because Dsg 1 is not present to compensate for the inhibition of Dsg 3. The binding of antibodies to desmogleins has been confirmed by epitope mapping and is presumed to disrupt desmoglein binding by affecting steric hindrance. Another proposal of the pathophysiology in PV that may occur in addition to the above explanation is the desmoglein non-assembly depletion hypothesis. This theory suggests that autoantibodies not only bind desmoglein but that they also bind each other leading to crosslinking and the inability for desmosomes to maintain cell-cell adhesion.

PV has been shown to have a genetic component, although familial cases are uncommon.

Exposure to certain medications like penicillamine and captopril can trigger PV. Such a trigger can happen through the effects on binding to molecules involved in cell adhesion, influence on enzymes that mediate keratinocyte aggregation, and molecules involved in cell and by stimulating neoantigen formation.