While the LeFort I osteotomy is most commonly performed by oral and maxillofacial surgeons or other head and neck surgeons, the critical importance of an interdisciplinary team is pre-operatively, peri-operatively, intra-operatively, and post-operatively cannot be overlooked. Successful outcomes are contingent upon comprehensive multi-disciplinary care and support. Pre-operatively and post-operatively, the orthodontist plays a critical role in preparing the patient for orthognathic surgery and by providing input and expertise relative to the surgical treatment plan and the anticipated need for post-surgical orthodontics.

For patients with medical comorbidities, pre-operative optimization is essential to safe and successful surgery. Depending upon the patient’s medical conditions, pre-operative optimization may involve care coordination and planning by physicians and caregivers from multiple disciplines. Intra-operatively, the role of the anesthesiologist or anesthesia provider facilitates a safe surgery and emergence from general anesthesia. Coordination and discussion between the surgeon and the anesthesia provider with respect to desired intubation technique, risks versus benefits of hypotensive anesthesia and timing of hypotensive anesthesia, and planning ahead for potential airway issues posed by maxilla-mandibular fixation and postoperative edema. Hypotensive anesthesia has been shown to reduce blood loss and provider better visualization of the surgical field and shorten the length of hospital stay.

In the immediate post-operative period, the nursing team will play a vital role in patient education, providing psychosocial support, and ensuring that patients meet immediate post-operative milestones. The pharmacist and pharmacy team will play an important role in determining the appropriate post-operative medications for the patient balancing adequate pain control with minimization of deleterious side effects. The pharmacist also plays a role in devising appropriate and effective pain control regimens for patients at risk for over narcotization or respiratory depression, as is the case with obstructive sleep apnea patients or the morbidly obese. Proper nutrition is critical for wound healing; thus, nutritionists and Registered Dieticians play a vital role in determining appropriate caloric needs, supporting and facilitating a dietary regimen, ultimately minimizing postoperative complications and decreasing patient morbidity.