GABA receptor antagonists produce convulsant and stimulant effects and mainly have a use for research purposes. For example, bicuculline and gabazine are frequently used to dissect GABA-A receptor components in neurons functionally. These GABA receptor antagonists act as subtype-selective compounds and help to study the behavioral effects of the different GABA-A receptor subtypes.

Not all GABA-A receptor antagonists are convulsants, however, such as the drug bilobalide, derived from Ginkgo biloba. Bilobalide instead acts as an anticonvulsant and neuroprotectant by reducing the release of L-glutamate and reducing excitation, as well as inhibiting GABA synthesis via inhibition of glutamate decarboxylase.

Some GABA receptor antagonists, such as flumazenil, are used for the management of suspected benzodiazepine overdoses and reversal of benzodiazepine sedative effects associated with general anesthesia. Flumazenil is a benzodiazepine GABA-A receptor antagonist, preventing benzodiazepines from binding to the benzodiazepine binding site on GABA-A receptors and preventing the influx of chloride ions and resulting hyperpolarization, thus preventing the GABA-ergic inhibitory effects.

There has been further research in the clinical indications of flumazenil, with one study finding that flumazenil may improve the features of Parkinson disease.

Suramin is an anti-parasitic drug used to treat African human trypanosomiasis or sleeping sickness. However, research has shown that suramin may be used in the treatment of autism by normalizing the hyperactive response of the hypothalamus-pituitary-adrenal (HPA) axis by antagonizing GABA-A receptors.

One study found that sepranolone, a GABA-A receptor modulating steroid antagonist to the progesterone metabolite allopregnanolone, significantly reduced negative mood in women with premenstrual dysphoric disorder (PMDD).