There are several other causes for a painful, red eye with vision changes/loss that are frequently encountered in the primary care and ER setting.  It is important to keep a broad differential when evaluating an eye complaint as there can be significant overlap with patient's symptoms.  The following causes of a red, painful eye require special skills that must be used in each case to differentiate them.  These special skills include visual acuity testing, IOP measurements, slit lamp biomicroscopy, and fluoroscein staining.

Conjunctivitis can present as a painful red eye with photophobia.  Bacterial conjunctivitis can present with purulent discharge which is not present in uveitis.  Patients with viral or allergic conjunctivitis will usually have serous discharge; however, they can also be without discharge. Follicles of the palpebral conjunctiva and the lack of anterior chamber inflammation help make the diagnosis of conjunctivitis.  Chemosis (swelling of the conjunctiva, **Figure 1b**) is also a finding found in conjunctivitis but not in uveitis.

Keratitis is significant inflammation of the cornea. It frequently presents with pain, photophobia, and perilimbic injection (**Figure 1a**) and is most commonly seen in patients with a history of contact lens use.  In keratitis, the cornea is often clouded if not frankly opaque (i.e. corneal ulcer,**Figure 1f**with ring infiltrate), which is not seen in uveitis.  Also, the pupil is usually normal in shape in keratitis but maybe constricted in anterior uveitis due to posterior synechiea formation (**Figure 1d**).  Fluoroscein dye will identify a brightly staining epithelial defect when viewed under a cobalt light (**Figure 1g**, same patient as in 1f with epithelial defect identified by fluorescein dye).  The presence of stromal whitening (corneal infiltrate,**Figure 1f**) that is seen with keratitis is not seen with corneal abrasions.

Acute angle closure glaucoma can present as a painful red eye with a change in vision.  The patient may complain of a unilateral headache and maybe nauseous even to the point of vomiting.  The affected pupil is often mid-dilated and poorly reactive to light.  The IOP will be significantly increased in acute angle closure glaucoma and is typically seen in most causes of uveitis **Figure 1c**) should be performed in each case to properly evaluate and treat the patient.  The cornea may also be cloudy due to the acute rise in IOP in angle closure glaucoma.

A corneal abrasion will often cause severe eye pain, photophobia, and tearing. Patients will usually endorse a history of trauma to the affected eye.  A drop of proparacaine at time of evaluation will nearly, if not completely, treat the pain.  This sensitivity to topical anesthesia is not a feature of a uveitis of any type.  Examination with fluorescein will identify the abrasion as a brightly staining lesion of the cornea and unless infected, will not likely have a stromal infiltrate/whitening.

A panuveitis such as seen in acute retinal necrosis from herpes infections and endophthalmitis causes severe inflammation resulting in a red, painful eye.  A hypopyn may be found in the anterior chamber (**Figure 1e**).  As discussed elsewhere, this finding should raise alarm.  A dilated eye exam is required to identify retinal whitening seen in acute retinal necrosis and significant vitritis in endophthalmitis, and as such, likely require an ophthalmology consultation.   If these diagnoses are suspected, an emergent ophthalmology consult should be placed as both are ophthalmic emergencies with earlier treatment resulting in better outcomes.

**Most common causes of a red, painful eye:**

- Anterior uveitis

- Keratitis

- Corneal abrasion

- Acute angle closure glaucoma

- Conjunctivitis

- Scleritis