Ultrasound is a useful diagnostic tool for amniotic fluid assessment and fetal evaluation.

SDVP is considered a reliable method for assessing the amniotic fluid on ultrasound. It is performed by assessing a pocket of a maximal depth of amniotic fluid, free of the umbilical cord and fetal parts. Measurements of less than two centimeters indicate oligohydramnios. SDVP normally ranges from two to eight centimeters. Measurements greater than 8 cm indicate polyhydramnios with mild polyhydramnios defined as 8-11 cm, moderate polyhydramnios between 12 to 15 cm, and severe polyhydramnios greater than 16 cm. This is the more commonly practiced method due to its simplicity and comparability to the alternative method, safety, and a  better diagnostic choice for amniotic fluid assessment. It is associated with avoiding unnecessary interventions without affecting peripartum outcomes.

AFI is the quantitative sum of the vertical amniotic fluid measurement in four abdominal quadrants. The ultrasound transducer is placed perpendicularly to the maternal abdomen. The measured fluid should be at least 0.5 cm in width and be devoid of the umbilical cord or fetal extremities. A measured AFI of 5 to 25 cm is within normal limits. Values of less than 5 cm indicate oligohydramnios. Polyhydramnios is defined as a value greater than or equal to 25 cm and can be further classified into mild (25 to 30 cm), moderate (30.1 to 35 cm), or severe (more than 35 cm). Color Doppler can be utilized to identify the presence of the umbilical cord.

When polyhydramnios is diagnosed, the evaluation should identify an underlying cause. The most common causes of polyhydramnios are fetal malformations and genetic diseases, gestational diabetes mellitus (GDM), multiple pregnancies, fetal anemia, fetal infections such as parvovirus B19, rubella, and cytomegalovirus, toxoplasmosis and syphilis, and other conditions such as Bartter syndrome, neuromuscular disorders.

A fetal anatomy scan is routinely performed for all patients between 18 to 22 weeks of gestation to assess for fetal abnormalities and identify multiple gestations. In severe polyhydramnios, a fetal anatomic evaluation using ultrasound should screen for structural abnormalities including oral, esophageal, tracheal, or intestinal deformities, central nervous system defects, cardiac septal defects, pulmonary masses, diaphragmatic hernia, urogenital anomalies, evidence of hydrops fetalis, anatomic findings consistent with trisomies, and placental masses.

There is no consensus regarding the frequency and interval of growth scans. However, antepartum testing and growth scans in the third trimester may direct delivery timing.

Laboratory investigations may help identify an underlying cause for severe polyhydramnios. All pregnant women are tested for impaired glucose tolerance at 28 weeks gestations or earlier if deemed at increased risk for GDM (i.e., primary family history, previous history of diabetes, or obesity with BMI more than 30 kg/m2). GDM should be assessed to rule out maternal hyperglycemia as this is a common cause of polyhydramnios. Screening for congenital infections includes a VDRL (Venereal Disease Research Laboratory) for syphilis, IgM, and IgG for rubella and parvovirus B19, and labs for other TORCH infections, including HIV, hepatitis, cytomegalovirus (CMV), and toxoplasmosis. Additionally, amniocentesis and karyotyping may help diagnose genetic abnormalities, including trisomy 21, 18, and 13 but are not recommended for mild cases of polyhdramnios.

In the setting of maternal hemorrhage or fetal anemia, maternal blood type should be assessed to identify the risk for alloimmunization. The Rosette test can detect maternal-fetal hemorrhage by fetal D+ cells in maternal Rh-negative cells. Rh immunoglobulin should be administered for a positive Rossette test, and the Kleihauer-Betke test determines the dose. Fetal hydrops should prompt maternal antibody screening for D, C, Lewis, Kell, Duffy, and Kidd antibodies, which cause hemolytic disease of the newborn. In unclear etiologies of fetal anemia, maternal screening should also be performed for maternal hemolytic anemia risk factors, including Barts hemoglobin for alpha thalassemia.

If severe polyhydramnios is associated with a fetal anomaly and a normal chromosomal microarray analysis,  gene sequencing can detect a genetic abnormality of clinical significance.[