The procedure of sputum specimen collection is usually non-invasive. In medicine, it is comparatively simple. However, in some clinical settings, the approach may be more vigorous due to the inability of the patient to expel such fluid from the upper respiratory tract. Thus, some maneuvers of physiotherapy may be considered adjuvant for getting some material for the analysis. Commonly, the "deep cough" sample of the early morning is collected before eating or drinking anything to avoid bias in interpreting the results. At first, the patients need to rinse out the mouth with clear water for 10-15 seconds to eliminate any contaminants in the oral cavity. After expelling saliva, the patients then breathe in deeply three times to cough at 2-minutes intervals until bringing up some sputum. The sputum is then released in a sterile well-closed container provided by the medical professionals to the patient.

The medical professionals will check the amount and gross qualities of the sputum, which should be thick to allow a proper investigation by the laboratory medical staff. In several institutions, clear and runny samples are not acceptable for further microscopic or microbiological studies. In some settings, the procedure can be repeated until 10 to 20 mL of sputum sample has been collected. It is paramount that the lid of the container where the first fluid is collected is changed to avoid contaminations. If the patient has difficulties coughing up enough sputum, the medical professionals may apply some physiotherapeutic maneuvers, which allow the progressive release of the sputum. Routine sputum culture requires that one sample is collected and sent to the lab on the same day of collection. If the patient leaves the specimen in the refrigerator after collection, there is often a tolerance range, which may run well over 24 hours. In tuberculosis (TB), three sputum samples must be collected on three consecutive days and be returned to the clinical lab each day.

**Sputum induction**is a procedure used to collect adequate lower respiratory secretions from patients who have trouble producing sputum to aid the diagnosis of TB. In particular, patients with suspicion of miliary tuberculosis and/or tuberculous pleural effusion are often targeted using this adjuvant procedure. In such settings, the patient inhales nebulized hypertonic saline solution to liquefy airway secretions. This solution stimulates the patient's coughing and promotes the expectoration of airway secretions. The medical professionals prepare a 20 ml 3% hypertonic saline solution and inject it into the nebulizer cup filled with water. Similar to the non-adjuvant procedure, the patients are always required to wash their mouths thoroughly.

Moreover, the patients wear the nebulizer cup to cover the face and nose after sitting in an upright position. The patients inhale and exhale through the mouthpiece. An expectorate saliva into an emesis bowl and expectorate sputum coughed up are collected into a sterile well-closed container. The medical staff turns on the nebulizer device to allow the patient to inhale the hypertonic mist for approximately five minutes. Then the patients take several deep breaths before attempting to cough. If there are difficulties for the patients to cough up the sputum, the medical staff may use gentle chest physiotherapy to aid the patients to produce sputum. During the procedure, the patients should be observed closely by the medical staff to identify any potential rupture of pleural bullae, triggering a life-threatening pneumothorax. The patients should stop when 1 to 2 mL sputum specimen is collected for each sample or reach 15 minutes of nebulization, or the patient complains of chest tightness, dyspnoea, or wheeze. Imaging is advised if there is the persistence of these symptoms at the end of the sputum collection.

**Bronchoscopy**is a procedure used to investigate the throat and airway through a thin viewing camera. It is also used to collect the sputum samples in some special situations such as a persistent infection, cough, or something unusual seen on clinical laboratory tests or chest X-rays. The sputum specimen will be examined under a microscope to detect whether abnormal cells are present. Flexible bronchoscopy is used more often than rigid bronchoscopy to collect the sputum samples. Before having a flexible bronchoscopy, the doctor may give the patient anesthetic to relax the throat muscles and numb the mouth, nasal passages, or throat. The procedure is performed using a thin and lighted bronchoscope inserted through the mouth or nose, down to the throat into the windpipe (trachea), and then to the major bronchi leading to the lungs. Sputum samples may be taken using the devices passed through the bronchoscope by the doctor.