**Stress**

There are two ways to perform stress testing:

- Exercise

- Pharmacological

**Exercise**

This mode is preferable, as it also informs the functional capacity of the patient. The Bruce protocol is applied for exercise, and the patient walks on a treadmill until 85% of MPHR (Maximum predicted heart rate) is achieved. The achievement of target MPHR (maximum predicted heart rate) is not an indication to end the test earlier. The radiotracer injected as close to peak exercise as possible.

Patients should be encouraged to exercise for at least 1 minute after the radiotracer injection. However, exercise should be terminated early if patients start having moderate to severe chest pain, marked shortness of breath, extreme fatigue, ataxia, dizziness, or near-syncope, signs of decreased peripheral perfusion such as cyanosis and pallor, patient are not able to exercise further, drop in systolic blood pressure of greater than 10 mmHg from baseline, hypertensive response (systolic blood pressure >230 mmHg and/or diastolic pressure>115 mmHg), unable to monitor the electrocardiogram or systolic blood pressure and in patients with implantable cardioverter defibrillators, when the heart rate achieved is within 20 beats per minute of the lowest heart rate at which therapy (anti-tachycardia pacing or shock) is programmed to be delivered.

The recommendation to terminate exercise tests early on an electrocardiogram basis are excessive ST-segment depression (>2 mm from baseline), ST elevation (>1 mm), sustained supraventricular tachycardia, or ventricular tachycardia, development of LBBB or intraventricular conduction delay that cannot be differentiated from ventricular tachycardia.

**Pharmacologic Agents**

Vasodilators: dipyridamole, adenosine, and regadenoson are three agents used as vasodilators for MPS. Vasodilator stress is recommended in all patients who are not able to exercise or submaximal exercise. It is preferable to do a stress test with a vasodilator instead of exercise if the patient has baseline LBBB.

Vasodilator test is contraindicated in high-grade AV block, patient with a history of severe reactive airway disease and history of intake of caffeinated drinks. The dose for myocardial perfusion scan of  vasodilators are dipyridamole 0.56 mg/kg, adenosine 140 mcg/kg/min and regadenoson 0.4 mg.

Intravenous adenosine continuous infusion starts at 140 mcg/kg/min, radiotracer injection should be given at 3 minutes, and then adenosine infusion continued for the next 3 minutes. A single intravenous dose of 0.4 mg is given for regadenoson, followed by 5 ml normal saline flush, and radiotracer is given at 10 to 20 seconds after the normal saline flush.

For dipyridamole, continuous infusion is given at 0.56 mg/kg for 4 minutes, then it stops, and radiotracer should be given after 3 to 5 minutes of stoppage of dipyridamole infusion. To reverse the effects of vasodilators, aminophylline can be given 50 to 250-mg intravenously.

Ionotropic: Iontropes indicated in patients who have contraindications to exercise and vasodilator. Dobutamine is a commonly used inotrope for MPS. Dobutamine infusion started at 5 to 10 mcg /kg/min and increases after every 2 mins until MPHR(Maximum predicted heart rate) is achieved. Radiotracer injected once MPHR (maximum predicted heart rate) achieved then dobutamine should be continued for the next minute. Dobutamine is contraindicated in patients with severe hypertension, unstable arrhythmia, and severe left main disease.

**Radiotracer**

There are two commonly used radiotracers for MPS.

- Thallium-201

- Technetium–99

Thallium-201 is a monovalent cation, property similar to potassium. It has a half-life of 73 hours and emits 80 keV photons. Its peak myocardial concentration achieves in 5 minutes and has the property of rapid clearance from the intravascular compartment. The differential washout-clearance of thallium 201 is more rapid from normal myocardium. As hyperinsulinemia stated, it reduces blood concentration and slow distribution of thallium 201, so fasting is essential. Thallium should be injected at peak stress, and images should be taken 10 to 15 mins of injection. Rest images after 4 hours of stress image.

Advantages of thallium-201:

- Its redistribution property allows single-injection studies and viability assessment.

- It is less expensive.

- It has less abdominal and hepatic uptake during exercise

Technetium–99 has a half-life of 6 hrs and emits 140keV photons. Technetium–99 tracers bound by mitochondria, limited washout occurs, so imaging can commence later and can be repeated. Rest images are obtained after 15 to 45 minutes of stress.

Advantages of technetium–99:

- It has a shorter half-life, which allows for a higher dose resulting in better count statistics

- It has less radiation exposure and attenuation effects

- It has higher energy levels, which allow improved resolution.