Patients planning a trial of labor after cesarean section require typical prenatal care with additional counseling regarding the option of TOLAC versus PRCD. Additionally, early ultrasound to confirm gestational age can be helpful if a cesarean section is scheduled.

With regards to labor management, spontaneous entry into labor is preferred as spontaneous labor carries a higher risk of successful vaginal delivery and a lower risk of uterine rupture.

While not required, epidural analgesia may be useful in improving patient comfort with the benefit of providing a rapid option for anesthesia if cesarean delivery is required.

Patients should have fetal heart tones monitored closely in labor and attention should be made to appropriate labor progress. Continuous fetal heart rate monitoring is strongly recommended. If concerns arise about possible uterine dehiscence or rupture cesarean delivery should be performed promptly. The most common sign of uterine rupture is an abnormality of the fetal heart rate tracing, which is seen in approximately 70% of cases of uterine rupture.

Vaginal delivery, delivery of the placenta and postpartum support is typical for patients undergoing VBAC delivery. Rarely, manual exploration of the uterus following placental delivery may lead to suspicion or discovery of previously undetected dehiscence of the uterine scar. Repair of such a defect is not required unless there is ongoing bleeding. Likewise, patients may experience occult uterine rupture which can lead to bleeding following delivery. VBAC patients experiencing post-delivery hypotension or other signs of hypovolemia should be evaluated promptly with consideration given to the possible diagnosis of uterine rupture.