Patients managed with antiepileptic drugs are frequently encountered by the nurse practitioner, internist, primary care provider, neurologist, and emergency department physician. In the past, it was widely believed that routine drug monitoring of antiepileptics was beneficial, but except for a few cases, this is no longer recommended. Instead, clinical monitoring within the context of a supportive, patient-centered, interprofessional team treatment plan based on a therapeutic clinician-patient relationship with the support of nurses and pharmacists is the key to success.

This interprofessional team will include physicians (MDs and DOs), specialists, mid-level practitioners (NPs and PAs), nurses, and pharmacists. In addition to checking for appropriate dosing and performing medication reconciliation, the pharmacist should emphasize the importance of medication compliance to the patient and the need for close follow-up. If there is evidence of non-compliance, the pharmacist should discuss the situation with the clinician managing the case. Pharmacists and nurses should assist in educating patients about the adverse effects of the drugs so that they know when to report back to the clinician; they must also be alert to signs of therapeutic failure, which must be documented and reported to other team members as necessary so regimen modification can be implemented if necessary. Only through such an interprofessional team approach with open communication channels between all team members can the morbidity of anti-convulsants be reduced and safe outcomes be achieved. [Level 5]