**Clinical Examination**

As mentioned before, the maxillary nerve carries sensory information of touch, pain, and temperature from the face, along with the ophthalmic and mandibular divisions of the trigeminal nerve. To assess the ability to feel light touch, the patient is asked to shut eyes, and the practitioner uses a cotton wisp to lightly touch both sides of the three divisions of the trigeminal nerve and compares the sensation from both sides using the patient's feedback. Testing of the ophthalmic division is by touching the forehead maxillary division testing is by touching the cheeks, and testing the mandibular division is by touching the area around the jawline.

**Lesions Affecting the Maxillary Nerve and its Branches**

The maxillary division of the trigeminal nerve can be affected by various pathologies, which include compromise of the sensory root of the trigeminal nerve, infections, iatrogenic injury, or trauma.

Trigeminal neuralgia is a clinical condition that affects the sensory root of the trigeminal nerve. The exact pathophysiology is still unknown but it may result from damage to the nerve from conditions like stroke, trauma, tumor, aneurysm, or multiple sclerosis. It is characterized by chronic pain in the areas supplied by the branches of the trigeminal nerve, including the maxillary division. The pain is severe, sharp, sudden in onset, and shock-like in character, lasting for a few seconds to minutes. It can be triggered by everyday activities like shaving, eating, or brushing teeth. It is unresponsive to normal analgesics. The first-line treatment includes medications like anticonvulsants but resistant cases can be treated by surgical destruction of the sensory root.

Herpes zoster virus infects trigeminal ganglion and can cause severe pain in all sensory areas supplied by the trigeminal nerve, including the maxillary division. It usually affects elderly and immunocompromised patients. In severe cases, complete loss of sensation might result in affected regions.

The maxillary nerve can also be involved in conditions affecting the cavernous sinus like infections, meningioma, or metastatic tumors. Lesions that affect infraorbital nerve in the infraorbital foramen, like the perineural spread of skin cancer, can cause numb cheek syndrome, which presents with numbness in cheek and upper lip. The upper incisor and canine teeth along with gingiva can also have involvement in this condition.