# Introduction

Creatine kinase (CK) is a dimeric enzyme that catalyzes the reversible phosphorylation of creatine by ATP.

# Pathophysiology

**Clearance of CK from Blood or Plasma**

Creatine kinase (CK) and its isoenzymes are inactivated in the lymph by proteolysis.

CK-MB can also be elevated in circulation in the absence of acute myocardial infarction (AMI),

Rhabdomyolysis, intense exercise, and trauma result in transient elevation of CK and CK-MB; CK-MB is present in skeletal muscles as well, albeit in lesser concentrations.

# Specimen Requirements and Procedure

Fresh serum-free from hemolysis is the specimen of choice for analysis of the CK isoenzyme pattern. Of the three commonly seen isoenzymes, CK-BB activity is the least stable. Adding a thiol such as 2-mercaptoethanol to the serum improves its stability.

# Testing Procedures

Electrophoresis and various immunological methods are commonly used for the analysis of CK isoenzyme.

Immunochemical methods are applicable to the direct measurement of CK-MB. In the immunoinhibition technique, an anti-CK-M subunit antiserum is used to inhibit both M subunits of CK-MM and the single M subunit of CK-MB and thus allow the determination of the enzyme activity of the B subunit of CK-MB, the B subunits of CK-BB, and macro-CKs. To determine CK-MB, this technique assumes the absence of CK-BB (and of the other sources of interference such as macro-CKs) from the tested serum.

In contrast with immunoinhibition, which measures the CK-MB isoenzyme by determination of its catalytic activity, mass immunoassays measure CK-MB protein concentrations.

# Interfering Factors

**Measurement of CK-MB, Interfering Factors, and Negating Techniques**

CK-MB was initially separated using gel electrophoresis, and densitometry was used to quantify the activity of CK-MB isoenzyme in blood.

CK-MB elevation was used as one of the criteria for diagnosing acute MI; as its use increased in frequency in the late 1980s and 1990s, it became evident that despite its high sensitivity in detecting acute MI, the specificity of CK-MB activity was low. Better methods to measure CK-MB have been developed to improve the specificity of CK-MB. CK-MB mass measurements using Immunoenzymometryic assays containing monoclonal antibodies binding to M and B subunits individually were proven to be highly specific and more sensitive than CK-MB activity measurement.

# Results, Reporting, and Critical Findings

- Reporting of gender-specific results is recommended by the American College of Cardiology (ACC), American Heart Association (AHA), and European Society of Cardiology (ESC)

- CK-MB is usually at undetectable levels in the blood.

- CK-MB levels are reported as positive if they are above the 99th percentile of normal values, 5 to 25 IU/L.

- CK-MB must always be reported along with the CK-MB relative index to add sensitivity and specificity to the test.

- Positive values must be informed to the test-ordering personnel within 1 hour of the positive result.

# Clinical Significance

**Diagnosis of Acute Myocardial Infarction**

Prior to the introduction of cardiac troponins, the biochemical marker of choice for the diagnosis of acute MI was the CK-MB isoenzyme.

**Non-acute MI Causes of CK-MB Elevation**

As discussed above, the skeletal muscle and myocardial cell death of any etiology will cause an elevation of CK-MB. Listed below are multiple other causes of CK-MB elevation in plasma.

False elevations in CK-MB occur in the presence of atypical CK isoforms, macrokinases, and adenylate kinase; however, these false elevations can be eliminated by adding reagents to testing kits.

Cardiac etiology - myocarditis, cardiac surgery can damage heart muscle resulting in elevation of CK-MB.

Peripheral sources - rhabdomyolysis, myositis, inflammatory myopathies, trauma, medications (daptomycin, statins, antiretrovirals)

To differentiate the elevation of CK-MB for cardiac etiology versus skeletal muscle source, we can calculate the CK-MB relative index (CK-MB RI) by using the below formula.

- CK-MB RI = CK-MB (ng/mL) x 100/CK (IU/L)

A CK-MB relative index < 3% is consistent with the skeletal muscle source, whereas a relative index > 5% is consistent with the cardiac source of CK-MB.

Hence in patients with clear evidence of lack of trauma, chronic skeletal muscle abnormalities, and a high index of suspicion for AMI, the use of CK-MB RI can increase the specificity of CK-MB testing. Miscellaneous causes include hypothyroidism, renal failure, alcohol intoxication, pregnancy, and certain types of malignancies.

**Current Biomarker Use**

As explained earlier, following the WHO criteria for diagnosis of AMI, multiple cardiac biomarkers were being used to diagnose acute myocardial infarction; among them, CK-MB was being used as the most sensitive and specific marker for diagnosis of AMI, detection of reperfusion, and estimating the size of myocardial infarction in the 1990s. During this time, troponin was evaluated as potentially a more specific biomarker for myocardial infarction when compared to CK-MB.

Troponin is a protein complex of 3 units, troponin T, troponin I, and troponin C, present in the actin filament of the skeletal and myocardial muscle cells. There are multiple isoforms of troponin T and troponin I, one of which is specific to cardiac muscle, and it is not expressed in adult skeletal muscle allowing the development of assays to measure its level in plasma.

Troponin is present in the myocardium as a 3 units complex in the contractile apparatus attached to the actin filament of the tropomyosin complex, however similar to CK-MB, there is unbound/free troponin in the cytosol of myocardial cells, which is known as the cytosolic pool. In the event of myocardial damage, unbound troponin is first released.

Troponin is more specific to the cardiac muscle when compared to CKMB, and current assays for troponin are more sensitive and specific than the assays for CK-MB measurement.

**Use of CK-MB despite Troponin being the Biomarker of Choice**

Troponin remains in circulation for a longer duration when compared to CK-MB. In conditions where reinfarction is suspected, CK-MB may be useful to classify a new event due to its shorter duration of elevation at detectable levels in plasma.

**CK-MB Isoforms**

The CK-MB isoenzyme exists as 2 isoforms: CK-MB1 and CK-MB2. Laboratory determination of CK-MB actually represents the simple sum of the isoforms CK-MB1 and CK-MB2.

CK-MB2 can be detected in serum within 2-4 hours after onset and peaks at 6-9 hours, making it an early marker for acute MI. Two large studies evaluating its use revealed a sensitivity of 92% at 6 hours after symptom onset, compared with 66% for CK-MB and 79% for myoglobin.

# Quality Control and Lab Safety

For non-waived tests, laboratory regulations require, at the minimum, analysis of at least two levels of control materials once every 24 hours. Laboratories can assay QC samples more frequently if deemed necessary to ensure accurate results. Quality control samples should be assayed after calibration or maintenance of an analyzer to verify the correct method performance.

The laboratory must participate in the external quality control or proficiency testing (PT) program because it is a regulatory requirement published by the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services (CMS) in the Clinical Laboratory Improvement Amendments (CLIA) regulations.

Consider all specimens, control materials, and calibrator materials as potentially infectious. Exercise the normal precautions required for handling all laboratory reagents. Disposal of all waste material should be in accordance with local guidelines. Wear gloves, a lab coat, and safety glasses when handling human blood specimens. Place all plastic tips, sample cups, and gloves that contact with blood in a biohazard waste container.

# Enhancing Healthcare Team Outcomes

Given the significant number of studies and guidelines from the American College of Cardiology recommending the use of troponin for the diagnosis and ruling out acute coronary syndromes instead of CK-MB, decreasing the use of CK-MB in hospital and outpatient settings requires an interprofessional team of healthcare professionals that includes a nurse, laboratory technologists, pharmacist and several physicians in different specialties especially cardiologists and cardiothoracic surgeons. Specialty-trained nurses are involved in the ordering and interpretation of this test.