Any biological process that gives rise to persistent, non-evolving, synchronized electrical field potentials arising from cortical neurons can elicit EEG patterns that lie on the IIC. The causes of rhythmic and/or periodic patterns that meet the criteria for the IIC are as diverse as the pathologies that underlie cortical dysfunction. Of note, the distribution of the observed pattern can offer increased specificity for discerning the underlying etiology. Distribution can be dichotomized into generalized and focal graph elements. A generalized IIC pattern usually reflects a systemic process that has produced diffuse cerebral dysfunction. In contrast, focal patterns indicate focal cortical dysfunction and are often, but not exclusively, secondary to a structural lesion.

Common etiologies for generalized patterns on the IIC include drug-induced neurotoxicity, anoxic brain injury, toxic-metabolic encephalopathy, and sepsis.

Special attention should be given to cefepime, a broad-spectrum fourth-generation cephalosporin commonly utilized as empiric treatment for the management of meningoencephalitis, which has been well-described as a common cause of GPDs in the critical care setting, as well as GPDs related to anesthesia withdrawal (GRAWs), which have been observed upon weaning propofol or barbiturates.

The presence of any lesional cerebral insult that results in a combination of focal cortical damage and increased cortical synchronicity can produce focal IIC patterns. However, these patterns can appear in the absence of gross focal edema or injury on imaging. Focal patterns that lie on the IIC may be attributable to a wide variety of disease processes, including infectious, vascular, autoimmune, neoplastic, traumatic, and inflammatory etiologies.

Acute stroke is the commonest etiology. Well-described causes include, but are not limited to, acute ischemic and hemorrhagic strokes, primary and metastatic central nervous system tumors, traumatic brain injury (TBI), infectious encephalitis, neurodegenerative processes, autoimmune epilepsy, and prion disease, but may also be idiopathic.

A uniform explanation for the development and progression of these rhythmic and/or periodic patterns in specific subsets of patients with lesional and non-lesional cerebral injury is yet to be elucidated.