Although the two-strand suture method still employs widespread acceptance, newer multi-strand techniques are increasingly used because they are more robust and have increased resistance to repair site gapping. More modern core tendon suture placement methods have shown greater initial repair site tensile strength while improving strength through six weeks postoperatively.

Vitamin C is an antioxidant previously examined in flexor tendon repair. Tissue damage and hemorrhage can disturb redox regulation, favoring a fibrotic response at the tendon repair site.

Recent research has described the use of ibuprofen at anti-inflammatory doses (2400 mg/day) to decrease peritendinous adhesions following zone 2 flexor tendon repairs, with increased range of motion when compared to control groups, and demonstrated no complications.

Literature has additionally demonstrated that methylene blue (MB) decreases levels of inflammatory cytokines and harbors anti-inflammatory and antioxidant properties while reducing the harmful effects of nitric oxide. This finding precludes the understanding that MB will accelerate the tendon healing process while reducing postoperative adhesions. Histopathological and biomechanical data of such studies have revealed fewer adhesions, with more comfortable movement, introducing a novel, cost-effective local therapy with important advantages.

Although well-known throughout various surgical procedures as a hemostatic agent while promoting tissue bonding, fibrin glue-augmented tendinous repairs have been reported throughout animal model studies to reveal an improved range of motion in the early postoperative phase.

Individual flexor tendons have a proximal region (i.e., proximal aspect of the palm, wrist, and forearm) that is extrasynovial and a distal region (i.e., the distal aspect of palm and finger) that is intrasynovial. Uninjured intrasynovial tendons are avascular and contain high levels of proteoglycans while expressing inflammatory factors, complement proteins, and glycolytic enzymes. In contrast, extrasynovial tendons are well vascularized, contain low levels of proteoglycans, and are enriched in inflammatory inhibitors and oxidative phosphorylation enzymes. Thus, the response to injury and repair are distinctly different between the two tendonous regions. Extrasynovial tendons display a robust and rapid neovascularization response, increasing the expression of complement proteins while exhibiting an acute shift in metabolism to glycolysis. As biomolecular modulation and tissue engineering for tendon repair are highlights of ongoing research, future treatment strategies may opt to promote features of extrasynovial healing, focusing on enhanced vascularization and modulation of the complement system and/or glucose metabolism.