# Continuing Education Activity

Fibrous dysplasia is a typically benign bone lesion characterized by intramedullary fibro-osseous proliferation secondary to altered osteogenesis. The polyostotic form often presents in childhood. Malignant transformation is rare, and remote radiation therapy has been reported as a risk factor. McCune-Albright syndrome is a relatively rare condition featuring polyostotic fibrous dysplasia (often unilateral) with skin pigmentation lesions and endocrine dysfunction (often female precocious puberty). This activity examines how to properly evaluate fibrous dysplasia and highlights the role of the interprofessional team in caring for patients with this condition.

**Objectives:**
- Review the history and physical exam of a patient with fibrous dysplasia.
- Summarize the treatment of fibrous dysplasia.
- Describe the evaluation of a patient suspected of having fibrous dysplasia.
- Explain how the facilitation of interprofessional team education and discussion can optimize the effective detection of fibrous dysplasia and inform the need for subsequent evaluations.

# Introduction

Fibrous dysplasia is a typically benign bone lesion characterized by intramedullary fibro-osseous proliferation secondary to altered osteogenesis.

# Etiology

The etiology of fibrous dysplasia has been linked with a missense mutation in the GNAS1 gene on chromosome 20. Abnormal proliferation of fibrous tissue ensues following an activating mutation.

# Epidemiology

Incidence has been estimated at 1 in 5,000 to 10,000.

# Histopathology

Fibrous dysplasia has histologic elements of immature collagen and immature bone trabeculae forming a fibrocellular matrix.

# History and Physical

Patients with monostotic fibrous dysplasia are often asymptomatic.  Occasionally patients may present with bone pain. Pathologic fracture with minor inciting trauma can also be a first presentation.

Physical exam has a minor role in evaluating lesions. In the setting of pain, focal palpation may increase pain with fractures. Visual inspection for skeletal deformities and asymmetries can provide clues to sites of involvement. Leg length discrepancy may indicate disease such as the classic shepherd’s crook deformity at the proximal femur.

Common sites of involvement subject to deformity are the ribs, long bones, and craniofacial structures. Less common sites include the hands, sternum, and spine.

# Evaluation

Imaging plays a chief role in the diagnosis and evaluation of the disease extent. Radiography should be utilized first in an evaluation. Advanced imaging such as computerized tomography (CT) and magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) can exclude other bone lesions; evaluate for soft tissue complications occurring from fractures, craniofacial neurovascular complications; and assess lesions for rare malignant transformation.

# Treatment / Management

Monostotic fibrous dysplasia cases are often asymptomatic. Patients in this category can be followed periodically with assessment for new symptoms and radiographs.

# Differential Diagnosis

In the setting of polyostotic McCune-Albright syndrome, accurate assessment of the cafe au lait skin pigmentation lesions is important. Associated skin lesion borders have been described as serrated, which is in contrast to smooth skin lesion borders in neurofibromatosis.

Fibrous dysplasia often has varied imaging presentation and osseous sites of involvement and therefore other bone diseases must often be considered. Monostotic radiologic appearance can mimic simple bone cyst, giant cell tumor, fibroxanthoma, osteoblastoma, hemangioma, osteofibrous dysplasia, and Paget disease.  Polyostotic appearance can mimic neurofibromatosis, hyperparathyroidism (Brown tumors), enchondromatosis, and eosinophilic granuloma.

# Complications

Usually fibrous dysplasia is monostotic and asymptomatic. In the cases of severe bone deformity, bowing may result in musculoskeletal dysfunction or accelerate development of osteoarthritis.

# Consultations

- Pediatric orthopedics

- Orthopedics

- Genetics

# Deterrence and Patient Education

Patient education regarding the risk of fracture is important.

# Enhancing Healthcare Team Outcomes

Managing fibrous dysplasia involves an interprofessional team approach, primarily with pediatrics/primary care, orthopedics, and radiology.  Genetics and endocrinology should be added for cases of McCune-Albright syndrome. Craniofacial involvement should prompt neurology, ophthalmology, audiology, and possible neurosurgery consultation.