Graves' disease is caused by thyroid stimulating immunoglobulin (TSI), also known as thyroid stimulating antibody (TSAb). B lymphocytes primarily synthesize Thyroid stimulating immunoglobulin within the thyroid cells, but it can also be synthesized in lymph nodes and bone marrow. B lymphocytes are stimulated by T lymphocytes which get sensitized by antigen in the thyroid gland. Thyroid stimulating immunoglobulin binds with thyroid-stimulating hormone (TSH) receptor on the thyroid cell membrane and stimulates the action of the thyroid-stimulating hormone. It stimulates both, thyroid hormone synthesis and thyroid gland growth, causing hyperthyroidism and thyromegaly.

Several environmental factors including pregnancy (mainly postpartum), iodine excess, infections, emotional stress, smoking, and interferon alfa trigger immune responses on susceptible genes to eventually cause Graves’ disease.

Graves' orbitopathy (ophthalmopathy) is caused by inflammation, cellular proliferation and increased growth of extraocular muscles and retro-orbital connective and adipose tissues due to the actions of thyroid stimulating antibodies and cytokines released by cytotoxic T lymphocytes (killer cells). These cytokines and thyroid stimulating antibodies activate periorbital fibroblasts and preadipocytes, causing synthesis of excess hydrophilic glycosaminoglycans (GAG) and retro-orbital fat growth. Glycosaminoglycans cause muscle swelling by trapping water. These changes give rise to proptosis, diplopia, congestion, and periorbital edema. If left untreated, it eventually leads to irreversible fibrosis of the muscles.

Pathogenesis of other rare manifestations of Graves disease like pretibial myxedema and thyroid acropachy are poorly understood and are believed to be due to cytokines mediated stimulation of fibroblasts. Many symptoms of hyperthyroidism like tachycardia, sweating, tremors, lid lag, and stare are thought to be related to increased sensitivity to catecholamine.