The diagnosis is made by history, physical exam, measurement of beta-human chorionic gonadotropin (beta-hCG), and an ultrasound

A thorough history should be obtained including pregnancy history, medical history, and history of present illness. History of present illness should include when and how symptoms/bleeding began, modifying factors, any treatments trialed up to the point of evaluation, and helping the patient to describe and quantify the bleeding

Transvaginal ultrasound may be used to locate the pregnancy and determine if the fetus is viable. The ultrasound can also help rule out ectopic pregnancy and to evaluate for retained products of conception. A yolk sac is typically seen at 36 days, and a heartbeat is seen on ultrasound at approximately 45 days after the last menstruation

A beta-hCG level of 1500 lU/mL to 2000 lU/mL is associated with a gestational sac on ultrasound. Beta-hCG doubles in 48 hours in 85% of intrauterine pregnancies. Beta-hCG is usually detectable the first nine to 11 days following ovulation and reaches 200 IU/mL at the expected time of menses

Rh factor will also determine if Rhogam should be administered to prevent hemolytic disease of the newborn in this pregnancy and subsequent pregnancies

Hemoglobin and hematocrit levels help monitor the degree of blood loss.

A urinalysis can also be obtained. Urinary tract infection (UTI) has been associated with signs and symptoms of threatened abortion

During the pelvic exam, suction or cotton swabs may be needed to remove blood and products of conception to allow for better visualization of the cervix. Ringed forceps can also be used to remove tissue that may be protruding from the cervical os. All tissue must be examined to determine if it is a clot or products of conception. Evidence of products of conception protruding from the cervix or within the vagina changes the diagnosis from a threatened abortion to a complete or incomplete abortion. Evaluation of the amount of bleeding/blood loss should be performed through a thorough history, as well as during the pelvic examination