As discussed earlier, most patients with selective IgA deficiency who undergo transfusion of blood products are asymptomatic. In patients where anaphylaxis does occur, emergency intervention is important. Immediately, the transfusion should be stopped, and epinephrine is to be administered. Hypotensive patients should be adequately resuscitated with intravenous fluids. Maintenance of a patent airway is important, and oxygenation should be provided. In severe cases, intubation and vasopressors may be necessary.

If IgA anaphylaxis is suspected in a patient with no known history of IgA deficiency, but additional transfusions are needed, there may not be enough time to confirm the presence of anti-IgA antibodies. In this situation, the safest method is to use washed red blood cells and plasma or platelets from known IgA deficient donors. If a platelet transfusion is required sooner than platelets from an IgA deficient donor can be supplied, platelets can be washed, but this requires extensive skill. If fresh frozen plasma (FFP) is required sooner than FFP from an IgA deficient donor can be supplied, then a slow transfusion can be initiated under a monitored setting. This is largely due to the fact that the benefit of the FFP transfusion outweighs the risk of an anaphylactic reaction, as anti-IgA antibodies have only been found in 18.1% of suspected IgA anaphylaxis cases. However, if a patient with confirmed IgA deficiency and anti-IgA antibodies needs platelets or FFP from an IgA deficient donor and these blood products are not readily available, then recombinant activated coagulation factor VII (rFVIIa) is a possible alternative. There have been cases in which rFVIIa has been used in systemic bleeding disorders in place of FFP or platelets. Theoretically, rFVIIa should be able to be transfused safely in IgA deficiency patients since it does not contain IgA.

In patients with anti-IgA antibodies requiring immunoglobulin replacement, subcutaneous immunoglobulin (SCIG) can be used. In a retrospective study of 15 patients with side effects to blood products and/or immunoglobulins, 4 patients had reactions due to anti-IgA antibodies. When these patients were given subcutaneous immunoglobulin, no side effects were seen. Additionally, the anti-IgA antibodies had disappeared in some patients, and they were able to tolerate intravenous immunoglobulin (IVIG) administration. In this study, it was theorized that the antibodies formed complexes with IgA, and these complexes might have been removed quickly from circulation.

Another possible approach in these patients is desensitization to blood products. In a case report of an individual with severe IgA deficiency and anti-IgA antibodies with a history of transfusion reactions with IgA-containing blood products, standard blood products were given without complication. This was achieved through continuous infusion of gradually increasing concentrations of IgA-containing immunoglobulin preparations. Thus, the patient was successfully desensitized to IgA.