Cardiac catheterization is required for many procedures such as angiography, angioplasty, valve replacement, valvuloplasty, ablation, or congenital heart repair. This process is required to assess and manage many patients presenting with myocardial infarction, heart disease, valvular disease, or congenital heart disease. Needless to say, catheterization is a heavily performed procedure in the field of interventional cardiology. A common site of entry for catheterization is the femoral artery. After catheterization procedures, appropriate mechanisms are necessary to close the port of entry of the catheter into the femoral artery. As a result, the need for devices to assist in the closure of the femoral artery is continually evolving.

Initially, the only mechanism to assist in hemostasis from the catheter insertion site would be mechanical femoral artery compression. Although mechanical compression is sufficient in patients without certain comorbidities, it can be challenging in patients who are obese and on anticoagulation therapy. In addition, patients managed through femoral access require a longer hospital stay than those who received radial access. Manual compression would take longer to reach hemostasis, thus increasing strain on the healthcare system. Certain procedures such as the insertion of left ventricular assist devices and mitral/aortic valve replacement procedures require relatively larger femoral vascular access sites, making mechanical compression cumbersome or a less effective method to achieve hemostasis.

Femoral vascular closure devices can be divided into two broad categories. They can be either passive or active. Passive closure devices help with mechanical compression or by increasing thrombosis for effective hemostasis. However, passive devices do not hasten the actual time it takes to reach hemostasis. Active closure devices include suture devices, collagen plugs, and clips.