Bronchospasm clinically presents itself as wheezing on physical exam. However, some additional indirect signs and symptoms may prompt a healthcare provider to suspect bronchospasm. The child may complain of chest tightness, shortness of breath, or cough. Parents will sometimes describe “noisy breathing.” On exam, accessory respiratory muscle use, nasal flaring, tachypnea, and prolonged expiratory phase are clues. Children with a past medical history of other atopic diseases (such as allergic rhinitis or atopic dermatitis) are more likely to have asthma. In bronchiolitis, the child additionally will have signs and symptoms of a viral prodrome such as rhinorrhea, nasal congestion, and sometimes fever. Anaphylaxis causes multi-system signs and symptoms, including wheezing secondary to bronchospasm (with symptomology similar to asthma), throat “tightness”, stridor, urticaria, flushing, edema and/or pruritus of the lips and tongue, nausea, vomiting, abdominal pain, dizziness, syncope, tachycardia, hypotension, anxiety, and periorbital edema. In the history, there is an acute onset of symptoms typically within seconds to minutes after exposure to a potential trigger.

Other unique presentations of medical conditions associated with bronchospasm and/or wheezing include foreign body aspiration and vascular ring. Foreign body aspiration typically occurs in late infancy or toddlerhood; the time when children can explore the world with their gained mobility but still enjoy frequently putting items in their mouths. There is an acute onset of respiratory distress with symptoms based on the location of the foreign body. Children present with stridor, unilateral wheezes, coughing, and choking. Alternatively, if a patient presents with long-standing symptoms of dysphagia and “noisy breathing” (such as stridor, wheezing, and high-pitched cough) without associated viral symptomatology, one may suspect a vascular ring compressing the trachea and/or esophagus.