The opioid system is considered one of the most complex neurotransmitter systems in the body that plays a critical role in major biological processes. The use of exogenous opioids for analgesia has limitations due to their undesirable adverse effects, including sedation, respiratory depression, and constipation. However, experiments have shown that drugs that bind to the delta-opioid receptor (DOR) lack respiratory and gastrointestinal adverse effects. So, developing DOR-specific drugs will prove to be a clinical advantage. Research suggests that acupuncture produces analgesia by the release of endogenous opioids. This is supported by the finding that the administration of an opioid antagonist reverses the analgesia induced by acupuncture.

Another notable finding is the correlation between alcohol consumption and endogenous opioids. Alcohol induces the activation of the endogenous opioid system. Clinical trials on outpatient alcoholics have demonstrated that administration of opioid antagonist naltrexone decreased the average number of drinking days per week, the desire to drink, and the alcohol-induced high. Another interesting piece of evidence is the in vivo studies of immunomodulatory activity of enkephalins on rats revealed their dual dose-dependent effect. In other words, high doses of enkephalins inhibit while low doses enhance the immune response. Recent investigations suggest that enkephalins act as modulators of cardiac function and play a vital role in aging, ischaemic preconditioning, heart failure, and hypertension.

Placebo-induced pain suppression is another area for clinical research on opioids. Placebo induces the release of endogenous opioids in anticipation of pain relief. Functional MRI (fMRI) response shows that placebo enhances the response in the rostral anterior cingulate gyrus, periaqueductal gray, rostral ventromedial medulla, and hypothalamus.

A new class of endogenous opioids, endomorphins, has been identified, with the highest affinity and selectively for mu-opioid receptors. Research has found their remarkable role in neuropathic pain, unlike other opioid analgesics.