Vaginal atrophy has a few different treatment modalities. It can be classified into non-hormonal and hormonal options.

**Non-hormonal treatment**with vaginal/topical moisturizers and lubricants is considered first-line. Lubricants provide short-term relief for patients and are typically used for vaginal dryness during intercourse, while moisturizers have a longer-lasting effect and may be used daily to every 2-3 days per week.  Patients are also encouraged to continue safe, regular sexual activity. The use of moisturizers, lubricants, and regular safe sexual activities helps in maintaining the health and integrity of the vaginal epithelium and flora.

As the environment of the vagina is altered with the progression of vaginal atrophy, the pH and osmolality of the moisturizer/lubricant are also of importance. The clinician should be prescribing topical vaginal moisturizers and lubricants which are closest to the physiological conditions of the natural vaginal environment. This not only assists in symptomatic relief of the patient but may also decrease the incidence of promoting vaginal infections.

**Hormonal therapy**would be an additional or second-line treatment as it focuses on treating the root cause of the symptoms. Moisturizers and lubricants are still considered the first line, but if symptoms persist, hormonal therapy may be necessary. Hormonal replacement therapy (HRT) may be systemic (oral estrogen replacement) or localized (intravaginal/topical estrogen, estrogen intravaginal releasing ring, and vaginal dehydroepiandrosterone (DHEA, testosterone). Studies show that systemic HRT alleviates symptoms in 75% of cases, whereas local therapy does so in 80%-90% of cases. Side effects are comparable but local therapy is considered much safer than systemic.

**Local estrogen**therapy comes in many forms including vaginal creams which are typically applied daily, intravaginal tablets/capsules for more accurate dosing of estrogen, and a vaginal ring which releases small amounts of estrogen daily. Local estrogen therapy should be initiated at lower doses. All preparations were all similarly effective in alleviating vaginal atrophy symptoms. Low dose local estrogen therapy has not been shown to increase total systemic estrogen levels, and overall have an excellent safety profile showing a minimal to no increased risk of endometrial hyperplasia in healthy females.

Women usually have an improvement in symptoms after 2 to 4 weeks of treatment, which can indicate continue response at 12 weeks.

As with all medication regimens, risk and benefits should be discussed with patients prior to initiating any hormonal therapy. At increased risk are breast cancer or endometrial cancer survivors, as their tissues may be more sensitive to lower levels of estrogen which may increase their risk for new or recurrence of cancer. Vaginal/topical estrogen therapy may still be used in these patients, but the risk of hormone sensitivity should be discussed, and if initiated should be done so at lower doses.

**Systemic hormonal replacement therapy**is typically reserved for patients experiencing systemic menopausal symptoms (ie night sweats, hot flashes, and flushes) in addition to vaginal atrophy. In patients who do suffer from these symptoms, systemic HRT's, including estrogen-progestins, or simply estrogen in females who have had a hysterectomy, have shown to have significant results. Females using systemic HRT's had growth and revascularization of the vaginal epithelium, normalized vaginal pH, and increased lubrication.

An additional treatment, especially useful for patients with a history of hormone-sensitive cancer, are **selective estrogen receptor modulators (SERM)**. SERMs are able to have a positive effect on the vaginal epithelium while having minimal to no effect on estrogen-dependent organs. More recent treatment modalities include laser and radiofrequency therapy. Laser therapy is able to promote re-vascularization and restores vaginal moisture and elasticity, however, the safety and efficacy are uncertain.

If there are anatomical vulvovaginal changes, vaginal dilators may be of use. This is reserved for women who cannot take estrogen therapy and failed moisturizers and lubricants. Dilators have shown to improve vaginal function.