Once diagnosed with an aneurysmal bone cyst, the patient should obtain a referral to an orthopedic oncologist. Surgical intervention is typically the treatment of choice to prevent pathological fracture. Based on the lesion size and the region of bone involved, either intralesional curettage, intralesional excision, or en bloc (complete) excision may be an option.

Intralesional curettage involves evacuating the cavity of its contents and filling the remaining space with bone graft or cement to strengthen the bone.

Intralesional excision is the preferred treatment of choice, which is similar to curettage: the surgeon makes a broad opening through the osseous wall of the lesion and removes the contents. This process allows a greater amount of the bone to remain intact to reduce patient morbidity when compared to en bloc excision. After the removal of the cystic contents, the surgeon can fill the lesion via bone grafting or other material to supply strength and promote healing of the bone. Differing from curettage, this type of treatment allows the use of various forms of adjuvant therapy to reduce the rates of recurrence, due to the broad opening made to gain access to the cavity. Adjuvant therapies include high-speed burr, argon beam coagulation, phenol, and cryotherapy. This type of excision is also beneficial in aneurysmal bone cysts that occur near joints and other structures where the desire to maintain normal anatomy is crucial for functionality.

En bloc excision consists of removing the entire cavitary lesion from the bone that contains it.  When considering en bloc excision, the surgeon must weigh the risks and benefits of the procedure, considering the possible loss of functionality of the area, especially when operating near a joint. Due to the result of significant patient morbidity, en bloc resection is typically reserved for patients with recurrent lesions that were not adequately controlled by less invasive means.

Selective arterial embolization (SAE) may be considered before surgery as an adjuvant, or as a primary treatment if the clinician suspects a severe loss of function or destabilization as a result of local or wide excision of the lesion. In up to 40% of patients being treated primarily with SAE, a second or third embolization attempt is necessary.

Radiotherapy has also found utility as adjuvant therapy in recurrent aneurysmal bone cysts cases. However, clinicians must consider the significant risks associated with radiation therapy. There is at least one documented instance of radiation-induced sarcoma of a patient receiving treatment with external beam radiation for a vertebral aneurysmal bone cyst.

Medical therapies with monoclonal antibodies for non-surgical candidates is an area currently being explored.