The accepted course of treatment for advancing wavelike epitheliopathy is the elimination of identifiable offending agents, debridement of the abnormal epithelium, and empiric application of a 1% silver nitrate solution to the superior corneoscleral limbus.

Most sterile compounding pharmacies are able to formulate this solution, as it is not available in a premade form. For treatment, the affected eye should be anesthetized with proparacaine, after which a cotton applicator is saturated with 1% silver nitrate solution and applied in a rolling fashion to the affected area. The area is flushed with saline, a bandage contact lens applied, and a 1-week course of topical antibiotics is prescribed. The bandage lens may be removed after 3 to 4 days, after complete epithelialization for the cornea.

Symptoms usually resolve within two weeks of treatment with the replacement of irregular epithelium with normal-appearing tissue. Following treatment, most patients experience a total return of vision in the affected eye, although some patients exhibit a mild permanent decrease in visual acuity.

Silver nitrate likely works via its cytological effects, causing apoptosis or chemical alteration of the abnormal stem cells that are responsible for the pathology.

Corneal epithelial debridement allows for a more complete treatment of the epitheliopathy and a more rapid resolution of symptoms.

AWE has rarely responded to artificial tears and topical steroids, although most patients showed no improvement, and steroid use was discontinued in all cases due to a rise in intraocular pressure. Hypertonic saline solution, antibiotics, and therapeutic contact lenses have been found to have little or no benefit in treating AWE.

Because of the similarities between AWE and partial limbal stem cell deficiency, there is the possibility that additional medical therapies effective in partial LCSD may also be applied to the treatment of AWE. These include topical retinoids, topical cyclosporine, autologous topical serum drops, and interferon-alpha-2b.