Other states of altered consciousness may superficially resemble coma. Perhaps the most important of these is the locked-in syndrome. If questioned, patients cannot respond with speaking or any movements of the extremities. Their eyes may be open. Typically this is caused by pontine damage from ischemic stroke or hemorrhage. Higher brain centers are intact and functional and the patents have awareness. Patients are conscious and aware of their environment but cannot respond due to damage of the motor tracts. Careful examination may show responsiveness to questions with patients only able to respond with eye blinks and vertical eye movements. Caregivers should assume that patients might comprehend communications even though they might appear unresponsive.

There has been a recent description of a minimally conscious state characterized by unresponsiveness with intermittent evidence of awareness. With prolonged observation, these patients may intermittently or inconsistently follow simple commands, visually pursue objects, or show other signs of responsiveness.

Feigned unresponsive rarely is prolonged. Attentive observation and examination will often reveal intermittent responsiveness and alertness. Cranial nerve testing will be intact including caloric testing. A startle maneuver with loud sounds may be diagnostic. Demonstrating the presence of nystagmus with caloric testing is consistent with alertness and may be tested if there is a doubt.

Common causes of coma include:

- Anoxic brain injury

- Cerebral infarction

- Cerebral hemorrhage

- Spontaneous
- Traumatic

- Cerebral neoplasms

- Hypertensive encephalopathy

- Hypoglycemia

- Metabolic encephalopathy

- Myxedema

- Status epilepticus

- Toxic encephalopathy