Oxygen saturation, often measured with a pulse oximeter, has become part of routine vital sign measurement in the clinical setting. This measurement, although clinically useful, does not always reflect the oxygen content of blood. For example, if a patient is anemic (low hemoglobin), but breathing well (normal pO2), then oxygen saturation may be close to 100%, but total oxygen content may be low. Oxygen is bound to hemoglobin, a tetramer of 2 alpha and 2 beta subunits. Each subunit can carry one molecule of oxygen, and a complete hemoglobin tetramer can carry four molecules. In the completely unbound state, hemoglobin predominates in the T (tense) form. The T form requires a higher pO2 to bind an oxygen atom, like that found in the oxygen-rich pulmonary capillary beds. The subsequent oxygen molecules can bind to hemoglobin more favorably. This is because binding oxygen-binding induces a conformational change in the other subunits towards the R (relaxed) form. This interaction between the hemoglobin subunits is termed cooperativity. The R form does not require a high pO2 to allow oxygen binding. By the time blood exits the pulmonary circulation, hemoglobin is 100% saturated with oxygen (four molecules bound). In normal lungs, hemoglobin molecules become close to 100% saturated with oxygen long before the end of the capillary bed, about a third of the way along. This allows effective oxygenation of the blood fully even during times of increased oxygen consumption (heavy exercise). Entering the systemic circulation, oxygen-rich hemoglobin is in the R form. At the lower pO2 in the peripheral tissues, oxygen begins to unbind. With less oxygen bound, and at a lower pO2, the T state becomes more favorable, which facilitates unloading oxygen atoms two through four. Throughout the bloodstream, at different pO2 levels, there is a continuum between the T state (unloading, requiring high O2 to bind) and the R state (loading, requiring low O2 to unbind). At rest, most of the oxygen-binding sites on hemoglobin are occupied. Of note, myoglobin, as a single subunit oxygen-carrying protein, does not exhibit cooperativity. It behaves like a single T state hemoglobin. This helps pull oxygen into skeletal muscle.

Plotting oxygen tension (x) vs saturation (y) reveals a sigmoid curve that describes visually how oxygen binds to hemoglobin. At higher oxygen tension, for example during pulmonary circulation, the oxygen dissociation curve plateaus. At lower oxygen tension, the slope of the oxygen dissociation curve is steeper.