Gonadal dysgenesis is clinically significant due to the issues it may cause to the physical and mental well-being of the patients affected by it. Patients with gonadal dysgenesis will likely need hormone therapy to develop appropriate secondary sexual characteristics. Even with hormone therapy a large percentage of these patients may not develop similarly to their peers and will remain infertile; this can have huge impacts on the patient’s mental health. Children and adults with gonadal dysgenesis may feel insecure about their physical appearance. For example, when an individual is genetically male but has female external genitalia as in 46, XY gonadal dysgenesis, it can be a point of concern and stress for both the patient and the patient’s parents. Females with gonadal dysgenesis may also be concerned when they do not develop menses or secondary sexual characteristics like their peers. Being able to produce offspring of our own is also a desire of many people in our society and being infertile may cause a great deal of emotional turmoil. Proper fertility counseling, discussion of the patient’s options, and referral to the appropriate services are vital in caring for these patients with infertility. In patients with gonadal dysgenesis that contains Y chromosomal material, there is also an increased risk for the development of gonadoblastoma, dysgerminoma, teratoma, and choriocarcinoma, which requires removal of the gonads early on in life to prevent tumor formation.

Additionally, a large number of patients with gonadal dysgenesis will have other associated health problems. As seen in Turner syndrome there can be significant cardiac and renal abnormalities that will require assessment and management by a physician. Turner syndrome patients also commonly have short stature that will indicate treatment with growth hormone early on to decrease growth stunting. Many other possible conditions correlate with gonadal dysgenesis, and it is essential to keep an eye out for these complications and utilize multiple specialists to create a care team for each patient on an individual basis. Gonadal dysgenesis is a complex condition with associated symptoms spanning across many organ systems. Our understanding of gonadal dysgenesis is limited but improving with time. Clinicians must be familiar with gonadal dysgenesis so that when a patient appears with the clinical characteristics of the condition they do not go unnoticed and the patient can go on to receive the treatment they need to improve their development and decrease their mortality.

In conclusion, multidisciplinary care involving a wide range of medical and allied specialties is required to provide optimal care to patients with gonadal dysgenesis.