All the lesions falling into the single ventricular physiology share some characteristic features.

- Both the systemic and pulmonary venous return needs to be guided to the single functional ventricle

- The mixing of blood results in a hypoxemic mixture with an oxygen saturation of 75 to 80%

- Single ventricle perfuses both systemic and pulmonary circulation (parallel circulation).

- Relative resistance of the pulmonary and systemic systems is the primary determinant of blood flow through them

- Presence of various degrees of pulmonary abnormalities secondary to the congenital cardiac lesion

The fetus, in utero, has a parallel circulation and adequate shunting of the blood for mixing. They also have patent ductus arteriosus to regulate pulmonary circulation. However, after birth, when the parallel circulation starts transitioning to the series circulation, neonates with the single ventricle physiology do not tolerate the transition and start showing signs of hypoxemia.

The survival of these neonates depends upon the following two factors. First is unrestricted mixing of systemic deoxygenated blood with oxygenated pulmonary venous blood. The location of the shunt to allow mixing may vary depending upon the type of lesion; however, it is usually at the level of atria. In around 6% of the people with single ventricle physiology, either the septum is intact or restrictive.

They need emergent atrial septostomy/sepetectomy or septoplasty and may even need stent placement for adequate mixing and channeling of the blood to the single functioning ventricle.

Infusion of prostaglandin E1, stenting of the ductus arteriosus, creation of central or Blalock-Taussig shunt, and emergent ventricular septostomy/septectomy are often utilized to achieve unrestrictive or minimally restrictive blood flow through the systemic and pulmonary circulation.

A single functioning ventricle has to receive and pump blood to both circulations, so it has pressure and volume overload. This is exacerbated by reduced ventricular compliance. Furthermore, pulmonary circulation can steal blood flow from the coronaries during diastolic runoff and pose a risk of myocardial ischemia. They very poorly tolerate changes in preload and afterload, further increasing the risk of myocardial ischemia.

With unrestricted outflow from the single functioning ventricle, the relative resistance of the pulmonary and systemic circuit is the main determinant that guides blood flow across them. However, most neonates develop systemic hypoperfusion secondary to lung expansion and fall of pulmonary resistance after birth. They might need intubation, hypoventilation, and sometimes inhaled nitrogen or carbon dioxide to counteract the fall of pulmonary vascular resistance (PVR).

Inotropic support might also be needed to achieve adequate peripheral perfusion. Multiple factors alter the resistance of these circuits and change blood flow through pulmonary and systemic circulation, which are summarized below in Table 1.

Table 1: Factors determining the pulmonary vs. systemic circulation in patients with single ventricle physiology

Facilitate pulmonary blood flow (Qp)

(Decrease PVR/SVR ratio)

Higher Fio2, hypocarbia, alkalosis, controlled ventilation, judicious PEEP

Facilitate systemic blood flow (Qs)

(Increase PVR/SVR ratio)

Lower Fio2, hypercarbia, acidosis, hypothermia, pain, valsalva efforts

Spontaneous breathing  (atelectasis, smaller TV)

Epinephrine, norepinephrine

nitrous oxide

systemic vasodilators

volatile anesthetics

The ideal blood flow ratio through the pulmonary and systemic circulation is 1:1 when minimal collaterals and no lung lesions are expected. This flow ratio provides optimal oxygenation and systemic perfusion, which is called balanced circulation.

Higher saturations reflect excess blood flow through the pulmonary circulation, which steals blood from the systemic circulation resulting in peripheral hypoperfusion—prolonged pulmonary over circulation results in pulmonary hypertension. Similarly, lower saturation signifies pulmonary under circulation.

All volatile anesthetics decrease the cardiac output dose-dependently, primarily by reducing the SVR. Sevoflurane is usually preferred given the minimal reduction of cardiac output.

Various degrees of anatomical and physiological pulmonary abnormalities are found in patients with single ventricular function, which compounds the complex univentricular physiology. These include endothelial dysfunction, altered pulmonary blood flow, venovenous and aortopulmonary collaterals, valvular dysfunction, obstruction of pulmonary venous return, etc.