Goodpasture syndrome is due to circulating autoantibodies directed at the glomerular basement membrane. The resulting crescentic glomerulonephritis is the result of the antigen-antibody complexes that form at the basement membrane.

The alveolar basement membrane shares the same collagen target as that of the glomerulus. The main component of the basement membrane is type 4 collagen, which can be expressed as six different chains, from alpha 1 to alpha 6. Despite the presence of circulating antibodies in anti-glomerular basement membrane disease, pulmonary symptoms are not always observed. An inciting lung injury seems to make pulmonary symptoms more likely.

In a healthy individual, the alveolar endothelium acts as a barrier to the anti-basement membrane antibodies. However, if an insult results in increased permeability of the alveolar capillaries, it leads to the trespassing of autoantibodies, which then bind to the basement membrane. The factors that may result in an increased alveolar-capillary permeability include:

- Increased capillary hydrostatic pressure

- Bacteremia

- Tobacco smoking

- Endotoxemia

- Exposure to volatile hydrocarbons

- Upper respiratory tract infections

- Higher inspired oxygen

Strong evidence for genetic involvement exists and patients with certain human leukocyte antigen (HLA) types are found to be more susceptible to disease and exhibit a poor prognosis.

An increased prevalence of HLA-DR15, DRB1*03, and DRB1*04 has been found and a reduced frequency of DRB1*01 and DRB1*07.

Although Goodpasture syndrome is regarded as an autoantibody-mediated disease, a vital role is played by T cells have in the initiation and progression of the disease. T cells cause B-cells to increase antibody production and play a direct role in the renal and pulmonary injury.