Age is the primary cause of cognitive impairment. Other risk factors include family history, physical inactivity, and disease/conditions such as Parkinson’s disease, heart disease, stroke, brain injury, brain cancers, drugs, toxins, and diabetes. Individuals may reduce the risk of cognitive impairment by keeping physically active, eating a healthy diet, and maintaining healthy blood pressure, blood sugar, and cholesterol levels. Some causes of cognitive impairment are treatable, like infections, medication side effects, depression, and vitamin B12 deficiency. It is important to identify people who are showing signs of cognitive impairment to ensure that they are evaluated by a healthcare professional and receive appropriate care or treatment.

Apart from increasing age, hypertension, diabetes, hypercholesterolemia, smoking, and obesity are thought to be responsible for the clearance of amyloid (protein) from the brain, which in turn increases the risk of developing Alzheimer disease. A higher risk of Alzheimer disease, in particular, is associated with the presence of a number of these risk factors at the same time and while the person is in his or her 50s. So it is essential to maintain healthy blood pressure, blood sugar, and blood cholesterol.

Environmental and behavioral interventions are beneficial, especially in managing behavioral problems. Simple approaches such as noise cancellations and redirecting attention, maintaining a familiar environment, providing security objects, monitoring personal comfort, and avoiding confrontation can help in managing behavioral issues. Regular aerobic exercise and the Mediterranean diet have been shown to slow the progression of Alzheimer disease.

There are various memory and cognitive function tests available online. It is important to understand that these tests only give you a general idea about cognitive deficits in someone. However, consultation with a physician and a full medical checkup is always necessary before coming to any diagnosis and starting management options. Alzheimer disease and dementia can create havoc not only in the patient but also in the family, friends, and the community. So the management encompasses the role of the physicians, patients themselves, family and friends, and also policymakers. Healthcare policymakers must explore policy changes and initiatives that will increase support, expand research, and, ultimately, improve the quality of life for people living with cognitive impairment and also their families.