Physicians should have a low threshold in suspicion of myocardial rupture post-AMI. Early diagnosis and emergent surgical intervention can increase the survival rate of up to 75%. Cardiac injuries need to be considered in all high-velocity deceleration blunt traumas. A bedside transthoracic echocardiography (TTE) is the diagnostic modality of choice. LV wall motion abnormality or myocardial injury is often apparent. Tamponade is seen as pericardial effusion, diastolic RV collapse, atrial collapse, and inspiratory decrease in Doppler flow velocities across the mitral valve. Associated papillary muscle rupture may be seen as a tear in the muscle head or may appear as a mobile echo density that prolapses into the LA in systole. Focused Assessment with Sonography in Trauma (FAST) can best accomplish the diagnosis promptly in the event of blunt thoracic trauma.

Pseudoaneurysm is seen as an echo-free space enlarging in systole and communicating with LV by a narrow neck. Chest X-ray (CXR) may show cardiomegaly with clear lung fields in LV rupture and pseudoaneurysm. Hemothorax may be observed with an associated tear of the pericardium. Mediastinal widening may also be seen in the event of aortic dissection. Computed tomography (CT) and magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) can be useful when TTE provides suboptimal images in stable patients such as pseudoaneurysm. Electrocardiography (ECG) showing persistent ST-segment elevation post-AMI is correlated with a high incidence of myocardial rupture.