The cannula should be gripped firmly in one hand with the forefinger and thumb on each side of the hub. Alternatively, if there is a side port, the tip of the forefinger may be curled around the cap of the side port with the thumb pressed over the end of the "flashback" chamber.  The operator should use their other hand to apply distal traction, stabilizing the vein and insertion site with the surrounding skin stretched tautly. Needle insertion follows at a shallow angle of fewer than 45 degrees through the skin, aiming towards the vein and is advanced slowly until a "flash" of blood appears in the chamber. If only a drop of blood is visualized, part of the needle bevel may still be outside the vein, and the line should be flattened slightly and inserted incrementally further by 1 to 2 mm until good flow is observed. The cannula is advanced over the needle until the hub sits at the skin; a second "flash" of blood should appear within the catheter while it enters the vein.

The tourniquet is then loosened or removed. Using the other hand, the operator should apply pressure proximally over the vein and catheter; this prevents blood from running while the needle is withdrawn and discarded safely into a sharps disposal box. Any desired blood samples should be taken at this point using a syringe or a phlebotomy adaptor, temporarily reattaching the tourniquet to generate adequate flow. The bung or IV administration set can then screwed in place over the hub, and the cannula should be secured to the skin with an appropriate dressing. A saline flush or a prepared bag of IV fluid with an administration set should be used to confirm adequate flow, observing for the absence of swelling or edema around the insertion site.

Various strategies have been suggested to increase the success of line placement, particularly in challenging circumstances, with varying degrees of evidence behind them.

- Gently ballotting or tapping the skin overlying the vein, and wiping the area with an antiseptic swab.

- Applying a warm compress, or soaking the limb in warm water, for a short period before line placement.

- Optimizing ergonomics for the operator placing the line, including patient position and ambient lighting.

- Apply topical aliquots of glyceryl trinitrate.

Where other attempts at peripheral access have failed in a critically ill patient requiring emergency intravenous access, peripheral venous cut-down may be considered. In this technique, a skin incision is made over a suitable peripheral site such as the median basilic vein in the arm or long saphenous vein in the leg, and the operator bluntly dissects down through the tissue to the vein, allowing insertion under direct vision.