Shift work enables businesses and organizations to maintain the pace of work and continuously provide access to goods or services throughout a 24-hour day. To operate continuously, companies usually divide the 24-hour day into discrete blocks of time, or shifts, during which groups of employees perform job duties. As one shift ends, another group of employees arrive, assume the job duties, and begin a new shift. A 24-hour operation requires companies to have employees present around the clock. There are numerous ways to organize shift schedules. This is tailored to suit the needs of a particular business. Variables include the length of the shift, start and end time, and whether shift patterns will be fixed or rotating.

According to the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services and the National Institute for Occupational Safety and Health, one standard method for organizing workers into shifts is to divide the 24-hour day into contiguous 8-hour blocks. An example of this method is:

- 9 AM - 5 PM: First shift (also called "day shift" or "morning shift")

- 5 PM - 1 AM: Second shift (also called "afternoon shift" or "evening shift")

- 1 AM - 9 PM: Third shift (also called "night shift" or "graveyard shift")

Another frequent method of organizing shift workers into shifts is to divide the 24-hour day into 12-hour blocks. An example of this method is:

- 7 AM - 7 PM: First shift (also called "day shift")

- 7 PM - 7 AM: Second shift (or "night shift")

Most occupations do not have 24-hour shifts due to health and safety concerns. However, some first responders and certain healthcare providers remain notable exceptions.

A fixed shift schedule is one in which there is no variation, and an employee works the same shift on the same day each week. An example of this is a nurse who works the day shift every week on Monday, Tuesday, Thursday, and Saturday. In contrast, some employees may work a rotating shift schedule in which shifts cycle through a progression. For example, an emergency room resident works mornings one week, evenings the next week, and nights the following week.

While variations exist in definitions for "shift work," it is generally agreed to refer to work hours outside of traditional business hours (approximately 9:00 AM to 5:00 PM). The term "shift worker" is most often used to describe individuals who work primarily during these nontraditional hours, especially at night. Individuals with nontraditional work schedules face additional physiologic and social challenges compared to those working traditional hours. A growing body of evidence demonstrates serious health, psychological, and societal consequences associated with shift work.

Occupations primarily comprised of shift workers include service industries, healthcare professionals, first responders, transportation industries, and manufacturing industries. Roughly 25% of the adult workforce currently performs shift work, which is projected to continue increasing to keep pace with society's growing expectations and demands.