Tay Sachs disease manifests in a wide spectrum, and it has infantile, juvenile, and adult-onset types. Infantile Tay Sachs is a prototype of degenerative diseases of grey matter in infancy. The infant is usually normal at birth, and the symptoms start between 3 to 6 months but can manifest as early as one week of life.

A cherry-red spot in the retina is almost a near-specific finding in Tay Sachs patients by fundoscopic examination(Figure.1).

Neurological symptoms are the hallmark of Tay Sachs disease. Infants are usually hypotonic since birth and present with developmental delays or regression by four to six months of age. By eight to ten months, symptoms rapidly progress, and spontaneous and voluntary movements diminish, and the infant becomes progressively less responsive.

By 18 months of age, patients usually develop macrocephaly.

Cardiovascular complications are rare but can occur due to the accumulation of the substrate. Prolonged QT interval and nonspecific T wave changes are reported.

Juvenile Tay Sachs disease manifests in early childhood between ages two to ten, caused by the reduced activity level of Hex A. The earlier the onset of the symptoms, the more quickly the disease progress. Early symptoms include incoordination, clumsiness, and muscle weakness. Other common symptoms include ataxia, dysarthria, dysphagia, and the progression of spasticity.

Adult Tay Sachs disease is an infrequent disorder, and diagnosis is often delayed at least by eight years of age. The adult form is less aggressive, resulting from a small mutation and high residual activity of Hex A, which is at least 5% to 20% of normal activity. Typical symptoms start in adolescence or early adulthood but can appear later(20 to 30 years of life).