Ultrasound is widely available for prostate evaluation but also for performing guided prostatic biopsy. Transabdominal (TAUS) or transrectal (TRUS) sonography can be used to evaluate the prostate, and transrectal is preferred for biopsy. The prostate is examined with TAUS by a transducer placing just above the pubic symphysis with a fluid-filled urinary bladder serving as an acoustic window. The average normal measurements are 3.75 to 4.00 × 2.5 to 3.00 × 3.1 to 3.8 cm (width x height x length) with a volume of 20 to 25 cm. The prostate volume is calculated using the formula for measuring any ellipsoidal structure is 0.5236 × height (H) × width (W) × length (L).

TAUS is limited in obese patients, and in those, bladder filling is not possible to correctly evaluate prostate volume. TRUS is performed in such cases. TRUS is also necessary for suspected prostatic pathology during the clinical exam, increased prostate-specific antigen (PSA) in the blood serum, prostatic inflammation/abscess, and follow up of prostatic cancer, as TRUS allows detailed evaluation of the prostate.

For TRUS, an endorectal transducer having a frequency of 8 to 10 MHz is delicately inserted into the rectum. Prostate volume is measured similarly to TRAS by obtaining width, height, and length. The gland is evaluated for its shape, symmetry, echogenicity, and integrity of the prostatic capsule. Periprostatic structures, e.g., seminal vesicles, neurovascular bundles, and blood vessels, are assessed for any abnormality, especially in suspected prostate carcinoma.

Elastography is a vital aid performed during TRUS to evaluate the firmness of the prostate tissue. The areas of increased firmness are often identified on elastography, which does not show any abnormal echogenicity on grayscale imaging.

**Benign Prostatic Hyperplasia**

TAS OR TRUS assesses the prostate volume to determine the course of management, i.e., prostatic volume more than 80 cm3 qualifies for open surgery-adenomectomy; otherwise, transurethral resection is the choice for management. European Association of Urology (EAU) suggests measuring prostatic volume via TRUS and residual urinary bladder post-void urine volume through TAUS. Ultrasound examination should be supplemented by visualization of the upper urinary tract to assess the degree of urinary tract dilatation.

**Prostate Inflammation**

Prostatitis is usually a clinical diagnosis. Sonography in prostatitis frequently demonstrates an enlarged and/or deformed gland with inhomogenous echotexture. Acute prostatitis may result in a parenchymal abscess, which appears as a hypoechoic or fluid consistency lesion within the prostate parenchyma. Ultrasound is performed not only for diagnosis but also for planning to evacuate it under ultrasound guidance. Ultrasound is useful in intraprostatic antibiotic injections in chronic prostatitis when pain is exacerbating.

**Prostatic Neoplasm**

Prostatic malignancy is difficult to diagnose in the USG as the tumor is often isoechoic to the surrounding normal gland. It could be hypoechoic. The US with color Doppler or power Doppler can identify angiogenesis, showing dilated and tortuous vessels, but it cannot detect small tumor foci. The diagnostic value of ultrasound is around 30% to 40%.

Some advances, like elastography, identify consistency difference and help in tumor diagnosis and guided biopsy. On elastography, neoplasm consistency appears firmer than the surrounding normal tissue. 3D TRUS allows computer processing of sectional images of the prostate and adds more detailed information about the morphology, surrounding structures, etc.