Alcohol withdrawal can range from very mild symptoms to a severe form, which is named delirium tremens. The hallmark is autonomic dysfunction resulting from the excitation of the central nervous system. Mild signs/symptoms can arise within six hours of alcohol cessation. If symptoms do not progress to more severe symptoms within 24 to 48 hours, the patient will likely recover. However, the time to presentation and range of symptoms can vary greatly depending on the patient, their duration of alcohol dependence, and the volume typically ingested. Most cases should be described by their severity of symptoms, not the time since their last drink. Noting the time of their last drink is essential in any patient with an alcohol dependence history who may be presenting with other complaints. You can help prevent withdrawal by staying on top of this! Some features that may heighten your suspicion that a patient could suffer severe withdrawal include a history of prior delirium tremens as well as a history of low platelets (thrombocytopenia) or low potassium levels (hypokalemia).

Mild symptoms can be elevated blood pressure, insomnia, tremulousness, hyperreflexia, anxiety, gastrointestinal upset, headache, palpitations.

Moderate symptoms include hallucinations and alcohol withdrawal seizures (rum fits) that can occur 12 to 24 hours after cessation of alcohol and are typically generalized in nature. There is a 3% incidence of status epilepticus in these patients. About 50% of patients who have had a withdrawal seizure will progress to delirium tremens.

Delirium tremens is the most severe form of alcohol withdrawal, and its hallmark is that of an altered sensorium with significant autonomic dysfunction and vital sign abnormalities. It includes visual hallucinations, tachycardia, hypertension, hyperthermia, agitation, and diaphoresis. Symptoms of delirium tremens can last up to seven days after alcohol cessation and may last even longer.

These symptoms mimic those of withdrawal from long-term benzodiazepine or barbiturate use, so important historical features to note when a patient presents with autonomic dysfunction suspicious for a withdrawal syndrome should always include a medication list and social history. Also, consider these risk factors for any patient presenting with seizures of unknown etiology.