Though a central sensory relay station, thalamic lesions can paradoxically present with various non-sensory clinical patterns, thereby complicating diagnostic issues.

Thalamic aphasia can present as lexical-semantic deficits with verbal paraphasia but with intact repetition and naming.

After a thalamic stroke, a rare condition called Dejerine-Roussy syndrome or thalamic pain syndrome may occur; this usually presents initially with the absence of sensation and tingling of the body contralateral to the affected thalamus. Months later, numbness occurs, eventually developing to severe chronic pain.

The reticular thalamic nucleus, a pacemaker zone for rhythmic cortical activity, might be the ictus for generalized spike-wave, as seen in idiopathic generalized epilepsy.

Patients with alcoholic Korsakoff syndrome have damage to their mamillary bodies, which can extend into the thalamus via the mammillothalamic fasciculus.

A hereditary prion disease called fatal familial insomnia exists in which the gene PRNP located on chromosome 20 at p13 deposits in the thalamus, causing degeneration over time. Patients develop worsening insomnia that can have associated psychiatric symptoms such as panic attacks, paranoia, and phobias. They then develop hallucinations and the complete inability to sleep. Rapid weight loss follows with dementia and mutism until death occurs.

The “pulvinar sign” is an MRI identification technique originally developed as a non-invasive method to identify patients with Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease.alpha-galactosidase A causes an acclamation of globotriaosylceramide in the blood, which deposits into tissues and organs. The pulvinar sign has been found to be a highly specific sign of Fabry disease of patients with cardiac and kidney involvement.

Concerning anatomical changes, the interthalamic adhesions appear enlarged in patients with Arnold-Chiari malformation type II.