In preparation for the procedure, one must first assess the patient. Some patients may prove to be more difficult candidates for successful endotracheal intubation with direct laryngoscopy. The following traits all can lead to more difficult visualization of the larynx with direct laryngoscopy, making a patient a less than ideal candidate:

- Interincisor gap of fewer than 4 centimeters

- A thyromental distance of less than 6 centimeters

- A sternomental distance of less than 12 centimeters

- Head and neck extension of less than 30 degrees from neutral

- Mallampati class 3 or 4

- Mandibular retrusion (micrognathia or true retrognathia)

- Neck circumference of greater than 40 centimeters

- Submental compliance

- History of cervical spinal fusion

- Radiation or burn contracture in the neck

Once the patient is adequately assessed, the patient must be pre-oxygenated. If a patient is a difficult intubation or at risk for rapidly desaturating, one can pre-oxygenate using apneic oxygenation. Apneic oxygenation is achieved by using passive oxygen insufflation via nasal cannula at 15 liters per minute. Another important part of the preparation is to keep a functioning suction device and bag-valve-mask nearby. Monitoring devices such as blood pressure, pulse oximetry, continuous cardiac monitoring, and capnography should be appropriately connected to the patient. Next, intravenous access should be established. A final preparation step is to ensure that induction agents, neuromuscular blocking agents, adjunctive medications, and emergency medications are prepared, as well as instruments are at the ready for surgical airway if the patient is a suspected difficult airway.