The jaw-wink reflex consists of a momentary retraction/elevation of the upper eyelid (which was ptotic) upon stimulation of the ipsilateral pterygoid muscle, which is followed by a rapid return to a lower position. The magnitude of the wink is worse in downgaze. This synkinetic phenomenon may be elicited not only by opening the mouth, but also by thrusting the jaw to the contralateral side, jaw protrusion, chewing, smiling, or sucking. The ocular associations of Marcus Gunn jaw-winking syndrome (MGJWS) include strabismus in 50% to 60% individuals, superior rectus palsy in 25% individuals, and double elevator palsy in 25% individuals.

Almost 5-25 % of these patients are reported to have anisometropia, and 30% to 60% are reported to have amblyopia.

Usually, this synkinetic movement of the eyelid will be observed first by the mother when the child is breastfeeding or bottle feeding. History of ocular trauma or strabismus surgery may also be present. The diagnosis is made based on the signs as described below:

- Unilateral blepharoptosis

- Upper eyelid movement is seen on opening the mouth, movement of the jaw to the contralateral side, chewing, sucking, swallowing, clenching teeth, and protrusion of the jaw.

- Hypotropia on the affected side may be present with the cover test due to associated superior rectus palsy.

Detailed clinical examination includes the following:

- Visual acuity (It is important to rule out amblyopia in infants and children)

- Pupillary examination

- Cycloplegic refraction mainly to rule out anisometropia

- Fundus evaluation, extraocular motility test, cover test to rule out superior rectus or double elevator palsy)

- Adequacy of Bell phenomenon as it can be decreased with superior rectus or double elevator palsy

- Head position: As a result of ptosis, the child may have chin lifting for better vision. If a child is not attempting to lift the chin in the presence of moderate-to-severe ptosis, then it is imperative to exclude amblyopia.

- Ptosis evaluation: The degree of ptosis should be assessed with the jaw immobilized in a central position and after disrupting the fusion with brief ocular occlusion.

- Vertical palpebral fissure which is the widest distance between the upper and lower lid

- Marginal reflex distance (MRD), which is measured with eyes in primary gaze position. MRD1 is the measurement of the corneal reflex to the central upper lid margin. MRD2 is the measurement of the corneal reflex to the central lower lid margin. MRD3 is the distance of the corneal reflex to the central upper-lid margin when the patient looks in extreme upgaze and is used to determine the measurement of LPS resection in ptosis surgery.

- Levator function, which is the distance the upper lid travels from downgaze to upgaze while the frontalis muscle is held firmly at the brow region. Levator function can be graded as normal (at least 15 mm), good (12-14 mm), fair (5-11 mm), or poor (less than or equal to 4 mm).

- Measurement of eyelid position in downgaze and presence of any lid lag