The histopathological process of subungual melanoma is unique due to the involvement of the nail unit. The pathology demonstrates an increased number of melanocytes in the basal layer of the specimen. This layer contains pleomorphic melanocytes with irregularly shaped nuclei. Invasive nail melanoma will show a high melanocyte count, two to three times that of benign melanonychia. The other features include multinucleation, atypia, and extensive pagetoid spread of melanocytes. Inflammation is also present in advanced melanoma but not demonstrated in benign melanonychia.

The histology is most likely consistent with acral lentiginous melanoma (67% of cases), a subtype of melanoma involving palms and soles. Fifty percent of cases are consistent with superficial spreading, and some cases have features of both. Acral lentiginous melanoma is characterized by acanthosis, elongation of rete ridges, and proliferation of atypical melanocytes in the epidermis. Basal keratinocytes become replaced by malignant melanocytes.

Histopathologic evaluation is the gold standard for obtaining the diagnosis of longitudinal melanonychia. Still, differentiating early-stage melanoma with the nail matrix involvement from benign melanocytic lesions is not straightforward. Accordingly, specific histopathological characteristics, including 1. cellular atypia, 2. pagetoid spread, and 3. nest formation, are common in not only melanoma in situ but also lentigines and nevi.

**Melanocytic activation**–  Nonspecific melanic pigmentation of the matrix epithelium with identical melanocyte numbers represents the activation of melanocytes. Early-stage melanocytic activation might be diagnosed with Fontana-Masson staining. The main advantage of Fontana-Masson staining is in cases with limited visible pigmentation. That said,  pigmented dendrites and keratinocytes; and sparse melanophages without any evidence of atypia in the superficial dermis are expected.

**Lentigo**– is identified by a mild to moderate number-wise increase in the matrix melanocytes ( 30 per mm). The increased melanocytes are individually located and aligned sparsely in the basal layer.

**Nevus**– A melanocytic nevus of the nail matrix is identified by melanocytic hyperplasia and nest formation.

**Melanoma****in situ**– is characterized by an increased number of melanocytes in the basal cell layer (on average 90 per mm), with a single melanocyte, a few nests, nuclear atypia, and pagetoid spreading. Atypical melanocytes, melanoma markers in situ, have large, hyperchromatic, pleomorphic nuclei and branching dendrites.[