Hearing loss in the pediatric population must be managed as part of an interprofessional team. Most children with hearing loss are otherwise normal but unfortunately, are often treated as if they are mentally dysfunction. Thus the key is awareness and education of the caregivers and the public. Parents should be provided with resources by the social worker where they can seek specialized help.

Today, many states have social workers and a hearing loss nurse or developmental nurse dedicated to providing caregivers with the best school environment, the best form of communication and the best resources. The nursing and audiology team should work with the clinicians to coordinate the cause of hearing loss and provide suitable treatment. Further, they should assist in patient education.

Other members of the team include medical doctors including otolaryngologists, audiologists, speech therapists, geneticists, and pediatricians. In addition to this, audiologists, speech and language therapists, educational psychologists and specialist nurses are vital parts of the wider team.

Communication is the most significant loss in people with deafness. Communication is vital for integration and socialization into society. Thus, every effort must be maintained to reverse the hearing loss. Today, most deaf children are taught to lip read and/or learn sign language. In addition, the hearing loss nurse should provide parents with information on devices like strobe lights connected to alarm clocks, doorknobs, and timers. Schools need to have a system so that the hearing loss child is able to hear any overhead announcements. All the latest TVs are now equipped with closed captioning.

Children who are deaf are at a high risk for abuse and thus a social worker should always follow these patients.

Delivery of the highest quality of care and support requires a coordinated approach amongst services including between primary and secondary care. It is important to identify hearing loss at an early age, because the earlier treatment is offered, the better the prognosis. (Level V)