Treatment with the ion lithium affects multiple organ systems, most notably the central nervous system and the GI system, causing tremors, twitching, drowsiness, a feeling of sluggishness, vomiting, diarrhea, and loss of appetite. Most minor symptoms of toxicity are treatable by adjustment of the medication dose.

Lithium's toxicity profile is also remarkable for a decreased ability to concentrate urine, hypothyroidism, weight gain, and hyperparathyroidism. The use of lithium during pregnancy is not without risks, so assessing the benefits vs. risks is a requirement before discontinuing lithium during pregnancy. Hyperparathyroidism is a consistent finding associated with lithium use, so calcium levels should be checked before and monitored throughout the duration of pharmacotherapy. It bears mention that elderly patients are more vulnerable to lithium toxicity. In cases of lithium toxicity, dialysis can be performed and is the treatment of choice, owing to lithium's low molecular weight. Lithium clearance should be maximized in hypovolemic patients by normalizing sodium and water in patients with low-volume status.

Valproic acid toxicity is manifested most commonly as central nervous system depression and potential cerebral edema, potentially leading to coma and respiratory depression. These manifestations can occur alongside pancreatitis and hyperammonemia. The healthcare team needs to recognize toxicity as management requires a focus on maintaining the airway and supportive care.