To understand how an abnormal patellar tendon reflex could indicate a potential neurological disease, it is first useful to review the basic physiology of the patellar tendon reflex. The patellar tendon reflex is elicited by stimulating the patella tendon, classically by a reflex hammer, located inferior to the patella. The stimulation stretches muscle spindles located in the quadriceps muscles, and this muscle spindle stretch excites afferent sensory neurons that innervate the muscle spindles. These afferent sensory neurons then synapse on alpha motor neurons located in the anterior horn area of the spinal cord.

In addition to synapsing directly with the efferent alpha motor neurons, the afferent sensory neurons make three additional synaptic connections in the spinal cord.

In general, it is thought that an absent or decreased patellar tendon reflex, as Westphal’s sign describes, is associated with the pathology of the PNS affecting the reflex arc at the level of the spinal cord, while hyperactive reflexes are associated with CNS pathology above the level of the spinal cord mediating the reflex.

An absent or diminished patellar tendon reflex may be due to PNS pathology affecting either the afferent sensory neurons or the efferent motor neurons. If the reflex is absent or diminished combined with sensory loss, the lesion is likely in the afferent sensory nerves.

Observation of a hyperactive patellar tendon reflex, on the other hand, generally suggests pathology to the CNS above the L2-L4 spinal cord level, where the patellar tendon reflex is mediated. The cerebral cortex and regions of the brainstem influence the deep tendon reflexes, such as the patellar tendon reflex.

Hyperthyroidism and hypothyroidism are also known to affect reflexes such as the patellar tendon reflex. Hyperthyroidism is associated with hyperreflexia and accelerated relaxation of the contracting muscles of the deep tendon reflex.

The quality of the patellar tendon reflex is a valuable clue in diagnosis. However, the diagnostic sensitivity and specificity for abnormal deep tendon reflexes are reportedly 50% to 70% and 70% to 95%, respectively (less specific with increasing age).