The first clinical sign of the disease is a white spot, which is the expression of the enamel subsurface demineralization - the surface enamel is more mineralized. If the acid challenge continues, the previously smooth enamel surface becomes rough. Eventually, enamel microcavitations and cavitations may occur - the average time that the carious lesions remain radiographically in the enamel was suggested to be three to four years

As the caries process progresses, the dentin also experiences mineral loss and bacterial invasion, which in return produces secondary dentin to protect the pulp.

**Active or Inactive?**

We can determine if a carious lesion is active or inactive according to several factors:

- Location: is the lesion in a plaque stagnation area? Is it located along the gingival margin?

- Aspect: is it white or brown? Is it matte or shiny?

- Texture: is it rough or smooth?

- Integrity: is it cavitated or non-cavitated?

- Gingival bleeding on probing: is the gingiva bleeding on probing?

A carious lesion is considered active when it shows more of these characteristics: it is whitish, matte, has a rough texture (when carefully touched with the tip of a blunt probe), has plaque stagnation, is cavitated, and if there is gingival bleeding.

By contrast, a carious lesion is presumed inactive if it has the opposite characteristics: brownish, shiny, smooth, non-cavitated, it is not associated with plaque and away from the gingival margin, and there is no gingival bleeding on probing.

**Root Caries**

A root caries also starts as a subsurface demineralization like an enamel caries; however, root caries becomes softer at an earlier stage.

**Recurrent Caries**

A recurrent or secondary caries is a new caries that forms at the restoration’s margin.