Reports in the scientific literature have found a correlation between body image disturbance and several mental and physical health outcomes.

- Evidence consistently shows that unhealthy body image is associated with obesity and physical inactivity.

- Patients that overestimate their body size may practice unhealthy weight control methods such as skipping meals, self-induced vomiting, fasting, and taking unprescribed weight-loss pills. The nutrition imbalance and extreme calorie restriction due to unhealthy weight control behaviors can lead to temporary weight loss, anemia, osteoporosis, irregular menstruation, amenorrhea, and dehydration.

- Studies consistently have shown a significant association between negative body image and depression. Body dissatisfaction and body image misperception can become even more severe in the presence of depression.

- Body image attitudes are affected by specific life context and quality of life. Body dissatisfaction may have negative outcomes, including anxiety or feeling stressful, poor self-esteem, isolation, preoccupation with appearance, and social anxiety.

- Individuals with body image disturbance may attempt dramatically to alter their appearance, for example, through seeking cosmetic surgeries. Steroid abuse and excessive gym attendance to increase muscle mass are common in patients with muscle dysmorphia.

- Body image misperception could be an important indicator of self- injurious behaviors and suicidal behaviors.

- Negative body image is associated with impaired sexual functioning and sexual dissatisfaction. Research shows that body dissatisfaction increases the risk of sexual dissatisfaction in women.

- Negative body image is associated with unsafe health behaviors such as unsafe sexual practices, smoking, and skin cancer risk behaviors.

- Research consistently shows that among psychosocial variables such as locus of control and perfectionism, body image distortion is the strongest predictor of clinical eating disorders and disordered eating behaviors.

- Body image distortion is a critical factor in the development and maintenance of anorexia nervosa, bulimia nervosa, body dysmorphic disorder, and is a known risk factor for the development of Binge Eating Disorder.

- In addition to increasing the risk of suicide and self-harming behaviors, eating disorders have the highest mortality rate among all psychiatric conditions.

- Clinical eating disorders and disordered eating can disrupt almost all major organ systems, including physiologic disruptions such as bradycardia, hypotension, and hypothermia. Medical complications of anorexia nervosa include:

Cardiovascular: bradycardia and hypotension, mitral valve prolapse, sudden death, arrhythmia, refeeding syndrome, echo changes

Endocrine and Metabolic: amenorrhea, infertility, osteoporosis, thyroid abnormalities, hypercortisolemia, hypoglycemia, neurogenic diabetes insipidus, arrested growth

Dermatologic: dry skin, alopecia, lanugo hair, starvation-associated pruritis

Hematologic: pancytopenia due to starvation, decreased ESR

Gastrointestinal: dysphagia, constipation, refeeding pancreatitis, hepatitis, acute gastric dilatation, delayed gastric emptying

Pulmonary: aspiration pneumonia, respiratory failure, spontaneous pneumothorax, emphysema

Neurologic: cerebral atrophy

Ophthalmic: lagophthalmos