Ulnar nerve injury can be caused by a number of reasons based on location of injury along the course of the nerve, most commonly at the elbow. Proximal injury to the lower trunk of the brachial plexus can result in Klumpke palsy, injury at the elbow may result in cubital tunnel syndrome, and compression at Guyon’s canal of the wrist can manifest as motor and sensory deficits in the hand.

Klumpke palsy is the manifestation of a lower trunk injury to the brachial plexus. Most commonly, lower trunk injuries are a result of an upward force on an infant’s arm, or upward traction on the arm in an adult. Injury can also be a result of traumatic vaginal delivery with traction of a baby’s abducted arm due to large birth weight infant or small birth canal. Klumpke palsy has a functional deficit of the intrinsic hand muscles presenting clinically with a complete claw hand. Clinically, observe hyperextension of MCP joint due to loss of flexors, radial deviation of wrist due to loss of flexor carpi ulnaris, and wasting of intrinsic hand muscles (lumbricals, interossei, thenar and hypothenar muscles) with flexion of the distal interphalangeal and proximal interphalangeal joints. This syndrome is also known as strap hanger’s syndrome.

Horner syndrome (ptosis, miosis, and anhydrosis) can occur due to loss of sympathetic input from T1. Pupil constriction is the result of unopposed parasympathetic input to the eye.

The most common site of ulnar nerve injury is near the elbow. Nerve pathology can be caused by anatomic damage from fracture of the medial epicondyle, osteophyte infection, soft tissue mass, or synovitis at the elbow joint. The nerve may also be damaged due to compression from prolonged periods of elbow flexion like sleep, exercise, driving, typing, or talking on phone. Cubital tunnel syndrome is a peripheral neuropathy due to chronic compression or repetitive trauma of the ulnar nerve at the elbow between the medial epicondyle of the humerus and the olecranon process of the ulna.

Congenital laxity of the cubital tunnel retinaculum can be seen, resulting hypermobility of the ulnar nerve. This can lead to repetitive subluxation and possible anterior dislocation when then elbow is flexed. Repetitive trauma at this location may result in inflammation from recurrent friction over the medial epicondyle.

Ulnar nerve impingement can also occur at the wrist due to compression through Guyon’s canal, local trauma, ganglion cysts, and external nerve compression. The ulnar nerve and artery enter Guyon's canal, a fibro-osseous tunnel formed by the pisiform and hook of the hamate. The ulnar nerve bifurcates within the canal into superficial and deep branches. Nerve compression at the wrist can also be caused by bikers with excess pressure from handlebars and prolonged compression while typing at a desk.

Diagnosis of ulnar nerve injury can be made with a thorough history, musculoskeletal and neurological physical exam. However, EMG and nerve conduction studies can be used as an adjunct in order to diagnose and localize the lesion.