The branches of the **radial artery**are best organized based on their anatomical location; in the forearm, wrist, or hand. They are listed below based on their order of origination traveling distally along the upper extremity.

**Forearm**

Radial Recurrent artery – Originates below the origin of the radial artery, typically on its lateral aspect, and travels proximally between the branches of the radial nerve to anastomose with the radial collateral artery, a branch of the deep artery of the arm.

Muscular branches – distributed along the medial aspect of the radial artery as it travels distally and provides multiple perforators to muscles on the radial aspect of the forearm.

Palmar (volar) carpal branch – Arising near the distal aspect of the pronator quadratus. It travels across the carpal bones and anastomoses with the palmar carpal branch of the ulnar artery.

Superficial palmar branch – Originating from the medial aspect of the radial artery over the radial styloid, it travels distally to anastomose with the terminal branches of the ulnar artery to form the superficial palmar arch.

**Wrist**

Dorsal carpal branch – Originates distal to the radial styloid and travels superficially over the scaphoid and anastomosis with the ulnar dorsal carpal branches to form the dorsal carpal arch.

First dorsal metacarpal artery – Arises at the level of the first metacarpal as the radial artery enters the palmar aspect of the hands to form the deep palmar arch. It is composed of two arteries that supply the medial aspect of the first digit and the lateral aspect of the second digit.

**Hand**

Princeps pollicis artery (principal artery of the thumb) – Arises as the radial artery travels medially. It supplies the lateral aspect of the thumb and the proper palmar digital arteries.

Radialis indicis artery (radial artery of the index finger) – originates near the principal artery of the thumb and runs between the heads of the first dorsal interosseous muscle to supply the lateral aspect of the index finger. Occasionally an anatomical variant may be present in which the radialis indicis arises from the princeps pollicis artery.

Deep palmar arch – The deep palmar arterial arch is formed primarily by the radial artery. It lies across the bases of the metacarpals. The deep palmar arterial arch arises from the princeps pollicis, radialis indicis, and three palmar metacarpal arteries. It terminates by anastomosing with the superficial palmar arterial arch.