**Fibrovascular Downgrowth vs. Epithelial Downgrowth**

The term retrocorneal membrane can encompass both epithelial downgrowth and fibrous downgrowth. Both can be a result of trauma or intraocular surgery; for example, fibrous downgrowth has been reported after cataract surgery

**Pseudophakic Bullous Keratopathy vs. Epithelial Downgrowth**

Pseudophakic bullous keratopathy (PBK) is the development of irreversible corneal edema after cataract surgery and postoperative inflammation. This corneal edema occurs due to the loss of corneal endothelium secondary to surgical trauma. PBK can clinically resemble epithelial downgrowth with a reduction in visual acuity, tearing, and pain. However, signs of PBK include stromal edema and sub-epithelial bullae. Epithelial downgrowth should be considered in patients undergoing penetrating keratoplasty for presumed diagnoses of PBK, and these may be distinguished immunohistochemically with the presence of anti-cytokeratin antibodies in epithelial downgrowth.

**Epithelial Downgrowth vs. Secondary Endothelial Proliferation**

Secondary endothelization usually arises from ischemia and can also present after multiple intraocular surgeries. The endothelial cells can proliferate in the angle and anterior surface of the iris. This can be considered a precursor to rubeosis iridis (neovascularization of the iris), which can lead to neovascular glaucoma, a form of secondary glaucoma. Clinically, this can appear as neovascularization of the iris. Histologically, this can be differentiated from epithelial downgrowth by a lack of stratification.