**Racial Disparities in Outcomes**

Breast cancer is the most common malignancy seen in women, excluding non-melanoma skin cancers. However, breast cancer does not affect all racial groups equally. Non-Hispanic White women are more likely to be diagnosed with breast cancer than any racial group, followed by Black, Asian/Pacific Islander, Hispanic, and American Indian/Alaska Native women with a lower incidence rate. In recent years, studies have shown an overall increase in the incidence of breast cancer in the United States, with the largest increases noted among Black and Asian/Pacific Islander women. In contrast, the incidence has remained stable among non-Hispanic White, Hispanic, and American Indian/Alaska Native women.

Yet, there is a troubling reality about the mortality rates for women with breast cancer. While the 5-year survival rate has increased for all women over the last 40 years, a substantial racial gap persists. The incidence of breast cancer is now quite similar between non-Hispanic White and Black women in the United States, yet Black women are 42% more likely to die from the disease. Black women are more likely to die of breast cancer than any other racial group at every age, even among patients with similar staging and tumor subtypes. Not only do Black women have higher mortality rates, but they are more often first diagnosed at regional or distant stages when compared with non-Hispanic White women (45% versus 35%).

Similarly, Hispanic women have a lower incidence of breast cancer than non-Hispanic White women. However, their breast cancers are often diagnosed at a later stage leading to poorer outcomes.

**Risk Factors**

All people are at risk of developing breast cancer, though several factors have been shown to alter an individual’s risk. The two strongest demographic features are gender and age. Although men are diagnosed with breast cancer at a rate of 1 in 1000, being female is the greatest single risk factor for breast cancer, with 1 in 8 women diagnosed throughout her lifetime. Age is another significant risk factor for developing breast cancer. With advancing age, the risk of breast cancer rises significantly until the age of approximately 75, at which point the risk begins to drop off again. The median age at the time of diagnosis is 61, though both Black and Hispanic females have a higher incidence of being diagnosed at younger ages. This may play a role in their increased rate of advanced disease at the time of diagnosis, although many other factors contribute to the disparity as well.

Reproductive factors such as early age of menarche, late onset of menopause, nulligravidity, advanced age at first pregnancy, hormone therapy, oral contraceptive use, duration of lactation, and high breast density have all been tied to increased breast cancer risk and vary among racial groups. Modifiable risk factors such as obesity, diet, exercise, and alcohol consumption have also been linked to breast cancer. Studies indicate that physical activity reduces breast cancer risk by lowering levels of insulin and insulin-like growth factor I and assisting with weight maintenance to avoid a high body mass index (BMI). A BMI of greater than 35 kg/m^2 has been shown to double the risk of breast cancer. Many epidemiological studies have found a linear increase in breast cancer risk with increasing alcohol consumption as well. Other lifestyle factors such as smoking, vitamin D levels, duration of sleep, air pollution, and night work are associated with increased rates of breast cancer. Many of these risk factors are inextricably related to social, cultural, environmental, and genetic predispositions, which contribute to the racial disparities seen in breast cancer outcomes, and thus, must be addressed on a systems-based level.

Breast cancer outcomes, as well as its risk factors, vary not only between racial groups but also within the socioeconomic status. Poverty is a critical driver of health disparity and is associated with poorer breast cancer outcomes among all women, regardless of race. However, because a larger proportion of minority women live in poverty, the barriers to health associated with low socioeconomic status fall more heavily on them. Low-income women have less access to early breast cancer screening and, therefore, a greater probability of late-stage diagnosis. They more often receive inadequate and disparate breast cancer treatment, which leads to higher mortality rates. Many poor communities lack the vital infrastructure providing access to primary care clinics or specialized physicians. Women living in poverty are less likely to have adequate health insurance. Studies have shown that Black women are two times as likely to be uninsured or to depend on public insurance as non-Hispanic White women, a finding in which socioeconomic status plays a large role. A recent survey of breast cancer survivors found that financial constraints prevent many minority women from accessing appropriate, timely follow-up care. Over half of the Black women who participated in the survey identified anxiety over out-of-pocket expenses as a major barrier to receiving healthcare.

Lower socioeconomic status has been linked to less education, poorer nutrition, and physical inactivity, much of which stems from social injustices such as limited school funding, decreased access to healthy foods, and lack of safe recreational spaces. All these social inequities lead to an increased prevalence of co-morbidities such as obesity, diabetes, and cardiovascular disease, which, in turn, increase the risk for breast cancer. Minority women are disproportionately affected by these socioeconomic factors contributing to breast cancer disparity. However, even when socioeconomic status is considered, studies suggest that racial disparities in breast cancer outcomes persist, indicating that other contributing factors exist.

A family history of breast cancer is one of the most widely known risk factors for developing the disease. Women with a family history of breast cancer are nearly 11 times more likely to develop the disease. That risk increases even further when inheritable gene mutations exist. Roughly 10% of breast cancers are hereditary. Of those, nearly half are due to BRCA1 (breast cancer gene 1) and BRCA2 (breast cancer gene 2) gene mutations.

The autosomal dominant BRCA1 and BRCA2 gene mutations are located on chromosomes 17 and 13, respectively. They produce tumor suppressor proteins that help repair damaged DNA. When these genes do not function properly, DNA damage is not adequately repaired, and cells are more likely to undergo genetic alterations leading to cancer development. The prevalence of these mutations varies by ethnicity. The highest rates of BRCA 1 mutations occur among Ashkenazi Jewish women (8.3%), followed by Hispanic women (3.5%), non-Hispanic White women (2.2%), Black women (1.3%), and Asian women (0.5%). Over half of the women who inherit a BRCA mutation will develop breast cancer by the age of 70. Moreover, women with BRCA mutations are more likely to develop secondary cancers such as ovarian cancer or contralateral breast cancer. They are also more likely to develop “triple-negative” cancer, which has a poorer prognosis than other breast cancers. Therefore, it is recommended that women with early-onset breast cancer or women with a family history consistent with a possible BRCA mutation have genetic testing when breast cancer is diagnosed. As gene sequencing continues to advance, other mutations increasing the risk for breast cancer have been identified as well. Some of the more common gene mutations include PTEN, TP53, MLH1, MLH2, STK11, ATM, CDH1, CHEK2, and PALB2, which should be included in genetic testing in appropriate cases.

The estrogen receptor (ER), progesterone receptor (PR), and human epidermal growth factor receptor 2 (HER2) are the most commonly used classifications of tumor biology in invasive breast cancer. The degree of tumor positivity to these receptors determines therapeutic approaches and can help predict clinical outcomes. The incidence of different hormone receptor-positive breast cancer varies by ethnic group. Women of color tend to have higher rates of ER/PR negative breast cancers, which can limit treatment options and lead to worse clinical outcomes. Black, Native American, Filipino, Chinese, Korean, Vietnamese, Indian/Pakistani, Mexican, South/Central American, and Puerto Rican women living in the United States were shown to be 1.4 to 3.1 times more likely to have ER/PR negative breast cancer when compared to non-Hispanic White women.

In addition, Black and Hispanic women are more likely to have tumors greater than 2cm in diameter at the time of diagnosis with poor differentiation and significant nuclear atypia. Furthermore, ER/PR/HER2 negative (“triple-negative”) tumors are more common among Black and Hispanic women. “Triple-negative” tumors are notoriously less responsive to standard treatments and thus portend a worse prognosis than other tumor subtypes.