**Surgery**

The main indications for surgery include those lesions refractory to conservative treatment as well those affecting the patient's daily activities, including the prevention of walking or difficulty in fitting shoes. Surgical strategy options include (1) local excision, (2) wide excision, or (3) complete fasciectomy.

- Local excision: removal of the node, with a recurrence rate up to 60% to 100%

- Wide excision: removal of the node with margins of 2 cm, with a recurrence rate up to 60%

- Complete fasciectomy: removal of the plantar fascia, with a recurrence rate of 25%

**Subtotal Plantar Fasciectomy**

S-shaped incision made, including all nodules. Dissection is performed to separate subcutaneous tissue from the plantar fascia. Isolate the plantar fascia and find its attachment to the calcaneus. Make an incision through the fascia 1 cm distal to the calcaneus and then dissect out distally to where neurovascular structures can be identified.

Ran et al. described a couple of cases in two brothers that underwent full-thickness skin grafts with free vascularized upper lateral arm flaps after extensive dermofasciectomy of their Dupuytren and Ledderhose after recurrence after multiple prior surgeries. Besides the recurrence of one plantar nodule on one foot, they had no evidence of recurrence, and the two patients were pain-free. The authors felt this was a good option for patients with severe recurrent disease (such as in diathesis). Recurrence after this procedure is found to be 47% at 13 years.

As described by Souza et al., it is important when planning for surgical intervention to be mindful of incisions over the plantar surface of the foot. Longitudinal or zigzag incisions medial to midline can put the skin at risk for necrosis due to arterial supply patterns to the plantar surface of the foot. Longitudinal incisions can also predispose the skin to form a hypertrophic scar. Incisions over weight-bearing surfaces of the foot can also cause issues as they can lead to pain while walking.