Once the ABCs (airway, breathing, circulation) have been addressed, injury-specific interventions should be undertaken.

Immediate life-threatening injuries require prompt intervention, such as emergent tube thoracostomy for large pneumothoraces and initial management of hemothorax. For cases of hemothorax, adequate drainage is imperative to prevent retained hemothorax. Retained hemothorax can lead to empyema requiring video-assisted thoracoscopic surgery.

The majority of thoracic trauma can be managed non-operatively. However, operative management should not be delayed when appropriate. Operative exploration of thoracic injuries should be considered if tube thoracostomy drainage exceeds 1000-1500mL immediately, about 200 mL per hour for 2 to 4 hours, or ongoing resuscitation (blood transfusion, persistent hypotension) with no other discernable cause.

**Admission**

Minor injuries may require close monitoring and pain control. Care should be taken in the young and the elderly. Patients with 3 or more rib fractures, a flail segment, and any number of rib fractures with pulmonary contusions, hemopneumothorax, hypoxia, or pre-existing pulmonary disease should be monitored at an advanced level of care.

**Pain Control**

Pain control significantly affects mortality and morbidity in patients with chest trauma.

Other pain control options include intrapleural nerve blocks, transdermal patches, intravenous patient control analgesia (PCA), and epidural analgesia.

Nonnarcotic transdermal patches are safe pain management options for many patients. It should be considered for patients with persistent chest wall pain despite lack of confirmed rib fractures, the patient's being discharged, or as an adjunct while admitted.

**Antibiotics**

Prophylactic antibiotics administration for tube thoracostomy for blunt thoracic trauma did not reduce the incidence of empyema or pneumonia when placed with sterile technique.

It should be considered in cases of grossly contaminated wounds or where the sterile technique was broken.

Following steps should be considered in managing pulmonary contusion due to chest trauma.

**Operative Management of Rib Fractures**

Open reduction and internal fixation (ORIF) has been shown to decrease mortality in patients with flail chest, shorten the duration of mechanical ventilation, reduce hospital length of stay, and reduce intensive care length of stay.

Most pulmonary contusions require supportive therapy until the contusion heals. Because contusions can gradually evolve over the first 24-48 hours after trauma, close monitoring is required. The goal of therapy is to prevent respiratory insufficiency, failure, and complications.

**Supportive care**like postural drainage, suctioning, chest physiotherapy, incentive spirometry, encouraging coughing, and deep breathing can be tried to prevent atelectasis. Positive pressure ventilation using CPAP and BiPAP may be used.

**Surgical stabilization**may be required in the case of multiple rib fractures/ flail chest to correct pulmonary mechanics. Patients refractory to all conventional therapies have been successfully managed by extracorporeal gas exchange (ECMO).