**History**

History should include the onset of pain, description, mechanism of injury if applicable, location, radiation of pain, quality, severity, factors contributing to relief or worsening of the pain, frequency of the pain, duration of the pain, and any breakthrough pain. A verbal numeric rating scale (VNRS) or number scale for pain is a common measure to determine the severity of pain, numbered from 0 to 10. This tool is commonly used for pain intensity. Furthermore, associated symptoms should be assessed, such as muscle spasms or aches, temperature changes, restrictions to range of motion, morning stiffness, weakness, changes in muscle strength, changes in sensation, and hair, skin, or nail changes.

There are multiple acronyms used to obtain the history of a patient's pain. Some of the most commonly used abbreviations are "COLDERAS" and "OLDCARTS." These acronyms summarize the character, onset, location, duration of exacerbating symptoms, relieving symptoms, radiation of pain, associated symptoms, and severity of illness. "PQRST" stands for provocation or palliation, quality, radiation or region, severity, and timing.

In addition to the patient's symptoms, the significance of the impact of the pain on day-to-day function should be discussed, and a review of daily living activities. It is important to understand how pain (particularly chronic pain) affects the patient’s quality of life. Is pain impacting relationships or hobbies? Does the patient find themselves becoming depressed? Is the patient able to sleep throughout the night or exercise regularly? Can the patient go to work without limitations? Are activities of daily living affected, such as toileting, dressing, bathing, or walking? Is eating limited or restricted?

Chronic pain is common in the elderly. The self-reporting of pain can be difficult in this population. Self-reporting of pain is essential for identifying and treating pain, while the inability to describe or communicate pain leads to undertreatment. Often, elderly patients describe pain differently than the average population. For example, they may complain of soreness or discomfort.

A multidimensional assessment of a patient's pain and the severity of their pain can be completed. A Pain, Enjoyment, General Activity (PEG) tool can aid the multidimensional assessment of patients in pain.

The Four-item Patient Health Questionnaire or PHQ-4 combines the PHQ9 and GAD7 assessment tools used to evaluate depression and anxiety, respectively.

The Defense and Veterans Pain Rating Scale (DVRPS) is a five-item tool with a 0 to 10 out pain scale, as well as an assessment of the impact of pain on sleep, mood, stress, and activity levels.

In children's self-reporting, behavioral observation scales are used to assess pain.

The Pediatric Pain Questionnaire and the Adolescent and Pediatric Pain Tool are used to assess the location of a patient's pain as well. The patient is asked to draw on the body map where they feel pain.

Observational pain assessment tools are used in populations who cannot self-report. The facial expression, fussiness, distractibility, ability to be consoled, verbal responsiveness, and motor control are observational findings used in such an assessment tool. Observational pain assessment in infants or young children can use the (r-FLACC) tool.

It is particularly challenging to assess pain in nonverbal children with neurologic impairment (NI). Caregivers are often needed to help determine changes in the patient's behavior. Grimacing, moaning, increased muscle tone, crying, arching, and atypical behavior such as aggressive behavior are a few symptoms to monitor in this population. Nonverbal children with NI include the Revised Face, Legs, Activity, Cry, Consolability (r-FLACC) scale and the Individualized Numeric Rating Scale (INRS). The assessment adds specific behavior for atypical presentations.

The Brief Pain Inventory (BPI) can be used to assess patients' beliefs as they pertain to pain and the impact of pain on their lives.

**Physical**

A detailed physical, including musculoskeletal, neurologic, and psychiatric exams, should be completed, as well as a focused examination of the area of pain.