The patient should be positioned to suitably expose their wound site and the area may be draped off.

Closed wounds are covered with a specialized adhesive dressing, the edges of which are reinforced with wide strips of transparent adhesive sealant tape to create a firm, airtight seal around the dressing. This is the single most essential part of any of the NPWT, as, without an adequate seal, the sub-atmospheric pressure cannot be achieved, and therapy will not be delivered.

Open wounds are covered with a specialized porous foam dressing, which is cut by hand to the exact dimensions of the wound unless it is available in a pre-cut formulation. The foam dressing must cover the whole wound, ideally in a single piece; if the wound is too large, multiple pieces may be utilized to gain adequate coverage. It is essential to document the number of pieces utilized, as this is important for when the dressing is changed to avoid retaining any pieces of foam inside the wound bed.

The foam dressing is covered in turn by large strips of transparent adhesive sealant tape to create a firm, airtight seal around the foam dressing. Depending on the VAC system to hand, a suction drain tube is either placed over the foam dressing before applying the transparent adhesive sealant tape or applied as part of a separate adhesive dressing that is placed on top of the transparent adhesive sealant tape.

Upon completion of the wound dressing, the NPWT suction device should be connected to the suction drain tube to test successful therapy delivery, which is indicated by an electronic signal on the suction device.