There are medical and surgical treatment options for cholangiocarcinoma, but surgery is the only curative therapy. The effectiveness of corrective surgery depends on the tumor site, the extent of bile duct involvement, nodal involvement, metastatic involvement, and the relationship of the tumor to critical vasculature in the vicinity. Typically, extrahepatic tumors have the best surgical outcomes. However, recurrence is widespread even with complete resection.

In patients with advanced disease, the purpose of treatment is to achieve adequate palliation through biliary stent placement, photodynamic therapy, transarterial chemoembolization, and radiofrequency ablation in selected cases of mass-forming lesions. Also, biliary bypass surgery is considered for palliation in patients in whom stent placement fails or is not possible. Liver transplantation can increase survival time in selected patients.

Surgical techniques for perihilar cholangiocarcinoma are improved by extended resection, portal vein embolization, and associating liver partition and portal vein ligation for staged hepatectomy. Criteria for resectability is defined by the following features; the absence of retropancreatic and paraceliac nodal metastases or distant liver metastases, the absence of invasion of the portal vein or main hepatic artery (some centers support en bloc resection with vascular reconstruction in such cases), the absence of extrahepatic adjacent organ invasion and lack of disseminated disease.

In patients eligible for surgical resection, challenges are to achieve negative bile duct margins, adequate liver remnant function, and adequate portal and arterial inflow to the liver remnant. Resection with a microscopically negative margin is the only way to cure patients with perihilar-hilar cholangiocarcinoma. Today, resection of the caudate lobe and part of segment 4, combined with a right or left hepatectomy, bile duct resection, lymphadenectomy of the hepatic hilum, and sometimes vascular resection, is the standard surgical procedure for most of the perihilar/hilar cholangiocarcinomas.

The type of surgery is based on the anatomical subtype and the tumor's location. Intrahepatic cholangiocarcinoma is usually treated by hepatic resection to achieve negative resection margins. For intrahepatic-peripheral tumors, resection of the involved hepatic segment or lobe is the preferred method. For intrahepatic-intraductal tumors, hepatic lobectomy or segmentectomy with excision of the involved hepatic duct is usually performed. Surgical treatment of perihilar cholangiocarcinoma depends upon the Bismuth-Corlette classification. For type 1 and 2 lesions, the procedure is en bloc resection of the extrahepatic bile ducts and gallbladder with 5 to 10 mm bile duct margins and a regional lymphadenectomy with Roux-en-Y hepaticojejunostomy reconstruction. Type 3 tumors usually also require hepatic lobectomy or trisectionectomy. For Type 3 and type 4 tumors, aggressive techniques such as multiple hepatic segment resection with portal vein resection (hilar en bloc resection) to achieve negative margins should not be a contraindication to resection. For the extrahepatic cholangiocarcinomas, pancreatoduodenectomy or a pylorus-preserving Whipple procedure are usually performed.

For curative resection in the management of cholangiocarcinoma, the location and local extension of the tumor dictates the required surgical planning. Accordingly, for the management of Bismuth-Corlette type IIIa tumors, right hepatic lobectomy, with or without resection of the adjacent caudate lobe, is part of the surgical plan. The alternative terminology is hemi-hepatectomy or extended hemi-hepatectomy plus hepatic caudate lobectomy. The index applied to illustrate the longitudinal extent of required resection is the imaginary line between U and P points. The former one relates to the posterior portal sagittal part, and the latter one refers to the right posterior portal branch.

Adjuvant chemotherapy or radiation have not been documented to be beneficial in the management. However, neoadjuvant chemoradiation followed by adequate surgical resection is recommended to manage perihilar tumors. Some specific anatomic points should be considered while managing the Bismuth-Corlette type III a and b. The right hepatic duct bifurcates earlier than the left. Therefore, tumoral involvement up to the second-order branches is more predictable in type IIIa than in type IIIb. Therefore, type IIIa might be adequately resected with the segmentectomy of segments I and IVb. The exact amount of resection is controversial. That said, if other margins of the tumor are clear in the frozen section assessment, the presence of severe dysplasia or carcinoma in situ would classify the resection as R0.

The other important point is the biliary duct reconstruction following the resection. Accordingly, if the hepatic duct openings in the cutting surface are close, Roux-en-Y anastomosis to the remaining lobe, which in type IIIa would be the left lobe, is recommended. However, if the hepatic duct stumps are far from each other, multi-port anastomosis is recommended.