**Medical Treatment**

Earlier, Pythium was grouped as fungal species; hence antifungals in the form of 5% natamycin suspension hourly, 1% voriconazole, or 1% itraconazole hourly were considered the first line of drugs. Hasika et al., in their analysis, highlighted that existing antifungals have no role in Pythium keratitis management. Since, before culture results, Pythium hyphae closely mimic fungal hyphae, and it is difficult to distinguish them clinically, antifungals still have a role to play in the initial management.

**Antibacterials**

Currently, the approved medical treatment of choice is topical antibacterials in the form of linezolid, azithromycin, tigecycline, minocycline, tetracycline, doxycycline, mupirocin, clarithromycin, and chloramphenicol. The most commonly used are 0.2% linezolid and 1% azithromycin hourly due to the easy availability and limited toxicity. The dose is tapered based on clinical response. Bagga et al., in their in vitro analysis of culture isolates, proved that antibacterials are superior to antifungals in managing this entity. Continued use of anti-Pythium drug hourly for weeks may result in toxicity and promote corneal thinning. Hence care must be taken to taper the dosage based on clinical response.

**Surgical Management**

**Therapeutic Keratoplasty (TPK)**

Due to the high virulence, the rapid proliferation of the microorganism, limited response to medical treatment, and high recurrence rate, early TPK is warranted in Pythium keratitis with a good 1 mm margin clearance (Figure 2). Hasika et al., in their retrospective study, showed that therapeutic keratoplasty (TPK) is the mainstay of treatment. The subjects not resolving maximal medical therapy for 10-14 days or developing endophthalmitis, scleritis, descematocoele, or corneal perforation should undergo early TPK.

**Evisceration and Enucleation**

Due to the rapid proliferation, high virulence, and tendency to spread towards the limbus and deeper structures, complications like endophthalmitis and panophthalmitis are not uncommon in Pythium keratitis cases. The patients developing non- resolving endophthalmitis and panophthalmitis should undergo evisceration and enucleation, respectively.

**Other Options**

**Cryotherapy with Ethanol**

Cryotherapy with ethanol as a treatment modality has also been utilized in managing Pythium keratitis. The proposed mechanism for cryotherapy is cellular destruction by ischemic infarction and dehydration and accumulation of toxic concentrates within the cell wall, which further destroys cells. Ethanol acts by decreasing cellular life by increasing cell lysis, reducing proliferation, and promoting apoptosis. Agrawal et al. used cryotherapy in 6 patients of Pythium with involvement of angle structures and sclera. They found that only one patient had a recurrence, thus proving it to be an effective treatment modality.

**Cyanoacrylate Glue with Bandage Contact Lens (BCL)**

In patients with early stromal melt, descematocoele, and corneal perforation, cyanoacrylate glue, along with BCL, acts as a potential rescuer. Due to its antibacterial properties and linezolid and azithromycin, cyanoacrylate glue has synergistic actions and can prevent vision-threatening devastating sequelae. Gurnani et al., in their case report, highlighted the first case of successful management of pediatric Pythium keratitis using cyanoacrylate glue, azithromycin, and Linezolid with excellent visual outcomes.