Huntington disease is an autosomal dominant disorder caused by the elongation of CAG repeats on the short arm of chromosome 4p16.3 in the HTT gene. The gene encodes for the HTT protein, which plays a role in the synaptic function and also plays a crucial role in the post-embryonic period. It is thought to have anti-apoptotic functions as well as protect against the toxic mutant HTT. There is some evidence that the mutant protein leads to both an addition as well as a loss of function. Intranuclear and intracytoplasmic inclusions are found in several areas of the brain. It is, however, unknown if the inclusions themselves play a role in the pathogenesis or if they are pathogenic themselves. The brain atrophy, particularly in the striatum with associated extensive neuronal loss, is well known.

Patients commonly have the HTT allele with CAG repeats in the range of 36 to 55. Those with juvenile-onset of the disease usually have CAG repeats greater than 60. Patients with alleles in the range of 27 to 35 do not show the disease phenotype but are, however, prone to repeat instability. There is an inverse correlation between the length of the repeats and the age of onset, which is determined by the onset of the first motor manifestation. The length of the repeats also determines 70% of the variation in the age of onset. The anticipation phenomenon is seen in the paternal line of inheritance, which arises due to the instability of the CAG repeats during spermatogenesis.

Studies have found three significant categories of risk factors for the onset of the disease. The CAG repeat lengths in the HTT gene, instability of CAG, and genetic modifiers were identified as risk factors. Among these, the most critical risk factor was found to be CAG repeat lengths. Genetic factors play an essential role in the progression of the disease. CAG length is also a significant factor for the progression of the disease, especially in cognitive, motor, and neurological disturbances.