**Sentinel Event Policy**

All healthcare organizations should have a policy for responding to a sentinel event. In 1996, the Joint Commission instituted a formal sentinel event policy. It partners with hospitals that have experienced a sentinel event in the investigation, analysis, and development of corrective action plans.

- Improve patient care and prevent such safety events in the future

- Analyze the root causes that contributed to the sentinel event (cultural, latent, and active failures), and develop strong, actionable plans

- Enhance general awareness and disseminate the learnings about patient sentinel events, root factors, and mitigation strategies

- Maintain the trust of the public, staff, and hospitals that patient safety is a topmost priority

**Sentinel Event Database**

The Joint Commission collects and analyzes the data from the sentinel events reviewed and reported by the organizations. The de-identified data helps in general awareness and dissemination of error prevention strategies to all hospitals. The Joint Commission’s website provides resources on sentinel events, statistics, webinars, and quick safety tips.

**Reporting a Sentinel Event to the Joint Commission**

Reporting a sentinel event to the Joint Commission is voluntary.

- The lessons learned from the sentinel event increase the awareness of the potential sentinel events, root causes, and strategies for prevention. Other hospitals and organizations can learn from the Joint Commission’s sentinel event database.

- Self-reporting allows consultation with Joint Commission staff for the systematic review and root cause analysis of the sentinel event and the development of an action plan.

- It reinforces the hospital’s message to the public and staff regarding its culture of safety.