**Acute Thyroiditis**

Infectious thyroiditis: Patients with suppurative thyroiditis can be managed with nonsurgical management. Antibiotics are used to control infection. NSAIDs are used to control severe neck pain and inflammation. Surgical intervention, like abscess drainage, can be done if clinically indicated.

Radiation-induced thyroiditis: Treatment is symptomatic with NSAIDs or prednisone in severe cases. These patients are increased risk of hypothyroidism and should be followed with a thyroid function test.

**Subacute Thyroiditis**

It is usually self-limiting, and symptomatic management is all that is needed. NSAIDs are preferred for pain control. In case of severe pain and severe symptoms of thyrotoxicosis, corticosteroids, and beta-blockers can be used for the treatment of inflammation and tachycardia due to thyrotoxicosis. The hypothyroid phase is usually mild and does not require treatment.

**Chronic Thyroiditis**

Autoimmune thyroiditis: Hashimoto thyroiditis with normal thyroid function can be monitored without treatment with levothyroxine.

Postpartum thyroiditis: It is usually transient, and 80% of patients eventually become euthyroid. Hypothyroid patients can be treated with levothyroxine and monitored with regular thyroid function.

Amiodarone induced thyroiditis: It can cause both hypothyroidism and hyperthyroidism.

Hypothyroidism- Once diagnosed, amiodarone is usually continued along with levothyroxine replacement. If amiodarone is stopped for a different reason, individuals without previous thyroid dysfunction usually progress to euthyroid state with the withdrawal of amiodarone.

Hyperthyroidism - Treatment of type I hyperthyroidism is done with beta-blockers and methimazole. For type 2 thyroiditis, the use of glucocorticoids is recommended to alleviate the hyperthyroid symptoms.

Lithium: Treatment is to continue lithium and start treatment with levothyroxine. It can also cause hyperthyroidism and Graves disease secondary to goiter formation.

Riedel thyroiditis: Treatment is surgical.