# Introduction

The coronary arteries play a crucial role in maintaining the function of the cardiac muscle by delivering oxygen and other nutrients. The anterior right atrial arteries (ARAA) originate from the right coronary artery (RCA), which emerges from the anterior ascending aorta. The ARAA primarily supplies blood to the anterior portion of the right atrium and secondarily supplies the inter-atrial groove and part of the left atrium.

# Structure and Function

The right anterior branch of atrial arteries originates within the first two centimeters of the RCA along the right atrioventricular groove just after the conus artery.

Like other blood vessels, the coronary arteries share the same characteristic layers, namely, the tunica intima, tunica media, and tunica adventitia.

The tunica intima is the inner-most layer of the ARAA and is composed of a simple squamous endothelium followed by a sub-endothelial layer and an internal elastic lamina. The multi-faceted endothelium functions as a selective barrier that can allow diapedesis of immune cells, the passage of chemical messengers, and the movement of fluid, electrolytes, and other molecules.

The tunica media is the next main layer of the ARAA. This portion of the arteries contains five layers of smooth muscle organized in a hexagonal arrangement and typically contains elastic fibers, proteoglycans, and collagen.

Lastly, the tunica adventitia is the outer-most layer, which is made up of fibroblasts and collagen. Within the tunica adventitia are vessels and nerves that supply and innervate the coronary arteries.

# Embryology

When discussing coronary artery embryology, there are three main topics to consider: the sinusoids, vascular endothelial network, and coronary buds of the aortic sinuses. The sinusoids are formed in the subepicardial space early in fetal development and are extensions of the trabeculae into the myocardium. The purpose of the sinusoids is to facilitate metabolic exchange between blood and fetal cardiac tissue before the establishment of proper coronary circulation.

During this stage, an in situ vascular network is developing within the epicardial atrioventricular and interventricular grooves. As the bulbus cordis begins to separate into the aorta and the pulmonary artery, the coronary buds are on both the right and left sinuses of Valsalva, just above the aortic valve primordia.

The ARAA arises from the proximal branching of the newly formed RCA established by the vascular endothelial network.

# Blood Supply and Lymphatics

The ARAAs are smaller arteries within the coronary circulation and therefore do not contain a network of vasa vasorum microvessels. In humans, vessels that are less than 0.5 millimeters in lumen diameter do not contain vasa vasorum.

# Physiologic Variants

The ARAA branch from the RCA at a proximal, yet variable, location. The average distance from the ostium of the right coronary artery to the ARAA is 18 millimeters. Also, the ARAA in a normal adult heart has an average cross-sectional diameter of 1.5 millimeters with a range of 0.8 to 2.3 millimeters.

# Surgical Considerations

Due to the high volume of open-heart operations involving the right atrium, surgeons need to be familiar with the arrangement of the atrial arteries. The ARAA are considered major arteries of the right atrium and are therefore of surgical significance. Surgeons must be aware of the nature and variations of the ARAA when working around the atrial chambers. It is crucial to avoid them during procedures to prevent postoperative atrial arrhythmias or other atrial dysfunction.

# Clinical Significance

More often than not, the anterior right atrial branch of the RCA supplies the SA node via the sinoatrial nodal artery. In these patients, substantial occlusion of the RCA due to coronary artery disease (CAD) may induce arrhythmias, such as atrial fibrillation, caused by the reduced blood flow to the SA node. Myocardial Ischemia is another common complication of reduced blood flow to the myocardium caused by CAD. Atherosclerotic plaques clogging the RCA or ARAA could potentially result in angina or myocardial infarction. This lack of blood flow to the atrium could cause cessation or severe impairment of cardiac function and send the patient into a cardiogenic shock.