A standard psychiatric interview is often used to make a diagnosis of personality disorders. Otto Kernberg's structured clinical interview, which was created in 1981, has continued to undergo revisions and restructuring as a structured clinical interview for personality disorders. The current version is a semi-structured diagnostic interview with questions focused on personality organization, defenses, object relations, and coping skills. This interview focuses on interpersonal relationships. The current version is copyrighted by the Personality Institute at The Weill Cornell Institute. The interview is based on psychodynamic principles and is expected to be used by persons who had have had previous training in psychoanalytical work.

Other instruments may measure the severity of narcissistic personality disorder, such as the five-factor narcissism inventory that looks at the five aspects of general personality. There are about 148 questions that are asked on the measure.

The instruments above are mostly used in research settings. In the clinical world, the clinical interview is of most value. An excellent clinical interview focuses on interpersonal relationships as persons with an NPD often present with conflicts with others in inpatient or outpatient settings. In outpatient settings, referrals are often made at the behest of a loved one. In inpatient or emergency room settings, symptoms often come into play when there is interaction with other personnel, especially others in authority. Persons with NPD often describe themselves in relation to others with themes of comparison.

Often a clinician's countertransference may help with forming a diagnosis. Often, persons with NPD create feelings of either feeling flattered or admired, or on the other extreme, having feelings of inadequacy and low self-worth.