The majority of cases of mastoiditis result from the progression of acute otitis media. The ear subdivides into three cavities: the outer ear, middle ear, and inner ear. In particular, the middle ear cavity extends from the tympanic membrane to the cochlea and includes important structures such as the Malleus, Incus, Stapes, and Eustachian tube. The middle ear cavity is continuous with the lining of the mastoid air cells, which are a portion of the temporal bone.

The Eustachian tube is a connection from the middle ear to the oral cavity. It is responsible for draining fluid or air from the middle ear. If this tube becomes narrowed via inflammation or debris, it provides an opportunistic environment for pathogens to grow. This lining in the middle ear cavity, as mentioned above, is continuous with the lining of the mastoid air cells. In acute mastoiditis, the extension of the infection from the middle ear to the mastoid air cells can lead to bony septation erosion and coalescence of small air cells into larger ones full of pus referred to as acute coalescent mastoiditis. The pus filling this eroding cavity can extend via direct extension, thrombophlebitis, and bony pathways resulting in sequela that include subperiosteal abscess, sigmoid sinus thrombosis, meningitis, and intracranial abscess.

The most common pathogen in mastoiditis is streptococcal pneumonia. Other common pathogens include Group A beta-hemolytic streptococci, Staphylococcus aureus, Streptococcus pyogenes, and Haemophilus influenzae. Risk factors for mastoiditis include age less than two years old, immunocompromised state, recurrent acute otitis media, or incomplete pneumatization fo the mastoid process.