Bowel ischemia frequently poses a diagnostic dilemma. These patients may exhibit non-specific signs and symptoms such as vomiting, nausea, and leukocytosis. The cause of bowel ischemia can be due to small intestinal ischemia(known as mesenteric ischemia) and large intestinal ischemia(known as colonic ischemia). Mesenteric ischemia is categorized based on the etiology of ischemia, which includes mesenteric arterial embolism, mesenteric arterial thrombosis, NOMI, mesenteric venous thrombosis, and chronic mesenteric ischemia. While the physical exam may reveal that the patient has a surgical abdomen, the cause is difficult to know without proper imaging studies. While the diagnose of bowel ischemia was made, it is essential to consult with an interprofessional team of specialists that include a general surgeon, vascular surgeon, gastrointestinal physician, interventional radiologist, and intensive care unit physician. The nurses are also vital members of the interprofessional group as they will monitor the patient's vital signs and assist with the education of the patient and family. In the postoperative period for pain, wound infection, and ileus, the pharmacist will ensure that the patient is on the right analgesics, antiemetics, and appropriate antibiotics. Also, Pharmacist consultation should be ordered for identifying the offending drugs and choosing the preference for medication therapy. The radiologist also plays a vital role in determining the cause. Without providing a proper history, the radiologist may not be sure what to look for or what additional radiologic exams may be needed. The American College of Radiology Appropriateness Criteria is evidence-based guidelines for mesenteric ischemia that are reviewed by an interprofessional expert committee. The current guidelines have been developed after an exhaustive review of current medical literature from peer-reviewed journals to determine the appropriateness of radiological imaging and treatment procedures by the committee. The summary of recommendations is as follows. CTA abdomen and pelvis with IV contrast is the recommended initial imaging examination for patients with suspected acute mesenteric ischemia. CTA abdomen and pelvis with IV contrast or MRA abdomen and pelvis without and with IV contrast is recommended as the initial imaging examination in patients with suspected chronic mesenteric ischemia. CTA abdomen and pelvis with IV contrast have been shown to provide the best accuracy and inter-reader agreement for grading mesenteric vessel stenosis compared to MRA and US.