Usually, the primary concern with a varicocele is infertility. Many men with varicoceles are fertile, but others have sperm that is compromised in function, morphology, numbers, or movement. Researchers theorize that the sperm may be damaged due to excess heat caused by increased oxidative stress on the sperm from blood pooling causing reduced oxygenation, direct hydrostatic pressure injury effects on the testis, toxin formation, hypoxia, autoimmunity, or an increase in adrenal steroids concentration being delivered to the testicle since the adrenal veins empty into the left renal vein almost directly opposite the entry of the internal spermatic vein. The most accepted theory is that increased blood flow leads to higher intratesticular temperatures which are the main cause of impaired sperm in varicoceles.

While untreated varicoceles may progress, they seldom cause pain although this is possible.  Suggested mechanisms for such pain include increased testicular temperatures, higher venous pressure, oxidative stress, hormonal imbalances, reflux of toxic metabolites from the kidneys or adrenals, hypoxia, or possible stretching of nerve fibers in the spermatic cords from the dilated varicocele complex. Orchialgia associated with varicoceles is typically described as aching, dull, or throbbing but rarely can be acute, sharp, or stabbing.

It is thought that large varicoceles might eventually cause testicular failure, ultimately resulting possibly in lower hormonal production, oligospermia, and testicular atrophy. Varicoceles can also decrease sperm nuclear DNA integrity which has been linked to reduced sperm motility, viability, counts, and abnormal morphology.

Varicoceles can cause a reduction in testosterone production by the Leydig cells in the testes. Varicocelectomy leads to improvement in the serum testosterone level in >80% of patients, with a mean increase between 100 and 140 ng/mL. The greatest increase in testosterone was found in hypogonadal (testosterone <300 ng/mL) men.  This finding suggests that varicocelectomy might be a viable surgical option to permanently treat low testosterone levels in hypogonadal men with significant varicoceles.