**Screening Recommendations**

Screening methodologies for various cancers have helped in early detection of and better survival of patients. For lung cancers, there have been debates since the 1960s about appropriate screening methods and the risk-benefit ratio. For screening to be effective, implementation in the right population with the benefits outweighing the possible harms is the key. Therefore, it should be limited to people at high risk for the disease as there is a real possibility of harm associated with overdiagnosis including unnecessary tests, invasive procedures, and psychological distress.

There were several studies done in the 1960s and 70s using chest X-rays as screening tools. These studies, though limited by the lack of a control group, showed no mortality benefit for chest x-ray screening.

The United States Preventative Services Task Force (USPSTF) based their recommendations on the findings from the NLST. In 2013 they recommended lung cancer screening with low dose computed tomography in adults within the age range of 55-80 years with a history of 30-pack-years of smoking who are active smokers or quit within the last 15 years.

Globally, tobacco use remains the most significant cause of lung cancers, and even with the current screening technologies, primary prevention is far more effective in decreasing the occurrence and mortality associated with lung cancer. Smoking cessation should be emphasized in every clinical encounter and recognized as the most effective way to counteract lung cancer incidence. Tobacco use directly relates to over 80% of lung cancer deaths.

**Limitations**

The biggest limitation of any screening test is its sensitivity and specificity. For LDCT there is a very real concern for over diagnosis leading to inflated costs and emotional distress. Across all the trials conducted for the LDCT approximately 20% of individuals screened had a positive result, however, only 1% had lung cancer. Everyone who screened positive required follow-up tests including further imaging and in some rare instances invasive testing for biopsies and surgical interventions for benign lesions.

Radiation exposure is another very serious concern related to regular screening. The risk of radiation from medical tests is low however it is a theoretical possibility. The ionizing radiation can cause DNA damage leading to double-stranded breaks which if not repaired correctly, will lead to mutations and possible cancers. Therefore, it is important to select the right population and to have a detailed conversation with patients about the risks and benefits.

As with all screening modalities, LDCT requires open and honest communication between patients and clinicians and it is imperative that the physician and patient engage in shared decision making. Shared decision making allows for providers to give patients all the relevant information regarding a screening test, including the possibility of false-positive results, the options for further diagnostic testing and the risks associated with undertaking each test. Recommendations are also that when discussing screening options for lung cancer, tobacco cessation must be part of the discussion, and the harms of tobacco use explained in detail and not restricted just to the association with lung cancer.

USPSTF recommends annual screening with the LDCT. Studies have shown that using decision aids which can be written, video or internet-based information about outcomes and options, help patients understand the recommendations and improve adherence. A Cochrane collaboration showed that when given educational aids, patients had an increased engagement in decision-making, better knowledge and a better understanding of risks and benefits.