Aspiration for ideal fracture healing necessitates a comprehensive knowledge and understanding of all the factors that directly or indirectly influence the healing process. The main pillars of fracture healing are a good biological environment with adequate blood supply and a good mechanical environment with adequate stability.

The AO has set four principles for ideal fracture healing. This includes fracture reduction to restore the anatomy, fracture fixation to achieve absolute or relative stability, preservation of the blood supply to the bone and surrounding soft tissues, and early and safe mobilization.

The list of factors that affect fracture healing is exhaustive; however, it can broadly be categorized into local and systemic categories.

**Local Factors**

- **The blood supply and the biological environment are**the most important local factors affecting the fracture healing process. Immediately after the fracture, the blood vessels in the surrounding area get disrupted with resultant low blood. This improves over the next few hours to days after the fracture and reaches its highest at two weeks, then declines back to normal between 3 to 5 months. Reduced blood supply to the fracture site can lead to delayed union or non-union. Bone blood supply should also be considered in the operative treatment of fractures and the used prosthesis. For example, reaming for intramedullary nailing would compromise 50% to 80% of the endosteal circulation. Also, canal tight-fitting nails compromise the endosteal blood supply compared to looser-fitting nails, which allow better endosteal reperfusion.

- **Fracture Characteristics and the mechanical environment:**Excessive movement and malalignment. Extensive soft tissue damage and soft tissues caught within the fracture site can lead to delayed union or non-union, as well as the amount of bone comminution and loss. Additionally, specific fracture patterns have more probabilities of developing non-union or delayed union, such as segmental fractures or fractures with butterfly fragments.

- **Infection: c**an significantly compromise the healing process with a consequent non-union or delayed unions.

**Systemic Factors**

- **Advanced age:**elderly have a lower capacity for fracture healing when compared to their younger population. Aging influences the inflammatory response during fracture healing. With aging, there is a weakness in the immune response and increased systemic pro-inflammatory status.

- **Obesity:**In animal studies, lower levels of FGF and TGF-β, and higher levels of TNF-α, were reported more in obese mice and contributed to delayed fracture healing.

- 
**Anemia**

- **Endocrine conditions:**diabetes mellitus affects the fracture healing process in multiple aspects; fracture callus would have low cellular content with resultant weak callus. Endochondral ossification is delayed, and fracture healing is generally prolonged compared to the general population. Menopause and parathyroid problems also compromise the fracture-healing process.

- **Steroid administration**.

- **Malnutrition:**a high proportion of the patients developing delayed union or non-union were reported to have metabolic compromise, especially of vitamin D. Calcium deficiency is another compromising factor of the bone union. Calcium deficiency can be secondary to gastrointestinal malabsorption or endocrinal problems such as secondary hyperparathyroidism.

- **Smoking:**nicotine inhibits angiogenesis and forms weak calluses with an overall delay in the fracture healing process.

- Medications: Certain medications can directly or indirectly affect the fracture healing process. NSAIDs can result in delayed union due to COX enzyme inhibition. For example, systemic corticosteroids have been reported to increase the non-union rate of intertrochanteric femur fracture. Conversely, long-term use of bisphosphonates has been associated with osteoporotic fractures such as subtrochanteric femoral insufficiency fractures. Quinolones have been reported to be toxic to chondrocytes with the consequent compromise of the fracture healing process.

Fractures have significant mortality and morbidity; an interprofessional approach is essential for good outcomes.

- **Dietary supplements**- calcium, protein, vitamins C and D.

- **Bone stimulators**- which can be electrical, electromagnetic, and ultrasound. The current effectiveness of these methods is still equivocal, and this area requires further research. There are**four principal modes**of electrical stimulation; the**direct current**reduces osteoclast activity and increases osteoblast activity by creating an alkaline tissue environment and reducing oxygen concentration. In contrast, the**alternating current**(AC) affects collagen synthesis and cartilage calcification. The other two types are magnetic, either**pulsed electromagnetic fields**that result in the calcification of fibrocartilage or**combined magnetic fields**that increase the concentrations of transforming growth factor beta and bone morphogenic proteins.**LIPUS**improves fracture healing by increasing chondrocytes, soft callus formation, and, consequently, earlier endochondral ossification.

- **A bone graft involves using**bone to help provide a scaffold to the newly forming bone. This graft can be from the patient's body (autograft) or a deceased donor (allograft).