The cardiovascular, respiratory, and cerebrovascular systems are primarily impacted during cardiac arrest. CPR aims to restore these systems' functions as soon as possible after cardiac arrest.

**Cardiovascular System**

The cardiovascular system comprises the heart and blood vessels. The heart receives de-oxygenated blood from body tissues through the inferior and superior vena cava and transfers it to the lungs for oxygenation through the pulmonary arteries. Oxygenated blood is transferred to the heart through the pulmonary veins and pumped to the body through the aorta. The coronary arteries supply the heart with blood, oxygen, and nutrients.

Cardiac arrest may result from myocardial infarction due to the obstruction of blood supply to the heart or medical conditions that alter the heart's normal function. Arrhythmias such as pulseless ventricular tachycardia and ventricular fibrillation (VT/VF) cause fatal abnormal electrical activity of the heart, significantly compromising the cardiac output and leading to cardiac arrest.

CPR aims to restore and ensure circulation and coronary blood flow through chest compressions and defibrillation with electric shock in the case of VT/VF. Successful cardioversion in cases of VT/VF in the prone position has been reported, and the need to turn the patient to a supine position may not be necessary.

Few studies have suggested that prone CPR may be more effective than standard CPR in the supine position. In a pilot feasibility study, six adult ICU patients who had failed a 45-minute-long standard CPR were switched to prone CPR prone. There was a significant improvement in systolic and mean arterial blood pressures. However, none of the patients had a return of spontaneous circulation.

Wei et al., using cadavers, also demonstrated that prone CPR generated greater systolic (79.4mmhg vs. 55.4 mmHg) and diastolic (16.7 mmHg vs. 13.0 mmHg) blood pressures compared with CPR in the supine position.

The less forward movement of the abdomen and its structures due to the contact with a dense surface during prone CPR may improve the effectiveness of chest compressions compared with CPR in the supine position.

**Respiratory System**

The respiratory system encompasses the upper and lower airways, the lungs, and the muscles of respiration. The respiratory system's primary function is to bring oxygen into the body for tissue oxygenation and eliminate carbon dioxide (CO2). Any condition that impairs the ability of the respiratory system to perform these functions efficiently may cause cardiac arrest.

If tissue hypoxia and gaseous exchange are not managed effectively during CPR, metabolic acidosis ensues, which impairs the effectiveness of chemical and electrical therapy. Therefore, 100% inspired oxygen is recommended during CPR to maximize arterial blood oxygen saturation and systemic oxygen delivery. Well-fitting masks and bag valve devices can achieve ventilation during prone CPR.

The prone position is associated with better ventilation-perfusion match, reduced shunts and increased airway patency, and intra-thoracic variations with improved oxygenation and ventilation, which may contribute to favorable CPR outcomes. Regurgitation and aspiration of abdominal contents are well-known complications of CPR in the supine position, which are minimized in the prone position CPR.

**Cerebrovascular System**

The cerebrovascular system includes the brain and the spinal cord. The medulla is a part of the brain stem that controls essential survival functions, including breathing, regulation of oxygen and CO2 exchange, heart rate, rhythm, and circulatory blood pressure.

The nucleus of the solitary tract (NTS) in the medulla receives neuronal signals from stretch receptors in the lungs and aortic baroreceptors in the carotid bodies. Information is relayed from the NTS to respiratory and cardiovascular centers in the medullary reticular formation for appropriate breathing and blood pressure regulation.

Dysregulation of this mechanism by any condition can cause cardiac arrest. During CPR, blood and oxygen are inefficiently delivered to the brain, causing anoxic brain injury that worsens with CPR duration. Therefore, prompt initiation of CPR in prone patients is necessary to improve survival and prevent irreversible neurological damage in patients that survive.