Oxygen therapy is recommended for patients with severe hypoxemia. It is usually given until a more definitive treatment like liver transplantation can be performed. An increase in oxygenation and reduction in hypoxemia leads to better exercise tolerance and improved quality of life.

Liver transplantation is the only established treatment shown to provide long-term survival benefits for patients with HPS. It improves hypoxemia in 6 to 12 months. Studies have shown that PaO2 and A-aO2 reverse rapidly after transplant, mostly within six months. Intrapulmonary shunts also reverse but may take longer than six months. DLCO has also been shown to improve in some patients in one study.

Chronic liver disease patients with a model for end-stage liver disease (MELD) score of 15 or greater are referred for liver transplant evaluation. Patients with HPS get exception points added to the MELD score to move them higher on the waiting list for liver transplantation. It is recommended that patients should undergo liver transplantation before the development of severe disease.

Medical therapies - There is currently no medical therapy approved for HPS. Many medical treatments, including garlic, pentoxifylline, mycophenolate mofetil, aspirin, methylene blue, inhaled nitric oxide, nitric oxide inhibitors, and somatostatin, have been tried. Still, none of those have been of conclusive benefit, and the FDA has approved none of them.

Transjugular intrahepatic portosystemic shunt (TIPS) - There is limited data on TIPS use, and clinical outcomes can vary. TIPS can aggravate the hyperkinetic circulatory state, increasing intrapulmonary vasodilatation, shunting, and worsening hypoxemia. There is also the risk of hepatic decompensation and encephalopathy after TIPS.

Pulmonary arterial coil embolization – Its use is limited as it can only be used in selected cases where there are large AV communications.