# Continuing Education Activity

Prostate cancer is the fourth most commonly diagnosed cancer worldwide, with approximately 1.4 million new cases, and is more commonly diagnosed in developed countries. To combat the disease, advanced biomarkers are constantly in development. Even though patients with prostate cancer have improved overall survival, from a global perspective, this is a disease that requires attention in terms of better diagnostic and treatment modalities, especially in the metastatic setting. This activity describes tissue-based biomarkers useful in clinical practice to help determine risk stratification at critical decision points in prostate cancer, which will help determine the relative need for a re-biopsy or further intervention, thus aiding physicians and patients in personalizing care for their disease.

**Objectives:**
- Describe the etiopathology of prostate cancer.
- Review the risk factors identified as causal factors in prostate cancer worldwide.
- Identify the indications and utility of the new prostate cancer biomarker tests in patients with prostate cancer.
- Summarize the utility of a broad panel of next-generation sequencing tests in resected prostate cancer tissue in the metastatic setting.

# Introduction

Prostate cancer is the malignancy arising from the prostate gland in men. Cancer of the prostate is the fourth most common malignancy worldwide amongst both sexes and is the fifth leading cause of death in men, according to the 2020 census. It is also a malignancy related to a nation’s development index, like breast, lung, and colorectum cancers.

The cumulative incidence and mortality risk are higher in countries with very high Human Development Index (HDI) scores (7.88%) as opposed to those nations with low HDI (3.29%) scores.

In general, the incidence and mortality of prostate cancer are lowest in Asia and highest in the Caribbean and Africa. Western Europe, Australia, and North America have relatively high incidence rates but low mortality.

Even though patients with prostate cancer have improved overall survival, from a global perspective, this is a disease that requires attention in terms of better diagnostic and treatment modalities, especially in the metastatic setting. Properly used prostate cancer tissue-based biomarkers can significantly improve prognostic determinations, risk stratification, and treatment selection.

Until recently, prostate cancer diagnosis and risk stratification has been based solely on clinical stage, grade group/Gleason score, and prostate-specific antigen (PSA) levels. The tumor being highly heterogenous, Gleason scoring adopts a sum of scores from two different histological areas. Clinicians use these variables to construct nomograms and risk calculators. The most commonly used prognostic tools are the Partin tables (to predict tumor and nodal stage after radical prostatectomy), the Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center (MSKCC) nomogram (predicts postoperative progression-free survival in addition to the tumor and nodal stage after radical prostatectomy), and the Cancer of the Prostate Risk Assessment (CAPRA) score (to predict postoperative high-risk features, lymph node involvement and recurrence-free survival at 3 and 5 years).

Taken together, these clinicopathological variables and prognostic tools, though somewhat useful in real-world clinical situations, are inadequate to reliably predict the course of the disease as evidenced by real-world experience. Worse, they are rapidly becoming obsolete as the field of oncology is being catapulted by cutting-edge molecular diagnostics revolving around cancer genomics, transcriptomics, biomarkers, and epigenomics.

This article addresses the utility and clinical application of new and cutting-edge prostate cancer tissue-based biomarker assays that have either been approved by regulatory bodies or are in a developmental pipeline awaiting further research.

# Etiology and Epidemiology

While the exact cause of prostate cancer is unknown, variations in the DNA leading to mutations or aberrant gene fusions could be the initiating event. However, there are strong risk factors that facilitate the development of malignancy. Older age, western African ancestry, family history of prostate cancer, especially with segregation of BRCA1 and BRCA2 gene variations, Lynch syndrome, obesity, unhealthy diet style, inadequate beta-carotene, alcohol consumption, smoking, and specific medications are known risk factors with increasing evidence of their contributions to the underlying etiology.

**Epidemiology**

Most men with prostate cancer will not die from the disease. In the United States, the 5-year overall survival rate is 99%.

Prostate cancer is more common in developed countries than in the Third World.

In 60% of countries worldwide (112/185), prostate cancer is the most commonly diagnosed malignancy.

The worldwide incidence of prostate cancer is 30.7 per 100,000, and the global mortality rate is 7.7 per 100,000.

According to the World Cancer Research Fund International, the nations with the highest per capita incidence and mortality rates of prostate cancer are:

Countries with the Highest Prostate Cancer Incidence per 100,000:

- Guadaloupe (184)

- Martinique (168)

- Ireland (111)

- Barbados (110)

- St. Lucia (103)

- Estonia (102)

- Puerto Rico (101)

- France (100)

- Sweden (99)

- Bahamas (98)

Countries with the Highest Prostate Cancer Mortality Rate per 100,000:

- Zimbabwe (42)

- Barbados (40.3)

- Haiti (40.2)

- Zambia (40.1)

- Jamaica (39.4)

- Trinidad and Tobago  (38.9)

- Bahamas (36)

- Dominican Republic (35)

- St. Lucia (33)

- Ivory Coast (30)

# Pathophysiology

The prostate gland is located at the base of the penis in the pelvis. From a lateral, anatomic view, it is adjacent and anterior to the rectum as well as inferior to the urinary bladder.

The tissue is predominantly glandular, producing an alkaline secretion that constitutes about 25 to 30% of the seminal fluid.

Malignancy arising from the gland is classified as an adenocarcinoma. The commonest metastatic sites are the draining regional lymph nodes and the bony skeleton.

The stages of malignant neoplasia are well-studied. It begins with prostatic intraepithelial neoplasia (PIN) and/or atypical small acinar proliferation (ASAP), progresses to localized malignancy, then to advanced cancer with local invasion, and finally to florid metastatic disease.

The genome and epigenome play a crucial role in the initiation and progression of prostatic malignancy. Genome-wide association studies (GWAS) have shown that about 31.5% of the familial relative risk (FRR) is attributed to 167 common variants or susceptible loci in the genome, and approximately 6% are due to BRCA2 and HOXB13. The first GWAS (2006) found single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) in the 8q24 loci, which are believed to influence the oncogene MYC.

Besides HOXB13 and BRCA2, familial mutations have also been found in ATM, CHEK2, BRCA1, RAD51D, and PALB2 genes.

As for common somatic variants found in prostatic cancer, the following are implicated:

- Deletions in APC, CHD1, ETS2, NKX3.1, and SETD2.

- Deletions/mutations in ATM, BRCA1, BRCA2, ERF, KMT2A, KMT2C, KMT2D, KDM1A, KDM3A, KDM6A, NCOR1, NCOR2, PTEN, RB1, SMAD4, SMARCA1, SMARCB1, and TP53.

- Amplification/mutation/splice variant mutations in AR.

- Fusion/deletion in ERG and ETVs.

- Mutations in EZH2, FOXA1, IDH1, and SPOP.

- Amplification in MYC, MYCN, and SETDB1.

The E26 transformation-specific (ETS) family of transcription factors is particularly important in prostate cancer, as TMPRSS2-ERG fusion is seen in ~50% of localized malignancies.ERG and ETVs are members of the ETS family of transcription factors.)

The molecular biology of metastatic prostate cancer is typified by novel EMT (Epithelial-Mesenchymal Transition) processes.

- Bone metastasis is supported by stromal cell-derived factor-1 (SDF-1/ CXCL12) and the CXCR4 receptor for homing and invasion of tumor cells.

- Hematopoietic stem cells locate and bind to niche via annexin A2 (ANXA2) that is found to be overexpressed in prostate cancer cells.

- Tumor-derived exosomes carrying integrins have been implicated in organotropic metastasis.

- Increased RANK-RANKL signaling within prostate tumor cells has significantly promoted skeletal metastasis.

# Specimen Requirements and Procedure

Table 1 Contemporary Assays and Techniques

FFPE tissue
Tumor specimen of at least 0.5 mm

# Diagnostic Tests

**Prostate Specific Antigen (PSA) Screening**

There is considerable controversy regarding PSA screenings for prostate cancer. The issue is not that PSA screening does not find prostate cancer but that it leads to overdiagnosis and overtreatment of indolent cancers without clinical significance for the patient.

There is a multitude of guidelines from a variety of professional organizations and societies regarding PSA screening. They all recommend a discussion of the risks and benefits of PSA screenings and starting testing in appropriate individuals who desire screening only after the process of shared decision-making has been completed.

There is a clear distinction between recommendations for men at average risk and those at high risk. High-risk individuals would include those men with a direct blood relative with prostate cancer (especially if it appeared at an early age or resulted in death), all those of African descent, a family history of multiple malignancies, Lynch syndrome, or known BRCA2 or similar high-risk germline carriers.

All of the guidelines recommend halting routine screenings in men with less than a 10-year life expectancy or by age 70 to 75. The average life expectancy of a generally healthy 75-year-old (according to the Social Security Actuarial Tables) is about 11 years, so the 75-year-old cutoff for routine screenings is suggested.

For a more detailed and comprehensive discussion of the PSA testing controversy, please review our companion StatPearls reference article on "Prostate Cancer Screening."

Summary of Published PSA Screening Guidelines:

- The American Cancer Society suggests starting PSA screening discussions at age 50 for men at average risk and earlier for high-risk individuals.

- The American Medical Association recommends discussing PSA screening at age 45 for high-risk men and age 50 for normal-risk individuals.

- The American Urological Association recommends initial discussions regarding screening for high-risk individuals aged 40 to 54 years and average-risk men 55 years and older.

- The European Association of Urology (EAU) recommends starting a review of screenings at age 40 for men with known BRCA2 germline mutations, age 45 for other high-risk individuals, and age 50 for average-risk males.

- The United States Preventive Services Task Force (USPSTF) currently recommends discussing the pros and cons of PSA screening for prostate cancer with men aged 55 to 69.

**Tissue-Based Biomarkers**

All of these biomarker tests are intended to help in the decision-making process for patients with a predicted life expectancy of at least ten years and where the results are likely to make a difference in their final treatment selection.

Of the multitude of assays that have been developed, the most valuable are ConfirmMDx, Decipher, Oncotype DX, Prolaris, ProMark, and Somatic tumor testing for targeted therapy.

**ConfirmMDx,**developed by MDxHealth, Inc. in Irvine, California, is a tissue-based assay used to predict the incidence of finding malignancy on a repeat biopsy for patients whose initial histology was negative. It reports the likelihood of finding cancer as a percentage.RASSF1, GSTP1, and APC, in the biopsy specimen. The concept is based on epigenomic changes that are presumably found in tumor-adjacent normal tissue. The Methylation Analysis to Locate Occult Cancer (MATLOC) and the Detection of Cancer Using Methylated Events in Negative Tissue (DOCUMENT) studies have validated the assay.

The latter found a negative predictive value (NPV) of 90%, and another study found an NPV of 96% in patients with lower methylation levels.

Patients who have had a negative prostate biopsy can consider using the ConfirmMDx test if they are contemplating a second biopsy. It is appropriate for patients with unexplained, persistent high, or rising PSA levels. It can also be useful in patients with high-risk factors or even just heightened anxiety about their biopsy results, such as multiple negative biopsies.

**The Decipher Prostate Genomic Classifier**is useful in two clinical scenarios: for men with localized prostate cancer deciding between active surveillance vs. intervention and in patients with high-risk pathology or clinical features after radical prostatectomy to decide on treatment or observation. The assay gives a result as a Genomic Classifier (GC) score of 0-1.0 (also known as the Decipher Biopsy score or Decipher Radical Prostatectomy score). The clinical endpoints targeted are the 5-year risk of metastasis, the likelihood of high-grade cancer on radical prostatectomy, and the 10-year prostate cancer-specific mortality risk.

The National Comprehensive Cancer Network (NCCN) guidelines suggest that the assay could be offered to patients with very low, low, and intermediate risk on biopsy, with a life expectancy of a minimum of 10 years. It can also be offered to patients with pathological T2 disease and positive surgical margins, persistent or recurrent PSA levels after radical prostatectomy, or pathological T3 disease to help decide on adjuvant radiation therapy.

Technically, the Decipher test is a transcriptomic assay that uses the microarray method to study the expression of 22 genes, namely, LASP1, IQGAP3, NFIB, S1PR4, THBS2, ANO7, PCDH7, MYBPC1, EPPK1, TSBP, PBX1, NUSAP1, ZWILCH, UBE2C, CAMK2N1, RABGAP1, PCAT-32, GLYATL1P4, PCAT-80, and TNFRSF19. These genes play an important role in the cell cycle, cell growth, differentiation, and androgen receptor signaling. The assay was developed by comparing 192 RP samples from men with metastatic prostate cancer and 353 healthy controls. The initial validation produced an area-under-curve (AUC) of 0.90.

A systematic review of 42 studies using data from 30,407 patients was conducted by Jairath K et al. to analyze the utility of Decipher in clinical decision-making.

**The Oncotype DX Genomic Prostate Score**was developed following similar commercial assays for breast and colorectal cancer. This assay is suitable for men with very low and low-risk prostate cancer. The assay offers results as a Genomic Prostate Score (GPS) of 0-100. The resulting score displays the likelihood of Gleason Grade Group 1 or 2 after radical prostatectomy or the likelihood of organ-confined disease after definitive surgery.

The assay uses reverse transcriptase PCR to study the expression of 12 genes involved in cell proliferation, organization, stromal response, androgen receptor pathway, and five housekeeping genes. TPX2, FLNC, GSN, TPM2, GSTM2, BGN, COL1A1, SFRP4, AZGP1, KLK2, SRD5A2, and FAM13C are the genes measured for expression. Oncotype DX has been validated in various cohorts.

**The ProMark test**was intended for patients with a Gleason grade group (GGG) score of 1 or 2 on biopsy (Gleason 3+3=6 and 3+4=7), which generally represents very low, low, and favorable intermediate-risk disease. The clinical endpoint predicted is the risk of Gleason grade group ≥3, or non-organ confined cancer after radical prostatectomy. Results are depicted as a score of 0 to 1.

The test uses measurements of eight proteins involved in cell proliferation, signaling, and stress response, namely DERL1, CUL2, SMAD4, PDSS2, HSPA9, FUS, pS6, and YBOX1.

Validation of the ProMark test showed:

- The positive predictive value (PPV) for detecting favorable disease with a risk score ≤0.33 is 83.6% with a specificity of 90%.

- The positive predictive value (PPV) for identifying unfavorable disease with a risk score >0.80 is 76.9%.

A clinical trial on the "Effects of a new diagnostic test on the care of prostate cancer patients: The ProMark clinical utility study" (NCT04550416) was completed in 2020, but the results have not yet been reported.

**The Prolaris prostate cancer prognostic test**is used in two clinical scenarios: newly diagnosed patients with prostate cancer (Prolaris biopsy test) and after radical prostatectomy (Prolaris post-prostatectomy test). Results are given as Cell Cycle Progression (CCP) scores of 0 to 6. The clinical endpoint is the 10-year risk of prostate cancer-specific mortality as well as the 10-year risk of biochemical recurrence (BCR) after radical prostatectomy.

The NCCN recommends the Prolaris assay for virtually all biopsy-proven prostate cancer patients (very low, low, favorable, and unfavorable intermediate-risk and high-risk) with a minimum life expectancy of 10 years. It can also be used post-prostatectomy. These indications were recently expanded.

Prolaris is a transcriptomic assay utilizing quantitative polymerase chain reaction (PCR) testing to measure the gene expression of 31 cell cycle progression genes against 15 housekeeping genes. The assay has been validated extensively yet is being clinically used relatively sparingly to help decide on active surveillance or definitive intervention (surgery/radiation) in borderline lower-risk prostate cancers.

**Somatic Tumor Testing**is generally performed on patients with metastatic castration-resistant prostate cancer who have progressed on androgen receptor-directed therapy, irrespective of any prior treatment with docetaxel.

Multigene molecular testing for patients with low, intermediate, and high-risk prostate cancer who enjoy an estimated life expectancy ≥10 years is suggested by the NCCN expert committee. The most recent NCCN guidelines recommend tumor genetic testing for homologous recombination repair mutations, microsatellite instability-high (MSI-H), deficient mismatch repair (dMMR) genes, and tumor mutational burden in patients with metastatic castration-resistant prostate cancer (mCRPC).

- Homologous recombination repair (HRR) genes: The HRR pathway is a metabolic process that aids the homology-mediated repair of damaged DNA.BRCA1, BRCA2, ATM, BARD1, BRIP1, CDK12, CHEK1, CHEK2, FANCL, PALB2, RAD51B, RAD51C, RAD51D, and RAD54L. It may be suitable for a PARP inhibitor. (see below)

- Microsatellite instability (MSI): Microsatellites are short stretches of repetitive nucleic bases. During replication, slippage errors may occur, leading to microsatellite (MSI) and genomic instability. Microsatellite instability is categorized as low, stable, or high. Clinically, the former two states (Low, Stable) are similar.

- Mismatch repair (MMR) genes: DNA Mismatch repair is a biological process that identifies and rectifies base mismatch, insertion, or deletion mispairs that may occur during DNA replication or recombination.MLH1, MLH3, MSH2, MSH3, MSH6, PMS1, and PMS2, in addition to significant proteins including ExoI, Pol δ, PCNA, RPA, HMGB1, RFC, and DNA Ligase I.

- Tumor mutation burden (TMB): From a biological perspective, the Tumor Mutation Burden (TMB) is the total number of mutations present in the DNA of a cancer cell. This is determined by calculating the number of mutations per megabase of the genomic sequence examined.

A finding of high microsatellite instability (MSI-H), deficient mismatch repair genes (dMMR), or high tumor mutation burden (TMB ≥10 mut/Mb) is an indicator for the addition of pembrolizumab, an immune checkpoint inhibitor, in appropriate clinical settings.

**PARP inhibitors**block the activity of the enzyme polyadenosine diphosphate-ribose polymerase (PARP), which would normally act to repair damaged intracellular DNA. They can effectively treat castration-resistant prostate cancers with HRR (BRCA) mutations. Olaparib and rucaparib are two examples.

- Olaparib can be used in metastatic castration-resistant prostate cancer and BRCA or other DNA damage repair gene mutations where the malignancy has progressed.

- Rucaparib may also be used in metastatic castration-resistant prostate cancer patients who test positive for BRCA mutations and have previously been treated with androgen receptor blockers and taxane-based chemotherapy.

- The FoundationOne CDx is a tissue-based molecular assay approved by the FDA for metastatic castrate-resistant prostate as a companion diagnostic for Olaparib, the biomarker being a panel of the homologous recombination repair (HRR) genes.

**Androgen Receptor Splice Variant 7 (AR-V7**) has been associated with more aggressive disease, shorter progression to metastatic cancer, higher PSA levels, greater disease burden, and shorter overall survival in metastatic prostate cancer patients.

Niclosamide and TAS3681 have been specifically designed to target and inhibit AR-V7, but their clinical use is still being investigated.

**Future and Investigational Biomarkers**

Newer potential biomarkers are being studied and developed, such as:

- Androgen receptor splice variant 7 (AR-V7) testing using liquid biopsy techniques

- PD-1/PD-L1 testing

- CD276 testing

- CD73 testing

- Tumor-associated macrophages (TAMs)

- Cytotoxic CD8 tumor-infiltrating lymphocytes (TILs)

- Regulatory T cells (Tregs)

- Mast cell testing

The NCCN guidelines mention Ki-67% and PTEN assessment as possible biomarkers, but they are not currently recommended.

The PTEN/TMPRSS2-ERG test developed by Metamark was designed for patients with a Gleason grade group score of 1 or 2 on biopsy. The assay checks for deletion of PTEN and fusion of TMPRSS2-ERG.PTEN function is associated with poorer outcomes, and the presence of TMPRSS2-ERG fusion predicts an increased risk of metastasis. The role of these assays in aiding clinical decisions is limited today, and the NCCN expert committee does not currently recommend them.

A study by Thomas Dillinger et al. found seven genes (SERPINB1, ACSS3, SCGB3A1, NKX2-6, HOXA7, CRABP2, and DHRS4L2) were hypermethylated in malignant tumor samples compared to normal adjacent tissue.

Recent research shows that circular RNAs and linear transcripts could be useful as biomarkers for prostate cancer.

- A combination of circATXN10 and linSTIL could be a useful biomarker to distinguish normal from malignant prostate cells.

- The biochemical recurrence rate could be predicted by linGUCY1A2, linNEAT1, and linSTIL. The method used is RT-qPCR on flash-frozen fresh tumor samples.

**Concise Clinical Summary of Prostatic Tissue Biomarkers:**

Prostate cancer tissue-based biomarkers are only useful and recommended for patients with a predicted 10-year or more life expectancy who are at a critical decision point in management. The test results are likely to make a significant difference in treatment selection.

A detailed description and review of the prostate cancer risk groups can be found in our companion StatPearls reference article on "Prostate Cancer."

- Negative biopsy: ConfirmMDx

- Very low-risk disease: Oncotype DX, Prolaris, or ProMark

- Low-risk disease: Decipher, Oncotype DX, Prolaris, or ProMark

- Favorable intermediate-Risk Disease: Decipher, ProMark, or Prolaris

- Unfavorable intermediate-risk and high-risk disease: Decipher or Prolaris

- Metastatic disease: Somatic tumor testing

- PSA persistence or recurrence after prostatectomy: Decipher or Prolaris

# Testing Procedures

All clinically relevant tissue-based biomarkers use FFPE tissue retrieved from a surgical specimen or biopsy as starting material. Fresh frozen tissue is known to be superior for extracting nucleic acids and downstream molecular analysis, but there are practical hurdles in relying on the latter for routine clinical use.

Irrespective of the starting material for testing, it is mandatory to adhere to all necessary and recommended quality control protocols regarding specimen preparation, storage, and transport for these molecular assays to provide reliable results.

# Clinical Significance

Even though patients with prostate cancer have improved overall survival, from a global perspective, this is a disease that requires attention in terms of better diagnostic and treatment modalities, especially at critical decision points and in the metastatic setting. Properly used prostate cancer tissue-based biomarkers can significantly improve prognostic determinations, risk stratification, and treatment selection.

# Enhancing Healthcare Team Outcomes

Oncology practice is entering a new age of improved diagnostic testing based on cancer-specific proteins, germline mutations, and genetics. The field is expanding so rapidly that it is difficult for healthcare professionals to keep up. Using the proper testing for the right patient at the right time for the right reason requires an interprofessional team approach, including primary care clinicians (MDs, DOs, NPs, and PAs), urologists, oncologists, genetic counselors, pathologists, cancer coordinators, nursing personnel, and pharmacists working together and communicating effectively to provide optimal advice, counseling, and treatment for their patients.

The biomarkers can provide significant insight into potential cancers. All practitioners on the case must document their findings and communicate them to the rest of the team so that all caregivers have the same accurate and updated case information from which to make decisions. Nurses will help coordinate referrals and communication between specialties, and in such cases, an oncology-specialized nurse may prove beneficial. This interprofessional paradigm in using these biomarkers will result in improved diagnosis, which will translate into better care and presumably improved patient outcomes. [Level 5]