The proper and successful management of hypertension often requires a whole-person approach that should include clinicians, mid-level practitioners, nurses, the primary care provider, pharmacists, and specialists to treat a patient with a wide variety of different etiologies of high blood pressure. It may require diversified help from medical specialties since diabetes, heart failure, renal compromise, and obesity often accompany hypertension. This demonstrates an interprofessional team approach to patient care. Although ARB therapy is one of many options in treating hypertension and concomitant conditions of diabetes and or heart failure, early treatment in the face of such a diagnosis has proven to have great success in treating hypertension.

When initiating ARB therapy, a pharmacist should also have involvement to verify dosing, check for drug interactions and contraindications, counsel the patient, and report back to the prescriber if there are any areas of concern. Likewise, nursing should answer patient questions, instruct them on proper administration, and maintain open communication with the prescriber and the pharmacist. This interprofessional team methodology ensures optimal patient results from ARB treatment. [Level 5]

Along with proper pharmacotherapy in treating hypertension, physicians overseeing ARB therapy should encourage patients to begin a weight loss program. Decreased inflammation and a reduction in systolic hypertension are all possible benefits of patients controlling their weight.