There are no known contraindications for using nitisinone in treating hereditary tyrosinemia type 1. Previous cases of NTBC use in pregnant patients with HT-1 showed no harm to the patient and a complete absence of fetal anomalies. Follow-up studies on infants born to HT-1-diagnosed mothers treated with NTBC while pregnant will help clarify the risks of nitisinone use in pregnancy.

Explorational experiments to identify potential contraindications with nitisinone treatment are being conducted. A non-randomized study was previously shown to assess nitisinone’s effect on cytochrome p450 (CYP) enzymes. The investigators tested changes in concentrations of drugs metabolized by specific cytochrome p450 enzymes before and after nitisinone administration. The results indicated that nitisinone was a weak inducer of CYP2E1 and a modest inhibitor of CYP2C9.

Nitisinone may be contraindicated with the concurrent use of drugs metabolized by these specific members of the CYP 450 family of enzymes. Nitisinone may cause an increase in the concentration of drugs normally metabolized by CYP2C9 and potentially even decrease drug concentrations of substrates normally metabolized by CYP2E1. Patients taking substrates of CYP2C9 should have their doses modified accordingly while also taking nitisinone to avoid toxicity and exacerbation of adverse effects. Examples of drugs metabolized by CYP2C9 include amitriptyline, diclofenac, fluoxetine, ibuprofen, losartan, naproxen, piroxicam, phenytoin, tolbutamide, torasemide, and warfarin.