A modified ABC’s approach can assist with code management:

**ABCDE**

**A= Assign**

**A= Assess**

**A= Anticipate**

**A= Airway (with c-spine control if needed)**

**B = BLS (effective)**

**B = Broselow tape**

**C= CPR**

**C= Cardiac monitor**

**D= Disability**

**D=Drugs**

**D=Disposition**

**E= Exposure**

**E= Environment (temperature and crowd control)**

In the adult population, the Universal Termination of Resuscitation guidelines have accurately predicted which patients with out-of-hospital cardiac arrest are less likely to have a return of spontaneous circulation.  In a study of 36,543 patients, researchers found that resuscitation should be terminated if, after at least four, two-minute intervals of cardiopulmonary resuscitation, three criteria are met

- Emergency Medical Services (EMS) did not witness the arrest

- There has been no return of spontaneous circulation

- No shocks were delivered.

There are no reliable predictors of outcome during resuscitation to suggest when resuscitation efforts are futile. Factors that portend to a poor outcome are delays in bystander CPR, especially in an out-of-hospital cardiac arrest and with delays in activating the EMS system. Children with prolonged resuscitation efforts without the return of spontaneous circulation after two doses of epinephrine are unlikely to survive.

The value of end-tidal carbon dioxide (ETCO2) monitoring has emerged as more than just an adjunct to endotracheal tube placement and assessment of ventilation. Continuous end-tidal carbon dioxide monitoring has a role in the cardiac arrest. A return of spontaneous circulation may be detected sooner with end-tidal carbon dioxide monitoring compared to pulse checks.