A thorough history must be obtained from patients, including a comprehensive fever history, antibiotic history including duration of antibiotic use, history of infection with multidrug-resistant organisms, history of previous hospitalizations or stays at skilled nursing facilities or nursing homes, appropriate cancer screening, HIV screening, past and recent surgical history, history of medical conditions like uncontrolled diabetes, recent cardiac valve replacement, nonhealing wounds and external lines like Mediport, Foley catheter, or peripherally inserted central lines (PICC). Physical examination of each organ system must be detailed, especially if the source of bacteremia is unknown.

- Urinary tract infections (UTI) are the most common infections caused by enterococci, usually occurring in chronically ill patients in the nosocomial setting associated with obstruction, urinary catheterization, or instrumentation.

- Bacteremia is usually secondary to IV catheters, UTIs including catheter-associated urinary tract infections (CAUTI), intra-abdominal including biliary tract infections, wound infections including burns and ulcers, and bone infections.

- The prevalence of enterococcal infective endocarditis (IE) is consistently rising, present in 8% to 32% of enterococcal bacteremia cases, and it usually has a subacute course.

- Intra-abdominal collections and peritonitis are associated with enterococci as well.

- Meningitis is uncommon and is mainly associated with intraventricular shunts, neurosurgical procedures, CSF leakage, trauma, anatomical defects in CNS, and high-grade bacteremia in immunocompromised patients. Interestingly, some reports showed an association with Strongyloides hyperinfection.

- They are also sometimes seen in surgical-site infections, diabetic and decubitus ulcers, prosthetic joint infections, endophthalmitis, dental and root canal failure infections.

- Some outbreaks of neonatal enterococcal sepsis have been reported in the USA.