The following tests may be ordered in patients with suspected coronary artery disease:

- **Complete blood count (CBC):**Anemia can present with chest pain and dyspnea due to the decreased oxygen content of the blood.

- **Thyroid function test (TSH and free T4):**Hyperthyroidism can cause palpitation, arrhythmias, or chest pain.

- **Fasting lipid profile:**Triglyceride, total cholesterol, and low-density lipoproteins (LDL).

- **Electrocardiogram (EKG):**Ischemia can result in T wave abnormalities ranging from T-wave flattening to inversions and ST-depressions. In STEMI, ST-segment elevation is present. Thus it helps to diagnose the condition. In NSTEMI, ischemic ECG changes previously described may be present.

- **Cardiac enzymes:**Creatine kinase such as MB isozymes (CKMB), troponins, and lactate dehydrogenase (LDH) is diagnostic for AMI. Troponins are more specific than others, but CKMB is diagnostic for re-infarction cases because its level starts to rise in blood within 4 to 6 hours after AMI. Troponins, peak level, is achieved in 12 to 24 hours after AMI. CKMB level drops to baseline after 36 hours. This is why CKMB may be more specific to diagnose re-infarction.

- **Echocardiography:**Echocardiogram can be useful to detect new-onset of wall motion abnormalities in myocardial infarction and also gives a cardiac function quantification.

- **Exercise tolerance test (ETT) or nuclear stress imaging:**Stress testing is helpful for the evaluation of underlying stable CAD.

- **Coronary angiography:**Coronary angiography is an invasive evaluation which delineates significant obstructive CAD. Coronary angiography is usually followed by a percutaneous intervention and stent deployment, which serves curative for the target lesion.

- **Intravascular ultrasonography (IVUS):**IVUS can accurately comment on a plaque with positive remodeling, which grows outwardly, where vessel lumen is not significantly stenosed. IVUS demonstrates the presence or absence of a fibrous cap, calcification, and ulceration, or cracks on plaque surface.

- **Fractional flow reserve (FFR):**Fractional flow reserve (FFR) is measured during coronary angiography by transducing a pressure wire to calculate the ratio between coronary pressure distal to focal coronary artery stenosis and the aortic pressure under conditions of induced maximum myocardial hyperemia. This ratio represents a potential decrease in coronary flow distal to the stenosis and guides whether the percutaneous intervention is warranted in moderately stenotic lesions.