Secondary polycythemia is due to an increased level of EPO or other transcription factors that, in turn, lead to an increase in the production of RBC mass. It should be noted that, unlike primary polycythemia, there is no intrinsic defect in the erythroid progenitor cell lineage. The increase in the levels of EPO can be due to a number of factors, including genetic and acquired, which are discussed below.

**Classification of Polycythemia**

On the basis of the response of the erythroid progenitor cells to the circulating cytokines, polycythemia can be further classified into primary or secondary.

**Primary Polycythemia**

Primary erythrocytosis is due to the increased proliferation of erythroid progenitor cells secondary to an intrinsic cellular defect. These patients have a suppressed erythropoietin level.

- Polycythemia vera: This neoplastic disorder is the result of increased erythroid progenitor cells as well as increased sensitivity to erythropoietin secondary to a mutation called JAK mutation.

- Pure erythrocytosis: The subset of patients with pure erythrocytosis have an isolated elevated RBC mass in the absence of any other precipitating factor.

**Secondary Polycythemia**

This is a heterogeneous group of disorders characterized by an elevated RBC mass due to either a physiologically appropriate response to tissue hypoxia or physiologically inappropriate secretion of erythropoietin and/or other contributing factors.

**Physiologically appropriate secondary polycythemia (tissue hypoxia)**

**Acquired**

- Central hypoxic process

- Chronic lung disease (COPD, Pickwickian syndrome)

- Right-to-left cardiopulmonary vascular shunts, cyanotic heart disease

- Carbon monoxide poisoning

- Smoker’s erythrocytosis

- Hypoventilation syndromes including obstructive sleep apnea, obesity hypoventilation syndrome

- High-altitude habitat

- Renal disease (local renal hypoxia, renal artery stenosis)

**Congenital**

- Hemoglobinopathy with high-oxygen-affinity

- Decreased levels of erythrocyte 2,3,-DPG

- Bisphosphoglycerate mutase deficiency

- Methemoglobinemia

- Hereditary ATP increase

- Oxygen sensing pathway gene mutations (EpoR,3 VHL,8-10 and PHD216)

**Physiologically Inappropriate Secondary Polycythemia**

- Tumors with excessive production of erythropoietin or erythropoietin related factors (renal cell carcinoma, hepatocellular carcinoma, pheochromocytoma, cerebellar hemangioblastoma, uterine leiomyoma, ovarian carcinoma, meningioma, parathyroid carcinoma/adenomas)

- Drug associated: erythropoietin administration, androgen administration

- Renal diseases including cysts, polycystic kidney disease, hydronephrosis, nephrotic syndrome, diffuse parenchymal disease, Bartter’s syndrome, end-stage renal disease, long-term hemodialysis, post-renal transplant erythrocytosis)

- Adrenal cortical hypersecretion

- Idiopathic polycythemia

**Relative Polycythemia (Gaisbock Syndrome, Spurious, or Stress Erythrocytosis)**

Relative polycythemia is an elevated hematocrit marked with a normal to high normal RBC mass and low normal to decreased plasma volume.

**Chuvash Polycythemia (CP)**

This endemic and recessively inherited congenital polycythemia is named after the Chuvash people in central Russia. EPO levels have been found to be significantly higher than normal. In addition to the higher EPO levels, the erythroid progenitor cells in patients with CP are hypersensitive to EPO. It is associated with a significantly increased mortality in the early years secondary to thrombotic and hemorrhagic events.