The Modified Duke Criteria are applicable in the evaluation of patients suspected of infective endocarditis. Three categories include definite infective endocarditis, possible infective endocarditis, or rejected infective endocarditis.

Definite infective endocarditis further subclassifies into

- Definite infective endocarditis by pathological criteria: where microorganisms are present on culture or histologic examination of the vegetation, embolized vegetation or an intracardiac abscess, or pathological lesions demonstrating active endocarditis

- Definite infective endocarditis by clinical criteria: defined by the presence of two major criteria, one major criterion plus three minor criteria, or five minor criteria in The Modified Duke Criteria

Major clinical criteria are defined as follows

- Multiple positive blood cultures, single positive culture for Coxiella burnetii or antiphase I IgG antibody titer greater than 1 to 800

- Endocardial involvement (presence of new valvular regurgitation)

- Presence of vegetation, abscess, or dehiscence (worsening or a change of pre-existing murmur does not meet criteria)

Minor clinical criteria are as follows

- Predisposing heart condition or use of intravenous drug use

- Fever with body temperature greater than 38 degrees C (100.4 degrees F)

- Vascular phenomena: arterial emboli, septic pulmonary infarcts, mycotic aneurysm, intracranial hemorrhage, conjunctival hemorrhages, and Janeway lesion

- Immunologic phenomena: glomerulonephritis, Osler nodes, Roth spots, rheumatoid factor, and

- Positive blood culture that does not meet the major criteria

Possible infective endocarditis criteria are when there are one major criterion and one minor criterion or three minor criteria present. Rejected infective endocarditis is defined when there is likely an alternative diagnosis, or there is no pathological evidence of IE with fewer than 4 days of antibiotic therapy or there is the resolution of clinical symptoms with fewer than 4 days of antibiotic therapy.

It is important to note that prior antibiotic therapy may mask the histopathological evidence of infective endocarditis. Vegetation on an echocardiogram is an oscillating intracardiac mass on the valve or supporting structures, in the path of regurgitant jets. The presence of abscess or partial dehiscence of the prosthetic valve also fulfills echocardiographic criteria of infective endocarditis. A transthoracic echocardiogram should be validated by transesophageal echocardiogram in the evaluation of patients with suspected infective endocarditis whenever indicated.

Significant echocardiographic findings include:

- Myocardial abscess

- New-onset valvular regurgitation

- Oscillating intracardiac mass on a valve

- Partial dehiscence of a prosthetic valve

The ECG may show a conduction block or delay in about 10% of patients. A new conduction block usually indicates the involvement of the septum and is a poor prognostic sign.

CT of the head is done in patients who exhibit neurological deficits.