As with any disease process, a thorough history and physical exam are crucial in diagnosing lumbosacral radiculopathy. Pain is the most commonly reported symptom. However, numbness or weakness along the distribution supplied by the respective nerve root(s) is often appreciated. Radicular pain is typically characterized by patients as "electrical shocks" or "shooting pains" that radiate from the buttock to the foot.  While gathering the history, it is important to screen for any red-flag symptoms, which could indicate an urgent/emergent clinical condition.  Evaluating clinicians must first rule out associated "red flag" symptoms including:

- Thoracic pain

- Fever/unexplained weight loss

- Night sweats

- Bowel or bladder dysfunction

- Malignancy (document/record any previous surgeries, chemo/radiation, recent scans and bloodwork, and history of metastatic disease)

- Can be seen in association with pain at night, pain at rest, unexplained weight loss, or night sweats

- Significant medical comorbidities

- Neurologic deficit or serial exam deterioration

- Gait ataxia

- Saddle anesthesia

- Age of onset (bimodal -- Age < 20 years or Age > 55 years)

A full neurologic exam shoulder is performed, including an assessment for upper motor neuron findings (Babinski sign, clonus, spasticity). On physical exam, several maneuvers can assist the clinician in making a diagnosis. Lasègue test, or straight leg test, is performed by passively raising one leg into the air. This creates increased tension on the sciatic nerve between 30 degrees to 60 degrees from the exam table. A reproduction of the patient's symptoms during passive movement between 30 degrees to 60 degrees is considered a positive sign and is suggestive of lower lumbar nerve root involvement (L4 to S1). Of note, a similar stretch can be created on the femoral nerve using a reverse straight leg, or Ely test. With this test, the patient's symptoms are reproduced by extending the hip and flexing the knee with the patient in the prone position. This will stretch the femoral nerve and the L2 to L4 nerve roots. Reproduction of radicular symptoms can also be produced by placing the patient in a seated position with the neck in full flexion and knees in full extension (slump test).