There are several potential causes of splenomegaly, and careful and thorough evaluation is often needed to find the underlying cause of splenomegaly.

These include:

- Cirrhosis

- Hepatitis

- Rheumatoid arthritis

- Felty syndrome

- Systemic lupus erythematosus

- Lymphoma

- Sickle cell anemia

Liver disease (cirrhosis, hepatitis) is one of the most common causes and history of liver disease, abnormal physical exam findings and elevated liver enzymes in addition to abnormal liver imaging can help diagnose liver diseases.

Hematologic malignancies and metastasis shall be especially considered in patients with constitutional symptoms and weight loss. Abnormal peripheral blood smear and biopsy can assist in diagnosing malignancies.

Autoimmune diseases such as rheumatoid arthritis (RA) and systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE) frequently are associates with splenomegaly. In RA, the presence of splenomegaly in addition to neutropenia is termed Felty syndrome.

Acute and chronic infections including viral, bacterial, fungal, and mycobacterial infections can all cause splenomegaly and shall be carefully ruled out.

Cytopenias and diseases causing splenic sequestration can be ruled out by complete blood counts, peripheral blood smear and hemoglobin electrophoresis.

Infiltrative disorders such as glycogen storage diseases are a rare cause of splenomegaly and shall be considered if other more common causes are ruled out in patients with other clinical features consistent with these glycogen storage diseases.