# Continuing Education Activity

Chronic suppurative otitis media (CSOM), characterized by repeated or prolonged episodes of acute otitis media lasting for more than 12 weeks, can cause damage to the tympanic membrane (TM) and result in a non-healing perforation. Tympanoplasty is the surgical procedure performed to repair a perforated tympanic membrane, with/without reconstruction of the ossicles, with the aim of preventing reinfection and restoring hearing ability. Microscopic and endoscopic approaches are utilized for tympanoplasty. This activity reviews the indication for tympanoplasty and treatment options; it highlights the role of the interprofessional team in evaluating and treating tympanic membrane perforations.

**Objectives:**
- Describe the anatomy of the tympanic membrane.
- Identify the indications for a tympanoplasty.
- Summarize the most commonly used surgical approaches for tympanoplasty.
- Describe common postoperative complications of tympanoplasty.

# Introduction

Chronic suppurative otitis media (CSOM), characterized by repeated or prolonged episodes of acute otitis media lasting for more than 12 weeks, can cause damage to the tympanic membrane (TM) and result in a non-healing perforation.

A subtype of CSOM is CSOM with cholesteatoma. Cholesteatomas are most commonly an acquired disease process occurring within the middle ear. They consist of a sac of squamous epithelium, usually in the attic and originating at the pars falccida of the TM, which can extend beyond the TM, eroding bone and thereby causing ossicular chain destruction.

Tympanoplasty is the surgical procedure performed to repair a perforated TM, with or without reconstruction of the ossicles (ossiculoplasty), aiming to prevent reinfection and restore hearing ability.

**Wullstein Classification**

Tympanoplasty can be classified into five types, according to the Wullstein classification.

- Type I: repair of the TM alone; no middle ear abnormality. Type I tympanoplasty is synonymous with myringoplasty

- Type II: repair of the TM and middle ear; the malleus is eroded. Tympanoplasty involves grafting the TM to the incus

- Type III: repair of the TM onto the stapes head; the malleus and incus have a defect

- Type IV: the TM is grafted to the stapes footplate, which is movable

- Type V: repair involves the stapes footplate, which is fixed

# Anatomy and Physiology

The middle ear cleft, also known as the tympanic cavity, is situated within the petrous temporal bone. The anatomical components of the middle ear include the inner layer of the TM, the Eustachian tube orifice, and the ossicular chain (malleus, incus, stapes). The middle ear cleft communicates posteriorly with the mastoid air cells via the tympanic antrum and the aditus ad antrum; the Eustachian tube connects anteriorly with the nasopharynx, allowing the middle ear to equalize pressure with the ambient environment.

The TM forms the majority of the lateral wall of the middle ear cleft. It is composed of three layers, the stratified squamous epithelial outer layer that is in continuity with the external ear canal, the fibrous stratum (lamina propria) middle layer, which is the most dominant component and provides stability to the TM, and an inner layer that is contiguous with the cuboidal mucosa of the middle ear. Within the fibrous stratum runs solid collagen fibers – it is the limited ability of these fibers to stretch that allows for high compliance with minuscule displacements of acoustic pressures but resistance (low compliance) to additional stretching at higher pressures. The TM diameter is around 10 mm, with a thickness of roughly 0.1 mm; it is usually pearly grey and slightly translucent, allowing for ossicular visibility.

The TM divides anatomically into the pars flaccida superiorly and the pars tensa inferiorly. The pars flaccida is anterior and posterior to the malleolar ligaments; it lacks a central fibrous layer and is, therefore, thinner and more compliant than the pars tensa. The pars tensa forms the majority of the TM, overlying the area below the neck of the malleus.

Functionally, the TM is the vibrational driver of the middle ear apparatus. Sound energy, in the form of air pressure waves, is transmitted from the TM across the ossicular chain to the fluid-containing inner ear via the oval window, producing a ‘liquid wave.’

# Indications

The goal of tympanoplasty is to reconstruct the TM with or without reconstruction of the ossicular chain, thereby preventing recurrent infections (otorrhoea) as well as restoring hearing. Indications are primarily CSOM or CSOM with cholesteatoma.

# Contraindications

Contraindications for tympanoplasty can be categorized into relative or absolute. Relative contraindications include patient age (extremities of age), a non-functioning Eustachian tube, dead (non-hearing) ear or consideration of tympanoplasty in the patient’s better hearing ear. Absolute contraindications include uncontrolled cholesteatoma, uncontrolled complications or sequelae of otitis media such as intracranial abscess, meningitis or lateral sinus thrombosis, malignancy, or patient-specific anesthetic contraindications.

# Equipment

The following equipment may be needed to perform a tympanoplasty:

- Microscope

- Otology instrument tray

If the tympanoplasty is being performed endoscopically, the following may also be required:

- High-resolution camera, light source, monitor

- A rigid endoscope (0, 30, and 45 degrees)

# Personnel

The personnel required to carry out a tympanoplasty include:

- An otologist

- An anesthetist

- Scrub team

# Preparation

Prior to surgery, a number of investigations assessing middle ear functionality are undertaken – the results can, in turn, influence both the tympanoplasty technique used and also the postoperative outcome.

Initially, any patient presenting with otorrhoea and hearing loss should undergo a complete history and examination, including a focused head and neck examination and examination of the ear using an otoscope/microscope. This will yield important information regarding TM perforation size, location (categorized into a quadrant, as mentioned previously), otorrhoea ('wet' or 'dry'), and whether there is active inflammation present. Tuning fork evaluation (Rinne and Weber tests at 512 Hz), pure tone audiometry (PTA) with speech discrimination, and tympanography should be performed before and after surgery for comparative evaluation of the difference between air and bone conduction thresholds (air-bone gap).

Imaging is rarely required in simple tympanic membrane perforations, but if required, computed tomography (CT) is the preferred imaging modality.

As well as assessing the middle ear clinically, the use of questionnaires measuring health-related quality of life outcomes is increasing for patients undergoing tympanoplasty.

Prior to surgery, patients will consent to tympanoplasty. Risks include pain, bleeding, infection, failure of the graft, recurrence, further surgery, worsening hearing loss or deafness, dizziness, and facial nerve injury resulting in facial palsy or to the chorda tympani nerve resulting in taste disturbances. The procedure is typically performed under general anesthetic, and patients will have an opportunity to speak with an anesthetist prior to surgery.

# Technique or Treatment

The majority of middle ear surgery involving the TM is classically performed using a postauricular approach; endaural (through the ear canal) and transcanal approaches are also used. Each technique has advantages as well as limitations and factors that are considered when deciding which approach to use, including the size of the TM perforation, the size of the ear canal, and the preference of the surgeon. As in other surgical fields, a trend towards more minimally invasive techniques has made trans-canal or endoscopic ear surgery increasingly popular.

Standard theatre preparations are undertaken regardless of the tympanoplasty technique used. Prophylactic antibiotics are commonly administered (although less so during endoscopic surgery). The patient lies supine on the operating table; a head ring is used to provide stability. If required, the patient’s hair will be shaved in the postauricular region. Local infiltration (lidocaine with adrenaline) is administered, and local hemostasis must be achieved.

**Grafts**

Autologous material for grafting is readily available, biocompatible, and inexpensive; hence there is limited rationale for utilizing artificial alternatives. Autologous grafts are usually made from temporal fascia or tragal/conchal perichondrium; however, studies have also reported using fascia lata, canal skin, and periosteum.

Most surgeons use the temporalis fascia more commonly used in practice than cartilage, and success rates of using this graft in tympanoplasty range between 93% to 97%. However, in situations calling for increased stability, such as multiply-recurrent perforations or high-risk patients, cartilage and perichondrium can be harvested by making an incision through the medial side of the tragal skin, perichondrium, and cartilage.

**Microscopic Approach**

When using a microscope, the postauricular and trans-canal approaches are frequently used for tympanoplasty. The Lempert endaural approach is far less commonly used in modern tympanoplasty but remains a viable option. The procedure starts with the surgeon making a semicircular incision roughly 1cm posterior to the auricle skin fold; the ear is folded anteriorly. This incision is carried down through the musculoperiosteum creating a musculoperiosteal flap, which is elevated towards the membranous ear canal, thereby entering the bony ear canal. The skin along the posterior aspect of the bony canal is elevated until the surgeon reaches the tympanomeatal flap incisions. The tympanomeatal flap can then be raised, and the middle ear can be entered.

At this stage, if required, the ossicular chain can be repaired by performing an ossiculoplasty.

**Endoscopic Approach**

Endoscopic repair of TM perforations is less invasive than traditional postauricular and endaural approaches. It can provide a wider view of the middle ear anatomy without making external incisions, reducing operative and recovery time.

Endoscopic tympanoplasty is performed using a transcanal approach. As before, the edges of the perforation are de-epithelized as necessary. An incision is made in the ear canal (endaural, lateral circumferential, or swing door), allowing the tympanomeatal flap and annulus to be elevated, creating access to the middle ear. The malleus is peeled off the TM, and at this stage, the ossicular chain is repaired (ossiculoplasty) if required. The prepared graft is placed medially to the TM remnant and lateral to the malleus. Gel foam sponges are inserted into the middle and outer ear canals.

# Complications

Studies have shown tympanoplasty to be successful in over 93% of patients (in patients undergoing primary tympanoplasty using temporalis fascia graft).

One large case series analyzing over 1000 patients undergoing cartilage tympanoplasty reported recurrence of TM perforation in 3.6% to 4.2% of patients (patients with cholesteatoma and high-risk perforations respectively) and conductive hearing loss requiring revision in 1.9% (high-risk perforations with/without patients with cholesteatoma) to 11% of patients (patients undergoing TM repair to improve hearing).

There are important neural structures that cross the middle ear, namely the facial nerve and chorda tympani. The facial nerve runs within the temporal bone and continues along the posterior wall of the tympanic cavity, superior to the oval window. Iatrogenic injury to the facial nerve is fortunately low due to the extensive training of otology surgeons performing tympanoplasty. The chorda tympani will always be confronted during middle ear surgery, and in CSOM with cholesteatoma, it may have to be sacrificed in order to get full disease clearance.

# Clinical Significance

Since the 1950s, tympanoplasty has been performed in patients with CSOM with the aim of reducing infection recurrence and refining hearing and, in turn, improving social development and quality of life. Methods of tympanoplasty have evolved over time; however, despite the increase in uptake of endoscopic middle ear surgery, a postauricular approach using an autologous graft is still the predominant surgical method in many centers.

# Enhancing Healthcare Team Outcomes

Managing patients with CSOM requires an interprofessional team composed of otologists, audiologists, radiologists, anesthetists, and nurses. Timely diagnosis and meticulous surgical planning are essential for optimal patient outcomes, including reduced infection rates and improved hearing. In pediatric patients, hearing impairment may profoundly impact speech and language development, and coordination with speech therapists may also be warranted pre and post-operatively. Nurses will assist in patient assessment, coordinate activities among the various specialists, assist in surgery, and offer patient counseling. All interprofessional team members must maintain accurate and updated records so that everyone involved in care has access to the same patient data to guide therapy decisions. The interprofessional model will yield the best patient outcomes with the fewest adverse events.