**Interproximal Ledge**

Wrongly positioning the bur can result in a ledge instead of the desired shoulder-free interproximal cutting. If the operator fails to remove the ledge, the crown seating will be impeded.

**Marginal Discrepancy**

Several researchers have extensively demonstrated the association between gingivitis and marginal defects, such as impaired marginal adaptation and insufficient removal of excess cement. Careful adaptation of the margins before fitting is required, and post-fitting gingivitis can be minimized by diligently polishing the crown margin. A preventive regimen, including oral hygiene training, should be included in the treatment plan.

**Inhalation or Ingestion of Crown**

A rubber dam is to be placed till cementation to prevent aspiration of the crown. Sometimes to prepare the distal surface, the rubber dam may be removed prior. Even after all the measures taken, accidents do happen. Clinicians and their staff must remain calm to make timely decisions to avoid potentially dangerous complications and ultimately save their patients' lives. The dentist's responsibility is to be alert to both early and delayed signs and symptoms of an aspiration accident and respond quickly if and when it occurs. High vacuum suctioning, patting on the back after placing the patient in the prone position, Heimlich maneuver should be tried to yield the crown. A clinical referral for a rapid chest radiograph should be made if still not successful in retrieving the crown. If the crown remains in the lung or bronchi, it can be removed via bronchoscopy. Immediate medical and surgical intervention would be required.