Apremilast is available in tablet form for oral consumption in adults in 10 mg, 20 mg, and 30 mg dosage forms. Its use for treatment in children aged 0 to 17 years has not been studied, and no data on safety and efficacy has been reported.

The dosing schedule for treating Psoriasis, Psoriatic arthritis, and Behcet disease is started as a 5-day titration period, gradually increasing the apremilast dose over the first five days until the recommended dose is reached.

- Day 1 - 10 mg in the morning once a day

- Day 2 - 10 mg in the morning and 10 mg in the evening

- Day 3 - 10 mg in the morning and 20 mg in the evening

- Day 4 - 20 mg in the morning and 20 mg in the evening

- Day 5 - 20 mg in the morning and 30 mg in the evening

- Day 6 - 30 mg twice daily moving forward

During the apremilast treatment initiation, patients should be started on a 10 mg dosage, followed by gradual dosage titration by an increase of 10 mg daily for six days, reaching the optimal daily dosage of 30 mg twice daily by day 6. The titration schedule helps prevent unwanted gastrointestinal adverse effects (severe diarrhea, nausea, and vomiting) that may occur with the initial therapy during the first few weeks. If the patient has impaired renal function (CrCl <30 mL/min), the dosing is 10 mg on days 1 to 3 and 20 mg on days 4 and 5 [(titrate using morning doses only (skip evening doses)] with a maintenance dose of 30 mg once daily in the morning after that. If a dose is missed, the patient is advised to talk to the doctor and pharmacist about when to take the next dose. Apremilast may be taken with or without regard. However, it should not be crushed, chewed, or split.