Mediastinitis is due to a breach in the mediastinal structures from an inciting incident, including direct injury or secondary to an acute infectious process. Postoperative mediastinitis has been linked to intraoperative contamination, although infectious spread can occur postoperatively from an infected surgical wound, into the mediastinum. The majority of cases are caused by gram-positive bacteria, particularly Staphylococcus aureus and coagulase-negative staphylococcus, accounting for 60% to 80% of cases. Infection linked to S. aureus is frequently due to intraoperative contamination from the surgeon or surgical staff who are carriers or endogenously from the patient’s nares. Coagulase-negative Staphylococcus are common occupants of the skin flora, thus allowing it to infect surgical wounds. Although S. aureus and coagulase-negative Staphylococcus are the most common causes, other gram-positive bacteria, gram-negative bacteria, and, rarely, fungi are causative agents.

Descending necrotizing mediastinitis is the spread of a pharyngeal, odontogenic, or cervical infection that proceeds down into the mediastinum. The infection can spread to the deep fascial planes and into the mediastinum, most commonly into the posterior mediastinum. Cellulitis, abscesses, sepsis, and necrosis may occur throughout this fulminant course.

Although the exact pathophysiology of fibrosing mediastinitis is unknown, it has been shown to have multiple variants, a granulomatous and non granulomatous form. These can then be divided into diffuse or focal distributions.