There are many different types of sutures grouped by several different characteristics. Understanding these characteristics allows for ideal suture selection.

The main factors used to classify sutures types are:

- Absorbable vs. non-absorbable

- Synthetic vs. natural

- Monofilament vs. multifilament

The first main suture category is absorbable versus non-absorbable sutures. Sutures are considered absorbable if they lose most of their tensile strength over variable periods ranging from a few weeks to several months.

Absorbable sutures can also classify as natural and synthetic sutures. Natural sutures are derived from purified animal tissues (usually collagen) and are sometimes made of the purified serosa of bovine intestines.

Non-absorbable sutures are used for long-term tissue closure like vessel anastomosis, permanently ligating internal tubular structures or vessels, performing a second layer of bowel hand sawing anastomosis, hernia fascial defects closure, and other uses.

Another important suture category is monofilament and multifilament. Monofilament sutures are single filaments (as their name implies) with less surface area than a multifilament (braided or twisted suture).

Conversely, multifilament sutures are more pliable; they hold knots more securely, have less memory, and are easier to handle by the surgeon. However, multifilament sutures also cause more friction through tissue and have increased capillarity and surface area, increasing their proclivity to inflammation and infection.

Any suture can have the addition of a dye. The dye helps with suture visualization. However, if sutures are under the epidermis, it is preferable to have them undyed, so they are not visible.

Most sutures have smooth surfaces. However, there are newer sutures manufactured with barbs. These barbs help approximate wounds and do not require knots for security. Barbed sutures more evenly distribute tension along the wound. These sutures are also known to be more time efficient.

Another critical property of a suture is its tensile or breaking strength, which generally comes from suture width. Sutures are numbered by their size relative to their diameter. Thick suture numbering is from 0-10, with #10 being the largest diameter. Thin sutures are those that have the greatest number of zeroes after them and range from 1-0 to 12-0 (12-0 having the least breaking strength).

The next important aspect of sutures is the needle. The needle is made up of three main parts, the eye, body, and point.

Amongst needles, there are different types based on the needle tip, mainly cutting or taper needles. Cutting needles have a tip with three sharp edges; a conventional cutting needle has the cutting surface inside the needle and a reverse cutting needle has it on the outside of the needle. Reverse cutting needles are commonly used for sewing skin.

Taper needles are rounded and can be either sharp or blunt. They work by piercing the tissue without cutting it, essentially spreading the tissue as it passes through it. These are good for soft and delicate tissues and tendon repair.

**Examples**

Natural Sutures: Plain Gut, Chromic Gut, Silk, Steel

Synthetic Sutures: Polyglactin 910 (Vicryl), Poliglecaprone 25 (Monocryl), Polydioxanone (PDS), Nylon (Ethilon, Dermlon), Polypropylene (Prolene, Surgipro)

Absorbable Sutures:  Polyglactin 910 (Vicryl), Poliglecaprone 25 (Monocryl), Polydioxanone (PDS)

Non-absorbable Sutures: Nylon (Ethilon, Dermlon), Polypropylene (Prolene, Surgipro)

Monofilament Sutures: Nylon (Ethilon, Dermlon), Polypropylene (Prolene, Surgipro), Polydioxanone (PDS), Poliglecaprone 25 (Monocryl)

Multifilament Sutures: Polyglactin 910 (Vicryl), Silk, Nylon (Nuralon), Polyester (Tricon)

Barbed Sutures: Stratafix, Quill, Durabarb

**Suture Removal**

Sutures should be cut immediately under the knot during removal; this allows the least amount of skin surface contamination to be dragged through the inside of the wound when the suture is pulled out.

**Table 1.**Classification of sutures

**Table 2.**Important definitions when describing sutures

**Figure 1**. Needle Anatomy

**Figure 2.**Common Types of Needles