The mitochondria control cellular metabolism and produce most of the heat in the body. This control is implemented with the help of the tricarboxylic acid cycle (TCA cycle) and the Electron Transport Chain. The TCA cycle, also known as the Kreb’s Cycle or Citric Acid cycle, is a central driver of cellular respiration and takes place in the matrix of the mitochondria. The TCA cycle begins with its substrates, Acetyl-CoA, and oxaloacetate derived from pyruvate, the end product of glycolysis. Besides glucose, the beta-oxidation of fats is another major source of Acetyl CoA. These two substrates are funneled into the TCA cycle, and undergo a series of redox reactions producing various intermediates and result in the formation of high energy bonds in the form of NADH and FADH2. NADH and FADH2 undergo oxidation at the Complex I and II of the electron transport chain respectively and participate in the oxidative phosphorylation process to generate ATP molecules. The process of oxidative phosphorylation occurs at the inner mitochondrial membrane, consumes oxygen, and phosphorylates ADP to form ATP molecules. Finally, this ATP is then used to power various molecular reactions throughout the body which creates heat. ATP hydrolysis is an exergonic process where the phosphate bonds are broken to release energy in the form of heat. The inner mitochondrial membrane also contains a unique uncoupling protein (UCP-1), also known as thermogenin that is involved in regulating the inner membrane permeability and the resultant generation of heat