A differential diagnosis for laryngomalacia should include the following etiologies of infant stridor including:

- Unilateral or bilateral vocal fold paralysis

- Laryngeal papillomatosis

- Subglottic hemangioma

- Subglottic stenosis

- Tracheomalacia or bronchomalacia

- Vascular ring

- Foreign body aspiration

Unilateral vocal fold paralysis typically presents after a surgical procedure in the thoracic cavity or the neck. A hoarse cry is a common complaint. These infants may have difficulties feeding as well. When bilateral vocal fold paralysis is present, infants typically have biphasic stridor and may require a tracheostomy if there is significant respiratory distress. Flexible fiberoptic laryngoscopy is used to diagnose these conditions.

Laryngeal papillomatosis may cause a hoarse cry with upper airway obstruction, which may present early in infancy and diagnosis is by either flexible fiber-optic laryngoscopy or direct laryngoscopy.

Subglottic hemangiomas are a rare cause of stridor, which is typically expiratory. Hemangiomas in a beard-like distribution are diagnostically suggestive. Confirmation is achievable with direct laryngoscopy and bronchoscopy.

Subglottic stenosis usually results from scarring of the subglottic region following intubation. Stridor may be heard but does not typically change with position.

Tracheomalacia and bronchomalacia may be present along with laryngomalacia. Expiratory airway sounds are generally present. Diagnosis is via bronchoscopy.

A vascular ring is a rare cause of airway obstruction. Feeding difficulties and stridor may be present — diagnostic confirmation is with a contrasted computed tomography scan of the chest. This condition should be a suspected diagnosis with tracheomalacia seen on bronchoscopy or compression of the esophagus seen on an esophagram.

Foreign body aspiration is a possibility after finding an infant in respiratory distress after being unaccompanied or after ingesting food, causing a choking or coughing event. Diagnosis is suggested with chest X-ray findings and decreased unilateral breath sounds. Bronchoscopy should be performed to diagnose and retrieve the foreign body.