# Continuing Education Activity

Sarcocystosis is caused by parasites of the Sarcocystis species, an intracellular protozoan parasite. It has a global distribution and is sporadically reported to cause human infections. Sarcocystosis is relatively rare as a majority of human infections tend to be asymptomatic and are detected incidentally. This article reviews the epidemiology, pathogenesis, evaluation, and treatment of sarcocystosis infection and highlights the role of an interprofessional team in identifying and treating this condition.

**Objectives:**
- Describe the etiology and epidemiology of sarcocystosis.
- Explain the evaluation and available investigations in patients with sarcocystosis. 
- Review the available therapeutic options in the treatment of sarcocystosis.
- Summarize the importance of an inter-professional team to enhance the clinical outcomes in patients with sarcocystosis.

# Introduction

Sarcocystis species are intracellular protozoan parasites. They were first reported by Miescher in 1843 as white threadlike cysts in striated muscles of a house mouse, and they were referred to as 'Miescher's tubules' for the next 20 years. For many decades it was unclear whether they were protozoa or fungi. Similar structures were found in 1865 in pig muscle. Subsequently, in 1967, these spindle or crescent-shaped bodies were studied under electron microscopy, and organelles were observed like those in apicomplexan protozoans of Toxoplasma and Eimeria.

They have a heteroxenous (more than one obligatory host) life cycle based on a prey-predator host relationship of definitive and intermediate hosts, identified in 1972.Sarcocystis spp. known and most have been isolated from muscle tissues of various intermediate hosts, including mammals, birds, and reptiles.

# Etiology

Sarcocystosis caused by Sarcocystis species can occur in two forms in humans, the intestinal and the muscular type. Humans can be either definitive or intermediate hosts. Sarcocystis hominis (in cattle) and Sarcocystis suihominis (in pigs) use humans as definitive hosts and are known to cause intestinal Sarcocystosis. The definite host in some non-human species like Sarcocystis nesbitti is presumed to be reptiles, and humans acquire by ingestion of sporocysts through contaminated food and water. Undocumented species where humans can serve as a definitive host may be possible with the meat of domesticated animals, birds, wild animals, and birds being eaten across the world.

# Epidemiology

Sarcocystis species that infect humans are widely distributed across the world. Muscular sarcocystosis has been reported, with the highest incidence seen in Asia and Southeast Asia.Sarcocystis antibodies in 19.7% of the surveyed population.

Intestinal sarcocystosis is reported from all regions of the world except Africa and the Middle East, which in humans tends to be more common in Europe compared to other continents. Sarcocystis spp. Cases have also been found in a vast majority of countries, including Vietnam, Slovakia, Spain, Tibet, Cambodia, Iran, and Australia.

# Pathophysiology

In the infective form, sporocysts, when ingested by the intermediate host (cattle and pigs), rupture to release sporozoites. The sporozoites enter the endothelium of blood vessels to undergo schizogony and form first-generation schizonts. These further develop into merozoites and invade small capillaries and blood vessels to become second-generation schizonts. These merozoites invade the muscle cells to form sarcocysts made up of bradyzoites. Upon consumption of undercooked meat containing these sarcocysts, bradyzoites are released in the small intestine of humans, invading the intestinal epithelium, where they differentiate into macro- and microgametocytes. The fusion of these gametes results in oocyst formation, which is shed in the feces.  Humans may also become dead-end or accidental hosts for many non-human Sarcocystis spp. after the accidental ingestion of oocysts. The sporozoites ex-cyst and schizonts develop in the vascular endothelium of blood vessels, following which merozoites invade the muscle tissue causing muscular sarcocystosis.

# Histopathology

Most sporocysts of various species measure about 10 by 15 µm, contain four sporozoites and a residual body. The overall size, presence, or absence of septa and ultrastructural morphology of the wall are some of these features that help identify. However, it varies with the host cell type, the sarcocysts, and the method of fixation. The intact oocysts appear as two adjacent sporocysts with a thin oocyst wall. It often breaks to release the sporocysts, which are the most commonly found structures in the feces.

The histopathological diagnosis is based on the part affected. Most sarcocysts in humans have been found in skeletal and cardiac muscle. Muscle biopsies will show sarcocysts within the muscle fibers. Sarcocysts of Sarcocystis hominis in cattle are microscopic, whereas those of Sarcocystis suihominis in pigs are macroscopic. Hematoxylin-and-eosin(H & E) stain can be used to detect sarcocysts in the muscles of the intermediate host. The walls of sarcocysts are positively stained by periodic acid-Schiff (PAS) reaction.

# History and Physical

A history of consuming undercooked or raw pork and beef should raise suspicion of sarcocystosis. Other meat, including meat from domesticated or wild mammals, birds, or reptiles, can potentially cause Sarcocystis infection if eaten undercooked.Sarcocystis infections tend to be asymptomatic in humans.

In symptomatic disease, the infection can present as two distinct syndromes or as a combination of both. Muscular sarcocystosis can present with fever, musculoskeletal pain, rashes, bronchospasms, cardiomyopathy, or subcutaneous swelling.

# Evaluation

Blood investigations can show lymphocytosis or eosinophilia.S. hominis and 11 to 13 days for S. suihominis. Oocyst/sporocyst excretion may last for around a month.

Fecal studies can include different flotation techniques, modified Kato thick smear, formalin-ether technique, or direct smear.

Accurate and sensitive diagnostic tests do not currently exist for Sarcocyst infections. Immunofluorescence assays (IFAs), Enzyme-linked immunosorbent assays (ELISAs), and serological methods such as antibodies to Sarcocystis have been tried in the past but are not widely available.

# Treatment / Management

**Intestinal sarcocystosis:****There are no**effective prophylaxis or therapeutic options currently for intestinal sarcocystosis in either humans or animals. Sarcocystis persisted.

****Muscular********sarcocystosis********:************Albendazole therapy was trialed with steroid cover for muscular sarcocystosis, which was ineffective.Sarcocystis, but no well-conducted clinical studies have been conducted.

Currently, no course of treatment can be recommended as superior or better than the other due to the lack of controlled studies and insufficient evidence of reported treatment protocols and clinical response.

# Differential Diagnosis

Sarcocystis may occasionally be misidentified as other cyst-forming coccidian parasites such as Toxoplasma or Neospora.

# Prognosis

Infections are usually self-limiting, although long-lasting.

# Complications

Occasionally in intestinal sarcocystosis, segmental eosinophilic enteritis or necrotizing enteritis may be seen.

# Consultations

Consultations in cases of suspected sarcocystosis should involve the microbiologist or tropical medicine physician trained in parasitology to identify the oocysts and sarcocysts in feces samples. In muscular sarcocystosis, a pathologist can identify the cyst with bradyzoites in the histopathology of a muscle biopsy. Treatment should be tailored, and patient-specific in the absence of standardized treatment regimens, and infectious diseases or tropical medicine clinicians may be consulted. Gastroenterologists and rheumatologists should keep the possibility of sarcocystosis in mind when treating gastroenteritis and myositis in patients with an unclear etiology.

# Deterrence and Patient Education

Prevention of infection remains the best option in the absence of effective prophylaxis and therapeutic options. Patient education should be carried out to ensure thorough cooking or freezing of meat to kill the bradyzoites in the sarcocysts. Thorough cooking renders bradyzoites non-infectious.

# Pearls and Other Issues

Sarcocystosis is considered a zoonotic disease with a complex interplay between animals and humans. Only two species, including S. hominis and S. suihominis, have humans as definitive hosts in their life cycles. There may be multiple species that have humans as an intermediate host or as a dead-end host. Sarcocystosis is also considered an emerging disease, which, coupled with the zoonotic aspects of the disease, highlights the importance of a one health approach to treating, controlling, and preventing the disease.

# Enhancing Healthcare Team Outcomes

An inter-professional team approach is required for sarcocystosis for early diagnosis to improve clinical outcomes. The inter-professional team can involve physicians, pathologists, public health practitioners, and microbiologists. Given the global prevalence, a high index of suspicion is required in patients presenting with gastroenteritis or myositis. Increased education and awareness regarding disease prevention remain the most effective step in managing this infection.

Infection control should also involve attempts to eradicate the parasite from the animal population in domestic animals and other animal populations such as pets that patients frequently encounter. Hence, a one-health approach is paramount in combating this infection. [Level 5]