**Diagnostic Procedures**

- Fundus fluorescein angiography (FFA) - FFA is an important tool to diagnose Eales disease. A delayed venous filling is seen in case of venous obstruction. The early venous phase shall show the staining of inflamed vessel walls, while the late phase may show extravasation of the dye. Sclerosed vessels may show capillary nonperfusion. In cases of neovascularization, the early arteriovenous phase shall show hyperfluorescence, while in the late venous phase, leakage shall be noted. The ischemic stage shall highlight venovenous shunts and areas of capillary closure. Capillary non-perfusion areas will show up as hypofluorescent areas.

- B-scan (ultrasound) - When the fundus view is precluded by vitreous hemorrhage, B-scan is useful to know whether retinal detachment is present or not. Variable echo density is seen in cases of vitreous hemorrhage. Ultrasound also reveals the presence of posterior vitreous detachment, vitreoretinal attachment (neovascularization), sub-hyaloid hemorrhage, vitreoschisis, and membranes in the vitreous cavity.

- Optical coherence tomography (OCT) - Macular edema may be quantitated with the help of OCT. Its resolution on serial follow-ups with treatment may also be seen on OCT.

**Laboratory Investigations**

Other diseases causing vasculitis need to be ruled out with appropriate laboratory investigations before making the diagnosis of Eales disease. To rule out leukemia and other hematological diseases, a complete blood count is needed. Erythrocytic sedimentation rate (ESR), blood sugar, and coagulation profile may be ordered. High-resolution computed tomography (HRCT) chest or chest X-ray and Mantoux test are needed to account for tuberculosis. HRCT chest is considered the highest diagnostic value in pulmonary tuberculosis.

Hemoglobin electrophoresis is done to rule out sickle cell retinopathy. To rule out sarcoidosis, serum angiotensin-converting enzyme and HRCT chest is required. Serum antinuclear antibody test may be needed to rule out systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE); however, arterioles are more involved (in Eales disease, veins are predominantly involved), and systemic lupus erythematosus has multiple soft exudates (cotton wool spots) around the optic disc or whitish retinal patches causing Purtscher-like retinopathy. Venereal Disease Research Laboratory test (VDRL) and Treponema pallidum hemagglutination (TPHA) test are required for syphilis.

In patients with associated retinitis or other suggestive features, HIV serology should also be done.