Injury of the pars interarticularis is among the most common causes of low back pain, especially in adolescent athletes. Sometimes these lesions develop in an asymptomatic manner, and they are detected in adulthood when the injury becomes chronic and symptomatic.

The spectrum of pathologies in the pars interarticularis ranges from bone stress and pars fracture (spondylolysis) to isthmic spondylolisthesis, representing an anterior vertebral slippage. Bone stress is considered the earliest sign of disease. Repetitive bone stress causes bone remodeling and may result in spondylolysis, a non-displaced fracture of the pars interarticularis.

Spondylolisthesis, a related condition to spondylolysis, is defined by the forward displacement of the upper vertebra relative to the caudal vertebra. In 1976 Wiltse et al.

- Type I or dysplastic: is attributed to congenital dysplasia of the superior articular process of the sacrum.

- Type II or isthmic: is due to a lesion in the pars interarticularis; these subclassify as:

- 
              
- (a) Lytic, when a fatigue pars fracture is present
              
              
- (b) Pars elongation due to multiple healed stress fractures
              
              
- (c) Acute pars fracture

- Type III or degenerative: originates from facet instability without a pars fracture.

- Type IV or traumatic: the displacement is due to an acute posterior arch fracture other than pars.

- Type V or pathological: is due to posterior vertebral arch bone disease.

- Type VI or iatrogenic: it is a potential sequel to spinal surgery.

For this activity, the focus will be on type II or isthmic spondylolisthesis.

Spondylolisthesis was classified by Meyerding et al. into five subtypes according to the magnitude of slippage on plain lateral lumbar radiographs measured by the movement of the upper vertebra relative to the inferior vertebra.

- Grade I,  less than 25% of displacement,

- Grade II, between 25 and 50%,

- Grade III, between 50 and 75%,

- Grade IV, between 75 and 100% and

- Grade V or spondyloptosis, when there is no contact between the vertebrae endplates. The commonly used Grade V, representing more than 100% slip or spondyloptosis, is not part of the original grading system.

Most pars lesions or spondylolysis occur at L5 (85 to 95%), with L4 being the second most commonly affected vertebra (5 to 15%). The other lumbar levels are less often affected.