# Continuing Education Activity

Body dysmorphic disorder, or BDD, formally known as dysmorphophobia, is a psychiatric condition defined in the DSM 5 as a preoccupation with a perceived defect or flaw in one’s physical appearance that is either not noticeable or only slightly observable by others. This activity outlines the evaluation and treatment of body dysmorphic disorder and reviews the interprofessional team's role in managing patients with this condition.

**Objectives:**
- Identify the etiology of body dysmorphic disorder.
- Explain the screening questions used to diagnose body dysmorphic disorder.
- Review the management options available for body dysmorphic disorder.
- Describe interprofessional team strategies for improving care coordination and communication to advance and improve outcomes of body dysmorphic disorder.

# Introduction

Body dysmorphic disorder, or BDD, formally known as dysmorphophobia, is a psychiatric condition defined in the DSM 5 as a preoccupation with a perceived defect or flaw in one’s physical appearance that is either not noticeable or only slightly observable by others. The preoccupation is severe enough to cause marked impairment in social, academic, occupational, or other areas of functioning. To meet diagnostic criteria, an individual at some point during the illness must engage in repetitive behaviors, such as excessive mirror checking, camouflaging (i.e., covering up the defect with makeup, clothing, etc.), skin picking, excessive grooming, excessive weight lifting or pervasive mental acts such as comparing one’s appearance to others. These behaviors are typically time-consuming, difficult to control, and are distressing to the individual. On average, these acts will last around 3 to 8 hours per day. The perceived physical flaws most commonly occur on the skin, hair, or nose, but any body part can be involved. Individuals with this disorder, on average, experience preoccupations with 5 to 7 different body parts throughout his or her life.  A subcategory of BDD is muscle dysmorphia, where an individual perceives his or her muscles to be too small or insufficient. Another form of this disorder is BDD by proxy, which involves an individual’s preoccupation with a perceived physical defect in another person.

In 1891, Enrico Morselli, an Italian psychiatrist, coined the term dysmorphophobia to describe the condition of people who perceive themselves as flawed but with no apparent physical deformities. This term was derived from the Greek word “dysmorfia,” which means “ugliness.” Pierre Janet, a French psychologist, has discussed cases of this condition, who labeled it as “l’obsession de la honte du corps,” which translates to “obsessions of shame of the body.” Sigmund Freud also detailed a case known as “Wolf Man,” a man obsessed with his nose, which caused him significant social distress. This condition was first recognized in the DSM in 1980 as an atypical somatoform disorder. In 1987, it was classified as a distinct somatoform disorder. DSM 5 now classifies BDD under obsessive-compulsive and related disorders.

# Etiology

The etiology of BDD appears to develop from biological, cultural, psychosocial, and neuropsychological factors.

# Epidemiology

Body dysmorphic disorder has been estimated to have a prevalence of 1.9% in the community, around 5.9% in adult outpatient psychiatric settings, and 7.4% in adult inpatient psychiatric settings.

# Pathophysiology

Research indicates abnormalities in frontostriatal and temporoparietaloccipital circuits involving visual-spatial processing.

# History and Physical

On examination, the provider must distinguish between a perceived flaw versus a true physical defect. Skin lesions secondary to skin picking are common with body dysmorphic disorder and can be observed during the patient's examination. Obtaining a thorough history of cosmetic procedures and surgical interventions is essential, along with past psychiatric history, prior suicide attempts, suicidal ideations, and previous treatments.

# Evaluation

Body dysmorphic disorder can be difficult to identify because individuals often have limited insight into the condition or carry feelings of shame and embarrassment regarding the preoccupations.

Assessment questions include:

- Do you feel concerned about your appearance?

- How much time do you spend worrying about this or trying to change it?

- How have you been affected by this in terms of quality of life?

When determining the severity of distress and impairment, it is essential to look at social, occupational, and academic functioning. Assess for obsessive thoughts and repetitive behaviors, including the amount of time, level of impairment, and distress these thoughts and behaviors cause. These behaviors can include camouflaging, comparisons to others, seeking reassurance from others, skin picking, frequent mirror checking, and excessive grooming.

BDD can be specified with the degree of insight, which includes good, fair, poor, absent, and delusional.

The current standard of assessment for BDD is the Yale-Brown Obsessive-Compulsive Scale (modified for BDD), a 12-item measurement conducted by the provider.

# Treatment / Management

Treatment of body dysmorphic disorder includes psychological and pharmacological interventions. Research suggests the benefits of psychotherapy, including cognitive-behavioral therapy (CBT) and metacognitive therapy. SSRIs such as fluoxetine have been shown to be beneficial.

# Differential Diagnosis

Differential diagnoses include eating disorders, other obsessive-compulsive disorders, illness anxiety disorders, depressive disorders, anxiety disorders, and psychotic disorders. Body dysmorphic disorder symptoms should not be better explained by any of these conditions, although these can co-occur with BDD.

# Prognosis

Although body dysmorphic disorder is thought to be a chronic disorder, studies suggest a likely response to evidence-based treatments. RCTs have shown a response rate of 50% to 80% with pharmacological treatment. Response rates can be monitored over time with the BDD rating assessments mentioned above. Relapse rates were shown to decrease with long-term pharmacologic treatment.

# Complications

Comorbid psychiatric disorders are common with body dysmorphic disorder and result in greater functional impairment. MDD is the most prevalent comorbid condition. Anxiety disorders, substance abuse, and OCD are also common.

# Deterrence and Patient Education

Psychoeducation regarding body dysmorphic disorder is important, as many patients lack insight into the condition. Patients should be discouraged from seeking cosmetic procedures, as this has not been shown to improve outcomes.

# Enhancing Healthcare Team Outcomes

Individuals are more likely to first present to other medical providers, including cosmetic surgeons and dermatologists, before being evaluated by mental health professionals. Body dysmorphic disorder is usually not identified in individuals until 10 to 15 years after the onset of the condition.

Managing BDD requires the efforts of an interprofessional healthcare team. This team includes clinicians, mid-level practitioners (NPs and PAs), nurses, pharmacists, and mental health professionals. It also includes the patient. These various disciplines need to collaborate their efforts, provide open communication, and engage in patient-centered strategies to deliver optimal outcomes. [Level 5]