Congenital anomalies involving the ear may be of significant physical and psychosocial concern to patients and the parents of afflicted children, given that these conditions may affect physical appearance, hearing, and balance.

While a wide variety of congenital anomalies of the ear exist, those that impact hearing are particularly concerning.

**Internal Ear**

Neonatal hearing loss is sometimes due to developmental anomalies of the neurosensory components of the internal ear. The most common cause, Enlarged Vestibular Aqueduct Syndrome (EVA), is an autosomal recessive condition in which there is a bilateral enlargement of the endolymphatic duct and vestibular aqueduct.

Maternal infection with rubella is another source of neonatal hearing loss that may hinder the development of the organ of Corti in the fourth week of development, resulting in its malformation. Similarly, maternal infection with cytomegalovirus is another potential cause of congenital sensorineural hearing loss. Other relatively common congenital anomalies of the internal ear include Mondini dysplasia and autosomal dominant nonsyndromic hearing loss.

**Middle Ear**

Congenital anomalies of the middle ear are relatively rare and include congenital fixation of one or more of the ossicles, a rare primary bone dysplasia called familial expansile osteolysis, and a cyst-like abnormal accumulation of skin cells called cholesteatoma. Developmental malformations of the middle ear structures responsible for sound conversion and transmission contribute to neonatal hearing loss.

**External ear**

Numerous congenital anomalies of the external ear have been recorded in the literature.

Preauricular tags, or simply ear tags, are common and usually benign findings in neonates that involve cutaneous, fatty, or cartilaginous growths. Occasionally, preauricular tags may be associated with other pharyngeal arch anomalies or genetic syndromes. Developmentally, accessory auricular hillocks sometimes produce auricular appendages, preauricular tags, or an accessory auricle.

Microtia is a developmental anomaly of the external ear involving an under-development of the typical mesenchymal proliferations that form the external ear. This condition presents at birth as an unusually small and sometimes misshapen external ear and is highly variable in its degree of severity. Microtia is associated with conductive hearing loss due to the possibility of middle and external ear malformations and the potential for complete agenesis of the external auditory canal.

Cryptotia is a malformation of the cartilage of the external ear that involves part of the external ear, usually the superior portion, being buried under the adjacent skin.

Another external ear congenital anomaly, unilateral or bilateral atresia of the external acoustic meatus, occurs in individuals who retain the meatal plug due to a failure of canalization. In most cases, the external acoustic meatus is only superficially obstructed by fibrous or bony tissue. Given its relationship to the first pharyngeal groove, atresia of the external acoustic meatus has been associated with various malformations. Finally, the complete absence of the external auditory meatus is a rare congenital anomaly of the external ear; this condition occurs due to a failure in the mesenchymal proliferation arising from the first pharyngeal groove.