All patients presenting with a confirmed diagnosis of retropharyngeal infection require hospital admission, intravenous antibiotics, and otolaryngology consultation. Antibiotic therapy should cover upper respiratory organisms, including anaerobic organisms. Patients presenting airway compromise should have immediate surgical incision and drainage performed to relieve their upper airway obstruction.

In patients not presenting with severe respiratory distress or airway compromise, management typically begins with a 24 to 48 hour trial of intravenous antibiotic therapy. After 24 to 48 hours of antibiotic therapy, the need for surgical incision and drainage will be reevaluated by a trained otolaryngologist. Factors that have been associated with an increased need for surgical incision and drainage include an abscess with a cross-sectional area greater than 2 cm2 and symptoms for greater than two days. There is no evidence that patients presenting with mature abscesses greater than 3 cm2 benefit from surgical intervention before 24 to 48 hours of antibiotic therapy.

All patients must have careful airway monitoring when undergoing treatment of retropharyngeal abscess, especially during the first 24 to 48 hours of therapy.

Initial antibiotic therapy should include either ampicillin-sulbactam (50 mg/kg every 6 hours) or clindamycin (15 mg/kg every 8 hours). If patients appear septic or do not respond to initial antibiotic therapy, vancomycin or linezolid also should be administered. Parenteral antibiotics should be continued until patients are clinically improved and afebrile for 24 hours. After patients demonstrate clinical improvement and remain afebrile, they may be transitioned to oral antibiotics. Amoxicillin-clavulanate (45 mg/kg every 12 hours) or clindamycin (13 mg/kg every 8 hours) are acceptable oral regimens. Oral antibiotics should be prescribed for 14 days, and the patient may be discharged home with strict return precautions.