Schamberg disease represents one of the most common types of pigmented purpuric dermatoses diagnosis is usually made by clinical inspection, although a biopsy is always useful for differential diagnosis, it is not mandatory. The exact cause of Shamberg´s disease is not known. T-cell mediated immunity plays an important role in the pathology; there is also a multifactorial component including gravitational dependency, alcohol intake, drugs, a genetic component, hepatitis B antigenemia, and dysfunctional immune system. This type of purpuric dermatoses affects all races and usually affects older adults with a male preponderance.

While Schamberg disease usually does not represent a diagnostic dilemma, treatment does. Since there is not an established therapy, the options are wide, such as topical steroids, phototherapy, pentoxifylline, colchicine, oral cyclosporine, griseofulvin, ascorbic acid, and other infrequent treatments. Among them, phototherapy has been considered in patients who fail topical therapy, even though larger studies are required to confirm phototherapy as a promising therapy. Although the treatment variety is wide, the expert opinion from the specialist is useful to select the appropriate therapy.

Differential diagnosis is crucial and is mainly depends upon thorough clinical inspection and identification of classic morphology. The histopathology plays a vital role in differentiating from mycosis fungoides. Although this is a benign disease, numerous exacerbations and spontaneous resolution can be discouraging in some patients. The residual pigmentation could induce depression and anxiety in patients. Therefore, psychological support is crucial in these circumstances.

The outcomes in Schamberg disease is usually good. There could be relapses, and the treatments could be extended even for years, therefore keeping the patient motivated is crucial to complete the treatment.