History and physical should aim at localizing the affected organ system, concurrently with the CD4+ cell counts. Since these opportunistic infections are manifested depending on the severity of the suppression of CD4+ counts, for this review, they have been categorized accordingly.

**All CD4+ counts**

**Mycobacterium tuberculosis:
**

Following infection with Mycobacterium tuberculosis, the bacilli can persist for years, referred to as latent TB infection (LTBI). An estimated 3 to 16% of untreated HIV patients have the annual risk of reactivation with TB disease, whereas the lifetime risk among HIV-negative persons with LTBI is about approximately 5%.

**CD4+ count less than 250 cells/mm^3**

**Coccidioidomycosis:**

Consists of two species, Coccidioidesimmitis, and Coccidioides posadasii, found in soil. Four different syndromes are noted: (1) focal pneumonia presenting with fever, cough and pleuritic chest pain, (2) diffuse pneumonia with fever, dyspnea, hypoxemia, (3) meningitis with headache, lethargy, and (4) positive serology tests without evidence of localized infection.

**CD4+ count < 200 cells/mm^3**

**Pneumocystis jirovecii pneumonia (PCP):
**

This fungus, until recently, was thought to be a protozoan. History of fever, progressive dyspnea, non-productive cough and hypoxemia on the exam are characteristic. Chest x-ray shows diffuse, bilateral, symmetrical interstitial infiltrates with a ground glass pattern.

**Mucocutaneous candidiasis:**

The causative organism is Candida albicans. Oropharyngeal infections present as painless, creamy, white, plaque-like lesions in the oral cavity. These lesions scrape off easily. Angular cheilosis is another feature. Esophageal candidiasis can present with retrosternal burning pain, odynophagia. Endoscopic testing reveals white plaques as seen in the oral cavity. In women with HIV, vulvovaginal candidiasis presents with mucosal burning and itching.

**CD4+ count < 150 cells/mm^3**

**Histoplasma capsulatum:
**

In immunocompetent individuals, acute pulmonary histoplasmosis is characterized by fever, myalgia, chills, headaches, and a nonproductive cough. These symptoms resolve spontaneously without therapy. In patients with AIDS and some elderly patients without HIV, chronic pulmonary histoplasmosis occurs as a reactivation process. Severe disseminated histoplasmosis manifesting as fever, fatigue, cough, weight loss, lymphadenopathy, hepatosplenomegaly, mucocutaneous ulcers of the nose, mouth, tongue, and intestine may occur.

**CD4+ count < 100 cells/mm^3**

**Cryptococcus neoformans:
**

It is a yeast that is characterized by a thick polysaccharide capsule. Can manifest as subacute meningitis or meningoencephalitis. Fever, malaise, headache are the common presenting symptoms. Pulmonary cryptococcosis can present with fever, chest pain, cough, dyspnea, positive blood cultures.

**Cryptosporidiosis:**

This condition results from the protozoa, Cryptosporidium. Typically associated with infections of the small bowel and causes diarrhea, however, in a profoundly immunosuppressed state may be associated with severe, extraintestinal cryptosporidiosis. Watery diarrhea with abdominal pain, nausea and vomiting are common.

**Herpes simplex viruses (HSV):**

Patients with AIDS suffer frequent and severe HSV infections including oropharyngeal disease, keratoconjunctivitis, genital herpes, eczema herpeticum, encephalitis, and neonatal herpes. HSV proctitis, with deep, extensive, nonhealing ulcers, generally seen in male patients in sexual relations with male HIV patients.

**Microsporidiosis:**

They are ubiquitous organisms, predominantly zoonotic or waterborne. Many species are reported to cause infections in human. Clinical presentations differ by the causative species. Encephalitozoon bieneusi can cause diarrhea, malabsorption, and cholangitis. E. cuniculi lead to hepatitis, encephalitis, and disseminated disease. E. intestinalis can cause diarrhea, disseminated infection, and superficial keratoconjunctivitis. E. hellem can cause superficial keratoconjunctivitis, sinusitis, prostatic abscesses, and disseminated infection. Anncaliia and Trachipleistophora cause keratoconjunctivitis, myositis. Trachipleistophora can cause encephalitis and disseminated disease.

**JC virus infection:**

Manifested as progressive multifocal leukoencephalopathy (PML). It is characterized by focal demyelination.

**CD4+ count < 50 cells/mm^3**

**Cytomegalovirus:**

The most common manifestation is retinitis. Often unilateral, but ultimately leads to bilateral involvement. Other presentations such as colitis, esophagitis, ventriculoencephalitis present. CMV pneumonitis is not common.

**Mycobacterium avium complex (MAC):**

It is one of the most common opportunistic bacterial infections in the AIDS population in the US. It can involve any organ and leads to persistent bacteremia and extensive infiltration of the tissues resulting in organ dysfunction. In the lung, nodules and cavitary lesions are common. Other manifestations include pericarditis, soft tissue abscesses, skin lesions, lymph node enlargement, central nervous system lesions, and bone infection.

**Toxoplasma gondii encephalitis:
**

It is a coccidian protozoan of worldwide distribution. Focal encephalitis is the most common presentation.

**Bartonellosis:**

Bartonella henselae and Bartonella quintana are associated with infections in HIV patients.B. henselae causes bacillary peliosis hepatitis and B. quintana is associated with osteomyelitis and culture-negative endocarditis.

**Coexisting infections with HIV**

**Syphilis:
**

Manifestations are similar to patients without HIV infection. Primary syphilis presents as a solitary, painless nodule at the point of contact which ulcerates quickly to form chancre. Primary lesions, however, may be absent in HIV patients.

**Human papillomavirus infection:**

Major risk factor for cervical cancer.

**Hepatitis B virus infection:**

It is the leading cause of chronic liver disease.

**Hepatitis C virus infection:**

They are minimally symptomatic in both acute and chronic infections. Low-grade fever, abdominal pain in the right upper quadrant, nausea, vomiting, and anorexia along with jaundice characterize the presentation. Long term complications include cirrhosis, which is seen in approximately 20% of patients with chronic HCV infections within 20 years after infection.