The cause of sensory-perceptual alteration depends on the underlying condition and risk factors. Factors that may increase the risk of sensory perceptual alterations include:

**Psychiatric Conditions**

Autism spectrum disorder (ASD): Alterations in sensory-dedicated neural circuits, including neuro-molecular and anatomical changes in primary sensory regions of the brain, are responsible for autism-associated sensory symptoms. GABAergic (gamma-aminobutyric acid) signaling is often affected and responsible for these alterations.

Attention deficit hyperactivity disorder (ADHD): The inability to inhibit irrelevant sensory extraneous stimuli leads to sensory overload in ADHD. This occurs due to impaired information processing and faulty perceptual capacity. Individuals with ADHD have a reduced ability to filter intrusive sensory, motor, and/or cognitive information.

Schizophrenia: Altered sensory processing and perceptual inference are responsible for the positive symptoms of schizophrenia.

Sensory processing disorder (SPD): SPD is a neurological condition in children when the brain is unable to process incoming information in an accurate and organized manner resulting in inaccurate processing and judgment of sensory information. Children can experience difficulty with regulating emotions, problems in attention, and adapting responses.

**Sleep Disorders**

Altered sleep or sleep deprivation can cause delirium leading to sensory and perceptual alterations. The decrease in rapid eye movement (REM) sleep has been ascertained as a possible factor that can cause delirium.

**Delirium in Intensive Care**

Critically ill patients in the intensive care unit (ICU) are at increased risk of developing delirium. Sensory and altered perceptions can occur due to host factors, acute illness, and environmental factors. Environmental and iatrogenic factors include sleep deprivation, sensory deprivation, immobilization, and social isolation.

Causes of disturbed sleep in the ICU may be due to:

- Mechanical ventilation and medication (benzodiazepines used to treat delirium can also adversely contribute to delirium particularly in elderly patients)

- Continuous exposure to light which will disrupt the circadian rhythm

- Noise exposure: sound from equipment, alarms, conversations amongst healthcare staff or patients

- Patient care activities: vital signs, nursing procedures, imaging, lab draws

Prolonged or frequent sleep deprivation can lead to:

- Delirium: due to impaired cognitive function

- Prolonged neurocognitive dysfunction

- A decrease in quality of life

- Impaired immune function

In certain circumstances (for example infection control), it may become necessary to isolate patients. Contact isolation will have a negative impact on a patient's mood, increasing the risk of depression, anxiety, hostility, and fear. Due to the uncertainty of the situation, the patient may feel that they are losing control within social isolation, thus influencing their mood.

**Neurological Disorders**

Several of the neurological disorders and syndromes can present with changes in behavior and cognitive function due to altered brain function.

Alzheimer's disease: Due to cortical disturbances, sensory visual impairments are a common finding in Alzheimer's disease. This occurs due to the accumulation of neurofibrillary tangles and neuritic plaques in the visual cortical areas leading to cortical degeneration and atrophy. Higher visual abilities are commonly compromised. These include simultanagnosia, problems with visual attention, visual memory, perceiving structure from emotion, object and face perception, visual learning, and reading. Impairment of visual perception in these patients decreases their quality of life and complicates the evaluation of other cognitive deficits.

Parkinson's disease: The progressive loss of dopaminergic cells in the retina and other areas of the visual system leads to visuoperceptual deficits in patients with Parkinson's disease. This dopamine deficiency in the retina leads to selective spatial-temporal abnormalities in the retinal ganglion cell function. Patients who develop visuoperceptual deficits are at a higher risk for the development of dementia.

Seizure disorder: Patients with epilepsy can have perceptual functions with all five senses affected. This results in impaired or occasionally supranormal sensibility. Ictal perceptual experiences are common but interictal function may also be affected. Since epilepsy is a network disease, it can affect neural circuits distant from the seizure focus. This may account for the correlation between sensory modality affected and the underlying epilepsy syndrome. People with temporal lobe epilepsy often experience impairment in olfaction, such as odor discrimination, identification, and recall. Such altered sensation is due to the close association of the olfactory system with the limbic system (which is often implicated in mesial temporal lobe epilepsy). Visual information processing may also be disturbed in occipital lobe epilepsy.

**Visual Dysfunction**

Common causes of visual dysfunction in the elderly are:

- Age-related changes in the optics of the eye

- Diabetic retinopathy

- Glaucoma

- Cataract

- Age-related maculopathy

- Visual hallucinations due to Bonnets syndrome

These dysfunctions lead to impairment in visual acuity, contrast sensitivity, color discrimination, motion perception, peripheral visual field sensitivity, temporal sensitivity, and visual speed processing.

**Hearing Problems**

Hearing loss can cause auditory hallucinations, such as Anton's syndrome.

**Electrolyte Imbalance**

This can cause an altered sensorium, especially hyponatremia and hypocalcemia, which can induce delirium in elderly patients.

**Alcohol or Illicit Drug Use**

This can lead to neurocognitive impairments resulting in altered sensory and perceptual alterations.

**Chronic Medical Problems**

Liver failure, renal failure, and acquired immunodeficiency syndrome (AIDS) can cause sensory-perception alterations. Other causes can include hospitalized elderly patients, ventilation-perfusion mismatch, polypharmacy, patients with a terminal illness, post-surgical status, or patients with a high fever.