**Neonatal Infection**

GBS remains the primary cause of neonatal sepsis since the 1970s. Based on the age of presentation, it divides into early-onset, late-onset, and late-late onset.

Early-onset disease defines as the onset of infection in the first six days of life, but most neonates (61% to 95%) become ill within the first 24 hours (median, 1 hour). Infants typically present with respiratory distress such as apnea or tachypnea, grunting respirations, and cyanosis. Other signs include lethargy, poor feeding, abdominal distention, pallor, jaundice, tachycardia, and hypotension. Fever usually is present in term neonates, but preterm infants often are non-febrile or hypothermic.

Bacteremia is the most common form of early-onset GBS disease, accounting for approximately 80% of cases. Pneumonia and meningitis, although not uncommon, are less likely presentations in early-onset disease, accounting for 15% and 5% to 10%, respectively.

Late-onset disease, defined as GBS infection from day 7 to day 89 of life (median 37 days), has a similar clinical presentation to early-onset disease.

Late-onset disease may also present with other less common foci of infections such as osteomyelitis, pyogenic arthritis, and cellulitis-adenitis syndrome.

Late-onset GBS disease, also known as later-onset or very late-onset disease, is defined as GBS infection in infants three months of age or older. Most cases of late, late-onset GBS disease occur in premature infants or those with very low birth weights whose corrected prepatellar age is less than three months. In term infants late, late-onset GBS disease can be associated with HIV infection or immunodeficiency. The clinical manifestations in these older infants are similar to those in patients with typical late-onset infection; bacteremia without a focus and meningitis are the most common clinical features.

**Adults**

Invasive GBS disease is a substantial cause of morbidity and mortality in adults over 65 years of age, African American, and adults with diabetes.

Underlying medical conditions are present in most adults with invasive disease. Diabetes (41%), heart diseases (36%), and malignancy (17%) account for the majority of infections.

The most common presenting manifestation is fever, chills, and change in mental status. A large number of infections in adults are associated with pregnancy. GBS accounts for 15% of peripartum endometritis cases, 15% of pregnancy-associated bacteremia, and 15% of wound infections after cesarean.

GBS-associated focal infections include pneumonia, endocarditis, skin and soft tissue infections, and osteomyelitis. About 4% of nonpregnant adults surviving the first episode of GBS bacteremia have a second recurrence when followed for a year.