Patients usually present with symptoms of excessive lacrimation and ocular discomfort. Most commonly, punctal stenosis is associated with chronic inflammation. Symptoms will, therefore, include uncomfortable, red, watery eyes and tearing. The patient may present with mixed seborrheic and ulcerative blepharitis.

The biomicroscopic examination takes into account the eyelid margin, punctal orifice, and the tear meniscus to classify punctal stenosis into four grades:

- Grade 0 No punctum identified, punctal atresia or agenesis (Fig 1)

- Grade 1 Papilla covered with a membrane (exudative or true membrane) or fibrosis (Fig 2)

- Grade 2 Less than normal size but recognizable

- Grade 3 Normal (easily recognized)

- Grade 4 <2mm

- Grade 5 >2mm, larger than usual punctum

Probing and irrigation are performed to confirm the diagnosis. Obstruction in the canalicular system is defined as a soft resistance to probing. In order to assess the lower lacrimal system, irrigation is done with normal saline and an irrigating lacrimal cannula (23 G). A normal patent lacrimal system will have no reflux of normal saline, whereas any obstruction will be evident through regurgitation of normal saline through the punctum.

When assessing a patient for punctal stenosis, it is important to determine the resting position of the lower punctum in particular. It should not normally be visible to examination under the biomicroscope. The normal punctum sits, pointing backward in the medial tear lake. Early lower eyelid laxity and ectropion will only be detectable with examination under the biomicroscope when the lower punctum is seen to be pointing upwards or outwards, even if the lower eyelid position seems to be normal on examination. Uncorrected, these early medial ectropions will lead to progressive stenosis of the punctum.