Anti-TNF agents are generally well tolerated, with the common adverse effects being minor and not needing drug discontinuation. However, serious adverse effects have occurred, the most common being that of severe infections.

Common adverse effects of all anti-TNF agents (occurring in more than 10% of patients)

**Infections**

Serious infections are a significant and concerning adverse effect of anti-TNF agents and may include bacterial, fungal, viral, or atypical infections. These infections may be fatal. Infections are more common in patients receiving multiple immunosuppressive agents such as methotrexate or corticosteroids combined with anti-TNF agents. Reports exist of the reactivation of tuberculosis and viral hepatitis B and C, and it is a recommendation to screen individuals for these before initiating an anti-TNF agent. In cases of reactivated latent tuberculosis, the reactivation occurs within the first few months of treatment with TNF-alpha inhibitors. Patients with latent tuberculosis should receive treatment with isoniazid or combination anti-tuberculosis agents before initiating anti-TNF agents. Patients living in areas with a higher incidence of certain fungal infections such as blastomycosis, coccidioidomycosis, or histoplasmosis should have screening for these conditions before initiating anti-TNF agents. Lastly, clinicians should hold anti-TNF therapy in patients who develop a serious infection, and they can consider resuming treatment after complete recovery from the infection, provided the benefits of restarting the anti-TNF therapy outweighs the risk of recurrent infections in the particular patient.

**Malignancies**

The risk of malignancies, especially lymphomas, has been an area of concern and debate since the introduction of anti-TNF agents. Theoretically, anti-TNF agents can decrease the host defense mechanisms against malignancy by inhibiting TNF. FDA has placed a black box warning on all anti-TNF agents regarding possible association with malignancies, especially lymphomas. The analysis by the FDA in 2003 showed an occurrence of lymphomas in 6 out of more than 6,000 RA patients treated with anti-TNF agents while none in the placebo-treated patients. However, the risk of lymphomas is higher in RA patients (2 to 3 times, especially non-Hodgkins lymphoma), especially with advancing age, and in those with higher RA disease activity. Several subsequent studies have not shown an increased lymphoma risk in RA patients treated with anti-TNF agents compared to those treated with conventional DMARDs.

Several studies have shown a higher risk of non-melanoma skin cancers (up to two times) in patients receiving anti-TNF agents, and annual skin examinations should be considered in patients receiving anti-TNF agents.

**Congestive Heart Failure**

Initial studies of anti-TNF agents in patients with RA and congestive heart failure NYHA Class III or IV showed poor cardiac outcomes, including increased mortality, an increase in hospitalizations, and a worsening of CHF.

**Drug-Induced Lupus**

Up to 50% of patients receiving an anti-TNF agent can develop positive autoantibodies, including anti-nuclear antibody (ANA) and anti-Ds-DNA antibodies. However, the occurrence of drug-induced lupus is a rare occurrence (less than 1%). The common manifestations of drug-induced lupus from anti-TNF agents are kin rash, thrombocytopenia, leukopenia, hypocomplementemia, and rarely hemolytic anemia.

**Demyelinating Disorders**

There are several reported cases of demyelinating disorders, including optic neuritis, multiple sclerosis (including exacerbation of underlying multiple sclerosis), myelitis, encephalitis, Guillain-Barre syndrome, transverse myelitis, and chronic inflammatory demyelinating polyneuropathy, in patients taking anti-TNF agents.

**Skin Reactions**

Rashes are not uncommon in patients receiving anti-TNF agents. The most common rash is a local injection site reaction/erythema, although other diffuse cutaneous reactions may also occur. An allergic reaction may lead to a diffuse drug rash. There are also reports of lupus-like rashes, hypersensitivity vasculitis, urticaria, new-onset psoriasis, granuloma annulare, erythema multiforme, and cutaneous T-cell lymphoma.

**Pregnancy and Lactation**

No controlled trials have taken place to assess the safety of anti-TNF agents in pregnancy or lactation. Anti-TNF agents have been labeled as Class B pregnancy risk by the FDA. Several registries have shown a low risk of major congenital defects with the use of anti-TNF agents in pregnancy, not significantly higher in the disease-matched comparison cohort, and with no birth-defect patterns. Researchers observed no fetal harm or malformations in animal trials. Except for certolizumab, all other anti-TNF agents cross the placenta, exposing the infant to the anti-TNF agent. Anti-TNF agent use in pregnancy should be a consideration only if there is a clear and strong indication.

Similarly, there is no data regarding the use of anti-TNF agents in lactating females. Anti-TNF agents have been found in the human milk at less than 1% of the maternal serum concentration, and there are no reports of adverse effects of anti-TNF agents in breastfed infants or on milk production. It is not known if the infant absorbs the anti-TNF agents at these low concentrations in human milk or not. Until more data is available, clinicians should avoid anti-TNF agents in lactating females.