Ossification of the posterior longitudinal ligament is an ectopic calcification in the tissue of the spinal ligament. About 70% of the cases OPLL developed in the cervical spine, but it may be seen in the thoracic and lumbar spine as well. Predominantly, it occurs in males than in females. The symptoms commonly present in the 40s and 50s.

**Clinical Presentation**

- Mild pain and discomfort in the early stage

- Clumsiness, dysesthesia, and tingling sensation in hands

- Lower extremity symptoms like gait disturbances may appear as the disease progresses, and suddenly or even quadriplegia may appear by mild injuries.

**Pathogenesis**

- The cause of the ossification of the posterior longitudinal ligament is still unknown. It is said to be a multifactorial disease. The genetic and non-genetic factors such as diet, obesity, age, diabetes mellitus, physical strain on the posterior longitudinal ligament play an important role in the development of the disease.

- Hypertrophic changes in the ligament itself are said to be one of the mechanisms of ossification of the posterior longitudinal ligament.

**Diagnosis**

A diagnosis of ossification of the posterior longitudinal ligament is based on radiological findings and clinical presentation. Since plain radiological exams have limitations, a CT scan or MRI is useful in the diagnosis. CT scan shows the accurate shape and size of the ossified mass and also helps to classify the type of OPLL. Three-dimensional CT is sometimes used to quantify the volume of OPLL. MRI is used to detect the compression from OPLL and also helps to detect the extent of spinal cord compression.