Fluconazole is available in oral and intravenous dosing. Oral doses are available in both suspension and tablets as either brand name or generic. Both suspensions are available as either 10 mg/mL or 40 mg/mL doses. Both tablets are available as 50 mg, 100 mg, 150 mg, or 200 mg tablets. The intravenous dosing is available in generic 100 mg/50 mL in NaCl 0.9% or 200 mg/100 mL in NaCl 0.9%. Ketoconazole is popular in topical cream, foam, gel, and shampoo forms. The 1% ketoconazole shampoo can be purchased over-the-counter (OTC).

The dosing of the azole medications varies due to the presenting condition. The presence of severe diseases, such as CNS blastomycosis, initial candidemia therapy, infections of cardiac valves, intra-abdominal infections, and endophthalmitis, requires loading doses of 800 mg once daily for several weeks or months followed by step-down dosing of 400 mg once daily for at least two weeks.

Esophageal candidiasis therapy includes a loading dose followed by daily dosing for up to 3 weeks. Some of the azole treatments - such as ketoconazole tablets, itraconazole capsules, and posaconazole solution - need gastric acid to be absorbed. Therefore antacids, histamine-2 blockers, and proton pump inhibitors decrease the absorption of these dosing types.

For specific dosing based on indication, please see articles on the individual agents.

Doses vary depending on the type of infection and the drug of choice.

- Miconazole: Is administered topically, vaginally, and buccally for oropharyngeal infections.

- Ketoconazole: For oral administration, dosing is 3.3 to 6.6 mg/kg body weight per day for two weeks. Dosages come in 200 mg tablets, and two 200 mg tablets or 0.5 mg tablets are the dosing options for prophylaxis of vaginal infections. The 1% ketoconazole shampoo can be purchased over-the-counter.

- Fluconazole: The dose is between 3 and 8 mg/kg body weight per day for 1 to 8 weeks. Doses are shorter for cutaneous infections and longer for mycoses. Doses come in 50, 100, and 200 mg tablets. There is a 150 mg tablet for vaginal infections. 150 mg can be used weekly or monthly for prophylaxis. It is also available and administered intravenously.

- Itraconazole: Dosing is 5 mg/kg body weight for 1 to 6 weeks; dose regimens are shorter for cutaneous infections and longer for mycoses. Dosing can be in pulses or continuous. The drug comes in 100 mg capsules.

- Voriconazole: This drug is available in tablets and as a suspension. It can also be administered IV, and it has weight-based dosing for most infections.

- Posaconazole: Available as a suspension, IV, and delayed-release tablets. Doses range from 200 mg to 400 mg daily for a period of weeks, depending on the type of infection. It does not require dose adjustment for hepatic insufficiency.

- Efinaconazole: This agent comes as a topical solution only for use on toenail fungus. It is applied once daily for 48 weeks.

- Isavuconazole: Dosed 324 mg orally or IV every 24 hours.