Treatment depends on the cause. Acute coronary syndromes should be managed per local expert cardiologist's guidance. Aortic dissections, especially type A (ascending aorta), should prompt emergent cardiovascular surgery consultation. If a pneumothorax is present, immediate evacuation of the air should be undertaken in patients with large pneumothorax (>2 cm from the chest wall at the level of the hilum), hemodynamic instability, new oxygen requirement, significant dyspnea or in those without a known underlying lung disease (secondary spontaneous pneumothorax) or trauma (traumatic pneumothorax).

Pulmonary embolism can be treated through multiple modalities, including home treatment with anticoagulants, inpatient initiation of anticoagulants, systemic fibrinolytic medications, catheter-directed fibrinolytic medications. The main determinants of in-hospital versus out-of-hospital management include oxygen requirement, the severity of pain, signs of right heart strain CT pulmonary angiography or echocardiogram, impending or apparent hemodynamic compromise despite volume resuscitation, social conditions which may impede immediate follow-up or comorbid acute or chronic conditions which may warrant hospitalization.

The treatment and analysis of pleural fluid in the case of pleural effusion depends on the size and imaging characteristics of the effusion. Categories of pleural effusion have been proposed based on the radiographic characteristics, culture, and chemistry values from the pleural fluid.

Category 1 pleural effusions are less than 10 mm on lateral decubitus film.

Category 2 pleural effusions are >10 mm but less than half of the hemithorax.

A category 3 effusion may also be defined as a pH of <7.20 or a positive gram stain/culture (empyema).

The combination of tPA/DNase showed significant improvements in hospital length of stay, effusion size on x-ray, and referral for surgery within 3 months compared to placebo.