**Intra-Aortic Balloon Pump in Acute Myocardial Infarction**

American College of Cardiology/American Heart Association (ACC/AHA) 2013 guidelines of ST-elevation myocardial infarction provides **class IIa (level of evidence: B)**recommendation to use IABP in patients with acute myocardial infarction complicated by cardiogenic shock as a temporary stabilizing measure in those not able to quickly achieve hemodynamic stability with pharmacologic treatment. However, alternative mechanical assist devices may be used(class IIb- the level of evidence C) in these patient groups with refractory cardiogenic shock.2108 European Society of Cardiology and the European Association of Cardiothoracic Surgery guidelines on myocardial revascularization do not recommend routine use of IABP in patients with cardiogenic shock due to ACS. However, short-term mechanical circulatory (MCS) support may be considered in patients with refractory cardiogenic shock complicating acute coronary syndrome, but the patient's age, comorbidities, neurological function, and the prospects for long-term survival and quality of life should be taken into consideration while making the decision about short-term MCS.**Class IIa** recommendation of ESC/EACTS 2014 guidelines recommends IABP insertion should be considered in patients with hemodynamic instability or cardiogenic shock due to mechanical complications and should be followed immediately by repair of the defect. And **Class IIb**recommendation for short-term mechanical circulatory support in ACS patients with cardiogenic shock may be considered.

Cardiogenic shock (CS) is the leading cause of in-hospital mortality in patients hospitalized with the acute coronary syndrome (ACS). Should We Emergently Revascularize Occluded Coronaries for Cardiogenic Shock (SHOCK) Trial Registry reports predominant left ventricular failure (78.5%) as the most common cause of CS in ACS; however, 12 % of patients suffered CS secondary to mechanical complications, i.e., ventricular septal defect, mitral regurgitation, or cardiac tamponade.P < .005. However, the revascularization rate was significantly variable between the two groups, i.e., only 20% in the thrombolytic group as compared to 68% (p-value < 0.001) in thrombolytic with IABP group, and most likely, this difference in revascularization has significantly influenced the difference in the in-hospital mortality between the two groups.

National Registry of myocardial infarction 2 also endorsed the findings of the SHOCK registry, suggesting that implementation of IABP as an adjunct to thrombolytic therapy has a mortality benefit in post-MI cardiogenic shock patients (mortality of 49% in thrombolysis plus IABP versus 65% in the control group without IABP); however, researchers observed no mortality benefit in patients treated with primary angioplasty.

To further delineate the role of IABP in patients with post-MI-CS, the subsequent clinical trial of Thrombolysis and Counterpulsation to Improve Cardiogenic Shock Survival (TACTICS), however, showed no overall mortality benefit at six months for patients treated with thrombolysis supported with IABP as compared with unsupported thrombolysis.

In October 2012, IABP-SHOCK II Randomized open-label trial compared IABP therapy with no IABP therapy in patients with cardiogenic shock complicating AMI who underwent early revascularization therapy in addition to standard medical treatment, and it showed no difference in the 30-day mortality.**.**

In 2013, Thiele H et al. reported an analysis of 12 months to follow up results of IABP-SHOCK II Randomized open-label trial to assess for any mortality benefit at an extended period after AMI.

A significant decline in the use of IABP has been reported in a study by Tomassini et al. (years 2003 till 2013) and Patel et al. (years 1998 till 2008) that may be attributable to a higher success rate of percutaneous coronary intervention (PCI) procedure and advancement in the guideline-directed treatment strategies.

Recently published long-term 6-year follow-up of IABP-SHOCK II Trial revealed no beneficial effect on all-cause mortality. Unfortunately, a higher mortality rate of 2 out of 3 patients with cardiogenic shock is observed despite receiving treatment with revascularization therapy. Moreover, no difference in recurrent MI or repeat revascularization, stroke, or re-hospitalization due to cardiac etiology, quality of life among survival (assessed by EuroQol 5D Questionnaire and New York Heart Association class) was observed.
 The currently available evidence suggests no short-term or long-term clinical benefit of IABP in patients with post-AMI cardiogenic shock without mechanical defects and endorses the recommendations of European Society of Cardiology to avoid the routine use of the IABP.

To elucidate whether IABP has a beneficial role when used as an adjunct to extracorporeal membrane oxygenation (ECMO) in patients with cardiogenic shock complicated by respiratory distress, Cheng et al. in 2015, conducted a systemic review with a meta-analysis of 16 observational studies with 1517 patients. This analysis did not demonstrate any dramatic improvement in survival to hospital discharge in patients with cardiogenic shock secondary to AMI, or postcardiotomy cardiogenic shock, or in those with cardiac arrest, who were treated with IABP as an adjunct to extracorporeal membrane oxygenation (ECMO) compared to those treated with ECMO alone.

**Comparison of IABP Therapy with New Advanced Percutaneous Mechanic Circulatory Device (pMCS) in Cardiogenic Shock**

In 2008, Seyfarth M et al. studied 25 patients with post-AMI CS and reported that earlier implantation of an advanced percutaneous mechanical circulatory device (PMCs) in post-AMI CS patients is feasible and safe and provides superior hemodynamic support (cardiac index) compared with the standard IABP support with medical treatment (delta cardiac index in left-side heart pump systems patients 0.49 +/- 0.46 l/min/m vs. delta CI in IABP = 0.11 +/- 0.31 l/min/ m; p = 0.02).

To determine whether the new advance percutaneous mechanical circulatory device (pMCS) has a better clinical outcome compared to IABP in patients with severe cardiogenic shock secondary to acute myocardial infarction requiring mechanical ventilation, Dagmar M. Ouweneel et al. in 2016, performed a multicenter, randomized, prospective, clinical trial (IMPRESS trial).**.**

Thiele H et al. in 2017 Performed a meta-analysis of 4 randomized clinical trials aimed to investigate the efficacy and safety of percutaneous mechanical circulatory support devices in comparison to IABP in patients with cardiogenic shock.

**Role of IABP in High-Risk PCI**

The application of IABP during the high-risk PCI in both stable and unstable patients was initially advocated based upon the low-quality evidence derived from the observational studies conducted by Mishra et al. and Briguori et al.

The randomized controlled clinical trial of Balloon Pump-Assisted Coronary Intervention Study (BCIS-1) evaluated the elective use of IABP during high risk percutaneous coronary intervention in patients with severe coronary artery disease (Jeopardy score equal or more than 8/12, when maximum possible score is 12) having compromised left ventricular function (ejection fraction under 30%).

It merits noting that the major procedural complications rate was lower in IABP supported group vs non-IABP –PCI group (1.3% vs 10.7%, P < .001; OR, 0.11 [95% CI, 0.01-0.49]). Bleeding complications including major or minor bleed occurred in 19.2% and 11.3% (P = .06; OR, 1.86 [95% CI, 0.93-3.79]) and access-site complications occurred in 3.3% and 0% (P = .06) of the elective IABP and no planned IABP groups, respectively.

Later on, a meta-analysis of 11 studies comparing the outcome of prophylactic IABP implementation during high-risk PCI with patients undergoing PCI without IABP suggested no benefit in terms of major adverse cardiovascular events and in-hospital mortality.

The new mechanical circulatory support devices (MCS) are known to provide better hemodynamic support than IABP in patients with compromised left ventricular function. To further evaluate the clinical outcomes of MCS implementation during high-risk PCI, Dangas et al. conducted PROTECT II clinical trial and compared the clinical outcomes of intra-aortic balloon pump with a left-side heart pump system in patients undergoing non-emergent high risk percutaneous coronary intervention.

Based on the evidence available, IABP use is not routinely recommended in hemodynamically stable patients with severe left ventricular dysfunction and extensive coronary artery disease undergoing high-risk PCI unless the patient is hemodynamically unstable or deemed to be at high risk of becoming unstable during the PCI. Also, if feasible, the hemodynamic support with a left-side heart pump system provides a better clinical outcome than IABP in high-risk patients undergoing PCI as suggested by PROTECT II clinical trial.

**Intra-Aortic Balloon Pump in Chronic Systolic Heart Failure Patients with Cardiogenic Shock**

Patients with chronic heart failure with accompanying reduced ejection fraction awaiting definitive therapy, i.e., heart transplantation or percutaneous left ventricular assist device (LVAD), may benefit from IABP counterpulsation as a bridge therapy.

The Acute Decompensated Heart Failure Syndrome (ATTEND) Registry demonstrated a very low utility of IABP (2.5 %) in patients with acutely decompensated heart failure (ADHF) without acute coronary syndrome.

Sintek et al. retrospectively studied patients with chronic systolic heart failure complicated by cardiogenic shock requiring IABP as a bridge therapy to left ventricular assist devices (LVAD) and identified baseline right and left ventricular cardiac power indexes as the clinical predictors to achieve hemodynamic stability with IABP.

Having relatively less complication rate and ease of IABP use with a better mortality outcome observed in patients with heart failure with cardiogenic shock encourage frequent use of IABP during earlier resuscitation period as a bridge to definitive therapy, especially when increasing dose of inotropic support is warranted. However, the clinical criteria specifying the target patient population who will benefit the most and criteria to help wean off the IABP is needed.

**Use of IABP in Medical Refractory Ventricular Arrhythmias**

The ventricular arrhythmias are more frequent in patients with ischemic cardiomyopathy with reduced left ventricular ejection fraction. Limited available evidence****supports the use of IABP in patients with reduced left ventricular ejection fraction having medical refractory ventricular arrhythmias leading to hemodynamic instability. And it helps provide the time to institute a definitive treatment, including arrhythmia focus ablation, a permanent ventricular assist device, or cardiac transplantation. The efficacy of IABP is dependent on the timing of balloon inflation and deflation relative to the cardiac cycle; therefore, controlling the timing of interbeat IABP inflation during both regular rhythm and arrhythmias by application of Real-time dicrotic notch detection algorithm ensures the efficacy of IABP in either condition.

**Use of IABP in Mechanical Complications of Myocardial Infarction**

IABP is commonly used as a bridge therapy to lend time for definitive surgical treatment for patients with hemodynamic instability secondary to acute mitral valve regurgitation or interventricular septum perforation due to acute myocardial infarction.

**Use of IABP During Cardiac Surgery**

Between years 2005-2014, use of MCS devices is observed in approximately 50% of cardiac surgery patients complicated by postoperative cardiogenic shock; however, a linear decrease in the use of MCS devices, predominantly due to decreased utilization of IABP despite an increase in other MCS devices use is observed during the same period. (DOI: 10.1016/S0735-1097(18)31225-7)

Patients with difficulty to wean from cardiopulmonary bypass support after coronary artery bypass graft surgery benefit from IABP to assist early weaning from the artificial cardiopulmonary support.

A meta-analysis, including 23 studies (7 randomized control trials and 16 observation studies) with a total of 9212 patients, performed by Deppe et al. showed an absolute risk reduction in mortality of 4.4% (Odds ratio 0.43; 95% confidence interval 0.25–0.73; p = 0.0025) when IABP is used preoperatively in high-risk patients prior to coronary artery bypass graft surgery.

In 2013 a randomized controlled trial (RCT) by Ranucci et al. demonstrated no mortality or morbidity benefit of preoperative IABP use in hemodynamically stable coronary artery disease patients with reduced left ventricular ejection fraction of less than 35% undergoing coronary artery bypass surgery.

Although the available literature to date suggested in favor of perioperative IABP utilization in terms of mortality and morbidity; however, emerging high-quality evidence in the form of RCTs and the meta-analysis that includes only RCTs is contradicting the mortality and morbidity benefit of perioperative IABP use.