Thromboembolism is a major concern with the use of umbilical arterial catheters. Occlusion of the mesenteric arteries can result in gut ischemia, bowel infarction, and necrotizing enterocolitis. Renal artery involvement can lead to hypertension or acute renal failure. More distal vascular accidents can result in an ischemic injury to the back, buttocks, and lower extremities. Removal of the catheter must be considered the first sign of any vascular compromise. Other complications, such as vessel perforation, peritoneal perforation, bladder injury, and false aneurysm, can occur during catheter insertion. Catheter-associated infection and bleeding are other frequently associated complications. Refractory hypoglycemia is a rare complication associated with high position umbilical artery catheters whose tip is near the celiac and mesenteric arteries.

There is a theoretical concern of necrotizing enterocolitis while infants are enterally fed in the presence of an umbilical arterial catheter. However, there is no evidence supporting this, and withholding enteral feeds while an infant has an umbilical arterial catheter is no longer recommended.

Thromboembolism is a significant concern with the use of umbilical arterial catheters. Occlusion of the mesenteric arteries can result in gut ischemia, bowel infarction, and necrotizing enterocolitis. Renal artery involvement can lead to hypertension or acute renal failure. Vascular accidents that occur more distally can result in an ischemic injury of the back, buttocks, and lower extremities. Removal of the catheter must be considered the first sign of any vascular compromise. Other complications, such as vessel perforation, peritoneal perforation, bladder injury, and false aneurysm, can occur during catheter insertion. Catheter-associated infection and bleeding are other frequently associated complications. Refractory hypoglycemia is a rare complication associated with high position umbilical artery catheters whose tip is near the celiac and mesenteric arteries.