Abdominal signs and symptoms can be from a wide variety of disease processes to include vascular, infectious, trauma, autoimmune, musculoskeletal, idiopathic, neoplastic, congenital, etc. The details below are not meant to serve as an exhaustive list; however, it should serve as a guide for commonly encountered pathology within their respective quadrants and can help guide clinical decision making, especially with regards to imaging and surgery.

**Right upper quadrant (RUQ) pain**

Commonly due to gastric reflux, gallbladder disease, hepatitis, peptic ulcer disease, pancreatitis, pyelonephritis, kidney stone, retrocecal appendicitis, or bowel obstructions

**Right lower quadrant (RLQ) pain**

Commonly due to appendicitis, Crohn disease, cecal diverticulitis, ectopic pregnancy, endometriosis, inguinal hernia, ischemic colitis, ovarian cyst, ovarian torsion, pelvic inflammatory disease, psoas abscess, testicular torsion, or kidney stones

**Left upper quadrant (LUQ) pain**

Commonly due to gastric reflux, peptic ulcer disease, pancreatitis, splenic infarction or rupture, pyelonephritis, bowel obstruction, or aortic dissection

**Left lower quadrant (LLQ) pain**

Commonly due to diverticulitis, kidney stones, pyelonephritis, ectopic pregnancy, inflammatory bowel disease, inguinal hernia, ovarian cysts, ovarian torsion, pelvic inflammatory disease, psoas abscess, testicular torsion, abdominal aortic aneurysm, irritable bowel syndrome, or small bowel obstructions

**Pectinate Line**

The pectinate (dentate) line also serves as clinical significance. Above the pectinate line, one can expect internal hemorrhoids and adenocarcinoma. The internal hemorrhoids are **not**painful due to their visceral innervation. Below the pectinate line, one can expect external hemorrhoids, anal fissures, and squamous cell carcinoma. The external hemorrhoids**are**painful due to their somatic innervation.

**Inguinal Hernias**

A hernia, which is a protrusion of abdominal contents through an opening, can cause extreme pain, incarceration, and potential strangulation. Two types of inguinal hernias exist - direct and indirect. One can remember the anatomical difference through the mnemonic "MDs don't LIe." If the hernia is **M**edial to the epigastric blood vessels, then it is a**D**irect inguinal hernia. However, if the hernia is**L**ateral to the epigastric blood vessels, then it is an**I**ndirect inguinal hernia.

Direct inguinal hernias, usually in older men, are only covered by external spermatic fascia and go through only the external inguinal ring.

Indirect inguinal hernias protrude through the internal and external inguinal rings and into the scrotum. They are covered by all three spermatic fascial layers: internal, cremasteric, and external.