**Labs**

- **Blood**
- White blood cell count can be normal or slightly elevated, and a left shift is not commonly present in MOE.

- **Erythrocyte sedimentation rate and C-reactive protein**
- Inflammatory markers are usually high in these patients and can be used as an indicator for the response for antimicrobial therapy. Once the disease has been identified, levels of ESR and CRP should be checked and followed regularly until they are back in the normal range. ESR starts to decrease within two weeks of starting treatment.

- **Blood glucose**
- Blood glucose should be checked in patients with diabetes to assess their baseline, as MOE can affect the baseline glucose intolerance.
- Non-d patients should be evaluated for diabetes.

- **Culture and sensitivities from the external auditory canal**
- Cultures from the ear drainage are to be done before initiating antimicrobial treatment. 
- Tissue sampling has proven to be of high value in choosing the right antimicrobial treatment and in cases of recurrent otitis externa.
- Biopsy of the external auditory canal should be obtained to exclude other causes, such as malignancy or cholesteatoma.

**Imaging**

- **Computerized tomography**
- The advantage of CT scanning is in detecting bony erosions and demineralization. 
- CT findings usually include obliteration of the fat planes in the subtemporal area and destruction of the bony cortex of the mastoid.

- **Magnetic resonance imaging**
- MRI is superior to CT with detecting anatomical locations and invasion of soft-tissue components.
- MRI is also better in evaluating intracranial complications such as thrombosis and intracranial spread. 
- However, it is hard to differentiate between active inflammation and resolving infection; therefore, many studies suggested that the use of CT and MRI imaging does not correlate to the prognosis and outcome of the disease.

- **Gallium citrate Ga 67 scan**
- Ga67 is a useful tool to monitor the resolution of the disease. The affected area usually shows increased uptake. However, the lesion to non-lesion ratio should be calculated to have more accurate results regarding the activity of malignant otitis externa.

- **Technetium Tc 99 methylene diphosphate bone scanning**
- Tc99 is useful for the initial evaluation of the disease, but the test is not useful in assessing the prognosis of the disease, as it stays positive for a long period, even after the resolution of the infection.

Nuclear studies are not sufficient to show the anatomical extent of the disease. CT and MRI should be accompanied by SPECT bone imaging for the initial diagnosis.

SPECT, in addition to gallium 67 scan, is the investigation of choice to assess the progress of the disease.