# Introduction

The human larynx is a specialized organ complexly organized of multiple tissue types. Although the intricate care, study, and surgical management of the larynx fall under the specialty of otolaryngology, knowledge of the larynx and associated conditions is beneficial for many medical specialties. Its position in the human body and unique functions allow the pathophysiology of the larynx to involve a spectrum of conditions and treatments from lifesaving respiratory interventions to improvements in voice quality.

# Structure and Function

The larynx is a cartilaginous skeleton with intricate neuromuscular control. The hyoid is the only bone in the larynx and articulates with many of the extrinsic muscles of the larynx. A notable external landmark of the larynx is the anterior prominence of the thyroid cartilage. The hyoid bone is palpable superiorly, and the thyroid gland is palpable inferiorly.

The structure of the larynx divides into three basic parts: the supraglottis, the glottis, and the subglottis.

The cartilages of the supraglottis are the epiglottis, two arytenoids, and two corniculate cartilages. The arytenoid cartilages contain a vocal process medially from which the vocal ligament extends anteriorly to the thyroid cartilage. The vestibular folds (false cords) are folds of mucosa positioned superolateral to the vocal ligaments. The lateral surface of the arytenoid contains the muscular process to which several intrinsic laryngeal muscles attach

The anatomy of the glottis is understood to be divided into the phonatory (anterior glottis) and respiratory (posterior glottis) portions functionally.

The inferior-most portion of the larynx is the subglottis. It extends from 1 cm below the vocal ligaments to the inferior border of the cricoid cartilage.

The primary functions of the larynx are in respiration, airway protection during deglutition, and phonation. In respiration, vocal folds are optimally in abduction, increasing the total area of the glottis to facilitate work of breathing.

# Embryology

The development of the larynx begins on approximately the third week of gestation with the generation of the laryngotracheal groove in the 6th pharyngeal arch.

By ten weeks of gestation, the laryngeal inlet develops a covering membrane.

# Blood Supply and Lymphatics

The blood supply to the originates from branches off of the thyroid arteries. The superior thyroid artery branches from the external carotid artery inferior to the greater cornu of the hyoid bone and gives rise to two arteries of the larynx: the superior laryngeal artery and the cricothyroid artery.

Lymphatic drainage is important to understand due to the aggressive metastasis of some laryngeal cancers. Though the lymphatic drainage can vary individually, there are understood consistencies. Supraglottic structures drain lymph to the deep cervical lymph nodes, which can further subdivide into levels. Subglottic structures drain lymph to the paratracheal and pretracheal lymph nodes.

# Nerves

The major contributor of innervation to the larynx is the vagus nerve, cranial nerve X, which innervates the intrinsic laryngeal musculature. The extrinsic musculature innervation divides between the vagus nerve and the cervical rootlets.

The laryngeal branches of the vagus nerve are the superior laryngeal nerve and the recurrent laryngeal nerve. The superior laryngeal nerve has two main branches - the external branch and the internal branch. The external branch of the superior laryngeal nerve carries somatic motor fibers to the cricothyroid muscle as its sole function.

The cervical rootlets comprise the plexus known as the ansa cervicalis. The ansa provides innervation to many of the extrinsic muscles of the larynx such as the infrahyoid and suprahyoid musculature. The pharyngeal branch of the vagus nerve innervates the pharyngeal constrictors, which act with the suprahyoid muscles to elevate the larynx during swallowing.

# Muscles

The intrinsic muscles of the larynx serve a variety of functions, many of which can be categorized by their action on the vocal ligament. The adductors are the thyroarytenoid (vocalis), lateral cricoarytenoid, and interarytenoid muscles.

The epiglottis is drawn posteriorly over the laryngeal inlet to prevent bolus aspiration. The aryepiglottic muscles originate at the apex of the arytenoids and insert at the lateral border of the epiglottis. Similarly, the oblique arytenoid muscles originate at the arytenoid apex and insert at the aryepiglottic fold. The thyroepiglottic muscle originates on the internal surface of the thyroid cartilage and inserts on the margin of the epiglottis. When contracting, this muscle inferiorly displaces the epiglottis. These muscles work synergistically to close the laryngeal inlet by pulling the epiglottis posteriorly and inferiorly.

Several cervical muscles act extrinsically on the larynx to aid in phonation and swallowing. Muscles inserted on the superior aspect of the hyoid (geniohyoid, digastric, mylohyoid, thyrohyoid, and stylohyoid muscles) and pharynx (stylopharyngeus, palatopharyngeus, and pharyngeal constrictor muscles) act in conjunction to elevate the larynx. Those muscles inserted on the inferior surface of the hyoid (sternohyoid and omohyoid muscles) and the sternothyroid muscle act to depress the larynx.

# Physiologic Variants

Small variations in laryngeal musculature can affect voice quality and tone. The differences in voice quality are apparent between male and female larynxes. In males, testosterone thickens the vocal ligaments, causing deeper voice quality. The strength and fine control of the muscles is acquirable from use. Singers can gain improved fine motor control over their intrinsic muscles through years of practice to better modulate pitch. Though anatomic variations can exist in the musculature, cartilaginous variations are more frequent with the thyroid cartilage most commonly affected.

While the innervation of laryngeal muscles frequently appears as described above, variations in innervation are common in the larynx. Often, the superior laryngeal nerve and recurrent laryngeal nerve branches will form a plexus, and aberrant branches will provide motor innervation to nearby muscles.

# Surgical Considerations

Hoarseness is a frequent complaint following long surgeries or prolonged admissions to the ICU. Often, the patient’s hoarseness is related to trauma caused by the intubation. Risk factors for intubation-related laryngeal injury are prolonged intubation (greater than 36 hours), intubation without myorelaxant drugs, large endotracheal tubes, aspiration, and coexisting presence of a nasogastric tube.

Because of its long course through the neck and mediastinum, the recurrent laryngeal nerve is subject to injury in cervical surgery (thyroid surgery, neck dissections, anterior cervical approach to the spine, etc.) and thoracic surgery (lung biopsy, aortic aneurysm repair, etc.). Surgical injury is the leading cause of unilateral vocal cord paralysis, followed by idiopathic and malignant causes.

# Clinical Significance

Assessing laryngeal function and mobility is valuable for both the otolaryngologist and primary care physician. As an outpatient, primary care physicians can use laryngeal mirrors to visualize the larynx for basic screening purposes to investigate foreign bodies, masses, or inflammation. To better assess laryngeal function and visualize anatomy more intimately, an otolaryngologist or another trained practitioner can use a flexible laryngoscope. After the nasal administration of a topical anesthetic, the scope is passed through the nasopharynx as far as tolerated by the patient. Performing this well-tolerated procedure on an alert patient allows for outpatient visualization of the dynamic larynx. For most diagnostic visualization and biopsies, rigid laryngoscopy under sedation is necessary.

Hoarseness and dysphagia can be the presenting symptoms of countless diseases. Trauma, stroke, malignancy, neuromuscular disorders, and psychiatric illness can cause combinations of these diseases. An appropriate differential can be generated based on demographics, exposures, and detailed history.