The pathogenesis and tissue tropism of SARS-CoV-2 relates to the binding of the viral spike protein to its cognate receptor on human host cells— the angiotensin-converting enzyme 2 (ACE-2) receptor. Efficient cell entry requires cleavage by protein transmembrane serine protease 2 (TMPRSS2). ACE-2 is expressed primarily on respiratory mucosal and alveolar epithelial cells and has been identified in other tissues, including the gastrointestinal tract, kidney, vascular endothelial cells, immune cells, and even neurons. Virulence is achieved via direct cellular invasion and death and the induction of widespread cytokine-driven inflammation and vascular leakage.

The potential of infection through ocular secretions is currently unknown, and it remains unclear how SARS-CoV-2 accumulates in ocular secretions. Possible theories include direct inoculation of the ocular tissues from respiratory droplets or aerosolized viral particles, migration from the nasopharynx via the nasolacrimal duct, or even hematogenous spread through the lacrimal gland.

Data surrounding the expression of ACE-2 and TMPRSS2 on the ocular surface are mixed. One study demonstrated the expression of both these proteins on the cornea and limbus but observed low levels on the conjunctiva.

A case report from Rome, Italy, isolated SARS-CoV-2 by RT-PCR from conjunctival swabs in a COVID-19 patient with ocular symptoms.

Using RT-PCR, Azzolini et al. found SARS-CoV-2 present on the ocular surface in 52 of 91 patients with COVID-19 (57.1%).