The diagnosis is mainly clinical rather than radiological. The most obvious sign in the diagnosis is physical palpation of the anterior midsagittal bony ridge over the forehead. When viewed from the vertex or "birds-eye" view, the triangular shape of the head is characteristic in this condition.

Craniofacial anomalies like hypotelorism and temporal narrowing with parietal widening are, in most cases, sufficient to accurately diagnose craniosynostosis. These additional features differentiate craniosynostosis from the benign metopic ridge.

A head computed tomogram (CT) scan with 3D reconstruction is performed to confirm the diagnosis and plan the surgery. It will show that the frontal bones have a triangular shape, orbits are closer than normal, and there is anterior displacement of the coronal sutures. Widening of the posterior parietal regions, pterional constriction, and flattening of the supraorbital ridges with lateral orbital hypoplasia are also identified.

Prenatal head ultrasound can be used during the second and third trimesters to make the craniosynostosis diagnosis.

**Radiographic Findings Associated with Metopic Synostosis**

The presence of three or more specific findings is diagnostic for 96% of patients with metopic synostosis.

- Omega sign - the prematurely fused metopic suture forms an "omega"-shaped invagination intracranially

- Interorbital narrowing - decreased distance between the medial orbital walls

- Upper orbital narrowing - the shape of the upper orbit is narrower than usual

- The frontal bone tangent intersects the orbital midline or more medially when viewed from above

- Posteriorly displaced lateral frontal bone

- Straight lateral frontal bone

- "Pulled" anterior fontanelle - Anterior fontanelle is partially open down the metopic suture

- Upsloping lateral orbital rim - the superior orbital rim is oriented more vertically than horizontally