**Laboratory Investigations**

Laboratory investigations include blood sugar, complete hemogram, complete blood count, bleeding and clotting time, platelet count, and peripheral blood smear.

**Ocular Ultrasound**

In cases where the posterior segment is not visible due to excessive vitreous hemorrhage, a B scan (brightness scan) with A-scan (amplitude scan) is done to find out the etiology as well as the characteristics of hemorrhage. Various characteristics of ultrasound have been described :

- Fresh VH / VH in vitrectomised eye: Multiple echolucent or low reflective dot-like echoes (RBCs) are seen, which may be better visualized in high gain. In a vitrectomized eye, the echoes may be very mobile in the vitreous cavity with the movement of the eye.

- Long-standing VH: Dot like echoes form a highly reflective membrane over a period of time, denser inferiorly. This must be differentiated from retinal detachment.

- Subhyaloid hemorrhage: It is seen as multiple dot-like echoes behind a mobile (with ocular movements) and thin membrane (posterior vitreous detachment, PVD).

- Other pathologies that may be detected using ocular ultrasound include underlying tractional or rhegmatogenous retinal detachment, retinal tear, mound in macula involving choroid suggestive of polypoidal choroidal vasculopathy, mass such as malignant melanoma, and intraocular foreign body.

- An area of vitreous attachment to the optic disc or peripheral retinal may denote the presence of neovascularization at the location of the vitreoretinal/vitreopapillary adhesion.

**Optical Coherence Tomography (OCT)**

This is important, especially in cases with premacular hemorrhage, to differentiate between subhyaloid or sub ILM bleed while planning treatment.

**Fundus Fluorescein Angiography (FFA)/ Indocyanine Green Angiography (ICGA)**

In cases where the view is there, with mild to moderate VH, FFA helps in localizing areas with capillary non-perfusion and neovascularisation, to plan laser therapy. ICGA may be helpful in cases with suspected IPCV/ AMD. ICGA has the advantage of better clarity in VH due to the longer wavelength used compared to FFA.

**Neuroimaging**

CT and MRI of the brain and orbit may be needed in cases with Terson syndrome to rule out intracranial bleeding. CT orbit may be necessary in cases with open globe injury to rule out any orbital fracture, intraocular foreign body, to assess the integrity of the ocular wall.

**10 Hz Flash VEP / Bright Flash ERG**

This is rarely done. It helps to predict the visual potential in cases with dense vitreous hemorrhages.