# Continuing Education Activity

The term "vascular ring" refers to the vascular structures that encircle and compress the trachea and esophagus, causing respiratory and gastrointestinal symptoms. It can be further classified based on the location of the aortic arch. An arch sidedness is defined by the position of the aortic arch in relation to the trachea and bronchi. A left aortic arch (LAA) would be on the left of the trachea and run over the left bronchus, whereas a right aortic arch (RAA) would be on the right of the trachea and run over the right bronchus. A double aortic arch (DAA) occurs when there are two transverse aortic arches running over the trachea and both bronchi. Normally, the arch sidedness is towards the left, and there is no arterial duct behind the trachea or esophagus. There is a patent vessel, an atretic vessel, or its remnants circling the trachea or esophagus in cases of the vascular ring. The most common aortic arch association with a vascular ring is a DAA or a right aortic arch with an aberrant (retro-esophageal) left subclavian artery. This activity reviews the evaluation and management of vascular rings and explains the role of the interprofessional team in managing patients with this condition.

**Objectives:**
- Identify the embryology of vascular rings causing a double aortic arch and a right aortic arch with aberrant left subclavian artery.
- Outline the presentation of a patient with vascular rings.
- Describe the treatment considerations for patients with vascular rings.
- Summarize the importance of collaboration and communication among the interprofessional team to enhance care coordination for patients affected by vascular rings.

# Introduction

The term "vascular ring" (VR) refers to the vascular structures that encircle and compress the esophagus and trachea, causing respiratory and gastrointestinal symptoms. VRs are further divided into two broad categories: complete or incomplete.

Complete VRs encircle the trachea and esophagus entirely. These include a double aortic arch (DAA) and a right aortic arch (RAA) with an aberrant (retro-esophageal) left subclavian artery. These are the most common types of vascular rings.

An arch sidedness is defined by the position of the aortic arch in relation to the trachea and the bronchi. A left aortic arch would be towards the left of the trachea and run over the left bronchus, whereas an RAA would be towards the right of the trachea and run over the right bronchus. A DAA is when there are two transverse aortic arches running over the trachea and both bronchi. Normally, the arch sidedness is towards the left, and there is no arterial duct behind the trachea or esophagus. In cases of the vascular ring, there is a patent vessel, an atretic vessel, or its remnants circling the trachea or esophagus.

DAA can be further divided into three main types. The most common is the dominant RAA with a smaller LAA (80%). The dominant LAA is found in 10% and equal aortic arches in the rest 10%.

Depending on the site of the regression of the fourth aortic arch, RAA can be divided into 2 parts.

Pulmonary artery sling occurs when the left pulmonary artery originates from the right pulmonary artery, which crosses between the trachea and esophagus before entering the left lung and thus compressing the trachea. It is the only type of VR that has an indentation in the anterior esophagus on barium swallow.

Anomalous innominate artery originates later from the transverse arch and then crosses the trachea causing anterior tracheal compression.

According to the International Congenital Heart Surgery Nomenclature and Database Committee, the classification system for vascular rings is as follows:

A. Complete vascular rings

- Double aortic arch (DAA)

I. Dominant right arch

II. Dominant left arch

III. Equal arches/balanced arches

- Right aortic arch (RAA)

I. RAA+ aberrant left subclavian artery (ALSA)

II. RAA with mirror imaging

B. Incomplete aortic arch

- Innominate artery compression syndrome

- Pulmonary artery sling

- Aberrant right subclavian artery (ARSA)

# Etiology

The exact cause of DAA is not yet known nor for any other VR. There have been associations of RAA and DAA with 22q11 deletion in the literature.

The first diagram below is a caudad view (looking from top to bottom) through a cartoon of a toti-potential arch. This arch DAA with bilateral ductus arteriosi was identified in one patient with transposition.

# Epidemiology

A double aortic arch is rare. whereas the incidence of RAA in the general population is more common at 0.1%.

Kommerell Diverticulum can have possible 2 scenarios: left aortic arch with aberrant right subclavian artery seen in 0.5% to 2% of the population.

# Pathophysiology

In DAA, the ascending aorta further divides into right and left transverse arches. The right transverse arch courses over the right mainstem bronchus, whereas the left aortic arch courses over the left mainstem bronchus. Because the aorta usually descends down towards the left side of the body, the right aortic arch goes posteriorly and inserts into it. Further branches originate from the transverse arches: left common carotid and subclavian from the left aortic arch and the right common carotid and right subclavian from the right arch. The arterial duct is usually left-sided and generally inserts in the left transverse arch or descending aorta.

The vascular ring is formed when there is a failure of the regression or persistence of some part of the aortic arch.

# History and Physical

Many patients with DAA have earlier presentations as compared to patients with other types of Vascular rings, most of them presenting in early infancy and almost all of them before three years of age.

In patients with a RAA with aberrant (retro-esophageal) left subclavian artery, it is considered a "looser ring" than a DAA. These patients usually have more problems with dysphagia. When they are babies, they can take milk easily. However, once they start taking solid foods, that is where the symptoms arrive. Many of these patients are not diagnosed until the teenage years when the guardians complain that the patient is the last to leave the dinner table. This is because the patient is chewing their food so that they can swallow without it hurting. Most do not realize that they are doing that.

# Evaluation

Prenatally, the diagnosis can be confirmed with a fetal echocardiogram.

Postnatally, other than confirming a suspected diagnosis, the purpose of testing is for side determination.

# Treatment / Management

Most patients need surgical intervention, which is earlier in cases of DAA, around 1.4 months after the presentation and 4.9 months after being symptomatic. The site of operation depends on the non-dominant arch, which is generally left-sided in around 71% of the patients. So, lateral thoracotomy via the left side is usually performed.

Alternatively, there is a minimally invasive surgery using video-assisted thoracoscopic techniques division of vascular ring, which seems safe and effective in children.

# Differential Diagnosis

The vascular ring should be differentiated from conditions that can present with similar complaints. These include congenital tracheal anomalies like tracheoesophageal fistula or tracheomalacia. It can also present like congenital laryngeal problems such as laryngomalacia, laryngeal webs or cysts, or external compression of the trachea with a mass like a lymphoma. Other things to keep in mind are common conditions like asthma, gastro-esophageal reflux, or recurrent pneumonia.

# Prognosis

Prognosis is excellent with about 26 of 300 patients needing reoperation.

# Complications

Postoperative complications are uncommon: chylothorax in 9% of the patients, transient hypertension in 4%, and vocal cord paralysis/paresis in 3% of patients.

# Deterrence and Patient Education

The median time between surgery and discharge from ICU was two days, whereas discharge from hospital was 5 to 8 days.

# Pearls and Other Issues

Double aortic arch presents at a younger age as compared to RAA with aberrant (retro esophageal) left subclavian artery. However, most infants have a full recovery without complications.

# Enhancing Healthcare Team Outcomes

The vascular ring is an uncommon diagnosis. DAA is an important cause of vascular ring, which generally causes symptoms in the newborn age group. Although cardiologists generally diagnosis the condition, it is first seen by the neonatologist as soon as the baby is born. The nurses are a vital part of the group who help diagnose the condition, based on the vital signs, respiratory and feeding difficulties. Radiologist plays a very important part in diagnosing the condition. The pharmacist is also a crucial part of the team, as the baby would need to be given nothing by mouth, and adequate fluids to be given by the venous route when planning for surgery. Ultimately, the surgeon is the one who would perform the surgery based on the information from all the members of the team.

A critical part of post-surgery care is the intensivist, who takes care of the patient and then transfers to the pediatrician, who then follows the patient for any complications. There is definitive evidence to recommend the type of imaging and treatment. [Level 1]