Hyperthyroidism: Disorders of the thyroid gland can result in excess T3 and T4 production along with the compensatory decrease of TSH. In addition, thyrotroph adenoma can produce unregulated TSH and can lead to increased T3 and T4 production. There is an ectopic production of thyroid hormone in some conditions, leading to increased thyroid hormones and compensatory TSH decrease.

Hypothyroidism: In primary hypothyroidism, decreased production of thyroid hormones by the thyroid gland causes a compensatory increase of TSH. Secondary hypothyroidism is caused by pituitary disorders causing decreased TSH release and decreased T3/T4 levels. Tertiary hypothyroidism is caused by hypothalamic disorders, resulting in decreased TRH levels, decreased TSH, and T3/T4 levels.

Two of the most common causes of hyperthyroidism and hyperthyroidism are below:

**Graves Disease**

Graves disease is the most common cause of hyperthyroidism. It is an autoimmune disease caused by the production of TSH receptor antibodies that stimulate thyroid gland growth and thyroid hormone release. Patients will have abnormally increased T4 and T3 levels and a decrease in TSH. A positive TSH-receptor IgG immunoglobulin test confirms the diagnosis. Immunoglobulin G (IgG) against TSH-receptor leads to increased thyroid function and growth. Patients will often present with symptoms of hyperthyroidism and diffuse goiter. TSH-receptor antibodies can also activate orbital fibroblasts leading to fibroblast proliferation and differentiation to adipocytes. As a result, there is increased production of hyaluronic acid and glycosaminoglycan (GAG), leading to an increased volume of intraorbital fat and muscle tissue. It causes exophthalmos, lid retraction, and diplopia due to ocular motility problems. Pretibial myxedema is another finding in Graves' disease. It is due to the stimulation of dermal fibroblasts that leads to depositions of GAGs in the connective tissue. 70% of patients with Graves disease have elevated anti-TPO antibodies.

**Hashimoto Thyroiditis**

The most common cause of hypothyroidism in iodine-sufficient areas is Hashimoto Thyroiditis. It is caused by autoimmune-mediated destruction of the thyroid gland. CD8+ T-cells cause thyroid follicular cell death. The release of IFN-gamma by TH1 cells causes recruitment and activation of macrophages. During the early stage of the disease, the patient may develop a non-tender, symmetrical, and painless goiter. As inflammation continues, thyroid follicles are damaged and can rupture. When thyroid follicles rupture, the patient may be asymptomatic or can experience Hashitoxicosis (thyroid hormone from ruptured follicles, causing symptoms of hyperthyroidism). As the disease progresses, the thyroid gland may become normal-size or small, depending on the extent of fibrosis. As a result, the patient can develop the symptoms of hypothyroidism. In addition to cell-mediated destruction, anti-thyroid autoantibodies (anti-thyroglobulin and anti-TPO) are also produced, leading to antibody-dependent cell-mediated cytotoxicity. Hashimoto thyroiditis is diagnosed via ultrasound, antibody detection, and thyroid function testing. Radioactive iodine uptake test and fine-needle aspiration can be performed to exclude malignancy.