Treatment with levothyroxine (L-T4) must be started immediately after the diagnosis of congenital hypothyroidism (CH). NBS programs and early L-T4 treatment initiation (prior to 2 weeks of life) can prevent intellectual deficits and optimize neurodevelopmental outcomes. L-T4 alone is the treatment of choice. The initial dose depends upon the severity of CH. A higher initial L-T4 dose of 10 to 15 micrograms (ug)/kg/day (50 ug/day for full-term infants with severe CH) is recommended, especially for neonates with a very low pretreatment T4 level. A high initial L-T4 dose can normalize serum T4 in 3 days and TSH by two weeks of therapy.

L-T4 tablets crushed and mixed with a small amount (1 to 2 ml) of water or breast milk may be administered orally via a small spoon or syringe. L-T4 should be given at the same time each day and at a different time of the day from calcium, iron, and soy to avoid interference with the absorption of the L-T4.

The first repeat thyroid function test (TFT), which includes free T4 and TSH, is to be drawn at 1 to 2 weeks after the start of L-T4 therapy with follow-up TFT every two weeks until a complete normalization of TSH. Repeat TFT is recommended every 1 to 3 months until 1 year of age. Children should have follow-up visits with TFT obtained every 2 to 4 months between the ages of 1 to 3 years, and every 3-12 months until growth is completed. More frequent visits and laboratory evaluations may be scheduled for patients with poor adherence or abnormal levels. Any L-T4 dose adjustment or formulation change requires a repeat TFT in 4-6 weeks. The goal of therapy is to maintain the total T4 in the upper half of the age-specific reference range and TSH level within the age-specific reference range.