Duloxetine is most commonly administered in a capsule form due to good absorption via the oral route, and administration can be with or without food. Duloxetine should not be crushed or chewed. However, studies have shown that duloxetine may remain stable up to 2 hours after being opened and sprinkled on apple juice or apple sauce.

**Management of fibromyalgia**: 30 mg once daily can be given for one week, then the dose may be increased to 60 mg once daily. A titration approach may also be utilized starting with 20 mg daily, then increasing the dose by 20 mg every week, up to 60 mg, as tolerated. Maximum dose: 60 mg/day.

**Treatment of generalized anxiety disorder (GAD)**: 60mg can be administered initially, however depending on patient tolerance, 30 mg may be given once daily for one week, then the dose may be increased to 60mg once daily. Though studies have shown no additional benefit to doses above 60 mg/day, some experts have reported benefits when increasing doses over 60 mg/day.

**Treatment of unipolar major depressive disorder (MDD)**: 40 to 60 mg/day can be given in a single or two divided doses. It may be necessary to start at 30mg/day for one week, and then the dose may be increased to 60 mg/day. Maintenance: 60 mg/day. Though studies have shown no additional benefit to doses above 60 mg/day, some experts have reported benefits when increasing doses over 60 mg/day.

**Management of pain associated with diabetic peripheral neuropathy**: 60 mg can be administered initially; however, lower starting doses may be appropriate depending on patient tolerance. Maximum dose: 60 mg/day.

**Management of chronic musculoskeletal pain:**

Low back pain: 30 mg can be given once daily for one week and increased up to 60 mg once daily as tolerated as an adjunct therapy. Maximum dose: 60 mg/day.

Knee pain: 30 mg can be given once daily for one week and increased up to 60 mg once daily as tolerated as an adjunct therapy.