The GPIb-IX-V complex is expressed on the platelet surface. By facilitating platelet adhesion to the subendothelium, the GPIb-IX-V complex leads to clot formation whenever the vascular subendothelium is exposed or a plaque ruptures, hence the activity of GPIb-IX-V complex is also critical in deep venous thrombosis (DVT).

The most important function of the GPIb-IX-V complex is to bind with VWF and initiate a signaling cascade that would activate the platelet integrin GPIIb-IIIa leading to platelet aggregation. Although VWF is also a weak agonist, a full activation signal is required via the thromboxane A2 and ADP dependent signaling pathway to activate the platelets.

The N-Terminal of GPIb-Alpha plays a critical role in platelet mediated coagulation by providing binding sites to high molecular weight (HMW) kininogen, Factors XI, and XII and alpha-thrombin. The same N-terminal of GPIb-alpha is a primary binding site for multiple ligands. It serves as a pivotal point for the cross-talk between platelets and leukocytes in thrombosis and inflammatory response.

The GPIb-IX-V also plays a role in maintaining platelet shape by linking the platelet surface to a sub-membranous network of actin filaments, the platelet membrane skeleton. This involves the central portion of the cytoplasmic tail of GPIb-alpha, particularly Phe568 and Trp570, which provides a binding site for the actin-associated protein, filamin A.

Considering all the functions of the GPIb-IX-V complex, one can understand that a mutation in the encoding genes could lead to reduced activation of the platelets, defective adhesion, and subsequently inadequate clot-forming capability. In addition to this, the defects in the complex can also explain the giant platelets in patients with BSS.