The etiology of temporal lobe seizures is extensive. The most common causes are:

- Hippocampal sclerosis

- Infections

- Tumors

- Traumatic brain injury

- Vascular anomalies

- Genetic

- Cryptogenic

MTLE is the most common form of epilepsy and is most commonly due to a neurodegenerative process known as hippocampal sclerosis (HS) found in the majority of patients diagnosed with this condition, upon histological evaluation.Ammon’s horn sclerosis.

The three types of HS, as classified by the ILAE, are as follows:

- HS ILAE type 1 - associated with significant neuronal cell loss and gliosis, mostly in CA1 and CA4 hippocampal regions. It has an association with a history of precipitating injuries in pediatric populations with early seizure onset. It also correlates with a better post-surgical prognosis.

- HS ILAE type 2 - A form with more pronounced cell loss and gliosis in CA1 hippocampal regions. Less studied but may be associated with a less favorable post-surgical prognosis.

- HS ILAE type 3 - This is with more pronounced cell loss and gliosis in CA4 hippocampal regions. As with type 2, less studied and may also be associated with a less favorable outcome.

-  No-HS - with gliosis only, often associated with a less favorable prognosis.

Although about 10 to 15 percent of children who develop febrile seizures progress to a diagnosis of epilepsy,  there is no compelling evidence of causality between a history of febrile seizures and the development of temporal lobe epilepsy. What is evident, however, is the association of lesions in anatomical correlates on neuroimaging, such as mesial temporal lobe sclerosis, in the pediatric population, and the development of temporal lobe epilepsy.