**Endocervical adenocarcinoma:**

- Usual type adenocarcinoma: HPV related. There is the proliferation of glandular or papillary structures, loss of polarity, overlapping of cells, and increased mitotic activity.

- Mucinous adenocarcinoma – gastric type: This type is predominantly composed of a proliferation of pyloric glands. Usually associated with poor prognosis.

- Mucinous adenocarcinoma – intestinal type: associated with the proliferation of glands with goblet cells or sometimes Paneth cells.

- Mucinous adenocarcinoma- signet ring cell type: Predominant signet ring cell morphology.

- Villoglandular adenocarcinoma- carries an excellent prognosis. Frond like papillary growth pattern. Associated with HPV subtypes 16, 18, and 45.

- Endometrioid adenocarcinoma – resembles endometrial adenocarcinoma. It is also thought that this type might develop from endometriosis.

- Clear cell adenocarcinoma – consists of cells with clear or eosinophilic cytoplasm, which sometimes show hobnailing with moderate pleomorphism and rare mitoses.

- Mesonephric adenocarcinoma- rare type, derived from remnants of mesonephric ducts. Tubular structures are predominant, with hyaline sections, there is mild-moderate pleomorphism among the cuboidal cells lining the tubules.

- Serous adenocarcinoma- consists of broad irregular papillae lined by cuboidal cells. There is a higher degree of nuclear pleomorphism and intense staining of tumor cells with WT-1 and P53 immunohistochemical stain.

**Endometrial adenocarcinoma:**

There are two types, type 1 and type 2. The histotypes are endometrial, mucinous, clear cell, serous, undifferentiated, and carcinosarcomas.