The initial step for appropriately diagnosing Type I hypersensitivity is to obtain a full history from either the patient or the patient's companions. Information about the patient's history should include:

- Signs and symptoms

- Timing: onset of signs and symptoms

- If the patient ingested anything or any new changes or triggers that caused the reaction

- Any previous exposure to the allergen

- Prior history of allergic reactions

- History of atopy (allergic rhinitis, asthma, eczema) or food allergies

- If the patient is febrile, as fever is not seen in Type I reactions

- Review of medical records and allergies, especially in patients who are unable to communicate

Medical history alone is not sufficient to diagnose an allergic response. A complete physical examination should also be performed. The presentation depends on the organs that are involved. In general, a patient that presents with a type I hypersensitivity usually develops a reaction within one hour after exposure to an antigen. The signs and symptoms exhibited in this type of reaction involve vasoactive mediators that are released by IgE bound mast cells and basophils.

The most common chief complaint and physical symptoms may include rash, hives, erythema, pruritis, edema, flushing, bronchospasm, wheezing, rhinitis, and gastrointestinal symptoms such as abdominal cramping. The presence of "wheal-and-flare" (skin bump and redness) reactions are the hallmark of IgE mediated reactions. Patients that present with anaphylaxis may also experience episodes of loss of consciousness, nausea, vomiting, angioedema, hypotension, tachycardia, tachypnea, etc. When assessing for anaphylaxis, the first steps are to evaluate the airway, breathing, circulation, and mentation.