The clinical spectrum shows great variability in the severity and age of onset of manifestations. The most common form of Cockayne syndrome (type 1) occurs during the first year of life. Cases of earlier onset with more severe symptoms (type 2) and later-onset cases with more moderate symptoms (type 3) have also been described.

**Common Disease Signs**

**Growth Disorders and Physical Features**

Progressive growth retardation occurs between one and two years with low weight, small height for age, and microcephaly. Dysmorphic features include a face long, a small protruding chin, sunken eyes, and big ears. As the child grows older, the face appears prematurely old, the body is very thin (cachectic), and the limbs are thin and slender.

**Neurological Disorders and Intellectual Deficit**

These signs appear and progressively worsen. They include walking difficulties, unstable gait, balance disorders, ataxia, tremor, and lower limb spasticity. Sometimes, the arms and legs remain permanently flexed. The muscles are often insufficiently tonic (hypotonia), and the reflexes are abnormal. Some children have epilepsy. The majority of children have intellectual difficulties, sometimes very severe. Speech is often hacked and difficult to understand.

**Eye Abnormalities**

Anophthalmia is common because of the disappearance of the fat that is normally behind the eyeball. The first signs of impaired vision may be photophobia, nystagmus, or strabismus. The decline in vision may be related to cataracts, atrophy of the optic retinopathy pigmentary nerve. Uveitis or conjunctivitis may also appear and aggravate the seeing disorders.

**Hearing Disorders**

They appear in early childhood and result in hypoacusia, which progresses and can evolve into profound deafness where the child perceives almost no sound.

**Sun Sensitivity**

Children have very thin skin and sensitive to ultraviolet rays; the slightest exposure causes severe sunburns that can sometimes leave scars or hyperpigmented spots. This photosensitivity also concerns the eyes.

**Dental Abnormalities**

The milk teeth may appear late, be small, irregular, and spaced. Later, they are not always replaced by a definitive tooth (dental agenesis). Sometimes the teeth remain small (dental hypoplasia) or are poorly or anarchically implanted. Children are more susceptible to cavities than average.

**Other Events**

The disease can affect the liver. This is mostly asymptomatic and only manifested by elevated plasma levels of transaminases. Sometimes the physical examination shows hepatomegaly.

Kidney damage may occur in some children and manifest as proteinuria. Sometimes, it results in high blood pressure.

Boys may have unusually small testicles and penises (hypogonadism). Chryptorchidism is also possible.