As an anticoagulant, apixaban's most common adverse effect is bleeding (1% to 10%). The risk of major bleeding is 3% or less, and clinically relevant nonmajor bleeding is 2% to 4%. Other less common adverse effects include nausea (3%), gingival hemorrhage (1% or less), hematuria (2% or less), hypermenorrhea (1%), anemia (3%), bruise (1% to 2%), hematoma (1% to 2%), postprocedural hemorrhage (1% or less), rectal hemorrhage (1% or less), increased serum transaminases (1% or less), aspartate aminotransferase increased (1% or less), gamma-glutamyltransferase increased (1% or less), epistaxis (4% or less), and hemoptysis (1% or less). In rare instances (less than 1%), it can cause a hypersensitivity reaction.

**Drug Interactions**

Most apixaban drug interactions are associated with CYP3A4 and P-gp, as apixaban is a substrate for both. The drugs that inhibit CYP3A4 and P-gp may increase the exposure of apixaban and the associated risk of bleeding. On the contrary, drugs that induce CYP3A4 and P-gp may decrease exposure to apixaban and increase the risk of stroke and other thromboembolic events.

**Coadministration of Apixaban with Combined P-gp Strong CYP3A4 Inhibitors**

If patients receive apixaban 5 mg or 10 mg twice daily, it is recommended to decrease the dose of apixaban by 50% for patients who are also receiving P-gp and potent CYP3A4 inhibiting drugs like ritonavir, ketoconazole, and itraconazole. However, If patients receive apixaban 2.5 mg twice daily dose, it is recommended to avoid coadministration for patients who are also receiving P-gp and potent CYP3A4 inhibitors.

**Coadministration of Apixaban with Combined P-gp Strong CYP3A4 Inducers**

It is recommended to avoid coadministration of apixaban with other P-gp and strong CYP3A4-inducing drugs like phenytoin, carbamazepine, and rifampin, as these drugs may lead to a decrease in the exposure of apixaban.

**Coadministration of Apixaban with other Anticoagulants and Antiplatelet Agents**

When apixaban is coadministered with other anticoagulants and antiplatelet agents like heparin, aspirin, and chronic NSAIDs, it may increase the risk of bleeding.