Classical bladder exstrophy has to be differentiated from other anomalies of the spectrum of bladder-exstrophy-epispadias-complex. It includes epispadias, at the mild end of the spectrum, characterized by the involvement of the only genitalia. The bladder is uninvolved in epispadias. Another anomaly, which lies at the most severe end of the spectrum, is cloacal exstrophy. It is also known as OEIS complex due to the presence of omphalocele, exstrophy of bladder, imperforate anus, and spinal abnormalities. The differentiation of bladder exstrophy from both these anomalies is based on clinical examination and doesn't require any other ancillary investigation. The other group of rare anomalies that must be differentiated from bladder exstrophy is the 'exstrophy variants.' These are also referred to as 'split symphysis variants.' These differ from the classical bladder exstrophy in the fact that they lack bladder abnormalities. Although the bladder is closed, there is a presence of pubic diastasis and divergent recti. The following are included in the category of exstrophy variants:

**Pseudoexstrophy:**the covering over the bladder consists only of the skin. The musculoskeletal abnormalities, including divergent recti and pubic diastasis, are noticeable. When the bladder is distended, it bulges out like a hernia.

**Superior Vesical Fissure:**the bladder is normally formed; however, there is an opening from the skin into the bladder leading the bladder to prolapse. It must be differentiated from patent urachus as there is an absence of musculoskeletal abnormalities in a patent urachus.

**Duplicate exstrophy:**there is the presence of a normal bladder with a normal phallus. In adjacent to the normal bladder, there is a suprapubic exstrophic mucosal plate. The exstrophic bladder plate is dry and does not receive any ureters. The presence of a superior vesical fissure that later gets fused is supposed to be responsible for this anomaly.

**Covered exstrophy:**it is different from pseudoexstrophy in the fact that there is the presence of an isolated ectopic bowel segment. This is present on the inferior abdominal wall. Another important difference from other variants is the presence of abnormalities of the external genitalia in covered exstrophy.