**Disqualifying Conditions**

Evaluation of any pilot or pilot candidate begins with a thorough history. The FAA has multiple disqualifying conditions that are listed in the table below. The Navy, Army, and Air Force first have medical directives for any person obtaining active duty status. The disqualifying conditions below would likely also disqualify a person from becoming an active duty member of the military. The Navy states that all conditions can be considered for a waiver if personnel has met general active-duty medical standards. The Army and Air Force also have similar rules. Whether the waiver is granted is ultimately up to the authorities within the aerospace medicine division of the different branches of the military.

Table 3: FAA Disqualifying Conditions, See image

**Distance Vision**

The FAA regulates that all airline and commercial pilots have 20/20 or better vision in each eye with or without correction, where private pilots can have 20/40 or better with or without correction. There are no limits to how poor vision can be as long as it is corrected to 20/20. Navy standards for students state 20/40 or better uncorrected in each eye which must correct to 20/20. Other aircrew members in the Navy have no limits to vision as long as vision can be corrected to 20/20. Army regulations state that an aviator has to have 20/50 vision or better, which is correctable to 20/20. The Air Force requires the same. The Air Force states that aviators may have a refractive error between -1.50 to -3.00 for myopia, +2.00 and +3.00 for hyperopia, and 1.50 to 3.00 for astigmatism. All errors must be correctable to 20/20.

**Near Vision**

Near vision for all pilots, according to the FAA, should be 20/40 or better with or without correction measured at sixteen inches. The Navy directives are slightly stricter with 20/40 or better uncorrected and 20/20 with correction. The Air Force notes no standard for uncorrected vision but must correct to 20/20. Aircrew members have no restrictions with near uncorrected vision as long as near vision can be corrected to 20/20. The Army holds the same limits as the Navy.

**Color Vision**

The FAA states that airmen must have the ability to perceive color necessary for the safe performance of duties. Examiners must use specific color vision plates for testing, such as Pseudoisochromatic Plates (PIP). The Army also uses color vision plates to test vision. The FAA prohibits web-based color vision tests. The Navy considers PIP as the primary test for color vision, and a passing rate is interpreting 12 out of 14 plates. Computerized Color Vision tests like Waggoner CCVT, Colour Assessment & Diagnosis, and Cone Contrast Test are also approved as color vision tests within the Navy. The Air Force uses the Cone Contrast Test (CCT) as their standard test. ACCT test score below 75 for red/green vision is considered evidence of deficiency.

**Ophthalmology**

A slit lamp exam is required by the Navy to rule out any anatomical abnormalities in the eye. Intraocular pressure is also tested and must be below 22 mmHg with a minimum of 4 mmHg difference between eyes.

**Hearing**

The Navy, Army, and Air Force have stricter requirements on hearing than that of the FAA. All military aviators and crew have to pass an audiometric exam. With the FAA, a pilot can demonstrate good hearing with an audiometric test or through a basic hearing exam in an exam room. The FAA states that a pilot has to demonstrate hearing of a conversational voice in a quiet room at a distance of six feet with both ears with his back turned to the examiner.

**Audiology**

The audiometric limits for the military are once again more demanding than the FAA standards for student pilots. Standards can be waived to FAA levels (with exception of hearing at 30db at a frequency of 100HZ) depending on the type and severity of hearing loss and the ability to hear warning tones and radio transmissions in the cockpit.

Table 1: Navy, Army, and Air Force Audiometric Standards (see image)

Table 2: FAA Audiometric Standards, See image

**ENT**

The FAA does not allow any ear condition that causes vertigo, a disturbance of equilibrium, or speech. The military branches have many more ENT conditions that are discussed in all of the regulations, but waivers are not granted for conditions that cause the above deficits. These conditions include Meniere disease and benign paroxysmal positional vertigo. Conditions such as chronic sinusitis, cleft palates (not able to be repaired with surgery), or any condition that inhibits speech are disqualifying for aviators as well.

**Pulse**

The FAA states that a pulse rate of less than 50 is disqualifying, but with no sign of underlying coronary artery disease, they may still obtain a certificate. The Navy notes that the pulse must be less than 100 and greater than 45 but if less than 45, the anomaly can be waived if appropriate cardiac response to exercise is noted. The Army has no lower limit so long as the candidate is asymptomatic. The Army notes persistent tachycardia greater than 100 is disqualifying. The Air Force sets no rate limits, but various arrhythmias are disqualifying.

**Blood Pressure**

The FAA allows for a pilot to be more hypertensive than all of the military branches. The maximum blood pressure value for the FAA is 155/95 mmHg, whereas blood pressure is not to exceed 140/90 for the military. If a diagnosis of hypertension is made, the FAA has approved alpha-blockers, beta-blockers, calcium channel blockers, diuretics, angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitors (ACE-I), angiotensin II receptor blockers (ARBs), direct renin inhibitors, direct vasodilators, and thiazide diuretics. The aviator is required to be grounded for seven days when initiating the approved medications to rule out any side effects. The Navy states that all hypertension medications are downing for flight except ACE-I, ARBs, thiazide diuretics (HCTZ only), and calcium channel blockers (amlodipine only), which are forgone due to limited side effects. When initiating a medication, the aviator must be downed for 30 days to prove blood pressure control and no evidence of side effects. The Air Force does not require a waiver for hypertension if blood pressure is controlled via lifestyle modifications or monotherapy with a thiazide diuretic, ACE-I or ARB.

**Electrocardiogram (ECG)**

An ECG is required at age thirty-five and annually after the age of forty, according to the FAA. The Navy requires an ECG every five years from the age of twenty-five and annually after the age of fifty. Common variances include sinus bradycardia, first-degree AV block, and incomplete right bundle branch block.

**Mental Health**

Per the FAA, any diagnosis of psychosis, bipolar disorder, or severe personality disorder is disqualifying. Severe depression with suicidal ideations or a suicide attempt or requiring multiple medications is disqualifying. There are considerations for minor depressive disorders, anxiety, and grief. Aviators may be granted a certificate if entirely off of medication, completion of psychotherapy, and stable for six months. FAA regulations state that individuals on monotherapy with specific SSRIs ( fluoxetine, sertraline, citalopram, escitalopram) for major depression for an extended period may be granted a waiver if they have medical proof of stability for at least six months.

Psychiatric disorders in any military aviation community are generally disqualifying, but all disorders may be considered for waiver. For example, if a member has been diagnosed with attention deficit disorder in the past but has been off medication for twelve months without issue, they may obtain a waiver. Overall, the use of all psychotropic medications, including SSRIs, is disqualifying. All military aviators must be off of all prescriptions and have stopped psychotherapy from being considered fit for duty. Generally, diagnoses of psychosis, bipolar disorder, or personality disorder are not granted waivers in aviation and sometimes require a medical discharge from the military as a whole since the use of antipsychotic medication, and routine psychiatric evaluation is disqualifying for duty.

**Substance Dependence and Use**

The FAA states that a diagnosis or medical history of substance dependence is disqualifying unless there is clinical evidence of total abstinence for the preceding two years. Substances include alcohol and other drugs, for example, opioids, amphetamines, marijuana, and cocaine. Substance use may be identified by case history with an appropriate medical review, the use of a substance in a physically hazardous situation, a positive drug test or alcohol level greater than 0.04 on a Department of Transportation required a drug test, or a refusal to complete a Department of Transportation drug test. There is currently no duty to report a known pilot identified with substance abuse disorder or other substance-related diagnoses if they present for care in emergency rooms.

**Pharmaceuticals**

The different military branches and the FAA have a list of pharmaceutical agents that can down an aviator permanently or for the period that the person is using a specific drug. The list of these medications is readily available on the FAA website. There are two basic categories of medications Do Not Issue and Do Not Fly. An airman may not receive a medical certificate if they are on a Do Not Issue medication such as angina medicines, seizure medicines, anticholinergics, hypoglycemia inducing diabetes medicine, centrally acting antihypertensives, and others. Do Not Fly drugs may be taken temporarily, but pilots are not to supposed to fly until a certain period after taking them. The period is defined as five times the half-life. Or if the half-life is unknown five times the maximum time interval. For example, if a patient is taking a medication on the list every six to eight hours, then the downtime would be 40 hours or five times the maximum interval of 8 hours. Other medications may have a specific downtime; for example, the acne medicine isotretinoin must be ended at least two weeks before flying due to concern for visual and psychiatric side-effects. Multiple other medications have specific guidelines and are available in the FAA guide. The waiver guides for the separate military branches also have a list of medicines that are temporarily downing. The military restrictions are much more severe, and therefore there are many more medications that are temporarily downing when compared to FAA guidelines. For example, in the Navy, nitrofurantoin and trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole are temporary downing, but erythromycin is not. All nasal decongestants are downing, but non-sedating antihistamines, such as loratadine, may be used.