Meningitis is a serious disorder with high morbidity and mortality. The majority of patients with meningitis first present to the emergency department and a streamlined interprofessional approach is vital if one wants to lower the high morbidity. The triage nurse must be fully aware of the signs and symptoms of the illness and refer the patient immediately to the emergency department clinician. Other specialists who are usually involved in the care of these patients are neurologists, pediatricians, intensivists, infectious disease specialists, and pharmacists. If bacterial meningitis is suspected, prompt antibiotics should be started even in the absence of laboratory results. The pharmacist, preferably specializing in infectious diseases, should assist the clinical team in choosing the appropriate antibiotics based on the age of the patient and local sensitivities and correct dosing to ensure penetration into the central nervous system.

To prevent this infection, the education of the public is vital. All healthcare workers (nurses, physicians, and pharmacists) should educate patients and parents in regards to vaccine-preventable meningitis (H. influenzae type B, S. pneumoniae, N. meningitidis, Measles, and Varicella). Across the board, the incidence of meningitis has decreased with the implementation of generalized vaccination. Family members should be educated about the need for prophylaxis when there is a family member with Neisseria and H. influenzae type B meningitis. All contacts should be educated about the signs and symptoms of the infection and when to return to the emergency department.