Point of care ultrasound has an important role to play in emergent and critical care settings and is now an established modality. Easy access, portability, relatively high sensitivity, and specificity, and the ability to arrive at a diagnosis relatively quickly without ionizing radiation exposure are all making lung ultrasound (LUS) an indispensable tool in lung assessment.

Ideally, the choice of the probe is determined by the area of interest. Low frequency (3-5 MHz) convex probes are better suited to assess deeper structures and are used to evaluate effusions and consolidations. Linear probes with higher frequencies (6-13 MHz) are better for the evaluation of more superficial structures like the ribs, soft tissue, and pleura.

A well-aerated lung is characterized by the presence of a white band or "pleural line" up to 2 mm seen at the lung/pleura interface, lung sliding caused by the movement of the two layers of pleura relative to each other, and a reverberation artifact called A-lines which are regularly spaced white lines seen in Merlin's space parallel to the pleural line. Merlin's space refers to the space between the pleural line, ribs shadow, and the bottom of the image. On M-mode, a characteristic seashore sign is seen, which is caused by lung sliding.

Pneumothorax is characterized by the absence of lung sliding with intact A-lines. This sign has a sensitivity of 100% and specificity of 96.5% for diagnosing pneumothorax.

Evaluation of the parenchyma by ultrasound, while limited, can be useful in critically ill patients. Consolidations are seen as hyperechoic areas with dynamic air bronchograms and "hepatization" of the parenchyma. Atelectasis can present similarly, but without dynamic air bronchograms, and with decreased or absent lung sliding.

In the case of trauma, subcutaneous emphysema, soft tissue hematomas, and rib fractures are easily picked up on ultrasound examination. Multiple studies have demonstrated the higher sensitivity of ultrasound compared to radiographs in detecting rib fractures.

Additionally, ultrasound has a major role to play in therapeutic procedures, such as thoracentesis and biopsy of superficial thoracic masses. It is also shown to have a high sensitivity and specificity in detecting chest wall invasion by neoplasms.