Malfunctioning of TREX1 is associated with a broad spectrum of inflammatory and autoimmune diseases which are apparently independent such as Aicardi-Goutieres syndrome (AGS),

Aicardi-Goutieres syndrome (AGS) is a genetically heterogeneous progressive encephalopathy that presents as a severe encephalopathy with demyelination, calcification of white matter and basal ganglia, and chronic CSF lymphocytosis. Disruption of innate immunity is a primary pathogenic event in AGS and disrupted TREX1 enzyme fails to maintain host innate immune tolerance to cytosolic self-DNA and results in an abnormal innate immune response.ADAR, IFIH1, RNASEH2A, RNASEH2B, RNASEH2C, SAMHD1, and TREX1.

AGS is an autosomal recessive disease and has two clinical presentations:

- An early-onset neonatal form that is most frequently associated with recessive missense mutations in the TREX1 gene and presents in infancy as progressive microcephaly, dystonia, spasticity, and psychomotor retardation.

- Aa later-onset presentation particularly due to mutations in RNASEH2B subunit of RNASEH2 endonuclease complex.

Cree encephalitis and intracranial calcification syndrome (MICS) which were first described as separate disorders have been found to have increased levels of interferon-alpha (IFN-alpha)  and considerable overlap with AGS.

Systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE) is a chronic, autoimmune, multisystem, and clinically heterogeneous disorder with a multifactorial etiology in which genetic, hormonal, immunologic, and environmental factors play a role. As with AGS, SLE is notable for interferon-alpha (IFN-α)  activation signature. Researchers have identified that TREX1 is involved in SLE pathogenesis and although rarely TREX1 mutations have been reported in sporadic SLE cases.

Familial chilblain lupus (FCL) is a rare form of cutaneous lupus erythematosus presenting in early childhood with painful inflammatory skin lesions on fingers, ears, nose, toes, and cheeks which are aggravated by cold. Other manifestations include arthralgias and positive antinuclear antibodies. This disorder demonstrates an autosomal dominant inheritance and is mostly due to TREX1 mutations.

Cryofibrinogenemia is a rare disorder due to the formation of cryoprecipitate in plasma and manifests with cold-induced acrocyanosis and skin lesions due to cutaneous ischemia. Cutaneous lesions typically involve hands, feet, ears, nose, and buttocks. Recent observations suggest that heterozygous mutations in TREX1 are associated with Cryofibrinogenemia.

Retinal vasculopathy with cerebral leukodystrophy (RVCL) is a rare genetic disorder with an autosomal dominant inheritance pattern. RVCL is characterized by microvascular endotheliopathy that involves the cerebrum, retina, kidney, and other systemic microvessels. Research has recognized that carboxyl-terminus frameshift mutations in the TREX1 gene as contributing to RVCL. Muted TREX1 protein maintains DNase activity, but aberrant localization of muted protein due to impaired translocation into the nucleus in response to oxidative DNA damage may be associated with systemic microvascular endotheliopathy in patients with RVCL.

TREX1 also plays an important role in modulating the innate immune response to type 1 human immunodeficiency retrovirus (HIV-1). Partial length DNA species produced by abortive HIV-1 reverse transcriptase get cleared by TREX1 enzyme leading to escape from type I interferon antiviral response.