an interprofessional approach to Zenker diverticulum is necessary as the diagnosis can be delayed because of the vague symptoms. Zenker diverticulum usually presents in the middle-aged and elderly population with symptoms of dysphagia and regurgitation. The condition is progressive and can lead to aspiration, halitosis, chronic cough, and hoarseness. Patients admitted with a diagnosis of Zenker diverticulum need to be looked after an interprofessional team of healthcare professionals because there are many treatment options. There is no data to show that one treatment is better than the other. The best treatment depends on patient age, presence of comorbidity, size of the diverticulum, surgeon experience, and patient preferences.

Hence, the nurse should educate the patient and family about the disease, its outlook, and management. At the same time, the nurse should take aspiration precautions by avoiding a supine position. A speech consult should be obtained to determine the risk of aspiration and a dietary consult to determine what type of foods are safe. Because many of these patients are frail and weak, a physical therapy consult may help increase exercise tolerance and ambulation.  After the surgery, the patient should be closely monitored by the nurse for dysphagia and aspiration. Only a team approach can lower the morbidity associated with Zenker diverticulum.

**Outcomes**

Even though there are several methods to manage Zenker diverticulum, the outcomes after all of these treatments are safe and effective. Almost all patients report an improvement in immediate symptoms. Unfortunately, there are no randomized trials or long-term studies to determine which is the most effective procedure and which is durable. The key is to have an experienced surgeon or endoscopist. The low prevalence of this disorder may make it difficult to conduct large randomized trials; hence the choice of treatment remains one of personal choice.