The underlying mechanical factor in PG is due to the pigment showers and deposits that get phagocytosed in TM cells leading to elevated IOP caused by reduced outflow. Chronic mechanical contact and friction between the posterior iris and lens structures lead to the release of melanin granules in PDS/PG.

**Laser peripheral iridotomy (LPI)**has been proposed in several studies performed in the 90s, with the aim of reducing physical contact and friction between AC structures by inducing iris flattening, reducing iris concavity, limiting posterior bowing of the iris, creating an equilibrium of the pressure in the anterior chamber and the posterior chamber; and preventing reverse pupillary block.

The reduction of IOP may be more in patients younger than 40 years as the reverse pupillary block is aggravated by the accommodation. However, numerous studies

LPI may be an option in individuals younger than 40 years, with irido-zonular contact seen on UBM and normal IOP. However, Laser treatment in PDS/PG remains debatable, thus further trials are needed to determine if different subgroups of patients with PDS/PG based on severity, AC anatomy, IOP, and other factors could benefit from LPI.

PDS patients at risk of converting to PG are advised to undergo periodic ophthalmologic examinations to monitor IOP and optic disc cupping. Similar to other forms of open-angle glaucoma, treatment is indicated for elevated IOP in the presence of functional and structural glaucomatous damage. Medical therapy, which ranges from beta-blockers, carbonic anhydrase inhibitors, prostaglandin analogs, or a combination of these, are the first-line treatment option in PG. Eye drop of pilocarpine is theoretically an ideal option for these patients considering that it reduces pupil movement, induces miosis, and limits posterior iris bowing. This therapy, however, is poorly tolerated considering the side effects including blurred vision, accommodative spasms, headaches, and retinal detachment. A randomized study found that latanoprost once daily was more effective in reducing IOP at one year and well-tolerated in patients with PG compared to timolol twice daily.

Eyes with PDS/PG have intense pigmentation of TM. **Argon laser trabeculoplasty (ALT)**has been shown to be useful in PG.

Older patients and patients with a long duration of PG may have increased IOP after ALT. Such eyes were not associated with more pigment dispersion to explain the IOP rise. The possible explanations include trabecular sclerosis preventing the tightening effect of ALT, and trabecular damage by ALT due to higher absorption of energy by a pigmented TM.

**Selective laser trabeculoplasty (SLT)**, which has greater absorption and effectiveness in pigmented tissues, induces less damage to TM and can be repeated over time. A study on 30 eyes undergoing 180-degree SLT revealed that the success rate at 1 year, 2 years, 3 years, and 4 years was 85%, 67%, 44%, and 14%, respectively. The average time to failure after SLT was around 27 months.

A study conducted in 2005 in eyes with heavily pigmented TM reported elevated IOP after SLT; thus, caution should be used when considering this treatment option. The eyes with PG on multiple glaucoma medications, severely pigmented TM, and a previous history of ALT may be at higher risk of IOP rise after SLT.

Surgery can be considered in patients with failure of maximal medical therapy or laser. Trabeculectomy has been shown to be effective in patients with PG, showing comparative outcomes to POAG patients.