Bladder diverticula can be addressed through conservative nonoperative therapy, surgical excision, and endoscopic care. Indications for treating bladder diverticula include urinary infection, stones, or cancer. Malignancy can be of particular concern related to bladder diverticula due to the lack of a muscle wall beyond the mucosal layer, resulting in a higher risk for extension of possible malignancy outside the bladder.

Adults with minor or no symptoms and no aggravating conditions may offer monitoring and surveillance. These people should be warned about the possibility of increased cancer risk and what red flags to be aware of, such as haematuria, dysuria, and other lower urinary tract symptoms. Unfortunately, the length and scheduling of those assessments are poorly defined, but they consist of regular reviews of symptoms, urine investigation including cytology, and regular cystoscopy exams. There is a role for clean intermittent catheterization in patients who cannot proceed with the surgical removal of the diverticulum or those who remain symptomatic despite the relief of obstruction.

Bladder diverticulectomy is usually done as an elective case. Surgery is generally indicated as described above when the bladder diverticulum becomes symptomatic. Most of the time, those symptoms are related to the poor emptying function of the diverticulum and urinary stasis. A detailed preoperative assessment is taken before surgery to decide the suitability of treatment for each individual.

The current minimal invasive treatment options available for diverticula removal are endoscopic resection, injecting bulking agents at the neck of the bladder, and fulguration.

For patients who are frail and not fit for prolonged surgery, endoscopic management of the diverticulum is considered. Multiple articles and reports in the literature have discussed and described those managements, including transurethral endoscopic fulguration of the bladder and transurethral resection of the diverticular neck, and fulguration of the mucosa of the diverticulum.

Diverticulectomy can be done open, laparoscopically, or using a robot. Extraperitoneal or intraperitoneal approaches to the open abdomen are both possible. For modest diverticula, a transvesical technique can be utilized, in which the anterior portion of the bladder wall is opened. Then the diverticulum is everted and circumcised, and then the bladder is closed. A dual approach of transvesical and extravesical can be used if the diverticulum is large or adherent to the surrounding structures; after entering the bladder and identifying the diverticulum, the diverticulum is equipped with gauze and mobilized, then extravesical circumcision of the bladder neck is performed.

Intraperitoneal or extraperitoneal laparoscopic diverticulectomy is possible, albeit the extraperitoneal method is more difficult. Concurrent flexible cystoscopy can aid in locating the diverticulum's neck. Compared to the open technique, laparoscopic diverticulectomy has been linked to a shorter hospital stay and a lower requirement for analgesics, despite being a technically complex treatment with a higher mean operating time.

Myer and Wagner published the first series of robot-assisted diverticulectomy (RAD) in 2007 and found that RAD had equivalent results to laparoscopic techniques, with a mean hospital stay of 2.4 days.

Ergonomics, 3D visualization, dexterity, and precision are all improved with RAD. Obese people may benefit most from the robotic technique. In children, the reasons for bladder diverticulectomy are identical to those in adults. Because of the inherent connective tissue disorders found in these patients, which affect the postsurgical healing process, increase perioperative surgical risk, and predispose to recurrence, observation and medical management are usually preferred in children with multiple bladder diverticula associated with a chromosomal syndrome.