**Hereditary Hemochromatosis**

An autosomal recessive defect in the HFE gene, resulting in decreased hepcidin production. HFE mutations are more prevalent in individuals of European descent. Decreased hepcidin results in increased iron uptake from diet and increased iron mobilization from macrophages. Continued iron absorption despite adequate serum levels can lead to iron overload (total body iron exceeds 20g). Symptoms of hemochromatosis are secondary to iron deposition in bodily tissue and typically present in the 4th and 5th decade of life for men and women, respectively. The classic triad includes skin hyperpigmentation, liver cirrhosis, and diabetes mellitus. Additional findings include dilated cardiomyopathy, hypogonadism, arthropathy, and hypothyroidism. Hemochromatosis patients also have increased infection risk now that serum iron levels cannot decrease during inflammatory states. The diagnostic basis is iron panel results showing an increased serum iron level with increased ferritin (> 200 mcg/L) and transferrin saturation levels (> 45%). Treatment involves lifestyle modifications, therapeutic phlebotomy, and medications. Dietary changes include a diet low in iron, restriction of vitamin C supplements and alcohol, and consuming tea because tannates reduce iron absorption by binding to it. About 1 to 2 therapeutic phlebotomy sessions per week initially to bring ferritin and hemoglobin to the target level and then every 2 to 4 months. The iron-chelating agents like deferoxamine to remove iron from the circulation.

**Anemia of Chronic Disease**

Anemia of chronic disease is the second most common cause of anemia after iron deficiency anemia. It is associated with a variety of disease states, including infection, neoplasm, chronic kidney disease, and autoimmune conditions like systemic lupus erythematosus. Hepcidin is an acute-phase protein, and upregulation is by interleukin-6 (IL-6) and other proinflammatory cytokines. As a result, hepcidin causes enterocytes and macrophages to degrade ferroportin, reducing absorption and promoting storage, respectively. Serum iron levels decline in an attempt to deprive rapidly dividing cells and invading microbes from nutrients. Anemia of chronic disease typically begins as a mild to moderate normocytic normochromic anemia denoted by a hemoglobin concentration of 8 to 9.5 g/dL. The anemia can progress to microcytic and hypochromic if the inflammatory conditions remain. Presenting symptoms are often nonspecific signs of anemia, including fever, pallor, and fatigue. An iron panel would show a decrease in serum iron level despite an increase in ferritin because of intracellular iron sequestration. Treatment with iron supplementation is often not beneficial as the issue lies with iron availability rather than deficiency. It is crucial to treat the underlying condition to prevent further inflammation.