Laboratory tests include liver function, kidney function, thyroid function, lipid profile, and insulin resistance should be ruled out before proceeding for imaging.

With recent advancements in imaging, nuclear medicine helps differentiate lipedema from lymphedema. In nuclear medicine lymphangioscintigraphy, NMLAS technetium-99m-sulfur colloid is injected dermally. Remarkable asymmetry of the lymphatic system and slower lymphatic flow has been found.

Dual-energy X-ray absorptiometry (DEXA) scan is used to measure bone mineral density; it is very useful to assess the fat mass lean body mass. It differentiates patients without lipedema by a cut-off value of 0.46 for fat mass in the legs (adjusted for BMI).

Ultrasound of lipedema tissue demonstrates thinner skin, increased thickness, and increased hypoechogenicity of subcutaneous fat more prominent towards the medial calf and distal extremity. Based on the thickness of the subcutis, the severity of lipedema has been classified by Marschall and Schwahn-Schreiber: mild: 12 to 15 mm, moderate: 15 to 20 mm, distinct: > 20 mm, and severe: > 30 mm. Ironically, similar values have been identified in the case of obesity as well. Therefore, the proposed value can misdiagnose lipedema in the absence of other symptoms.

Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of the legs shows a widening of lymphatic vessels up to 2 mm, whereas, in the case of lipedema, widening can be > 3 mm.

In transthoracic 2D echocardiography, enlarged left atrial diameter, increased LV end-diastolic diameter and volume, increased LV end-systolic volume, impaired left ventricular apical rotation, left ventricular twist, and aortic stiffness, along with increased ascending aortic systolic and diastolic diameters have been reported. Ejection fraction has been preserved in Lipedema patients. In 3D speckle-tracking echocardiography dilated end-systolic and end-diastolic mitral annulus disjunction, the mitral annulus area has been observed.