**Normal Respiration**

The respiratory center in the brain activates spontaneous breathing via the transmission of impulses through the phrenic nerve. Lourenco et al. showed that diaphragmatic activity is proportional to phrenic nerve activity.

**Physiology of Edi Signal**

All muscles in the body stimulate muscle contraction by generating electrical activity. The nerve stimulus controls this electrical activity. The NAVA ventilator utilizes this electrical activity to assist the patient’s respiratory efforts in a synchronized manner. Edi is the primary requirement for NAVA to function and the main source for ventilator trigger. In theory, NAVA overcomes the limitation of proportional assist ventilation such as air leaks and asynchrony between patient and ventilator. The ventilator breath is triggered and terminated by changes in this electrical activity. The pressure is delivered in proportion to the Edi signal and ends when the Edi signal subsides. The ventilator displays two forms of Edi; Edi max (peak inspiration) and Edi min (tonic activity of diaphragm).

Figure 1: A process of inspiration and ventilator trigger

**NAVA Level**

NAVA level converts the Edi signal into an appropriate pressure. NAVA level is expressed as cmHO/ µV. During ventilation, the ventilator will deliver pressure by multiplying each Edi by the NAVA level (see below). Increasing or decreasing the NAVA level will change the pressure delivery for the same Edi. However, pressure delivery varies with each breathing effort, and it depends on the measured electrical activity of the diaphragm. Hence, the patient controls both own and ventilator pressure and thus improves synchrony and comfort.

Calculation of Peak inspiratory pressure (PIP) = NAVA level x (Edi max – Edi min) + PEEP