Clinical Manifestations

Hypotonia:

Infantile hypotonia is very characteristic and found in nearly all individuals with Prader Willi syndrome. They have poor suck reflex producing feeding difficulties, decreased muscle mass, and strength, failure to thrive early in life, requiring to have special equipment for feeding or the need for gavage to improve the nutrition for an extended period.

Dysmorphic features:

Some facial characteristics include almond-shaped palpebral fissures, narrow frontal diameter, strabismus, narrow nasal bridge, thin upper vermilion with downturned corners of the mouth, and enamel hypoplasia. They can also present with small hands and feet, this could not be apparent at birth, but can evolve slowly over time.

Developmental delays and behavioral issues:

Motor developmental delay is present in the majority of individuals with Prader Willi syndrome. Milestone acquisition is, on average, at about double the usual age.

Growth hormone deficiency:

Short stature can be present since early childhood and appears in almost all cases in the second decade of life. Growth hormone deficiency is the most common endocrinopathy reported. Although the pathogenesis is not completely clear, IGF-1 is deficient or subnormal in almost every patient with Prader Willi syndrome. In addition to impairment in the growth hormone secretion test, 24-hour growth hormone spontaneous secretion is also abnormal.

Hyperphagia and obesity

There are four nutritional phases described, ranging from failure to thrive to obesity, which is the hallmark of Prader Willi Syndrome. Phase 0: In utero, showing decreased fetal movements and growth restriction. Phase 1: infants are hypotonic and not obese. Divided in a subphase 1a consisting of difficulty feeding with or without failure to thrive from birth to 15 months of age, followed by another subphase 1b characterized by a steady growth at an average rate of weight gain of the infant. Phase 2: the weight gain begins. Split into 2a, where weight increases with no significant changes in calorie intake or appetite; in subphase 2b weight increments now associated with increased appetite and interest for food at a median age of 4.5 years old. Phase 3: represented by hyperphagia related to food-seeking behavior and lack of satiety, the median age of 8 years. Phase 4: some patients reach this phase, where insatiable appetite is no longer present.

Hyperphagia that occurs in phase 3, in correlation with the food-seeking behavior, stealing of food or money for food, associated with the decrease of total caloric requirement, results in obesity. In Prader Willi syndrome, obesity is mainly central, in the abdomen, thighs, and buttocks, leading to significant complications with increased morbidity and mortality.

Hypogonadism:

Hypogonadism is present in all patients with Prader Willi syndrome. Cryptorchidism is a feature in almost all male cases, and many of them are required to have orchiopexy. Penile size is reportedly average at birth, but length starts to fall 2 SD under the standard curve later in time. As a result of smaller penile size and increase fatty pad over the pubic area; urination can be troublesome while standing, a short course of testosterone can be helpful in potty-training. At the time of puberty, which appears to occur at an average age, testosterone increases but remains low; generally, LH remains at low-normal levels, while FSH remains normal to high levels. At Tanner stage 3, the arrest of puberty is noticeable, finding testicular failure and a small testicular size that persists into adulthood.  Females are born with hypoplasia of external genitalia, puberty usually starts at an adequate age, but breast development delays significantly. Very few patients with PWS can reach menarche and occurs on average at 20 years of age. Estrogen and LH are low to normal, while FSH is normal to hight in the pubertal period, which can be indicative of central and primary defects. Males and females with PWS are considered infertile. There is a high percentage of premature adrenarche in both genders, and estimates are that in about 14 to 30 % of cases, it correlates with advanced bone age, which could be the consequence of obesity.

Other manifestations: Sleep disorders, hypopigmentation, thick viscous saliva, high pain threshold, decreased vomiting, temperature instability, scoliosis/kyphosis, osteoporosis.