**Repercussions**

The damage of WPV in the healthcare industry causes both institutional and individual repercussions. Failure to address it can cause a spiral of worsening. The ramifications of violence extend beyond physical injury to healthcare workers. Wirth et al. found that physical violence correlated directly with PTSD and inversely with patient compassion, while verbal abuse correlated more with negative emotions such as anger, depression, anxiety, guilt, humiliation, and helplessness.

This also resulted in higher attrition rates and turnover for nursing and auxiliary staff. For physicians, it produces higher rates of psychological distress and promotes a culture of incivility that may be especially prevalent in teaching institutions.

Resident physicians may be particularly vulnerable. Resident physicians function as both a clinician and an apprentice. This places them in the unique position of simultaneously falling victim to Type II and Type III violence. Higher rates of burnout, emotional exhaustion, cynicism, or depersonalization lead to erosion of self-confidence, fear of procedures, and deterrence of future candidates.

Type III WPV has the propensity to self-perpetuate. Consciously, residents may feel compelled to contribute to the WPV of their colleagues to draw the spotlight away from themselves or to avoid retribution in performance evaluations or ingratiation.

To reduce the incidence of WPV in the healthcare field, especially the ED, patterns of addressable factors must be identified. Unfortunately, the repository of literature from the past two decades is small.

**Trivialization**

Trivialization is common, especially in the ED.

Another study found clinicians minimalized the abuse as an ordinary and emotionally cathartic byproduct of the patient's illness. Reporting violence is perceived as taboo, reflecting the clinician's incompetence. Faulty reasoning concludes if the patient were properly treated, they or their visitors would not be violent. In some cases, an ineffective legal system may be used as an excuse to doubt real repercussions.

**Incognizance**

Incognizance is the lack of understanding of what constitutes workplace violence. Unless clearly egregious, there are disagreements in the literature about what constitutes reportable violence.

If workers recognize WPV, many are unfamiliar with the reporting process. Nurses and patient care technicians are likelier to report to their supervisor or the charge nurse than to file a report or formal complaint. Many find reporting too time-consuming or difficult, especially in a chaotically busy work environment.

**Cost**

A workplace's institutional, personal, and societal costs may be direct or indirect. Direct cost includes the cost of care. Indirect costs can include lost productivity, wages, legal costs, staff attrition, understaffing, and diminished capacity to care for patients.