Complications of botulinum toxin injections may include mild bruising (11 to 25% of patients), brow or eyelid ptosis (0.59% of patients), local hypesthesia, dry skin, allergic reaction to components, injection site pain, headache, asymmetry, and unwanted cosmetic result.

Procedural techniques to reduce bruising include careful avoidance of superficial blood vessels (which can be more easily visualized by removing makeup and having adequate lighting) and application of pressure and ice post-injection. Gentle stretching of the skin can also reveal superficial blood vessels. If a vessel is punctured, prompt digital pressure should be applied to the region.

Given the variation in depth along the course of the corrugator supercilii, injecting too superficially medially can lead to inadvertent injection of the frontalis muscle, causing brow ptosis rather than elevation. In addition, diffusion of toxin into the levator palpebrae superioris can lead to eyelid ptosis. The treatment for refractory ptosis caused in this manner is apraclonidine eye drops. Apraclonidine is an alpha-2 agonist and sympathomimetic that stimulates the contraction of Muller's muscle, causing eyelid elevation.

Inadvertent injection deep to the procerus and into the frontalis muscle can cause skin drooping between the eyebrows. This is best avoided by superficial injection in the glabellar area when targeting the procerus.

Frontalis injection can lead to ptotic eyebrow position in multiple ways, including injecting too inferiorly, injecting too superficially when attempting to address the medial corrugator, neglecting to inject the opposing orbicularis oculi and glabellar muscles, and administering too large a unit volume compared to the opposing musculature. Blepharoptosis can also occur if there is a pre-existing LPS weakness that is unmasked. As mentioned previously, overcorrection of the medial versus the lateral frontalis can lead to "Mephisto" or "Spock" deformity. It may occur if frontalis injections are only performed between the mid-pupillary lines and can be corrected with the careful injection of the lateral frontalis, with care not to overcorrect and cause brow ptosis laterally.

Unintended outcomes of orbicularis oculi injection may occur if the injection is carried out too medially and inferiorly. If this occurs, the zygomaticus major and minor muscles may be inadvertently injected. These muscles are important in smiling function, and therefore injection can lead to an asymmetric smile. An aggressive medial/inferior OO injection may also create the appearance of a "shelf" at the lid/cheek junction, where the cheeks elevate during smiling, but there is no movement of the periorbital skin.

Asymmetry can occur if botulinum toxin is dosed or administered unequally between sides of the face. This is best avoided by careful attention to injection quantity and consistent dilution technique.