When treating patients with hypoalphalipoproteinemia, the objective is to reduce cardiovascular risk and increase HDL cholesterol levels.

**Statins**

- Atorvastatin

- Fluvastatin

- Lovastatin

- Pravastatin

- Rosuvastatin

- Simvastatin

- Pitavastatin

Statins have been shown to increase HDL-C levels by up to 15%.

Statins also reduce triglycerides transferred into HDL particles by cholesterol ester transfer protein (CETP), which leads to a reduction in HDL catabolism by hepatic lipase.

The AFCAPS/TexCAPS study enrolled 5608 men and 997 women with average triglycerides and LCL-C with below-average HDL-C. Participants received either Lovastatin or a placebo in addition to a low-saturated fat, low-cholesterol diet. Participants who received Lovastatin increased HDL-C by an average of 6%. Participants with a baseline HDL-C >45 mg/dL experienced a 15% relative risk reduction for cardiovascular events, while the risk reduction for participants with a baseline HDL-C <45 mg/dL was 45%.

**Fibric Acid Derivatives (Fibrates)**

- Gemfibrozil

- Fenofibrate

- Fenofibric Acid

Fibrates are synthetic PPAR-alpha agonists that influence HDL metabolism. On average, fibrates raise serum HDL-C by approximately 10%.

A study with 2531 male participants with CHD, HDL-C <40 mg/dL, and LDL-C <140 mg/dL compared gemfibrozil therapy (1200mg/day) with a placebo. After one year, HDL-C increased by 6%, and triglycerides decreased by 31%. There was a 24% reduction in the combined outcome of death from stroke, CHD, and nonfatal myocardial infarction. Gemfibrozil therapy significantly decreased the risk of major CV events in participants with CHD whose primary lipid irregularity was a low HDL-C.

**Nicotinic Acid (Niacin)**

Niacin binds to receptors on macrophages and adipocytes (mouse PUMA-G and human HM74 receptors).

In the AIM-HIGH trial, 3414 patients taking statins with well-controlled LDL and low HDL-C were assigned to receive either niacin or a placebo. Despite a significant increase in HDL-C levels in statin-treated patients with the addition of niacin, no clinical benefit was found.

**Lifestyle Changes**

Smoking cessation may yield an increase in HDL levels in thirty days.