Quality in the traditional sense pertains to examining whether a product or service meets its expected characteristics and satisfies the consumer—in other words, how well does a product or a service do what it is meant to do.

**Healthcare Quality Domains**

The goal of the healthcare system is to provide ideal care from a qualified provider in an appropriate setting for a particular patient. In other words, the patient is to receive the best possible care (i.e., standard of care based on evidence-based medicine) by a provider with the right expertise in a setting that maximizes efficiency and minimizes risk and abuse of resources—all the while treating the patient with respect and allowing involvement in care plan as the patient desires. In recent years, six domains have been identified by IOM that help to achieve a high degree of quality; health care must be safe, effective, patient-centered, timely, efficient, and equitable.

**Quality Management**

In healthcare, quality management refers to the administration of systems design, policies, and processes that minimize, if not eliminate, harm while optimizing patient care and outcomes.

Here is the definition of quality and quality management as applied to a case scenario, noting that all six IOM domains are easily identifiable. A trauma hospital offers a service: to safely and efficiently assess and stabilize a patient after suffering a traumatic injury. Regardless of the patient’s history or background, the patient is seen within a specific time frame based on the acuity of the trauma. To achieve optimal care, all trauma providers are all trained in Advanced Trauma Life Support (ATLS) to keep the evaluation of this patient organized and address the most life-threatening injuries first.