Chronic fatigue syndrome (CFS) is a diagnosis made on clinical examination after excluding other possible etiologies.

Initially, when the etiological considerations were considered mainly viral in origin, the Center for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) U.S.A., in 1988, came up with the criterion for the same with the primary focus on the physical symptoms. The Oxford criterion was developed in 1991 and defined a case of chronic fatigue syndrome where mild to severe symptoms of fatigue, myalgias, and tiredness were present.

Subsequent conclusions stated that the Oxford criterion was over-inclusive and had a low threshold that recruited patients with milder symptoms, leading to the generalization of treatments for all patients. Hence, the treatment guidelines could not be generalized to patients with severe symptoms, chronic pain, post-exertional malaise, and other conditions that mimicked chronic fatigue syndrome.

Considering the need for revision of the diagnostic criterion, the CDC, in the year 1994, came up with a broader definition for chronic fatigue syndrome developed by Fakuda and colleagues.

The modified CDC criterion was extensively used until 2015, when the institute of medicine (IOM) proposed the criterion to diagnose chronic fatigue syndrome.

**2015 IOM Diagnostic Criteria for CFS**

Diagnosis of chronic fatigue syndrome requires the presence of the following three symptoms for more than six months as well as the intensity of the symptoms should be moderate or severe for at least 50% of the time.

The three main symptoms include:

- Fatigue - A noticeable decrease or impairment in a patient's ability to engage in activities they would have enjoyed before the onset of the illness. This impairment continues for more than six months and is associated with new-onset severe fatigue unrelated to exertion and not relieved by rest.

- Post-exertional malaise - Patients experience worsening symptoms and function after exposure to physical or cognitive stressors, which they previously well tolerated.

- Unrefreshing sleep - patients feel tired after a night's sleep.

Criterion fulfillment for diagnosis requires the three above-stated symptoms plus one of the additional below-mentioned symptoms.

- Cognitive impairment - Problems with the thought or executive function worsened by exertion, effort, stress, or time pressure.

- Orthostatic intolerance - Worsening of symptoms upon assuming and maintaining an upright posture. Although not necessarily abolished, symptoms are improved by lying back down or elevating the feet.

The typical approach to a patient with chronic fatigue should begin with a history and physical examination, identifying the underlying symptoms and ruling out any serious illnesses. The providers should use a validated clinical questionnaire like the DePaul symptom questionnaire or the Center for Disease Control Symptom Inventory.

There are no pathognomonic or diagnostic tests or single biomarkers of CFS. Tests to rule out other etiologies are undertaken in the context of the particular patient. The standard laboratory tests include urinalysis, complete blood count with differential, blood chemistries, thyroid function tests, muscle enzymes like creatine kinases, and C- reactive protein.