Tinnitus is the perception of sound that does not originate from a source external to the individual's body. When discussing tinnitus, it is first crucial to categorize it between either subjective or objective, as well as between pulsatile and non-pulsatile tinnitus. In subjective tinnitus, which is more common, only the patient can perceive the sound. On the other hand, in objective tinnitus, both the individual and potentially the examiner can hear the sound. For example, subjective tinnitus is classically caused by a sensorineural hearing loss in patients experiencing presbycusis. The examiner is not able to perceive the tinnitus; however, the patient can.

Next, it is important to distinguish between pulsatile and non-pulsatile tinnitus. Pulsatile tinnitus is commonly caused by vascular-associated abnormalities such as a high-riding jugular bulb, jugular diverticula, atherosclerosis, hypertension, benign intracranial hypertension, or glomus tumors which may or may not coincide with the patient's heartbeat. Non-pulsatile tinnitus can be caused by sensorineural hearing loss, otosclerosis, or acoustic neuromas. Tensor tympani syndrome, also known as the tensor tympani myoclonus) is a rare form of pulsatile, objective tinnitus, which includes various types of tensor tympani-associated tinnitus caused by contraction of the tensor tympani (TT) muscle. The TT muscle is a striated muscle innervated by the mandibular branch of the trigeminal nerve (CN V). The TT attaches from parts of the greater wing of the sphenoid with connections to the bony and cartilaginous Eustachian tube and inserts onto the malleus head in the middle ear after passing through the cochleariform process. During contraction, it functions to open the Eustachian tube, as well as pull the malleus medially, which subsequently stiffens the tympanic membrane and decreases the propagation of sound throughout the ossicular chain. The TT muscle, tensor veli palatini, and muscles of mastication are all innervated by the CN V. It is hypothesized that due to their analogous innervation, the TT muscle functions to decrease the intensity of sound during chewing and swallowing. TT syndrome (or TT myoclonus) is a type of middle ear myoclonus (MEM). Myoclonus is the rhythmic contraction of the muscle. The contraction of the stapedius muscle causes another form of MEM. The stapedius muscle normally functions to contract the stapes of the oval window to decrease the propagation of high-intensity sound. Both TT and stapedius muscles are involved in the acoustic reflex, which is the involuntary contraction of these muscles following high-intensity sounds and is suspected of protecting the inner ear cells from damage.