Kayser–Fleischer rings are a sign of Wilson disease. They are not specific to Wilson disease alone. Kayser–Fleischer rings rarely are seen in other chronic cholestatic disorders such as primary biliary cholangitis and children with neonatal cholestasis. Wilson disease is usually managed by an interprofessional team that includes an ophthalmologist, neurologist, gastroenterologist, and hepatologist. The outpatient management is by the nurse practitioner and primary care provider.

As per the American Association for Study of Liver Disease guidelines, the presence of Kayser–Fleischer rings, low serum ceruloplasmin concentration (less than 20 mg/dL), and elevated basal 24-hour urinary excretion of copper are sufficient to establish a diagnosis of Wilson disease. If Kayser–Fleischer rings are present but the serum ceruloplasmin is above 20 mg/dL, a liver biopsy is needed to make a diagnosis of Wilson disease. In the absence of Kayser–Fleischer rings, a liver biopsy with hepatic copper quantification is mandatory to confirm the diagnosis of Wilson disease. Normal urinary excretion of copper is less than 40 micrograms in 24 hours. Most patients with Wilson disease have urinary copper excretion higher than 100 micrograms in 24 hours, and the copper excretion often exceeds 1000 micrograms per 24 hours in those with fulminant hepatic failure. A hepatic copper concentration of more than 250 micrograms per gram of dry weight, accompanied by low serum ceruloplasmin and elevated basal 24-hour urinary excretion of copper establishes the diagnosis of Wilson disease. In cases where the hepatic copper content is between 50 and 250 micrograms per gram of dry weight, molecular testing (confirming homozygosity for one mutation or two mutations constituting compound heterozygosity) is required to make a diagnosis of Wilson disease. If the hepatic copper content is less than 50 micrograms per gram of dry weight, a diagnosis of Wilson disease is excluded. An elevated copper concentration alone on liver biopsy does not make a diagnosis of Wilson disease. Hepatic copper concentration may be elevated in other chronic cholestatic disorders and non-Wilsonian hepatic copper overload conditions such as Indian childhood cirrhosis, Tyrolean infantile cirrhosis, and idiopathic copper toxicosis.