Alpha-1 agonists are used in the critical care setting to increase systemic vascular resistance are considered high alert drugs and can be very dangerous if used or dosed incorrectly. Clear and concise communication is necessary between the nurse, pharmacist, and ordering practitioner (physician, nurse, or physician assistant) in these instances to prevent mistakes that can cause morbidity and mortality. Very close continuous monitoring is also necessary for patients receiving these drugs, and many facilities assign these patients a one-to-one nurse staffing. Many local anesthetics are co-formulated with epinephrine as a hemostatic agent, and when injected subcutaneously, this can cause skin necrosis. Special care between physicians, pharmacists, and nurses is necessary to identify the local agents containing epinephrine clearly to prevent unnecessary complications. Many alpha-1 and alpha-2 drugs are used clinically in the emergency department, so clinical staff must be very thorough in medical and social history before ordering these medications.  In patients that are in skilled nursing facilities that are likely fall risks, if given an alpha-1 blocker or alpha-2 agonist, it should be communicated that they should have close monitoring by nursing staff, as well as fall precautions including a bed alarm, bed rails, and a fall mat, due to the risk of orthostatic hypotension. Drugs that affect alpha-receptors, both antagonists and agonists, require an interprofessional team approach to include clinicians, specialists, nurses, and pharmacists, all working as a collaborative interprofessional team, to direct therapy optimally and derive successful results for patients. [Level V]