The etiology of gallstone ileus results from adhesions forming between an inflamed gallbladder and an adjacent GI tract followed by gallstones causing pressure necrosis or inflammation between the two tissues. The inflammation or necrosis results in erosion and formation of a cholecyst-enteric fistula. Gallstones can move from the gallbladder to the GI tract through this direct access. Fistulas can form within any part of the GI tract, with approximately 60% occurring in the duodenum due to the proximity. Less commonly, a gallstone may enter the duodenum through the common bile duct, a dilated papilla of Vater, or after an endoscopic sphincterotomy. A fistula between the gallbladder can also occur with the stomach, transverse colon, and distal small bowel. The pathology may be part of the natural course of Mirizzi syndrome.

Spillage of gallstones during laparoscopic cholecystectomy may also result in an intraabdominal abscess that can ulcerate the intestinal wall and lead to an entryway into the bowel lumen. The site of fistula formation, size of gallstone, and size of bowel lumen will determine the location of impaction. Gallstones most commonly impact at the terminal ileum and ileocecal valve due to their narrow lumen and potentially less active peristalsis. The majority of gallstones smaller than 2 cm may pass spontaneously while those larger are more likely to become impacted. The presence of diverticula, strictures, or neoplasms can also serve as impaction sites.

When gallstone impaction occurs, there is pressure generated on the bowel walls, with proximal distension. Eventually, necrosis and even perforation can occur.