The diagnosis of urosepsis requires both suspicion of sepsis as well as evidence of a UTI. SIRS (systemic inflammatory response syndrome) signs and symptoms are indicators of sepsis but are no longer required for the formal diagnosis. This includes abnormalities in body temperature (warm skin), heart rate (bounding pulses, tachycardia), respiratory rate, and white blood cell count (elevation or depression). In more severe forms, sepsis is diagnosed when there is evidence of organ dysfunction, including but not limited to kidney dysfunction evidenced by decreased urine output, encephalopathy with an abrupt change in mental status, or a low platelet count. The diagnosis of a complicated UTI in the setting of SIRS includes signs and symptoms (dysuria, flank pain), physical exam findings (costovertebral angle tenderness, evidence of urinary retention), radiologic features, and laboratory results showing bacteriuria and leucocyturia.

If urosepsis is suspected, the laboratory workup should include a urinalysis with a urine culture. Providers should also order a complete blood cell count, a comprehensive metabolic panel, blood cultures, and a lactate level to look for evidence of end-organ dysfunction. Post-renal obstruction is one of the most common causes of urosepsis. Ultrasound can identify 93% of common contributing causes of urosepsis, such as hydronephrosis or prostate abscess. However, the dependence on an experienced ultrasonographer and their availability often limit the utilization of ultrasound for such patients. Computed tomography (CT) imaging is rapidly available at all hours and is easily reproducible without a need for technologist expertise. This often makes CT scan the diagnostic modality of choice when urosepsis is suspected. It can also identify subtle radiographic findings not easily visualized with ultrasound.