To evaluate bronchospasm, a healthcare provider will work-up the suspected etiology.

Pediatric asthma is often diagnosed clinically based on the presentation of symptoms consistent with airway constriction and inflammation in response to an environmental trigger. By six years of age, children typically have the cognitive and physical ability to participate in spirometry, a test to measure airflow obstruction and aid in the diagnosis of asthma. It is helpful to perform this testing in a healthy state in order to solidify a baseline. Annual follow-up spirometry may be performed to assess if one’s asthma is controlled and if treatment regimens need adjustment. During an acute exacerbation of asthma, the patient is assessed clinically and a treatment plan is generated based on the history and physical. If a child with status asthmaticus, the most severe form of an asthma exacerbation, is deteriorating from a respiratory perspective or has altered mental status, one may consider performing an arterial blood gas to evaluate the patient’s gas exchange. A chest radiograph may be to evaluate for pneumothorax, atelectasis, and pneumonia.

Acute viral bronchiolitis is a clinical diagnosis based on a child’s history and physical exam findings. Laboratory and imaging studies are not routinely required. However, if there is not a consistent history of a viral prodrome, it is outside the typical season (winter), the patient’s clinical exam is not entirely consistent with bronchiolitis, and/or the child has increased risk factors for severe disease, laboratory studies as well as chest radiographs may need to be considered in the work-up.

Anaphylaxis recognition can be challenging due to the various organ systems that can be involved. It is a clinical diagnosis based on diagnostic criteria that have been developed. Anaphylaxis is highly likely if one of the following criteria are fulfilled: 1) acute onset of skin/mucous membrane involvement, plus either respiratory compromise or shock; 2) after an exposure to a likely allergen, two or more of these symptoms: skin/mucous membrane involvement, respiratory compromise, hypotension, or gastrointestinal dysfunction; and 3) hypotension after exposure to a known allergen for that patient.

If foreign body aspiration is suspected in older children, inspiration and expiration anteroposterior chest radiographs can be performed. On the expiration film, the laterality of the airway obstruction from the foreign body is determined by the exhibition of unilateral air trapping. Infants and toddlers are unable to follow directions for such imaging. In this population, lateral decubitus films are performed bilaterally. The side with the foreign body is determined by the lung that will not deflate due to its obstruction when it is put in the dependent position.