In discussing the history and physical exam findings of antepartum infections, it is important to delineate between the findings in primary (in this case, maternal) infection and congenital infection. It is likewise important to note that the manifestations of congenital infection may not be present immediately following birth. Several findings are common to many congenital infections. These include hepatomegaly, splenomegaly, thrombocytopenia, and a violaceous macular or papular rash, commonly called a "blueberry muffin rash" that results from extramedullary hematopoiesis.

Maternal primary toxoplasmosis is asymptomatic; approximately 70 to 90% of congenitally-infected infants are likewise asymptomatic at birth.

Congenital rubella syndrome (CRS) can include deafness, cardiac defects, and a variety of ophthalmic and ocular findings, including microphthalmia, cataracts, and glaucoma.

Other manifestations include ascites, hepatosplenomegaly, hydrops, pericardial effusion, and placental enlargement.

Tertiary syphilis can manifest with cardiovascular complications such as aortitis and neurological abnormalities like tabes dorsalis or paresis.

Maternal infection with parvovirus can be asymptomatic or may present with a distinctive "slapped cheeks" rash preceded by a flu-like illness of fever, malaise, arthralgias, and myalgias.

Acute primary HCV infection presents similarly to HBV above. Most cases of congenital infection are asymptomatic, but, in contrast to congenital HBV infection, the majority of cases of congenital HCV result in chronic infection.

Vertical transmission has been documented but is rare.