High suspicion for globe injury exists in any patient reporting direct eye trauma, continuing eye pain, and vision deficit. The mechanism of the injury should be elicited and the time it occurred. It is also essential to inquire about any anticoagulant use. In globe rupture, physical examination findings may reveal decreased vision or frank vision loss, the irregular contour of the globe, teardrop pupil, hyphema, or a shallow anterior chamber on the slit-lamp exam. The Seidel sign is positive in globe rupture, indicating the flow of aqueous humor from the injury site in the fluorescein-stained eye. However, if the globe rupture is apparent, Seidel's test should be avoided. The clinical presentation of retrobulbar hematoma is classical with proptosis and severe eye pain. As in globe rupture, vision loss may be reported.

There may be associated periorbital swelling, ecchymosis, or subconjunctival hemorrhage in either of these entities, depending on the mechanism of the injury. Typical symptoms of globe rupture include eye deformity, eye pain, and vision loss, though the deformation may not be readily apparent on the exam, depending on the clinical suggestion. Similarly, a retrobulbar hematoma may present with eye pain and vision loss, but proptosis helps clinch this diagnosis. Both are vision-threatening diagnoses and require emergency ophthalmologic consultation for definitive measures.

**Manifestations**

**Anterior Segment Manifestations**

**Conjunctiva**

- Subconjunctival hemorrhage

- Conjunctival congestion

- Foreign body of conjunctiva

- Conjunctival tear

**Cornea**

- **Epithelial damage**- There can be abrasion, punctate epithelial erosions, epithelial defect, foreign body due to breach in the epithelium and revealed brilliantly on fluorescein staining. If the damage involves the pupillary axis, the vision is grossly impaired.

- **Corneal edema -**There can be corneal edema due to endothelial injury or extensive damage due to abrasion. Corneal edema usually is associated with stromal edema, and Descemet membrane (D.M.) folds.

- **Descemet membrane tear**- D.M. tears are vertical tears noticed after birth trauma. Recurrent corneal erosions.

- **Recurrent corneal erosions (recurrent keractalgia) -**Usually result from fingernail injury. The patients will present as pain, redness, watering, and photophobia due to loose attachment of epithelium to the underlying Bowman's membrane.

- **Corneal tear (Partial or lamellar or full-thickness tear) -**There can be self-sealed tears or total thickness tears best detected with Seidel's test.

- **Blood staining of endothelium**- This may be secondary to hyphema or raised IOP and may take as long as two years to clear. The blood staining of endothelium clears from periphery to center.

- **Corneal scar**- May be seen after a long duration post-trauma, usually after 2-3 months.

- **Corneal infiltrate -**Blunt trauma can also result in a corneal ulcer.

**Sclera**

Can have a partial thickness or full thickness tear with or without vitreous prolapse. There can also be occult posterior tears. Sometimes the foreign body can be lodged in the sclera. The sclera is thinnest at the equator; hence occult posterior equatorial injuries are common. The direction of trauma also determines the site of the tear. e.g., the sclera usually gives way at the site of old manual small incision cataracts surgery incision in case of inferior blunt trauma.

**Anterior Chamber Hyphema**

- **Anterior chamber hyphema**- can also result from a blunt trauma from the iris root or ciliary body. The blood settles down at the bottom of the chamber with a particular fluid level. Hyphema can result in raised IOP and manifest as optic neuropathy and corneal endothelial staining.

**Hyphema Grading**

**S. No**

**Grade**

**Anterior chamber volume**

1

Microhyphema

Circulating red blood cells

2

I

Less than 33% of anterior chamber volume

3

II

33-50% of anterior chamber volume

4

III

More than 50% of anterior chamber volume

5

IV

Total anterior chamber hyphema (Eightball hyphema)

- **Anterior chamber exudates and fibrinous membrane -**can also be seen due to traumatic uveitis. Traumatic glaucoma or angle recession glaucoma can be detected on gonioscopy post blunt trauma. Angle recession is the separation of longitudinal muscle fibers from circular muscle fibers of the ciliary body, resulting in widened ciliary body band and deep anterior chamber.

**Iris**

- **Iridodialysis**- It is the separation of the iris root from the ciliary body. It is described as D-shaped with a biconvex area adjacent to the limbus best visible on retro illumination. The upper lid masks superior iridodialysis, but iridodialysis in other quadrants caused glare, photophobia, and monocular diplopia. Very rarely, blunt trauma can result in 360-degree iridodialysis with extrusion of the iris through cataract surgery tunnel resulting in aniridia.

- **Iris stromal tears -**Tears in the iris stromal tissue

**Pupil**

- **Traumatic mydriasis (iridoplegia) -**Iridoplegia is due to spasms of the sphincter muscle

- **Traumatic miosis -**It occurs due to the irritation of ciliary muscles and loss of accommodation

- **Pupillary margin rupture -**multiple sphincter tears at the pupillary margin

**Ciliary Body**

- **Ciliary body detachment**- result in ciliary body shutdown and hypotony.

**Lens**

- **Cataract -**Traumatic cataracts can result from blunt trauma due to direct damage to the lens and ruptures in the lens capsule leading to an aqueous humour inflow, lenticular fiber hydration, and opacification of lens fibers.

- **Vossius ring -**Ring-shaped impression of the pupillary margin over the anterior lens capsule due to blunt trauma. The ring is usually smaller than the pupillary diameter.

- **Rosette cataract -**Blunt trauma can manifest as opacification of posterior subcapsular cortex and sutures, resulting in a flower-shaped cataract.

- **Subluxation -**Subluxation can result from zonular dialysis or damage to suspensory ligaments. The lens may tilt towards the area of intact zonules. The anterior chamber becomes deep, and the lens may tilt or rotate posteriorly. The lenticular edges and zonules can be seen during dilatation, and there may be iridodonesis and phacodonesis with blinking and ocular movements. If there is gross subluxation, it may result in diplopia and astigmatism from the aphakic portion of the lens.

- **Dislocation -**When the zonular fibers are damaged completely, they may dislodge the lens in the anterior chamber or the vitreous cavity.

**Globe Rupture**

Globe rupture can also result after severe blunt trauma. If the visual acuity at presentation is light perception, the prognosis is usually poor. Globe rupture usually occurs adjacent to the angle structures, with prolapse of iris, lens, ciliary body, and vitreous. Anterior globe rupture can be hidden by subconjunctival hemorrhage, and rupture at the site of the old surgical wound like cataract and keratoplasty may result from severe blunt trauma. An occult posterior rupture can be present when the anterior chamber depth is variable. The rupture can be the site of recti muscle insertion, where the scleral is the thinnest.

**Posterior Segment Manifestations**

**Optic Nerve**

- **Optic nerve avulsion -**It is a rare manifestation when a foreign body or object gets impacted between the globe and orbital wall, thus displacing the eye. The mechanism implicated is the rotation or anterior movement of the globe. It can occur as isolated or in association with other orbital trauma. Fundoscopy shows retraction of the optic nerve head from the dural sheath. The visual prognosis is poor in most cases, and there is no treatment.

- **Traumatic optic neuropathy -**Traumatic optic neuropathy can also result from blunt head or orbital trauma. The patient usually presents with sudden vision loss, and there is RAPD with color vision defect.

**Vitreous**

- **Vitreous hemorrhage -**It can be seen in association with posterior vitreous detachment. Pigmentary cells floating in the vitreous, also called tobacco dust, can be noticed. The tobacco dusting may or may not be associated with a retinal tear.

- **Vitreous detachment**- It can be anterior or posterior

- **Vitreous opacities**- Liquefaction of vitreous can occur, and clouds of opacities can be present.

- **Vitreous prolapse**- Can occur in an anterior chamber associated with subluxated or dislocated cataracts.

**Choroid**

- **Choroidal rupture -**Usually temporal to the optic disc and its circular shape. It can be associated with pigmentation at the margins.

- **Choroidal hemorrhage -**Can be seen under the retina, or the blood may enter the vitreous in case of retinal tear.

- **Choroidal detachment -**Kissing choroidals are also observable in cases of blunt trauma.

- **Traumatic choroiditis -**Patches of depigmentation and discoloration can be seen.

**Retina**

- **Berlin's Edema (Commotio Retinae) -**It usually presents as a cherry spot at the fovea and results in milky white cloudiness at the posterior pole. Usually, berlin's edema resolves on its own and, in some cases, may manifest as pigmentary changes at the fovea.

- **Retinal tear -**It occurs in eyes predisposed to retinal tears like myopia, white without pressure, or senile degeneration after blunt trauma.

- **Retinal detachment**- It may manifest after blunt trauma in the eyes with retinal tears or vitreoretinal traction. Approximately 10% of retinal detachments are secondary to blunt ocular trauma and are more common in young boys. There can be retinal dialysis, giant retinal tear, or equatorial breaks.

- **Traumatic Proliferative Retinopathy -**It occurs in cases with vitreous hemorrhage.

- **Retinal hemorrhage**- There can be flame-shaped or boat-shaped. Flame-shaped hemorrhage occurs in cases with blunt trauma.

******Macula**

- **Macular edema -**due to concussion injury after blunt trauma

- **Pigmentary degeneration -**Pigmentary degeneration is usually observed in long-standing cases after blunt eye trauma

- **Macular hole -**Traumatic macular can be seen after blunt eye trauma

- **Macular cyst -**Traumatic macular cyst can be also be observed after blunt trauma

- **Macular scar -**Macular scar can also be seen after blunt eye trauma