Of all the valves in the heart, the tricuspid valve (TV) is the largest and most apically placed between the right atrium (RA) and the right ventricle (RV). It consists of three leaflets, namely septal, anterior and posterior, and has a normal valve area of 7-9 cm2.

The anterior (or attitudinally anterosuperior) leaflet is the largest of the three leaflets with the greatest motion. Septal leafet is the least mobile and attached to the septum less than 10 mm apically from the septal insertion of the anterior mitral leaflet, a distinguishing feature helpful in diagnosing Ebstein anomaly when it is tethered to the right ventricular wall giving it an echocardiographic appearance of greater than 10 mm apical attachment and causing atrialization of the RV with severe TR. The posterior (or attitudinally inferior) leaflet is the shortest circumferentially. The coaptation point of the leaflets is at or below the level of the annulus. The coaptation length is 5 to 10 mm, allowing more valve area available in case of annular dilatation before failure to coapt.

Usually, there are two papillary muscles, anterior and posterior, with a third septal papillary muscle, which is variable. Anterior papillary muscle is the largest, and attached chordae support the anterior and posterior leaflets. This papillary muscle sometimes joined by the moderator band. The posterior papillary muscle can be bifid or trifid, and the attached chordae support posterior and septal leaflets. The tricuspid annulus is a dynamic structure and D shaped, with a larger semicircular C-shaped segment correlating with the RV free wall and a shorter and straighter segment correlated to the septum.

**Pathophysiology of Tricuspid Regurgitation (TR)**

The two main types of tricuspid regurgitation (TR) are primary and secondary (functional). The most common etiology of TR is secondary (functional), and its incidence is approximately 90% among patients with TR. Primary TR is less common and caused by anatomical involvement of TV structures and usually due to a congenital or acquired etiology affecting leaflets or chordae. In secondary (functional) TR, leaflets and chords are normal, and TR occurs due to atrial and ventricular dilatation, annular dilation, and chordal tethering. The most common causes of secondary TR are left-sided valvular or myocardial pathologies and pulmonary hypertension.

Following are the causes of tricuspid regurgitation:

**Primary TR**

**A. Congenital**

- Ebstein anomaly

- TV hypoplasia, clefts

- Double orifice valve

**B. Acquired**

- Prolapse or flail of TV leaflets due to myxomatous degeneration

- Carcinoid syndrome

- TV endocarditis

- Pacemaker and ICD related

- Rheumatic disease

- Traumatic injury to the valve structures (chest trauma or iatrogenic with right-sided intracardiac procedures)

**Secondary TR**

- Left-sided valvular heart diseases (mitral valve stenosis/regurgitation)

- Left ventricular dysfunction

- Primary or secondary pulmonary hypertension

- Right atrial enlargement (in atrial fibrillation)

- Right ventricular dysfunction and dilatation (remodeling after right ventricular infarct)

- Tricuspid annular dilatation