The anal sphincter complex is comprised of the internal and external anal sphincters. The external sphincter is a striated muscle complex encircling the anus and is under voluntary control. The internal sphincter is a circular muscle closer to the interior of the anal canal and is under involuntary control. There are four main types of fistula in ano.

- **Intersphincteric:**The most common is an intersphincteric located between the two muscles with the external opening close to the anus.

- **Trans-sphincteric:**This fistula traverses the external sphincter and is open more lateral and associated with horseshoe type abscesses.

- **Suprasphincteric:**This fistula passes above the puborectalis muscle tracking laterally near the levator ani.

- **Extrasphincteric:**The least common fistula is extrasphincteric, which traverses the ischiorectal fossa and the levator ani then into the rectal wall superior to the dentate line.

Based on the origin of the anorectal fistula development from cryptoglandular abscesses, the internal opening of most fistulas is located at the dentate line. The type of fistula is most commonly diagnosed at an anorectal examination under anesthesia, where anoscopy or flexible sigmoidoscopy can be performed at the time of fistula tract exploration. The decision of which structures the fistula connection incorporates, i.e., internal and external sphincter complex is important as only a small amount of external sphincter muscle that can be cut.Goodsall's rule, which states that if a transverse line is drawn across the anus, a fistulous external opening which is anterior to this line and will be located internally 3 cm of the anal verge, with the fistulas tract radially and directly into the anal canal. However, if the external opening is posterior to this line or outside of the 3 to 4 cm area from the anal verge, then these fistulas tend to arc around to the posterior midline anal gland. These arching fistula tracts are sometimes difficult to completely discern at the first operation, so the tract can be partially unroofed towards to anal verge being careful to avoid the destruction of the external anal sphincter. Although Goodsall's rule has been taught for years, there are some challenges to this rule recently; however, for simple fistulas, it is a good starting point.