Flecainide is available in 50 mg, 100 mg, and 150 mg tablets. Dosing regimens for specific conditions are as follows:

Paroxysmal Atrial Fibrillation/Paroxysmal Supraventricular Tachycardia (per ACC/AHA/HRS guidelines):

- 50 to 300 mg daily by mouth divided into 8 to 12-hour intervals.

- Start with 50 mg orally every 12 hours, then increase 100 mg per day every four days. The maximum dose is 300 mg daily. Dose adjustment is made based on serum levels.

Ventricular Arrhythmia Prophylaxis:

- 100 to 400 mg daily by mouth, divided into 8 or 12-hour intervals.

- Start 100 mg daily every 12 hours, and increase dosing by 100 mg per day every four days. The maximum dose is 400 mg daily. Dose adjustment is made based on serum levels.

No dosage changes are necessary for liver disease, as per the manufacturer. With renal disease and CrCl less than 35ml/min/1.73m^2, caution is necessary when increasing the dose at 4-day intervals.

Consult facility guidelines or manufacturer prescribing data for pediatric dose regimens.

**Pregnancy Considerations**

Using flecainide during pregnancy may pose some risk to the fetus, so clinicians must perform a risk/benefit analysis. Fetal risks include fetal heart rate variability, acceleration impairment, and QT interval abnormalities.

**Breastfeeding Considerations**

Flecainide is present in breast milk; the relative infant dose is 8% when the maternal dosing is 200mg/day. The relative infant dosing is calculated using the highest average breast milk concentration compared to the maternal dosage. Breastfeeding is acceptable as long as relative infant dosing is under 10%.

**Pharmacodynamics and Pharmacokinetics**

Oral bioavailability is nearly 100% but decreases when administered with milk. It is 40% protein-bound, and half-life elimination varies across age groups. In newborns: less than 28 hours, 3 months: 11 to 12 hours, 12 months: 6 hours. In children: 8 hours, adolescents 12 to 15 years: approximately 11 hours, adults: 12 to 24 hours. It takes 1 to 6 hours to peak in serum after administration. Excreted in urine 30% and feces 5%.