**Barriers to Reporting Sexual Harassment in Medicine**

Barriers to reporting sexual harassment include worry of not being believed, shame if peers know, lack of trust in authority, and a belief that these behaviors are necessary to advance.

Despite juridical and organizational reassurances, fear of reprisal and career harm are obstacles exacerbated by the hierarchy in medicine and medical education. Trainees and junior faculty are less likely to report and fear reprisal.

**Employer Liability**

Someone can be the victim or perpetrator of sexual harassment regardless of sexual orientation or gender identity. Victims can include employees, nonemployees, and patients, as well as witnesses or bystanders to the harassment. Nonemployees directly perform services for the employer, such as contractors, consultants, sales representatives, vendors, and delivery people. The victim does not have to be the person harassed but could be anyone affected by the offensive behavior. Unlawful sexual harassment may occur without economic injury to or discharge of the victim.

Employers have the responsibility regarding sexual harassment to (1) prevent the incident, (2) investigate incidents, and (3) correct the incidence in their workplaces. Employers are responsible for sexual harassment when perpetrated by their employees or nonemployees and when patients harass employees or nonemployees. Employers are strictly liable for sexual harassment when managers or supervisors are the perpetrators, regardless of whether the employer was aware of the behavior. On the other hand, employers are liable for sexual harassment when employees or nonemployees are the perpetrators only if the employer knew or reasonably should have known of the harassment and did not take immediate corrective action.

**The Role of Bystanders and Changing Bystanders to Upstanders**

Bystanders witness discrimination or harassment and have the opportunity to condone, intervene, or ignore the behavior.

When bystanders ignore harassing behavior, they appear to be condoning the behavior. By encouraging bystanders to speak up when they witness discriminatory or harassing statements or behavior, an organization can change bystanders into upstanders who help make harassment-free workplaces that are safe and more inclusive. Individuals need to be motivated and educated to provide them with confidence and practical ways to confront and intervene when harassing behavior occurs.

Bystander intervention is when a bystander becomes an upstander when discriminatory or harassing behavior occurs. The bystander effect is the psychological theory that people are less likely to help a victim or intervene when other people are present because there is a diffusion of responsibility and a social influence of other individuals’ choice not to intervene. Therefore, bystander intervention is not the same as the bystander effect.

When bystanders decide to become upstanders, they intervene to mitigate the effects of unwelcome behavior or words. One proactive option for bystander intervention is to use the Right to Be 5 Ds (previously known as Hollabacks! 5 Ds) – Distract, Delegate, Document, Delay, and Direct. [See the Right to Be 5 Ds on righttobe.org] These methods are designed to de-escalate situations and provide a safe environment; 4 are indirect intervention methods and do not require confrontation.

**The Right to Be 5 Ds**

**1. Distract:**Indirectly diffuse the situation by interrupting the harasser and the victim. Distraction is an excellent option for those who are somewhat uncomfortable with confrontation or when the upstander thinks the harasser may escalate behavior if confronted. Examples of distraction include the following:

- Ask the harasser for information such as the time, directions, upcoming meeting details, or any random information intended to redirect the harasser from continuing to target the victim.

- Move between the harasser and the victim while continuing to do what you were doing. Use your presence to separate them.

- Cause a commotion to shift attention, such as spilling coffee, dropping files, or pretending to have lost your phone and need help locating it.

**2. Delegate:**Ask someone for help with intervening in harassment. Look for someone close in proximity and willing to help. Supervisors or leaders are ideal delegates. Communicate what is happening and how you’d like their assistance. Examples of what the upstander could do:

- Ask the delegate to stand between the two individuals and distract the harasser, so the upstander can ask if the one potentially being harassed is okay.

- Work with another bystander to team up and intervene.

**3. Document:**Record or take notes of the harassment if someone is already helping the targeted person and if your safety is ensured. Always ask the person who was harassed if they want your recording or notes, and don’t use them without their permission, especially posting online.

**4. Delay:**Check in with the person targeted with discriminatory or harassing behavior after the incident. Often harassment happens quickly, and there isn’t time to intervene, but the upstander can speak to the person targeted after the incident and offer support and assistance. Examples of practical assistance include the following:

- Tell them you saw what happened, reinforce that the behavior was wrong, and ask how they feel about the incident.

- Ask them what they think is the best way to support them and offer to be present with them for a while.

- Offer to help them report the behavior and ask if they want the documentation you have of the incident.

**5. Direct:**If everyone is physically safe and you don’t think the situation will escalate, respond directly and speak against the harassment or discrimination in short, succinct language. Avoid debating or arguing with the harasser. If the harasser responds and tries to debate, focus on the one harmed and do not engage with the harasser. Prioritize safety and do not put yourself or others in harm’s way.

If you choose direct intervention, some examples of what you could say are as follows:

- “Please stop now” or “leave her alone.”

- “She’s asked you to leave her alone, and I’m going to support her.”

- “That’s inappropriate,” or substitute “inappropriate with “disrespectful,” “gender discrimination,” “harassment,” “homophobic,” or other appropriate terminology.

Within institutions, studies have shed light on key elements to encourage bystanders to become upstanders. Leaders need to be prepared to be upstanders, as individuals first look to leadership to intervene or address the behavior. Creating a work culture based on respect, listening with checks for understanding, and modeling appropriate behavior encourages bystander-to-upstander action.

Clinicians play a crucial role because they interact with staff and patients and may be present when sexual harassment occurs. Bystanders must know that they can become upstanders and have the power to interrupt harassment and provide support to targets of sexual harassment, even if they feel unable to confront a harasser directly.

The behavioral options for bystanders in a low-immediacy situation are to provide support and advise the target to report the behavior. The bystander could directly confront the harasser afterward and later serve as a proxy reporter. In high-immediacy situations, the bystander can interrupt the behavior, remove the target from the immediate situation, and encourages the target to report the behavior.

**Organizational Culture - Most Potent Predictor**

Research suggests that organizational culture is the most potent predictor of sexual harassment, and leaders can change corporate culture. The degree to which those in the organization perceive the behavior to be tolerated or not tolerated impacts the prevalence of the behavior. Concrete steps to reduce sexual harassment within the entire organization to ensure that workers interact safely in a harmonious work environment are necessary to change the behavior.

The highest management level must lead the charge to create a workplace culture where harassment is not tolerated, and practical prevention efforts are in place. Beyond a commitment to an inclusive and respectful workplace, accountability systems must ensure that harassers are held responsible in appropriate ways. Those who prevent or respond to harassment should be rewarded, and those who fail to respond should be held accountable for the failure. Effective leadership ensures that the appropriate time and resources are spent on harassment prevention.

Men overwhelmingly occupy leadership positions such as department chairs, search committee leads, deans, and chief executive officers of hospitals and physician-hospital organizations, even though women outnumber men in those workplaces.

Although individual behavioral changes can yield meaningful results, wholesale cultural transformation is key to preventing sexual harassment. The employer should design a culture based on mutual respect, inclusion, and dignity. Improving transparency and accountability, clearly communicating a code of conduct that forbids unacceptable behavior, outlining punitive repercussions, and promoting a zero-tolerance attitude help define an anti-harassment culture.

**Archetypes of Leaders Who Inadequately Respond to Sexual Harassment in Medical Education**

There are five types of leaders who do not respond adequately to sexual harassment in medical education: avoiders, authoritarians, dismissers, ineffective supporters, and enablers.

**Business Case for Prevention**

A compelling business case for preventing harassment exists. Between 2018 and 2021, the EEOC recovered nearly $300 million for individuals who filed harassment claims. Victims of sexual harassment in the workplace experience mental, physical, and economic harm. All workers are affected when productivity decreases, turnover increases, and the organization's reputation is harmed.[See EEOC Sexual Harassment in our Nation's Workplaces] Several investigations identified job-related outcomes, such as decreased job satisfaction, absenteeism, organizational commitment, requests for transfers, decreased productivity, and increased work withdrawal. Sexual harassment can influence career trajectories and result in judiciary and economic expenses that negatively impact the finances and reputation of the organization and the industry in general.