Damage to nerves that supply the forearm could originate anywhere along the brachial plexus. Damage to the brachial plexus, known as brachial plexopathy, can result from trauma, inflammation, tumor, radiation, or bleeding.

Cubital tunnel syndrome results from compression and damage to the ulnar nerve at the cubital tunnel. The cubital tunnel is the space on the dorsal medial aspect of the elbow. This syndrome causes tingling down the ulnar aspect of the forearm and into the 5th finger and ulnar half of the 4th finger. Nearly half of patients with cubital tunnel syndrome will show improvement with conservative management.

Compartment syndrome is another noteworthy surgical consideration that could have detrimental effects on the function of the forearm. This syndrome occurs when swelling in a particular area compresses the vessels and nerves in the same region. The most common etiology of compartment syndrome in the forearm is fractures of the forearm bones. Signs and symptoms of this condition are remembered by the five P's: pain out of proportion to exam, pallor, paresthesias, pulselessness, and paralysis. A change in pressure from diastolic and compartment pressures that is less than 30 mmHg indicates compartment syndrome.

Understanding the innervation of the muscles of the forearm and the action of the forearm muscles is important clinically. When there is a lesion to a nerve, the normal function of the muscles that specific nerve innervates will be abnormal. This abnormality is deducible through proper history and physical exam, which allows the physician to provide treatment effectively.