HIPAA Privacy and Security Rules have substantially changed the way medical institutions and health providers function. The complex legalities and severe civil and financial penalties, as well as the increase in paperwork and implementation costs, have substantially impacted health care. All health professionals must be trained in HIPAA and have an understanding of the potential pitfalls and acts that can lead to a violation.

**Clinical Care Effects**

HIPAA, combined with stiff penalties for violation, may result in medical centers and practices withholding life-saving information from those who may have a right to it and need it at a crucial moment. Through the HIPAA Privacy Rule, the US Government Accountability Office found that health care providers were "uncertain about their legal privacy responsibilities and often responded with an overly guarded approach to disclosing information. Ultimately, the solution is the education of all healthcare professionals and their support staff so that they have a full appreciation of when protected health information can be legally released.

**Education and Training Effects**

Education and training of healthcare providers and students are needed to implement HIPAA Privacy and Security Acts. Effective training and education must describe the regulatory background and purpose of HIPAA and provide a review of the principles and key provisions of the Privacy Rule.

**Research Effects**

HIPAA restrictions on research have affected the ability to perform chart-based retrospective research. This has made it challenging to evaluate patients prospectively for follow-up.

- HIPAA Privacy rules have resulted in as much as a 95% drop in follow-up surveys completed by patients being followed long-term.

- Recruitment of patients for cancer studies has led to a more than 70% decrease in patient accrual and a tripling of time spent recruiting patients and mean recruitment costs.

- Significant legal language required for research studies is now extensive due to the need to protect participants' health information. While such information is important, a lengthy legalistic section may make these complex documents less user-friendly for those who are asked to read and sign them.

Many researchers believe that the HIPAA privacy laws have a negative impact on the cost and quality of medical research.

**Costs**

HIPAA Privacy and Security Acts require all medical centers and medical practices to get into and stay in compliance. The costs of developing and revamping systems and practices and an increase in paperwork and staff education time have impacted the finances of medical centers and practices at a time when insurance companies and Medicare reimbursements have decreased. Ultimately, the cost of violating the statutes is so substantial, that scarce resources must be devoted to making sure an institution is compliant, and its employees understand the statutory rules.

**Conclusions**

HIPAA is a potential minefield of violations that almost any medical professional can commit. Staff with less education and understanding can easily violate these rules during the normal course of work. While a small percentage of criminal violations involve personal gain or nosy behavior, most violations are momentary lapses that result in costly mistakes. Writing an incorrect address, phone number, email, or text on a form or expressing protected information aloud can jeopardize a practice. HIPAA education and training is crucial, as well as designing and maintaining systems that minimize human mistakes.