**Cilium Incarnatum Internum**

Most patients with cilium incarnatum internum will present with a history of a foreign body sensation. The onset is usually sudden and often only a few days old. Some patients will observe that the eye is more uncomfortable in a particular gaze, depending upon the site of the lash protruding through the tarsal conjunctiva. Examination of the eye may reveal punctate keratopathy with conjunctival inflammation, which may be mistaken for episcleritis, and the patient may have photophobia because of the keratitis. Unless the physician examines the eyelid margin and the everted eyelid margin carefully with the biomicroscope, these lashes may be missed. Sometimes, just a dark spot showing the tip of the lash protruding through the tarsal conjunctiva may be visible.

Any patient presenting with either keratitis, unilateral conjunctivitis, conjunctival injection, photophobia, or episcleritis should be examined on the slit lamp to exclude trichiasis, foreign bodies, and cilium incarnatum internum.

**Cilium Incarnatum Externum**

These are usually asymptomatic, although some patients may present with a complaint of a bump, indicating the elevation around the buried eyelash. Sometimes, a patient may complain of a sharp discomfort on rubbing his eyelid, especially if the tip of the hair comes through the skin, which is usually not the case. There is usually no evidence of inflammation, ulceration, or bleeding. The lash can usually be identified coursing under the eyelid skin (see photograph).