The femoral triangle is an important location for many reasons: it provides palpable access to the vital femoral artery, is a common location for quick vascular access, and can be used to locate many important structures for interventions. Radiologic interventions such as coronary and peripheral angioplasty, interventional embolization, and many other interventional endovascular procedures obtain catheterization through the femoral artery or vein to gain access to the many significant vessels of the body.

The large diameter of the vessels within the femoral triangle allows the introduction of larger catheters. Venipuncture of the femoral vein in the femoral triangle can be used for venous access when peripheral veins cannot be accessed. The femoral triangle can be easily visualized with ultrasound, and many of the procedures that require access to the femoral vessels can be initiated under ultrasound guidance. The area of the femoral triangle and its roof contain both deep and superficial inguinal lymph nodes; this area can be a target for lymphadenectomy in the staging of cancer involving the inguinal lymphatic drainage.

**Lériche Syndrome**

Lériche syndrome is a triad of erectile dysfunction, claudication, and diminished distal arterial pulses.

The ankle-brachial index is a useful and non-invasive technique to assist in determining the presence of peripheral arterial disease, which is one of the underlying factors in Lériche syndrome. This technique involves measuring the blood pressure at the ankle and then at the antecubital fossa. A low number is an indicator of peripheral arterial disease. This result points toward a diagnosis of Lériche syndrome. The diagnosis can be confirmed using Doppler ultrasonography, computer tomographic angiography, and aortic angiography.

The differential diagnosis of Lériche syndrome includes aortic occlusion, neuropathy, aortic dissection, spinal cord stenosis, Guillain-Barré syndrome, and spinal disc herniation.

Treatment of Lériche Syndrome can involve aortoiliac endarterectomy, aortofemoral bypass grafting, and endovascular bypass.

**Erectile Dysfunction**

Fifty years ago, erectile dysfunction was considered primarily a psychological problem.

Although erectile dysfunction can have severe psychological effects, it is not fatal per se. However, the subset of the population of patients with erectile dysfunction that have Lériche syndrome will succumb unless treatment is instituted. Thus prompt diagnosis and treatment of Lériche syndrome are essential to avoid disastrous future outcomes.