Patient presentations vary widely based on the respective underlying subtype; however, certain features of this condition are essential for the practitioner to identify and appropriately investigate to aid in diagnosis and progression of care. The biochemical collagen pathology is present at birth; however, clinical manifestations become apparent later. Skin hyperextensibility and hyperflexible joints are two of the most common presenting signs of EDS.

Cutaneous manifestations are the hallmark of Ehlers-Danlos syndrome. The most common ones are hyperextensibility, smooth and velvet-like texture, fragility, delayed wound healing, and thin atrophic scars after wound healing.

Mental development is generally normal.

Dental pathologies are commonly observed in these patients, such as hypodontia of permanent teeth, delayed eruption, and dentin dysplasia.

Common musculoskeletal manifestations include hypermobility leading to repeated subluxation and dislocation, leading to early osteoarthritis and chronic pain. This hypermobility may manifest as early as peripartum with hip dislocations in the newly delivered infant. Recurrent fractures may also be present.

Other tissues are susceptible to friability due to underlying collagen dysfunction, including hollow and solid internal organs. They can be subject to both spontaneous and traumatic rupture or perforation. Additionally, hernias and rectal prolapse are common features.

**Physical Examination**

The skin is usually white in color and soft to the touch, and underlying vessels can become apparent. The skin has a doughy feel and is easily hyperextensible. It is easily stretchable and immediately returns to its original state after release. Molluscoid pseudotumors are small, spongy outgrowths observed over scars and pressure points. They are commonly found in patients with type I EDS.

Smaller, deep, and movable nodules are often palpable in the subcutaneous tissue. They can be observed in the arms and over the tibia. Radiography may reveal calcification. The fragility of dermal skin with frequent bruises and lacerations is common. The joints are hyperextensible, but the degree of involvement varies. The digital joints are most commonly influenced, but alterations can be present in all the joints.