As discussed previously, various inflammatory conditions may cause or contribute to SI joint pain. If an inflammatory condition is suspected, consider ordering complete blood cell count, erythrocyte sedimentation rate, C-reactive protein, antinuclear antibody, human leukocyte antigen (HLA-B27), and rheumatoid factor. Although cancer is a far less common cause of sacroiliitis, if a cancerous process is suspected, consider ordering labs to assess for malignancy.

In most clinical evaluations, common laboratory findings in the aseptic setting include:

- WBC count - usually normal (elevated in infection/septic presentation)

- ESR - elevated

- CRP - elevated

- HLA-B27 - About 50% to 92%% of patients with ankylosing spondylitis will be HLA-B27 positive

- Rheumatoid Factor (RF) - Negative in the setting of true ankylosing spondylitis

If trauma or inflammatory causes are not suspected, then radiographs are typically not needed, as there is usually no correlation between pain and radiographic images. If radiographs are performed an anteroposterior view of the pelvis/lumbar spine should be ordered. These images can show sclerosis or other degenerative changes of the SI joint. Specific sacroiliac views also can be taken at a 25 to 30-degree angle to help delineate widening or sclerotic changes at joint margins. CT scan also can show sclerotic changes and reveal reactive spurring or subluxation. The previously noted imaging findings are usually later changes. MRI may show subchondral edema, which is the earliest sign of sacroiliitis. PET scans can be ordered to evaluate for bony metastatic disease.

The most informative test for the diagnosis of sacroiliitis is SI joint injection with local anesthetics and steroids. If this procedure relieves the pain, it is likely that the inflammation at this site was the cause of the pain. Potentially, a single injection or series of injections can completely treat the pain. If the injection provided a very significant amount of pain relief, even if for a short period, then the chronic pain can likely be attributed to the SI joint. In such cases, a surgical intervention should be considered as the injections were able to localize the pain to the SI joint(s). No more than three injections should occur over a year.