**Radial Tunnel Syndrome**

Radial Tunnel Syndrome presents with symptoms including fatigue or dull, aching pain at the proximal portion of the forearm during use. Less commonly, these symptoms can occur at the dorsal aspect of the wrist or hand. Radial Tunnel Syndrome typically occurs secondary to overuse or repetitive movements from pushing, pulling, gripping, pinching, or bending at the wrist, typically from a job or playing sports. Muscle overuse may cause compression of the radial nerve anywhere along its path but most commonly occurs over the elbow as it passes through the radial tunnel. Treatment for radial tunnel syndrome can be conservative or surgical if non-operative therapy fails.

**Radial Nerve Palsy**

Radial neuropathies occur from injury to the radial nerve due to compression, ischemia, fractures to the arm, or penetrating wounds. Wrist drop is the most common presentation. The severity of the neuropathy depends on the level of the injury. Surgical procedures such as the stabilization of an acute humeral fracture with humeral nailing can also cause radial neuropathies. Palsy of the radial nerve is also known as crutch palsy, Saturday night palsy, and honeymooner’s palsy, conditions which may occur after placing one’s arm over a chair (or crutches) for an extended period causing a pressure injury to the radial nerve.

**Radial Nerve Entrapment**

Radial nerve injury or compression can occur anywhere along the nerve's path, which can cause extensor or supinator muscle denervation. This can result in pain, weakness, dysfunction, or paresthesias and numbness along the sensory distribution of the radial nerve. The proximal forearm is the most common area of compression where the posterior interosseous branch of the radial nerve passes between the supinator heads. Other, less common, sites of compression can occur due to fractures of the humerus about the middle and proximal thirds of the shaft. The radial aspect of the wrist is another site of possible compression of the radial nerve. Treatment for radial nerve entrapment depends on the pathology and may be treated conservatively or surgically if conservative measures fail.

**Cheiralgia Paresthetica****(Wartenberg syndrome)**

Cheiralgia paresthetica is a hand neuropathy commonly caused by trauma or compression of the superficial branch of the radial nerve. The dorsum of the hand near the base of the thumb (in the vicinity of the anatomical snuffbox) is typically affected; however, it may affect the dorsum of the thumb, index finger, and hand. Symptoms include pain, numbness, tingling, or a burning sensation. There is no motor involvement since the superficial branch is purely sensory. Its etiology is thought to be caused by a constriction of the wrist as with a watch band or bracelet. It is associated with handcuff use and is also commonly referred to as handcuff neuropathy.