# Continuing Education Activity

Hypoglycemia is the most common metabolic disturbance occurring in the neonatal period. Screening at-risk infants and the management of low blood glucose levels in the first hours to days of life is a frequent issue in the care of the newborn infant. Yet, a clear definition of neonatal hypoglycemia is lacking. Current screening guidelines and management algorithms are based on limited evidence, relying more on expert opinion to guide recommendations. This activity reviews neonatal hypoglycemia and the need to develop an improved knowledge of it. This activity highlights the role of the interprofessional team in the recognition and management of neonatal hypoglycemia.

**Objectives:**
- Explain the features of neonatal hypoglycemia.
- Describe current guidelines for the management of neonatal hypoglycemia. 
- Review how current knowledge regarding neonatal hypoglycemia could be clarified.
- Explain the role of interprofessional team members in optimizing collaboration and communication to ensure neonatal hypoglycemia is recognized early and every effort is made to deliver optimal care, which will lead to enhanced outcomes.

# Introduction

Hypoglycemia is the most common metabolic disturbance occurring in the neonatal period. Screening at-risk infants and the management of low blood glucose levels in the first hours to days of life is a frequent issue in the care of the newborn infant. Yet, a clear definition of neonatal hypoglycemia is lacking.

Despite a better understanding of early glucose homeostasis and transitional hypoglycemia in the first 48 hours of life, gaps in our knowledge persist. Observations have shown that healthy infants experience transient hypoglycemia as a part of the normal adaption to extrauterine life, with a decline in blood glucose concentrations to values as low as 20 to 25 mg/dL in the first two hours of life.

A 1988 multicenter nutritional study by Lucas et al. suggested a blood glucose concentration <47 mg/dL as the critical threshold associated with adverse neurodevelopmental outcomes.

It is clear that extremely low blood glucose concentrations in neonates can cause apnea, irritability, lethargy, seizures,

# Etiology

Healthy infants experience an expected drop in blood glucose concentrations immediately following birth as a part of the normal physiologic transition to extrauterine life. Abruptly clamping the umbilical cord at birth disrupts the infant's connection to the placenta, upon which it relied to supply glucose and other metabolites necessary to meet its energy needs in utero. The continuous supply of exogenous intravenous glucose from the placenta suddenly ceases, and the infant's blood glucose concentration declines in the first hours of life. For most healthy infants, this transitional neonatal hypoglycemia is brief, transient and most often asymptomatic.

Infants are at risk for more severe or prolonged hypoglycemia due to one or a combination of the following underlying mechanisms: insufficient glucose supply, with low glycogen or fat stores or poor mechanisms of glucose production; increased glucose utilization caused by excessive insulin production or increased metabolic demand; or the failure of counter-regulatory mechanisms (i.e., pituitary or adrenal failure).

- Intrauterine growth restriction or small compared to gestational age infants

- Infants of diabetic mothers or large for gestational age infants

- Late-preterm infants (34 to 36.6 weeks gestational age)

Preterm, intrauterine growth restricted and small for gestational age infants are at risk for hypoglycemia because they are born with decreased glycogen stores, decreased adipose tissue and experience increased metabolic demands because of their relatively large brain size.

Infants of diabetic mothers (IDM) and large for gestational age infants experience fetal hyperinsulinism and increased peripheral glucose utilization, putting them at risk for hypoglycemia in the immediate postnatal period.

Infants experiencing perinatal stress (e.g., fetal distress, perinatal ischemia, maternal preeclampsia/eclampsia, sepsis, hypothermia) or those with congenital heart disease have increased metabolic energy requirements, which puts them at risk for hypoglycemia.

Other iatrogenic causes of transient neonatal hypoglycemia include intrapartum administration of maternal medication (e.g., beta-adrenergic tocolytic agents, valproic acid, propranolol, and conduction anesthetics), delayed feeding, and exogenous insulin administration.

Low glucose concentrations beyond the first 48 hours of life raise concern for an underlying disorder as the etiology of hypoglycemia. The underlying physiologic mechanisms that cause pathologic or persistent hypoglycemia are similar to those described above: hyperinsulinism (e.g., congenital hyperinsulinism, Beckwith-Wiedmann syndrome, Soto syndrome), insufficient energy supply (i.e., inborn errors of metabolism that result in deficiencies in glycogen, amino acids, or free fatty acids), or a deficiency in cortisol or growth hormone (e.g., Costello syndrome, hypopituitarism, congenital adrenal hyperplasia). Causes of persistent neonatal hypoglycemia include

- Congenital hyperinsulinism

- Congenital syndromes: Beckwith-Wiedemann syndrome, Soto syndrome, Costello syndrome

- Endocrine disorders: congenital hypopituitarism, congenital adrenal hyperplasia, hypothyroidism

- Inborn errors of metabolism: maple syrup urine disease, glycogen storage disorders, hereditary fructose intolerance, galactosemia, fatty acid oxidation disorders

# Epidemiology

The reported incidence of neonatal hypoglycemia is variable, depending on several factors: the population of infants included, the frequency and timing of glucose testing, the method of testing, and the definition of hypoglycemia used. A 2006 study by Harris et al. that sought to determine the incidence of hypoglycemia (blood glucose <47 mg/dL) in the first 48 hours of life in infants greater than 35 weeks gestation at risk of hypoglycemia by AAP guidelines found that 25% of all deliveries were at risk for hypoglycemia; of those at-risk infants, 51% experienced at least one episode of hypoglycemia.

# Pathophysiology

The fetus depends on maternal metabolism and placental circulation to provide the glucose, ketones, free fatty acids, and amino acids necessary to meet its energy requirements.

Any mechanism that disrupts this sequence of physiologic changes puts the infant at risk of more severe or prolonged periods of low glucose. The risk for hypoglycemia is greatest in the first hours after birth.

Persistent hypoglycemia results from excessive insulin secretion, a deficiency of cortisol or growth hormone, or inborn errors of metabolism.

# History and Physical

The clinical presentation of neonatal hypoglycemia is variable. An otherwise healthy infant may remain asymptomatic despite extremely low blood glucose levels during the period of transitional hypoglycemia. Clinical symptoms do not correlate with blood glucose levels.

Symptoms of neonatal hypoglycemia include

- Sweating

- Feeding difficulties, poor suck

- Weak or high-pitched cry

- Tremors

- Hypothermia

- Irritability

- Lethargy/stupor

- Hypotonia

- Seizures

- Coma

- Apnea, grunting or tachypnea

- Cyanosis

# Evaluation

The two major academic societies, the American Academy of Pediatrics (AAP) and the Pediatric Endocrine Society (PES), present conflicting guidelines for screening at-risk infants and the management of neonatal hypoglycemia. The most recent AAP guidelines recommend screening for late preterm and term infants that experience symptoms of hypoglycemia, and asymptomatic infants at highest risk for hypoglycemia in the first 12 to 24 hours of life. "At risk" infants include late preterm (34-36.6 weeks gestation), term infants who are small for gestational age, infants of diabetic mothers, and large for gestational age infants.

The Pediatric Endocrine Society (PES) recommends screening all infants with risk factors for prolonged or pathologic hypoglycemia, including

- Symptomatic hypoglycemia

- Large for gestational age

- Perinatal stress

- Perinatal hypoxia/ischemia, fetal distress
- Maternal pre-eclampsia/eclampsia
- Meconium aspiration syndrome, erythroblastosis fetalis, polycythemia, hypothermia

- Premature or post-term delivery

- Infant of diabetic mother

- Family history of genetic hypoglycemia

- Congenital syndrome (e.g., Beckwith-Wiedermann), abnormal physical features (e.g., midline facial malformations)

Per the PES guidelines, infants unable to maintain pre-prandial blood glucose values >50 mg/dL in the first 48 hours of life or >60 mg/dL thereafter are at risk for persistent hypoglycemia and require further workup prior to discharge home.after the first 48 hours of life, to exclude those infants experiencing transient low glucose levels (i.e., transitional neonatal hypoglycemia).

The PES recommends evaluation of the following infants to exclude persistent causes of hypoglycemia

- Symptomatic hypoglycemia or severe hypoglycemia requiring treatment with intravenous dextrose

- Infants unable to maintain blood glucose concentrations >50 mg/dL in the first 48 hours of life and >60 after 48 hours of age

- Family history of a genetic form of hypoglycemia

- Congenital syndrome (e.g., Beckwith-Wiedermann), abnormal physical features (e.g., midline facial malformations)

Point-of-care testing (POCT) offers a quick and cost-effective method for screening for hypoglycemia.

More recently, the use of continuous glucose monitoring (CGM) in the detection and management of neonatal hypoglycemia is under investigation. A study published in 2010 by Harris et al. looked at the usefulness of continuous glucose monitoring in 102 infants >32 weeks gestation at risk of hypoglycemia during the first 7 days of life.

In infants with persistent hypoglycemia suspected of having an underlying disorder, measuring bicarbonate, lactic acid, beta-hydroxybutyrate, free fatty acids, insulin and carnitine levels during hypoglycemia (blood glucose <50 mg/dL) is useful in differentiating between the metabolic causes of persistent hypoglycemia and aids in the diagnosis of hyperinsulinism and disorders of fatty acid oxidation.

# Treatment / Management

In the absence of a consistent definition of neonatal hypoglycemia, recommendations differ as to the lower level of glucose that is acceptable and when intervention is necessary. Though strategies focus on target glucose concentrations, the ultimate goal of management is to reduce the risk of brain injury and long-term neurodevelopmental deficits that may correlate with hypoglycemia.

Early initiation of breastfeeding is crucial for all infants. For asymptomatic infants at risk of neonatal hypoglycemia, the AAP recommends initiating feeds within the first hour of life and performing initial glucose screening 30 minutes after the first feed.

Dextrose gel 200 mg/kg massaged into the buccal mucosa is an effective treatment alternative in asymptomatic late preterm and term infants.

The AAP recommends admission to the neonatal intensive care unit and intervention with intravenous dextrose for the following

All symptomatic infants with a glucose level less than 40 mg/dL

Infants with persistent hypoglycemia despite increased feeding frequency

***Asymptomatic at-risk infants with extremely low blood glucose concentrations <25 mg/dL in the first 4 hours of life or <35 mg/dL at 4 to 24 hours of life.

Intravenous glucose is given as a bolus of 200 mg/kg (dextrose 10% at 2 mL/kg), followed by continuous infusion of dextrose 10% at 5 to 8 mg/kg per minute (80 to 100 mL/kg per day) to maintain blood glucose levels of 40 to 50 mg/dL.

Second-line therapies for the treatment of persistent hypoglycemia include the use of corticosteroids or glucagon.

The PES recommends target glucose concentrations >50 mg/dL for infants at risk of hypoglycemia without a suspected congenital disorder during the first 48 hours of life, and >60 mg/dL thereafter.

For infants with persistent hypoglycemia, the goal of management in infants with suspected hyperinsulinism is to prevent recurrent episodes of low blood glucose levels that put the infant at risk for future episodes of hypoglycemia. For neonates with inborn errors of metabolism and impaired endogenous glucose production, the goal of management is to prevent metabolic acidosis and subsequent growth failure.

# Differential Diagnosis

The symptoms of neonatal hypoglycemia are nonspecific and overlap with symptoms of other conditions, including prematurity, sepsis, hypoxic-ischemic encephalopathy and hyponatremia. As discussed above, though rare, persistent causes of hypoglycemia must be excluded.

# Prognosis

The implications of asymptomatic hypoglycemia in the first 48 hours of life on long-term neurodevelopmental outcomes remains bot well established. As a result of an influential study published in 1988 by Lucas et al. suggesting that recurrent, moderate neonatal hypoglycemia correlated with serious motor and mental impairments at 18 months corrected age,

Despite requests for further research of infants at risk of hypoglycemia with long-term neurodevelopmental follow up,

The CHYLD study is a prospective cohort investigation of infants born >32 weeks gestation with risk factors for neonatal hypoglycemia.

# Complications

Severe, prolonged hypoglycemia in the neonatal period can have devastating outcomes, including long-term neurodevelopmental disabilities, cerebral palsy, and death. Infants with congenital causes of persistent hypoglycemia have significantly higher rates of morbidity and mortality: 25 to 50% have developmental disabilities.

# Deterrence and Patient Education

Frequent blood glucose screening and the diagnosis of neonatal hypoglycemia can be stressful for new mothers. The best management approach is one that promotes mother-infant bonding and early breastfeeding.

# Enhancing Healthcare Team Outcomes

It is essential that clinicians and nursing staff in the newborn nursery maintain clinical suspicion for neonatal hypoglycemia as symptoms are vague and nonspecific. For infants at risk for persistent hypoglycemia, it is vital to establish that the infant can maintain blood glucose levels at target range before discharge home, as persistent hypoglycemia may not manifest clinical symptoms until after the first 48 hours of life, by which time many infants have already been discharged home.