Reading smears is a critical step in sputum microscopy. The Global Laboratory Initiative (GLI) handbook for acid-fast microscopy specifies guidelines for reading, recording, and reporting results for both, Ziehl-Neelsen and the auramine methods.**For the Ziehl-Neelsen Method (via light/brightfield microscopy)**

- **No Acid-fast bacilli (AFB) seen**- Report as "0". It means no AFB was observed in 2 lengths (i.e., 300 visual fields), thus, conferring a "negative" result.

- **1-9 AFB in 1 length**- Record the actual number of AFB seen (e.g. +1, +2, +9). Note that the plus sign should precede the number. This is also referred to as a scanty positive result.

- **10-99 AFB in 1 length**- Report as "1+". Note that the plus sign should come after the number. This is a positive result.

- **1-10 AFB per field in at least 50 visual field**s - Report as "2+". Note that the plus sign should come after the number. This is a positive result.

- **More than 10 AFB per field in at least 20 visual field**s - Report as "3+". Note that the plus sign should come after the number. This is a positive result and is highly infectious.

**For Auramine Method (via fluorescence microscopy at 400x magnification)**

- **No Acid-fast bacilli (AFB) seen**- Report as "0". It means no AFB was observed in 1 length, thus, a "negative" result. Only 1 length is required because it has a wider visual field compared to the brightfield microscopy.

- **1-2 AFB in 1 length**- Confirmation should be done before reporting through the slide reading of another medical technologist (i.e., medical laboratory scientist, microscopist) or by preparing a new slide for examination.

- **3-24 AFB in 1 length**- Record the actual number of AFB seen (e.g. +3, +4, +24). Note that the plus sign should precede the number. This is also referred to as a scanty positive result.

- **1-6 AFB in 1 length**- Report as "1+". Note that the plus sign should come after the number. This is a positive result.

- **7-60 AFB in 1 length**- Report as "2+". Note that the plus sign should come after the number. This is a positive result.

- **More than 60 AFB in 1 length**- Report as "3+". Note that the plus sign should come after the number. This is a positive result and is highly infectious.

Note that in examining slide smears, a separate reporting for 200x magnification using a fluorescence microscope is also available and may be used by more skilled and experienced personnel.