Tinea capitis usually affects children. Therefore, it is essential to inquire about any colleagues and friends from the school that have the same condition; this might give a clue about the mode of transmission. The infection usually starts as red papules that will increase in size with the time. As the infection spreads, it might involve the whole scalp. The skin of the infected area of the scalp may be normal close to the center of the round patch, but will probably appear irritated, red, or inflamed near the edges. Symptoms of tinea capitis include redness, itching, scale formation, and alopecia.

The symptomatic presentation of ringworm infection of the scalp is quite different depending upon the causative organism. Commonly, the infection may look like severe dandruff that appears on various places on the scalp. Some infections cause patches of hair loss. The inflammatory type (kerion) is associated with pus discharge and might lead to permanent hair loss.

There are three distinct clinical presentations which include:

Black dot tinea capitis, which is the classical presentation: in this type, there is an infection with a fracture of the hair.

Kerion is another presentation that involves inflammation and may progress to scarring alopecia.

Favus is the boggy inflammatory type and typically presents with deep-seated oozing nodules, abscesses, crusting, or scutula.

Id reaction or an idiosyncratic reaction is caused by the immune response to the fungi. The id reaction tends to occur at a distant site and is often triggered by antifungal treatment. The id reaction presents as intense itching of vesicles, usually on the feet. It may also present as erythema nodosum or annular erythema.