The most characteristic symptom of PAD is claudication which is a pain in the lower extremity muscles brought on by walking and relieved with rest. Although claudication has traditionally been described as cramping pain, some patients report leg fatigue, weakness, pressure, or aching. Symptoms during walking occur in the muscle group one level distal to the artery narrowed or blocked by PAD. Patients with aortoiliac artery occlusive disease, therefore, have symptoms in the thigh and buttock muscles while patients with femoropopliteal PAD have symptoms in their calf muscles. The walking distance at which symptoms occur depends on multiple factors including disease severity, walking pace, terrain, and incline.

Surprisingly, many patients with PAD have few if any symptoms. The reason for this absence of symptoms usually falls into 1 of 2 broad categories. Some patients with mild or moderate PAD rarely sustain a walking pace that increases the blood flow requirement of the lower extremity muscles. By being physically inactive, these patients avoid the supply-demand mismatch that triggers claudication symptoms. Other patients with PAD have muscle discomfort when they walk but fail to report these symptoms because they attribute them to the natural consequences of aging.

Patients with severe PAD can develop ischemic rest pain. These patients do not walk enough to claudicate because of their severe disease. Instead, they complain of burning pain in the soles of their feet that is worse at night. They cannot sleep due to the pain and often dangle their lower leg over the side of the bed in an attempt to relieve their discomfort. The slight increase in blood flow due to gravity temporarily diminishes the otherwise intractable pain. In some cases, edema from keeping the leg in a dependent position may be mistakenly attributed to venous thrombosis.

Other features of PAD include erectile dysfunction, which is often an early indicator of the disease.

The physical exam may reveal the following:

- Loss of pulses

- Pain on palpation

- Pallor

- Muscle atrophy and loss of hair

- Cool and cyanotic skin

- Presence of bruit