The anatomy is a field full of surprises; nothing is ever definitive, in consideration of the knowledge to be acquired. Rich is the bibliography of anatomical dissections to demonstrate the many variations on the human body.

**Root of C1**

Four different patterns of intradural relationship exist between the XI nerve and the small roots of the first cervical nerve. In the first type, the posterior root of C1 is absent, whereas XI could anastomize with the anterior root of C1. In the second variant, there is no connection between XI and the posterior root of C1. In the third type of scheme, more anastomoses are found between XI and the posterior roots of C1 at different points. In the last type, there is a connection between XI and the posterior roots of C1, but without the connection to the spinal cord of the latter.

Other variations of the spinal accessory nerve path exist in relation to other neck structures.

A recent article reports a connection between the first cervical root and cranial nerve 11 via the McKenzie nerve; moreover, the same McKenzie nerve can connect the vagus nerve and the accessory cranial nerve 11 in the area adjacent to the exit of the jugular foramen.

**Internal Jugular Vein**

The nerve crosses the internal jugular vein ventrally, passes dorsally or laterally, or passes through the vein. Less frequently, it travels medially to the vein. Near the vein, the nerve XI could diverge and go back, traveling medially and laterally to the vein.

**Sternocleidomastoid**

- The XI passes along the internal surface of the sternocleidomastoid (SCM) and sends branches without penetrating the muscle (type A); a single branch, without penetrating the muscle (type B), or penetrating the muscle deeply (type C).

- The trapezius muscle rarely could be innervated only by the cervical roots. Rarely, within the skull, the XI nerve could create an anastomosis with the facial nerve, innervating both the sternocleidomastoid muscle.

- The cervical plexus can contribute to the function of the spinal accessory nerve, from the level of C2 and C3.