A patient with congenital ptosis requires assessment by an ophthalmologist but may also require to be assessed by a pediatrician, physician, cardiologist, neurologist, and head and neck surgeon. Geneticists may need to be consulted when a patient has blepharophimosis syndrome.

Interprofessional communication will lead to better patient management. The patient with congenital ptosis will most commonly present to the primary health care provider or nurse practitioner. These professionals should be aware of the condition of ptosis as it is treatable and may avoid visual problems. After prompt referral, a child with congenital ptosis should ideally be assessed by a pediatric ophthalmologist and an oculoplastic surgeon. Before and after any surgical intervention, these patients will need periodic assessment by the pediatric ophthalmologist and oculoplastic surgeon. When frontalis slings are performed using alloplastic materials, there may be slippage of the slings, necessitating further surgery. The primary care physician should receive updates on the child's progress to address any vision tests needed at school.

An interprofessional team that provides a holistic and integrated approach to postoperative care can help achieve the best possible outcomes. If the patient is to be discharged home after surgery, consultation should be made with a social worker and community nurses who can monitor the patient and make referrals as needed. Collaboration, shared decision-making, and communication are key elements for a good outcome. The interprofessional care provided to the patient must use an integrated care pathway combined with an evidence-based approach to planning and evaluation of all joint activities. The earlier signs and symptoms of a complication are identified, the better is the prognosis and outcome. Hence such a collaborative, interprofessional approach to care can ensure optimal patient outcomes. [Level 5]