Amiodarone is one of the most commonly used anti-arrhythmic drugs. While the United States FDA has labeled amiodarone for the treatment of life-threatening ventricular arrhythmias, the drug is commonly used off-label to treat supraventricular tachyarrhythmias such as atrial fibrillation as well as for the prevention of ventricular tachyarrhythmias (VTs) in high-risk patients.

One of the most common indications for amiodarone use in the acute setting is atrial fibrillation with a rapid ventricular response. It is particularly useful in hemodynamically unstable patients and patients with congestive heart failure with reduced left ventricular ejection fraction who may be adversely affected by negative inotropic or vasodilating effects of other rate-controlling agents. Amiodarone has effectively controlled the ventricular rate and converted to and maintained sinus rhythm in patients with atrial fibrillation and rapid ventricular response.

Amiodarone also can be used to treat other supraventricular tachyarrhythmias, including atrial flutter, refractory AV (atrioventricular) nodal, and AV re-entrant tachycardia (commonly referred to as SVT). Finally, amiodarone is indicated for the treatment of ventricular arrhythmias, specifically monomorphic VT, non-Torsades polymorphic VT (secondary to myocardial ischemia and not associated with prolonged QTc), as well as for pulseless ventricular fibrillation (VF) and pulseless VT that fail to convert after CPR, defibrillation, and epinephrine administration. When studied in patients with out-of-hospital cardiac arrest, amiodarone resulted in a higher rate of return of spontaneous circulation (ROSC); however, this ROSC benefit did not result in a higher rate of survival to hospital discharge with the favorable neurological outcome.