The axillary lymph nodes reside in the axillary pad of fat and fall into five groups.

- Anterior (pectoral) lymph nodes are along the inferior border of pectoralis minor, near the lateral thoracic vessels. They receive lymph from the breast, skin, and muscles of the supraumbilical anterolateral body wall. They drain into the central and apical nodes.

- Posterior (subscapular) lymph nodes are located on the posterior wall of the axilla along the inferior border of the subscapularis. They receive lymph from the scapular region, as well as the posterior thoracic wall. They drain into the central and apical nodes.

- Lateral (humeral) lymph nodes are over the lateral wall of the axilla. They receive lymph from the arm and drain into the central, apical, and deep cervical nodes.

- Central lymph nodes appear in the base of the axilla. They receive lymph from the anterior, posterior, and lateral groups, and drain to the apical lymph nodes.

- Apical (terminal) lymph nodes are located deep in the apex of the axilla. They receive lymph from all of the groups mentioned above, in addition to the upper breast. The efferent vessels from the apical group converge to form the subclavian lymphatic trunk. On the left, this drains directly drains into the thoracic duct, and on the right, the subclavian trunk drains into the right venous angle via the right lymphatic duct.

The function of the axillary lymph nodes, like that of the rest of the lymphatic system, is to defend against foreign particles, provide immunity against microorganisms, and return excess interstitial fluid back to the systemic circulation.

Structurally a lymph node consists of three basic compartments; a cortex, paracortex, and medulla.

Further, the area in the axilla divides into three levels based on where the lymph nodes are traceable. They are:

Level I: In this level, the lymph nodes are traced inferior and lateral to the pectoralis minor muscleLevel II: The lymph nodes are traced deep to the pectoralis minor muscleLevel III: Lymph nodes here can be traced medial and deep to the medial border of the muscle of pectoralis minor.