Psoriasis Area Severity Index (PASI) is the most widely used measurement tool which assesses the severity of the condition and allows for the evaluation of treatment efficiency.  Topical therapy is used in mild to moderate psoriasis. Emollients and moisturizers may help in improving barrier function and retain the hydration of the stratum corneum. Topical agents used are coal tar, dithranol, corticosteroids, vitamin D analog, and retinoids are used initially.

- In patients who do not respond to the above treatments, methotrexate can be effective.

- Cyclosporine can be used to induce a clinical response but its use should be intermittent.

- When patients fail to respond to methotrexate, switch to biological agents; in some cases combine with methotrexate

Phototherapy includes PUVA therapy which combines psoralen with exposure to ultraviolet light (UVA), as well as NBUVB (Narrowband UVB light) with a range of 311 nanometers to 313 nanometers. NBUVB  is equally effective without the side effects of psoralen like gastrointestinal upset, cataract formation, and carcinogenic effects. It can safely be given to children, pregnant and lactating females, and even older patients. Guttate psoriasis has been known to respond best to phototherapy

Systemic drugs are used in extensive cases, the involvement of nails and psoriatic arthritis. Methotrexate, retinoids, cyclosporine, and fumarates are possible options. Routine blood, liver functions, and renal functions should be monitored in patients on systemic therapy.

Biologicals are manufactured proteins that interrupt the immune process in psoriasis which are infliximab, adalimumab, etanercept, and interleukin antagonists. Before starting any biological agent, the patient should be worked up for tuberculosis and hepatitis. There is a serious risk of infections in these patients and all precautions should be taken that the patient is not severely immunocompromised.

Prolonged use of steroids and other immunosuppressives may delay wound healing.

Ocular psoriasis requires aggressive treatment with topical corticosteroids.

Patients with psoriasis should avoid all skin trauma for fear of inducing the Kobner reaction. In addition, psoriatic patients should avoid the use of beta-blockers, chloroquine, or NSAIDs. They should also avoid alcohol because of the risk of developing fatty liver.