Pavlov recorded several phenomena associated with classical conditioning. He found that the rate of acquisition, the initial stages of learning, depended on the noticeability of the stimulus and the time in between the introduction of the neutral stimulus and the unconditioned stimulus. In Pavlov’s experiment, this would translate to the time in between the bell ringing and the presentation of food. Second, Pavlov observed that the conditioned response was vulnerable to extinction. If the conditioned stimulus is continuously supplied in the absence of the unconditioned stimulus, then the conditioned response becomes weaker and weaker until it disappears. In Pavlov’s experiment, this would translate to Pavlov ringing the bell without giving food to the dogs. Eventually, the dogs would stop salivating at the sound of the bell. However, spontaneous recovery was also observed. Even if a substantial amount of time had passed, the conditioned response would easily recover if the neutral stimulus and the unconditioned stimulus were paired again. Lastly, he found that stimulus generalization and stimulus discrimination can occur. Stimulus generalization occurs when the dog can respond to stimuli that are similar to the conditioned stimulus. For example, if Pavlov’s dogs salivated at the sound of another ringing sound such as a cell phone ringing, that would be stimulus generalization. Stimulus discrimination, on the other hand, is being able to differentiate between similar stimuli and respond only to the correct stimuli.