Treatment of CBS can vary depending on the severity of symptoms. In mild symptoms, reassurance may be all that is needed. However, in more severe symptoms, treatment includes behavioral techniques and medications to suppress hallucinations. Studied techniques include blinking during hallucination or rapid eye movement from one object to another away from the perceived hallucination field of vision.

**Pharmacotherapy**

Medications are often reserved for severe diseases, including those with disturbing or continuous hallucinations. Antipsychotics have been found to have mixed efficacy; however, atypical antipsychotics such as low doses of quetiapine or olanzapine are preferred due to safer side effect profiles, especially in the elderly CBS tends to affect.

Other medications with good efficacy and minimal side effects include cholinesterase inhibitors such as donepezil. Beneficial medications anecdotally include antiepileptics such as valproate, carbamazepine, gabapentin, and clonazepam. Lastly, some promising medications that are effective in small case series include antidepressants such as venlafaxine and escitalopram, as well as prokinetic agents like cisapride.

**Psychological Therapy**

Various techniques such as hypnosis, relaxation training, distraction, cognitive remodeling, and psychological therapy for the phantom phenomenon have been advocated to minimize visual hallucinations' unpleasant and troublesome effects.

**Reassurance and Counselling**

CBS patients may experience anxiety and are usually unaware of the condition. Many patients may show disappointment and unsympathetic reactions to meeting the healthcare professional regarding their hallucinations.

Patients with intact cognition need no further intervention, but patients having dementia may be difficult to reassure because of a lack of insight and vision loss of distressing nature. Reassurance and counseling are the mainstays of treatment.

**Optimizing Visual Function**

This beneficial impact on hallucination may be the best treatment, although visual deficit correction may not always be possible, especially in elderly patients. The spectacle and visual aid prescription are necessary for optical correction, and cataract surgery may be necessary for visual correction.