Typically, routine assessment laboratory studies are not required. However, certain laboratory studies can be considered if there is a suspicion of metabolic or systemic disease. These include rheumatoid factor, antinuclear antibody, c-reactive protein, erythrocyte sedimentation rate, uric acid, and complete blood count. If there is a high degree of suspicion of osteomyelitis, the clinician can consider MRI and radionuclide imaging.

Establishing a diagnosis can be typically done through a physical exam. Imaging can help clinicians determine the extent to which the first MTP joint has suffered damage. Evaluation is primarily with plain radiography, with X-rays (AP and lateral weight-bearing) of the foot. Imaging demonstrates a lateral hallux deviation at the first metatarsal (normal hallux valgus angle is less than 15 degrees, and the intermetatarsal angle is less than 9 degrees). Typically, the deviation is in the transverse plane. However, HV deformity can cause rotation of the hallux resulting in the nail facing medially (pronation of the frontal plane). Following the determination of the severity of the deformity has been determined, the clinician can perform the most appropriate procedure.

The classification is mild, moderate, and severe based on the weight-bearing anteroposterior, lateral oblique, lateral, and sesamoid axial views. This imaging helps evaluate the structural status of the foot. The AP projection helps assess the intermetatarsal angle, hallux abductus angle, metatarsus adductus angle, hallux abductus interphalangeal, hallux rotation, and the condition of the first MTP joint. The lateral projection primarily serves to assess the first metatarsal position (elevated or plantar-flexed) and dorsal exostosis/osteophytes. The lateral oblique projection helps evaluate the density, uniformity, and trabeculation of the bone (bone stock). The sesamoid axial view looks primarily for sesamoid subluxations and degenerative joint changes to the cristae.

Degree: Hallux valgus angle (HVA) / Intermetatarsal angle (IMA)

- Normal: less than15 degrees / 9 degrees

- Mild: 15 to 30 degrees / 9 to 13 degrees

- Moderate: 30 to 40 degrees / 13 to 20degrees

- Severe: over 40 degrees / over 20 degrees