Relative contraindications to TACE include but are not limited to the following:

- Poor expected survival. This can be predicted if the patient has a PST greater than 3, in other words, patient completely disabled, cannot self-care, or confined to a bed or chair.

- Contraindication to chemotherapy, such as heart or kidney failure and leukopenia

- Unwilling or unable to comply with follow-up guidelines

- Extra-hepatic metastases

- Malignant ascites

- Tumor greater than 5 cm

- Poor baseline liver function (as defined by reference)

- Patients with end-stage cirrhosis (Child-Pugh)

- Encephalopathy

- Jaundice

- Active alcohol consumer

- Hypovascular tumor based on appearance on MRI or CT

- Main portal vein thrombosis associated with a high risk of post-treatment liver failure

- Biliary obstruction or bilirubin greater than 3 mg/dL, unless segmental injections can be performed

- Patient eligible for a potentially more effective therapy

In general, no more than 50% of liver volume should be chemo-embolized at a time. Therefore, if a patient has a tumor occupying more than 50% of the liver volume, then that patient is best treated with 2 TACE procedures.

TACE should not be done in patients with decompensated cirrhosis which is defines as the presence of ascites, encephalopathy, jaundice or variceal bleeding.

TACE usually does not cause significanr damage to the adjacent liver parenchyma univoled with the tumor as HCC receives blood via the hepatic artery ( which is targeted in TACE) and the normal liver parenchyma receives blood mainly from the portal vein. Portal vein thrombosis is not a contraindication to palliative TACE if there is adequate collateral hepatopetal flow to supply the liver parenchyma to be embolized. However, in patients with portal vein thrombosis, it is wise to avoid TACE. Mortality associated withvTACE was reportedly below 1% and most of the deaths were due to liver failure.

Many physicians treat bile duct obstruction before offering TACE, which could exacerbate bile duct obstruction.

The NCCN does not include TACE in its treatment algorithm for primary cholangiocarcinoma.