**Skull X-ray**

X-rays have been used in the past to identify pneumocephalus, but they will miss small quantities of air.

**Plain Computed Tomography (CT) Scan of the Head**

This imaging modality is the gold standard investigation in the diagnosis of pneumocephalus. It can detect even 0.55 ml of intracranial air, whereas a skull radiograph requires at least 2 ml.

- "Mount Fuji sign" (named after Mount Fuji, the highest volcano mountain in Japan) formed by the accumulation of air in the frontal region, with separation of tips of two frontal lobes, in a patient in the supine position is diagnostic of tension pneumocephalus.

- "Air bubble sign" denotes the presence of multiple air bubbles scattered in several cisterns.

"Peaking sign" denotes bilateral compression of frontal lobes without separation of the tips. It shows a less severe condition compared to the Mount Fuji sign.

**Calculation of the Volume of Post-operative Pneumocephalus**

- 
**Bed-side technique - ABC/2 method)**

Steps:

- Select a representative slide near the center of the pneumocephalus.

- "A" = longest longitudinal length in millimeters (mm) of the pneumocephalus in the axial plane

- "B" = maximum width (in mm) of the pneumocephalus (measured from the inner table of the skull) perpendicular to "A" on the same slice

- "C" = height of the air in the coronal plane = Number of CT scan axial slides showing the pneumocephalus multiplied by the slice thickness.

- Estimated volume (in ml) = **A x B x C / 2**

- 
**Computer-assisted volumetric measurement**

**Magnetic Resonance Imaging (MRI) Scan of the Brain**

MRI may also be useful but not as sensitive as a CT scan in diagnosing pneumocephalus. Moreover, air may be mistaken for flow voids or blood products, appearing dark in almost all sequences.