The history of the patient presenting with symptoms of acute urinary retention should focus on lower urinary tract symptoms using questions such as, "Over the past month:"

1. How frequently have you had the sensation of not being able to empty your bladder completely after voiding?

2. How frequently have you had to urinate again less than two hours after finished urinating?

3. How frequently have you found you stopped and started several times when you were voiding?

4. How often have you have found it difficult to postpone urination?

5. Over the past month, how often have you had a weak stream?

6. How often have you had to push or strain to begin urination?

7. How many times did you get up to urinate from the time you go to bed until you get up in the morning?

The American Urological Association developed a scoring system using these question using a rating scale:

- Not at all=0

- Less than 1 time in 5 = 1

- Less than half the time = 2

- About half the time = 3

- More than half the time = 4

- Almost always = 5

This scoring system helps identify mild symptoms (0 to 7), moderate symptoms (8 to 19), and severe symptoms (20 to 35) related to the prostate as a cause.

The clinician should inquire about the history of prostate diseases such as cancer, trauma, surgery, kidney stones, prostate infections, sexually transmitted infections, radiation treatment or exposure, and back pain. History on the presence of hematuria, dysuria, fever, low back pain, neurologic symptoms of tremors, weakness is vital. A thorough urogenital review of systems is a must. The medication list should undergo thorough review as several medications can cause urinary retention, and inquiry into past surgical procedures, and anesthesia may also prove informative.

The physical examination should focus on the lower quadrants of the abdomen, pelvis, and genitals. Palpation can often note the distended bladder; the rectal exam can note an enlarged prostate (showing prostatic hyperplasia) or fecal impaction (showing impingement on the bladder neck or urethra), or poor sphincter tone (showing a spinal cord problem). Neurologic examination for strength, sensation, reflexes, and muscle tone is also informative. Thorough patient history and physical exam will often identify the etiology.