# Continuing Education Activity

Pain is a multifaceted issue affecting millions of individuals that often requires multimodal therapies with an integrated team model. Due to refractory pain, medicinal cannabis has ventured into the realm of additional treatments. Medicinal cannabis must be recommended by a licensed practitioner, although it is not currently FDA approved for pain. This activity will review the pharmacology, adverse events, clinical studies, and pertinent information regarding the controversy of cannabis within the medical community and highlight the importance of an interprofessional team in the pain patient's care requiring medicinal cannabis.

**Objectives:**
- Review the most important cannabinoids.
- Understand how cannabinoids function endogenously.
- Analyze the role of cannabinoids in different types of pain.
- Describe the current medicinal cannabis controversy.

# Introduction

Pain is a significant and distressing issue for millions of individuals across the United States; an estimated 20% of the American population was affected by pain in 2016.

Since pain is classified as a symptom and not a diagnosis, it is important to appropriately distinguish pain classification: acute vs. chronic, nociceptive vs. neuropathic, somatic vs. visceral, etc. This helps narrow the differential diagnosis and thus leads to proper evaluation and proper treatment. The treatment of pain is often methodical and ranges from nonpharmacological to pharmacological to interventional measures. As a possible result of the opioid epidemic and the complexity of pain and individualized results of pain management, medical cannabis has garnered interest as an additional avenue of pharmacological treatment even though it is not currently FDA-approved for pain.

# Function

The cannabis plant comes from the family Cannabaceae and contains hundreds of compounds called cannabinoids. These compounds have been isolated and discovered, with the most relevant being tetrahydrocannabinol (THC) and cannabidiol (CBD). Research in the late 20th century identified the first cannabinoid receptor.

CB1 receptors are commonly found in the central nervous system (CNS), whereas CB2 are generally found in the periphery in the immune and hematologic systems.

On the other hand, CBD functions as a negative allosteric modulator of CB1 and has effects on other endogenous systems involving the vanilloid receptor (TRPV1), adenosine A2A, and others. It has anti-inflammatory, analgesic, and anti-psychotic effects.

# Issues of Concern

Although medicinal cannabis is another method of treatment for patients with pain, as with any medication, there are adverse effects. A systematic review of 31 clinical studies over 40 years was evaluated, and the most serious effects were relapsing multiple sclerosis, vomiting, and urinary tract infections. One of the most common benign effects was dizziness.

In the long term, medicinal cannabis can lead to cognitive disorders such as depression or schizophrenia, although more high-quality studies are needed to quantify such risks.

There are several routes to administer THC and CBD, including inhalational, oral, oromusocal sprays, and topical.

# Clinical Significance

Cannabis has been shown to have beneficial effects in treating certain types of pain. Studies have shown that the type of pain dictates the response to treatment. In a randomized, double-blinded study of 40 patients undergoing abdominal hysterectomy, patients were subjected to two groups: one receiving 5 mg of oral THC and placebo. Pain reduction was examined postoperatively and revealed no analgesic effects.

Although medicinal cannabis hasn’t shown efficacy in treating acute pain, it has shown benefit in treating chronic pain. A systematic review and meta-analysis were conducted involving 43 randomized control trials, which revealed pain reduction in patients with chronic pain with inhalational cannabis (p < 0.0001). The study also concluded medicinal cannabis might be effective for specifically chronic neuropathic pain.

Another systematic review involving 18 trials was performed for cannabinoids in treating non-cancer pain. In greater than 80% of the trials, there was a significant analgesic effect and in four of the trials studied, smoked cannabis for neuropathic pain with benefit.

Several clinical trials were conducted studying smoked cannabis specifically for pain. One clinical study evaluated 56 patients with fibromyalgia and results revealed pain reduction on the visual analog scale before and after two hours of self-administered cannabis.

A clinical trial involving 28 HIV-positive patients with chronic neuropathic pain smoked cannabis five days a week for two weeks or placebo. There was a significant difference in pain relief with the cannabis group versus the placebo group (p = 0.016).

# Other Issues

Many of these randomized clinical trials involving medicinal cannabis consisted of small sample sizes, ultimately leading to low power. Additional trials are understandably needed to further validate the extent of pain benefit. However, the paucity of data may partially be due to cannabis being a Schedule I controlled substance. Controversy remains in the legalization of cannabis in the medical community to date for this reason. Furthermore, ethical, societal, and cultural reasons are implicated with cannabis. As well, it is important to be cognizant of state regulations; the majority of states have approved the recommendation or authorization of medicinal cannabis. However, several states have yet to approve the use of medicinal cannabis.

Not all states have approved both THC and CBD. Some states have only approved CBD in the form of CBD oil.

# Enhancing Healthcare Team Outcomes

The evaluation and treatment of pain require a multidisciplinary approach. Pain is purely subjective, and its complexity requires an adequate history and physical exam. After a comprehensive assessment, a team-based model should be ensured to care for the patient. Social workers, physical therapists, psychologists, consultants such as pain management, neurologists, physiatrists, and addiction specialists are all involved. The integrated team must understand the risks and benefits of using medicinal cannabis as it is a schedule I controlled substance due to its high potential for abuse. [Level 2]