Non-surgical management of DRS consists of spectacles or contact lenses for refractive error, prism glasses to improve the compensatory head position, and treatment of amblyopia with standard therapy. The efficacy of botulinum toxin has also been investigated. In most patients, the results of injection have been relative and short-term.

Indications for surgical management of DRS include 1) significant ocular deviation in primary position, 2) marked anomalous head posture, 3) disfiguring retraction of the globe on attempted adduction, and 4) upshoots and downshoots of the globe in adduction.

Patients should be informed that no treatment or surgical procedure will restore normal ocular movements in all gaze positions, as the underlying abnormality of paradoxical innervation cannot be corrected. Also, before operating any case of DRS, a forced duction test (FDT) is necessary to rule out MR or LR contracture in the affected eye.

Surgical options for esotropic DRS include:

- Medial rectus recession (MRc) – In cases with a tight MR and minimal co-contraction, MRc is generally indicated. Unilateral MRc of the DRS eye can correct up to 20 prism diopters (PD) of esotropia. It is recommended that MRc of the DRS eye should be limited to less than 6 mm. This is because a larger MRc increases the likelihood of an iatrogenic adduction limitation, which compromises the field of binocular single vision by causing an exotropia in the contralateral gaze.

- Bilateral MRc – It is considered in certain situations.

- MRc with LR recession (LRc) - In cases of esotropic DRS with moderate to severe co-contraction, MRc may be combined with LR recession. This reduces the anomalous innervation of the LR during adduction.

- Transposition of vertical muscles (VRT) - This surgery aims to create active abduction vector forces by creating a tone for LR through the transposed muscle.

- Transposition of superior rectus (SRT) – Transposition of superior rectus eliminates the risk of iatrogenic vertical limitation and anterior segment ischemia. It is recommended in esotropia of less than 15 PD with minimal co-contraction. In esotropias of 15 to 25 PD, SRT combined with unilateral or bilateral MRc is recommended.

- Recess-resect procedures – Lateral rectus resection of the concerned eye is usually not advised as globe retraction may be worsened. However, combined MR recession and LR resection may be considered in cases of esotropic DRS of less than 25 PD, with normal adduction and severely limited abduction. Globe retraction and shoots should also be absent.

For exotropic DRS, LR recession (LRc) is advocated when there is normal LR activity in abduction. Unilateral LRc corrects up to 20 PD of exotropia. For exotropia of more than 20 PD, bilateral LRc may be considered. Recessing LR may worsen abduction limitation if present; therefore if bilateral LR recession is required, the larger recession should be done in the contralateral eye.

Conversely, if the anomalous activity of LR is present, periosteal fixation of the LR may be considered. In this procedure, the insertion of LR is moved from the globe to the lateral orbital wall, eliminating the effect of paradoxical innervation and co-contraction in adduction. The resultant absence of abduction is correctable with transposition procedures, which may increase the risk of anterior segment ischemia. As a relatively new procedure, there is limited literature data on its efficacy.

Surgical options to correct shoots and globe retraction include:

- Y-split of the LR – This procedure has been advocated to treat mechanical shoots. In this procedure, LR is divided into two horizontal limbs as far posteriorly as possible and inserted 20 millimeters apart. Thus, when the eye elevates in adduction, the lower half of the LR contracts prevent the globe from slipping upwards.

- Periosteal fixation of the LR

- Vertical rectus muscle recession or inferior oblique myectomy – This procedure has been advocated to treat innervational shoots.