There are various techniques to provide anesthetic care for eye surgery. Topical anesthesia is one of the most commonly performed approaches, particularly for procedures involving cataracts or for patients with glaucoma. This is an option for patients on anticoagulation therapy where it is necessary to mitigate risks of intraocular bleeding that may occur with needle insertion for local anesthetic injection, especially for retrobulbar blocks. Choice of anesthesia will also depend on the type of surgery as well. For instance, complete akinesia may not be required for cataract surgery, making topical anesthesia the superior choice, which would eliminate adverse effects present with regional anesthesia. Topical anesthesia is achieved by placing local anesthetic drops or gels such as lidocaine, proparacaine, and tetracaine directly to the cornea and conjunctiva.

Another approach to providing anesthesia care is accomplished using regional techniques, which can provide varying degrees of akinesia and analgesia of the eye through transconjunctival or percutaneous injections. When sharp needles are being used for injection, patient cooperation is paramount as they must be able to follow instructions when requested to look straight ahead, which is otherwise known as the primary gaze position. Looking straight before injection will help protect the ophthalmic artery and optic nerve from damage caused by the injection needle. After needle injection has occurred, the next step is to confirm negative aspiration of the syringe to identify possible intravascular injection when injecting the local anesthetic.

The three most common approaches to providing regional anesthesia via nerve blocks are the retrobulbar block, peribulbar block, and the sub-Tenon block, which is not typically performed in the United States. One of the earliest blocks to be performed in ophthalmologic surgery is the intraconal, retrobulbar block. This is completed using anatomical landmarks by identifying the space slightly lateral of the junction of middle and lateral thirds of the inferior orbital rim.

The peribulbar block is another regional eye block that can be performed with a 25 to 27 gauge needle with a maximum length of 1.25 inches. It is a safer alternative than the retrobulbar block and is becoming more popular when providing anesthetic care.

Inferotemporal and medial peribulbar approaches have been described when performing peribulbar blocks. The inferotemporal approach is similar to the retrobulbar block regarding anatomical landmarks. However, the needle does not enter inside the myofascial cone of the orbit. This block has the added benefit of blocking the orbicularis oculi muscle (which is responsible for closing the eyelid) compared to the retrobulbar block. This can help facilitate the surgeon and improve operating conditions when performing surgery on the eye.

The last regional anesthesia block to be discussed is the sub-Tenon block. This technique is performed by creating a small incision through the conjunctiva and Tenon capsule. These anatomical structures are secured via forceps followed by careful dissection of the sclera with blunt scissors. A small 19 gauge catheter is then placed through the incision hole. Approximately 2 to 5 mL of local anesthetic is deposited into this space. This local anesthetic can spread to the posterior portion of the globe via this anterior approach. Similar to the peribulbar block, this block may take approximately 5 minutes to affect analgesia and akinesia. Regardless of the type and technique used for regional anesthesia, it is important to evaluate the success of the performed block by assessing for any motion of the globe or extraocular muscles.

Another technique in which eye surgery can be performed is under general anesthesia. Although this may be rare, this decision is based on patient factors and the details of the specific type and approach of the eye surgery being completed. Under general anesthesia, it is necessary to maintain a deep and stable plane of anesthesia to create the best surgical outcomes. Vitreoretinal surgery is one of the most common ophthalmic procedures performed under general anesthesia.

It is important to be mindful of the anesthetic implications under general anesthesia, which would include knowledge of intravenous and volatile anesthetic agents for induction and maintenance, pharmacotherapy concerns of opioids and neuromuscular blocking agents, airway management, and emergencies. Additionally, the relationship between these anesthetics and intraocular pressure (IOP) must be continuously evaluated to improve surgical outcomes. Most induction agents, including propofol, thiopental, and etomidate, decrease IOP by approximately 30%.

In terms of airway management, the anesthetic plan to secure the airway via endotracheal intubation or through a supraglottic airway device (SGA) is important as both airway devices have advantages and disadvantages. The benefit of an SGA is that it produces a smaller increase in IOP and allows for a smoother emergence upon removal as compared to endotracheal intubation.

If the intubation route is selected, it may be beneficial to avoid depolarizing neuromuscular blocking agents as this may cause a transient increase in IOP.

Additionally, if the nondepolarizing neuromuscular blockade is pursued, it may be beneficial to reverse the paralytic using sugammadex instead of neostigmine and glycopyrrolate, which are anticholinergic agents that have been known to increase IOP.