The pancreas plays a key role in the digestion, absorption, utilization, and storage of energy substrates. It consists of two parts, the exocrine and endocrine pancreas, which are structurally distinct but functionally integrated glandular systems. Both parts arise from the primitive gut. Secretion by the exocrine pancreas is controlled by neural and hormonal signals in the form of gastrointestinal peptides. Islet cells are interspersed among the exocrine pancreas.

Each islet has at least five types of cells, which are insulin-producing β-cells (65% to 80%), the glucagon releasing α-cells (15% to 20%), the somatostatin producing δ-cells (3% to 10%), the pancreatic polypeptide containing PP cells (1%), and the ghrelin containing ε-cells (<1%).

The human pancreas is a  solitary organ, 14 to 18 cm long, 2 to 9 cm wide and 2 to 3 cm thick, weighing 50 to 100 g and can be divided into three major parts which are the head, the body, and the tail with no clear-cut borders between these parts. The border between the head and the body is made by the left border of the superior mesenteric artery, whereas the border between the body and the tail is marked by the midpoint of the body and tail combined. Some authors distinguish a fourth and a fifth part, both of which are parts of the head. The uncinate process is located beneath the SMA, and the neck or isthmus, which is a thinned part, is situated over the SMA. The head of the pancreas is a C-shaped part aligned with the upper curvature of the duodenum. The flat body of the pancreas is situated behind the stomach extending almost horizontally in the medial plane. The body of the pancreas crosses main vessels, including the abdominal aorta, inferior vena cava, portal vein, the superior mesenteric artery, superior mesenteric vein. The pancreatic tail lies in the hilum of the spleen.

The pancreas is surrounded by a  fibrous capsule that gives rise to connective tissue septa, which divides its parenchyma into lobes and lobules. Mesenchymal tissue of the pancreas makes up approximately 15% to 25% of total pancreas volume and contains numerous fat cells.