Promethazine has several routes of administration, including oral, rectal, intramuscular, and intravenous. The tablets, solutions, and suppository dosage is generally 12.5 mg to 50 mg.

- Promethazine hydrochloride injection solution: 25 mg/mL; 50 mg/mL

- Promethazine hydrochloride oral solsution: 6.25 mg/5 mL

- Promethazine hydrochloride suppository: 12.5 mg; 25 mg; 50 mg

- Promethazine hydrochloride oral syrup: 6.25 mg/5 mL

- Promethazine hydrochloride oral tablets: 12.5 mg, 25 mg, 50 mg

Promethazine should be given with food, water, or milk to decrease gastrointestinal discomfort when administered orally. The intramuscular injection must be into deep muscle tissue as the subcutaneous injection may damage tissue. Intravenous use should be performed with caution as severe tissue damage may also occur. Promethazine may be diluted before IV administration in selected patients to prevent promethazine-induced tissue necrosis.

In pediatrics, promethazine has the same routes of administration as adults. However, dosing adjustments are necessary based on the weight of the patient and the indication. Utilizing the lowest dose of efficacy is recommended. There are no dosage adjustments for renal or hepatic impairment.

**Allergy******

The normal recommended oral dose is 25 mg administered before bed; however, alternatively, a patient can be given 6.25 to 12.5 mg may be taken three times before meals and on retiring, as necessary. After initiation of the treatment, the dose should be adjusted to the minimum dose to relieve the symptoms adequately in children or adults.

**Motion Sickness**

The average recommended adult dose is 25 mg, taken twice daily. The initial dose needs to be taken one-half to one hour before travel and repeated every eight to twelve hours later if needed. On following days of travel, 25 mg can be administered when up and repeated before the evening meal. Promethazine hydrochloride syrup, tablets, or rectal suppositories are administered at 12.5 to 25 mg twice daily for children.

**Nausea and Vomiting**

Antiemetics are not recommended to treat vomiting of unknown etiology in children and adolescents. The average effective dose of promethazine for the active treatment of nausea and vomiting in children or adults is 25 mg. When the patients do not tolerate oral medication, it can be administered parenterally or rectally. Promethazine 12.5 mg to 25 mg may be repeated at four to six-hour intervals. For treatment of nausea and vomiting in children, the usual recommended dose is 0.5 mg/pound (bodyweight). The dose should be based on the patient's age, body weight, and the severity of nausea/vomiting. During surgery and the postoperative period, the recommended dose is 25 mg administered at four to six-hour intervals for prophylaxis of nausea and vomiting.

**Sedation******

Promethazine relieves apprehension, inducing a quiet sleep from which the person can be easily aroused. Administer 12.5 mg to 25 mg promethazine orally or rectally at bedtime to provide sedation in children. Adults usually need 25 mg to 50 mg before surgery to relieve apprehension and produce quiet sleep for nighttime, obstetrical, or presurgical sedation. Children need 0.5 mg promethazine/pound (bodyweight) as a preoperative medication combined with adequately reduced narcotic/barbiturate and the required amount of an atropine-like drug. The usual recommended adult dosage is 50 mg promethazine with an adequately reduced dose of narcotic/barbiturate and the appropriate dose of a belladonna alkaloid. Postoperative sedation and adjunctive use with analgesic medicines may be achieved by the 12.5 mg to 25 mg promethazine in children and 25 mg to 50 mg promethazine in adults.