It is important to rule out non-accidental trauma in these patients presenting with multiple fractures.

Diagnosis: is based on clinical and family history, bone mineral density (lumbar vertebra), bone biochemistry, and radiographic features.

The most common clinical finding is bone fragility in most OI types. Most of them have specific features, as described by Van Dijk and Sillence.

Patients usually present with four Major Clinical Features:

- Decreased bone mass, increased bone fragility

- Blue Sclera

- Dentinogenesis imperfecta (Normal enamel with dentin abnormality)

- Hearing loss

- Other features include ligament laxity, increased joint mobility, short stature, and easy bruising.

Fractures in OI: the earlier the onset of fractures, the poorer the prognosis is.

Facies in OI: Elfin facies, helmet head appearance.

Manifestations depend on the type of OI.

Laboratory: no commercially available diagnostic test is available due to a wide variety of genetic mutations. Laboratory values are typically within the normal range with potentially mildly elevated alkaline phosphatase (ALP).

**Plain Radiograph**

- Head, neck, and Spine: wormian bones, basilar invagination, kyphoscoliosis (39 to 100%), platyspondyly

- Chest: pectus excavatum or carinatum

- Pelvis: protusio acetabuli, coxa vara

- General: osteoporosis, lack of funneling of long bones, cortical thinning, hypertrophic callus formation, popcorn calcifications involving metaphysis and epiphysis, pseudoarthrosis at the site of fractures

Prenatal ultrasound: decreased calvarial ossification, shortened and angulated long bones, multiple bone fractures, a beaded appearance of ribs, polyhydramnios.

**Computed Tomography (CT)**

- Wormian bone

- Basilar invagination

- Otosclerosis

- Long bone fractures

**Magnetic Resonance Imaging (MRI)**(to evaluate basilar invagination)

Fibroblast culturing to analyze type I collagen (positive in 80% of type IV): used for confirmation of the diagnosis in equivocal cases

**Biopsy**

- Collagen analysis of a punch biopsy

- Iliac crest biopsy which demonstrates a decrease in cortical widths and the volume of cancellous bone, with increased bone remodeling