All figurate erythemas have a mixed clinical and histopathological diagnostic approach.

The clinical differential diagnosis for erythema marginatum include

- Annular urticaria

- Annular erythema of infancy

- Erythema annulare centrifuged (EAC)

- Autoinflammatory diseases such as TNF receptor-associated periodic syndrome Still disease.

- Erythema multiforme

- Erythema marginatum hemorrhagicum -figurate erythema with hemorrhagic crusting in patients taking sorafenib

Histopathologically the figurate erythemas can be classified based upon the predominant inflammatory infiltrate, which can be lymphocytic, neutrophilic-eosinophilic, granulomatous, and plasma cells. The presence or absence of associated vasculitis with fibrinoid necrosis is also a differentiating feature.

Neutrophilic-eosinophilic infiltrates: this group includes annular psoriasis, annular erythema of infancy, annular leukocytoclastic vasculitis, urticaria multiforme, and eosinophilic dermatitis. The presence of stratum corneum microabscesses as well as spongiform pustules (psoriasis), and extensive capillary dilation with dermal edema (urticaria) are some of the differentiating histopathological features.

Lymphocytic infiltrate: this group includes erythema annulare centrifugum (superficial and deep forms), chronic erythema migrans, erythema gyratum repens, erythema multiforme, and necrolytic erythema.

The presence of a “coat sleeve” pattern of perivascular infiltrates (EAC), hyperkeratosis, and parakeratosis with the clinical appearance of concentric rings (erythema gyratum repens), vacuolar interface dermatitis with epidermal edema, and necrosis (erythema multiforme) are characteristic differentiating features.

Granulomatous diseases: this group includes granuloma annulare, sarcoidosis, borderline tuberculoid leprosy. The presence of classical epithelioid or naked granuloma (sarcoidosis) is a differentiating characteristic.

Secondary syphilis is also known as the “great mimicker,”  has a variable clinical presentation with papulosquamous lesions (commonest), papular, follicular, psoriasiform, and rarely EAC-like annular forms. The presence of mixed lymphocyte plasmacytic infiltrates as well as lichenoid interface dermatitis is a diagnostic feature.

Apart from plain histopathology use of special stains (examples: silver staining for spirochetes in secondary syphilis and erythema migrans) and immunofluorescence for dermal and perivascular immune deposits are additional diagnostic aids.

In erythema marginatum associated with hereditary angioedema, there is a presence of dermal deposits of bradykinin, while in psittacosis, a histopathological overlap with EAC is observed.