A good history is essential to make a timely and correct diagnosis. The emergency clinician should ask about the timing of the abortion, whether it was performed by an appropriate abortion provider at the appropriate facility, and whether any intraoperative or early postoperative complications took place. A thorough past medical and past surgical history are important to obtain, including chronic conditions or past surgeries that may complicate the current condition further. Careful medication history is of paramount importance, such as fertility medications and anticoagulants.

The presentation depends on the type of complication that a patient develops. Intraoperative and early postoperative complications are usually not seen in emergency departments (ED) as they are identified and managed by abortion providers during or immediately following the procedure.

However, post-abortion complaints, such as pain, bleeding, low-grade fever are frequently seen in the ED, and the diagnosis of retained products of conception must be sought promptly as a source of the symptoms. Excessive bleeding (postoperative hemorrhage) may be indicative of uterine atony, uterine perforation, ectopic pregnancy, coagulopathy, or iatrogenic surgical instrumentation injury. The post-abortion syndrome can present as progressively worsening lower abdominal pain and hemodynamic compromise without vaginal bleeding. This is due to the collection of blood and/or retained products of conception in the uterus, causing overdistention of the uterine cavity, which is unable to contract in order to expel its contents.

Bowel or bladder injury may initially present as bleeding and pain, but may quickly progress to infection and septic shock.

Failed abortion is more common with early gestational age, and patients may present to ED with symptoms of continued pregnancy.

The physical exam must include the following:

- Vital signs - Frequent vital signs in the ED are essential as patients that were afebrile in triage may develop a fever while in ED. Tachycardia and hypotension are indicative of a hemodynamic compromise.

- Abdominal exam - Look for peritoneal signs, absent bowel sounds, palpable masses, or severe tenderness.

- Pelvic exam - Assess for the severity of vaginal bleeding, look for an obvious vaginal or cervical injury, determine whether the cervical opening to the uterus is open or closed, and note the size and tonus of the uterus as well as uterine tenderness and/or adnexal tenderness.

- A rectal exam may be necessary if a bowel injury is suspected.

- Bowel or bladder perforation should be considered in patients with low abdominal pain.