Post-acute COVID-19 syndrome is a multisystem disorder that commonly affects the respiratory, cardiovascular, and hematopoietic systems. In addition, neuropsychiatric, renal, and endocrine systems are also involved to a lesser extent. Significant organ-specific histopathologic findings are described below.

**Lungs**

- COVID-19 lung autopsy has shown all phases of diffuse alveolar damage with focal and organized fibroproliferative diffuse alveolar damage similar to ARDS.

- Lung tissue analysis (autopsy and explanted lungs of lung transplant recipients) with severe COVID-19 pneumonia showed histopathology like end-stage pulmonary fibrosis without active SARS-CoV-2 infection, suggesting that some people may develop lung fibrosis following resolution of active infection.

- The severity of endothelial damage, microthrombi seen on lung autopsy is significantly more in SARS-CoV-2 infection compared to ARDS from influenza.

**Heart**

- There is much variability in COVID-19 myocardial insult in the histopathologic examination. 62% of Autopsy findings of acute COVID-19 showed the presence of virus genome in the heart tissue.

- Endomyocardial biopsy is the definitive test in the diagnosis of myocarditis. The presence of lymphocyte infiltration with myocyte injury without ischemia is consistent with viral myocarditis according to 1987 Dallas criteria. However, in post-acute Covid-19 syndrome, only 10% to 20% of myocarditis is diagnosed with endomyocardial biopsy. This low sensitivity is secondary to sampling error.

- Immunohistochemical analysis of endomyocardial biopsy showed severe intramyocardial inflammation with increased perforin-positive cells. There are increased numbers of macrophages, T lymphocytes, CD45R0 T memory cells. There is an increased number of cell adhesion molecules(CAM) like CD 54/ICAM-1.

**Brain**

- A single-center histopathological study of brain specimens obtained from eighteen patients who succumbed to COVID-19 demonstrated acute hypoxic injury in the cerebrum and cerebellum of all patients. Notably, no features of encephalitis or other specific brain changes were seen. Additionally, immunohistochemical analysis of brain tissue did not show cytoplasmic viral staining.

**Renal**

- SARS-CoV-2 has been isolated from multiple kidney biopsies, with the most predominant finding being acute tubular necrosis. The presence of collapsing variant focal segmental glomerulosclerosis, acute tubular injury, and global tuft involution is specific for COVID-19 associated nephropathy (COVAN).