When monitoring the use of normal saline, there must be periodic assessments of the patient’s clinical and laboratory findings. Specifically, one must observe any changes in electrolyte concentrations, volume status, and acid-base disturbances. Significant deviations from normal concentrations may require tailoring of the electrolyte pattern in these or alternative solutions.

Patients require evaluation for signs and symptoms of dehydration and fluid overload. Patients with elevated lactate and creatinine concentration are signs that they may not be receiving an adequate amount of volume. Also, the patient's volume status is assessable by monitoring urine output. Ideally, a urine output target of 0.5 mL/kg/hr indicates adequate hydration but may not be useful to determine volume status in patients with renal impairment.

Patients at high risk of developing fluid overload should receive frequent re-evaluation, especially patients with known cardiopulmonary diseases. Signs and symptoms of fluid overload can undergo an evaluation with a comprehensive physical exam. Clinicians should investigate for pulmonary edema (e.g., new or worsening crackles on lung exam), as well as any new or worsening peripheral edema in the extremities.

Additionally, the infusion of more than one liter of isotonic (0.9%) sodium chloride per day may supply more sodium and chloride than physiological levels, which can lead to hypernatremia, as well as hyperchloremic metabolic acidosis. Therefore, patients receiving large volumes of normal saline require monitoring for electrolyte imbalances.

To minimize the risk of possible contaminations, the final solution should be inspected for ambiguity or precipitation immediately after mixing, before administration, and periodically during administration.