Hydatiform mole is characterized by an overgrown villous trophoblast with cystic "swollen" villi. Macroscopically can be visible, the second trimester, as clusters of vesicles (similar to small grapes) developed from the transformation of chorionic villi. Complete mole differs from partial mole, in cytogenetic and microscopical appearance. Important is a complete lack of embryonic/fetal tissue in complete moles and the presence of-of embryonic tissue in partial moles.

Microscopically, a complete mole has markedly hydropic and deformed chorionic villi with the formation of "cisterns" containing stromal fluid; there is a peripheral proliferation of both cytotrophoblast and syncytiotrophoblast, arranged in lace-like structures, papillary formation, or circumferential. In normal early placenta the cytotrophoblast and syncytiotrophoblast are polarized. There is the absence of fetal stromal blood vessels. An immature vascular network is otherwise present, positive for CD31, with dysmorphic features such as a complete lack of lumen. In partial mole there are hydropic chorionic villi surrounded by hyperplastic trophoblasts with variable degrees of central cistern formation, with an irregular maze-like pattern; also, there are normal chorionic villi and embryonic or fetal tissue mixed with hydropic villi. There are recognizable fetal blood vessels containing fetal red blood cells. The curettage material should be examined carefully, especially in first trimester pregnancies, and if a partial mole is suspected the whole specimen should be examined. The main differential diagnosis is with a hydropic abortion, where the main clue is the presence of villous edema only with microscopical evaluation and lacks cistern formation or trophoblastic proliferation. A pitfall in hydropic abortion is the presence of polar stratification of anchoring trophoblast in a first-trimester placenta. The villous size in hydropic abortion ranges from small, to medium and large.

An important marker that aids in the diagnosis of the complete mole is the presence or absence of p57 in immunohistochemistry. This marker is a paternal-imprint inhibitor gene so its expression implies the maternal contribution; in brief, the absence of p57 expression supports the diagnosis of androgenetic gestational disease with complete mole