# Continuing Education Activity

As the United States faces two decades of continuous war, media and individuals with personal military connections have elevated public and professional concerns for the mental health of veterans and service members. This activity outlines the evaluation and management of mental health disorders affecting military service members and veterans, focusing on screening for military service and risk factors unique to these populations. Several of the most salient disorders, including post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD), depression, suicidality, and substance use, are explored. This activity highlights the role of the interprofessional team in improving care for patients with these conditions.

**Objectives:**
- Describe the epidemiology and diagnostic features of PTSD.
- Review the effective therapies of depression in the military community.
- Identify risk and protective factors for suicide in military and veteran populations.
- Summarize management options by the interprofessional team for substance use disorders (SUDs) in military members and veterans.

# Introduction

As the United States faces two decades of continuous war, media and individuals with personal military connections have elevated public and professional concerns for the mental health of veterans and service members.

Current U.S. Census reports estimate roughly 18 million veterans and 2.1 million active-duty and reserve service members (https://www.census.gov/newsroom/press-releases/2020/veterans-report.html). Since September 11, 2001, there have been 2.8 million active-duty American military personnel deployed to Iraq, Afghanistan, and beyond, leading to increasing numbers of combat veterans amongst the population. More than 6% of the U.S. population have served or are serving in the military. However, this statistic fails to capture the even greater number of family members affected by military service.

**Post-Traumatic Stress Disorder (PTSD)**

Post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD) was first codified in the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders (DSM) 3 in 1980, driven in part by sociopolitical aftereffects of the Vietnam War. It has been alluded to in different forms throughout history, from “soldier’s heart” at the time of the Civil War, “shell shock” in the First World War, or “combat fatigue” around the Vietnam War. DSM criteria remained largely unchanged until the most recent update in 2013, although its classification continues to be debated. It is a complex and evolving biological, psychological, and social entity, making it challenging to study and diagnose. PTSD is often researched in war and disaster survivors but can affect anybody, including children. It is usually seen in survivors of violent events such as assault, disasters, terror attacks, and war, although it is also possible to experience PTSD from secondhand exposure, such as learning that a close friend or family member experienced a violent threat or accident. Many individuals exposed to trauma have transient numbness or heightened emotions, nightmares, anxiety, and hypervigilance but usually overcome symptoms within one month. In roughly 10 to 20% of cases, symptoms become persistent and debilitating.

**Depression**

After two decades of continuous war in Afghanistan, a growing population of veterans with combat and deployment experience is presenting for mental health care. Providers must take into account not only the physical wounds these veterans may have sustained but also the less visible ones such as PTSD, acute stress disorder, and depression. Although the condition does not garner the same attention as PTSD, depression remains one of the leading mental health conditions in the military. In fact, studies show that up to 9% of all appointments in the ambulatory military health network are related to depression. The military environment can act as a catalyst for the development and progression of depression. For example, separation from loved ones and support systems, stressors of combat, and seeing oneself and others in harm’s way are all elements that increase the risk of depression in active duty and veteran populations.  Military medical facilities saw an increase from a baseline of 11.4% of members diagnosed with depression to a rate of 15% after deployments to Iraq or Afghanistan.

Major depression manifests through many symptoms, including depressed mood, loss of interest in activities, insomnia, weight loss or gain, psychomotor retardation, fatigue, decreased ability to concentrate, thoughts of worthlessness, and thoughts of suicide. These symptoms coalesce to significantly impact patients’ abilities to function fully. While the complement of symptoms is readily apparent on paper, a patient’s actual presentation can often be ambiguous. One out of every two depressed patients is not appropriately diagnosed by their general practitioner.

**Suicide**

Veteran suicide rates are at the highest level in recorded history, with annual deaths by suicide at over 6,000 veterans per year.

**Substance Use Disorders**

Despite public attention over recent decades, SUDs, including alcohol use, remains a problem among veterans and military members. In these populations, alcohol use is common and is often used for stress relief and socializing. SUDs are associated with significant adverse medical, psychiatric, interpersonal, and occupational outcomes. One study on military personnel found that approximately 30% of completed suicides and around 20% of deaths due to high-risk behavior were attributable to alcohol or drug use. In the general U.S. population, alcohol is the fourth leading cause of preventable death, and 31% of driving-related fatalities involve alcohol intoxication.

# Etiology

**PTSD**

The etiology of PTSD is yet to be fully elucidated. Progress in neuroscience and genetics have helped characterize it as biological, not just psychological, disease. Current research points include fear conditioning, neural circuit dysregulation, memory reconsolidation, genetics, and epigenetics, especially childhood trauma on hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal (HPA) axis regulation. Like other complex disorders, it is thought to be highly polygenic and influenced by external exposures.

Several risk factors exist before, during, and after inciting traumas. Childhood trauma places patients at higher risk for subsequent development of PTSD.

**Depression**

Despite decades of research on major depressive disorder (MDD), its etiology is still not fully understood. There is a clear neurobiological link that exists for this mood disorder. However, exactly which markers and processes play the most critical role is still debated. Patients with major depressive episodes have shown increased responses to cortisol in the HPA axis, which could explain how stress is a substantial risk factor.

Many factors predispose individuals to major depressive episodes. Some common risk factors in the general population include unemployment, financial stress, female gender, and personal or parental history of mental health concerns. The military brings additional risk factors that providers should consider, for example:

- Uniformed code of military justice actions (legal concerns)

- Rank and promotion complications

- Deployments

- Combat exposure

- Physical fitness concerns

- Permanent changes of station (frequent relocations)

- Command/leadership discord

**Suicide**

Studies on veterans and service members have attempted to characterize factors correlating military operations and suicide in an attempt to identify vulnerable patients and provide early intervention. While serving in the military, members may have stressors such as disciplinary actions, physical problems including pain, leadership conflicts, transferring duty stations, reductions in rank, or administrative separation from service.

Several protective factors may exist in military cohorts, such as a sense of duty to others, belonging or identity, strong interpersonal bonds, and access to healthcare. In particular, service members with family and friends with whom they can discuss deployments are less likely to experience suicidal ideation (SI). Another identified protective factor is a sense of purpose or control of one's life.

**Substance Use Disorders**

Neuroscientific advances have provided an increased understanding of drug effects on the brain. Addiction is a chronic relapsing disorder triggered by repeat drug exposures in those vulnerable due to genetics, development, and psychosocial conditions, including accessibility, drug use norms, and social support (or lack thereof). Drug use is driven by a substance’s pharmacological effects, which provide rewarding experiences. Its reinforcing effects depend largely on dopamine signaling at the nucleus accumbens. Chronic exposure triggers glutamate-mediated adaptations in the striato-thalamo-cortical pathway, primarily in the prefrontal cortex at the orbitofrontal and anterior cingulate cortices. Another identified pathway is the limbic system, which consists of the amygdala and hippocampus. Drugs cause changes in the extended amygdala, producing negative baseline emotional states, which the drug helps temporarily alleviate. Counterintuitively, drug use is associated with blunted dopamine release in brain reward regions. The drug use experience does not meet the expectations of reward triggered by conditioning to drug cues. Altogether, the substance creates enhanced motivations for drug seeking and impaired self-regulation through effects on the prefrontal cortex.

Significant genetic influences contribute to SUDs, such as neurotransmission pathways, most importantly within the dopaminergic system. Other genetic influence points include drug processing and metabolism. Research on the gene-environment interaction has shed light on potential mechanisms of how the environment influences substance use biology. Epigenetic studies have demonstrated drug-induced changes in gene expression, which differ by stage of disease (substance initiation versus chronic use). Studies on epigenetic mechanisms such as methylation and microRNA with substance use are ongoing.

# Epidemiology

**PTSD**

Prevalence of combat-induced PTSD ranges from 2 to 17% in U.S. veterans but is lower and with a narrower range in other Western countries throughout the same conflicts. This variability is multifactorial, including the uniqueness of each theater and changes in diagnostic criteria. Each war exposes participants to varying intensities of combat and occurs in different sociopolitical contexts from which troops are pulled and returned. There are also noteworthy differences between studies, including sampling methods, measurement strategies, such as self-report versus structured interviews, and delays in assessment after combat exposure, oftentimes years or decades later, possibly increasing recall bias. The multifactorial, inherently subjective, and evolving nature of PTSD poses significant challenges to accurately defining its epidemiology.

**Depression**

Major depression is the most prevalent mood disorder in the general population, with an estimated lifetime prevalence of up to 21%. Lifetime incidence for females ranges as high as 25%, and in males as high as 12%.

**Suicide**

Before 2000, suicide rates within the military and veteran populations were lower than in civilians. However, rates have increased during the last twenty years and currently exceed the civilian rate. There are approximately 19.74 deaths per 100,000 members within the military service, and age-adjusted suicide rates (amongst 17 to 59 year-olds) in the U.S. population is 16.8 per 100,000.

**Substance Use Disorders**

Changes to DSM criteria and the fact that not all veterans receive care through the VA make it challenging to know the true prevalence of SUDs in veterans. As with the general population, SUDs are more common in male veterans (10.5% alcohol and 4.8% other drugs, compared to 4.8% and 2.4%, respectively, amongst female veterans). Unmarried and veterans younger than 25 are at the most risk.

In military and veteran populations, alcohol use disorders (AUDs) are the most prevalent form of SUD. According to the National Survey on Drug Use and Health, compared to non-veterans, veterans were more likely to use alcohol (56.6% versus 50.8% over one month) and use heavily (7.5% versus 6.5% over one month). Problematic drinking was higher in those with more combat exposure: heavy and binge drinking were found at 26.8% and 54.8%, respectively, in those with high combat exposure, compared to other military personnel at 17% and 45%. Smoking is more common in veterans compared to age-matched civilians (27% versus 21%). Opioids are being given to veterans at increasing rates. From 2001 to 2009, the number of VA opioid prescriptions increased from 17% to 24%. A diagnosis of PTSD (17.8%) or other mental health disorders (11.7%) increased the likelihood of getting an opioid prescription compared to those without (6.5%). Illicit drug use among veterans occurs at similar rates to civilians, at around 4% over one month. Marijuana is the most common among veterans at 3.5% compared to 1.7% for other illicit drugs over one month. Cannabis use disorders increased by 50% between 2002 to 2009 among VA patients.

# History and Physical

**Assessment of Military Service**

The foundations of a thorough mental health assessment do not change when discussing mental health concerns with a service member or veteran. A challenge that practitioners face is identifying military service in a patient’s history.

- “Have you or someone close to you ever serve in the military?”

- “When did you serve?”

- “Which branch did you serve in?”

- “What did you do while you were in the military?”

- “Were you assigned to a hostile or combat area?”

- “Did you experience enemy fire, see combat, or witness casualties?”

- “Were you wounded, injured, or hospitalized?”

- “Were you exposed to noise, chemicals, gases, demolition of munitions, pesticides, or other hazardous substances?”

- “Have you ever used the VA for health care?”

**PTSD**

Some individuals may have difficulties being aware or forthcoming about the emotional or cognitive aspects of PTSD and may instead present with complaints about physiologic symptoms such as insomnia. Nonetheless, history will form the basis of diagnosis, as not all patients have physical exam findings. There are eight criteria and two specifiers for PTSD, which should be explored through thorough history-taking, and are outlined below (see “Evaluation”).

**Depression**

The basis of a major depression diagnosis is found in the patient’s history. This should include a course of present illness, current symptoms and timeline, prior history of similar symptoms, alleviating or aggravating factors, impact on daily living, and complete medical history to include psychiatric history. Other categories to explore include family mental health history and social history, which includes job or relationship stressors as well as possible support structures. The same thorough history should be attained for military and veteran patients.

A pertinent physical exam is imperative for any encounter and is no different in patients presenting with mental health concerns. For example, patients experiencing depression often have physical manifestations such as fatigue, insomnia, or weight changes. Thorough consideration of organic etiologies must be given to those with somatic symptoms. Furthermore, providers must be willing to change a diagnosis if other symptoms and a more appropriate etiology are identified.

**Suicide**

Thorough histories are essential in evaluating patients with suicide risk. Specifically, clinicians should identify exacerbating and protective factors, particularly modifiable targets for intervention.

**Substance Use Disorders**

SUDs are a pattern of drug use causing distress or impairment, with at least two of eleven symptoms categorized under four categories (impaired control, social impairment, risky use, and pharmacologic effects) occurring over one year. Detailed criteria are in the “Evaluation” section below. Following a positive screen (also discussed below), providers should obtain a thorough history and exam, including medical and mental health comorbidities, family history, and social history. Presentations vary depending on the substance(s) used, and individuals may have incentives to minimize them. A mental status exam (MSE) may be helpful in the presence of psychiatric symptoms. This is an assessment of appearance, behavior, speech, motor activity, mood and affect, perceptions, thought processes, thought content (including suicidal/homicidal ideation, hallucinations, and delusions), insight, judgment, and cognitive function. Abnormalities should alert providers to the possibility of a SUD, as they are often associated. The MSE, however, is usually normal in SUD except during intoxication, withdrawal, active psychosis, or cognitive impairment from chronic substance use. Beyond the history and physical, a multidimensional assessment is necessary to offer personalized, comprehensive management plans. Consider:

- The pattern of substance use, treatment history, intoxication/withdrawal potential, and continued use potential

- Emotional, behavioral, and cognitive conditions

- Living environment

- Employment and finances

- Criminal justice involvement

- Readiness to change

Alcohol use can manifest in many organ systems and the behavioral, psychiatric, and social realms and may not be attributable to drinking. Examples include:

- Injuries from accidents or assault

- Anxiety, depression, and suicidality

- Concurrent use of other drugs

- Central or peripheral neurologic symptoms

- Sleep disturbances

- Hypertension

- Cardiac disease

- Electrolyte disturbances

- Gastrointestinal symptoms including reflux (GERD)

- Bone marrow suppression

- Macrocytosis

- Malignancies, including oropharyngeal and gastrointestinal

The use of other substances is also associated with compromised function in virtually every organ system. Diseases may develop from direct toxicity, method of administration, and high-risk behaviors surrounding use such as needle sharing, unprotected sex, or poor hygiene. Possible physical indicators of substance use include:

- Unintended weight loss or gain

- Scars (“track marks”) in injection drug use

- In inhalational use: nasal mucosal atrophy or septum perforation

- In acute intoxication/withdrawal: unsteady gait, slurred speech, pupil changes, conjunctival injection, eye tearing, rhinorrhea, odd behavior, tachycardia, diaphoresis

- Signs of medical comorbidities resulting from drug use (see “Complications” below)

# Evaluation

**PTSD**

Screening: PTSD screening serves several functions, the first of which is risk assessment. This helps identify patients at risk of developing PTSD who do not yet meet full criteria, allowing them to be routed to early prevention efforts. Screening also allows for earlier detection of acute and sub-threshold cases or uncover unidentified chronic PTSD patients.

Diagnosis: DSM-5 diagnostic criteria for adults are:

- Exposure to death (actual or threatened), serious injury, or sexual violence by:

- 
              
- Direct experience,
              
              
- Witnessing as it occurred to others firsthand,
              
              
- Learning that it occurred to a close friend or family member, or
              
              
- Experiencing repeat or extreme exposures to unpleasant details of the event(s), for example, police officers repeatedly finding human remains. This is not applicable if the exposure was through media unless as part of the patient’s work.

- One or more “intrusion symptoms”:

- 
              
- Distressing memories of the event which are invasive, involuntary, and reoccurring
              
              
- Recurrent nightmares about the event
              
              
- Dissociative reactions such as flashbacks where the patient feels like they are reexperiencing the event
              
              
- Prolonged or intense psychological distress to cues resembling some aspect of the event
              
              
- Significant physiologic response to cues resembling some aspect of the event.

- Avoidance of trauma-related stimuli, as displayed by one or both:

- 
              
- Efforts to avoid stressful memories or thoughts
              
              
- Efforts to avoid people, locations, topics, situations, etc. which trigger stressful recollections of the event.

- Negative mood or cognitions surrounding the event, as displayed by two or more of these criteria:

- 
              
- Inability to recall significant features of the event, excluding other etiologies such as TBI and intoxication
              
              
- Exaggerated or persistent pessimistic beliefs about the self, others, or world
              
              
- Distorted ideas about the cause or consequences of the trauma
              
              
- Persistently negative emotional state, which can be fearful, angry, shameful, etc.
              
              
- Detachment from others
              
              
- Inability to feel good emotions such as satisfaction, love, and happiness.

- Altered arousal and reactivity, as shown by two or more of the following:

- 
              
- Irritability despite minimal provocation, often expressed as angry outbursts or physical/verbal aggression
              
              
- Recklessness or self-destructive behavior
              
              
- Hypervigilance
              
              
- Marked startle response
              
              
- Concentration difficulties
              
              
- Insomnia.

- Criteria B through E must be present for longer than one month.

- Symptoms must cause significant distress or impairment in social, occupational, or other important functional domains.

- Symptoms cannot be due to substances or another medical condition.

The PTSD diagnosis is ideally made using multi-method assessments given limitations of individual tools. This practically includes a self-report symptom severity measure such as the PCL-5 and a semi-structured clinical interview. Biological measurements such as heart rate, sweat gland activity, and neuroimaging are areas of ongoing research and are not widely available. Semi-structured interviews, most commonly the Clinician-Administered PTSD Scale (CAPS-5), are conducted by trained interviewers and are the gold standard for diagnosis. They have the advantage of the ability to clarify responses, decreasing the likelihood of misinterpretation of questions, symptom exaggeration or minimization, and inconsistent responses.

**Depression**

Screening: Major depression is both prevalent and underdiagnosed in the general population. Because of this, the United States Preventive Services Task Force recommends screening for depression in those aged twelve or older. The youngest service members are eighteen years old. Therefore, screening for depression in the military community is highly recommended. Currently, a two-item (PHQ-2) and a nine-item (PHQ-9) Public Health Questionnaire are effectively used to identify patients warranting further investigation. They share similar sensitivities; however, the specificity of the PHQ-9 is higher at 91 to 94% compared to the PHQ-2 (78 to 92%).

While still useful as a severity tool, the BDI-II was found to have high sensitivity but lower specificity at over 90% and 59%, respectively, than the PHQ tools.

Diagnosis: according to DSM-5 criteria, a diagnosis of MDD can be applied when a patient experiences one or more major depressive episodes. A major depressive episode is defined as having five of the following symptoms present during a two-week period with a change in baseline functional status. Furthermore, depressed mood or loss of interest or pleasure in activities must be one of the endorsed symptoms. The full list of symptoms to consider includes depressed mood, loss of interest/pleasure in activities, weight loss or gain, insomnia or hypersomnia, psychomotor agitation or retardation, fatigue, feeling worthless or excessive guilt, decreased concentration, and thoughts of death or suicide. Physiologic causes, substance use, and other psychiatric disorders must be excluded.

Laboratory and imaging: Evaluations should be performed at the provider’s discretion, guided by the history and physical exam. Common laboratories drawn in the initial evaluation of a patient with depressive symptoms include:

- Complete blood count

- Serum chemistry panel

- Urinalysis

- Thyroid-stimulating hormone

- Rapid plasma reagin

- Human chorionic gonadotropin

- Urine toxicology screen

Imaging is generally reserved for instances where structural brain diseases are suspected. Further laboratory and neuroimaging evaluations should be guided by findings in the history and physical examination.

**Suicide**

While many resources are available for identifying those at elevated risk of suicide, most such screening tools are ineffective in accurately predicting risk. They frequently have low positive predictive values, high false-negative rates, and high false-positive rates.

Item 9: “Over the past two weeks, how often have you been bothered by thoughts that you would be better off dead or of hurting yourself in some way?”

Responses: “Not at all,” “Several days,” “More than half the days,” or “Nearly every day.”

Generally, patients who respond with high levels of SI are associated with a higher risk of death by suicide.

Clinicians should conduct suicide risk evaluations on patients who screen positive. There are multiple analytic models and assessment tools for determining the future risk of suicide. These methods help standardize information gathering during the patient interview.

**Substance Use Disorders**

Screening: Several alcohol-use screenings have been validated, but none have advantages over the single-item screening, Alcohol Use Disorders Identification Test (AUDIT), or AUDIT-Concise (AUDIT-C) in primary care settings. AUDIT was the most effective in identifying those with high risk, hazardous, or harmful drinking (51 to 97% sensitivity, 78 to 96% specificity depending on score cutoffs, and “harmful use” criteria used), while CAGE questions were best at predicting alcohol abuse and dependence (43 to 94% sensitivity, 70 to 97% specificity). Several single-item screening questions have been proposed. One validated example asks, “on a single occasion within the last three months, have you had five or more drinks containing alcohol?” An affirmative was 62% sensitive and 93% specific for problematic alcohol use. Brevity, memorability, and a lack of scoring make this easy to use. AUDIT is the most widely validated AUD screening. It contains ten items and takes two to three minutes to complete. Questions assess the frequency, quantity, drinking occasions, impairment, dependence, harmful use, and concern from others. Scores range from 0 to 40, with an 8 or higher considered indicative for unhealthy alcohol use. AUDIT-C contains three questions on excess consumption. It was proven primarily in male veterans, but other studies validating its use in other populations are being published. Studies show a 54 to 98% sensitivity and 57 to 93% specificity for varying definitions of “heavy drinking.”

- How often do you have a beverage containing alcohol?

- How many beverages containing alcohol do you have on a typical drinking day?

- How often do you have 6 (male) or 4 (female) or more drinks on a single occasion?

CAGE is a series of four questions designed to detect substance abuse and dependence per DSM-4 criteria. It is most useful for identifying patients with severe problems (when two or more questions are positive) and must be supplemented with quantity and frequency questions if positive.

- Have you ever felt the need to **C**ut down on drinking?

- Have others **A**nnoyed you by criticizing your drinking?

- Have you ever felt **G**uilty about your drinking?

- Have you ever needed to drink first thing in the morning to steady your nerves or get rid of a hangover (**E**ye-opener)?

Diagnosis: DSM-5 diagnostic criteria are below. The presence of two to three symptoms is considered mild, four to five moderate, and six or more severe.

Impaired Control:

- Taking the substance in larger amounts or over a longer period than intended

- Unsuccessful attempts or persistent desire to reduce or regulate the use

- Spending excess time to obtain, use, or recover from the effects of the substance

- A strong craving, or intense desire/urge, for the substance, can occur at any time

Social Impairment:

- Substance use causes significant interference with work, school, or home roles.

- Continued use despite recurrent social or interpersonal consequences exacerbated by the use

- Reducing or abandoning important social, recreational, or occupational activities due to substance use

Risky Use:

- Substance use in physically hazardous locations

- Use despite knowing of persistent physical or psychological consequences exacerbated by the drug.

Pharmacology:

- Tolerance: increasing doses of substance needed to achieve the desired effect

- Withdrawal: physical or psychological symptoms occur with abrupt discontinuation/dose decreases.

Laboratory tests: Urine, blood, sweat, hair, saliva, and breath tests exist for alcohol and other drugs and can detect recent use. Patients are more likely to answer use-related questions more honestly when an objective measure has been taken. However, they cannot quantify the frequency or dose(s) used. Thus, they may be of higher utility in monitoring for abstinence. Basic screening tests exist for amphetamines, cocaine, cannabis, certain opioids, and phencyclidine. Except in emergencies, permission for obtaining a drug screen must be obtained. Several alcohol-specific laboratory tests exist but tend to require heavy, repetitive consumption to cause abnormalities. Most are non-specific to varying degrees. In the absence of other explanations, the following can aid in the assessment of unhealthy alcohol use:

- Liver function tests: aspartate aminotransferase (AST) and alanine aminotransferase (ALT) can be elevated with hepatotoxicity. An AST:ALT ratio of 2:1 is more specific to alcohol-induced liver disease. Bilirubin may be elevated. Albumin will be decreased in liver damage.

- Complete blood count: anemia, pancytopenia, and macrocytosis can be seen in chronic alcohol use.

- Gamma-glutamyltransferase (GGT): another enzyme primarily found in the liver, often elevated with excessive alcohol use (reference range: 8-40 units/L in females, 9-50 units/L in males).

The following are less widely available:

- Carbohydrate-deficient transferrin (CDT): a level greater than 1.6 percent suggests chronic excessive alcohol use over an approximate two-week period. It is relatively specific but can be elevated in certain rare liver diseases, i.e., primary biliary cirrhosis.

- Phosphatidylethanol (PEth): this is specific for alcohol use. A value greater than 20 ng/dL is seen in moderate alcohol consumption, while values greater than 200 ng/dL typically indicate heavy alcohol consumption.

# Treatment / Management

**PTSD**

Treatment for PTSD should be initiated soon after diagnosis when symptoms have persisted for at least four weeks, although most patients present months or years later. First-line treatment generally consists of psychotherapy, with medications as a reasonable alternative or augmenting strategy based on patient preference or when psychotherapy is unavailable.

Non-pharmacologic therapies: Effective PTSD psychotherapies include exposure therapy, cognitive processing therapy (CPT), trauma-focused cognitive-behavioral therapy (TF-CBT), and eye-movement desensitization and reprocessing (EMDR). Exposure therapy is rooted in emotional processing theory and seeks to correct a dysfunctional fear cognitive structure. CPT is trauma-specific and takes twelve weeks. This also draws on emotional processing theory along with social cognitive theory and attempts to correct distorted cognitions about the self and world after trauma.

Pharmacotherapy: Medications can be effective in reducing core PTSD symptoms and should be kept as an option. They are more effective against hyperarousal and mood symptoms and less so for re-experience, emotional numbing, and avoidance symptoms. No medication class has demonstrated better suitability or tolerability than others. However, the largest and greatest number of trials have been conducted on selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors (SSRIs). Multiple randomized control trials found reduced PTSD symptoms with SSRIs when compared to placebo. Venlafaxine, a serotonin-norepinephrine reuptake inhibitor (SNRI), has shown effectiveness and tolerability in a smaller body of literature.

Combining therapies: Some trials suggest that SSRIs, TF-CBT, and their combination are roughly equivalent in effectiveness, with some advantages to psychotherapy for patient preference. There was improved adherence when patients were given their preferred treatment modality.

**Depression**

Treatment for MDD remains the same for both the general and military populations. Combinations of pharmacologic and psychotherapies have been proven to be the most effective treatment strategy.

Psychotherapy: Psychotherapy is a category of treatment options involving talk sessions between patient and provider. There are several types, including CBT, interpersonal psychotherapy, behavioral activation, problem-solving therapy, supportive psychotherapy, and psychodynamic psychotherapy. Although no type has been shown to be superior to another, CBT and interpersonal psychotherapy are often selected first because of the lengthy list of studies on those methods.

Pharmacotherapy:  Evidence continues to support the use of pharmacologic agents in the treatment of MDD. Options include serotonin reuptake inhibitors (SRIs), SSRIs, MAOIs, SNRIs, and TCAs. Each class of medications works in slightly different ways and is beyond the scope of this article. The selection of the appropriate agent should be individualized to the patient. Patient factors include comorbid conditions, clinical presentation, side effects, and previous medication use.

Electroconvulsive Therapy (ECT): ECT involves an electric current to stimulate the brain into a generalized cerebral seizure. It is widely viewed as efficacious and safe but is generally reserved for cases of severe, resistant MDD.

**Suicide**

As part of treatment, the VA and DoD recommend a crisis response plan that includes assessing SI and history of previous attempts. Patients at imminent risk of suicide should be hospitalized, and a safety plan developed.

**Substance Use Disorders**

Non-pharmacologic therapies: Psychotherapy is the mainstay of SUD treatment. Screening, Brief Intervention, and Referral to Treatment (SBIRT) is a “first aid” strategy designed to intervene on unhealthy drinking before progression to AUD and provide immediate treatment to those who have already developed it. If further treatment or evaluation is indicated, patients should be offered longer-term management in primary care or specialist settings. Evidence-based psychotherapy or behavioral interventions should be offered. This typically consists of short-term CBT to identify and modify maladaptive thoughts and behaviors around substance use. CBT can also help incentivize abstinence, manage contingencies, and improve stress management skills.

Pharmacotherapy: Several pharmacotherapies have received support in managing SUDs, primarily by reducing cravings or withdrawal symptoms to incentivize abstinence or reduce barriers to quitting.

In addition to clinical interventions, veterans with SUDs can be introduced to self-help groups such as Alcoholics Anonymous or Narcotics Anonymous. They are generally free, available in most locations, and can be helpful as ongoing maintenance engagement in those seeking abstinence.

# Differential Diagnosis

**PTSD**

The differential diagnosis of PTSD is extensive and is complicated by high rates of psychiatric comorbidities, some of which are addressed under “Complications.” Below is a limited list focusing on adults:

- Acute stress disorder: Individuals presenting with at least nine of fourteen symptoms in the five categories (intrusion, negative mood, dissociation, avoidance, and arousal), lasting between three days to a month after a trauma, and suffering functional impairment, qualify for this diagnosis. The majority of patients recover within this period. Those who remain symptomatic after thirty days are reclassified as having PTSD.

- Adjustment disorders

- Depressive disorders

- Anxiety disorders: includes specific phobias, social anxiety disorder (social phobia), panic disorder, agoraphobia, and generalized anxiety disorder.

- Substance use

- Obsessive-compulsive disorder

- Bereavement

- Schizophrenia and other psychotic disorders

- Personality disorders, especially borderline personality disorder

- Dissociative disorders

- Conversion disorder

- TBI

**Depression**

While the entire differential diagnosis for MDD is expansive and beyond the scope of this article, three other conditions must be considered before establishing this diagnosis: grief, adjustment disorder, and persistent depressive disorder (PDD). Grief usually occurs with the loss of a loved one. Patients experiencing grief often have symptoms that overlap with depression, such as decreased interest in activities, depressed mood, and thoughts about the deceased individual.

**Substance Use Disorders**

Differential diagnoses depend on the substance in use and are numerous. In addition, most other DSM-5 diagnoses require ruling out substance-induced variants, which can manifest in similar ways or trigger the onset of such disorders. Categories of diagnoses associated with substances include psychotic, bipolar, depressive, anxiety, obsessive-compulsive and related sleep disorders, sexual dysfunction, delirium, and neurocognitive disorders.

# Prognosis

**PTSD**

PTSD prognosis varies widely between individuals and can sometimes become a chronic condition. Approximately one-half of adults will recover within three months. Another one-third of patients will recover by twelve months, and a significant minority of patients may remain symptomatic after ten years. Those who will recover without treatment are likely to do so within the first year. Affected individuals are more likely to have educational or occupational problems, intimate relationship struggles, and less social support.

**Depression**

The course of MDD is variable, with less than half of cases resolving within 3 months of onset vs. approximately 80% improving within 12 months. A higher risk of recurrence is associated with major depressive episodes falling under the severe specifier and can sometimes become a chronic condition that will continue to require attention and maintenance. Studies have shown that patients who continued with pharmacotherapy for a minimum of six to twelve months following their first depressive episode experienced less risk of recurrence of symptoms compared to those who discontinued medication earlier (25% compared to 50%). While remission is the ultimate goal, trials show that continued care and collaborative treatment programs reduce the prevalence and incidence of major depressive episodes later in life.

**Suicide**

Patients with non-completed suicide attempts have a significantly increased risk for subsequent attempts. Although the risk of completed suicide is highest in the first year after an attempt, the danger can remain elevated for a decade.

**Substance Use Disorders**

One large study on VA patient-centered medical homes found that depression, severe mental illness (except for PTSD), and SUDs were associated with an increased one-year risk of hospitalization and death. The authors attributed the PTSD exemption to increased healthcare encounters in PTSD patients. This supports the idea that mental illnesses, including SUDs, are associated with poor outcomes but can be somewhat relieved by access to care.

# Complications

**PTSD**

Patients are subject to a variety of somatic and mental health comorbidities. The directionality and degree of overlap between diagnoses are complex. One study in OIF/OEF veterans with PTSD found that compared to veterans without mental health conditions, they had more medical diagnoses, the most common being lumbosacral spine disease, headache, lower extremity joint problems, and hearing loss.

PTSD and AUD have been linked over decades of research. Men have a higher prevalence of AUD, and women of PTSD, but individuals with either disorder are likelier to have the other. SUDs were four times more likely (55 to 75% rate) with PTSD in Iraq and Afghanistan veterans.

Similarly, depression and PTSD are associated. One study found that 36% of depression patients had positive PTSD screens. Those with both have higher medical illness burdens, worse prognoses, lower social support, higher SI rates, and prolonged treatment.

TBI and PTSD also have known comorbidities and are an area of extensive research. The largest studies of Iraq and Afghanistan veterans show an overlap rate between 5 to 7%. In those with mild TBI (mTBI), PTSD frequency ranged from 33 to 39%. As many as 23% of returning OIF/OEF veterans suffered TBI, the vast majority being mild. However, even mild cases can lead to somatic, cognitive, or behavioral alterations which confound PTSD symptoms. Whether treatments for mTBI or PTSD alone are helpful is still unknown. There is some concern that PTSD pharmacotherapies may exacerbate the cognitive symptoms of PTSD. Cognitive limitations, impaired emotional regulation and impulse control, and pain from TBI may limit PTSD treatment effectiveness and patients’ ability to engage in therapy.

**Depression**

MDD comes with a constellation of symptoms which can lead to further complications. Weight gain and fatigue are common symptoms of depression. Studies show an odds ratio of 1.18 linking depression and obesity.

**Suicide**

Suicide attempts and completions are traumatic events that can affect the breadth of people and lead to long-term concerns. Friends and family members may experience a variety of emotions towards the patient, including anger, guilt, betrayal, anxiety, or helplessness. Post-suicide interventions can help family and friends understand suicide victims and reduce their inappropriate assumption of responsibility.

**Substance Use Disorders**

Psychiatric symptoms, including distress, often precedes and worsens cravings. Comorbid psychiatric disorders make SUDs more severe and difficult to treat. Among OEF/OIF veterans with SUD, 82 to 93% had another mental health disorder. Those with a SUD were three to four times more likely to have PTSD or depression. Less than 1% had an isolated diagnosis of SUD. Dually-diagnosed veterans were more likely to be homeless and require disability benefits. Lower quality of life, poorer relationships, and aggression are also more common.

- Cardiovascular disease: hypertension, cardiomyopathy, endocarditis, heart failure

- Gastrointestinal disease: pancreatitis, cirrhosis, chronic liver disease, hepatitis B/C

- Kidney failure

- Central nervous system disease: dementia, memory/attention impairment, cerebral vasculitis, intraparenchymal hemorrhage, stroke/TIA, TBI

- Pulmonary disease: chronic obstructive lung disease, bronchospasm, pneumonia, hypersensitivity pneumonitis, tuberculosis

- Sexually transmitted infections

- Impaired immunity

- Bacterial infections

- Pregnancy and birth complications

# Consultations

Practitioners should be committed to understanding the unique challenges veterans and their families face and familiar with available military resources. Appropriate referrals are an essential aspect of continued care. Reasons to refer to military or VA-related organizations are wide-ranging; however, veterans often benefit from treatment plans, including providers and other veterans who understand their life experiences. The DoD and affiliated organizations provide programs to help with a broad range of concerns.

Military OneSource is one example that serves military members and families, with programs like non-medical counseling, financial coaching, employment resources. Coaching into Care is a VA telephone service connecting veterans and loved ones with relevant programs in local VA facilities or communities. It includes free coaching from licensed psychologists and social workers to help veterans adjust to civilian life and seek treatment. Community peer groups can be a valuable tool when available.

If there are no local VA services, veterans and family members can call the Vet Center Call Center, which provides twenty-four-hour readjustment counseling from staff who are also combating veterans or their family members. In moments of crisis, the VA offers the toll-free Veterans Crisis Line, which has trained responders, many of whom are veterans.

# Deterrence and Patient Education

**PTSD**

The risk of developing PTSD and the effectiveness of treatments can be influenced by social support. However, it can be challenging for patients to admit to the effects of past traumas and initiate care. There may be a strong sense of fear, vulnerability, and confusion. PTSD affects physical and mental health in ways that are not always apparent. Thus awareness about the signs and symptoms is essential. Patient buy-in and commitment to treatment courses, often alongside treatment of comorbid conditions, are paramount to limiting illness burden for patients and loved ones.

**Depression**

Military members are at risk of developing MDD given risk exposures inherent to both the general population and military service. Despite the DoD’s renewed energy and devotion to providing members adequate access to care, the stigma around mental health remains. Military members and veterans report worrying about appearing weak or being overlooked for a position as reasons not to seek care.

**Suicide**

Due to high rates of suicide among veterans, safety plans are mandated by the VA for those at risk.

- Step 1: Identify warning signs that indicate an impending suicidal crisis

- Step 2: Employ internal coping strategies (meditation, pleasant activities, or relaxation techniques, etc.)

- Step 3: Reach out to social contacts or visit locations that serve as distractions.

- Step 4: Contact a family member or friend for help

- Step 5: Contact a professional or agency (Veterans’ Crisis Line or therapist, etc.)

- Step 6: Remove or reduce access to lethal means

It is important to note that safety plans do not protect patients or clinicians, and patients who agree to their safety plan may still be at high risk. Therefore, thorough evaluations and meaningful therapeutic interactions should also be utilized, particularly in impulsive patients.

**Substance Use Disorders**

Treatment of SUDs usually involves short-term therapy to identify and modify unhelpful thoughts and behaviors tied to substance use. Some, such as opioids, alcohol, and tobacco, are effectively treated medications as well. Others, like cocaine and marijuana, have no approved medications, making counseling the mainstay of treatment. The military and VA offer free counseling, including smoking cessation, which has been effective and improves long-term outcomes. Treatment can be individualized, help rebuild relationships with loved ones, and build valuable life skills.

# Enhancing Healthcare Team Outcomes

Mental health disorders in military and veteran populations can be diagnosed through detailed history-taking; however, mental status or cognitive testing and labs may be needed to distinguish between several medical and psychiatric illnesses. Timely diagnosis and intervention are best achieved through interprofessional collaboration.

Primary care providers can screen populations at risk and can likely be the first to suspect PTSD, depression, suicidality, SUDs, and comorbidities. Nurses can be instrumental in patient education and monitoring and can be a conduit between care teams. Social workers serve as outpatient counselors and are indispensable in these disorders with such pervasive social effects. Pharmacists should be consulted when utilizing pharmacotherapy, especially in those with comorbid medical and psychiatric illnesses. Psychologists and psychiatrists can guide or provide care, especially for patients with high acuity or complexity.

All treatment and intervention should involve the patient and family as part of the interprofessional treatment team, as social support is an overarching driver in both the pathogenesis and recovery of these disorders. These interprofessional methods will result in better patient outcomes.