Ramsay Hunt patients typically present with the classic triad of ipsilateral facial paralysis, otalgia, and painful vesicles on the auricle; however, patients who present early in the course of the disease may only have pain without facial paralysis or a rash. Notably, the characteristic rash correlates to the areas innervated by the facial nerve; on the auricle, this includes the conchal bowl, anti-helix, and postauricular sulcus, but the rash can involve the auditory canal, scalp, cheek, tongue, or palate.

Although the presence of rash is variable, the majority of Ramsay Hunt patients report pre-herpetic, or pre-eruptive, otalgia. This is most frequently described as severe, of a sharp or stabbing quality, may awaken the patient from sleep, and persists for multiple days.

Generally, the most apparent feature on physical examination will be unilateral hemifacial palsy, which will be complete in close to 50% of patients.

The third pass of the facial examination should repeat the same movements as the second pass, but the examiner should look for involuntary movements in other areas of the affected hemiface. These synkinetic movements, commonly seen as twitching of the mouth during eye closure or winking during a smile, indicate aberrant regeneration and do not typically appear until 4-6 months after the onset of the paralysis; they are more common in patients with more severe initial paralysis.

Patients with lagophthalmos should have their Bell's phenomenon evaluated, as this is an important corneal protection mechanism. The Bell's phenomenon is the upward rotation of the globe when the eyelids close; it is often lost as patients age. Patients who complain of eye pain or a foreign body sensation should undergo a slit-lamp examination to assess for corneal abrasions or exposure keratopathy, which are very common in cases of facial paralysis. Assessment of corneal sensation is also important because even though corneal anesthesia is rare in Ramsay Hunt syndrome, patients will be predisposed to ocular injury if the eye does not close properly and foreign bodies cannot be felt. Patients with hearing or balance complaints should undergo audiometry and potentially vestibular testing, and patients who note hoarseness or dysphagia should undergo fiberoptic laryngoscopy to evaluate the vocal cords. All patients should receive a thorough cranial nerve examination and inspection of the oral cavity, scalp, external ears, and auditory canals to look for a vesicular eruption. The nose and eyes are not typically involved with vesicles in Ramsay Hunt syndrome, but this can be seen in other forms of zoster. Vesicles near the tip of the nose, Hutchinson's sign, can be associated with ocular lesions.