The nail unit consists of the nail plate and periungual tissues. Each unit is listed below.

**Nail Matrix**

The nail matrix is the structure that produces the nail plate, the visible part of the nail that is hard and translucent. The nail matrix is about halfway between the proximal nail fold and the distal interphalangeal joint. It is divided up into the proximal and distal nail matrix. The distal nail matrix is visible and is called the lunula. The lunula looks like a white half-circular flat structure at the proximal portion of the nail plate. There are three portions of the nail matrix that correspond to the three-layer structure of the nail plate. The dorsal aspect of the nail matrix corresponds to the proximal nail fold and the upper nail plate. The intermediate aspect of the nail matrix, the classical nail matrix, corresponds to the intermediate nail plate. The ventral aspect of the nail matrix corresponds to the nail bed and the lower nail plate. The proximal nail matrix produces most of the nail plate, and for that reason, it is important not to disrupt its structure when performing nail surgery.

**Nail Bed**

The nail bed is epithelium that provides firm attachment to the dermis. The nail plate makes up only one-third of the length of the nail unit, and only the distal portion is visible, as most remains hidden underneath the proximal nail fold.  It extends from the distal margins of the lunula to the hyponychium.

**Nail Plate**

The nail plate is a modified stratum corneum that serves as a laminated keratinized structure that protects the nail bed and matrix. It is considered a bilaminar structure that provides its thickness and density as it grows distally. There are both longitudinal and transverse axes in the nail plate. These axes provide strong attachments. In the great toe, the lateral margins of the matrix and nail extend almost halfway around the terminal phalanx, which provides additional strength.

Grossly, the upper surface of the nail can be smooth with some rigidity depending on the age of the patient. In childhood, there are partial oblique ridges called herringbone or chevron pattern. With age, longitudinal ridges become more common.

The nail plate has several layers produced by different parts of the nail matrix. The apical matrix produces the most superficial layers of the nail plate. The middle matrix produces the middle nail plate, and the distal matrix is for the deep layers.

The nail plate is firmly attached to an area known as the nail bed. When they are firmly attached, the nail should be a pink color. The nail bed has a thin epithelium. The distal aspect of the nail plate is called the nail isthmus and is where the granular layer of the nail plate appears and marks the transition to the hyponychium.

The hyponychium is where the nail plate and nail bed separate. It is the epithelium equivalent of the skin contains granular and thickens cornified layers. It serves as a barrier from outside material from entering between the nail bed and plate, which is why it exhibits strong keratinization.

**Nail Folds**

There are three total nail folds, two laterally, and one proximally. These function to direct the nail growth in the correct direction and shape.

**Growth Rate**

Growth measurement is in the longitudinal axis from a defined reference point to the free edges. Nails do grow continuously. However, both age and poor circulation can decrease growth rate. Toenails do grow slower than fingernails. The time for a toenail to undergo full replacement is about 12 to 18 months. The toenails grow about 1mm in a month. Several systemic diseases, for example, scarlet fever, can cause a reduction in the rate of matrix-cell division, causing thinning of the nail plate. Typically, toenails in women are about 1.4 mm thick and 1.65 mm thick in men.

**Normal Nail Histology**

The dorsum of the proximal nail fold is similar to the skin of the digits. The ventral aspect is thin and flat epidermis. Between them, there is thick stratum corneum making the nail cuticle. The nail matrix has multilayered epithelium as it serves as the production of the nail plate. It is the sole site of hard keratin synthesis. The nail bed epithelium is thin and lacking a stratum granulosum layer. The stratum granulosum layer reappears in the hyponychium, the distal thickened part of the nail bed. The distal matrix is composed of loose and edematous tissue. The dermis contains multiple glomus bodies, which represent arteriovenous anastomosis. The nail plate itself is composed of multiple paralleled layers of keratinized, flat well-differentiated cells called onychocytes. These cells are firmly adherent and do not desquamate.