**Medical Management**

In patients with SAH and suspected aneurysm, appropriate medical management should be initiated immediately to stabilize the child and to prevent potential secondary complications of hemorrhage, as rebleeding represents the most serious complication within the first 48 hours after rupture.

Paying strict attention to the patient’s volume status usually requires placement of an indwelling urinary catheter and arterial line. Adequate analgesia and sedation to treat the associated anxiety and headache of SAH must be weighed against the need for frequent evaluation of the neurological examination. Allowing the parents to remain with young patients often helps alleviate the child’s fear. Antihypertensive medications, including calcium channel blockers, beta-blockers, and vasodilators may be a requirement for pressure control.

We routinely initially administer antiepileptic agents to prevent post-SAH seizures and the undesirable effects of secondary hypertension and hypoxia. Stool softeners, breathing treatments, and antiemetic medication may also be helpful in reducing fluctuations of intracranial pressure caused by straining, coughing, and vomiting.

Calcium channel blockers, such as nimodipine, may reduce the incidence of severe neurological deficits associated with vasospasm.  Angiographic vasospasm is less common in children, with rare clinical progression and experience with nimodipine in children with SAH is limited. In cases of clinical vasospasm, the use of volume expansion, hyperdynamic therapy with pressors and inotropes, and hemodilution should be instituted.

Prevention and recognition of delayed medical issues such as gastrointestinal hemorrhage (complicates approximately 4% of patients), pulmonary edema, and hyperglycemia are important. Aggressive pulmonary toilet should be implemented with appropriate use of antibiotic agents in cases of suspected infection. Unrecognized hyponatremia (cerebral salt wasting) may exacerbate alterations in the level of consciousness, increase seizure activity, and worse cerebral edema. Decreased plasma sodium may be present in up to 35% of SAH patients, with a peak incidence between the second and tenth days after rupture. Extracellular volume assessment in these patients typically shows a hypovolemic state. In most cases of hyponatremia, sodium replacement (oral sodium supplements and hypertonic intravenous saline), combined with volume expansion (normal saline, colloids, and red cells), is often adequate and appropriate therapy.

**Surgical Management**

Surgical and endovascular intervention remains the definitive treatment of cerebral aneurysms in children. Several clinical series have correlated nonsurgical management with an overall poorer outcome. This improved outcome from surgery must be weighed against the increased rate of spontaneous aneurysm thrombosis that experience shows may occur in childhood lesions. In cases which partial thrombosis of the lesion has already occurred, a conservative course of observation and supportive care may be necessary.

In cases of mycotic aneurysms, conservative treatment with antibiotic agents is a reasonable, although controversial, an alternative to direct surgical repair in some cases. For children with multiple aneurysms and those with preexisting cardiac disease and endocarditis, the risk of surgery may be unexceptionally high, even when weighed against the ongoing risk of a potentially devastating hemorrhage. After institution of antimicrobial therapy, lesions should be followed closely with serial angiography every 2 to 3 weeks. Failure to involute or progressive enlargement of lesions despite antibiotics is a strong indication for surgical intervention. CT-angiogram and MR-angiogram can be utilized to assess the response of mycotic aneurysms to treatment.

Postponement of intervention for 7 to 14 days after the SAH may allow for stabilization of high-grade, critically ill children. Resolution of the cerebral edema and vasospasm also helps reduce surgical morbidity and mortality. These advantages balance against the risk of rebleed. We think that obliteration of the aneurysm should be performed for low-grade patients at the earliest possible date. The indications and timing for surgery in high-grade cases varies for each child.

From a technical perspective, surgical management of aneurysms in children is quite similar to that of adults. Special attention must be paid to the smaller size of anatomic structures and the decreased tolerance for temperature changes, blood loss, and large fluid shifts due to smaller physiologic reserve in children.

Due to the often giant size and unusual locations of pediatric aneurysms, surgical obliterations frequently not straightforward. A review of the literature shows that direct clip ligation of the aneurysmal neck is possible in only 29.5% of cases. A high percentage of pediatric patients require specialized and often innovative procedures to obliterate their lesions.