The onset of transverse myelitis is acute to subacute. Neurologic symptoms are prominent. Symptoms include motor, sensory, and/or autonomic dysfunction. Motor deficits include rapidly progressing paraparesis, which can involve, upper extremities initially with flaccidity followed by spasticity. This may be caused by damage to white matter structures in the spinal cord. Most commonly, there is sensory involvement with symptoms, including pain, dysesthesia, and paresthesia at the level involved. Autonomic features of TM include urinary urgency, bladder/bowel incontinence, difficulty/inability to void, bowel constipation, or sexual dysfunction. Urinary retention may be the first sign of myelitis and should warrant further investigation into myelopathy.

Motor symptoms may vary depending on the level of the spinal cord involved. Upper cervical lesions (C1-C5) may affect all four extremities. Additionally, if the lesion affects the phrenic nerve (C3, C4, C5), it could lead to diaphragmatic dysfunction and respiratory failure.

Lesions in the lower cervical levels (C5-T1) may develop upper and lower motor neuron signs in the upper extremities and exclusive upper motor neuron signs in the lower extremities. Cervical lesions account for approximately 20% of cases.

Lesions in the thoracic region (T1-T12) may cause both upper and lower motor neuron signs in the lower extremities. The thoracic region is the most commonly affected in TM cases (70%).

Lesions in the lumbosacral regions (L1-S5) may cause both upper and lower motor neuron signs in the lower extremities. Lumbar lesions account for approximately 10% of cases.

Sensory symptoms generally affect the level of the lesion or one of the levels above or below the lesion.

Back pain in the corresponding area of the lesion may also be present.