**TBM**

CNS-TB begins with either the hematogenous dissemination of MTB following primary lung infection or the late reactivation of TB.

- Leptomeningitis, epididymitis, choroid plexitis, encephalitis, and later pachymeningitis with basal and opticochiasmatic arachnoiditis

- Vasculitis with endarteritis and infarcts

- Hydrocephalus, secondary to disturbed CSF flow and absorption

The extensive exudative arachnoiditis at the base of the brain and optic chiasma encases the multiple traversing cranial nerves, most commonly the abducens, optic, oculomotor and trochlear. Similarly, there is arteritis and phlebitis resulting in vasculitic infarcts due to arterial vasospasm, thrombosis, or hemorrhage of the vessels.

In many patients symptomatic for three weeks or more, the inflammatory process extends to the basal cisterns, where CSF circulation and absorption are hampered, resulting in communicating hydrocephalus.

**Tuberculoma**

Deep-seated tubercular granulomatous foci acquired during initial bacteremia may coalesce and develop into conglomerated caseous masses called tuberculomas without producing meningitis. Often they may be present as clinically silent single or multiple lesions in patients with TBM and detected on brain imaging. In immune-suppressed individuals, these may form tubercular abscesses. Spinal cord tuberculoma may be located at any level of the cord due to similar pathogenesis or by local extension from abutting tubercular spondylitis.

**Spinal Arachnoiditis**

Spinal arachnoiditis may arise as a result of previous TBM or vertebral osteomyelitis. The caseating inflammation may progress over weeks to months, leading to clumping of nerve roots or partial/total encasement of the cord by the thick gelatinous exudate or fibrous mass.