There are many causes of biotin deficiency. It can occur in rare inborn errors of metabolism, namely holocarboxylase synthetase deficiency or biotinidase deficiency.

Biotin deficiency can also occur in patients on parenteral nutrition without added biotin.

Low Biotin levels can occur in patients on antiepileptics such as carbamazepine, phenytoin, and phenobarbital. Possible underlying mechanisms include impaired biotin uptake across the intestinal mucosa, exaggerated biotin catabolism, and inhibition of renal reabsorption. Therefore, patients who are likely to be on anticonvulsants for long periods should receive biotin supplementation.

Prolonged use of oral antibiotics may also lead to biotin deficiency. The most likely underlying mechanism is the inhibition of intestinal flora, leading to reduced biotin production. Another possible explanation is the antibiotic-driven overgrowth of biotin-consuming bacteria.

Likewise, low biotin levels can occur in patients on isotretinoin for acne treatment, elderly individuals, people with alcohol use disorder, and smokers (particularly women).

Reports exist of biotin deficiency in severely malnourished children in developing countries and through the intake of modified milk without biotin supplementation. Biotin deficiency has been observed in infants consuming hypoallergenic formulas.

Consuming large amounts of raw egg whites can lead to acquired biotin deficiency. Raw egg contains the glycoprotein avidin. Avidin binds to biotin in the gastrointestinal tract and prevents biotin absorption, also known as “egg white injury.”