Clinicians must have a high index of suspicion for diabetes during pregnancy and screen offsprings of women in high-risk populations.

**Monitoring of Glucose Level**

1-hr glucose challenge test with 50 gm of glucose at 24-28wks of gestation. More than 130-140 gm/dl serum glucose level one hour after oral intake is abnormal. Those women who fail to respond to 1-hr screening should be provided with a 3-hr glucose tolerance test. More aggressive testing is vigilant in high-risk groups. Testing of hemoglobin A1c before conception helps to identify high-risk populations.

**Ultrasound and Growth Monitoring**

Ultrasound is the principal imaging modality for fetal monitoring and the status of pregnancy. Viability is checked in the first trimester, whereas structural integrity is monitored in the second trimester. The gestational sac can be visualized as early as 4-5 weeks of gestation and the yolk sac at about five weeks to check the viability of early pregnancy. Embryos can be measured at 5-6 weeks of gestation. Fetal growth and wellbeing are monitored during the third trimester. The biophysical profile provides information regarding the wellbeing and risk for potential asphyxia. Diagnosis of fetal abnormality with ultrasound is best around or before 20 weeks of gestation. Detection rates vary according to the type of fetal anomaly.

**Doppler Ultrasound and Cardiotocograph**

Fetal and placental vascularity can be assessed by doppler ultrasound. Fetal vasculitis and villous abnormalities can be detected by doppler.

**Fetal MRI**

This can be considered in the case of an ultrasound suspect of multiple congenital anomalies or technical limitations due to issues such as obesity and/or excess or reduced amniotic fluid.

**Fetal Alpha-fetoprotein**

This should be tested during 16-18 weeks. A high level of alpha-fetoprotein in maternal serum indicates risk for neural tube defects, among other causes.

**Fetal Lung Maturity**

Fetal lung maturity is assessed after 32 weeks of gestation. Phosphatidylglycerol levels can be evaluated through amniotic fluid analysis. The lecithin/sphingomyelin ratio is also crucial.

Additional monitoring includes non-stress tests twice a week after 32 weeks, and contraction stress tests if there is a failed nonstress test.