Cavernomas can be more difficult to diagnose than other vascular malformations because of their low flow state and small size of the abnormal blood vessels. In particular, cerebral angiography is insensitive for the detection of these lesions, giving rise to the term "angiographically occult".

On computed tomography (CT) imaging, cavernomas may appear well demarcated with either a homogeneous or heterogeneous high density related to calcification, thrombosis, increased blood volume, and hemosiderin deposition. They may demonstrate some degree of contrast enhancement. Significant edema or mass effect is unusual except in cases with recent hemorrhage.

Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) is the diagnostic modality of choice, particularly gradient-echo sequences (T2*/GRE) showing the "blooming effect of hemosiderin" and susceptibility-weighted imaging sequences (SWI/VenBold) that show areas of prior hemorrhage and multifocal lesions when done at 3T. There are usually mixed signals of blood at different stages of organization and calcifications, with a surrounding hemosiderin ring (best appreciated on T2-weighted sequences).

Cavernous malformations can be divided into four groups (Zabramski classification) based on their appearance on MRI.

New MRI techniques - quantitative susceptibility mapping (QSM) and dynamic contrast-enhanced quantitative perfusion (DCEQP) - can measure the quantity of iron deposition and vascular permeability in cavernomas and can be potential biomarkers of disease activity.