**Epithelial Cells (Cilia)**

Epithelial cells provide a physical barrier that prevents invasion of the underlying tissue. Stratified squamous epithelium within the cavity gives way to the pseudostratified columnar respiratory epithelium further along in the respiratory tract. Cilia at the apex of epithelial cells act to propel mucus, allergens, and foreign particles from the nasal cavity towards the pharynx where they are removed by swallowing. Epithelial cells are also involved in the inflammatory response by releasing cytokines.

**Endothelial Cells (Underlying Blood Vessels)**

The rich blood supply to the nasal mucosa is formed by endothelial cells. This thin layer of cells allows the rapid warming of air entering the respiratory passage. The smooth muscle surrounding this endothelial layer allows constriction and dilation of blood vessels, functioning to regulate congestion of the nasal passage during an inflammatory response.

**Mucous Glands**

Mucus produced in the lamina propria is released via glands onto the epithelial surface—the mucus functions to trap external particles while also preserving the epithelial barrier. An increase in parasympathetic stimulation leads to an increase in mucus production and release. Lysozymes and IgA are found within the mucus and protect from invading microbes.

**Neurons**

Receptor neurons in the roof of the nasal cavity recognize and bind odor molecules. These stimuli lead to depolarization of the neurons and ultimately, signal propagation along the olfactory nerves toward the central nervous system (CNS).