**Actinic Keratosis**

Actinic keratosis demonstrates hyperkeratosis and parakeratosis within the epidermal layer. Dyskeratosis is typically present, as shown by premature keratinization of cells at the level of the stratum granulosum and spinosum. The dermal layer exhibits solar elastosis and may have a mild inflammatory infiltrate comprised chiefly of lymphocytes and plasma cells.

There are a few subtypes, such as hypertrophic and atrophic. Cellular atypia is always present, though to varying degrees of severity. As such, histopathological evaluation of the entirety of the lesion to include superficial stromal layers is necessary to exclude the possibility of stromal invasion, which, if present, would indicate squamous cell carcinoma.

Special stains are not generally needed in the diagnosis of actinic keratosis. However, pigmented actinic keratosis may mimic early melanoma, in which case special immunohistochemical stains may be used to help an experienced pathologist reach the correct diagnosis.

Melan-A staining may be positive in pigmented lesions. More recent studies suggest a role for HMB-45 in helping differentiate these pigmented lesions.

**Basal Cell Carcinoma**

Histologically, these lesions originate from the stratum basale of the epidermis. These cells are classically blue and basaloid in appearance and are located below the superficial skin, within the stromal layers. They have large, bland, crowded nuclei with a high nuclear to cytoplasmic ratio.

There are multiple histologic patterns, but all generally form dense islands of tumor cells with classic "palisading" at the edges of these tumor islands. These islands are separated from other dermal components by a clear margin as a result of refraction artifacts from tissue processing ("separation artifacts" or "clefts"). Within the islands, tumor cells show enlarged crowded nuclei and mitotic figures. Rapidly progressive BCC may demonstrate areas of necrosis.

As BCC is an epithelial tumor, it stains positively with cytokeratin. BerEp4 (stain for EpCAM antigen) is commonly used to assist in diagnosis, and it has high sensitivity and specificity for BCC but is negative in normal squamous epithelium.

**Squamous Cell Carcinoma & Keratoacanthoma**

SCC tumor cells originate from the superficial epidermis. SCC tends to form nests and strands which extend into the dermis. The tumor cells are generally large with prominent eosinophilic cytoplasm and a high nuclear to cytoplasmic ratio. Keratin pearls are often present.

SCC is typically classified based on the severity of characteristics of abnormal squamous epithelium. The degree of keratinization, presence of intercellular bridges (desmosomes), pleomorphism, and presence of mitotic figures are helpful in the stratification of SCC. They can be classified as well-differentiated, moderately differentiated, poorly differentiated, or undifferentiated. Perineural or lymphatic invasion may be present, the former presenting with pain.

As SCC is an epithelial tumor, it may be stained with cytokeratin. Poorly differentiated and undifferentiated forms may be difficult to establish and often requires additional immunohistochemical stains, such as desmin, to exclude melanoma or sarcoma.

Keratoacanthoma is often considered a well-differentiated form of SCC. As such, the histologic appearance is similar to that of SCC. It appears as a crater-like depression filled with keratin. It can be differentiated by the general well-differentiated nature of the squamous cells. Depending on the stage of growth or regression, it is often surrounded by a chronic inflammatory response. As a result of its many similarities to SCC, making the two difficult to differentiate, and the potential for malignant transformation, many ophthalmologists recommend complete excision of the lesion.

**Sebaceous Carcinoma**

Sebaceous carcinoma is of adnexal sebaceous origin, and histopathologic classification is based on the level of differentiation of the cells in the tumor. A well-differentiated tumor contains cells with sebaceous differentiation and "foamy" vacuolated cytoplasm. A moderately differentiated tumor histopathologically demonstrates most cells with hyperchromatic nuclei containing prominent nucleoli and basophilic cytoplasm with areas of well-differentiated sebaceous cells interspaced within.

A poorly differentiated tumor contains hyperchromatic, atypical cells with high mitotic activity. The comedocarcinoma subtype of SC often displays necrosis of the center of the tumor. Staining lipids with Oil Red O or human milk fat globulin-1 can help distinguish SC from squamous and basal cell carcinoma.

SC can have flat (pagetoid) spread to the epidermis of the eyelid and epithelium of the conjunctiva and spread directly to the orbit, intracranial cavity, and paranasal sinuses. Poorly differentiated SGC can have perineural and lymphatic spread and metastatic spread to distant organs.

**Melanoma**

Malignant melanoma is of epidermal melanocytic origin and can originate from lentigo maligna or an intradermal melanocytic lesion such as a dysplastic nevus. In the case of the lentigo maligna, atypical melanocytes are present in the basal layers of the epidermis and the adnexal structures such as the eyelash pilar units. Regardless of its origin, a diagnosis of malignant melanoma is made when these atypical melanocytes are observed beyond the epidermal basement membrane.

Clark's and Breslow micro staging of skin melanoma is a method that strictly looks at the tumor's depth. Since the eyelid skin has a different structure, this type of staging is not applied. Eyelid margin involvement, depth of invasion, and the presence of skin ulceration are used as prognostic indicators. It is of note that ulceration is seldom seen in cutaneous eyelid melanoma. Other prognostic indicators, such as involvement of regional lymph nodes and the presence of distant metastases, have been reported, but the significance is uncertain due to the rare nature of eyelid melanoma.

**Merkel Cell Carcinoma**

Merkel cells are neuroendocrine receptor cells present in the mucous membrane and skin. Merkel cell carcinoma (MCC) is a rare neurogenic tumor found in the upper eyelid and eyebrow, containing ample mitotic figures and round cells with round to oval nuclei with prominent nucleoli and reduced cytoplasm. Immunohistochemical staining positive for neuron-specific enolase, neurofilaments, and cytokeratin-20 and negative for S-100 and leukocyte-common antigen can differentiate MCC from other epithelial and neuroendocrine tumors.