The pelvic ring forms from the sacrum and the two innominate bones, each containing an ilium, ischium, and pubis. There is no inherent stability to the bony anatomy of the ring. Therefore the strong ligamentous attachments are required for maintenance of the ring structure. The ring has to be disrupted in at least two sites for displacement to occur. Pelvic ring injuries cover a broad spectrum. Simple minimally displaced fractures of the sacrum or pubis may be treated conservatively, while high energy disruptions of the bony or ligamentous ring represent life-threatening injuries requiring intervention.

**Ligamentous Anatomy of the Pelvic Ring**

- Anterior symphyseal ligaments that resist external rotation.

- Pelvic floor ligaments including sacrospinous ligaments that resist external rotation and sacrotuberous ligaments that resist shear and flexion.

- Posterior sacroiliac complex: theses are the strongest ligaments in the body and confers more stability to the pelvic ring than their anterior counterparts. The complex includes the following ligaments:

- Anterior sacroiliac ligaments resist external rotation after the failure of the pelvic floor and anterior structures.

- The interosseous sacroiliac ligament resists anterior-posterior translation of the pelvis.

- Posterior sacroiliac that resists cephalad-caudad displacement of the pelvis.

- Iliolumbar ligament resists rotation and augments posterior SI ligaments.

The bony ring, with its ligamentous tight structures, provides a stable compartment for the hollow viscera and the following neurovascular structures

**Neurological Structures**

- The lumbosacral trunk passes anterior to the sacral ala and sacroiliac joint.

- L5 nerve root courses anterior to the cranial part of the sacral ala.

- S1 nerve root exits from the anterior sacral foramina between first and second sacral segments.

**Vascular Structure**

- The external iliac artery passes anteriorly along the pelvic brim and terminates as the common femoral artery distal to the inguinal ligament.

- The internal iliac artery curves posteriorly approximate to the SI joint and divides into anterior and posterior divisions, terminating as obturator and superior gluteal arteries.

- The corona mortis is an anastomosis between the obturator artery and the external iliac artery or the deep inferior epigastric artery. It is situated at a mean distance of 6.2 cm from the pubic symphysis.

- The venous plexus in the posterior pelvis is the main source of hemorrhage associated with pelvic ring injuries.