Inguinal anatomy is essential knowledge for the general surgeon. The canal exists between two openings within the abdominal wall known as the internal (deep) inguinal ring and the external (superficial) inguinal ring

Several additional structures are important to identify during open inguinal hernia repair. The iliopubic tract is an aponeurotic band that begins at the anterior superior iliac spine and courses medially before inserting on the superior aspect of the Cooper's ligament. The shelving edge of the inguinal ligament is the superior attachment of the inguinal ligament to the iliopubic tract. The iliopubic tract forms the inferior border of the internal inguinal ring as it courses medially before becoming part of the femoral canal. Additionally, the lacunar ligament in the medial aspect of the inguinal ligament as it fans out and inserts on the pubic tubercle. Lastly, the conjoined tendon inserts on the pubic tubercle as the culmination of the internal oblique and transversus abdominis fibers.

Two types of inguinal hernias may occur. These are classified as direct and indirect hernia. An indirect hernia passes through the deep (internal) inguinal ring and is located lateral to the inferior epigastric vessels. A direct hernia passes through a weakened area of transversalis fascia in Hesselbach’s triangle (lateral edge of rectus abdominis, the inferior edge of the inguinal ligament, and medial to inferior epigastric vessels). A Pantaloon hernia is a combination of a direct and indirect hernia.