**Factors That Alter the Set Point**

**Genetics**

Interpersonal variation in obesity despite exposure to similar obesogenic environments may suggest a prominent genetic role in determining set point. Obesity has a strong heritability factor. Monogenic forms of obesity involving mutations of leptin, leptin receptor, and melanocortin 4 receptor (MC4R) are identified and can alter the set point leading to obesity. However, these forms of obesity are not very common, and polygenic involvement is more common.

Based on genome-wide association studies, multiple genes are involved with obesity, and each gene contributes to minor effects promoting obesity.

The role of genetics in the pathophysiology of obesity is demonstrated by studies that report identical responses in body weight to overfeeding or underfeeding among monozygotic twins.

**Epigenetics**

Environmental and nutritional factors can alter histones, leading to persistent changes that last a lifetime and can pass through paternal and maternal generations.

In utero exposure can cause epigenetic variations, such as gestational diabetes exposure resulting in methylated DNA changes that lead to multiple adiposity-related outcomes. This phenomenon was discovered through epigenome-wide association analysis, highlighting the crucial role of maternal health in obesity.

**Obesogens**

Obesogens are chemicals that can promote obesity by altering adipose tissue indirectly. These chemicals can impact metabolism, food calorie intake, and energy balance and may cause an altered set point leading to obesity later in life.

**Obesogenic Environment**

The set-point regulation may be lost in a world of calorie abundance, resulting in various "settling points" (series of set-point changes in response to energy intake and expenditure changes, eventually reaching a balance point).

The obesogenic environment in the modern world includes the promotion of fast food outlets, high-sugar drinks, energy-dense snacks, and low-cost, large-serving portions. Mechanized transport systems and urban design limit activity and contribute to this environment.

The "runaway weight-gain train model" suggests that small changes in energy balance create a positive feedback loop that promotes weight gain.

There are several brakes to this positive feedback loop, including social stigma, personal physical discomfort from body habitus and voluntary reduction of energy intake, metabolic changes including increased leptin levels with decreased appetite, insulin resistance, increased energy expenditure, and increased sympathetic system activation. However, these brakes are ineffective enough to stop the powerful accelerating forces on a downhill slope.

The positive feedback loop is perpetuated by movement inertia (people with obesity tend to do less energy-expenditure activity), a mechanical dysfunction cycle (physical problems arising from being overweight, such as arthritis limiting physical activity), a psychological dysfunction cycle from psychiatric issues arising from obesity resulting in increased calorie intake and reducing activity, and a dieting cycle (hypocaloric diets causing weight loss compensated with excessive overshooting weight gain).

Socioeconomic factors may also contribute to an obesogenic environment. A lower income can limit access to healthy food options and expensive recreational activities, increasing obesity risk. Communities with lower socioeconomic status (SES) have a more obesogenic environment than communities with high SES.

Chronic stress from low SES contributes to comfort eating, increased alcohol consumption, and chronic hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal axis activation.

**Bariatric Surgery**

Bariatric surgeries such as Roux-en-Y gastric bypass and sleeve gastrectomy achieve more significant weight loss and long-term sustainability than lifestyle changes and pharmacotherapy, making them the most effective approaches to weight loss and treating obesity-associated comorbidities.

Bariatric surgery has been shown to reduce hunger and potentially lower the body's set point for weight, in contrast to lifestyle changes alone. Surgery can alter hormones such as increased GLP-1 secretion through 2 possible mechanisms: (1) via the foregut hypothesis in which surgery excludes the proximal jejunum and duodenum from nutrients, and (2) the hindgut hypothesis in which surgery promotes rapid nutrient delivery to the distal ileum.

Surgery can increase peptide YY and decrease ghrelin levels, decreasing hunger.

Rodent studies demonstrate that gastric sleeve surgery can lead to weight regain when food is unrestricted. Additionally, female rodents who undergo sleeve gastrectomy and become pregnant often regain weight to prepregnancy levels.

**Diet and Physical Activity**

A sedentary lifestyle and the availability of calorie-dense foods can promote weight gain. This can be addressed by dietary changes that include low-calorie diets regardless of the type of macronutrients, altering meal timing, and increasing physical activity.

However, weight changes from diet control and physical activity may show short-lived results and do not permanently alter the set point, leading to difficulty sustaining weight loss for many individuals. Despite weight loss from these interventions, the set-point mechanism remains in operation, eventually leading to weight gain reaching the set point once diet modifications are stopped, and physical activity is reduced.

**Obesity Pharmacotherapy**

The available medications for obesity treatment can aid in achieving weight loss and maintaining the new weight for a certain period. In small-sized rodent studies, Liraglutide was reported to reduce set point in diet-induced obese rats.

**Diseases**

Rapid weight gain or loss can occur in many disease conditions, possibly due to set-point disturbance. Examples of such conditions include infectious diseases like HIV, endocrinological conditions, gastrointestinal disorders, cancer cachexia, and neuropsychiatric conditions such as depression, dementia, and anorexia nervosa.