On the whole, the most studied cases of holoprosencephaly are those occurring due to chromosomal anomalies but with normal karyotype. They are rarely associated with malformation syndromes. The majority of live births with HPE have a ‘nonsyndromic, nonchromosomal HPE, which describes HPE that cannot be attributed to chromosomal or syndromic causes and includes environmental causes, deletions of or mutations in genes known to be involved in HPE, or currently unidentifiable factors.

From the above discussion, it can be concluded that the etiology of holoprosencephaly can be divided into-

**Genetic Causes**

**Nonsyndromic monogenic causes:**SHH anomalies are the most common defects that have been recorded in HPE patients with associated midline defects. Other main genetic causes include ZIC2, SIX3, and TGIF.

**Syndromic causes:**Around 32-42 % of the cases occur due to anomalies of chromosome number, most commonly trisomy 13, followed by trisomy 18 and triploidy.

**Specific syndromes**related to HPE include both autosomal dominant and autosomal recessive syndromes including-

- Autosomal dominant: 1) CDON gene-related Steinfield syndrome

2) FGFR1 gene-related Kallman syndrome two and Hartsfield syndrome

- Autosomal recessive: 1) CENPF gene-related Stromme syndrome

2) DHCR7 gene-related Smith-Lemli-Opitz Syndrome

**Nongenetic causes:**

HPE is associated with pregestational maternal diabetes. Consistent maternal folic acid use appears to be protective. Animal studies suggest HPE can result from exposure to teratogens, such as ethanol, retinoic acid, food-borne mycotoxins like ochratoxins, cyclopamine (Hedgehog signaling inhibitors), and drugs that interfere with cholesterol biosynthesis.