**Communicating the Diagnosis with Patients**

Stillbirth may be confirmed by a second ultrasonographer as deemed necessary. The diagnosis is conveyed to the mother by a health care provider as quickly as possible, making all attempts to provide privacy, empathy, and support. How this occurs will depend on the situation. Ultrasonographers usually contact a provider and arrange for immediate consultation if the diagnosis is made without prior warning. If the provider makes the diagnosis at the bedside, the diagnosis should be confirmed immediately and conveyed to the patient. The patient may be given the option to view the ultrasound images with the provider. The patient will require compassionate support. Some patients may need to leave immediately, as a coping mechanism, and should be encouraged to do so if they are medically stable. Some patients may appreciate a hand to hold until a family member can arrive for support. Empathy and support are demonstrated by saying you are sorry and by offering the support the patient desires. This may include providing written information instructing the patient how to reach you when they are ready and how to schedule a follow-up appointment as soon as desired.

An attempt to obtain fetal measurements and to scan for any obvious abnormalities may be attempted as permitted.

It is important to tell the patient that they did nothing wrong and to demonstrate respect to the baby by addressing them by name.

If the patient is not medically stable secondary to complications associated with the fetal demise, then one must provide information in a calm, clear, and concise fashion to obtain informed consent for any urgent procedure(s).

**Meeting Emotional Needs**

When caring for a patient/couple/family experiencing a stillbirth, it is important to convey compassion, empathy, and sensitivity while being mindful of their emotional needs. The diagnosis of stillbirth is often made or confirmed by ultrasound when there is an inability to detect fetal heart tones or randomly at the time of an ultrasound performed for something other than stillbirth evaluation. The patient may have an underlying concern regarding the wellbeing of her fetus or may be presented with this diagnosis unawares. Emotions should be validated.

Communicating bad news is not a natural skill, and one's ability to deliver bad news does not necessarily improve with experience.

A copy of the ultrasound may be placed in a sealed envelope and offered to the patient as a keepsake.  It may be offered either at the time of the exam or at subsequent visits.

The patient may ask about the management plan after the diagnosis of stillbirth, and the caregiver should be prepared to convey this information in a private and comfortable environment. The caregiver should ask if any religious or cultural practices need to be respected.

**Management**

Discussion on the mode of delivery will depend on the gestational age of the stillborn, the desires of the patient, the physical status of the patient, and prior obstetrical/surgical history. Information is provided presented clearly and concisely, and confirmation of understanding should be obtained.

Coagulation abnormalities caused by a release of tissue factor from the placenta may occur if the dead fetus is retained for several weeks.

Usually, a vaginal delivery is the safest route of delivery even after a previous lower segment cesarean delivery. Some women may request a primary or a repeat cesarean section to avoid experiencing labor. This is an option provided the patient is fully aware of the risks versus benefits.

Stillbirth before 24 weeks is best managed by a dilation and evacuation (D & E) by a competent provider. This involves dilation of the cervix and manual removal of the product of conception. The cervix is often pre-dilated using laminaria placed in the cervix the night before the procedure. This risk of the procedure is greater when the fetus measures greater than 24 weeks in size. An ultrasound estimated fetal size less than 24 weeks is, therefore, more important than the estimated gestational age in determining the appropriateness of a D&E. A fetus on ultrasound may measure smaller than the established gestational age due to either growth restriction caused by the underlying pathology or the stillbirth predating the diagnosis. This procedure is considered less morbid than the induction of labor because it is associated with a lower risk of infection.

Stillbirth after 24 weeks with a favorable cervix (Bishop score >6) is conducted with standard doses of synthetic oxytocin.

Stillbirth after 24 weeks with an unfavorable cervix (Bishop score <6) in the absence of a previous hysterotomy scar is achieved with misoprostol 50 mcg vaginally repeated every 4 hours for a maximum of 6 doses.

Different protocols may be followed if approved by the delivery facility. In some cases, a foley balloon is used to ripen the cervix. In some cases, a high dose of [itocin regimen is used.

Vaginal delivery is not contraindicated in pregnancies less than 24 weeks complicated by placenta previa.

Women with a prior single, low transverse, cesarean delivery, and second-trimester stillbirth may receive mechanical ripening agents or misoprostol less than or equal to 200 mcg vaginally every 4 hours. The risk of rupture is 0.28 percent versus 0.04 percent in these women with no prior cesarean section.

Women with third-trimester fetal demise and an unfavorable cervix, and a prior history of a cesarean section should use a mechanical method of cervical ripening followed by oxytocin for induction. Misoprostol may be considered as an option only after rigorous informed consent. The lowest dose of 25 to 50 mcg vaginally should be used, and the dose should not be doubled to reduce the risk of uterine rupture.

Fetal-pelvic disproportion seldom is a concern for the delivery of a stillborn, whether breech or cephalic, in the absence of macrosomia. Overlapping skull bones and fetal deterioration often allow the delivery of even large fetuses. A persistent shoulder or transverse lie may require an attempted internal or external version.

**Emotional Intelligence**

For the patient (and her support), a stillbirth is a catastrophic event. Although staff may be empathetic, their experience does not compare to that of the parents. As a result, communication can be perceived as cold. While the focus of caregivers is on the mother and the future, the parents remain focused on their baby. Parents may not understand why vaginal birth is being recommended and will need clear communication to understand why a cesarean section is not the norm. Part of care includes discussing coping strategies and supporting the variety of normal behaviors and will support healing. Parents may be influenced by staff. Counseling regarding autopsy should be done in a respectful way, which allows the family to understand its purpose and timescale.

At delivery, if a name has been chosen, the baby should be addressed by their name. Contact between the mother and the stillborn should be offered; the patient/family should be counseled well before delivery on the things for which they need to prepare. Developing a connection with the baby makes the death real, helps prevent emotional withdrawal from the loss, and helps in the transition to parenthood.

The options for autopsy, it's benefits and costs must be presented in a sensitive, informative, and non-biased fashion. Most religious leaders support autopsy provided burial occurs within a reasonable time frame, and the parents are adequately counseled.

Some women/families will not want to be around other new families at this time. Pictures of newborns and families displayed in their immediate care area may also provoke negative feelings. All efforts should be made to identify the patient's loss so that inadvertent comments or gestures are avoided by caring staff. The patient should also be offered housing in an area away from newborns if requested.

Counseling regarding breast engorgement, which may lead to physical and emotional pain, is essential. Some mothers will request information on how to stop milk production as quickly as possible, while others may wish to consider donating milk helpful emotionally.

If there are other children in the home, they need to be included in the grieving and healing process. The importance of talking about the baby, addressing feelings/grief, and displacing guilt has been validated.

At an appropriate time, concerns regarding family planning and future pregnancy may be discussed. An interpregnancy interval of fewer than six months is not associated with an adverse pregnancy outcome in the next pregnancy.