- Inflammatory polyps (pseudopolyps): There is a well-defined association between identifying pseudopolyps and the spectrum of inflammatory bowel disease. However, a variety of other infectious and non-infectious colitis, including amoebic, ischemic, and schistosomal colitis, might be attributed. The larger lesions with greater than 1.5 cm diameter, classifying as giant pseudopolyps, might present as an extensive polyposis syndrome.

- Familial juvenile polyposis is inherited via an autosomal dominant pattern. The colon and rectum are most commonly involved. Malignant degeneration through the adenoma and carcinoma transformation is possible. Due to the high malignant yield, annual screening should merit consideration from 10 to 12 years. Although it is an uncommon polyposis syndrome in adults, it has a remarkable significant percentage of polyposis syndrome in the pediatric population.

- Hyperplastic polyps: The colon is most commonly affected by hyperplastic polyps. Although the hyperplastic polyps do not classify as premalignant lesions, due to the similarities with adenomatous polyps in colonoscopy, once diagnosed, they require removal. They may occur as a polyposis syndrome with multiple or giant polyps harboring the significantly increased risk of malignancy.

- Familial polyposis coli: Familial adenomatous polyposis (FAP) or familial polyposis coli is considered one of the rare causes of colorectal adenocarcinomas. Specific mutation of APC and positive family history are evident in the majority of patients. There is already an extremely significant value of timely screening and surveillance in positive family and personal history of FAP, respectively. Among those affected with FAP, the risk of colorectal cancer goes way up to 100% by the age of 50.

- Turcot syndrome: Familial colorectal adenocarcinomas, including FAP and HNPCC, may accompany with variety of central nervous system tumors known as Turcot syndrome. Moreover, Turcot syndrome categorizes according to the type of CNS tumor and number of colonic polyps in a couple of subgroups; type I, attributes to the glial tumors and a small number of colonic polyps, while a significant number of polyps and greater risk of medulloblastoma have been well-documented in type II.

- Cowden syndrome and PTEN hamartoma: PTEN acts as a tumor suppressor gene. Cowden syndrome, as an autosomal dominant syndrome and related to PTEN hamartoma tumor syndrome (PHTS), has a broad range of clinical manifestations, including trichilemmomas in the face, malignant pathologies in the breast, thyroid, and gastrointestinal polyps. Obtaining timely screening schedules to exclude malignancies in these patients is crucial. Traditionally, there was a remarkable 80% germline PTEN mutation in patients affected by Cowden syndrome; however, recently, the specificity of these criteria has been questioned.

- Peutz-Jeghers syndrome: Peutz-Jeghers syndrome, or mucocutaneous pigmentation and polyposis syndrome, is classified as an autosomal dominant hamartomatous polyposis. Although evidence of the remarkable malignant potential is lacking, stepwise screening plans are generally the recommended approach to evaluate not only the GI tract but also other possible sites for malignancies, including breast, upper gastrointestinal tract, pancreas, cervix, ovaries, and testicles.

- Cronkite-Canada syndrome: Cronkite-Canada syndrome is a rare non-inherited disorder in which patients develop gastrointestinal polyposis in correlation with alopecia, cutaneous pigmentation, and fingernail/toenail atrophy. Diarrhea is a prominent symptom, and malabsorption, vomiting, and protein-losing enteropathy may occur. Most patients die of this disease despite maximal medical therapy, and surgery is only for complications of polyposis such as obstruction. Cowden syndrome is an autosomal dominant disorder with hamartomas of all three of the embryonal cell layers. Facial trichilemmomas, breast cancer, thyroid disease, and gastrointestinal polyps are typical of the syndrome. Patients should have screening for cancers.

- Attenuated familial adenomatous polyposis (AFAP) is a recognized variant of FAP. Patients present later in life with fewer polyps (usually 10 to 100) predominantly located in the right colon compared to classic FAP. Colorectal carcinoma develops in more than 50% of these patients but occurs later (average age, 55 years). Patients are also at risk for duodenal polyposis. However, in contrast to FAP, APC gene mutations are present in only about 30% of patients with AFAP. When present, these mutations express in an autosomal dominant pattern. Mutations in MYH, a gene involved in the repair of DNA, also result in the AFAP phenotype but are expressed in an autosomal recessive pattern.

- Serrated polyps, including sessile serrated adenomas and traditional serrated adenomas, are a recently recognized, histologically distinct group of neoplastic polyps. Endoscopically they are flat lesions and frequently difficult to visualize. These lesions were long thought to be similar to hyperplastic polyps with minimal malignant potential. However, it has become clear that some of these polyps will develop into invasive cancers. Additionally, research has described a familial serrated polyposis syndrome.