Chronic lymphocytic leukemia is a neoplasm of mature B cells almost always preceded by monoclonal B cell lymphocytosis (MBL) which refers to an absolute increase in peripheral blood lymphocytosis less than 5000/microL without any disease manifestations. Pathogenesis of the disease is complex and consists of multiple factors leading to the clonal expansion of CD5 mature B cells in the peripheral blood, bone marrow, and lymph nodes.

As MBL worsens, clinical manifestations relating to the abnormal B cell accumulation and subsequent lack of function become apparent. For instance, decreased functional B cells from MBL hinder the body’s ability to generate immunoglobulins, resulting in hypogammaglobulinemia and ultimately leading to an impaired immune system which is often observed as the disease progresses. The abnormal clonal B cells fail to undergo apoptosis and can continue to proliferate in the lymph nodes resulting in lymphadenopathy, a common manifestation of the disease.

Furthermore, in the disease process, neoplastic B cell precursors infiltrate the bone marrow leading to impaired hematopoiesis and peripheral blood cytopenia. Infiltration into the spleen leading to splenomegaly is also observed, resulting in increased sequestration of platelets and red blood cells, which may worsen cytopenia.

At the molecular level, the pathogenesis of  CLL is driven by impaired cell apoptosis and increased cell proliferation secondary to genetic abnormalities and aberrant cellular signaling. Over the last decade, significant technological developments in the field of molecular biology have advanced the knowledge of the pathogenesis of CLL. With the advent of FISH (fluorescent in-situ hybridization) technology, it has been found that around 80% of CLL tumors have at least one of four common chromosomal abnormalities. These cytogenetic abnormalities include del(13q14), Trisomy 12, del(11q22-23), and del(17p12), all of which are restricted to B cells.

The most common chromosomal abnormality, del(13q14), is observed in approximately 50 to 60% of CLL tumors and pertains to miR15A and miR16A, microRNA deleted regions.

The second most common chromosomal abnormality, Trisomy 12, is found in approximately 10 to 20% of CLL tumors and is involved in the upregulation of the gene RUNX3.

Understanding this cytogenetic abnormality plays an important role in treatment. CLL cells without or with an abnormal ATM gene function cannot correctly respond to DNA damage induced by chemotherapy and ultimately fail to undergo apoptosis. Del(17p12) is detected in approximately 4-10% of CLL tumors. Del(17p12) leads to the loss of the TP53 gene, which plays a crucial role in cell apoptosis and DNA damage repair. The presence of either Del(17p12) or TP53 mutations has treatment implications; for example, chemotherapeutic agents that work by inducing DNA damage are ineffective in the presence of these mutations.

In addition to genetic abnormalities, certain gene mutations are vital to CLL pathogenesis, and multiple subpopulations of evolving malignant cells have been identified.

Of the many somatic gene mutations described, four alterations, NOTCH1, ATM, SF3B1, and TP53 mutations, are detected in over 5% of patients. Notch proteins control the development of hematopoietic cells by working as transmembrane receptors for the cell. Mutations in the coding and non-coding regions of these NOTCH1 proto-oncogenes can lead to worsening disease through splicing events and an overall increase in their activity.

SF3B1 is the gene responsible for nuclear ribonucleoproteins that create spliceosomes needed for messenger RNA splicing, ultimately affecting the cell cycle.

Another genetic abnormality significant in the pathogenesis of CLL includes aberrant expression of microRNA (miRNA), which are small non-coding RNAs that work at the post-transcriptional level. Studies involving miRNA expression in CLL have found direct associations with disease prognosis. For instance, a study of 56 CLL patients found that miR21 and miR155 were overexpressed in nearly all of the analyzed samples.

Further illustrating this involvement, a more extensive study found significantly elevated plasma miR155 levels in the study subjects with CLL compared to the standard control sample. This same study also found that miR155 was associated with higher mortality and refractory disease burden.

Histone deacetylase activity downregulates the expression of miR29b, miR16, and miR15a.

Outside of the specific gene mutations in CLL, aberrant signaling pathways also play a crucial role in the pathobiology of CLL. The three main pathways implicated include antigen-independent BCR signaling, BCL2 proto-oncogene upregulation, and impaired DNA damage response, with the latter two discussed earlier. The antigen-independent BCR signaling pathway directly affects cell survival, growth, differentiation, and cellular adhesion or migration through antigen-independent or antigen-dependent autonomous signaling of CLL cells. As mentioned above, it is affected by low levels of miR150 and high FOXP1 and GAB1 expression.

BCR activation leads to the upregulation of kinases PI3K, SYN, BTK, and LYN, which leads to cytoplasmic domain integrin activation and conformational changes leading to more ligand binding to integrin’s extracellular activity, ultimately affecting cell proliferation, migration, differentiation, and survival.

Lastly, the antigen-independent BCR signaling pathway is also affected by somatic mutations of immunoglobulin heavy chain variable region (IGHV) genes. Mutated IGHV has weaker BCR signaling through narrower antigen specificity, resulting in higher mutation burden and lower driver mutation frequency. Because of this, mutated IGHV CLL cells have a slower proliferation making the disease process more benign and less clinically aggressive. Contrarily, unmutated IGHV CLL cells have sustained BCR signaling by binding to multiple epitopes resulting in lower mutation burden and higher driver mutation frequency. Ultimately this process leads to quicker clonal expansion and more clinically aggressive disease.