The most common findings in a patient’s history to suggest VBI include risk factors for cardiovascular diseases such as atherosclerosis and advanced age. A thorough history and physical exam should be completed, with special attention to not only the neurological but cardiac exam for conditions such as an arrhythmia which may cause the symptoms as well. Symptoms of VBI are a result of ischemia on the different parts of the brain supplied by the posterior circulation.

Symptoms include:

- Vertigo (the most common symptom)

- Dizziness/syncope: Sixty percent of patients with VBI have at least 1 episode of dizziness.

- "Drop attacks:" Patient feels suddenly weak in the knees and fall

- Diplopia/Loss of vision

- Paresthesia

- Confusion

- Dysphagia/dysarthria

- Headache

- Altered consciousness

- Ataxia

- contralateral motor weakness

- Loss of temperature and pain

- Incontinence

If VBI advances into a brainstem infarction, several syndromes may arise depending on the location such as lateral medullary syndrome, medial medullary syndrome, basilar artery syndrome, and Labyrinthine artery occlusion. Other aspects of the history which should be noted during the physical exam are reproducible symptoms during positional head changes, i.e., syncope while turning the head laterally (Bow Hunter syndrome) or during head extension

Physical exam

Findings are common following a vertebral artery stroke and can include the following:

- Change in level of consciousness

- Hemiparesis

- Alteration in pupil size and reactivity

- Cranial nerve palsies (usually abducens nerve palsy)

- Ocular bobbing

- Vertical gaze palsy (CN lll lesion)

- Horizontal gaze palsy (CN 6 lesion

- Facial nerve paralysis

- Bulbar palsy ( dysarthria, dysphonia, dysphagia, dysarthria, facial weakness)

- Contrateralhemianopia with macular sparing (posterior cerebral artery involvement)

- Ipsilateral temperature loss and facial pain, Horner syndrome (part of medullary syndrome)

Care must be taken to rule out other more benign conditions that may also cause similar symptoms such as labyrinthitis, vestibular neuritis, and benign paroxysmal positional vertigo (BPPV). Vertigo is a common symptom in VBI. It is also a central symptom of peripheral vestibular disorders which are more benign. It is especially important in the emergency department setting to differentiate between vertigo due to peripheral vestibular disorders and central vestibular problems most commonly due to vertebrobasilar insufficiency (VBI) which may require hospitalization. Vertigo by itself cannot be diagnosed as TIA or VBI. Vertigo in the presence of brainstem signs or symptoms will be diagnostic of vertebrobasilar territory TIA. Physical examination to look for brainstem signs or cranial nerve abnormalities is very important. Presence of contralateral extremity signs or symptoms is helpful. The type of nystagmus such as vertical nystagmus or direction-changing nystagmus is indicative of VBI. The head thrust test if performed and interpreted properly may differentiate peripheral vertigo from central vertigo due to VBI at the bedside. A positive head thrust test is indicative of a peripheral cause of vertigo.

Vertebral artery stroke is associated with a variety of syndromes depending on the clinical features. Some of these syndromes include:

- Locked in syndrome

- Lateral medullary syndrome

- Internuclear ophthalmoplegia

- Cerebellar infarction

- Medial medullary syndrome

- Posterior cerebral artery occlusion