When dealing with postoperative care, in the immediate postoperative phase, it is crucial to prevent hypoxia in the patient. It is recommended that for the first 24 to 48-hour time periods, oxygen is administered routinely. Serial hematocrits, as well as central venous pressure, should be assessed to ensure the maintenance of an adequate blood volume. Portocaval shunts have the highest incidence of hepatic coma, so efforts postoperatively should be continuous to decrease protein catabolism.

During the postoperative period, when the patient is NPO, they should receive a minimum of 200 g of carbs per day. This will aid in the prevention of the undue breakdown of protein. Once p.o. intake is resumed, protein intake should be restricted initially to 30 g/day. If the patient tolerates this well, gradual increments, usually an increase in 10 g every other day, can be instilled until a level of about 50 to 75 g of protein per day is accomplished. Patient tolerance of this nitrogen load can be monitored with a fasting and a 2-hour postprandial blood ammonia level. If any signs of hepatic insufficiency develop, protein intake should be restricted, and the patient should receive intestinal antibiotics. Monitoring of the prothrombin activity and supplemental vitamin K can be given as needed.

Vitamin preparations can also serve as a useful adjunct and be administered to the patient postoperatively. A rather dangerous postoperative problem that can also be distressing is ascites. It is critical to monitor the fluid and sodium intake to prevent and/or minimize this complication. If the development of ascites occurs, it can be best managed by severe sodium restriction in combination with diuretic therapy. There is an increased incidence of peptic ulceration following a portacaval shunt procedure. This should be remembered, and appropriate, low-sodium antacid therapy and proton pump inhibitors should be administered.