Encopresis is mainly a clinical diagnosis, and the majority of patients do not need any further testing. North American Society for Pediatric Gastroenterology, Hepatology, and Nutrition (NASPGHAN) included in their recommendations that routine laboratory testing to screen for hypothyroidism, celiac disease, and hypercalcemia in the absence of alarm symptoms is not recommended for constipation, which leads to the majority of encopresis cases in children.

A recent study involving children with defecation disorders reported spinal cord abnormalities (such as an intradural lipoma or tethered cord) in only 3% of affected children. Imaging of the spinal cord is therefore recommended only in children presenting with neurologic complaints or physical symptoms, such as gluteal cleft deviation, suggestive of spinal cord abnormalities.

Anorectal manometry can be used as a beneficial tool for patients with chronic constipation. Fundamentally, anorectal manometry assesses the anal pressure and rectal sensation. In clinical practice, sphincter muscles may need assessment when there is a spinal cord injury or local injuries in sphincter muscles. The internal anal sphincter may lose the ability to relax in a patient with Hirschsprung disease during the rectal balloon distention test.

A barium enema should not be done in patients with mild constipation. It should be used in the assessment of the caliber of small or large intestines, which may provide beneficial clinical findings in the suspicion of  Hirschsprung disease or evaluation of anal atresia after the surgical intervention.