As with any condition, a thorough history and physical is necessary. The history may be limited in critically ill postoperative patients, particularly if intubated; bedside nurse reports can be essential in this situation. New or markedly increased wound drainage or a new abdominal wall bulging are indicators of dehiscence of the fascia. The clinician should ask the patient about obstructive symptoms, including nausea, vomiting, or obstipation. Patients may report pulling or popping sensation as the inciting symptom; often, this may occur during an episode of coughing, straining, or retching.

The clinician should also elicit surgical history, with a particular focus on recent surgical procedures as dehiscence is most likely during the first 1 to 2 weeks following surgical procedures. The medical history should also have a specific focus on diabetes, conditions requiring chronic steroid use (COPD, adrenal insufficiency, etc.), connective tissue disorders, and malnutrition. Smoking history and an updated medical list are also necessary.

A focused abdominal examination should follow. The prior incision site should undergo inspection for signs of infection, including erythema or drainage. If drainage is present, the character is important; purulent fluid raises suspicion of underlying surgical site infection. Clear or serous-appearing drainage may represent decompressing seroma or may be normal in small quantities as healing progresses. The classic “salmon-colored” drainage is concerning for fascial dehiscence. The abdomen should be palpated to evaluate for any masses or bulging, which could signify seroma, abscess, or herniation of abdominal contents. Peritoneal signs (guarding, rebound tenderness) may be present if organ space infection or bowel ischemia exists.

Often, surgical closures, including staples, sutures, or negative pressure wound therapy devices may be present. If the skin closure remains intact, removal of sutures/staples before imaging or presence of a surgeon is not recommended as opening the incision may lead to the conversion of fascial dehiscence to evisceration requiring emergent surgical intervention. Probing of the wound with sterile swabs (i.e., between staples at areas of persistent skin separation) may be performed to evaluate the integrity of the fascial closure and attempt to detect fascial separation though this is best left to the discretion of a surgeon.

In some instances, patients will present with obvious or suspected dehiscence, as noted during dressing change (packing or negative pressure wound therapy), when superficial tissues have been left open to heal by secondary intention. Fascial defects, with or without visualized underlying bowel loops, may be visible. The diagnosis of fascial dehiscence should be clear in this subset of cases. Bowel evisceration, if noted, should prompt emergent surgical evaluation.