**Ankle Fracture**

Ankle fractures are common in all ages with the involvement of one or both malleoli. The fracture pattern determines the stability of the fracture. Patients typically present with pain, swelling, and inability to bear weight on the ankle joint. Management of stable fractures includes a short leg cast for 4 to 6 weeks. Unstable fractures require an open reduction and internal fixation (ORIF) to restore a congruent mortise and fibular length.

The Lauge-Hansen and AO classifications are tools used to help determine the prognosis and treatment of ankle fractures. The Lauge-Hansen classification has its basis on the foot position and the mechanism of injury. Fractures classify into four different groups: supination-adduction, supination-external rotation, pronation-abduction, pronation-external rotation. The first term describes the position of the foot during an injury while the second refers to the direction of force applied to the ankle.

The Danis-Weber classification of describing ankle fractures has its basis on the location of the fibular fracture. This classification divides into three groups: fracture below the syndesmosis (type A), at the syndesmosis (type B), and above the syndesmosis (type C).

**Talus Fracture**

This injury usually occurs from a high energy injury like a motor vehicle accident or a fall from a height. The talus has a tenuous blood supply and is at high risk of avascular necrosis (AVN) in displaced fractures. The Hawkins classification helps to predict the chance that AVN will occur. There are four different types of talus fractures, with type I having the best prognosis and type IV predicting a hundred percent chance of developing AVN. Type I is a nondisplaced fracture of the talar neck, type II is a subtalar dislocation. Type III is similar to type II, but with tibiotalar dislocation, type IV is similar to type III but with a talonavicular dislocation. Determining the type of fracture is not only important for predicting the chance of AVN, but it is also important for determining the type of treatment needed. Type I fractures are usually treated with percutaneous pins while types II-IV are treated with open reduction and internal fixation (ORIF).

Ottawa Ankle Rules:

Simple guidelines to identify patients with ankle or midfoot injury who do not need X-ray. Ankle X-ray is necessary if any of the following are present.

- Inability to bear weight on the affected ankle

- Bone tenderness along the posterior aspect of the distal 6 cm of either the medial or lateral malleolus

- Point tenderness at the proximal base of the fifth metatarsal

- Point tenderness over the navicular bone