The common differential diagnosis for alimentary tract duplications include:

- Meckel's diverticulum: It presents in a similar age group and has a similar presentation of abdominal pain and upper gastrointestinal bleeding. A pertechnetate scan can be positive in both scenarios. However, a definite diagnosis is established only on exploration. The distinct difference is location. Duplication cysts are located on the mesenteric side, while Meckel's diverticulum is located on the anti-mesenteric side.

- Congenital segmental intestinal dilatation: It is characterized by a segmental dilatation of the small or large intestine up to three to four times. Although dilatation can be seen in both duplication cysts and congenital segmental dilatation, the difference between these two is the lack of any cystic structure adjacent to the normal bowel in segmental dilatation. However, the treatment of both is similar.

- Other intraabdominal cystic lesions: These include mesenteric, omental, choledochal, and ovarian, etc.

- Presacral masses: Rectal duplication cysts can mimic other presacral masses, including sacrococcygeal teratoma, anterior meningocele, and dermoid, etc. Magnetic resonance imaging and biochemical tests, including alpha-fetoprotein assay, usually help in definite diagnosis.

- Other intrathoracic cysts: Other intrathoracic cysts, including the pericardial cyst and the thymic cyst, may be considered as close differentials of duplication cysts. However, these are located in the middle and the anterior mediastinum, respectively, unlike the duplication cyst, which is located in the posterior mediastinum.