**Semen Analysis**

At least two separate analyses should be done with three days of sexual abstinence preceding each specimen. In patients with azoospermia who have normal ejaculate volume, there is either spermatogenic failure or obstruction between the testes and the seminal vesicles. Patients with azoospermia having low semen volume and normal-sized testicles may either have ejaculatory duct obstruction or ejaculatory dysfunction. Therefore, all patients displaying absent ejaculate (aspermia) or low-volume ejaculation (1.5 ml<) should be requested to redo the semen investigations and also give a post-ejaculation urine example.

**Hormonal Evaluation**

In evaluating azoospermia, especially with normal testicle size and consistency on physical examination, a detailed endocrinological evaluation is necessary to make a specific diagnosis and strategize the treatment protocol.

Hypogonadotropic hypogonadism is a relatively uncommon cause of nonobstructive azoospermia. It accounts for no more than 2% of all infertile males. Possible causes include Kallmann syndrome, androgen-induced hypogonadism (from testosterone supplementation), brain neoplasms, radiation, trauma, radiation, etc.

**Imaging (Scrotal Ultrasonography****)**

The role of scrotal ultrasound in evaluating male infertility is evolving and becoming more routine. It allows for a more precise measurement of testis size and can identify cysts, varicoceles, spermatoceles, and lesions that might not otherwise be detectable by other means. It can also help differentiate obstructive from nonobstructive azoospermia. Scrotal ultrasonography will tend to show ectasia of the epididymal tubules and/or the rete testis, abnormal epididymal echogenicity, or dilated proximal vas deferens in obstructive azoospermia. Testicular volume, epididymal head size, and the resistive index of intratesticular vessels will all tend to be increased compared to patients with nonobstructive azoospermia.

If the seminal vesicles are absent or dilated/enlarged, an obstructive etiology of azoospermia can be diagnosed. The presence or absence of an ejaculatory duct cyst can also be determined using transrectal ultrasonography. Ultrasound examinations are painless and inexpensive, but a discussion with the diagnostic radiologist on which factors to look for and evaluate when a scrotal ultrasound is ordered for a male infertility patient will be very helpful. Therefore, the recommendation is for routine use of a comprehensive sonographic evaluation to help diagnose azoospermia and the differentiation of obstructive from nonobstructive etiologies.

**Genetic Testin****g**

**Klinefelter Syndrome**

Cytogenic abnormalities will be found in approximately 5% of men with nonobstructive azoospermia.

- Taller than average stature

- Longer legs, shorter torso, and broader hips compared to other boys

- Poor muscle tone

- Poor fine motor skills, dexterity, and coordination

- Absent, delayed, or incomplete puberty

- After puberty, less muscle as well as less facial and body hair compared with other teens

- Small, firm testicles

- Small penis

- Enlarged breast tissue (gynecomastia)

- Infertility

The presence of germ cells and sperm is highly variable in these individuals. Microscopic testicular sperm extraction (micro-TESE) can retrieve viable sperm in 50% of men with Klinefelter syndrome.

Adult men with the syndrome also have high rates of hypogonadism, diabetes, thromboses, metabolic syndrome, various cancers (breast, hematological, and extragonadal germ cell tumors), and cardiovascular disease and should receive appropriate counseling and referrals.

**Other Genetic Disorders**

The overall incidence of chromosomal abnormalities in infertile men is about 6%.

All men with primary testicular failure should be given karyotype and Y chromosome microdeletion testing. About 6% of men with nonobstructive azoospermia will have microdeletions of the Y chromosome involving the AZFa and/or AZFb subregions. Men with such microdeletions typically have extremely poor sperm retrieval rates and should be counseled to consider using donor sperm for ICSI or adoption.

Four percent will have a microdeletion of the AZFc subregion, which is not quite as severe a problem with infertility but will be inherited by male offspring. Up to 30% of nonobstructive azoospermic men will have Y chromosome microdeletions.

Men with hypogonadotropic hypogonadism should also be considered for genetic testing. About a third will demonstrate a genetic lesion with variable inheritance. For example, 13 genes have been identified to date that contribute to maturational arrest resulting in nonobstructive azoospermia.

**Differentiating Obstructive Azoospermia from Non-Obstructive**

Obstructive azoospermia will tend to have normal FSH and LH levels along with normal-sized testes. Testicular ultrasound may demonstrate an increased intratesticular resistive index or some dilated ducts in the testes, epididymis, or proximal vas. Nonobstructive azoospermia may have normal FSH and LH levels but will often show elevated levels. The size of the testes may be normal, hypotrophic, or atrophic. If the differentiation is still unclear, a testis biopsy may be required.

**Further Evaluation of Low Semen Volume Azoospermia**

Azoospermia patients with semen volumes consistently below 1.5 ml are likely to have retrograde ejaculation, an ejaculatory duct cyst, or congenital absence of the vas or seminal vesicle. Examination of the post-ejaculation urine sample can identify patients with retrograde ejaculation. The physical examination can determine if there is an absent vas deferens. Transrectal ultrasonography or cystoscopy can be used to identify an ejaculatory duct cyst. The seminal vesicles can be evaluated with transrectal ultrasonography.

**Further Evaluation of Nonobstructive Azoospermia**

Azoospermia is diagnosed with at least two separate semen samples for detailed analysis. In nonobstructive azoospermia, the abnormal hormonal profile suggests a significant spermatogenic abnormality as evidenced by an elevated FSH level. In cases of a normal hormonal profile, a testicular biopsy can be used to further evaluate spermatogenesis as it would be the definitive way to diagnose azoospermia from causes like maturational arrest and Sertoli cell-only syndrome. A karyotype analysis, genetic testing, and Y chromosome microdeletion test should be performed to assess genetic abnormalities. Endocrinological abnormalities are diagnosed and then managed accordingly.

**Further Evaluation for Obstructive Azoospermia**

In cases of obstructive azoospermia, the hormonal profile and testicular volume measurements are generally normal.

Dilation of the epididymis, presence of a hydrocele, or absence of the vas deferens suggest obstruction. Azoospermia due to vassal obstruction or epididymal obstruction has a normal biochemical profile in the seminal fluid. Testicular biopsy is indicated in azoospermic men with normal testicular examinations and hormonal profiles. These patients do not require a karyotype evaluation. However, an assessment for the CFTR gene mutation should be done to rule out cystic fibrosis.

**Diagnostic Testicular Biopsy**

The design of the testicular tissue is heterogeneous, and spermatogenesis occurs in the foci; hence, a biopsy is infrequently utilized as a diagnostic tool.

**Testicular Etiologies**

Direct testicular pathology may infer from varicocele-induced testicular damage, undescended testes, testicular torsion, mumps orchitis, toxic effects of medications, radiation, hereditary variations from normal, and idiopathic causes. Essential testicular failure in conjunction with azoospermia, commonly named nonobstructive azoospermia, is best managed by collecting testicular sperm, if possible, for ICSI. Higher serum FSH levels and smaller testicular volumes are suggestive of a more severe degree of spermatogenic disruption and poorer outcomes in men with nonobstructive azoospermia.

In general, maturational arrest, Sertoli cell-only syndrome, and Y chromosome microdeletions of AZFa, AZFb, or AZFc subregions are permanent and untreatable forms of nonobstructive azoospermia. However, micro-TESE may allow sperm retrieval in about 50% of cases.

Other causes of azoospermia include XYY syndrome, myotonic dystrophy, Noonan syndrome, 5 alpha-reductase deficiency, androgen insensitivity syndrome, and vanishing testis syndrome. There is sufficient evidence to confirm that varicoceles have a deleterious impact on the semen and testes, while varicocelectomy has been shown to improve sperm parameters and testicular function.

**Undescended Testes**

Undescended testicles are the most common genital mutation in boys and young males. They are noted in 2.7% of newborns and up to 0.8% of 1-year-olds.

**Testicular Torsion**

Testicular torsion happens in about 1:4,000 males before the age of 25 years.