Unfortunately, the efficacy of post-ICU clinics and other services to address the Post Intensive Care Syndrome (PICS) once it has occurred is modest at best.  For example, a recent Cochrane Review of studies investigating the impact of ICU follow-up services found limited effectiveness in terms of improving health-related quality of life (HRQoL).

- A- Assessment, management, and prevention of pain

- B- Both spontaneous breathing trials and spontaneous awakening trials

- C- Choice of sedation and analgesia (maintain a relatively light level of sedation and avoid benzodiazepines)

- D- Delirium assessment, prevention, and management

- E- Early mobility and exercise

- F- Family engagement and empowerment

Collectively, these measures address the physical impairments of PICS by preventing immobility and prolonged mechanical ventilation, the cognitive impairments by minimizing the exposure to sedatives and preventing delirium, and the mental health impairments by promoting patient-centered care. One well-studied method to address the mental health aspects of PICS and PICS-f is the use of ICU diaries, written chronological accounts of the ICU stay, often with accompanying pictures, that are shared with survivors and their family members during and after the ICU stay. Because ICU patients often have limited or distorted memories of their ICU experience due to sedation and delirium, these diaries can be re-orienting and serve as an enduring reminder of the patient’s medical progress. A meta-analysis found that the use of ICU diaries was associated with a decreased incidence of depression and anxiety in ICU survivors, while HRQoL scores also improved. ICU diaries also reduced the risk of PTSD in family members, but the evidence supporting this conclusion was not as robust.

Quality communication between the ICU team and family members is also thought to decrease the risk of PICS-f. This can be achieved by regularly scheduled family conferences, strategies of empathic listening, avoidance of medical jargon, and the involvement of social workers, psychotherapists, and clergy members.