The diagnosis of bladder exstrophy is clinical and is made by the pediatrician as soon as the baby is born in the majority of cases. A fleshy, red mass prolapsing out of the suprapubic region represents the open bladder plate. There is continuous urine leakage from the mass. As a rule, the degree of bladder plate exposure correlates with the degree of pubic diastasis. Therefore, the bladder prolapse can range from only exposed trigone to the entire bladder. The ureteric orifices are often visible, but an attempt of blind poking or cannulating the orifices must not be made. In male newborns, the phallus is short, stubby, and has a dorsal chordee (pointing upwards). The glans is flattened with widely separated (divergent) corpora due to the wide pubic diastasis.

The testis may not be descended at birth, and occasionally there may be the presence of bilateral inguinal hernias. In females, the clitoris is bifid with a slightly anterior vaginal opening. Uterine and vaginal duplications are also not uncommon in these children. Apart from these, both male and female newborns have an anterior ectopic anus due to abnormalities of the pelvic floor. A patulous anal orifice with mucosal prolapse can be seen in some children with exstrophy bladder. Although the management of bladder exstrophy begins from the time of birth only, it is not uncommon for some children to present later in life.

This happens especially in developing countries. In this subset of patients, a severe excoriation in the para-exstrophy skin, hypertrophied-polypoidal bladder plate with squamous metaplasia, poor control over bowel movements, and waddling gait are common. Social problems due to the continuous wetting of clothes are also frequently seen in these children.