Dexamethasone is available in various formulations. It is available in strengths ranging from 0.5 mg to 6 mg as a tablet. Other administration forms are an injectable suspension or an oral solution.

- Oral tablets: 0.5 mg, 0.75 mg, 1 mg, 1.5 mg, 2 mg, 4 mg, 6 mg, and 20 mg

- Oral elixir or solution: 0.5 mg/5 mL

- Oral concentrate: Dexamethasone Intensol: 1 mg/mL ( contains alcohol)

- Injection dexamethasone sodium phosphate: 4 mg/mL, 20 mg/5 mL, 120 mg/30 mL, 10 mg/mL, 100 mg/10 mL

**Adult Dosing**

- In treating inflammation, it is advisable to start with low doses of 0.75 mg/day, which may be titrated to 9 mg/day, with dosing divided into 2 to 4 doses throughout the day, which applies to intravenous, intramuscular, and oral administrations. Less may be used when directly administered to the lesion or tissue, with dosing ranging from 0.2 to 20 mg per day.

- For acute multiple sclerosis exacerbations, 30 mg oral daily doses for seven days are recommended, followed by one month of 4 to 12 mg daily doses.

- As cerebral edema may be a life-threatening condition, aggressive treatment is necessary. The recommendation is for 10 mg of intravenous dexamethasone, followed by 4 mg of intramuscular administration, given every 6 hours. In this instance, it is necessary to titrate down over seven days to discontinue dexamethasone therapy.

- The regimen is 1 to 6 mg/kg of intravenous dexamethasone as a one-time bolus in treating circulatory shock. The clinician may substitute this regimen with 40 mg, given intravenously every 2 to 6 hours. Treatment with high-dose dexamethasone is not recommended beyond 2 to 3 days.

- Research has shown that allergic reactions improve with a 6-day regimen beginning with 4 to 8 mg intramuscular injection on the first day. This dose is followed by oral doses on days 2 to 6, beginning with 1.5 mg every 12 hours for days 2 and 3, 0.75 mg every 12 hours for the third day, and finally, 0.75 mg daily for days 5 and 6. Therefore, the patient should be appropriately titrated by day 7 with no dosing necessary on day 7.

- Patients with COVID-19 (severe COVID-19): 6 mg once daily for ten days.

- Cushing syndrome test begins with a low-dose test. There are two versions of this test: the standard two-day and the overnight tests.

- A 0.5 mg oral dose of dexamethasone is given every 6 hours for two days with the standard test. Six hours after giving the final dose, serum cortisol levels are measured. The overnight test begins with a 1 mg oral dose of dexamethasone at 11:00 PM, with a second 1 mg oral dose at midnight. The following morning, serum cortisol levels are tested between 8:00 AM and 9:00 AM. The test is interpreted as positive screening for Cushing syndrome if the final cortisol reading is high, signaling that the more specific confirmative high dose dexamethasone suppression test should follow.
- The high-dose dexamethasone suppression test has three forms: the standard 2-day, overnight, and intravenous (IV). With all three versions of the test, baseline serum cortisol levels need to be determined before commencing with the test. Baseline serum is measurable with a 24-hour urinary free cortisol test.

**Use in Specific Population**

**Patients with Hepatic Impairment**

No dosage adjustments are provided in the manufacturer’s labeling.

**Patients with Renal Impairment**

The effect of renal impairment on the pharmacokinetics of dexamethasone has not been studied.

**Pregnancy Considerations**

Corticosteroids, including dexamethasone, readily cross the placenta. Adverse developmental consequences, including orofacial clefts (cleft lip with or without cleft palate) and intrauterine growth restriction (IUGR), have been documented using corticosteroids during pregnancy. In animal studies, the administration of corticosteroids to pregnant animals during organogenesis resulted in structural abnormalities, embryo-fetal mortality, and growth alteration. Advise pregnant women of dexamethasone's potential risk to a fetus. Dexamethasone is administered with anti-myeloma products that can cause embryo-fetal harm and are contraindicated for use in pregnancy. Human Data suggests that dexamethasone should be used during pregnancy only if the potential benefit justifies the potential risk to the fetus. Multiple courses of antenatal dexamethasone had been associated with reduced birth weight, susceptibility to infections, and increased blood glucose levels in newborns. Neonatal hypoglycemia was also reported. Also, infants should be carefully observed for signs of hypoadrenalism with in-utero exposure to substantial doses of corticosteroids via maternal administration.

**Breastfeeding Considerations**

Systemically administered corticosteroids appear in human milk and interfere with endogenous corticosteroid production, suppressing growth. Therefore, instruct women not to breastfeed during treatment two weeks after the last dose. Dexamethasone can decrease basal serum prolactin and thyrotropin-releasing hormone-stimulated serum prolactin increase in nonnursing women.