Breast cancer is the most common cancer and the second leading cause of cancer death in women in the United States. Breast cancer treatment has progressively improved with advances in endocrine therapy, early detection, and breast conservation surgical techniques. However, for patients undergoing mastectomy, the concerns of a potentially disfiguring surgery after a cancer diagnosis significantly affect the patient’s treatment and overall psychosocial recovery. The plastic surgeon's goal, along with that of the patient and her breast surgeon, is to develop a plan to restore body image after successful oncologic treatment. Breast reconstruction is multifaceted; chemoradiation, procedure choice, timing, and the entire scope of the cancer treatment must be considered before proceeding with reconstruction. Breast reconstruction surgery can restore self-confidence and eliminate the need for uncomfortable prosthetics. This activity reviews commonly used breast reconstruction options, describing each approach's potential indications, contraindications, risks, and benefits. The role of the healthcare team in managing and improving care for patients who undergo breast reconstructive surgery is discussed.

**Objectives:**
- Distinguish between immediate and delayed surgical options for breast reconstructive surgery.
- Identify the absolute and relative contraindications to breast reconstruction.

- Appraise the indications, risks, and benefits of different surgical approaches used in breast reconstruction.
- Apply effective healthcare team processes for coordinated prehospital and hospital care to improve clinical outcomes for patients undergoing breast reconstruction in the setting of a breast cancer diagnosis.