An overproduction of ketone bodies through increased ketogenesis can pose a problem due to their acidic nature.

Diabetic ketoacidosis (DKA) is an example involving the overproduction of ketone bodies. It occurs when there is a lack of or resistance to insulin. This usually occurs in people with type I diabetes, although it can happen to people with advanced type II diabetes as well. In most cases of type II diabetes, enough insulin production continues to prevent excessive ketogenesis.

Due to the lack of glucose brought in by insulin, cells start to produce glucose via gluconeogenesis. This process, along with existing glucose that cannot be brought in with insulin, significantly elevates serum glucose levels. The threshold for DKA is a glucose level of 250. However, it is typically greater than this amount.

Once carbohydrate stores become depleted and gluconeogenesis cannot occur anymore, ketogenesis is substantially increased, and greater amounts of ketone bodies are produced. Due to the acidic nature of beta-hydroxybutyrate and acetoacetate, this causes an anion gap metabolic acidosis.

On presentation, patients are usually very dehydrated from being hyperglycemic. The high glucose levels lead to osmotic diuresis, involving greater osmole concentrations (in this case, the osmole being glucose) that cause an increased osmotic pressure, which leads to reduced water reabsorption in the kidneys. Along with being dehydrated, patients typically present with confusion, nausea, vomiting, and abdominal pain. Because of the acidosis, patients often breathe very deeply and rapidly to eliminate carbon dioxide and cause respiratory alkalosis. This process is known as Kussmaul breathing, and, over time, a patient can experience respiratory distress due to the prolonged exertion of respiratory muscles. Cerebral edema can occur in severe cases of DKA. Because of the acetone produced by ketogenesis, patients can have breath that smells fruity or like nail polish remover.

The main goal of treating DKA is to resolve metabolic acidosis, which involves giving glucose and insulin to lower blood glucose levels and downregulate the ketogenic pathway and decrease the number of ketone bodies produced.

Ketoacidosis also can occur with severe alcoholism and prolonged starvation.