There are three biochemical abnormalities accountable for the formation of uric acid calculi in the renal framework. The most meaningful is the urinary pH, besides other factors, namely hyperuricosuria, and urine volume.

Low urinary pH: The pKa (dissociation constant) of Uric acid is 5.5, at which 50 percent of uric acid is in the form of urate, the soluble form. The remaining 50 percent is in the relatively insoluble uric acid form. The pH of urine can vary considerably. Uric acid is a weak acid, and thus in the presence of an acidic urinary pH (less than 5.5), soluble urate converts into insoluble uric acid.

Low pH of the urine is the primary determinant contributing to stone formation in metabolic syndrome and gouty diathesis. Low urine pH in subjects with metabolic syndrome can be attributed to defective ammoniogenesis.

The two elements that can lead to the acidic pH of urine are: 1) an increase in the net production/excretion of acids and 2) a decrease in the urinary buffering capacity.

The two types of buffers for counteracting excess acid in urine are:

- High capacity ammonium ions (NH4+)

- Low capacity titratable acids

Insulin resistance in metabolic syndrome induces the lipotoxicity of cells in the proximal convoluted tubule (PCT). The following mechanism becomes defective in the absence of insulin:

- Insulin stimulates the metabolism of glutamine in PCT, leading to the formation of two molecules of ammonia and alpha-ketoglutarate.

- Na+/H+ transport in PCT produces H+ in the PCT, which combines with NH3 in the tubular lumen, forming ammonium (NH4+). This ammonium acts as the primary buffer for urinary acid. It is capable of significant variation in response to increasing acid in urine.

- In the absence of NH4+, titratable acids, including phosphates, are responsible for buffering the urine. However, these are not able to respond significantly to urine pH changes, thus leading to an acidic pH and subsequent stone development.

- The underlying mechanism of low urine NH4+ and pH, simultaneously with a drop in NHE3 (sodium hydrogen exchanger-3) activity, due to renal steatosis, was exhibited on the comparison of diabetic fatty rats with lean rats.

**Hyperuricosuria**can be defined as the daily urinary uric acid excretion of more than 800 mg in men and more than 750 mg in women. It can be the result of numerous congenital and acquired causes, leading to increased uric acid generation or diminished elimination of uric acid. However, it is never singularly accountable for the production of stones. An added biochemical abnormality must also be present.

**Low urine volume**can lead to supersaturation of lithogenic factors in the urine. The solubility of uric acid is 100 mg/L, at which it remains soluble in urine. However, when the concentration of uric acid reaches 200 mg/L, the maximum stable limit, lithogenic factors start precipitating uric acid crystals which can then lead to stone formation. Thus, the intake of fluid to produce at least 2 - 2.5 liters of urine daily is recommended to avoid urinary supersaturation with lithogenic factors.