Due to the architectural complexity of bone, scanning, and transmission electron microscopy are frequently used to examine specimens, which enables the differentiation of mineralized and unmineralized components.

Scanning electron microscopy (SEM)

SEM affords a high spatial resolution, relatively large depth, and wide field of view without significant modification of the sample. SEM is typically used to identify composition and characterize the surfaces of samples. The strength of SEM in the topographical visualization of surfaces stems from the technique of detecting electrons reflected off the sample.

When visualized, periosteal osteoblasts have elongated processes projecting from the cell surface. Both the cell surface and processes have globular structures with a diameter of approximately 0.1 microns. As the periosteal surface is mineralized, the globules coalesce to form nonhomogeneous mineralized spherules.

Endosteal osteoblasts have a similar general appearance, with fewer processes and no globular structures.

Transmission electron microscopy (TEM)

TEM primarily provides the characterization of a sample's inner structures. In this imagining method, a beam of electrons is passed through a sample, and the detected contrast from electrons absorbed and scattered converts into an image.

TEM has helped to reveal membrane-bound matrix vesicles within osteoblasts that appear to form through budding cell processes. Secretions from these osteoblast cell processes were observed to have preformed membrane-bound vesicles resembling extracellular matrix vesicles.