Multiple risk factors have been postulated and noted to correlate with HBS in retrospective studies, case reports, and case series reviews. These factors include elevated levels of parathyroid hormone (PTH), alkaline phosphatase (ALK-P), body mass index (BMI), blood urea nitrogen (BUN), and increased size of resected glands. Evidence of bone diseases such as brown tumors, fractures, and osteitis fibrosa cystica with higher osteoclast numbers on bone biopsy have also correlated with an increased risk of HBS. On the other hand, there have been divergent risk factors noted in the incidence of HBS, like older age and high pre-op calcium levels in primary hyperparathyroidism versus younger age and lower preoperative calcium levels in the secondary hyperparathyroidism cases.

Unfortunately, thus far, there has been no specific level of PTH at which the risk for HBS is proportional to suggest the creation of a clinical calculator or indicator. However, more often, the levels of PTH elevation in primary hyperparathyroidism are more subtle in the range of 300-400 pg/ml as compared to 700-1000 pg/ml range in patients with secondary hyperparathyroidism. **Summary of risk factors**

Common Risk Factors

- Elevated PTH

- Elevated alkaline phosphatase

- Radiologic evidence of bone disease

- Higher BMI

- Larger volume or weight of parathyroid glands removed

- A higher number of osteoclasts on bone biopsy

- Higher Blood urea nitrogen levels

Divergent Risk Factors

- Primary Hyperparathyroidism

- Older Age
- Higher preoperative calcium levels

- Secondary Hyperparathyroidism

- Younger Age
- Lower preoperative calcium levels

- Thyrotoxicosis

- Lower lumbar spine bone mineral density

Diagnosis hinges on a profound and persistently low calcium level of less than 8.4 mg/dl (2.1 mmol/L) for more than four days postoperatively along with hypophosphatemia and normal PTH levels. Often there is also associated with hypomagnesemia and hypocalciuria.