Hair has many areas of clinical significance which include diseases of hair loss, excess, alterations due to nutritional deficiencies, infectious causes, and effects of drug reactions.

The unwanted loss of hair, known as **alopecia**, is a widespread condition affecting both sexes, occurring in numerous patterns, and classified into non-scarring and scarring (cicatricial) subtypes.

The most common non-scarring type of alopecia is **androgenetic**or “pattern” hair loss which develops due to a combination of genetic predisposition and the action of androgen on hair follicles. While men commonly are associated with this condition, women can be affected as well and exhibit their own characteristic pattern. The hair loss typically begins in both temples and recedes to form an “M” shape.

This is not to be confused with **traction alopecia**which is seen in people who wear their hair and tight braids and ponytails.

**Alopecia areata**is patchy hair loss, usually on the scalp, which often has the characteristic “exclamation point” hairs that are short and broken and appear to be floating exclamation marks.**Alopecia totalis and universalis**are the most severe forms of alopecia. Alopecia totalis eradicates all terminal scalp hairs alopecia universalis eradicates all body hairs. Former NBA athlete Charlie Villanueva displays this pattern of alopecia.

**Scarring alopecia**can arise from cutaneous manifestations of lupus or a bacterial inflammatory condition known as dissecting folliculitis. These patterns of alopecia exhibit patches of shiny, bare skin and result in permanent hair loss in the affected areas.

**Telogen Effluvium**is when hair roots are pushed into the telogen resting phase. This usually occurs after some stress and can be acute or chronic.

A proliferation of fine lanugo hairs past the neonatal period can be a symptom of malnutrition and aid in the diagnosis of anorexia nervosa. Hair loss can also be due to an infection, like **tinea capitis**, a fungal infection that results in a patch of hair loss on the scalp. A kerion, fungal abscess, can sometimes form and also result in hair loss most commonly on the scalp and sometimes on the face, torso, and extremities.**Hair transplantation**has become a therapeutic option for those who fail to have hair growth with medication.

Excess hair or hair in abnormal locations is known as hypertrichosis. Hypertrichosis can be seen in the setting of porphyria cutanea tarda, where people experience photosensitivity blistering, and hypertrichosis. It can develop as an inherited condition or a drug reaction, for example after the use of phenytoin, cyclosporine, and minoxidil.