A thorough consultation should be conducted with a patient before a dental extraction is performed. Ideally, the consultation and the treatment should be performed on separate occasions to allow the patient time to confirm that they are happy to proceed with the treatment.

During this consultation appointment, a thorough medical history should be taken. This should include any medical diagnoses and conditions, all medications the patient regularly takes - both prescription and non-prescription - along with any allergies. Any subsequent considerations based on this medical history should be explored. These diagnoses can have medical impacts, as described in previous sections, and also may impact the ideal timing of treatment. A patient's weight may also be prudent to take to allow for a maximum safe dosage of local anesthesia to be calculated.

A clear diagnosis should be in place before considering extraction. The patient's symptoms should be explored, and a causative tooth should be identified prior to presenting dental extraction as a treatment option. This will avoid unnecessary dental extractions, for example, in cases where facial pain mimics dental pain.

If a patient does choose to proceed with the extraction of the causative tooth, then a consent discussion must be had. This should cover all the commonly occurring risks of dental extraction - pain, bleeding, bruising, swelling, infection - and less frequently occurring risks. Clinicians may wish to discuss potential damage to adjacent teeth as this can happen during treatment, especially if neighboring teeth are heavily restored.

Site-specific risks should also be discussed, such as IDN injury causing a temporary or permanent altered sensation in the lip, cheek, tongue, and teeth, an altered sense of taste, or OAC formation. It should be emphasized to the patient that these site-specific risks are rarer. However, the clinician should ensure they have conducted enough investigations to understand each patient's specific level of risk for these site-specific complications. The patient's consent should be recorded in written format and re-confirmed on the day of treatment.

If required, further investigations should be performed. Clinicians should always have a radiograph of the tooth they intend to take out. This radiograph should include the apex of the tooth. Based on this radiograph, further investigations, such as cone beam CT imaging, may require a complete consent discussion with the patient.

Patients may have medical-specific factors that should be handled before treatment is conducted. For example, if liaising with a patient's medical team is required, this should be done prior to treatment to ensure that any pre or post-operative instructions are given to the patient in good time. If a medication is to be suspended or dosage changed, then the patient should also be informed of this in good time to allow them to do so before their extraction.

At the treatment appointment, the clinician should indicate to their assistant what equipment they think they should need based on which tooth they are extracting and other factors such as loss of coronal tissue of the tooth. The assistant should then have this equipment ready for when treatment starts. Consent should be re-confirmed with the patient prior to treatment starting. The clinician should have thoroughly reviewed previous notes and radiographs of the relevant tooth to be prepared for the upcoming treatment.