Soft tissue radionecrosis can occur in any organ or tissue that has had substantial amounts of radiation exposure usual from therapeutic procedures for treating cancer. The initial radiation damage (acute phase) to the tissue is at the DNA level, and if the damage is severe enough, the cells will not be able to recover. This will lead to cell death. If these are cancer cells, this is the desired effect of the radiation, but when the normal tissue that is in the ionizing radiation field is damaged, then undesirable changes can take place in the tissue. Initially, there is edema and inflammation in the tissue from the radiation that results in the clinical erythema. After the initial radiation-induced erythema, then the tissue may develop an obliterative endarteritis that can increase hypoxia in the tissue with tissue fibrosis. These fibrotic tissue changes are a precursor for the development of the final delayed effects of radiation therapy. The damaged tissue has a lack of normal capillaries and arterioles and increases in the stroma that give the tissue its fibrotic appearance and texture. Such tissue is hypoxic because of the farther distance of diffusion for oxygen from the red blood cells going through the decreased number of capillary beds. Not only is there a lack of normal capillary beds, but the capillaries that are present are frequently disorganized and do not provide adequate perfusion of the tissue for normal oxygenation. The proliferative endarteritis and fibrosis results in tissue that is predisposed to tissue breakdown either spontaneously, or many times, in conjunction with trauma and/or infection. These delayed soft tissue radiation changes often happen 6 months to years after the initial radiation treatments.