Surgically, it is vital to note the course of epigastric arteries along the abdominal wall for many procedures such as trocar placement in laparoscopic surgeries, percutaneous endoscopic gastronomy (PEG) tube placement, inguinal hernia repair, paracentesis, and drain placement during cardiothoracic surgery. Disruption of the epigastric arteries can lead to failure in future procedures where superior epigastric artery may be used for arterial perforation, such as in a trans-rectus abdominis muscle (TRAM) flap or sternal reconstruction procedure. Bleeding may result in abdominal wall hematoma formation, leading to post-op complications such as infection, incisional hernia formation, or severe blood loss depending on where arterial transection occurs.

Though trocar and cannula placement is safe, it may injure blood vessels of the anterior abdominal wall, more so to the inferior epigastric artery. These injuries occur in 3 of 1000 (or 0.2-2%) of laparoscopic cases. In these cases, there is a risk of bleeding, which is controllable with either direct pressure, wall suture ligation, or tamponade with a Foley catheter balloon through the insertion site. It is also controllable with a two-handed technique, where the vessel is clamped or compressed with an instrument with one hand and ligated, clipped, or coagulated with the other. If these measures fail, the surgeon must perform a wound exploration which leads to unnecessary prolongation of procedure, in which the patient needs to be under anesthesia for an extended period, or even a possible conversion to laparotomy, delaying post-op wound healing among the other complications listed above.

Many surgeons may use transillumination technique to visualize significant vessels through the skin to avoid piercing the area with a trocar. However, this is difficult in dark-skinned patients and patients with a high body mass index. A study by Quintet et al. showed that vessels were visualized using transillumination technique in only 63% of 103 patients studied.

“Safety” and “danger” zones have been defined by various studies in cadavers in different countries. Bhatti et al. defined the “danger zone” of the superior epigastric artery to be 3 to 8.5 cm lateral to midline and “safety zone” to be from midline to 3cm immediately adjacent to midline bilaterally on the abdomen.