**Medical Treatment**

The approach to treating H. influenzae infections mainly involves antibiotics and conservative measures. The initial antibiotic choice is a third-generation cephalosporin while waiting for the culture and sensitivity results. Antibiotic resistance is the issue of concern, and it is essential to monitor the response to treatment and alter the antibiotic accordingly. In a study performed in the UK on sputum samples of H. influenzae positive patients with COPD, 67% showed resistance to ampicillin (more than half were beta-lactamase positive), 46% were resistant to macrolides like erythromycin, and none of the specimens demonstrated resistance to fluoroquinolones. Similar results were obtained in a study carried out in China on the pediatric population, with almost 52% isolates resistant to ampicillin. Cefotaxime and ampicillin/sulbactam had the highest susceptibility rates making them the best choices for empiric therapy. The duration of antibiotic treatment depends upon the site of infection and the response to therapy.

In cases of suspected Hib meningitis, antibiotic choices include ceftriaxone, ceftazidime, cefotaxime, ampicillin-sulbactam, fluoroquinolones, and azithromycin given via parenteral route for one week. Antibiotics typically avoided are ampicillin due to resistance caused by plasma-mediated beta-lactamase production, cefuroxime due to delayed sterilization, and chloramphenicol because of the exhausting monitoring of drug levels for side effects such as bone marrow toxicity and idiosyncratic aplastic anemia. Dexamethasone is an important adjunctive treatment as it reduces the cerebral edema associated with inflammation of the meninges and also reduces complications such as hearing loss and other neurological sequelae. For steroids to be beneficial, they must be administered prior to or along with starting parenteral antibiotics. There is an established benefit of a 4-day steroid course given at a dose 0f 0.6 mg/kg/day. Additionally, continuous supportive therapy, and proper management of complications like shock, syndrome of inappropriate antidiuretic hormone secretion (SIADH), seizures, and abscesses are carried out to decrease mortality. A repeat lumbar puncture is needed in complicated cases to check the sterility of CSF after treatment completion.

If children come in with respiratory distress from suspected epiglottitis, management includes starting face mask oxygen, nebulized epinephrine in 1:1000 ratio, repeated intravenous steroids, and, most importantly, ensuring patency of the airway by endotracheal tube or tracheostomy in emergency cases. The antibiotic of choice is ceftriaxone 2 grams intravenously (IV) once daily until clinical improvement, and then switched to oral antibiotics, for example, amoxicillin/clavulanate 625 mg three times a day. The antibiotics may be changed depending upon the culture and sensitivity results, and the total duration of treatment varies from 7-10 days. In cases of allergies to the above antibiotics, IV vancomycin plus IV ciprofloxacin followed later by an oral fluoroquinolone for 7-10 days is in practice. The recommended management of occult bacteremia is obtaining repeated cultures, chest radiographs, and CSF analysis to find out the focus of infection. A 5-14 day course of parenteral antibiotics is given subsequently to control infection, similar to the course followed in other gram-negative bacteremias.

Mucosal infections by NTHi are treated with oral antibiotics. The drug of choice is amoxicillin, given in a high dose, i.e., 80-90 mg/kg/day two times a day, and the second line is amoxicillin/clavulanate. If there is an allergy to penicillin, then erythromycin-sulfisoxazole or cefaclor is prescribed. The length of treatment depends upon the age of children and the severity of the disease process. Children less than 2 years with severe infection are treated for a total of 10 days, 2 to 5-year-olds with mild to moderate otitis media are treated for a week, and 5 to 7 days of therapy is enough for children older than 6 years with mild-moderate symptoms. Invasive NTHi disease is treated similarly as invasive Hib by administering parenteral antibiotics.

**Surgical Treatment**

In cases of complications such as subdural and pleural effusion or empyema, surgical drainage is required. Septic arthritis requires repeated joint fluid aspirations and arthroscopy with the placement of a surgical drain to relieve pressure and reduce the risk of avascular necrosis of the femoral head.