The clinical features common to all CMTs are distal symmetrical weakness, wasting, hypo/areflexia, and skeletal deformities. These are more pronounced in lower limbs as compared to upper limbs. Commonly reported symptoms are difficulty in walking fast or running, tripping, falls, and twisting or spraining of ankles. Patients may have delayed motor milestones. During childhood, these patients are clumsy and ‘slow’ in sports, and not athletic. As the weakness progresses, patients develop foot drop and high-stepping gait. The weakness of hands manifests as difficulty in buttoning, zipping, and writing. Onset in upper limbs and weakness of proximal muscles may also occur, but uncommonly. Sensory symptoms and signs are relatively less prominent. About 20% to 30% of patients complain of pain, which is often musculoskeletal and rarely neuropathic. Thus paresthesia and positive sensory symptoms are rather infrequent.

Examination reveals pes cavus, hammertoes, and clawed hands in patients with long-standing disease due to the weakness of intrinsic muscles. Wasting of legs and distal thighs may seem like an inverted champagne bottle. Spinal deformities (scoliosis) may also occur. Early and severe scoliosis is suggestive of, but not an exclusive feature of SH3TC2 mutations.MFN2 mutations.

Age at onset ranges from infancy to the elderly, but the most have onset within the first two decades of life. Since the onset is insidious and progression is usually slow, it is sometimes difficult to find the exact age at onset. Congenital hypo-myelinating neuropathy and Dejerine Sottas disease may have onset in the neonatal period or infancy. Affected patients manifest with foot deformities, delayed motor milestones, difficulty in walking, and impaired sensation.

Patients have varying severity of the disability, spanning a spectrum from minimally symptomatic to severe.PMP22 may manifest with classical CMT1A, hereditary neuropathy with liability to pressure palsies (HNPP), Dejerine-Sottas syndrome, or congenital hypo-myelinating neuropathy or may remain asymptomatic with only minor abnormalities detected on electrophysiological testing.

In addition to the classical phenotype of distal wasting, weakness, and deformities, patients may have several other features. In a study of 49 patients with genetically established CMT, Werheid et al., reported that 88% of the patients had at least one added feature, with 65% having two or more other manifestations. This may give a clue for underlying genetic variations.PMP22 and mutations in MPZ and GJB1 may have pupillary abnormalities. They include tonic pupils, miosis, mydriasis, anisocoria, and impaired pupillary reaction.

Other ocular manifestations include ptosis, optic atrophy, early cataract, glaucoma, and age-related macular degeneration. Cranial neuropathies like deafness, vocal cord palsy, facial/ bulbar weakness, and tongue atrophy can also occur. Patients with PMP22 and MPZ associated neuropathies may report pain and paresthesias, as noted in acquired neuropathies. Patients with specific mutations in MPZ viz Thr124Met and Gly123Ala present with late-onset phenotype with pupillary abnormalities, shooting pains, disturbing paresthesias, and sometimes with rapid progression.PMP22 duplication.

Features of dysautonomia, including urinary urgency and incontinence, orthostatic hypotension, and hyper-hidrosis, have also been reported.INF2.