The diagnosis of MG is mostly clinical. The laboratory investigations and procedures usually aid the clinician in confirming the clinical findings.

**Serologic Tests:**The anti-AChR Ab test is very specific, and it confirms the diagnosis in patients with classical clinical findings. It is present in four-fifths of patients with generalized MG and only in half of the patients with pure ocular MG. The rest of the patients, about 5% to 10%, will demonstrate anti-MuSK antibodies. Only in a few sporadic cases, both anti-AChR and anti-MuSK antibodies are present in the same patient. The 3% to 50% of the remaining patients who are seronegative to either of these antibodies will demonstrate anti-LRP4 antibodies. Anti-striated muscle antibodies are present in 30% of MG patients. They are more useful as a serologic marker for thymoma, especially in younger patients.

**Electrophysiologic Tests:**These are relevant in patients who are seronegative for antibody testing. Commonly employed tests for MG are the repetitive nerve stimulation (RNS) test and single-fiber electromyography (SFEMG). Both the tests assess for conduction delays in the NMJ. Routine nerve conduction studies are usually performed to determine the functioning of the nerves and muscles before undertaking these tests.

- **RNS Test**: This is done by stimulating the nerve at 2-3Hz. Repeated nerve stimulation depletes the ACh in the NMJ, and produces a low excitatory postsynaptic potential (EPSP). A 10% or more decrease in the EPSP between the first and fifth stimulus is diagnostic of MG.

- **SFEMG**: This records action potential (AP) from individual muscle fibers, and thus allows to record the AP simultaneously from two muscle fibers innervated by a single motor neuron. The difference between the time of onset of these two action potentials is called the "jitter." In MG, the "jitter" will increase because of the reduced NMJ transmission. This is the most sensitive among the diagnostic tests for MG.

**Edrophonium (Tensilon) Test:**Edrophonium is a short-acting acetylcholinesterase inhibitor that increases the availability of ACh in the NMJ. This is particularly useful for ocular MG, where electrophysiologic testing cannot be performed. It is administered intravenously, and the patient is observed for improvement in the symptoms of ptosis or diplopia. It has a sensitivity of 71% to 95% for MG diagnosis.

**Ice-pack Test:**When edrophonium testing is contraindicated, an ice-pack test can be performed. This test requires an ice-pack placed over the eye for 2-5 minutes. Then, an assessment for any improvement in ptosis is done. This test cannot be used for the evaluation of extraocular muscles.

**Imaging:**Chest computed tomography (CT) or magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) should be performed in patients diagnosed with MG to assess for thymoma. In cases presenting with pure ocular MG, MRI of orbits and the brain needs to be performed to evaluate for any localized mass lesions.

**Other Laboratory Tests:**Myasthenia gravis commonly coexists with other autoimmune disorders, and testing for anti-nuclear (ANA) antibodies, rheumatoid factor (RF), and baseline thyroid functions are recommended.