Celiac artery compression syndrome is a diagnosis of exclusion. Pertinent workup of this condition may include simple tests to rule out other etiologies causing diagnostic uncertainty. These can include colonoscopy, ultrasound of the liver, pancreas, and gallbladder, upper gastrointestinal endoscopy, complete blood count, hepatic function testing, serum amylase and lipase, C-reactive protein, and testing of certain antibodies such as anti-smooth muscle antibody (ASMA). Several diagnostic modalities can be employed to make a diagnosis of celiac artery compression syndrome. These can be categorized as non-invasive and invasive modalities.

The invasive modalities include conventional visceral angiography while the invasive modalities include Doppler ultrasound (US), magnetic resonance imaging (MRI), and computerized tomography angiography (CTA). On ultrasound, there is a demonstration of elevated celiac artery peak systolic velocities with deep expiration. More specifically, the following two criteria are supportive for the diagnosis of celiac artery compression syndrome on ultrasound: expiratory peak velocity of greater than 200 cm/s and deflection angle greater than 50 degrees.

Additionally, the following findings may also be encountered: the abnormal origin of the celiac artery, flow reversal in the hepatic artery and lowering of velocity in the celiac artery when the patient stands erect. Conventional visceral angiography shows partial to complete stenosis of the celiac artery secondary to extrinsic compression with possible post-stenotic dilation and retrograde filling of the celiac artery. During visceral angiography, intravascular ultrasound can be used to demonstrate ostial compression of the celiac artery with expiration. CTA shows compression of the celiac axis with focal stenosis and post-stenotic dilation. On these modalities, one can appreciate the difference in perfusion of the celiac artery during inspiration and expiration. Additional studies that may be done to diagnose celiac artery compression syndrome include gastric tonometry and percutaneous celiac ganglion block.