According to the 2013 American College of Cardiology/American Heart Association guidelines, primary prevention focuses on atherosclerotic cardiovascular disease (ASCVD), including coronary heart disease, stroke, and peripheral arterial disease. Comparison guidelines are available in the organization's 2016 United States cholesterol treatment update. It also provides treatment recommendations for primary prevention of ASCVD for those with LDL cholesterol greater than or equal to 190 mg/dL and those with or without diabetes mellitus. Recommendations are also provided for secondary prevention for those with established ASCVD and those older than 75 years of age. Treatment with 3-hydroxy-3-methylglutaryl-coenzyme A reductase inhibitors (HMG-CoA Reductase Inhibitors-statins) is recommended for each category.

In adults, indications for fluvastatin include hypercholesterolemia and mixed dyslipidemia. In addition, it helps to decrease the amount of total blood cholesterol. The primary purpose of the therapy is to reduce low-density lipoprotein cholesterol and triglycerides and increase blood concentrations of high-density lipoproteins. When used together with a low-fat diet, a weight-loss program, and exercise, fluvastatin may reduce the risk of heart attack and stroke in people who have heart disease or are at risk of developing heart disease.

Fluvastatin is indicated for heterozygous familial hypercholesterolemia in children and adolescents between 10 and 16. The indication is for those who are unresponsive to dietary restriction and whose LDL cholesterol remains greater than 190 mg/dL. It is also indicated when dietary restrictions have failed and the individual's LDL cholesterol is greater than 160 mg/dL. In addition, fluvastatin is indicated if the individual has a positive family history of premature cardiovascular disease or has two or more cardiovascular risk factors. Females must be a post-menarche for at least one year to meet the criteria for fluvastatin use. In those less than ten years of age, the safety and efficacy of fluvastatin have not been established.