Prevention of patient self-mutilation and injury by reducing the likelihood of traumatic Foley catheter extractions is beneficial to hospitals and patients by reducing hospital days and avoiding urological complications. This has been hampered in the past by the need for specific physician orders for either a sitter, restraints, or sedation. These precautions are costly, require a physician's order, use valuable resources better utilized elsewhere, and may not even be very effective. Making traumatic Foley removals a nurse-initiated program greatly facilitates its implementation and effectiveness. In particular, the nurses liked using the decoy catheters and found them particularly effective, even in the most difficult cases. Newer devices have been developed for difficult catheterizations to prevent malpositioning as well.

The key, however, is to have a collaborative interprofessional team identifying the patients at risk for a traumatic Foley removal and implementing safety measures to prevent this occurrence. A nursing-driven risk assessment for every patient on admission or after Foley catheter insertion to identify patients at high risk for inappropriate extractions and communicating these findings with the medical provider can greatly reduce the risk. Nurses and clinicians must coordinate the care of Foley catheters so that appropriate protective measures may be undertaken. The nurse can also assist the medical provider in identifying when a patient is no longer in need of a Foley catheter. Communicating this finding with the provider will lead to the early safe removal of the catheters and prevent traumatic self-extraction by the patient. An integrated interprofessional team can greatly reduce the incidence of this troublesome problem with improved patient safety, reduced urethral trauma, increased quality, and better outcomes. [Level V]