Primidone toxicity has been studied in numerous animal species and was found to be exceptionally low. Nevertheless, hepatotoxicity and behavioral problems with primidone are more common than phenobarbital. For patients undergoing chronic primidone therapy, the ALT and ALP serum levels are more elevated than for any other widely used anticonvulsant. Additionally, there is documentation that hepatic cirrhosis secondary to chronic primidone use may also occur. Idiosyncratic reactions to primidone may also occur, which include hepatotoxicity and megaloblastic anemia. In patients with renal impairment, dosing adjustments should be according to clinical response and biological monitoring.

Moreover, several studies demonstrated that primidone could have significant toxicity, including:

- Genotoxicity. While the antiepileptic agent showed mutagenic proprieties in one strain of Salmonella typhimurium strain and genotoxicity during in vivo experiments, the real risk of genotoxicity to humans is unclear.

- Carcinogenicity. Studies demonstrated an increased incidence of hepatocellular neoplasms in mice, thyroid neoplasms in both mice and rats, and an increased incidence of renal carcinomas in male rats at clinical doses. Nevertheless, the risk of carcinogenicity to humans is unknown.

- Teratogenicity. Teratogenic effects in rodents included palatal defects, enlargement of cerebral ventricles, club foot, open eyes, and subarachnoid hemorrhage. The drug also showed memory impairment and effects on fertility in animals.

**Primidone Overdose**

Patients who have had a primidone overdose may present with hypotension, coma, CNS depression, suppressed response to pain, suppressed reflexes, respiratory depression, and decreased urine output. Overdose requires management with symptomatic and supportive treatment, including the removal of any unabsorbed drug. Urine alkalinization and forced diuresis may enhance excretion. Hemodialysis may be necessary.