Over the last few decades, there has been an increase in multi-drug resistant organisms causing UTIs, making treatment more complicated. This is thought to stem from the overuse of antibiotics to treat suspected UTIs as confirmation is not available for 2 to 3 days until a urine culture with antimicrobial susceptibility has resulted.

Research aimed at reducing mortality from sepsis via aggressive treatment modalities, including the original Rivers trial, has shown that early goal-directed therapy (EGDT) reduces mortality from sepsis. While some of the original recommendations of EGDT have been challenged recently, these overall treatment guidelines remain: (1) Rapid initiation of empiric antibiotics that are chosen to eliminate the suspected source of infection, (2) Supportive care, including hemodynamic and pulmonary stabilization, and (3) Adjunctive therapies. When choosing antibiotics, the goal is to have these infused into the patient within one hour of a confirmed diagnosis, but they should be given only after urine and blood cultures have been collected. Each hour antibiotics are delayed after the initial six hours is associated with an 8% decrease in survival. Local susceptibility patterns guide antibiotic choice but often includes a third-generation cephalosporin, piperacillin in combination with a beta-lactamase inhibitor, or a fluoroquinolone. It is important to remember in dosing these antibiotics that many patients with severe sepsis have end-organ dysfunction, including renal and liver impairment, which might affect the clearance of antibiotics.

In addition to early antibiotics, there are other important parts of the management of sepsis. Initial fluid resuscitation with crystalloid is still recommended at a minimum of 30 mL/kg. Consider early administration of vasopressor support to maintain a mean arterial pressure greater than 65 mm Hg. The first choice for vasopressor support in sepsis is norepinephrine (with epinephrine and vasopressin 2 and 3). Tight glucose control is also recommended, with corticosteroids and blood products being more controversial in the literature.

If the patient has a complicating factor in the urinary tract that is identified and warrants treatment, it should be performed as soon as possible (e.g., Foley catheter placement to relieve urinary retention or stent placement to bypass an obstructing ureteral calculus causing urosepsis).