There have been numerous surgical techniques for NAC reconstruction that have been described over time.

**Local flaps**transfer adjacent skin and subcutaneous fat to create a projected nipple. Multiple techniques exist, with at least 30 unique techniques in the literature.

**Nipple sharing**is a technique considered for patients with excessive contralateral nipple projection who are willing to sacrifice contralateral projection for ipsilateral reconstruction. About 50% of contralateral nipple height is lost in nipple sharing techniques.

**Skin grafts**can be used to reconstruct the areola or the NAC. Full-thickness skin grafts are harvested from other pigmented areas such as the axillary area or upper inner thigh. Dermabrasion has been described as an alternative to create hyperpigmented skin for the reconstructed NAC.

**Intradermal tattooing**is commonly used as an alternative to the skin graft for reconstruction of the areola or to color the NAC after nipple reconstruction with a local flap. It is typically performed 3 to 4 months after nipple reconstruction after most nipple shrinkage has occurred.

**Internal and/or external nipple prosthetics**offer patients another minimally invasive NAC reconstruction option. In the case of external prosthetics, off-the-shelf and custom options exist. For a custom prosthetic, an impression is made of the contralateral NAC, from which mold and silicone prosthetic are created by a prosthetist.

**Postoperatively,**nipple-specific dressings and/shields are placed to protect the reconstructed NAC and avoid compression, trauma, and/or infection, leading to loss of NAC projection. Multiple dressings and shields have been described in the literature, including nipple-specific plastic guards, donut-shaped sponges, occlusive dressings with anti-biotics, silicone-based products, and modified ocular shields and protectors.

**Tissue engineering and regenerative medicine (TE&RM)**nipple-areolar reconstruction with 3D-printed tissue scaffolds is presently being investigated as an NAC reconstruction method of the future.