Hyperbaric oxygen can increase perilymph oxygen tension and restore hearing in a significant number of patients with sudden sensorineural hearing loss. Efficacy may depend on many factors including the degree of patency of the labyrinthine artery and the ability to increase oxygen tension in the perilymph. Many prospective randomized controlled trials have proven their benefits over placebo. The best results are found when patients are treated within 14 days of symptoms onset and with concomitant steroids (either systemically or intratympanic). Steroids should be given at an initial dose of 1mg/kg/day and tapered over 2 to 3 weeks unless contraindicated. Patients with moderate to severe hearing loss (more than 40 decibels) should be considered for hyperbaric oxygen therapy. The American Academy of Otolaryngology recommends hyperbaric oxygen be considered as a treatment option for up to 3 months after symptom onset and recommends against the routine use of antivirals, thrombolytics, vasodilators, vasoactive substances, or antioxidants. Patients who have failed an initial course of steroids can still often benefit from a combination of intratympanic steroids and hyperbaric oxygen therapy even as far out as ten weeks after symptom onset. An otolaryngologist and audiologist should evaluate patients with an audiogram, MRI of the brain (to rule out retrocochlear pathology), full autoimmune and vasculitis evaluation, and auditory brainstem response. Follow-up audiograms should be done during (after the first ten treatments) and after (at the completion of 20 treatments) the course of hyperbaric oxygen therapy and at 6 months follow up. Additionally, patients should be educated on the natural history of the condition, the benefits and risks of interventions, and the limitations of the existing evidence regarding efficacy. Patients should be counseled on the possibility of incomplete recovery of hearing and possible benefits of amplification and hearing-assistive technology and other supportive measures.