**Nonopioid analgesic agents**

- **Acetaminophen (paracetamol)**: Toxicity develops at 7.5 g/day to 10 g/day or 140 mg/kg, it is rare at doses of less than 150 mg/kg for an adult or 200 mg/kg for a child. If taken in large amounts, this medication may cause severe liver damage leading to liver transplant or even death. Although acetaminophen poisoning is observed more frequently in children, adults usually present with a more serious and fatal presentation.

- **Nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs)**: Most cases of acute NSAID overdose are asymptomatic or develop insignificant self-limiting gastrointestinal symptoms. However, serious complications may occur and include confusion, headache, nystagmus, drowsiness, blurred vision, diplopia, tinnitus, convulsions, metabolic acidosis, acute renal or liver failure, GI bleeding, and coma.

- **Antidepressant medications**:
- Amitriptyline: Severe signs and symptoms of toxicity include confusion, transient visual hallucinations, mydriasis, agitation, dysrhythmias, severe hypotension, convulsions, hyperreflexia, stupor, drowsiness, muscle rigidity, vomiting, hypothermia, hyperpyrexia, coma, and death. Alteration in the ECG, particularly in QRS axis or width, are clinically significant indicators of TCA toxicity. Other abnormalities include prolonged PR interval, ST-T wave changes, ventricular tachycardia, and fibrillation. The absence of these findings does not exclude TCA poisoning.
- Duloxetine: Signs and symptoms of toxicity include serotonin syndrome, somnolence, syncope, tachycardia, seizures, autonomic instability, diarrhea, vomiting, and coma. There is no antidote available for duloxetine overdose. Nonetheless, cyproheptadine and cooling measures merit consideration in cases of serotonin syndrome.

- **Antiepileptic medications**:
- Gabapentin: Gabapentin does not carry the risk of overdose or addiction as other pain management medications (eg., opioids). However, gabapentin may increase a euphoric state caused by opioids.
- Pregabalin: Limited information is available regarding overdose. The highest documented accidental overdose occurred during clinical research and was 8000 mg. As in the case of gabapentin, pregabalin has no specific antidote.

- **Local anesthetics**: Lidocaine toxicity usually presents at lidocaine blood concentrations above 5 mcg/mL. Symptoms progress from slurred speech, tinnitus, paresthesias, and dizziness to loss of consciousness, seizures, cardiac arrhythmias, and cardiorespiratory arrest. Management is supportive (oxygen, IV fluids, and inotropes), and, in cases of refractory cardiovascular collapse, intravenous lipid emulsion is indicated.

**Opioid Agents**

Opioid overdose may result in death due to severe respiratory depression. Physicians should suspect opioid toxicity in any patient presenting with altered mental status, bradypnea, and constricted pupils. Naloxone is indicated for patients with respiratory depression; it may be given intravenously, intramuscularly, or intranasally. Since naloxone is only active for 30 to 60 minutes, it must be administered through intravenous infusion in cases of a long-acting opioid overdose.