Glaucoma is a preventable cause of blindness making patient education crucial in managing and preventing the progression of open-angle glaucoma. Effective and successful treatment open-angle glaucoma can prevent the evolution of optic nerve atrophy and preserve patients vision. However, patient adherence and compliance to medical therapy in patients with glaucoma is notoriously difficult. Treatment regimens require daily treatment to control intraocular pressure and this is can be a challenging task for patients for the rest of their life. The nature of medication regimens requiring daily dosage is difficult for many patients and inconsistent medication administration will not adequately control intraocular pressure. Some patients will attempt to use their drops every day but will fail to properly deliver the medications into their eye and thus the medication will not be absorbed, specifically at-risk elder populations, may struggle with administering drops into their own eyes. Over a prolonged time frame, failure to adhere to prescribed daily drops or oral medication will increase the likelihood of progression to blindness and thus produce a lower quality of life as well as increase overall downstream healthcare costs for the patient. Studies have confirmed an inverse relationship between the number and frequency of dosage and patient adherence with respect to glaucoma treatment. One study looked into the reasons why patients struggled to adhere to their regimens and the most commonly cited reasons were: forgetfulness (30%), other priorities (11%), lack of information (9%), emotional factors (7%) with 27% of individuals surveyed not providing a reason. Previous studies have shown that improved patient education regarding disease processes and the rationale behind treatment regimens makes patients consistently more likely to adhere to their prescribed medication regimens. One would think that a "lack of information" can be addressed by the physicians in the office but a 2018 study found that physician-centric multifaceted informational and educational mailings were not effective in improving adherence to IOP-lowering treatment in this population of elderly patients with glaucoma. Therefore, we know that patient education is an important factor in glaucoma management but we have yet to find the best way to address patient education. Interestingly, other studies have confirmed that there is no relationship between medication adherence and medication side effects, and that side effects are unlikely to deter patients. A deceiving component of glaucoma is that patients are usually asymptomatic and are not constantly being reminded of their disease process, patients do not sense their slow loss of vision until it is too late. This is where interprofessional healthcare teams can play an integral role in detecting patient with risk factors and symptoms in nursing homes and elderly care facilities. An interprofessional approach is necessary as not all patients see their ophthalmologist regularly thus making nurses, therapists, social care workers, and primary care physicians the first line of defense who can help these patients with risk factors get screened.