Hypoxemia: During single-lung ventilation, the ventilation to one of the lungs is interrupted. However, the perfusion is still present in the nonventilated lung, which leads to an intrapulmonary shunt in the form of wasted perfusion to the nonventilated lung.

Protective mechanisms like hypoxic pulmonary vasoconstriction can counteract hypoxia to a certain degree. However, the anesthesiologist must have measures in place for hypoxemia that may arise during single-lung ventilation. Ventilation and perfusion (V-Q) matching plays a significant role in the management of oxygenation in patients on single-lung ventilation. Some authors note that oxygenation is much better in the lateral decubitus position when compared to the supine position.

Classically, an inspired oxygen fraction (FiO2) of 1.0 has been advocated while performing single-lung ventilation. The rationale behind using a higher inspired fraction of oxygen is to have a safety margin. Higher Fio2 also leads to vasodilatation, which may help increase the blood to the ventilated lung. Oxygenation at FiO2 of 1.0 can lead to atelectasis, so it is advisable to initiate with a Fio2 less than 1.0 and increase if needed.

If hypoxia develops during the performance of single-lung ventilation, the following steps must take place:

- Check the position of the double-lumen tube/endobronchial tube/bronchial blocker. Changes in position may occur due to surgical manipulation. A repeat fiberoptic bronchoscopy through the tracheal lumen is useful in clinching the diagnosis. Additional steps involve suctioning the lumens of the tube to clear secretions that may also contribute to hypoxia.

- FiO2 is increased to 1.0 to improve the amount of oxygen delivered.

- Recruitment maneuvers are employed on the ventilated lung, which is in the dependent position; these are performed to overcome any atelectasis and thus help oxygenation. PEEP may be applied to this lung to eliminate atelectasis, resulting in a decrease in the shunt, thereby improving oxygenation

- CPAP to the operative lung may be applied to decrease shunting and thus improve oxygenation. However, this does make the surgical procedure challenging to the surgeon, and should only be an option when other measures have not resulted in any improvement.

- If the hypoxemia is severe and does not resolve with the abovementioned steps, the next best step is to revert to 2-lung ventilation.

- Severe hypoxemia should alert the anesthesiologist to look for causes like pneumothorax on the dependent lung. Chronic obstructive lung disease patients are more likely to experience such a complication. Intraoperative development of pneumothorax mandates aborting the surgical procedure and immediate insertion of a chest tube on the side of the pneumothorax.

Ventilator-induced lung injuries: Using standardized protocol has been shown to increase adherence to lung-protective strategies in SLV.