Establishing the diagnosis depends on a three-pronged approach: clinical manifestations, biochemistry analysis of peroxisomal enzyme, phytanic acid concentration in plasma, and molecular genetic testing. Reaching an early diagnosis is essential for Refsum disease management, especially CRD, as it is the only peroxisomal disorder that has a good prognosis with dietary modifications coupled with plasmapheresis.

**Classic/adult Refsum Disease**

1. Clinical Examination:

- Ocular examination: Complete ophthalmologist examination, including visual fields. Manifestations include arteriolar narrowing degeneration and reduced electroretinography, often not present until the third decade. Initially, there is peri-macular depigmentation. Pigmentary degeneration usually occurs later in life.

- Anosmia testing using the University of Pennsylvania smell identification test.

- Neurological examination: In both CRD/IRD, no intellectual deficits are seen since there is no defect in plasmalogen synthesis, which is a major phospholipid component of the nervous system.

- Audiology: Pure tone audiometry or otoacoustic emission testing. A brainstem auditory evoked response test can be done if hearing difficulties are suspected but couldn't be identified on pure tone audiometry.

- Radiology: Along with a physical examination of hands, feet, and knees, a radiologic assessment for metacarpal/tarsal shortening. In contrast to other peroxisomal disorders, bone abnormalities are mild if at all present.

- Cardiology: Cardiac evaluation, including electrocardiogram and cardiac ultrasound examination to assess for arrhythmias and cardiomyopathy.

2. Genetic Profiling:****

- Consulting with a clinical geneticist or a genetic counselor.

3. Biochemistry: ****

- The pathognomic finding of Refsum disease on plasma analysis is a highly raised phytanic acid level >200 µmol/L (normal <30 µmol/L), unlike other peroxisomal disorders where levels are usually lower.

- Albuminocytologic dissociation of CSF and much higher phytanic acid levels than in IRD.

- Enzyme phytanoyl-CoA hydroxylase is entirely undetectable in liver tissue, hence commonly referred to as true peroxisomal disorder.

4. Histopathology:

- Biopsy of peripheral nerves shows hypertrophic changes with onion bulb formation, and on electron microscopy, paracrystalline inclusions are seen.

**Infantile Refsum Disease**

1. Biochemistry:

- The metabolic profile shows various derangements of peroxisomal metabolism, including elevated VLCFA (22 carbons in length), di- and tri-hydroxycholestanoic acid, pipecolic acid, and phytanic acid with reduced plasmalogens levels in tissues and erythrocytes.

- The pathognomic finding of Refsum disease on plasma analysis with a highly raised phytanic acid level is present.

2. Histopathology:

- Notable findings include the complete absence of peroxisomes on liver biopsy and degeneration of all retinal layers.