Tetanus is a disease that mainly affects the central and peripheral nervous systems. The clinical features of tetanus and its relationship to wounds and injuries are well known, dating back to ancient times. Tetanus is synonymous with the term "lockjaw," a cardinal sign as a reminder of the intense, painful spasms of the masseter muscles and an inability to open the mouth. Tetanus has 4 manifestations, including localized, generalized, cephalic, and neonatal.

Tetanus is now rare in developed nations due to effective immunization programs, but it remains a threat to all unvaccinated people, especially in undeveloped nations. Most reported cases in the United States are attributed to unvaccinated individuals and improper identification and treatment of wounds and traumatic injuries.

Tetanus has high morbidity and mortality worldwide before the development of tetanus toxoid in 1924. The first vaccine was not very effective and had significant adverse effects. A better and safer version became available in 1938. It became widely used in the 1940s during World War II for soldiers, which resulted in a 95% reduction in the rate of tetanus. The tetanus toxoid is considered worldwide as the safest and most effective medicine in healthcare.

Tetanus toxoid is used in combination with Diptheria and pertussis as vaccines. Currently, there are five tetanus toxoid-containing vaccines (DTaP, DTP, Tdap, Td, DT). Nomenclature is as followed: D is for diphtheria, T is for tetanus, P is for pertussis, and a is for acellular. The lower case p and d just mean reduced toxoid of that vaccine. DTP (diptheria, tetanus, pertussis) was used from 1948 to 1991. It was discontinued due to a high adverse injection reaction of redness, swelling, and pain around the site. Two new vaccines replaced it in 1992, TDaP and DTaP.

The current Advisory Committee on Immunization Practices (ACIP) recommends for children doses of DTaP or DT at 2, 4, and 6 months of age, with additional doses between 15 and 18 months, and between 4 and 6 years.

Tetanus prophylaxis includes understanding and knowing the current tetanus immunization guideline(s), recommendation(s), and indication(s) for prophylaxis.

The key to the prevention of tetanus is immunization, identification of those at risk, and proper identification and treatment of wounds and traumatic injuries.