Quinolones are bactericidal antibiotics that directly kill bacterial cells. They act on bacterial type II topoisomerases, DNA gyrase, and topoisomerase IV, inhibiting their function and converting them into toxic enzymes that produce permanent double-stranded breaks in the bacterial chromosome. DNA topoisomerases are essential for normal physiologic functions of the bacteria, such as DNA replication, transcription, recombination, and condensed DNA remodeling. They function by performing transient single- and double-stranded breaks, which help to facilitate their fundamental roles in removing torsional stress and knots in the bacterial chromosome that form during regular nucleic acid processes. Quinolone antibiotics stabilize the enzyme-DNA cleavage complexes by inhibiting DNA ligation. When the gyrase and topoisomerase IV create breaks in the bacterial chromosome to perform their physiological functions, it leads to fragmentation of the bacterial chromosome. When the DNA strand breaks overwhelm the cell’s ability to repair the DNA, it leads to cell death.

Growing bacterial resistance against quinolones is a rising concern in antibiotic use. There have been three main mechanisms of resistance documented, include target-mediated, plasmid-mediated, and chromosome-mediated resistance. The most common is target-mediated resistance, in which specific mutations in the quinolone target enzymes weaken interactions between the quinolone active site and the enzyme. Plasmid-mediated resistance has become increasingly common, allowing for the horizontal spread of extrachromosomal elements encoding for proteins that can either disrupt quinolone-enzyme interactions, alter the metabolism of the drug, or increase the efflux of the drug from the cell. While it usually only confers a lower level of resistance, it can lead to the continued selection of mutants with even higher levels of quinolone resistance. Chromosome-mediated resistance involves either the underexpression of porins, which normally allow quinolones to enter the cell, or the overexpression of efflux pumps that can remove quinolones from the cell, decrease their intracellular concentrations, and decreasing their efficacy against the bacteria.