There are four mechanisms of LES relaxation: vagus nerve stimulation-induced, swallow-induced, esophageal distention-induced, and spontaneous transient LES relaxation (TLESR).

Both sympathetic (primarily splanchnic) and parasympathetic (vagus) fibers innervate the LES, with the vagal pathway essential for the reflexive relaxation of the LES. Vagal sensory afferents from the LES and distal esophagus synapse in the nucleus tractus solitarius (NTS) of the hindbrain. Vagal efferents arise in the dorsal motor nucleus (DMN) and synapse with the myenteric plexus of the enteric nervous system. The parasympathetic system contributes to inhibitory and excitatory neurons, with excitatory nerves arising from the rostral portion of the DMN and inhibitory nerves arising from the caudal portion of the DMN. The DMN and the NTS form a dorsal vagal complex in the hindbrain that coordinates reflex control of the sphincter.

As previously discussed, excitatory impulses are primarily cholinergic-mediated via ACh, with minor contributions by tachykinins (substance P, neurokinin A/B). Inhibitory impulses are primarily nitrergic-mediated (nitric oxide) with smaller contributions by other compounds, including vasoactive inhibitory peptide (VIP), purine structures (particularly ATP), and carbon monoxide. Due to this dual innervation by the vagus nerve, a bilateral vagotomy or tetrodotoxin (pufferfish toxin which blocks neural transmission via sodium-channel blockade) administration elicits no change in baseline LES tone. Conversely, blockade of the inhibitory neurons (with NO inhibitors) or excitatory neurons (with atropine, an anti-cholinergic) leads to unopposed action of the opposite system. While the vagus elicits dual effects, there have been suggestions that the inhibitory effect is more significant, as studies have demonstrated that vagal stimulation leads to net LES relaxation.

For proper transport of ingested contents into the stomach, relaxation of the LES and diaphragmatic sphincter must occur. The action of swallowing and distention of the esophagus are the two major stimuli that induce EGJ relaxation. Swallowing-induced LES relaxation occurs through the release of VIP and NO, begins within 2 seconds of the onset of swallowing, and lasts approximately 6 to 10 seconds.

The LES must not only relax but open enough to allow passage of the bolus into the stomach. It is necessary to understand the difference between opening and relaxation, as manometry measures the relaxation of the LES and not the opening function. As long as the LES intraluminal diameter is greater than the size of the manometry catheter, the catheter records complete relaxation. However, for the bolus to pass through the LES, it must open to the diameter of the bolus. LES relaxation is an active process mediated by neurotransmitters, but opening is related to the passive properties of the LES. Under normal circumstances, an opening of 13 mm is required for a bolus to pass freely into the stomach.

**Transient Lower Esophageal Sphincter Relaxation (TLESR)**

TLESR is the spontaneous relaxation of the LES in the absence of swallowing. While swallow-induced LES relaxation is a physiologic mechanism for the antegrade flow of food, gastric distention-induced TLESR is a physiologic mechanism allowing for the retrograde flow of stomach contents into the esophagus. Vomiting, belching, and physiologic reflux in normal subjects occur through the mechanism of TLESR. While TLESR is a physiologic mechanism seen in both normal individuals and patients with GERD, TLESR is widely considered the primary mechanism of GERD.

Typically, TLESR is of longer duration than swallow-induced LES relaxation, lasting approximately 10 to 45 seconds. The criteria for the definition of TLESR are:

- Absent pharyngeal swallow signal 4 seconds before to 2 seconds after the onset of LES relaxation

- LES pressure fall of 1 mmHg/sec

- A time of 10 seconds from the onset of relaxation to complete relaxation

- A nadir pressure of 2 mmHg

Gastric distention (air or food contents) triggers TLESR. Stomach distention triggers a vasovagal reflex that results in TLESR, which acts as a protective mechanism by preventing the accumulation of excess gas in the stomach from entering the duodenum.

Motilin, a neurohumoral agent released into the circulation by specialized cells in the wall of the intestines, is responsible for phasic LES contraction. Phasic contraction of the proximal portion of the LES also occurs following swallow-induced or esophageal distention-induced LES relaxation. Contraction occurring post relaxation is coordinated with esophageal peristalsis and is atropine sensitive. For example, an atropine dose of 15 g/kg reduces LES pressure by 50 to 70% in humans.