The presence of air leak and ALS in a patient is sometimes a diagnostic and management challenge. A review of the literature did not show any specific guidelines for management. The overall consensus is to get a surgical consultation if the air leak persists after 4 days.[6]

**Simple Aspiration**

Simple aspiration is the recommended therapy for most primary pneumothoraxes. Aspiration of air from the pleural cavity is performed in a sterile condition. The site of needle insertion is the fourth or fifth intercostal space along the anterior, middle auxiliary line. After accessing the pleural space with the needle, usually an 18-gauge, a three-way stopcock is attached. A 50 mL syringe is attached to the stop clock, and the other end is attached to an intravenous tubing with is connected to a water seal. Aspiration is completed when the practitioner feels a resistance to pulling, excessive coughing from the patient, or a sensation that the lung has fully expanded.

**Needle Thoracostomy**

For tension pneumothorax which is a medical emergency, it is recommended to use a needle that is about 3 to 6 cm long as the thickness of the chest wall is around 4 to 4.5 cm. The site of insertion is the second intercostal space along the midclavicular line. The cannula should be left in place and, if possible, connected to an underwater seal. The presence of an air bubble will indicate proper functioning.

**Chest Tube Insertion**

If simple aspiration fails, the next option is to insert a chest tube and connect it to a chest tube drainage system. A large-bore or small-bore tube can be inserted. If there is no associated hemothorax, a small-bore tube is adequate. The most common site for insertion is the middle auxiliary line. This minimizes the potential damage to the internal mammary artery as well as the soft tissue of the breast. The chest tube with the drainage system should be in place until there is full lung re-expansion and no further air leak. If suction is required for the drainage of air from the pleural cavity, a pressure of between 10 to 20 cm H20 is applied.

**Prevention**

To prevent reaccumulation or recurrence of pneumothoraxes, three methods can be utilized.

- **Medical pleurodesis**This is the instillation of bleomycin or talc into the pleural cavity. This creates an inflammatory response and causes the sealing of the visceral and parietal pleura, and permanently seals the pleural cavity.

- **Pleural tenting**This idea was first suggested by Miscall in 1956 and Hansell in 1957. It is also called extrapleural apicolysis and parietal pleurolysis. It is performed at the same time with lobectomy. The parietal pleura is partially separated from the chest wall. This tent or sheet of pleural tissue is then attached to the surface of the non resected lung. This tent separates the non resected lung from the extrapleural space that is surgically created. Phrenoplasty is sometimes done in conjunction with pleural tenting. The pericardium and diaphragm are divided allow the hemidiaphragm to rise, thus reducing the pleural dead space. The function of the diaphragm is not impaired by this procedure.

- **Surgical Pleurodesis**This method entails the stripping and abrasion of the parietal pleural. An inflammatory response is produced that also seals the pleural cavity.

Prolonged air leak (PAL) is the presence of an air leak that persists for more than 4 to 5 days postoperatively. PAL is the most common complication following operative intervention in the thoracic cavity, followed by pneumonia, respiratory failure, and bleeding. The mortality is between 1% to 12%.

In PAL, the first thing to determine is the origin of the leak. Air leaks can occur from the following structures:

**Alveolus**

This air leak originates from a peripheral lesion via the alveolus.

**Bronchial Structure**

This air leak arises from the bronchial stump or anastomosis, creating a bronchopleural fistula. If this is the case, a bronchoscopy is indicated. In most instances, air leak originates from the alveolus, and the initial treatment should be directed towards the correction of alveolar air leak.

**Treatment of PAL (Persistent Air Leak)**

The pneumoperitoneum method has been in existence since the early eighties. During surgery, if, after resection of the lung, the remaining part of the lung cannot completely fill the chest cavity, PAL can develop. To correct this, a pneumoperitoneum is artificially created through a transdiaphragmatic route which is closed by a pouch string suture. Air leaks will resolve within a few days, and the peritoneal air is absorbed within a couple of weeks.

**Blood Patch**

The infusion of autologous blood into the pleural cavity as a sealant has been used to treat persistent PAL.

**Intrabronchial Valve**

This is a less invasive therapy where a one-way endobronchial valve is introduced into the bronchus for the treatment of bronchopleural fistula.

**Heimlich Valve (Flutter Valve)**

Henry Jay Heimlich is an American who invented the Heimlich valve. It is a flutter valve that has a one-way valve. This allows air to flow in one direction. Air from the pleural cavity enters the valve when the sleeve opens and closes to prevent backward flow of air from the valve. It can be connected to the tube in the pleural cavity, and the patient can be managed in an outpatient setting. The use of this valve can significantly reduce the length of inpatient stay.

**Surgical Intervention**

If all these interventions are not successful, a video-assisted thoracoscopy (VAT) is carried out. VAT can be used to visualize the pleural cavity, identify the leak, and apply sclerosing agents. In some instances, pleurotomy is done.