Currently, there is no specific cure or treatment for Sertoli cell-only syndrome or male maturation arrest. However, in some cases, patients with very low sperm counts or even no sperm in the semen can still be considered for assisted reproductive procedures. Microscopic testicular sperm extraction (micro-TESE) allows for the microsurgical extraction of sperm directly from the patient's testes. It has a much higher success rate of sperm retrieval than testicular sperm aspiration (TESA), which is done with a simple needle stick but does not require a skilled microscopic surgeon.

The rate of successfully retrieving sperm from men with Sertoli cell-only syndrome varies substantially. Multiple factors, such as the presence of even small numbers of sperm cells and the surgeon's experience, can substantially influence the outcome of TESE/TESA, micro-TESE, and ICSI.

Just using an operating microscope can still miss up to an estimated third of infertile men who still have some limited spermatogenesis.

In general, the rate of successful fertilization and pregnancy from ICSI is significantly lower in men (48% vs. 60%) with non-obstructive azoospermia compared to men with obstructive disease.

In one study, the sperm retrieval rate in patients with Sertoli-cell-only pathology was 30.35%, hypospermatogenesis was 89.74%, and maturation arrest was 32.43%.

In multiple reports, including a meta-analysis of 32 studies, the mean overall sperm retrieval success rate in Sertoli cell-only syndrome was only about 50% (47%), while ICSI by itself only enjoys about an average 40% to 50% pregnancy rate (although 24% to 80% rates are reported).

In one study of 125 non-obstructive azoospermic men where no sperm were found on their first micro-TESE, there was an 18.4% chance of a repeat procedure successfully retrieving viable spermatozoa.

**Klinefelter**patients have a reported successful sperm retrieval rate with micro-TESE as high as 50% to 72% in some studies.

Couples are advised to undergo genetic testing to confirm if their biological children could also be at risk of the same condition. This is because Y chromosomal defects are transmissible to biological male offspring if TESE and ICSI are ultimately successful. Therefore, genetic testing and counseling should be given to men with Sertoli cell-only syndrome and similar severe genetically transmissible fertility disorders prior to starting assisted reproductive techniques. It has been suggested that this applies to all men with non-obstructive azoospermia or severe oligospermia (<5 million sperm/mL).

**Maturation arrest**is a separate and distinct entity but is often confused with Sertoli cell-only syndrome as they both present similarly with non-obstructive azoospermia. Maturation arrest in men is defined as the extensive and uniform interruption of spermatogenesis in both testes without any apparent impairment of the Leydig or Sertoli cells.

Maturation arrest may be early or late. Early maturation arrest has spermatogenesis halted at the primary spermatocyte stage and constitutes 69% of the total.

Like Sertoli cell-only syndrome, maturation arrest can be primary or diffuse with total involvement of all seminiferous tubules (24%) or just focal (76%).

in one study, twenty-six patients with late-stage non-diffuse maturation arrest who had failed initial micro-TESE were treated with recombinant FSH for 12 months. Mature sperm were found in the ejaculate of 5 (19%) patients, but only two resulted in a successful pregnancy for an overall success rate of only about 8%.

Sertoli cell-only syndrome and early maturation arrest tend to have poorer overall results with assisted reproduction techniques than hypospermatogenesis or late maturation arrest.

The American Society of Reproductive Medicine has recommended that all men with non-obstructive azoospermia (which includes Sertoli cell-only syndrome and maturation arrest) or severe oligozoospermia be offered a karyotype chromosomal examination before undergoing assisted reproductive procedures.

Whole-exome sequencing is potentially useful in predicting successful testicular sperm extraction (TESE), especially after a failed first attempt in men with maturational arrest. However, further data and studies are needed before this technology can be useful clinically.