Treatment of sicca symptoms involves:

- Dry eyes usually respond to artificial tears applied regularly during the day or to gels applied at night. We usually have patients use a preservative-free drop during the day and a preservative-free gel or ointment at night.

- Punctal occlusion with plugs or cauterization is frequently needed in more severe cases. Cauterization should only be performed after a trial of plugs to ensure the patient is not left with excessive tearing.

- Eye drops that reduce inflammation in the glands around the eyes, such as cyclosporine (Restasis) are used to increase tear production.

- Many patients are helped by serum tears which are derived from their own blood. Most eye centers now have the capability of making these for the patient.

- Drinking water, chewing gum, or using saliva substitutes may relieve dry mouth.

- Some patients benefit from using prescription medications that stimulate saliva flow, such as pilocarpine (Salagen) or cevimuline (Evoxac).

- If patients develop yeast infections, anti-fungal therapies may be used. Humidifiers and nasal saline irrigation may improve nasal dryness. Medications that reduce gastric acid (such as proton-pump inhibitors and H2 blockers) may lessen symptoms of acid reflux. Treatments may help relieve some of the dryness, but usually some dryness persists.

- The first approach to extra-glandular (systemic) major organ-system disease is oral/parenteral corticosteroids.

- Various DMARDs (methotrexate, azathioprine) have been successfully employed as steroid-sparing agents although none is specifically approved for Sjogren.

- Hydroxychloroquine is recommended to treat inflammatory polyarthritis. B cell depletion may have a role in certain severe extra-glandular manifestations (vasculitis). TNF-alpha inhibitors have not proved effective for Sjogren.