Although human parainfluenza virus 1 (HPIV-1) is commonly associated with croup and may be diagnosed only based on clinical presentations, other HPIV serotypes do not have certain clinical features that allow them to be diagnosed clinically.

The timing of the sample collection is important. Early in the illness, it is more convenient to test samples from the upper airway, which have shown to be positive. Later in the illness, it is better to test secretions such as sputum and bronchoalveolar fluid from the lower airways.

HPIV-3 has been isolated in children from as early as 6 days prior to 6 weeks past the first symptom. Immunocompromised patients and adults have been noted to shed HPIV-1, HPIV-2, and HPIV-3 for many months.

- Viral culture: Considered for years to be the gold standard for diagnosis. The detection of hemadsorption (HAD) to the monolayers or the development of structural changes in host cells called cytopathic effect (CPE), the existence of either one of them is significantly important for viral isolation on the cell culture.

- Fluorescent antibody assays: As a rapid method of diagnosis, it has been used since the 1970s and is based on the identification of viral antigens directly on clinical samples.

- Molecular assays: Polymerase chain reaction (PCR) assays can be used easily and efficiently to detect and diagnose the HPIV infection. Based on the sensitivity, specificity, and rapidity of the PCR, it is the most accurate test for HPIV diagnosis.

- Serologic diagnosis: Rarely used in clinical practice and is primarily a research tool.