At birth, newborns are born with no air within their alveoli; thus, the volume is zero. The compliance (elasticity of lung tissue) is low at birth. Therefore, the effort to create negative intrapleural pressure during the initial breaths is high; however, the lungs fill with air and become more compliant with successive breaths. As the lungs become more compliant, the newborn's lungs will follow Boyle's law of the inverse relationship of pressure and volume.

Pneumothorax is a clinical condition that can either be primary (typically from trauma) or secondary (patient has a predisposing condition such as COPD). Boyle's law dictates how air draws into the lungs. As the intrathoracic pressure becomes increasingly negative, the intra-alveolar pressure decreases below atmospheric pressure, causing air to flow into the lungs. In a pneumothorax, there is increased pressure within the intrapleural space, thus causing the need for an increased force to create enough negative pressure for air to come into the lungs.

Boyle's law also applies when using a medical syringe. When the cylinder on the syringe is empty, it is said to be in a neutral state as there is no air in the syringe. As one pulls back on the plunger, the volume in the cylinder increases, therefore by Boyle's law, the pressure decreases. The liquid is thus drawn into the cylinder to balance the pressure within the syringe and outside of the syringe.

SCUBA divers must be cognizant of Boyle's law as they descend and ascend to great depths. As a diver descends in the water, the pressure on the person's lungs increases, and therefore according to Boyle's law, the volume of air inside the lungs must decrease. As the diver ascends in the water and the pressure on the thoracic cage decreases, the volume of air increases.