The first step when evaluating any potential snake envenomation victims is to assess the ABCs: airway, breathing, and circulation.

When obtaining a history from a victim of potential envenomation without compromised ABCs, several pieces of information are necessary. The time since the envenomation occurred and the anatomic location of the bite should be asked to allow for appropriate monitoring of local symptom progression.

As above the first step in any physical exam, assessment is of the cardiopulmonary system to identify any signs of compromise. Next, examine the envenomation site, which will likely reveal two puncture wounds a few centimeters apart. The leading edge of the erythema/edema should be marked to monitor for progression.

The most common localized findings following pit viper envenomation are pain, edema, ecchymosis, and erythema in descending order. Tissue necrosis is possible and more likely to occur with rattlesnake envenomation. Systemic symptoms occur in 15% of patients or less. Systemic manifestations include vomiting, bleeding from distal sites (e.g., gingival bleeding or epistaxis), and/or signs of neurotoxicity (e.g., fasciculations, myokymia, cranial nerve palsies, paresthesias, or respiratory paralysis).

Providers should assess other symptoms such as chest pain, abdominal pain, headache, etc.

While rattlesnakes are generally recognized as causing more severe envenomations than their Agkistrodon counterparts, species alone does NOT dictate the degree of envenomation. Management should be based on a combination of history, physical, and lab abnormalities, regardless of the species involved.