GSDs are a group of complex metabolic disorders best managed by an interprofessional team of clinicians, nurses, pharmacists, and dietitians. At present, there is no cure for any GSD, and most treatments attempt to alleviate signs/symptoms. However, even this symptomatic management requires vigorous patient/parent education to ensure dietary restrictions and frequency of carbohydrate administration are appropriately managed.

Registered dieticians and specialty nurses play a key role in educating patients and their caregivers to ensure hypoglycemia is avoided. This not only ameliorates the risk of hypoglycemia-associated complications but also prevents long-term disease sequelae in most GSDs. Specialty pharmacists play a pivotal role in managing GSD type II to ensure enzyme replacement therapy is carried out adequately and that the medication is administered under optimal circumstances. Primary care clinicians, which include physicians and mid-level practitioners, and pediatricians, in coordination with specialists, help ensure patients have adequate growth and function with minimal risk of severe complications such as renal or liver failure.

All interprofessional team members should be vigilant in monitoring these patients and alert the other team embers if any complications develop or the patient's condition worsens; this requires meticulous documentation and open communication between everyone on the care team. The key overall goal is to avoid and treat hypoglycemia, hyperlactatemia, hyperuricemia, and hyperlipidemia. A well-coordinated interprofessional team can help manage patients with these diseases adequately and ensure they live a normal life. [Level 5]

The development of experimental therapies, such as gene therapy, may eventually provide curative options for patients with these diseases in the future.