Muscular dystrophy is a progressive genetic myopathy, which leads to degeneration of the normal anatomy and physiology of skeletal muscle cells. The complete or partial absence of the dystrophin protein is the pathologic mechanism of both Becker and Duchenne muscular dystrophy. Dystrophin is a protein that is associated with the filaments of skeletal muscle. Dystrophin provides structure and support to the sarcolemma of the monofilament. The lack of dystrophin protein leads to damage in the supporting sarcolemma, weakness, and eventual atrophy of healthy muscle fibers. Duchenne muscular dystrophy affects up to 1 in 3600 boys, making it the highest incidence among the types of muscular dystrophies. Many with Duchenne have a low life expectancy because there is currently no treatment available. Management of these disorders is purely supportive. The most common cause of death in these individuals is cardiorespiratory failure.

Sarcopenia is the loss of muscle mass and atrophy that is associated with aging. It results from a reduction of muscle size and a reduction in satellite cells, mitochondrial numbers, and elasticity. Sarcopenia is seen in increasing numbers with advancing age but is not universal. Sarcopenia varies in degree of physical activity, gender, and race. It can attribute to the loss of muscle power and immobility issues such as falls, commonly seen in aging populations.

Smooth muscle cells line the entirety of the human vascular system. They exhibit plasticity in response to vascular injury. It is this plasticity that has implications in the disease process of atherosclerosis. Mature smooth muscle cells are involved in the contraction and tone of the vascular system. Cholesterol load demonstrably increases stress on endothelial cells, leading to vascular injury. This damage changes the vascular smooth muscle from the inactive contractile state to the pro-inflammatory response state. Smooth muscle cell proliferation and remodeling then result; this leads to the fibrous capsule formation seen in atherosclerosis.

Hypertrophic obstructive cardiomyopathy (HOCM) is an autosomal dominant disorder caused by genetic variants that code for a portion of the contractile element of the cardiomyocyte. These mutations allow for heightened myofilament calcium sensitivity, thickening of the interventricular septum, and the eventual obstruction of blood flow. Although commonly asymptomatic, symptoms of obstruction can result in chest pain during exertion, tachycardia with shortness of breath, syncope, and sudden cardiac death. HOCM is the most commonly inherited cardiac disorder, with a prevalence of 1 in 500. It is the leading cause of sudden death in young individuals and currently has no cure.