Commonly used hormonal contraceptives may be leveraged to achieve menstrual suppression, including continuous or extended use of the combined OCP, the combined transdermal patch, the combined intravaginal ring, the progestin-only pill, and DMPA, as well as LARC methods such as the levonorgestrel-releasing IUD and the subdermal etonogestrel implant. Less commonly used options include GnRH agonists and testosterone.

Complete cessation of menses is difficult to achieve, and success rates and associated side effects vary between methods. Therefore, although complete amenorrhea is possible for some, patients should be counseled on realistic expectations, with the typical goal being to decrease bleeding days and associated burdens.

**Combined Oral Contraceptive Pills**

Continuous or extended use of monophasic combined OCPs is the most well-known method of menstrual suppression among adults and adolescents. Suppression is achieved by taking a daily pill continuously without pausing for a placebo week to precipitate withdrawal bleeding.

Numerous monophasic formulations and brands are available, though they all contain ethinyl estradiol (EE) in combination with a progestin (e.g., norethindrone, levonorgestrel, norgestimate, or drospirenone). Different formulations have varying doses of EE combined with different progestins, though, in monophasic formulations, the dose of hormones is the same for each pill in the pack. Triphasic formulations are not utilized for menstrual suppression because the varying hormone levels throughout the pack increase the risk of breakthrough bleeding.

Higher doses of EE (>20 mcg) are associated with lower rates of bothersome breakthrough bleeding (see Complications).

Benefits of using OCPs include ease of use, wide accessibility, a large body of data on safety and efficacy, generally high provider knowledge on and comfort with use, and associated improvements in perimenstrual symptoms, including dysmenorrhea, fatigue, bloating, and headache.

The downsides include the need for daily patient compliance, the inability to utilize OCPs in patients with contraindications to exogenous estrogen (see Contraindications), and the risk of breakthrough bleeding, which is of variable annoyance for patients.

**Combined Transdermal Patch**

The transdermal combined contraceptive patch can be used continuously, similarly to OCPs, for menstrual suppression.

The main advantage of this method is weekly rather than daily dosing. Data on prolonged use is limited, as only the EE 75 mcg/norelgestromin 6 mg version of the patch has been studied.

This method cannot be used in persons with contraindications to exogenous estrogen (see Contraindications).

**Intravaginal Ring******

Like the patch, the combined intravaginal contraceptive ring can be used continuously for menstrual suppression. The ring is typically replaced every four weeks without a hormone-free interval. Only the monthly EE 0.015 mg/etonogestrel 0.120 mg ring has been studied specifically for menstrual suppression.

This method demonstrates "excellent" amenorrhea rates: a 2008 study demonstrated up to 89% of users had no to minimal bleeding at six months of continuous use.

Monthly rather than weekly or daily dosing may be advantageous for compliance and convenience and increase patients' perceived control over their menses.

The most significant downside and common reason for discontinuing the ring is bothersome breakthrough bleeding. Although full menstrual-type bleeding days decrease with extended ring use, spotting days may increase compared to cyclic use.

Another disadvantage is the requirement for refrigeration of the rings if they are to be stored by the patient longer than four months, which may create a barrier for those who do not have access to reliable refrigeration or electricity. The newer EE 17.4 mg/segesterone acetate 103 mg ring is a longer-acting effective contraceptive that can remain in place for 12 months and does not require refrigeration or repeat prescriptions. However, data is limited regarding rates of amenorrhea achieved with continuous use of this method, and more research is necessary to understand its efficacy for menstrual suppression.

This method cannot be used in persons with contraindications to exogenous estrogen (see Contraindications).

**Progestin-only Oral Pills**

Oral progestin-only pills (POPs), including norethindrone, norethindrone acetate, and drospirenone, may be used for menstrual suppression, particularly in persons with contraindications to exogenous estrogen.

Amenorrhea has been reported in up to 76% of users at two years with standard doses of norethindrone acetate (5 mg). However, rates are as low as 10% with standard doses of norethindrone (0.35 mg), and data on rates with drospirenone (4 mg) are limited.

The main advantages of progestin-only pills are the ability to use them in individuals with contraindications to exogenous estrogen, the ability to adjust the dose and frequency easily, and the ease of use and start.

However, the disadvantages are significant, including low and inconsistent rates of amenorrhea, higher prices compared to combined OCPs, the need for strict adherence and timed daily dosing for adequate suppression and contraceptive efficacy, and irregular breakthrough bleeding.

Progestin-only pills are not typically recommended for use in adolescents.

**Injectable Depot Medroxyprogesterone Acetate (DMPA)**

DMPA is a longer-acting contraceptive option that may be leveraged for menstrual suppression; it is injected either intramuscularly at a dose of 150 mg or subcutaneously at a dose of 104 mg every 11 to 13 weeks.

Advantages include infrequent dosing, ease of administration, and high amenorrhea rates.Complications).

Disadvantages include initial excessive prolonged uterine bleeding with the first dose as the existing endometrial lining is shed, the need for an in-person clinic visit for repeated injections four or more times per year, weight gain associated with high-dose progesterone, and loss of BMD (see Complications).

**Levonorgestrel-releasing Intrauterine Device**

The levonorgestrel-releasing IUDs (52 mg, 19.5 mg, or 13.5 mg) are progestin-only LARC methods that can effectively achieve menstrual suppression. The 52 mg device demonstrates the highest rates of amenorrhea: up to 50% of users will be amenorrhoeic at 6 to 12 months, and up to 60% will be amenorrhoeic at five years.

The devices are used for 3 to 8 years at a time, with the duration depending on device dose and brand; the 52-mg device is approved for contraception for up to 8 years, and menstrual suppression rates appear to remain high throughout that time.

Benefits of using the levonorgestrel-releasing IUD include excellent contraceptive efficacy (<0.2% failure rate), lower volume of menstrual blood loss, long duration of the use for a single device, reliable compliance (no individual user variability), ability to utilize the device in individuals with contraindications to exogenous estrogen, and treatment benefits for other medical conditions such as heavy menstrual bleeding, endometriosis, adenomyosis, leiomyomas, and hemostatic disorders.

Disadvantages include insertion-related pain and fear, the need for a provider trained in the placement procedure, difficulty accessing the procedure, lack of provider knowledge, up-front expense, breakthrough bleeding, and the potential for mechanical complications and expulsion (see Complications).

Breakthrough bleeding is most likely during the initial 3 to 6 months after placement and improves with time; as few as 11% of users will experience spotting at two years.

The levonorgestrel-releasing IUD can be safely used for menstrual suppression in adolescents, and ACOG supports its use in this population.

There are many misunderstandings and fears regarding the IUD that decrease its popularity for menstrual suppression and contraception in general, including perceived lack of personal control over menses, fear of pain or complications associated with placement, fear of having a foreign object inside the body, and fear that not having a predictable period will decrease personal certainty that pregnancy has not occurred.

The copper-containing IUD is inappropriate for menstrual suppression, as it does not alter menstrual cycle physiology or the endometrial lining.

**Subdermal Etonogestrel Implant**

The subdermal etonogestrel-containing implant is an extremely effective contraceptive device (<0.05% failure rate) and an additional method to consider for menstrual suppression.

It is not typically recommended for menstrual suppression in adolescents because up to 22% of adolescent users request removal for breakthrough bleeding.

**GnRH Agonists**

GnRH agonists are non-contraceptive medications that may be utilized for menstrual suppression by creating a hypoestrogenic state.continuous presence of GnRH inhibits the release of FSH and LH (these hormones typically respond to intermittent GnRH pulses).

The most common formulation is depot-leuprolide acetate 11.25 mg IM injection given every 12 weeks, though it may also be given once monthly at a dose of 3.75 mg IM or via subdermal implant or intranasally at varying doses.

GnRH agonists are utilized in transgender and gender-diverse adolescents for delay or blockade of puberty in support of gender-affirming care, in individuals with malignancy, or in individuals with endometriosis or severe heavy menstrual bleeding with anemia which is refractory to other hormonal treatments.

However, several significant disadvantages are associated with the hypoestrogenic state induced by GnRH agonists, including perimenopausal symptoms and a decrease in BMD (see Complications).

Additionally, GnRH agonists are very expensive, ineffective as a form of contraception, and may be less accessible in the primary care setting due to lower provider familiarity.****(such as norethindrone acetate 5 mg once daily) can help reduce this risk and minimize other bothersome symptoms.

**Testosterone**

Among transgender and gender-diverse persons, testosterone can be used for menstrual suppression. Testosterone acts directly on the endometrium, causing atrophy.

Testosterone can be administered via topical gel, subcutaneous injection, or intramuscular injection. Intramuscular injection is the most common with testosterone enanthate or cypionate. A typical starting dose of both formulations is 100 mg every two weeks intramuscularly.****Amenorrhea is achieved in a dose-dependent response to testosterone, with higher or more frequent doses achieving amenorrhea sooner.

It is important to note that testosterone is not an adequate contraceptive method, and pregnancy has been reported while actively using testosterone.