Priorities in the management of dehydration include early recognition of symptoms, identifying the degree of dehydration, stabilization, and rehydration strategies.

Symptoms include vomiting, diarrhea, fever, decreased oral intake, inability to keep up with ongoing losses, decreased urine output, progressing to lethargy, and hypovolemic shock.

**Mild Dehydration**

The American Academy of Pediatrics recommends oral rehydration for patients with mild dehydration. Breastfed infants should continue to nurse. Fluids with high sugar content may worsen diarrhea and should be avoided. Children can be fed age-appropriate foods frequently but in small amounts.

**Moderate Dehydration**

The Morbidity and Mortality Weekly Report recommends administering 50 mL to 100 mL of oral rehydration solutions per kilogram per body weight during two to four hours to replace the estimated fluid deficit, with additional oral rehydration solution, administered to replace ongoing losses.

**Severe Dehydration**

For patients who are severely dehydrated, rapid restorations of fluids are required.

Patients who are severely dehydrated can present with altered mental status, lethargy, tachycardia, hypotension, signs of poor perfusion, weak thread pulses, and delayed capillary refill.

Intravenous fluids, starting with 20 ml/kg boluses of normal saline are required. Multiple boluses may be needed for children in hypovolemic shock. Additional priorities include obtaining a point of care glucose test, electrolytes, and urinalysis assessing for elevated specific gravity and ketones.

Hypoglycemia should be assessed at the point of care testing via glucometer, and venous blood gas with electrolytes or serum chemistries. It should be treated with intravenous glucose. The dose is 0.5 gm/km to 1 gm/km. This translates to 5 ml/kg to 10 ml/kg of D10, 2ml/kg to  4 ml/kg of D25, or 1 ml/kg to- 2 ml/kg of D50. The use of D50 is usually reserved for an adolescent or adult-sized patients using a large bore intravenous line.

**Replacement of Fluids**

An assessment of the degree of dehydration will determine the fluid replacement. Using tables that can predict the degree of dehydration is helpful. If a previous "well weight" is available, that can be subtracted from the patient's "sick weight" to calculate total weight loss. One kilogram weight loss equates to one liter of fluid lost.

The rate of replacement is based on the severity of the dehydration. Patients with hypovolemic shock need rapid boluses of isotonic fluid either normal saline or ringer lactate at 20ml/kg body weight. This could be repeated 3 times with reassessment in-between the boluses. Ringer lactate is superior to normal saline in hemorrhagic shock requiring rapid resuscitation with isotonic fluids.

Rapid infusion can cause cardiac insufficiency, congestive heart failure, and pulmonary edema. Rapid correction in patients with diabetic ketoacidosis can cause cerebral edema in adolescent and children.

The rate of replacement fluids is calculated after taking into account for the maintenance, replacement and deficit requirement of the patient. Sodium requirements of the children in the hospital are higher than that of the adults. The children have high metabolic needs, has higher insensible lose as they have a higher body surface area. They also have higher respiratory and heart rates, requiring the use of an intravenous solution containing high sodium like D5NS. The deficit is determined by the degree of dehydration as outlined earlier. The second phase of fluid replacement therapy lasts for 8 hours, during which the child requires 1/2 of the remaining deficit in addition 1/3rd of the maintenance fluid. The remaining half of the deficit and the 2/3rd of the daily maintenance therapy is given during the third phase of the therapy which spans the following 16 hours.

Holliday-Segar calculation is used for calculation of maintenance fluid in children, which is 100ml/kg/day for first 10 kg body weight (BW), then 50 ml/kg/day for the next 10 kg BW and then 20 ml/kg /day for any BW over and above.

For patients where intravenous access can not be achieved or maintained, other methods can be employed. They include continuous nasogastric hydration and subcutaneous hydration.

**Hypodermoclysis**refers to hydrating the subcutaneous space with fluid which can be absorbed systemically. Hypodermoclysis is best reserved for the stable child or infant with mild to moderate dehydration who either fails a trial of fluids by mouth or who needs some degree of rehydration to facilitate gaining intravenous access after a slow subcutaneous fluid bolus has been given.

The process begins with:

The placement of topical anesthetic cream, such as EMLA, cover with an occlusive dressing, wait for 15 to 20 minutes.“Pinch an inch” of skin anywhere, but the most practical site for young children is between the scapulae.Insert a 25-gauge butterfly needle or 24-gauge angiocatheterInject 150 units hyaluronidase SC (if available).Infuse 20 mL/kg isotonic solution over one hour, repeat as needed or use this technique as a bridge to intravenous access.