Routine laboratory tests show no specific abnormality. Complete blood count (CBC), complete metabolic panel (CMP), thyroid-stimulating hormone (TSH), B12 are usually checked to rule out other causes.

CT brain shows cerebral atrophy and widened the third ventricle. It is suggestive but it's nonspecific because these abnormalities are also present in other illnesses and people with normal age-related changes.

Cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) analysis for low beta-amyloid 42 and elevated tau is helpful in the diagnosis of the preclinical stage.

EEG typically shows a generalized slowing with no focal features. It is diagnostically helpful but still nonspecific.

The most reliable method to detect mild cognitive impairment in early disease is neuropsychological testing.

More recently, volumetric MRI is being used to precisely measure volumetric changes in the brain. In Alzheimer's disease, volumetric MRI shows shrinkage in the medial temporal lobe. However, hippocampal atrophy is also linked to normal age-related memory decline, so the use of volumetric MRI for early detection of Alzheimer's disease is questionable. A definite role for volumetric MRI to aid the diagnosis of Alzheimer's disease is not fully established yet.

Functional brain imaging techniques like PET, fMRI, and SPECT are being used to map patterns of dysfunction in smaller brain areas of the medial temporal and parietal lobe. These studies may be helpful in early detection and monitoring clinical courses; however, their role in the diagnosis of Alzheimer's disease is not fully established yet.

Most recently, there have been developments in brain imaging techniques to detect core histological features of Alzheimer's disease, which are amyloid plaques and neurofibrillary tangles. The utility of these techniques is still being investigated.

Genetic testing is usually not recommended for Alzheimer's disease. It may sometimes be used in families with rare early-onset forms of Alzheimer's disease.

It is important to understand that diagnosing the type of dementia with all certainty may not be entirely possible despite excellent clinical history, physical examination and relevant testing. Some patients will complain of cognitive impairment that can be verified objectively, but is not severe enough to impair activities of daily life and thus does not meet criteria for dementia, and is usually just classified as mild cognitive impairment. However, a significant proportion of people with mild cognitive impairment will develop dementia of some type in 5 to 7 years.