**The main guiding principles of management are as follows:**

- To prevent the development/progression of endometrial malignancy.

- To rule out the presence of a coexisting endometrial malignancy.

- To offer a treatment plan that best suits the needs of the patient.

**Management of benign endometrial hyperplasia/ hyperplasia without atypia:**

The risk of progression to invasive malignancy is less than 5 % over 20 years. Spontaneous resolution can occur if the hormonal milieu is corrected (reversible causes of estrogen excess like obesity and use of HRT/ over the counter preparations that may contain a high dose of estrogen). Progestogen therapy has a higher disease resolution rate (89-96%) than observation ( 74.2- 81%) alone.

Women who refuse LNG-IUS can be started on continuous oral progestogens in the following dose:  medroxyprogesterone 10-20 mg /day or norethisterone 10-15mg/day (cyclical progestogens are not recommended by the Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists (RCOG).

**Treatment duration and follow up:**

In order to induce the regression of the hyperplasia, treatment should be for at least six months. Endometrial surveillance with office endometrial biopsy is recommended at six-monthly intervals. Before discharging the patient, two consecutive 6 – monthly negative biopsies should be obtained. Women who have a BMI of more than 35 and who were treated with oral progestogens are at a higher risk of relapse and should be advised annual follow -up. All women should be advised to come for a follow -up if they experience the symptoms of abnormal uterine bleeding.[2]

**Indications for surgical management of benign endometrial hyperplasia/ hyperplasia without atypia:**

Surgery is not a first-line treatment in these patients as medical management has a high cure rate in this category.

**Indications for hysterectomy:**

- Atypical hyperplasia develops during the treatment period

- No resolution of the disease after 12 months of treatment

- Relapse of endometrial hyperplasia

- Non-resolution of bleeding

- A non-compliant patient who declines surveillance and follow-up

A postmenopausal patient needing surgery for benign endometrial hyperplasia/hyperplasia without atypia can be offered total hysterectomy with bilateral salpingo-oophorectomy.

If a premenopausal woman requires a hysterectomy, performing oophorectomy should be on a case to case basis. It would be a good practice to consider bilateral salpingectomy as it decreases the risk of developing ovarian cancer.

A laparoscopic procedure is preferred to an abdominal procedure because it has several advantages like lesser postoperative pain, faster recovery, and a shorter inpatient duration. [2] Uterine morcellation, endometrial ablation, and supracervical hysterectomy are not recommended for the management of endometrial hyperplasia as they may lead to residual disease and formation of intrauterine synechiae which may make future follow -up and diagnosis difficult.

**Management of  endometrial intraepithelial neoplasia/ hyperplasia with atypia:**

Endometrial intraepithelial neoplasia / Atypical hyperplasia has a high risk of progression to invasive malignancy. Considering the risk of progression to endometrial adenocarcinoma, a total hysterectomy has been recommended. A laparoscopic procedure is preferred. Routine lymphadenectomy and frozen section analysis of the uterine lining do not confer an advantage.

As with the earlier category, postmenopausal women who require surgery should be offered total hysterectomy with bilateral salpingo-oophorectomy. Also, premenopausal women require a hysterectomy should have an individualized decision making regarding oophorectomy. Conservative surgeries are not recommended. Management of endometrial intraepithelial neoplasia/ hyperplasia with atypia in women who wish to preserve their fertility or who are not suitable for surgery, there are several risks involved with the conservative management of endometrial intraepithelial neoplasia. These could be coexistent / progression to invasive disease, coexistent ovarian malignancy, systemic involvement, metastases, and death. The woman should be carefully counseled about the risks involved.

The investigation results, including tumor markers, radiological findings, and histopathology, should be discussed in a multidisciplinary meeting involving gynecologic oncologists. The treatment should be planned on an individualized approach. It is possible to provide fertility-sparing treatment to these women if indicated, but this data is based on very small studies.

**Hormone replacement therapy (HRT) and endometrial hyperplasia:**

Systemic estrogen-only HRT should not be prescribed. Women should be counseled to report unscheduled bleeding to their care provider promptly. Those on sequential HRT preparation who wish to continue HRT and have endometrial hyperplasia should be counseled to switch to continuous combined HRT preparation / LNG-IUS. Women on continuous combined HRT with endometrial hyperplasia should be counseled for the lack of substantial evidence for the optimal progestogen. It would be a good practice to review the symptom profile to assess the need for HRT.

**Tamoxifen treatment and endometrial hyperplasia:**

The management plan should be individualized and developed with the involvement of the woman’s oncologist.

**Management of endometrial hyperplasia confined to an endometrial polyp:**

The uterine polyp should be removed completely, and the rest of the endometrium should be sampled. In the absence of hyperplasia in the surrounding endometrium, it is considered curative. If the surrounding endometrium shows hyperplasia, it should be treated accordingly.

Prevention of recurrence by providing long term medical therapy may be associated with adverse effects. Many clinicians counsel patients for lifestyle changes leading to weight loss or bariatric surgery, which can help them to revert the risk factors like obesity and thus reducing the risk.