# Introduction

The occipital nerves are a group of nerves that arise from the C2 and C3 spinal nerves.

# Structure and Function

**Greater Occipital Nerve**

The GON is the biggest purely afferent nerve that arises from the medial division of the dorsal ramus of the C2 spinal nerve. It runs backward between the C1 and C2 vertebrae and traverses between the inferior capitis oblique and semispinalis capitis muscles from underneath the suboccipital triangle.

**Lesser Occipital Nerve**

The LON originates from the ventral rami of the C2 and C3 spinal nerves and goes to the occipital region along the posterior margin of the sternocleidomastoid muscle.

**Third Occipital Nerve**

The TON is a superficial medial branch of the dorsal ramus of the C3 spinal nerve and is thicker compared to other medial branches.

# Blood Supply and Lymphatics

The scalp is highly vascularized and is characterized by having many arterial anastomoses. Most of the blood supply comes from the external carotid arteries.

The GON is also closely associated with the occipital artery. After the GON perforates the semispinalis capitis, it travels with the occipital artery that is medial to the nerve.

# Nerves

As mentioned previously, the GON arises from the medial branch of the dorsal ramus of the C2 spinal nerve and innervates the skin of the back of the scalp up to the vertex of the skull, the ear, and the skin just above the parotid gland.

# Muscles

**Greater Occipital Nerve**

As stated previously, the GON traverses between the inferior capitis oblique and semispinalis capitis muscles from underneath the suboccipital triangle.

**Lesser Occipital Nerve**

Regarding the LON, the area where the LON traverses from behind the sternocleidomastoid, the area where the LON ascends along the posterior margin of the sternocleidomastoid, and the area where the LON intersects with the nuchal line have been found to serve as potential compression points.

# Physiologic Variants

**Greater Occipital Nerve**

As stated previously, for the GON, the region where it traverses between the atlas and the axis, the area where it courses between the obliquus capitis inferior and semispinalis capitis, or the area where it perforates the semispinalis capitis and the trapezius are potential areas of GON irritation and entrapment and could likely lead to occipital neuralgia.

In another study by Tubbs et al., among samples from 12 adult cadavers, the GON perforated the trapezius in 16.7% of cases and the aponeurosis in 83.3% of cases. In another study by Junewicz et al., among 272 patients who had GON decompression surgery, the GON was discovered to perforate the semispinalis in all patients bilaterally.

**Lesser Occipital Nerve**

Concerning the LON, it was mainly found to be at the posterior margin of the sternocleidomastoid muscle. However, reports exist showing some anatomic variations of the LON. For instance, Madhavi et al. reported a case of bilateral triplication of the LON in an adult cadaver.

# Surgical Considerations

The GON, LON, and TON are commonly associated with occipital neuralgia, cervicogenic headaches, and migraine headaches.

**Occipital Nerve Block**

GON blocks are frequently used to treat migraine headaches and occipital neuralgia. A small dose of local anesthetic combined with corticosteroids is injected halfway on the nuchal line between the occipital protuberance and the mastoid process and above the occipital ridge.

**Pulsed Radiofrequency (PRF) or Thermal Radiofrequency Ablation (TRFA)**

Regarding the GON, LON, and TON, PRF may decrease pain by generating a low-intensity electrical field around sensory nerves that hinder the operation of the A-delta and C fibers in the long run.

**Occipital Nerve Stimulation/Neuromodulation**

Occipital nerve stimulation has been used to relieve severe pain caused by occipital neuralgia when conservative medical treatments and block procedures are ineffective. It involves placing nerve stimulator leads obliquely or horizontally near the bottom of the skull across from the GON location.

**Ultrasound-guided Cryoneurolysis of the GON**

Cryoneurolysis of the GON has been used to manage the symptoms of patients with ON. Even though there is limited evidence on this technique's efficacy, a previous study by Kastler et al., who performed seven cryoneurolysis procedures of the GON in six patients with occipital neuralgia, demonstrated the technique helped alleviate pain for three months in five of the patients.

**Dorsal Rhizotomy**

Another possible treatment option for occipital neuralgia is dorsal rhizotomy of the C1 to C3 spinal nerves, in which the ventrolateral margin of the C1 to C3 rootlets become separated at the entry points.

**Peripheral Neurectomy**

Peripheral neurectomy has been suggested to be an effective surgical technique for patients with occipital neuralgia that provides effective pain relief in most patients. However, few studies have evaluated the efficacy of this treatment. Thus, more studies are required to fully assess the efficacy and possible complications for performing peripheral neurectomies among patients with ON.

**Surgical Decompression**

Botulinum toxin could potentially offer pain relief to patients with ON. Within presynaptic cholinergic nerve terminals, the toxin attaches to high-affinity recognition sites and blocks acetylcholine delivery.

In addition to the surgical considerations above, physicians should take into account any anatomic details or variations for the GON, LON, and TON that were mentioned previously to reduce the risk of undesirable postoperative outcomes and help maximize the benefits for patients who are receiving treatment with regards to these occipital nerves.

# Clinical Significance

Because the GON, LON, and TON play significant roles in the innervation of the scalp, they are often associated with occipital neuralgia. Based on the International Headache Society, patients with occipital neuralgia have a stabbing pain in the GON and LON dermatomes that originates from GON or LON compression and spans from the suboccipital area to the upper portion of the neck, the area behind the eyes, and the posterior region of the head.

Additionally, GON blocks have been used to treat other forms of headaches, such as migraines, cluster headaches, and cervicogenic headaches.

Patients with whiplash injuries may also suffer from third occipital headaches. Whiplash injuries are often associated with motor vehicle accidents, and patients with these injuries may have stiffness and pain in the neck, paresthesias, memory problems, and psychological pain.