Demyelinating neuropathies can classify as hereditary, toxic, and immune-mediated. Immune-mediated polyneuropathies can be further classified in acute and chronic, depending on the onset. Guillain-Barre syndrome (GBS) is a syndrome with several variants, with acute inflammatory demyelinating polyneuropathy (AIDP), being the most common type of inflammatory neuropathy in North America. The pathophysiology of GBS and its variants appear to be secondary to an inflammatory process leading to molecular mimicry between central and peripheral nervous structural components and microbial/viral antigens. This condition leads to a lack of self-tolerance from the adaptive immune system and activation of neuroinflammatory processes affecting nerve conduction. The microbial and viral antigens may include Campylobacter jejuni, HIV infection, Epstein-Barr (mononucleosis), and Zika virus.

Clinically, AIDP presents with an acute, symmetric, flaccid, and distal weakness that usually starts in the lower extremities and has an ascending pattern as time progresses.

Further evaluation includes a lumbar puncture, which often shows albuminocytologic dissociation (0 cells and high cerebrospinal (CSF) protein without signs of infection), although a fair percentage of patients may not have positive CSF findings until three weeks into the disease course. A smaller percentage of patients may have unremarkable CSF results. In summary, the diagnosis of AIDP requires a thorough history and physical exam, screening of risk factors, lumbar spine imaging, comprehensive CSF studies to discard alternate diagnoses, and ancillary electrodiagnostic studies.

Electrodiagnostic studies can support the diagnosis and serve for prognostication of the patient's course when an AIDP is suspected. They can help localize a lesion (e.g., bulbar, peripheral, neuromuscular junction, muscle), and discern the extent of the pathology and etiology (e.g., autoimmune, axonal, myopathic, etc.). They are thought of as an extension of the neurological exam, providing valuable information about the nerve conduction, muscle-nerve connections, and structural integrity of the myelinated sensory and motor fibers. In more severe cases, AIDP can affect axons, which may have a worse prognosis. This article will focus on the findings that are typical of acute demyelinating polyneuropathies.