**Genetics:**

In humans, the GnRH I gene, consisting of four exons and three introns, resides on the short arm of chromosome 8 (8p21-p11.2). The journey of GnRH begins in the medial olfactory placode. From here, it travels along the olfactory bulb to reach the hypothalamus. GnRH is then secreted, in a pulsatile fashion, into the hypophyseal portal circulation where it reaches its primary destination, the anterior pituitary. Here it binds the gonadotropin-releasing hormone receptor (GnRHR), which is a G-protein coupled receptor, on the pituitary gonadotrophic cells. Binding of GnRH to the GnRHR initiates downstream signaling of the primary gonadotropins: follicle-stimulating hormone (FSH), and luteinizing hormone (LH).

Multiple genes aid in the process of development and differentiation (fibroblast growth factor receptor 1 (FGFR1) and its ligand fibroblast growth factor 8 (FGF8), heparin sulfate 6-O-sulphotransferase 1 (HS6ST1) and nasal embryonic LH-releasing hormone Factor (NELF)), migration (NOS1, semaphorin 3A (SEMA3A), prokineticin 2 (PROK2) and prokineticin receptor 2 (PROKR2)), and neuronal stability (SEMA3E).

**Neuroanatomy:**

GnRH cell bodies are in the medial preoptic area (POA) and the arcuate/infundibular nucleus of the hypothalamus, forming a neuronal network with projections to the median eminence. GnRH secretion occurs from the median eminence into the fenestrated capillaries of portal circulation and then is carried to the anterior pituitary. In humans, estimates of the number of GnRH neurons range between 1000 to 1500. The co-location of GnRH neurons with other central regulators allows the GnRH network to be influenced by a range of neuroendocrine and metabolic inputs.

**Gonadotropin-releasing hormone receptor (GnRHR):**

The location of the GnRH receptor (GnRHR) is in the anterior pituitary and belongs to the family of the G protein-coupled receptors. Its seven transmembrane domains describe this receptor class. These receptors, when bound by an activating subunit, undergo conformation change and activate intracellular pathways leading to modulation of genes within a target cell, via phosphorylation events. Activation of the receptors leads to the creation of receptor clusters. These receptor clusters can be shuttled to the surface of the cell or degraded in lysosomes after they become internalized.  A short intracellular carboxy-terminal tail characterizes this particular receptor. This structure helps to prevent desensitization and slow internalization of the receptor. The GnRHR links to a member of the G-protein family called Gq. The Gq protein cleaves a molecule called phosphatidylinositol-4-5-bisphosphate (PIP). PIP cleavage results in the formation of inositol phospholipid (IP3), and cleavage of the molecule PIP2. IP3 stimulated the endoplasmic reticulum to release calcium into the cytosol. DAG activates the protein kinase C (PKC) signaling cascade. Protein kinase C then goes on to stimulates the MAP kinase and ERK1/2 cascades. As a minor action, activation of the GnRHR can activate the cAMP and protein kinase A (PKA) signaling cascades, which occurs via the Gs and the calcium and calmodulin system. Once these pathways are activated, they lead to the biosynthesis and secretion of gonadotropin.