Pentamidine is used in pneumocystis pneumonia, leishmaniasis, and first-line agent for Stage 1 of trypanosomiasis caused by T. gambiense. The drug is available in nebulized (inhaled) and intramuscular or intravenous injection forms. Healthcare workers such as doctors and nurses caring for patients who require the drug should closely monitor the patients for signs of adverse effects of the drug, which are quite common due to its multiple mechanisms of action, which cause multiorgan toxicities. Additionally, as there is currently no proven antidote for the drug, appropriate measures should be taken to counteract the effects of toxicity; an infectious disease specialty pharmacist is a valuable asset for consultation when using pentamidine, especially when the patient is on a number of other medications. This interprofessional healthcare team approach can maximize therapeutic outcomes while minimizing interactions and adverse effects. [Level 5]

Studies show differences in efficacy related to the dose, making it essential to prescribe adequate doses and administer them accordingly to prevent harmful effects.

In the event of hepatotoxicity or renal impairment, specialists should be involved to monitor progress, and if a nephrotoxic drug is required, the patient requires close monitoring to prevent deterioration.

Injection site abscesses and infections should be cared for and treated accordingly.

Instructions for the inhaled form should be explained to the patient and administered efficiently to ensure maximum drug delivery.