Oxygen, discovered by Joseph Priestley, is the most important gas for human survival. In 1771, Priestley observed that a mouse in a sealed jar would eventually collapse. He placed a sprig of mint inside, and the subject revived, which led him to discover that plants give off a gas which he named "dephlogisticated air." This discovery enabled future scientist, Antoine Lavoisier to soon discover that this "dephlogisticated air" is indeed oxygen. It also helped future scientists to understand the importance and the working of cellular respiration and photosynthesis, both essential to life on Earth.

The primary purpose of the respiratory system is to take in oxygen and give off carbon dioxide. Oxygen is necessary for cellular metabolism; it acts as the last acceptor of an electron in the electron transport chain in mitochondria. Without oxygen, the human body metabolizes anaerobically, an unstable stage. If this continues for some time, cells die. It becomes essential to monitor the levels of oxygen in cases of cardio-respiratory illnesses by measuring the amount of hemoglobin saturation by pulse oximetry. Pulse oximetry is a noninvasive means by which to monitor a person's oxygen saturation.

The products of cellular metabolism are water and carbon dioxide. Carbon dioxide is an acid, and when it accumulates, it causes respiratory acidosis, which can lead to a lowering of the pH and can have a profound effect on cellular homeostasis and can also lead to cellular death. It becomes essential to monitor the levels of carbon dioxide during procedural sedation through capnography. Capnography is a method of monitoring the concentration or partial pressure of carbon dioxide in the respiratory gases.