Infliximab, being a TNFa inhibitor, acts by blocking TNFa, which is a proinflammatory pleiotropic cytokine particularly involved in defense mechanisms. Nevertheless, the role of TNFa differs respectively to its concentration as low levels confer a protective effect while high amounts display a pathogenic role.

The protective role in infection is the most important effect of TNFa. Interestingly, TNFa is involved in attaining resistance to infectious agents, as well as having a pathogenic role in septic shock. TNFa produces anti-inflammatory effects by signaling via TNFR Type 2. The explanation has been that TNFa promotes resistance by activation of polymorphonuclear leucocytes and platelets, while enhancing the cytotoxic action of macrophages and natural killer cells, and thereby stimulation of the immune system.

Another role of TNFa is resistance to tumors and occurs due to the cytotoxic effect of TNFa leading to cell lysis or apoptosis. Fiers studied the effect of TNFa on tumors in animal models and found that TNFa acts directly on the tumor cells, particularly in the presence of interferon.

In particular, the biological effects are beneficial in a variety of host responses. However, TNFa has been found to exert pathogenic roles in certain instances.

The role of TNFa in inflammatory diseases was identified in 1988 with the finding of increased TNFa expression in synovial fluid of patients with rheumatoid arthritis making it the prototypic disease of TNFa. This finding obtained confirmation with the discovery of increased TNFR expression in active diseases. Furthermore, the quantities of shed receptors correlate with the disease activity. The evidence suggests that TNFa acts as a regulator of proinflammatory cytokines and therefore, has a central role in inflammatory processes.

Another disease linked with TNFa is psoriasis. Studies have shown increased expression of TNFa in psoriatic skin lesions. The study confirmed this by investigating the peripheral blood mononuclear cells for the presence of TNFa mRNA expression and revealed increased expression in psoriatic patients when compared to healthy controls.

Infliximab acts by binding to both soluble and membrane-bound forms of TNF, the binding with TNFa is found to be stable with high affinity, thereby neutralizing its action; In addition, it causes apoptosis of cells that release TNFa, alters the cytokine secretion and up regulates p38 MAP kinase which takes part in the downward signaling of TNFa. Binding triggers intracellular signaling, complement-mediated cell lysis and decrease of cytokine production.

The effect of intracellular signaling launches a variety of responses including reduction of cytokines