As a nurse, one has the honor of taking care of the most vulnerable populations. This includes patients and loved ones who experience loss. It is important to assess characteristic signs of grief and loss and address them appropriately. It is important for the nurse to start this process by building rapport with the patient and any present loved ones. Encourage them to speak, openly and honestly, about their emotional and physical feelings. Utilize active listening skills and provide a nonjudgmental environment.

The American Association of Critical Care Nurses supports a method for therapeutic communication during emotional conversation topics called the NURSE technique. Utilizing this technique when communicating with people experiencing grief will help demonstrate empathy and build rapport by utilizing the NURSE pneumonic as this example below shows:

When a family member mentions: “This is overwhelming.”

The nurse may respond:

- **Name**: “You feel overwhelmed.” – Name what they just said.

- **Understand:**“There is so much going on, how can I help you?"

- **Respect:**“I’m really impressed with how well you are handling everything.” – Express your respect for them in this situation.

- **Support:**“I’ll be here with you all shift.” – Show them that you are there for them.

- **Explore:**“What is the hardest part?” – Further the conversation with an open-ended question.

These techniques can be used individually or as a bundle.

It is important for the nurse to assist the patient and loved ones in their coping with their grief to include anticipatory grief. Educate them on what is expected to include the stages of grief and what are some normal feelings as well as what are some resources to help adjust to this loss they are experiencing. Evaluate how they are handling this experience and address any fears related to grief and loss.

Grief may affect individuals differently but can be exhibited through signs and symptoms such as altered immune responses, distress, anger, sleep disturbances, withdrawal, pain, panic, and suffering. It may be evident by one’s lack of understanding of death and its severity and finality of the loss. Encourage loved ones at the bedside to remember to take care of their own health. Remind them or help them have access to food and hydration. Encourage adequate sleep and hygiene.

It is important to be able to provide your patients and their loved ones with resources to adjust to their loss and help them through their grieving process. This may mean chaplain services, their own clergy or spiritual support, psychological referrals, individual therapy, group therapy, and community peer support groups as well as social work referrals.

Anticipatory grief may be experienced before an actual loss. This type of grieving gives the patient and their loved ones an opportunity to begin the grieving process together. This is often displayed when a patient learns of a terminal illness diagnosis or has a planned amputation surgical procedure.

Complicated grief is when the feelings of loss are debilitating and do not improve after a long amount of time passes. There is no set amount of time that one moves through the stages of grief; however, there is a general movement toward growth and healing in a normal grief experience. A generally accepted amount of time is one year. In complicated grief, the painful emotions are so consuming that the individual has trouble recovering from the loss to resume their life. In the beginning months after a loss, normal grief and complicated grief appear very similar; however, complicated grief will likely worsen instead of gradually fade. Individuals experiencing complicated grief generally need support and resources to help them reclaim a sense of acceptance and peace.

**Signs and Symptoms of Complicated Grief**

- Intense sorrow, pain, and rumination over the loss

- Inability to focus on anything other than the loss itself

- Intense and persistent longing or pining for the deceased

- Difficulty accepting the death

- Numbness or detachment

- Bitterness about loss

- Feelings that life holds no meaning or purpose

- Lack of trust in others

- Inability to enjoy life or even remember any positive experiences of a loved one

- Have trouble carrying out normal routines

Some types of relationships to the loss are at a higher risk of complicated grief such as the loss of a child, the loss of a spouse, and the loss of a loved one whom the bereaved may not be able to show their grief such as in an affair or a divorced partner.