Prednisone may be administered orally with food or milk to decrease gastrointestinal upset. Maximal adrenal cortex activity occurs between 2:00 AM and 8:00 AM, and it is minimal between 4:00 PM and midnight. Exogenous corticosteroids suppress endogenous adrenocortical activity the least when administered during the time of maximal activity (the morning) for single-dose administration. Therefore, recommendations are that prednisone administration takes place in the morning before 9:00 AM, and when administering large doses, the patient should use antacids between meals to help prevent peptic ulcers. Multiple-dose therapy should have an even dose distribution in evenly spaced intervals throughout the day. Antacids also may be administered between meals to help prevent peptic ulcers.

The delayed-release tablets should be swallowed whole without breaking, dividing, crushing, or chewing. The administration of the oral solution should be with the provided calibrated dropper only. Other forms of steroids may be available if the oral formulation is not well-tolerated, for example, intramuscularly (IM), or subcutaneously (SQ). Depending on the disease process, topical steroids may also be an option. It is best to take this medicine with food. Swallow the medication whole. Store the medicine in a tightly closed container at room temperature, away from heat, moisture, and direct light. Do not freeze the oral liquid. Other routes of administration include liquid, solution, syrup, tablet, delayed-release tablets, nasal, rectal, injection, and intravenous.

Ask a patient if they are taking the following medications: aminoglutethimide, amphotericin B, carbamazepine, cholestyramine, cyclosporine, digoxin, isoniazid, ketoconazole, phenobarbital, phenytoin, or rifampin, a blood thinner (such as warfarin), NSAID pain or arthritis medicine (such as aspirin, diclofenac, ibuprofen, naproxen celecoxib), diuretic (water pill), diabetes medicine, a macrolide antibiotic (such as azithromycin, clarithromycin, erythromycin), estrogen (including birth control pills or hormone replacement therapy).