**Structure**

The radial nerve is formed as a continuation of the posterior cord of the brachial plexus and arises from the C5-T1 nerve fibers. It courses from the axilla to the posterior compartment of the arm, then into the anterior compartment of the arm, and continues into the posterior compartment of the forearm.

**Arm**

The radial nerve derives from the posterior cord of the brachial plexus and exits the axilla posteriorly to the brachial artery. It passes with the deep brachial artery and gives two motor branches and one sensory branch before traversing the triangular interval. These motor branches innervate the medial and long heads of the triceps. This sensory branch is called the posterior cutaneous nerve of the arm, which supplies cutaneous sensory innervation to a portion of the distal posterior arm. After passing through the triangular interval, the radial nerve descends the radial groove before laterally wrapping around the humerus. At this point, the radial nerve gives a motor branch to the lateral head of the triceps brachii, followed by two sensory branches: the inferior lateral cutaneous nerve of the arm, which perforates through the lateral head of the triceps, and the posterior cutaneous nerve of the forearm.

**Forearm**

The posterior cutaneous nerve of the antebrachium also perforates through the lateral head of the triceps but continues to innervate a posterior strip of the forearm. After giving these two sensory branches, the radial nerve passes through the lateral intermuscular septum to infiltrate the anterior compartment of the forearm between the brachialis and brachioradialis muscles. The radial nerve then passes over the lateral epicondyle into the cubital fossa and forearm. Here, the radial nerve separates into deep and superficial branches. The deep branch is a motor branch that passes between the heads of the supinator muscle and becomes the posterior interosseous nerve to innervate the muscles of the posterior compartment of the forearm. The superficial branch follows the radial artery inferiorly to the anterolateral portion of the radius, deep to the brachioradialis muscle. The superficial branch then courses dorsally over the distal radius over the anatomical snuffbox to innervate the posterior lateral three and a half digits (the thumb, index, middle, and lateral half of the ring fingers) and the associated hand area.

**Function**

The following is a list of the motor and cutaneous sensory functions of the radial nerve.

**Sensory**

Anterior aspect:

- The inferior lateral cutaneous nerve of the arm - provides sensation to the anterior lateral aspect of the mid-arm.

Posterior aspect:

- The posterior cutaneous nerve of the arm - sensation to the posterior distal arm.

- The posterior cutaneous nerve of the forearm - sensation to a strip posterior aspect of the forearm

- Superficial branch - sensation to the posterior aspect of the thumb, index, middle, and lateral half of the ring fingers, as well as the associated dorsal hand area.

**Motor**

The Radial Nerve branches off to the Deep Branch after it passes through the cubital fossa and then continues as the Posterior Interosseous Nerve after it passes between the supinator muscle heads.

Radial Nerve:

- Triceps brachii (medial and lateral heads) — provides the extension of the forearm.

- Extensor carpi radialis longus — provides for the extension of the wrist.

- Brachioradialis — provides flexion of the elbow as well as pronation and supination, depending on the position of the forearm.

- Anconeus — provides for elbow extension.

Deep Branch of the Radial Nerve:

- Extensor carpi radialis brevis — extends and abducts the wrist.

- Supinator — supinates the forearm.

Posterior interosseous nerve:

- Abductor pollicis longus — abduct the thumb at the wrist.

- Extensor carpi ulnaris — extends and adducts the wrist.

- Extensor digiti minimi — extends the wrist and small finger.

- Extensor digitorum — extends the medial four digits of the hand.

- Extensor indicis — extends the index finger and, to some extent, wrist extension.

- Extensor pollicis brevis — extends and abducts the thumb at the carpometacarpal and metacarpophalangeal joints.

- Extensor pollicis longus — extends the terminal phalanx of the thumb.