The patients with aneurysmal bone cysts benefit significantly from an interprofessional team providing their care.  Typically, primary care providers or emergency physicians will be the first to evaluate the patients. Chiropractors may also be the first to encounter an aneurysmal bone cyst on their radiographs and must be knowledgable so that they can refer the patient appropriately. After obtaining the initial plain film X-rays, the patient should receive a referral to an orthopedic surgeon. The radiologist will provide imaging interpretation, and an orthopedic oncologist will provide surgical care. Finally, rehabilitation the patient should receive rehabilitation by a physical or occupational therapist. Each of these disciplines must work together to provide the most optimal outcomes for these patients and to allow the patients to return to their normal activity as quickly as possible. [Level 5]

Focus on the patient’s quality of life should be of the utmost concern. Nursing will assist in all phases of the case management, from surgical prep, assisting in surgery, and providing postoperative care, and acting as a liaison between therapists and the treating physician. This type of interprofessional team approach is necessary to optimize outcomes. [Level 5]

Key areas for future research should focus on ways to decrease the functional restriction of patients who have aneurysmal bone cysts close to major joints, as these lesions tend to cause the greatest morbidity. Additionally, further narrowing the inciting cause of aneurysmal bone cysts can help identify populations at risk.