An evaluation of hypercapnia needs to follow clinical suspicion, as the differential diagnostic list is long.  Essential tests to consider in most patients include:

- Complete blood count to determine if anemia is present.

- Complete metabolic panel to specifically evaluate sodium, potassium, and chloride as aberrations in these electrolytes are often the source of symptoms. HCO3 is also important to evaluate to determine if compensation is occurring for developing respiratory acidosis.

- Thyroid stimulating hormone to evaluate whether underlying hyperthyroidism or hyperthyroidism are present to induce thyrotoxicosis.

- An arterial or venous blood gas is possibly the most valuable laboratory test as it allows for evaluation of pH status, serum CO2, and serum HCO3. Additionally, an anion gap can be calculated to assist in determining if acidosis is metabolic or respiratory in nature.

- Spirometry evaluates the general functioning of the lung. Forced expiratory volume over 1 second and forced vital capacity measurements are used to determine whether a restrictive or obstructive process is the etiology of hypoventilation. If air trapping is suspected, this may indicate COPD or asthmatic pathologies most commonly.

- Chest x-ray is essential in any respiratory disease evaluation to determine anatomical pathologies as well as pneumonia, pulmonary edema, among others.

- Chest CT is a more detailed radiographic evaluation and is typically used as a step up a strategy to further elucidate suspected pathology on chest x-ray.

- Echocardiography may be considered if a cardiopulmonary abnormality is suspected. Specifically, the function of the heart can be evaluated looking at the ejection fraction and valvular function.

- ECG and EMG are used to evaluate for central nervous system malfunctions and neuromuscular diseases respectively.

- Polysomnography is essential for the evaluation suspected central or obstructive sleep apnea.