Patients may be asymptomatic or may complain of worsened visual acuity or metamorphopsia.

On ocular examination, choroidal folds are visualized, which are best appreciated with a slit lamp and +90D or +78D lens. A red-free filter accentuates the appearance of folds.

Other relevant ocular and systemic history, according to the associated condition may be present.

In cases of idiopathic choroidal folds, the most common type, patients are invariably asymptomatic males that present with presbyopia. These cases usually have hyperopia. The choroidal folds can be either bilaterally symmetrical or occur in one eye, followed by the involvement of another eye during the observation period. The folds are usually bilaterally symmetrical, parallel, and confined to an area above and below the optic disc and macula.

Cases of acquired hyperopia with choroidal folds are usually in males and are detected on routine examination or with a complaint of blurred vision. Along with choroidal folds, they may be associated with ophthalmic findings such as mild disc swelling, focal retinal pigment epithelial defects, phoria or tropia, and central serous pigment epitheliopathy.

In the case of choroidal tumors, the choroidal folds surround the tumor base. Since the tumor stretches the overlying choroid, there are no folds above the choroidal tumor.

The intraocular pressure is usually less than 6 mm of Hg in choroidal folds related to hypotony. The choroidal folds are broad and randomly oriented.

In the case of nanophthalmos, patients have small hyperopic eyes which are in a deep orbit with narrow palpebral fissure. Other features include an elevated papillomacular bundle, retinal fold, pigmentary retinopathy, and macular holes.

Cases of papilledema usually present with symptoms of headache, nausea, vomiting, and sometimes with associated transient visual obscurations. The fundus examination usually shows papilledema and choroidal folds concentric to the disc along with horizontal choroidal folds over the macula, which converge towards the nasal margin of the optic disc.

A scleral buckle is usually placed in cases of rhegmatogenous retinal detachment. Choroidal folds in such cases are usually formed near the posterior slope of the buckle.

Cases of uveal effusion have a waxing and waning clinical course. The choroidal folds are associated with serous choroidal detachment. Sometimes these cases would just have choroidal folds as the initial sign.

Cases of posterior scleritis present with a unilateral decrease in vision with severe pain (may not allow the patient to sleep or may awaken the patient from sleep), mild proptosis, and restricted ocular movements with pain during ocular movements. These patients may have a history of rheumatoid arthritis, collagen vascular diseases, or other autoimmune diseases. The ocular examination usually reveals a localized choroidal elevation, which is surrounded by concentric choroidal folds.

VKH disease usually has a clinical course passing through the following stages: prodromal phase, acute uveitic phase, convalescent phase, and chronic recurrent phase. The prodromal phase manifests as tinnitus, ocular pain, low-grade fever, photophobia, and nuchal rigidity. The acute uveitic phase manifests as a visual loss with fundus findings of choroidal folds, exudative retinal detachment, disc edema, and Dalen-Fuchs nodules.

SANS is seen in astronauts who usually present with hyperopic refractive error, disc edema, choroidal folds, and retinal cotton-wool spots after long-duration space travel.

In the case of intra-conal lesions, patients usually have hyperopia, whereas extra-conal lesions lead to astigmatism. In cases of orbital lesions, a choroidal fold pattern gives us a clue to localize the lesion.

Choroidal folds have a variable pattern depending on whether the orbital lesions are intra-conal or extra-conal.

- In intra-conal lesions, choroidal folds are produced as a result of the expansion of tumors between the muscle cone and optic nerve. If the lesion pushes the optic nerve to one side, the choroid is compressed in the direction where the nerve is pushed and comes under tension in the opposite direction resulting in a parabolic fold pattern with the optic nerve head in between the folds.

- Extra-conal lesions, being located between the orbital wall and muscle, do not directly compress the optic nerve. In such cases, choroidal folds are usually concentric and perpendicular to the direction of the compressive force of the lesion.