The emergency department physician must refrain from giving the patient any pain medication until the surgeon has seen the patient. The analgesics can mask the peritoneal signs and lead to a delay in diagnosis or even a ruptured appendix.

**Lab Testing**

Laboratory measurements, including total leucocyte count, neutrophil percentage, and C-reactive protein (CRP) concentration, are requested to proceed with diagnostic steps in patients with suspected acute appendicitis.****Both increasing levels of CRP and WBC correlate with a significant increase in the likelihood of complicated appendicitis. The possibility of a patient having appendicitis with both normal values of WBC and CRP level is extremely low.

**Imaging**

Appendicitis is traditionally a clinical diagnosis. However, several imaging modalities are used to proceed with the diagnostic steps, including an abdominal CT scan, ultrasonography, and MRI.

**CT-scan**

An abdominal CT scan has greater than 95% accuracy for the diagnosis of appendicitis and is used with increasing frequency. CT criteria for appendicitis include an enlarged appendix (greater than 6 mm in diameter), appendiceal wall thickening (greater than 2 mm), peri-appendiceal fat stranding, appendiceal wall enhancement, the presence of appendicolith (approximately 25% of patients). It is unusual to see air or contrast in the lumen with appendicitis due to luminal distention and possible blockage in most cases of appendicitis. Non visualization of the appendix does not rule out appendicitis. Ultrasound is less sensitive and specific than CT but may be useful to avoid ionizing radiation in children and pregnant women. MRI may also be useful for pregnant patients with suspected appendicitis and an indeterminate ultrasound. Classically the best way to diagnose acute appendicitis is with a good history and detailed physical exam performed by an experienced surgeon; however, it is very easy to get a CT scan done in the emergency department. It has become common practice to rely mostly on the CT report to make the diagnosis of acute appendicitis. Occasionally appendicoliths are incidentally found on routine x-rays or CT scans. The major concern with obtaining an abdominopelvic CT scan is radiation exposure; however, the average exposure with a typical CT would not exceed 4 mSv, which is slightly above the background exposure of almost 3 mSv. Despite the higher resolution of CT images obtained with the maximal radiation of 4 mSv, lower exposures would not affect the clinical outcomes. Moreover, obtaining an IV-contrast abdominopelvic CT scan in patients suspicious of acute appendicitis should be limited to an acceptable glomerular filtration rate (GFR) equal to or above 30 ml/min. These patients are at a higher risk of developing appendicitis than the general population. These patients should be considered for prophylactic appendectomies. Studies have also shown a 10 to 30% incidence of appendicoliths present in appendectomy specimens done for acute appendicitis.

**Ultrasonography**

Abdominal ultrasonography is a widely used and available primary measure to evaluate patients with acute abdominal pain. A specific index of compressibility along with a diameter of less than 5 mm is used to exclude appendicitis. On the contrary, several evidence, including an anteroposterior diameter of above 6 mm, an appendicolith, and abnormally increased echogenicity of the peri-appendiceal fat, are suggestive of acute appendicitis. The major concerns with using abdominal ultrasonography to evaluate the potential diagnosis of acute appendicitis are the innate limitations of the sonography in obese patients and the operator-dependency to find the suggestive features. Moreover, patients complicated with peritonitis would hardly tolerate the graded compression.

**MRI**

Despite the high sensitivity and specificity of MRI in the context of acute appendicitis identification, major concerns with obtaining an abdominal MRI exist. Performing an abdominal MRI is not only expensive but also demands a high level of expertise to interpret the results. Therefore, its indications are mainly limited to special groups of patients, including pregnant women in whom an unacceptable risk of radiation exposure is embedded.