**Trauma**

Trauma is the number one cause of death in the United States for individuals between 1 and 44 years of age. Among them, hemorrhagic shock is the primary cause of death for 30% to 40% in the first 24 hours following injury. Loss of blood triggers a compensatory hemodynamic response to restore volume. The compensatory mechanisms click in when there is acute blood loss of more than 5% to 10%. Blood losses of greater than 20% will require fluid resuscitation to support the continued delivery of oxygen to vital organs.

Trauma and acute blood loss trigger compensatory mechanisms aimed at restoring volume deficits to maintain adequate perfusion of vital organs. Trans-capillary refill occurs first and involves the shift of fluid from the interstitial space into the intravascular space secondary to increased capillary permeability and decreased plasma colloid osmotic pressure. The resultant effect is the sequestration of about 1 liter of fluid into intravascular spaces. Activation of the renin-angiotensin-aldosterone system occurs next, activated by the reduction in renal perfusion and causing sodium and water retention by the kidneys.

The overall goal is to replace the fluid lost from the interstitial compartment to the intravascular spaces. But one must exercise caution, because an aggressive large volume fluid resuscitation may lead to hypothermia, acidosis, and coagulopathy.

Two major types of fluids used for resuscitation are colloids which specifically expand the intravascular volume and crystalloids, which briefly expand the intravascular volume and quickly re-distribute into the interstitial compartment. For resuscitation, crystalloids are given as 1- to 2-liter bolus in patients with hemorrhagic shock. However, recent studies using colloids favor permissive hypotension. For example, in patients with penetrating trauma, aggressive fluid resuscitation may exacerbate bleeding, so the emphasis is on administering small boluses of fluid (250mL) allowing a low systolic blood pressure equal to  90 mm Hg or mean blood pressure equal to 50 mm Hg until one achieves sustained hemorrhagic control. This strategy has been shown to improve survival and reduce the amount of fluid replaced.

It is important to remember that it is only safe to allow low blood pressures when there is good clinical evidence of adequate organ perfusion indicated through adequate urine output and mental status.

**Sepsis**

Sepsis is a leading cause of morbidity and mortality in critically ill patients with mortality ranging between 20% to 45%. Uncontrolled inflammation, tissue hypoperfusion, microvascular and micro-cellular level abnormalities, and dysfunction are critical determinants in the progression toward multiple organ failure, which predict poor outcomes. Septic shock is defined as refractory hypotension that results from a systemic inflammatory response syndrome (SIRS) caused by or suspected to be from an infection.

The key characteristic of septic shock is systemic vasodilation which results in hypovolemia, decreased tissue perfusion and decreased oxygen delivery. The main aim of fluid resuscitation is to restore hemodynamics to optimize tissue perfusion and ultimately the tissue oxygen delivery.

For resuscitation, one should give crystalloids at a dose of 30 mL/kg of ideal body weight as early as possible, typically within the first 3 hours. Central venous pressure (CVP), mean arterial pressure (MAP), and central venous oxygen saturation (ScvO2) can guide fluid resuscitation if shock (mean arterial blood pressure - MAP less than 65 mm Hg or lactate level greater than 4.0 mmol/L) persist. Within the first 6 hours of initial resuscitation, one should aim for a CVP target between 8 to 12 mm Hg in spontaneously breathing patients and CVP between 12 to 15mm Hg in mechanically-ventilated patients; a MAP greater than 65 mm Hg and ScvO2 greater than 70% have been shown to improve mortality. Lactate level should be monitored during resuscitation since increases may reflect a decrease in tissue perfusion.