Direct-acting parasympathomimetic agents act at muscarinic ACh receptors to mimic the physiologic effects resulting from activation of the parasympathetic nervous system. All muscarinic receptor subtypes (M1-M5) are G protein-coupled receptors linked to intracellular signal transduction pathways. Binding of direct agonists to Gq-coupled M1, M3, and M5 receptor subtypes stimulates phospholipase C, which initiates the phosphatidylinositol signaling cascade, ultimately leading to the mobilization of intracellular calcium and activation of protein kinase C. Binding of direct agonists to Gi/o-coupled M2 and M4 receptor subtypes leads to inhibition of adenylyl cyclase activity, resulting in decreased levels of cyclic AMP, and to increased potassium conductance, resulting in hyperpolarization of the membrane potential.

The five subtypes of muscarinic ACh receptors have varying distributions throughout the central nervous system and periphery. For example, M1 receptors are mainly found in cortical regions of the brain, autonomic ganglia, glands (gastric and salivary), and enteric nerves. M2 receptors are predominantly expressed in cardiac and smooth muscle. M3 receptors are abundant in exocrine glands, smooth muscle, and vascular endothelium.

The parasympathomimetic effects of indirect-acting agents are mediated by their inhibitory effect on the hydrolysis of endogenous ACh at cholinergic synapses by acetylcholinesterase. Increased synaptic concentrations of ACh result in prolonged stimulation of cholinergic receptors throughout the central and peripheral nervous systems.

The significant effects of parasympathomimetic medications are summarized below by organ system:

- Eye

- Contraction of the sphincter pupillae muscle (miosis)
- Contraction of the ciliary muscle (accommodation for near vision)

- Cardiovascular

- Vasodilation (via endothelium-derived relaxing factor)
- Decrease in firing rate of the sinoatrial node (negative chronotropy)
- Decrease in conduction velocity through the atrioventricular node (negative dromotropy)
- Decrease in contractile strength of the atria (negative inotropy)

- Gastrointestinal

- Stimulation of salivary and gastric glands
- Increase in gut motility
- Relaxation of sphincters

- Urinary

- Contraction of the detrusor muscle
- Relaxation of the trigone and sphincter muscles

- Respiratory

- Contraction of bronchial smooth muscle
- Stimulation of tracheobronchial secretions

- Other Effects

- Stimulation of secretion from lacrimal, sweat, and nasopharyngeal glands