Beta-1-selective adrenergic antagonists such as atenolol are widely used worldwide to treat hypertension, angina, and myocardial infarction. According to AHA, beta-blockers as initial pharmacological therapy for hypertension are common in clinical practice even though beta blockers are not the first-line treatment in hypertensive patients without compelling indications.

An interprofessional team, including all clinicians(MD, DO, NP,  PA), and pharmacists, must be aware of atenolol's indications, adverse drug reactions, and contraindications. Nurses who administer atenolol need to monitor for adverse drug reactions and be mindful that the effects of the drug could mask the symptoms of hypoglycemia and thyrotoxicosis. Pharmacists should verify dosing based on individual patient parameters and check for potential interactions that could alter therapeutic results. Nursing staff can counsel on medicine administration, verify patient adherence, assess regimen effectiveness on follow-up visits, and report concerns to the clinician. All interprofessional team members must maintain accurate, updated records. If they note any problems, they must immediately communicate with the prescriber to share these concerns and open the way for possible therapy modification.

The interprofessional team involved in the patient's care must also ensure that they regularly monitor renal function, heart rate, and blood pressure. All healthcare providers should educate the patients on the importance of compliance with atenolol therapy, administration, and adverse drug reactions. This interprofessional team approach will lead to therapeutic success and ensure an optimal outcome for the patients using atenolol.[Level V] In a pragmatic randomized controlled trial, a team-based care (TBC) intervention between clinicians, pharmacists, and nurses was utilized for patients suffering from uncontrolled hypertension. The results indicated that the interprofessional approach could reduce long-term systolic BP among uncontrolled hypertensive patients related to antihypertensive therapy, including beta blockers.