**Plantar Fasciitis**

Patients typically complain of heel pain accompanying the first steps in the morning after getting up. Others report heel pain after standing from a prolonged sitting position. In long-standing cases; pain might persist throughout walking and rest times. Tenderness usually elicited inferiorly over the medial calcaneal tubercle.

**Heel Fat Pad Atrophy**

Patients present with diffuse central plantar heel pain precipitated by barefoot walking on the hard surfaces. Tenderness can be elicited on the central part of the calcaneus.

**Calcaneal Stress Fractures**

Patients present with diffuse heel pain and positive squeeze test (tenderness on medial and lateral compression of the calcaneus).

**T****arsal Tunnel Syndrome**

Patients present with pain, tingling and hypoesthesia along the whole plantar surface.  Tapping on the area behind the medial malleolus provokes a positive Tinel’s sign.

**Medial Calcaneal Neuropathy**

Patients will present with burning pain and paresthesia on the skin over the calcaneus. Pain does not radiate distally as in cases of the entrapment of the tibial nerve or Baxter's nerve. Tinel’s sign might be positive over the medial surface of the calcaneal bone.

**Baxter Nerve Neuropathy**

Patients have a sharp, radiating pain along the course of Baxter's nerve. Pain is worse after activities (e.g., walking) and at night. A positive Tinel's sign and maximal tenderness can be elicited at the above-mentioned two points of nerve entrapment.

**S1 Radiculopathy**

Patients might have a history of chronic low back pain. Clinically, radicular pain and numbness from back down to the heel. A positive straight leg raises test, a crossed straight leg rises test, or a Lasegue test can provoke it. The examiner might find a decreased sensation over the skin of the sole, heel and lateral foot. The physical examination might reveal the weakness of the gastrocnemius, gluteus maximus, hamstring, peroneal and foot muscles and diminished ankle reflex.

**Systemic Causes**

Symmetric or asymmetric polyarthritis, uveitis, psoriasis, lower gastrointestinal symptoms, enthesitis, balanitis, dactylitis, sacroiliitis, and spondylitis should be screened.