# Continuing Education Activity

Mental health conditions are highly prevalent amongst the American Indian and Alaskan Native populations. Compared to other ethnic groups, this population has a high rate of post-traumatic stress disorder, substance use disorder, and suicidality. This activity reviews the role of the interprofessional team in improving care for patients with these conditions.

**Objectives:**
- Describe the challenges to the management of mental health disorders amongst American Indians and Alaskan Natives.
- Summarize the common mental health disorders in American Indians and Alaskan Natives.
- Identify specific risk factors for increased suicidality in American Indians and Alaskan Natives.
- Explain the importance of cultural competence in health care.

# Introduction

American Indians (AI) and Alaska Natives (AN), descendants of the indigenous people, are a diverse population group growing in number every year. Studies have shown that American Indians and Alaska Natives (AI/ANs) have a decreased life expectancy, higher mortality rate, and lower quality of life than the general US population.

In addition to having higher rates of general medical conditions such as diabetes, obesity, and high blood pressure, there is a high prevalence of mental health problems and psychiatric comorbidity amongst American Indians and Alaska Natives (AI/ANs).

Post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD), violence, suicide, and substance use have been identified as some of the more prevalent mental health issues among AI/ANs when compared with the general population in the United States.

There should be an increased effort to improve AI/AN mental health care disparities through culturally competent clinical interventions. In working towards this goal, it is important to identify the existing disparities in mental health care delivery and outcomes among AI/ANs. This will then help guide the steps that are necessary for improved outcomes and reduction in health disparities.

# Issues of Concern

American Indians and Alaskan natives have been associated with high rates of mental disorders and psychiatric diagnoses such as post-traumatic stress disorder, substance use disorder, and suicidal behaviors compared to other ethnic and racial groups.

**PTSD**

Research has found a high rate of American Indians and Alaskan natives with PTSD and PTSD-related symptoms compared to other races and ethnicities. In the general U.S. population, the prevalence of lifetime PTSD is 4.8% to 6.4%.

For a long time now, AI/ANs have served in the US Armed Forces at high rates, and this may be one of the contributing factors for the high prevalence of PTSD among this group.

**Substance Use Disorder**

High rates of substance use which includes both illicit drugs and alcohol use, is another major issue that should be recognized when addressing the specific needs in caring for mental health in AI/ANs. In one study which screened a group of 489 American Indian females at an Indian Health Service (IHS) institution, the lifetime prevalence for any substance use disorder was greater than 60%.

Given the high number of adolescent AI/ANs with substance use disorders, it may help explore different interventions that may help prevent the early initiation of substance use. Of note, alcohol use was a large contributing factor for the significantly higher rate of premature deaths in AI/ANs than other races in the United States.

**Suicide**

Suicide rates have historically been higher amongst the AI/AN population compared to the total US population. In 2015, the National Violent Death Reporting System (NVDRS) found that the suicide rates in the 18 participating states were more than 3.5 times higher than when compared to ethnic groups with the lowest suicide rates.

Compared to other ethnic groups, AI/AN adolescents were found to have more severe negative experiences such as victimization, substance abuse, and depression and may contribute to increased suicidality.

There may be some utility in early identification and intervention amongst AI/ANs who experience suicidality. Suicidal behaviors have also been found to co-occur with substance use, including alcohol and drug use, in many AI/AN communities. Previous research on this topic has identified potential targets for intervention, including increasing coping skills, reducing the stigma of mental health services, and building an organized community infrastructure for health care for AI/ANs.

# Clinical Significance

It has been well established that American Indians and Alaska Natives are disproportionately affected by different health conditions, including many mental health disorders compared to other ethnic and racial groups. The health disparities among this population group may in part be explained by the numerous sociodemographic and socioeconomic differences, including lower educational achievement, income, and health status.

It is important for clinicians and public health officials to recognize these demographic and socioeconomic determinants of health inequalities and prioritize further research and efforts towards combating these disparities. Besides, it is also important to realize that there are cultural issues and other risk factors that may contribute to the high prevalence of mental health disorders among AI/ANs. The National Institute of Health (NIH) has taken the initiative to provide funding towards promoting health and disease prevention in Native Americans, including American Indians and Alaska Natives. Through this funding opportunity, multiple projects to improve health outcomes in this population group have been launched.

Continued research relevant to the surveillance, prevention, and treatment of mental health disorders is necessary so that there may be further development of culturally appropriate interventions, and ultimately a reduction in the existing health disparities.

# Enhancing Healthcare Team Outcomes

Health disparities for American Indians and Alaskan Natives have been attributed to limited access and availability of health services, education, and poverty.

**Access to Health Services**

One way to improve mental health outcomes amongst American Indians and Alaskan Natives is to increase access to available healthcare services and facilities. The Indian Health Service (IHS), a federal agency established in 1955, is one of the main health care systems created to serve a large proportion of the Native Americans.

Only federal hospitals that IHS funds may provide coverage for health services, and a large majority of these hospitals are located in areas that are geographically isolated. This makes it challenging for AI/AN seeking care in more urban areas and larger cities where there is a limited number of IHS-associated facilities.

**Cultural Differences**

It is important to recognize that there are cultural differences when it comes to health-related values and beliefs. There are various evidence-based treatments and western models of intervention that have been largely utilized by society in approaching the treatment of mental health disorders. However, even with these established treatment models, some AI/ANs prefer traditional healing and tribal traditions to address substance use and other mental health issues. There is the challenge of overcoming the distrust of formal services that may exist in Indigenous communities.

Recognizing the importance of cultural competence may help to reduce health care disparities among AI/ANs. Cultural competence in health care means understanding and respecting the various cultures of different patient groups then using the knowledge to tailor health care to provide more culturally and linguistically appropriate interventions for different patient groups.

**Research**

There is still a limited amount of available literature on mental health disorders and appropriate treatment, specifically regarding the American Indian and Alaska Native populations. While the amount of knowledge about AI/AN mental health problems is growing, little research specific to treatment efficacy and outcomes among AI/AN has been published. To put this into context, within a set of randomized control trials on major mental health disorders between 1986 through 2005, none of the 10,000 participants were identified as American Indian or Alaskan natives.

**Summary**

Improving the availability and quality of care for Native American populations will require the efforts of an interprofessional healthcare team, both in terms of providing the care and also recognizing the unique challenges that confront this population. This team includes all personnel from every discipline, including clinicians, mid-level practitioners, nurses, pharmacists, lab and other medical technicians, physical and occupation therapists, and even ancillary staff. It requires open communication, collaborative effort, and empathy regarding the challenges present in these patients so optimal care can be rendered and bring healthcare in the AI/AN population up to standard. [Level 5]