The majority of all Rca are adenocarcinomas (90%), and others not frequently seen are adenosquamous, spindle, squamous and undifferentiated. RCA adenocarcinoma can be further differentiated in cribriform comedo-type, medullary, micropapillary, serrated, mucinous, and signet-ring cell. Adenocarcinomas are categorized by the percentage of gland formation into well (greater than 95%), moderately (greater than 50%), and poorly (less than 49%) differentiated, but further divided into a 2-tier low grade (well-moderate)/high grade (poor) with prognostic significance. Mucinous or signet ring cells pathological description denotes that more than half of the stained cells possess that particular characteristic. Differential clinicopathological diagnoses include neuroendocrine, hamartomas, mesenchymal, and lymphomas. Cytokeratin 20 (CK20) and caudal-type homeobox 2 (CDX2) immunohistochemistry (IHC) can accurately identify CRC adenocarcinoma origin, except medullary carcinoma with MSI-H expressing other markers such calretinin, CK7, SABT2, and CDH17.

The tumor, node, metastasis (TNM) staging system of the American Joint Committee on Cancer/Union for International Cancer Control (AJCC/UICC) 2017 is the preferred staging system for CRC. Of note, peritoneal carcinomatosis (M1c) and nodal micrometastases (cluster greater than 0.2 mm) are included as poor prognostic factors. Other prognostic indicators that the classification continues to exclude are extramural deposits, lymphovascular invasion (LVI), perineural invasion (PNI), poor histological grade, diagnostic serum carcinoembryonic antigen (CEA), MSI-H, and RAS/BRAF mutation status. The most important prognostic indicator is the pathological stage at presentation supported by data from the SEER observed overall survival (OS) at 5-year rates for rectum in Stage I includes 74%; Stage IIA, 64%; Stage IIB, 51%; Stage IIC, 32%; Stage IIIA, 74%; Stage IIIB, 45%; Stage IIIC, 33%; and Stage IV, 6%. Complete, intermediate, and poor tumor regression grade (TRG) at resection after neoadjuvant CRT in the German Rectal Cancer study group showed improved disease-free survival (DFS) with 90%, 74%, and 63% at 10 years, respectively. Surgical pathology specimens with neoadjuvant treatment effects are reported with “upstage and TRG” to more accurately reflect outcomes.

Complete mesorectal resection (R0) with all negative circumferential resection margins (CRM) is an important goal to avoid local-distant recurrence (38% CRM+ versus 10% CRM-) and increase survival. Lymph node involvement is the strongest outcome predictor, and the total number resected directly influences prognosis on Stage II (node-negative) and Stage III (node-positive) disease. Current guidelines by the American Society of Clinical Oncology (ASCO), National Comprehensive Cancer Network (NCCN), and European Society for Medical Oncology (ESMO) recommend a minimum of 12 nodes surgical resection, although the numbers of lymph nodes are significantly less on rectal cancer treated with neoadjuvant therapy related to a higher TRG. Lymph node ratio from the INT-0089 trial showed a 5-year OS of 80% with less than 0.05 LNR versus 50% greater than 0.4 ratios depending on the total of node retrieved.

The NCCN and the College of American pathologists, among other associations, recommend universal MMR/MSI status (15 to 20% sporadic CRC), BRAF p.V600 E (less than 10% sporadic CRC), and RAS mutational (12 to 75% sporadic CRC) testing for prognostic and predictive of chemotherapy efficacy.  hMLH1 and hMSH2 IHC provides a high sensitive (92.3%), and specific (100%) method, and positive (96.7%)  / negative (100%) predictive value method for screening for MMR/MSI status. MSI-H is synonymous with dMMR, and MSI-stable will refer to proficient MMR state. The prevalence of MSI-H in CRC is about 15% in stage II, 8% in stage III, and 4% to 5% in stage IV. BRAF gene mutation testing is indicated after a negative MLH1 IHC, indicating MLH1 gene down-regulation through somatic methylation. Recently, 6 independent classification systems coalesced into 4 consensus molecular subtypes (CMSs) with distinguishing features: CMS1 (MSI-immune, 14%), hypermutated burden, dMMR, microsatellite unstable and strong immune activation; CMS2 (canonical, 37%), high chromosomal instability, epithelial, marked WNT and MYC signaling activation; CMS3 (metabolic, 13%), epithelial and evident metabolic dysregulation, KRAS mutation; and CMS4 (mesenchymal, 23%), CpG hyper-methylation, prominent transforming growth factor-beta activation, stromal invasion, and angiogenesis. CMS classification had a prognostic value, CMS1 good, CMS4 poor, and CMS2/3 intermediate.