Band-shaped keratopathy: Surgical removal of band-shaped keratopathy is the main treatment modality; however, the local and systemic cause of band-shaped keratopathy needs to be controlled before surgical correction. Epithelial debridement followed by chelation with EDTA (ethylenediaminetetraacetic acid) is the main treatment modality.

PBK and ABK: PBK and ABK are the end result of endothelial cell loss during cataract surgery. The only treatment is replacing the damaged endothelial cells with healthy endothelial cells from a donor cornea. Descemet's stripping endothelial keratoplasty (DSEK) and Descemet's membrane endothelial keratoplasty (DMEK) is the viable treatment options.

Striate keratopathy: Topical steroids is the mainstay of treatment. Depending on the degree of striate keratopathy the dose of topical steroids have to be tailored. Hypertonic saline drops or ointments may be added according to the severity.

Whorl keratopathy: The deposits in whorl keratopathy are not visually significant and thus need not be treated. On discontinuing the causative medication this resolves. However, reports of using topical heparin for whorl keratopathy are available.

Exposure keratopathy: Instillation of frequent artificial tears, lubricating gel, and nighttime taping is an option in Bell's palsy associated exposure keratopathy. The same treatment regimen is also advised prophylactically for patients admitted in Intensive Care Units. Topical prophylactic antibiotics are also added to the regimen to avoid secondary bacterial infection. Lateral paramedian or central tarsorrhaphy is done depending on the degree of lagophthalmos and status of Bell's phenomenon.

In Exposure keratitis secondary to proptosis, the actual cause of proptosis needs to be addressed. In Thyroid eye disease (TED), systemic control is of utmost importance and is also combined with orbital decompression surgeries in severe cases. If the proptosis is secondary to some orbital tumor then, that needs to be taken care of simultaneously.

For exposure keratopathy secondary to congenital or acquired lid coloboma, a pedicle graft or flap needs to be done.

Infectious crystalline keratopathy: In view of resistance to medical management, the definitive management will be re-doing of the penetrating corneal graft. Medications can be tailored based on the biopsy report (culture, sensitivity, and histopathology).

Neurotrophic keratopathy: Neurotrophic ulcers are managed with serum, amniotic membrane transplantation, and tarsorrhaphy. FDA (Food and drug administration, USA) has approved cenegermin-bkbj ophthalmic solution (1 drop to be used 6 times a day for 8 weeks) for this indication.

Metabolic keratopathy: Corneal stromal haze in MPS often requires a lamellar or full-thickness corneal transplant. KF ring per se is not visually significant and does not require treatment. Treatment of Wilson's disease though has to be given. Topical cysteamine drops (0.55%) can help dissolve cystine crystals; however, the severe cases often require penetrating keratoplasty. There is always a risk of recurrence in the graft also. Systemic cysteamine may help to decrease the severity of the disease.

Filamentary keratopathy: Treatment of the underlying dry eye is of utmost importance. Proposed treatments include topical lubricants (drops and ointment) and topical steroid/nonsteroidal agents.

Climatic droplet keratopathy: Treatment needs to be tailored for individuals depending on the location, extent, and severity. If visual acuity is getting hampered, then one can plan for superficial keratectomy with amniotic membrane transplantation, phototherapeutic keratectomy, lamellar keratoplasty, and penetrating keratoplasty, depending on the severity.

Lipid keratopathy: The vessels bringing lipoidal infiltrates into the cornea are cauterized. Subconjunctival and intracorneal anti-VEGF (vascular endothelial growth factor) therapy has also been given to prevent further infiltration of lipids.

Superficial punctate keratopathy and ultraviolet keratopathy: Lubricants are the mainstay in SPKs. However, one should also take care of the offending agents, like contact lenses and giant papillae. Contact lens should be discontinued and giant papillae should be treated with intralesional steroids in addition to topical lubricants.

VKC related keratopathy: Treatment of ocular allergy with topical steroids, mast cell stabilizers, and antihistaminics helps in keratopathy also. Lubricants are also added to the treatment regimen. Topical tacrolimus or cyclosporine are being used as steroid-sparing agents.

Keratopathy related to SJS/TEN: The Mucous membrane graft (MMG) works well in children over PROSE (prosthetic replacement of ocular surface ecosystem) lens; whilst, PROSE  works better than MMG in adults. PROSE and MMG when combined together, give superior outcomes in both adults and children.

Keratopathy related to aniridia: Limbal stem cell transplantation followed by penetrating keratoplasty is the treatment option available.