All Patients presenting with aSAH should be organized according to the severity of disease. In general, management include medical measures and interventional options like endovascular coiling or direct surgical clipping of the IA. Patients are typically treated with both medical and interventional options. More conservative or less invasive interventions may be sufficient for patients with grade I or II SAH. The key goals for all SAH patients are the prevention of rebleeding, delayed cerebral ischemia (DCI), supportive care, pain management, and accurate diagnosis and treatment.

Although immediate care aims to prevent rebleeding and to secure the aneurysm, other common problems include hydrocephalus and vasospasm. Hydrocephalus is present in up to 30% of patients with intraventricular hemorrhage.

Osmotic diuretics (i.e., Mannitol) and antihypertensive medications for blood pressure control are required to stabilize the patient until surgical or endovascular interventions can be initiated to secure the IA.

**Monitoring**

**Transcranial Doppler**– Transcranial Doppler (TCD) sonography is used for detecting and monitoring vasospasm in SAH. A TCD is able to detect changes in velocity prior to the clinical sequelae of vasospasm. However, it is an operator-dependent technology that has imperfect sensitivity and specificity.

**Imaging studies**– In the acute phase of SAH, imaging studies like CT angiography (CTA) and CT perfusion can detect arterial narrowing or perfusion asymmetry. These methods are sensitive and help in predicting delayed cerebral ischemia.

**Electroencephalography (EEG)**– Continuous EEG can be useful to detect subclinical seizures or nonconvulsive status epilepticus, particularly for patients with poor-grade SAH who develop unexplained neurologic deterioration or fail to improve.

**Frequency of neuro checks**– Patients with acute SAH should be carefully examined every one to two hours, especially during the high-risk period for delayed cerebral ischemia.

A development of neurologic deficits should be evaluated with an urgent head CT scan (to identify rebleeding, cerebral infarction, hydrocephalus), angiography (to identify symptomatic vasospasm), and/or EEG (to detect subclinical seizures). Medical complications can also contribute to a change in neurologic status.

Even in the absence of clinical change, it is important to identify cerebral vasospasm and decreased cerebral perfusion. Therefore, some centers monitor all patients with aneurysmal SAH with TCD sonography daily and head CT, CTA, and CT perfusion on admission and between days 3 to 5 and days 7 to 10 to screen for evidence of decreased cerebral perfusion or vasospasm.

**Intracranial pressure monitoring**– It is recommended to perform a ventriculostomy in patients with enlarged ventricles on CT or with WFNS scale score ≥3; this allows direct measurement of ICP and also allows treatment by drainage of cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) when appropriate.

**Medical Management**

The significant concerns after an aSAH are rebleeding, hydrocephalus, and vasospasm. The most immediate problem is rebleeding. The most significant risk of rebleeding and mortality is within the first 6 hours of the initial hemorrhage.

**Drug Therapy**

Historically, tertiary and academic medical centers have had specialized neuroscience units. In recent years, smaller community hospitals that previously cared for neuroscience patients in general medical or surgical ICUs are becoming specialized. With this, the number of neuroscience/neurological ICUs and specialty medical-surgical units are increasing.  The role of neuroscience-specialized pharmacists is growing, providing an additional level of expertise to understand the effects of neurological illness or injury, drug interactions, and the impact on the patient.

**Blood Pressure Control**

Blood pressure control is critical to reducing the risk of rebleeding until the IA is secured and during the first 24 to 48 hours postoperative period.

Labetalol and hydralazine are often the favored intermittent dosing medications, whereas nicardipine (Cardene) and clevidipine (Cleviprex) are continuous infusions used for blood pressure control.

Nicardipine (Cardene) is given via continuous IV infusion in titrated doses from 5 to 15 mg/hr to maintain the systolic blood pressure of 150 to 160 mm Hg to prevent rebleeding. Some clinicians prefer to maintain a blood pressure of less than 140 mm Hg to prevent rebleeding.

Clevidipine (Cleviprex) is also a calcium channel blocker with a similar mechanism of action as nicardipine.

**Vasospasm Prevention and Treatment**

The drug categories that prevent and treat vasospasm include calcium channel blockers, magnesium, endothelin antagonists, and statins. These categories are revieNimodipine following sections to describe their current use, if any, in vasospNimodipinement.

Calcium Channel Blockers

Calcium channel blockers (CCBs) reduce cardiac and smooth muscle contraction without an effect on skeletal muscle. The effectiveness of this classification of drugs in the management of aSAH has been a source of many studies over the years. Still, it is considered that CCBs mitigate the abnormal vasoconstriction of cerebral vascular smooth muscle. Oral administration of the dihydropyridine-type calcium channel blocker nimodipine is the only treatment with consistent, high-quality evidence for decreasing DCI and is now standard of care in patients with aSAH. However, these results are advocated by one large trial.

Magnesium

The use of Magnesium sulfate has shown to have mixed results on neuroprotective and its vasodilatation properties—vasodilation results from an inhibition of Voltage-gated calcium channel-mediated smooth muscle contractions. Various spasmogenic agents such as endothelin-1, norepinephrine, angiotensin II, and serotonin are counteracted by magnesium. The Magnesium for Aneurysmal Subarachnoid Hemorrhage (MASH-2) trial was a phase 3, randomized, placebo-controlled trial. A total of 1,204 patients were enrolled. The study concluded with no improvement in outcomes in the intervention group.

Endothelin Antagonists

Endothelin antagonists (ET-A) are another potential treatment under investigation. ET-A receptors mediate vasoconstriction in arterial smooth muscle. Clazosentan is a selective ET-A receptor antagonist that demonstrated a decrease and a reversal in vasospasm after SAH. One study, CONSCIOUS-1 (Clazosentan to Overcome Neurological Ischemia and Infarct Occurring after Subarachnoid Hemorrhage), found a significant dose-dependent effect on vasospasm when evaluated with angiography. The 413 patients in this study were randomized and given placebo or clazosentan within 56 hours and continued on their assigned protocol for up to 14 days.

Statins

Research with statin drugs have also demonstrated a lack of efficacy and have shown no benefit in the treatment of vasospasm and neither does it improve short term or long term outcomes in aSAH

Anticoagulants

As per the 2015 guidelines from the Neurocritical Care Society (NCS) and Society of Critical Care Medicine (SCCM), it is recommended to discontinue all antithrombotic agents and reverse all anticoagulation until the aneurysm is definitively repaired by surgery or coiling.

Pain Control

Pain management is an essential aspect of patient care. With complaints of the “worst headache of my life”, the interprofessional health care team needs to provide interventions to make the patient as comfortable as possible. Nonopioid medications such as acetaminophen (650 mg PO or 1,000 mg IV) are first line medications and be administered every 4 to 6 hours; however, consideration must be given to contraindications, that is, liver diseaase.

**Surgical management**

Once an aSAH or a ruptured aneurysm is identified, repair with surgical clipping or endovascular coiling is the only effective treatment and should be performed as early as feasible, preferably within 24 hours