Past medical history and previous medication use should be noted. It is essential to assess the recent medical history for depression, psychosis, seizures, or cancer because some antidepressants, anticonvulsants, antipsychotic agents, and cytotoxic agents can cause SIADH secretion. For those unconscious patients, questioning how the patient was immediately before the episode is essential. The most common presentation in SIADH secretion will be hyponatremia with a euvolemic fluid status in which clinical features include normal blood pressure, regular heart rate, normal skin turgor, moist mucus membranes, absent jugular venous pulsations, no pitting edema, and normal central venous pressure if measured. Clinical manifestations include nausea, vomiting, restlessness, headache, lethargy, obtundation, seizures, coma, and respiratory arrest. These manifestations progress as the level of hyponatremia advance from mild to severe.

In a presentation of DI due to neurohypophysis dysfunction, it is essential to rule out all other acquired etiologies of DI as the treatment should address the primary etiology causing the symptoms. The most common symptoms of DI include polyuria and polydipsia, with the patients complaining of increased thirst that at first can be controlled by increasing the water intake to maintain normal levels of serum osmolality and volume status. Some patients with altered neurological status will not recognize the thirst sensation and will not be able to drink water developing free water deficiency with hyperosmolarity, hypernatremia, and signs of dehydration that can progress to hypertonic encephalopathy with irritability, confusion, disorientation, muscle twitching, seizures, coma, and death. Other symptoms include weakness, fatigue, and myalgias.

Some patients may develop acute kidney failure, hypotension, muscle damage, and even hepatic failure. There is an increased incidence of subarachnoid hemorrhage, strokes, and deep vein thrombosis in the setting of hyperosmolar states.