Treatment for myopathy is generally supportive due to the nature of the etiology of the muscle disease including exercises, physical and occupational therapies, nutrition, and dietetics, and may be genetic analysis and counseling.

Inherited muscular dystrophies: Prednisone 0.75 mg/kg/day has presented improvement in muscle strength, increased muscle bulking, and slowed the disease progression. It is also important to anticipate complications and treat them accordingly. In mitochondrial myopathies creatine monohydrate 5-10 g/day may benefit improving the symptoms, Coenzyme Q10 replacement still needs more consistent research results to prove significance.

Acquired myopathies, in general, improve by treating the main causing disease whether it is a systemic disease like thyroid disease, sarcoidosis. Some acquired myopathies will be caused by infection ( Bacterial, Viral, Fungal, Parasitic, or spirochetes) the myopathy symptoms improve by treating the infection. Toxin or drug-related myopathy is also managed by the removal of the causative agent and avoiding it in the future. HIV-related myopathy is also responding well to antiretroviral therapy HAART, and maybe steroids as well.

Inflammatory myopathy and autoimmune related myopathies are treated mainly by immunomodulatory, immunosuppressants, and steroid drugs. It is proved that steroids are better in comparison to immunomodulatory drugs due to side effects. Medications used are methotrexate, azathioprine, cyclosporin, and cyclophosphamide besides oral dexamethasone and daily oral prednisolone. Unfortunately, some cases including IBMs are refractory to immunosuppressants medication and steroids, and they continue to progress to more generalized weakness. High quality Randomised clinical trials are needed to determine the effectiveness and toxicity of the immuno-mediated drugs in the treatment of these inflammatory myopathies.

Rhabdomyolysis: The ultimate goal for treatment in rhabdomyolysis is preventing the acute kidney injury by the myoglobin resulting from the muscle damage. Aggressive hydration by IV fluids, and closely monitoring the kidney functions, and the electrolyte balance.