The goal of management of an MPE is palliative; if a patient is asymptomatic, observation is reasonable along with chemotherapy for those primary malignancies that are responsive. However, many patients present with significantly disabling dyspnea. Treatment should aim to relieve dyspnea, minimize discomfort, and limit hospitalization time. Several therapeutic approaches depend on the following factors: (1) the clinical status of the patient, (2) the ability of the lung to fully expand, and (3) the availability of approaches like thoracoscopy.

Serial thoracenteses can be performed for long-term management with the removal of no more than 1.5 liters at a time due to the risk of re-expansion pulmonary edema. This is reasonable in patients who have a prognosis of less than 1 month. However, in those who are expected to live longer, this may not be a practical treatment option. Furthermore, repeated thoracenteses may result in adhesions between parietal and visceral pleura and can limit future thoracoscopic interventions.

Definitive management with pleurodesis, which is a technique to allow for apposition of the parietal and visceral pleura to prevent reaccumulation of pleural effusion, depends on whether the patient has trapped lung. If the patient has trapped lung physiology, they are unlikely to benefit from pleurodesis techniques as the thick fibrous peel surrounding the visceral pleura would prevent apposition of parietal and visceral pleural surfaces.

In those who do not have trapped lung physiology, chemical pleurodesis should be pursued with sclerosants. This can be achieved by placement of chest tube with instillation of talc slurry, which is the most effective of available sclerosants; talc is thought to incite an inflammatory reaction in the pleural space that leads to fibrin formation and apposition of the parietal and visceral pleura. Tetracyclines and bleomycin are alternative sclerosants that can be used.

If the above procedures fail, pleuro-peritoneal shunt or pleurectomy can be performed but have significant cost and morbidity.