**Anterior Torsion**

Position the patient, so they are lying on the side opposite the sacral rotation (i.e., the sacrum has rotated left, lay the patient on their right). Introduce side-bending and rotation of the lumbar spine by pulling the patient’s lower arm out from under them, engaging the restrictive barrier of the sacrum. Monitor the sacral base by flexing the thighs and localize the position at which the tissues feel the most relaxed just before reaching the barrier. Lift the feet off the table and ask the patient to pull the feet toward the table as the clinician applies an equal and opposite resistance, holding for approximately 5 seconds or until noting a change in tissue texture, then have the patient relax. After relaxing, increase the hip flexion and lift the feet more toward the ceiling to engage the next barrier. Repeat each cycle three to five times and recheck for correction of the dysfunction after completing the treatment.

**Posterior Torsion**

Again, position the patient, so they are lying on the side opposite the sacral rotation. Pull out the lower arm to introduce side-bending and rotation of the lumbar spine to engage the sacral barrier. Extend the thighs to localize the point just before the barrier is engaged, and sacral motion is restricted. Bring the patient’s top leg forward and drop over the edge of the table. Ask the patient to lift their leg toward the ceiling as the clinician exerts the opposing force generating an isometric contraction and hold for 5 seconds or until you notice a change in tissue texture. Engage the next barrier by increasing hip extension and dropping the leg further toward the floor between each effort and repeat three to five times. Always reassess for the resolution of the dysfunction after completing the treatment.

**Unilateral Flexion**

Position the patient prone and locate the SIJ and sacral base. While monitoring the SIJ on the dysfunctional side, abduct and internally rotate the ipsilateral leg engaging the tissue barrier. Position the heel of the hand on the ipsilateral ILA (the most posterior ILA) and detect the sacral motion through the patient’s respiratory cycle. As the patient inhales, causing counternutation of the sacrum, follow the ILA anterior and cephalad. Maintain resistance at this point preventing the ILA from moving posteriorly as the patient exhales. Repeat this motion of restriction after each inhalation approximately three to five times and then reassess sacral mobility and identify any further dysfunction.

**Unilateral Extension**

The patient again assumes a prone position. Monitor the SIJ and sacral base on the dysfunctional side while abducting and externally rotating the ipsilateral leg. The clinician is positioned at the head of the patient with the base of one hand on the dysfunctional sacral base while the other hand is placed over the ipsilateral ASIS, providing support and a counterforce. Add lumbar extension by asking the patient to come up onto their elbows. Ask the patient to take a deep breath in and upon exhalation, follow the sacral base anterior and caudad. Maintain resistance in this position as the patient inhales again, preventing the posterior motion of the sacral base. Repeat the cycle three to five times and then reassess for any residual asymmetry.