For patients presenting with an acute allergic reaction after administration of penicillin, it is important to determine when the medication was given, route of administration, as well as onset and type of symptoms including respiratory difficulty, GI symptoms, mental status changes, and cardiovascular collapse such as hypotension or skin findings. For those patients who report a history of penicillin allergy due to previous exposure, onset and timing are again important as is route and ability to tolerate other beta-lactams previously. Other important historical questions include how the penicillin allergy was managed. For example, if the patient was treated with antihistamines or epinephrine and had improvement/resolution of symptoms, this is supportive of an IgE reaction and a true penicillin allergy.

For patients presenting with an acute allergic reaction to penicillin, the initial exam should always focus on airway, breathing, and circulation. The patient should quickly and carefully be examined for edema of the lips, tongue or oropharynx and any difficulty swallowing or handling his/her secretions. Heart and lungs should be carefully auscultated as well for arrhythmia, and adventitious breath sounds such as wheezing or stridor. Confusion and abdominal pain are also findings of severe anaphylaxis. Cutaneous symptoms are often the first and most common finding of an allergic reaction, however, are absent in 10% to 20% of patients experiencing an allergic reaction. Common cutaneous symptoms are generalized urticaria, flushing, pruritis, and angioedema.