The nurse or other personnel who administers vincristine should always check the label for the dose, duration, and route of administration. Administration of vincristine is never an emergency; several fatal cases have resulted from administering vincristine via the wrong route or rapid rate.

Vincristine should be administered intravenously as a short 5 to 10-minute infusion. The Institute for Safe Medication Practices (ISMP) and the World Health Organization (WHO) strongly recommend vincristine be dispensed in a 25 to 50 ml mini bag. If the mini bag is not available, vincristine administration may be as a slow 1-minute intravenous push. Administration via any other routes may be fatal. For patients receiving medications intended for CNS administration, vincristine should be administered separately and not at the same time.

Vincristine is a vesicant; therefore, proper caution must be taken to ensure correct needle or catheter placement prior to and during intravenous infusion to avoid extravasation. In instances where extravasation occurs, the infusion should be discontinued and disconnected immediately, leaving the needle or cannula in place. The extravasated solution should then be gently aspirated, ensuring the line is not flushed. Then the hyaluronidase antidote should be initiated, followed by removing the needle or cannula, and a warm, dry compression should be applied for 20 minutes 4 times a day on days 1 and 2 of extravasation. Lastly, reevaluation should occur and the remaining vincristine dose administered intravenously through a separate vein.

**Metabolism**

Vincristine is rapidly removed from the bloodstream and is tightly bound to tissues, but it poorly penetrates the blood-brain barrier. Vincristine undergoes extensive metabolism in the liver via CYP3A4. Patients with serum bilirubin levels > 3 mg/dl will require dose adjustments; per the manufacturer's label, the dose in such patients should be 50% of the normally administered dose. Vincristine is excreted primarily in the feces.