In T1DM, there is the immune destruction of the beta cells in the pancreatic islets over months or years, causing an absolute deficiency of insulin. Although the exact etiology of T1DM is still unknown, researchers believe there is a genetic predisposition with a strong link with specific HLA (DR and DQ) alleles, especially DRB103-DQB10201 and DRB 10401-DQB10302H. Multiple other genes contribute to heritability, as well. The risk of developing T1DM with no family history is approximately 0.4%, while the offspring of an affected mother is 1% to 4%, the offspring of an affected father is 3% to 8%, and the offspring of both affected parents is as high as 30%. In monozygotic twins, the risk of developing T1DM in the first ten years of diagnosis of the first twin is 30%, with a lifetime risk of around 65%.

The presence of circulating pancreatic autoantibodies suggests that the individual is at risk for or has developed T1DM. These antibodies include islet cell cytoplasmic antibodies (ICA), antibodies to insulin (IAA), glutamic acid decarboxylase (GAD65), insulinoma-associated 2, or protein tyrosine phosphatase antibodies (IA-2), and zinc transporter8 (ZnT8). The greater the number of detectable antibodies and the higher their titers, the greater the risk of developing T1DM.

In those at risk, it is generally believed that a virus or other environmental factors trigger the autoimmune beta-cell destruction. Some studies have found an increased development of T1DM in children born to a mother with Coxsackievirus or another Enterovirus during pregnancy. Environmental toxins have also been postulated to play a role. The hygiene hypothesis suggests that improved sanitation relates to the increased development of autoimmune-mediated disorders. It is proposed that reducing childhood exposure to infectious agents leads to the lack of proper immune system development. Dietary factors have also been examined as potential triggers. One study showed an increased development of islet autoimmunity with cow’s milk-protein consumption in study participants with low to moderate-risk HLA-DR genotypes but no significant increased risk in those with a high-risk genotype.