**Corneal Complications**

**Epithelial Complications**

**Epithelial Edema**

Epithelial edema occurs secondary to hypoxia and is usually reversible. It is one of the commonest and earliest corneal complications.

**Microcysts**

It occurs due to a decrease in corneal metabolism over a long period. They are seen most commonly with soft CL or extended wear contact lenses. These appear as small dots over the cornea of varying density and may mimic Cogan's microcystic dystrophy. These dots clear once the lens is removed. It is advised for these patients to switch from extended wear to daily wear or daily wear to gas-permeable lenses.

**Abrasions**

These are caused by trauma or mechanical injury due to the lens or while insertion or removal of the lens. A foreign body embedded in the lens can also induce corneal abrasions.

**Superficial Punctate Keratitis**

Superficial Punctate Keratitis (SPKs) occurs due to mechanical injury from the lens or during lens application.

The associated ocular pathologies like dry eyes and blepharitis can also cause SPKs. Patients with SPK have to stop the lenses until the lesions resolve. The topical antibiotics, lubricating eye drops, and ointments also promote healing. The patient should be reassessed before deciding on CL wear again.

**Staining at 3 and 9 o Clock**

This occurs due to corneal desiccation because of interruption of tear film or reduction of tear film at the nasal and temporal limbus. The main risk factors are poor lens edge tilt, limited lens movement, low riding lens, poor blink rate, presence of pinguecula, and adherence to the lens surface. It occurs most commonly in RGP lenses.

**Sterile Infiltrates**

These are due to an inflammatory response to a particular antigen with associated corneal leucocyte infiltration from the adjacent limbal vessels.

**Peripheral Corneal Ulceration**

These ulcers are characterized by epithelial infiltration with an intact Bowman layer. The clinical presentation is different from that of microbial keratitis.

**Corneal Neovascularization**

This results from excessive hypoxia due to prolonged lens wear or a tight or thicker lens. Neovascularization can be superficial, deep, sectoral, or involve 360 degrees of the cornea.

**Microbial (Infective) Keratitis**

This is also known as contact lens-induced keratitis (CLIK). It is one of the serious complications but not a very common complication of contact lens wear. It may occur with any type of contact lens wear but is more common with soft CL and more familiar with extended wear CL.

It starts with an epithelial defect secondary to trauma or hypoxic associated with microbial contamination. The significant risk factors are poor personal hygiene, inadequate lens cleaning, contamination of lens cover or lens cleaning solution, and the presence of dry eyes and blepharitis. The common organisms involved are Pseudomonas aeruginosa and Acanthamoeba. The other microorganisms, such as gram-negative and gram-positive bacteria, can also cause CL-induced keratitis.

**Acanthamoeba Castellani Infection**

This condition is more common in patients using homemade saline for lenses, swimming in a swimming pool with CL, swimming in contaminated water, and exposure to tub and tap water. The most common clinical features are a pain out of proportion to clinical findings, irregularity of epithelium, and patchy stromal infiltrate.

The late clinical features include stromal infiltrate, radial keratoneuritis, and elevated linear epithelial lines. Precautions must be taken to prevent this problem in patients. Prolonged lens wear, primarily sleeping with CL on, is a significant risk factor for acanthamoeba keratitis. Good ocular hygiene with regular cleaning and disinfection are the critical factors in preventing corneal ulcers in these patients. The patient should be explained in detail the risk factors and warning signs of corneal infection to avoid this ocular catastrophe. Once the corneal ulcer has occurred, it should be dealt with very early and meticulously.

**Pseudomonas Aeruginosa Keratitis**

Pseudomonas is the most common cause of microbial keratitis in patients using CL. The patient usually presents with pain, redness, and discharge out of proportion and size of the infiltrate. The clinical findings are the presence of corneal infiltrate, ring infiltrates, and the presence of hypopyon in advanced cases.

**Fungal Keratitis**

Another sight-threatening complication associated with CL is fungal keratitis, characterized by dense gray-white stromal infiltrate, feathery margins, satellite lesions, endothelial exudate, and hypopyon. The diagnosis is by the corneal scraping of the infiltrate, and smearing and culture will pinpoint the microorganism.Aspergillus, Fusarium, and Candida. CL wear is the major cause of yeast-like fungal keratitis.

Extended-wear lenses are associated with an increased risk of CL keratitis, followed by hydrogel and rigid gas-permeable contact lenses. Trauma with vegetative matter is the major cause, and topical antifungals are the mainstay of treatment. The commonly used antifungals are 5% Natamycin, 0.3% Amphotericin B, 1% voriconazole, 1% Itraconazole, and 1% Itraconazole. Non-resolving cases will require therapeutic keratoplasty.

**Warpage**

Prolonged contact lens wear can induce severe and permanent astigmatism in the eyes in response to chronic hypoxia. The corneal shape changes temporarily due to prolonged use of impermeable hard CL. The warpage is usually detected on corneal topography and reverses with the discontinuation of CL. It can also cause a temporary reduction in visual acuity.

The other complications with contact lenses can be foreign body tract formation, corneal Dellen, vacuoles, mucin ball formation, and dimple veiling.

**Corneal Endothelial Changes**

Contact lens wearers can have both short-term and long-term endothelial changes. The endothelial changes are thought to occur secondary to hypoxia which causes lactic acid accumulation in the cornea,  elevated levels of carbon dioxide, and reduced pH.

**Two types of changes are seen clinically**

**Endothelial bleb response**

This is thought to occur minutes after using a thick, soft, or rigid contact lens. This is a transient effect and doesn't produce other side effects. The bleb changes usually resolve after 30 minutes of lens application or rapidly after lens discontinuation.

**Endothelial Polymegathism and Pleomorphism**

These changes are noticed after a long time of contact lens wear. These changes are associated with corneal decompensation following intraocular surgery. These changes can be reduced by promoting the use of daily wear CL over extended-wear lenses and the use of RGP lenses over rigid PMMA lenses.

**Contact Lens-Related Discomfort**

Per the Tear Film and Ocular Surface Society, discomfort associated with CL is characterized by occasional or regular adverse eye sensations associated with lens application, which may or may not be associated with visual discomfort, secondary to reduced harmony between the CL and surrounding ocular surface environment.

This results in reduced usage or discontinuation of CL. The CL factors associated with discomfort are lens material, design, wearing time, hygiene, and fit to the ocular surface. The environmental factors are ocular surface changes, occupation, external temperature, humidity, associated medication use, and compliance. The goal of management is to reduce patient discomfort and modify the associated factors to provide a comfortable daily wear time.

**Conjunctival Complications**

**Allergic Conjunctivitis**

This common complication has been reported with thiomersal-containing solutions. The patient presents with pain, redness, itching, and burning sensations. The reaction usually develops after days to months following exposure to thiomersal.

**Giant Papillary Conjunctivitis**

This is an immunological complication in which the contact lens deposits and proteins act as an allergic stimulus.

The most common symptoms are itching, redness, increased mucus production, photophobia, irritation, and reduction in lens tolerance. The upper palpebral conjunctiva show giant cobblestone papillae.

**Superior Limbic Keratoconjunctivitis**

Superior limbic keratoconjunctivitis is a hypersensitivity reaction to thiomersal or preservatives in contact lens solution. SLK is usually bilateral and asymmetric.

The patients typically present with pain, redness, foreign body sensation, and contact lens intolerance. The anterior segment findings usually reveal inflammation and hypertrophy of superior bulbar conjunctiva that stain with Rose Bengal stain, punctate epithelial erosions, microphones of the superior cornea, and papillary hypertrophy of superior tarsal conjunctiva. The CL should be discontinued, and lubricating eyedrops should be used frequently. When the pathology resolves, the patient should be given a new pair of contact lenses and must be advised to use non-preserved saline and perform frequent lens cleaning.