**Chronic hyperglycemia**is considered to be the primary pathogenic agent in DR (as described by UKPDS and DCCT).

In the polyol pathway, glucose is reduced to sorbitol by the aldose reductase enzyme. The impermeability of sorbitol leads to its accumulation in all retinal cells leading to osmotic damage to the cells. Also, the use of NADPH (reduced nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide phosphate) during the reduction process leads to further oxidative damage.

**Oxidative stress**results from increased levels of reactive oxygen species (ROS), leading to cell and tissue damage.

Protein kinase C is involved in signal transduction. Its activation leads to basement membrane alterations and vascular changes like increased vascular permeability, the release of angiogenic growth factors, vascular stasis, and capillary occlusion.

In non-enzymatic protein glycation, reducing sugars react with free amino acids of nucleic acids, proteins, and lipids leading to the formation of advanced glycation endproducts responsible for the alterations in extracellular matrix proteins.

The morphological changes seen in small retinal vessels in DR include early loss of pericytes, basement membrane thickening, loss of endothelial cells, increased vascular permeability, platelet aggregation, leukostasis, and capillary dropout.

Diabetic retinopathy does not only affect the microvessels of the retina but also the Müller cells, which are the primary glial cells of the retina. The functions of Müller cells are maintaining the structural integrity of the retina, regulation of the blood-retinal barrier and retinal blood flow, uptake and recycling of various neurotransmitters, retinoic acid compounds, and ions (such as potassium), regulation of metabolism and supply of nutrients to the retina.

In diabetes, there is downregulation of the Kir 4.1 channel because of which there is continued potassium uptake leading to swelling of Müller cells, which leads to Muller cell dysfunction.

Hyperglycemia leads to the release of growth factors and cytokines/chemokines.

- Growth factors:

- Vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF)
- Pigment epithelium-derived factor (PEDF)
- Platelet-derived growth factor(PDGF)
- Basic fibroblast growth factor ( bFGF or FGF2)
- Insulin-like growth factor (IGF)
- Hepatocyte growth factor/scatter factor (HGF/SF)
- Placental growth factor (PIGF)
- Erythropoietin
- Angiopoietin-2

- Cytokines and chemokines:

- Interleukin-1β (IL-β)
- Interleukin-6 (IL-6)
- Tumor necrosis factor-α (TNF-α)
- Chemokine ligand-2 (CCL2)