History and physical examination are, of course, essential in the diagnosis of conjunctivitis and in determining the cause and, therefore, treatment of the condition. Important points to remember when taking the ocular history of the patient should include the timing of onset, prodromal symptoms, unilateral or bilateral eye involvement, associated symptoms, previous treatment and response, past episodes, type of discharge, the presence of pain, itching, eyelid characteristics, periorbital involvement, vision changes, photophobia, and corneal opacity.

The ocular exam should focus on visual acuity, extraocular motility, visual fields, discharge type, shape, size and response of pupil, the presence of proptosis, corneal opacity, foreign body assessment, tonometry, and eyelid swelling.

The redness of the conjunctiva in conjunctivitis is generally diffuse. It involves the entire conjunctival surface, both the bulbar and tarsal conjunctiva, which helps exclude more severe conditions such as keratitis, iritis, and angle-closure glaucoma as they involve the entire bulbar conjunctiva but spare the tarsal conjunctiva. If the redness is localized, one should consider an alternative diagnosis of foreign body, pterygium, or episcleritis.

After redness, the type of discharge is an important factor in determining the cause of conjunctivitis. Bacterial conjunctivitis is typically associated with purulent discharge, which reforms immediately after removal from the eye, or mucopurulent discharge, which tends to be thicker and sticks to the eyelashes.

Similar to redness and discharge, many other common signs and symptoms of conjunctivitis are nonspecific and can make determining the underlying cause more difficult. For example, itching has historically correlated with allergic conjunctivitis. While in the context of watery discharge and a history of atopy, this is likely true, one study found that 58% of patients with culture-positive bacterial conjunctivitis also reported itchy eyes.

Comparably, papillae are a nonspecific finding in conjunctivitis. Papillae can be present in both noninfectious and infectious conjunctivitis. They are small elevations with central vessels, usually under the superior tarsal conjunctiva. Papillae are often present in bacterial conjunctivitis, allergic conjunctivitis, and contact lens intolerance. The papillae in chronic allergic conjunctivitis can lead to a cobblestone appearance of the conjunctiva.

While also nonspecific, the presence of follicles, in correlation with other findings, can help differentiate the etiology of conjunctivitis. Follicles are small, elevated yellow-white lesions found at the palpebral and bulbar conjunctiva junction, also known as the lower cul-de-sac. Follicles are a lymphocytic response often present in chlamydial and adenoviral conjunctivitis.

In a patient with a history of perioral cold sores, current skin lesions, or suspected viral conjunctivitis, a fluorescein examination should be performed as herpes simplex virus (HSV) can produce corneal dendritic lesions even in the absence of skin lesions. This exam is an important step in the physical evaluation as it may result in the only finding to differentiate HSV from other viral causes of conjunctivitis, which subsequently requires different management and follow-up. In comparison, herpes zoster ophthalmicus typically presents in patients over 60 years with a painful vesicular rash following the distribution of the fifth cranial nerve. Prodrome can include headache, fever, malaise, and photophobia. Vesicles at the tip of the nose, referred to as the Hutchinson sign, strongly predict eye involvement with herpes zoster.

While presentations can often overlap, a systematic approach, thorough history, and physical exam can safely rule out any acute sight-threatening diagnoses and lead to the likely cause of conjunctivitis. The classic findings of the three most common types of conjunctivitis can be found below:

- Bacterial: symptoms of redness and foreign body sensation, morning matting of the eyes, white-yellow purulent or mucopurulent discharge, conjunctival papillae, and infrequently preauricular lymphadenopathy.

- Viral: symptoms of itching and tearing, history of recent upper respiratory tract infection, watery discharge, inferior palpebral conjunctival follicles, tender preauricular lymphadenopathy.

- Allergic: symptoms of itching or burning, history of allergies/atopy, watery discharge, edematous eyelids, conjunctival papillae, no preauricular lymphadenopathy.