Diamond Blackfan anemia has a unique quantitative defect in erythropoiesis rather than hematopoiesis, as seen in other bone marrow failure syndromes (BMF).

**Genetic conditions with BMF**

- Transient erythroblastopenia of childhood (TEC) is a type of acquired anemia of unknown etiology which usually (over 80%) presents at one year of age, while DBA usually (90%) presents before one year of age. Another distinguishing feature of TEC is only 10% of patients have elevated eADA, and anemia is normocytic.

- Fanconi anemia is bone marrow failure syndrome with pancytopenia, and physical abnormalities usually present within the first decade of life.

- Shwachman-Diamond syndrome (SDS) is a clinical syndrome characterized by exocrine pancreatic dysfunction with malabsorption, single or multi-lineage cytopenia, growth failure, bone abnormality, and susceptibility to myelodysplastic syndrome (MDS) and acute myeloid leukemia (AML).

- Pearson syndrome is a maternally inherited mDNA mutation characterized by sideroblastic anemia of childhood, exocrine pancreatic failure, liver failure, renal tubular defects, and pancytopenia. Death generally occurs in infancy by progressive liver failure and severe metabolic acidosis.

- Dyskeratosis congenita (DC) is a genetically inherited disorder with a wide spectrum of severity. It is a telomere biology disorder with the classic triad of lacy reticular pigmentation of the upper chest and/or neck, dysplastic nails, and oral leukoplakia. These patients have an increased risk of MDS, BMF, or AML.

- Cartilage-hair dysplasia (CHH) is an autosomal recessive inherited disorder with a high incidence in the Amish and Finnish populations. It is characterized by anemia, macrocytosis, defective T cell-mediated immune response, short tubular bone, and fine, sparse blond hair.

- Thrombocytopenia absent radii syndrome presents in the neonatal period or infancy with thrombocytopenia, absent radii, and the presence of bilateral thumbs. Other physical findings include rib, cervical, ulnar and humeral deformities, cardiac septal defects, gastrointestinal abnormalities, and genitourinary abnormalities. In rare cases, aplastic anemia, multilineage cytopenia, or leukemia have been clinical features.

- Congenital amegakaryocytic thrombocytopenia (CAMT) usually presents at birth or in the neonatal period with severe thrombocytopenia, petechiae, and/or intracranial or intestinal mucosal bleeding. There is no congenital physical finding with this disease. In childhood, these patients may develop pancytopenia, MDS, or leukemia.

Acquired conditions with BMF include viral infections (parvovirus B19, viral hepatitis and mononucleosis, and human T- cell lymphotropic virus type 1, HIV-associated pure red cell aplasia), immune-mediated diseases (myasthenia gravis, thymoma, multiple endocrinopathy, and systemic lupus erythematosus), and drugs (antiepileptic drugs, sulfonamide, isoniazid, chloramphenicol, procainamide, azathioprine, and thiamphenicol).