After the patient is prepped, marked, draped, and the consent document is signed, a local anesthetic (1% lidocaine with 1:100,000 epinephrine) is injected into the scalp from the temporal fossa across the entire forehead, up 1 to 2 cm into the frontal hairline, and into the contralateral temporal fossa. Centrally, the local anesthetic should be injected down to the bone and laterally down to the level of the temporalis muscle fascia. Alternatively, the tumescent solution may be used rather than undiluted lidocaine; this may be particularly useful if the patient is undergoing additional aging face procedures that will also require high doses of local anesthetics to minimize the likelihood of toxicity.

The incision is then marked running from a point just superior to the root of the helix, up through the temporal hair tuft and meeting the hairline just as it makes a curve from the vertical temporal segment to the horizontal frontal segment. The exact location where the incision leaves the hair-bearing scalp to come out anterior to the hairline will vary depending on the preoperative contour of the hairline and any desired reshaping. The portion of the incision that follows just anterior to the central frontal hairline should have an irregular contour, just as the hairline is irregular to help camouflage the final scar. The incision then proceeds back into the contralateral temporal hair tuft and down towards the helical root.

Care should be taken to bevel the incision either parallel to the hair follicles or perpendicular to them; different surgeons have different preferences, but some feel that bevelling parallel to the follicles makes follicular injury less likely, and others feel that a perpendicular bevel allows the hairs to grow through the scar and better camouflage it. The incision is made with a #15 blade scalpel, and conservative hemostasis may be achieved with bipolar electrocautery or the application of Raney clips. Centrally - between the temporal lines - the incision should be carried down at least through the galea aponeurotica and potentially down through the periosteum as well, depending on the desired plane of dissection. Some surgeons prefer a subgaleal dissection that leaves the periosteum adherent to the calvarium, and some prefer a subperiosteal approach. In either case, leaving the periosteum intact will permit elevation of a pericranial flap, if necessary. Laterally, the incision should be carried down through the TPF and stop at the temporalis muscle fascia.

If a subgaleal plane is selected, blunt finger dissection will be sufficient to elevate the central forehead, although spreading with Metzenbaum scissors may be more comfortable. For a subperiosteal dissection, the elevation of the periosteum may begin with a Freer elevator and then proceed toward the supraorbital rims using a 1/4 curved Daniel forehead elevator. Elevation may proceed blindly until 1 to 2 cm superior to the supraorbital rims. If hairline adjustment is planned, 4-5 cm of back elevation posterior to the incision may be useful as well.

At this point, the lateral dissection should begin. The TPF should be incised and the temporalis muscle fascia exposed, after which the TPF should be elevated off the temporalis fascia from lateral to medial until the conjoint tendon is encountered. By carefully maintaining this plane, the surgeon ensures that the frontal branch of the facial nerve is elevated in the flap and remains intact, even though it is not likely to be visualized during the dissection. Once the conjoint tendon is identified, it should be perforated with a Freer elevator, from lateral to medial, 2 to 3 cm superior to the zygomaticofrontal suture. The Freer is then swept superiorly and inferiorly to avulse the conjoint tendon from the calvarium and create continuity of the central and lateral dissection compartments. The same technique is then employed contralaterally.

With this exposure, the forehead flap may be reflected inferiorly onto the nose; if the flap does not stay in this position unaided, an assistant may retract it with double prong skin hooks, taking care not to place them where the frontal branches of the facial nerves are located. The supraorbital rims and glabella should then be exposed under direct visualization. The supratrochlear neurovascular bundles may not be visualized, but in most cases, the supraorbital bundles will be encountered. The supraorbital neurovascular bundles should be released from their notches to permit full reflection of the forehead flap and exposure of the supraorbital rims; if foramina are present rather than notches, the inferior borders of the foramina may be osteotomized gently, laterally, and medially, with a 3 mm osteotome to release the bundles and permit flap reflection without neuropraxia. Regardless of the initial plane of dissection, the periosteum should be elevated at the level of the supraorbital rim itself and for approximately 1 cm superior and lateral to it. Exposure and periosteal elevation should run continuously from the level of the left lateral canthus all the way to the right. If the elevation was performed in a subglaeal plane and a pericranial flap was planned, the flap would need to be elevated at this juncture. If the dissection was performed in a subperiosteal plane and a pericranial flap was planned, the pericranial flap may be elevated off the undersurface of the forehead flap at any time.

After complete exposure of the supraorbital rim, the arcus marginalis should be divided sharply and spread aggressively to permit effective elevation of the brows. Failure to divide and spread the arcus marginalis is the primary reason for inadequate brow elevation. Any additional procedures, such as frontal cranioplasty, should be performed at this time.

The forehead flap is then redraped and retracted superiorly with skin hooks until the desired brow height is reached. Some surgeons elect to secure the flap in its elevated position prior to closure, and several different methods can be employed, although the authors of this article prefer the use of resorbable polymer anchors. These anchors can be used not only to ensure the elevation of the brows by maintaining superiorly directed tension but can also be placed pointing the opposite direction to maintain anteriorly directed tension to ensure hairline advancement if it is required.

The closure is then begun by tacking the incision closed with sutures or staples and determining how much excess tissue can be removed and from where. In the case of most female aging face patients, this process will simply result in the removal of a long, elliptical strip of the scalp. However, in patients who desire hairline adjustment, the process can be slightly more nuanced, resulting in removing some non-hair-bearing skin laterally and some hair-bearing skin from the widow's peak area to reduce the M-shaped contour typical of a receding male hairline. This technique is particularly applicable to facial feminization. After the excess tissue has been removed, the remainder of the closure is performed, following appropriate hemostasis. The closure is accomplished in layers: galea aponeurotica/TPF, subdermis, and skin surface. Antibiotic ointment is applied over the sutures and/or staples. A drain may be placed, although it is not always necessary, and a pressure dressing may also be applied. However, if a pressure dressing is used, care is necessary to ensure that it applies pressure to the forehead without depressing the brows.