Atypical antipsychotics can cause adverse effects of weight gain, hyperlipidemia, diabetes mellitus, QTc prolongation, extrapyramidal side effects, myocarditis, agranulocytosis, cataracts, and sexual side effects, which this activity will discuss here. Treatment with second-generation antipsychotics can contribute to weight gain and, subsequently, metabolic syndrome with high blood sugar, hypertension, abnormal cholesterol, and triglyceride concentrations, posing a patient at risk for stroke, myocardial disease, and diabetes mellitus. The mean increase in weight over a ten-week period for patients treated with standard doses of atypical antipsychotics was 4.45 kg with clozapine and 4.15 kg with olanzapine. Weight gain was not as significant with other antipsychotics; however, data on quetiapine has been variable. Olanzapine was associated with an increased and significant adverse effect on triglycerides and lipids in the Clinical Antipsychotic Trials of Intervention Effectiveness (CATIE) study, while ziprasidone was the only second-generation antipsychotic that was not associated with metabolic syndrome. Numerous studies suggest that certain atypical antipsychotics, especially clozapine and olanzapine, are associated with diabetes mellitus. Patients can also demonstrate increased serum triglyceride and cholesterol concentrations with clozapine, olanzapine, and quetiapine.

In the Clinical Antipsychotic Trials of Intervention Effectiveness (CATIE) study, ziprasidone was the only antipsychotic associated with improvement in triglyceride and cholesterol concentrations, while olanzapine was associated with greater and adverse effects of these metabolic variables. QTc prolongation is another adverse effect of antipsychotics. In the CATIE study, there was no difference in the effects of olanzapine, risperidone, quetiapine, and ziprasidone. However, a recent focus is on ziprasidone and its impact on QTc prolongation, especially when the medication administration takes place with a drug that inhibits its metabolism.

Myocarditis is another adverse effect, especially associated with the use of clozapine. Evidence suggests that clozapine is associated with a low risk of fatal myocarditis, and the medication would require discontinuation, and the patient monitored closely for any signs and symptoms of cardiomyopathy or myocarditis. Sexual side effects are also common because of the drug's effect on dopaminergic, alpha1 and alpha2 adrenergic, and H1 histamine receptors. Antipsychotic-induced sexual dysfunction is mainly related to the D2 receptor blockade in the pituitary gland leading to an excess of prolactin. Hyperprolactinemia is associated with menstrual and sexual dysfunction, and therefore consideration should be given to switching to a medication that is prolactin sparing, such as aripiprazole. Atypical antipsychotics are typically associated with fewer extrapyramidal side effects when compared to typical antipsychotics. Antipsychotics have an FDA boxed warning of increased death in geriatric patients with psychoses related to dementia.