# Introduction

Traditionally, medical training has centered around teaching trainees to make optimal decisions and perform procedures correctly, thereby avoiding errors. The focus on error avoidance was also echoed by experts in the fields of learning and training.

# Function

Error management training derives from the cognitive theory that describes work-related actions to be based on action-oriented mental models.

The two key elements of error management training based learning are 1) learners are “given only minimal guidance and otherwise, are encouraged to actively explore and experiment on their own,” and 2) “EMT creates a learning environment in which errors are likely to occur.”

# Curriculum Development

Error management training in medical simulation has primarily been studied in procedural specialties, including surgery and intensive care settings.

An example of the development of an EMT based curriculum has recently been published in the field of combat medicine. There were high rates of lower extremity fasciotomies requiring revision amongst combat-wounded patients when they reached a higher level of care, indicating a need for improvement in training surgeons to perform fasciotomies.

When creating an error management training curriculum, it is important to evaluate what is being taught and who are the trainees. Prior work has demonstrated that trainees who had higher cognitive skills or were more open to new experiences learned the most from error encouragement training.

D’Angelo et al. created a classification scheme for evaluating errors made by residents performing a simulated surgical task. The classification scheme had its basis on prior work in the field of human factors engineering.

# Procedural Skills Assessment

Traditional assessment of procedural skills has been through checklists, global rating scales, and final product analysis.

# Clinical Significance

It is now clear that clinician’s technical skills are associated with patient outcomes including post-procedure complications, and rates of reoperation, readmissions, and emergency department visits.

There is evidence that EMT can be utilized to teach skills to novices. Medical students without prior ultrasound experience were randomized to EMT or EAT for performing fetal sonographic evaluations.

An important factor in medical training is the durability of the skills learned. General surgery interns were randomized into EMT and EAT groups for a simulation-based curriculum on internal jugular and subclavian central line placement.

The encouraging results of these studies indicate a need to create a formalized curriculum for integrating EMT into medical training. Riefkohl-Ortiz et al. published their work creating an intensive EMT based curriculum for emergency medicine residents and fellows to learn how to manage iatrogenic critical care procedure complications.

For healthcare practitioners to provide excellent patient care, they need a training method that supports clinicians progressing to independent practice who have the skills to recognize and mitigate errors while taking care of patients. Combining EMT and medical simulation may provide a means by which to achieve this goal more effectively than traditional training methods, such as EAT.

# Pearls and Other Issues

In summary, the major teaching points are as follows:

1) The traditional assessment of procedural skill has through checklists, global rating scales, and final product analysis.

2) Errors act to provide feedback and identify specific areas that one’s mental model is not adequate. Error management training sees errors not just as negative feedback indicating failed performance, but rather as an impetus for active learning and exploration to further develop one’s mental model.

3) The two key elements of error management training based learning are that firstly learners are “given only minimal guidance and otherwise are encouraged to actively explore and experiment on their own”; and secondly “EMT creates a learning environment in which errors are likely to occur.”

# Enhancing Healthcare Team Outcomes

Although the majority of research on error management training in medical simulation has focused on surgical and procedural skill acquisition amongst individual trainees, the educational method applies to team-based training and multiple disciplines throughout medicine.