Diagnosis of papillary fibroelastoma is challenging and often incidentally discovered after an event. For instance, the differential diagnosis for a cerebrovascular accident involves a cardioembolic source of stroke and often evokes reference for left atrial or ventricular thrombus embolization. However, a PFE should also be in the differential diagnosis, as embolization can lead to stroke.

The symptomatic stroke patient may initially present in the care of a neurologist, who may then refer the patient to a cardiologist to determine the cardiac etiology. In some instances, the emergency department physician or an internist may be the first physicians to evaluate symptoms of chest pain and recognize a myocardial infarction and refer the patient urgently under cardiology care. Once the interventional cardiology team determines the cause of the patient's chest pain is not an acute plaque rupture event and rather an embolization event, further workup with imaging studies with TTE and TEE follows. Once the diagnosis of PFE results from typical imaging findings, a cardiothoracic surgeon with experience in removing PFEs should be on the case. No randomized trial data exists on the medical or surgical management outcomes for PFE. The level of evidence is Level 4, as papillary fibroelastomas are a rare occurrence.

In the few cases where surgery is not possible, a cardiology board-certified pharmacist can assist with appropriate anticoagulation therapy. Cardiology specialty nurses can also prove invaluable for follow-up management in both surgical and medical cases by charting the progress of treatment, counseling the patients, answering their questions, and reporting any concerns to the rest of the interprofessional healthcare team. In this interprofessional team paradigm, all disciplines share information about the case, everyone on the team is kept current, and the patient can achieve optimal outcomes. [Level 5]