Iris cysts can be classified into primary and secondary cysts. Primary cysts do not have a recognizable etiology, while secondary cysts do. Shields et al. have proposed a classification system.

Primary cysts can arise from iris pigment epithelium or iris stroma. Iris pigment epithelium cysts are further subdivided according to their location. Examples include pupillary/central, mid-zonal, peripheral, dislodged, free-floating in the anterior chamber or vitreous chamber. Stromal cysts develop within the iris tissue and can cause iris deformation. Free-floating cysts can also occur and are epithelial in origin. Stromal cysts can be congenital or acquired.

Secondary cysts are subdivided according to the pathophysiology. Implantation cysts can occur due to the presence of a foreign body in the iris or by epithelial downgrowth following an ocular surgery or trauma.

Drug-induced cysts are also recognized, and these are associated with miotics such as phospholine iodide, pilocarpine, and the prostaglandin analog latanoprost.

Inflammation and uveitis are rare causes of iris cysts. They have been noted in Fuch heterochromic iridocyclitis, herpes zoster ophthalmicus, and other cases of non-granulomatous anterior uveitis.

Parasites are very rare causes of iris cysts, and cysticercosis is the most commonly associated pathogen.

Intraocular tumors can present with cysts, which may be from a primary uveal tumor-like uveal melanoma or nevus, and the extension of periocular tumors and metastasis.