**Clinical Manifestations**

Gout is a metabolic disorder that allows for the accumulation of uric acid in the blood and tissues. This leads to the precipitation of urate monohydrate crystals within a joint. When tissues are saturated with urate, crystals will precipitate. Precipitation is enhanced in acidic environments and cold environments, leading to increased precipitation in peripheral joints, such as the great toe. Gout has a male predominance in a 4:1 ratio of men to women. Uric acid levels can be elevated ten to 15 years before clinical manifestations of gout.

In uric acid nephrolithiasis, uric acid is handled by the renal system, and three factors can influence uric acid stone formation. These factors are TH acidic urine, dehydration, and hyperuricosuria. Persistent acidic urine is the most common cause of uric acid stone formation. Hyperuricosuria is defined as uric acid levels that exceed 800 mg/day in men and 750 mg/day in women. It is most commonly associated with increased dietary intake. Uric acid stones are 5% to 10% of all urinary stones.

**History**

Hyperuricemia does not represent a disease or a specific indication for therapy. The majority of patients with elevated uric acid are asymptomatic and require no long-term therapy.  The patient may give a history of a purine-rich diet or alcohol consumption, specifically beer. Past medical history, as well as current medications, should be reviewed to find a correlation with poor renal excretion of urate or increased production.

The two most common complaints associated with hyperuricemia are gout and uric acid nephrolithiasis.

With gout, a patient will complain of a red hot, swollen joint, most commonly in the big toe.

With nephrolithiasis, patients will complain of flank pain, hematuria, nausea/vomiting, and colicky pain.

**Physical Exam**

There will be no specific physical exam finding that will indicate hyperuricemia unless the patient is presenting with complaints of gout or nephrolithiasis.

With gout, there is evidence of an erythematous, warm, and swollen joint. Most commonly affects the big toe, but it can affect any joint in the body. Usually, gout affects one joint at a time.

Nephrolithiasis has no specific physical exam findings but may have costovertebral angle tenderness. Look for hematuria on urinalysis.