Although the underlying complex etiology of cognitive impairment in Alzheimer disease (AD) and other neuropsychiatric conditions is not fully understood, the histopathological examination of the brain tissue of the patients with Alzheimer disease has shown degeneration. Predominantly, the cholinergic neurons produce acetylcholine, a neurotransmitter associated with memory formation and learning. The degree of cholinergic loss has been correlated with the severity of dementia, neurofibrillary tangles, and the brain density of amyloid-β plaques, which is a neuropathological hallmark of Alzheimer disease.

While the precise mechanism of galantamine’s therapeutic action remains unknown, it is postulated to exert its beneficial effect by enhancing cholinergic function. This is accomplished primarily by increasing the availability of acetylcholine in the synaptic cleft through reversible, competitive, and selective inhibition of cholinesterase and thereby blocks hydrolytic degradation of acetylcholine.

Galantamine, a unique drug, is an allosteric potentiator of α4β2 and presynaptic α-7 nicotinic acetylcholine receptors.

Some studies have shown a reduction in both the expression and activity of nAChRs in patients with Alzheimer disease, which may explain the decreased central cholinergic neurotransmission in these patients. Galantamine, a cholinomimetic agent, binds to nAChRs at the allosteric site, which triggers a conformational change of the receptor that leads to increased release of ACh, and enhances the activity of neighboring serotoninergic and glutaminergic neurons. This modulation of nAChRs facilitates cholinergic transmission, both excitatory and inhibitory, in brain tissues and also increases the sensitivity of receptors. Galantamine-induced modulated release of other neurotransmitters may also contribute to upregulating nAChRs and ameliorating behavioral symptoms in AD.

Galantamine is a scavenger for reactive oxygen series. This antioxidant function has been shown to be neuroprotective by antiapoptotic effects.