Wrist arthrodesis is a complex procedure that can have a significant impact on the affected patient. An informed decision with the operating surgeon is advised before surgery to establish if this is the right procedure for the patient and to discuss any other alternative treatments. Once the patient and the surgical consultant have decided to proceed, a preassessment is advisable. During preassessment, the patient's general health can be assessed by the team, and necessary preoperative tests can be performed, such as blood tests, electrocardiograms, and radiography. Where indicated an anesthetic review could also be done if the patient has a complex past medical history. The surgical ward nurse's role is very important in preparing the patient for theatre on the day of admission as well as monitoring the patient following the procedure. A clear plan should be made for the ward staff to follow once the patient has had their procedure. The anesthetic team plays an essential role in providing both a general anesthetic as well as pain relief (in the form of nerve block), and the theatre staff is a very important part of the surgical team. Once the procedure has finished, the recovery team usually recover the patient until they are awake and ready to be returned to the ward. A physiotherapy assessment postoperatively is an important step in the recovery process of the patient. Clinical follow up with the operating surgeon is advised as the patient will require close monitoring of wound healing, complications, and overall rehabilitation.