The vector tsetse fly, Glossina, carries the trypanosome within the midgut after a blood meal. These protozoa then migrate to the salivary glands of the fly whereby they can be transmitted during the next feeding. After inoculation within the host, the parasite can live freely within the bloodstream and evade mammalian host defenses through variable surface glycoproteins (VSG). The slender form secretes bloodstream stage-specific VSG to evade the host immune system, and it is in this form that the organism proliferates. As the parasite population increases, a morphologic stumpy form with division arrest occurs. It is in this stage it may be transmitted to another tsetse fly from the mammalian host. Within the new tsetse vector and, after this stumpy stage, the organism progresses to a procyclic form whereby VSG is lost, and the organism is established again in the fly midgut. Cell division is again arrested, and they migrate to the salivary glands as epimastigote forms. These transition from another proliferative stage to a non-proliferative form where they again re-acquire VSG and are now capable to re-infect a new mammal at the next blood meal.

The vector, the Reduviid bug, also called the kissing bug, is primarily a nocturnal insect. At the time of feeding the insect deposits feces through breaks in the skin that contain T. cruzi. Less common modes of transmission include the ingestion of contaminated food, congenital transmission, or transmission through contaminated blood or tissue.