The neurosensory retina is a complex structure, and patients with ophthalmologic disease often present with unexplained vision loss. Identifying the etiology of disease within the retinal infrastructure is a diagnostic challenge. Therefore, an interprofessional team approach is crucial for providing adequate patient care. Patients with acute onset vision loss frequently present in the emergency department. Nurses triage the patient as the first point of contact based on symptom severity and onset.

Given the concern for emergent conditions and an indeterminate clinical diagnosis and, providers and nursing staff routinely order a costly workup involving a battery of tests, and the majority of which return negative. In turn, patients are instructed to follow up with an outpatient ophthalmologist. Typically, this will involve a standard eye examination by a comprehensive ophthalmologist. However, these preliminary diagnostic tests mostly detect structural abnormalities, which are not always consistent with clinical presentation. In turn, patient diagnoses may be mistaken for a benign condition and, in some cases, presumed to be malingering. Neuro-ophthalmology is the field that is commonly acknowledged when the etiology of vision impairment remains unknown, despite extensive medical workup.

Considering a broad differential is essential to distinguish retinal dysfunction from alternative, similar appearing causes since the option of therapy depends on the underlying etiology of the disease process. Electroretinography, in conjunction with clinical findings, provides invaluable data for patient management while avoiding unnecessary testing. Transparent communication and care coordination between nurses, providers, ophthalmologists, including subspecialists, are essential for deriving a correct diagnosis and therapeutic decision-making. [Level 5]