**Supraclavicular Nerve**

Arising from the C3 and C4 ventral rami, the supraclavicular nerve (SCN) courses deep to the sternocleidomastoid muscle and passes through the posterior triangle of the neck, deep to the platysma muscle before dividing into the medial/anterior, intermediate, and lateral/posterior branches which provide cutaneous innervation to the superior, anterosuperior, and posterosuperior aspect of the shoulder.

**Axillary Nerve**

This nerve originates from the posterior cord of the brachial plexus with contributions from the C5 and C6 ventral rami. The axillary nerve travels through the inferior-lateral axilla, and around the surgical neck of the humerus with the posterior circumflex humeral artery.

**Musculocutaneous Nerve**

The sensory component arises from the musculocutaneous motor nerve, which comes off the lateral cord of the brachial plexus and receives a contribution from the C5 to C7 ventral rami. The musculocutaneous nerve passes from the lateral aspect of the shoulder into the front of the axilla and pierces the coracobrachialis muscle, innervating muscles of the anterior arm. It goes through the deep fascia and continues as the lateral antebrachial cutaneous nerve providing sensation to the lateral forearm from wrist to elbow.

**Radial Nerve**

The origin of the radial nerve is from the posterior cord of the brachial plexus with contribution from the C5 to T1 ventral rami. It runs posteriorly to the brachial artery and passes through the triangular space to the radial sulcus of the humerus. The posterior cutaneous brachial nerve is the first branch that arises as the radial nerve passes through the axilla, before reaching the radial sulcus. The lateral inferior brachial cutaneous nerve and the posterior antebrachial cutaneous nerve arise from the radial nerve in the radial sulcus. The lateral inferior brachial cutaneous nerve provides sensation to the inferolateral arm, and the posterior antebrachial cutaneous nerve innervates the posterior forearm. As the radial nerve passes across the lateral epicondyle of the humerus, it splits into the posterior interosseous nerve and superficial branch of the radial nerve. It continues under the brachioradialis muscle where it splits again into the medial and lateral branches which give cutaneous innervation to the dorsum of the hand and radial side of the thumb, respectively.

**Median Nerve**

The median nerve's origin is from the medial and lateral cords from the brachial plexus with contributions from the C6 to T1 ventral rami. It travels with the brachial artery from the axilla and crosses medially to pass through the cubital fossa. Before passing through the carpal tunnel, the median nerve gives off the palmar cutaneous branch for sensory innervation of the lateral palm and the anterior interosseous nerve which provides motor to the majority of the anterior forearm muscles. After passing through the carpal tunnel, the nerve divides again into the recurrent branch of the median nerve to innervate the thenar muscles and the palmer digital branch to provide sensation to the first three digits and radial side of the fourth, and motor to the first and second lumbricals.

**Ulnar Nerve**

The ulnar nerve derives its origin from the medial cord of the brachial plexus with contributions from the C8 and T1 ventral rami. After passing the axilla, it travels medially to the brachial artery until passing through the intermuscular septum into the posterior compartment. It travels posteriorly to the medial side of the arm and passes through a musculoaponeurotic structure known as the arcade of Struthers to reach the epicondyle of the humerus within the cubital tunnel. Before entering the wrist, the ulnar nerve divides into muscular branches and palmer and dorsal cutaneous nerve branches. The palmer nerve branch supplies sensation over the hypothenar eminence and the dorsal nerve branch supplies sensation to the proximal one-third of the fifth phalanges and ulnar side of the fourth phalanges. The ulnar nerve passes through the canal of Guyon to enter the hand, and it splits into the deep motor branch and cutaneous superficial branch, which innervates the cutaneous skin of the distal two-thirds of the proximal fifth phalanges and ulnar side of the fourth phalanges.

**Medial Brachial Cutaneous Nerve**

After branching from the medial cord of the brachial plexus with C8 and T1 contributions, this purely cutaneous nerve courses along the medial side of the upper arm, and pierces the deep fascia and supplies innervation to the cutaneous medial upper arm. It has connections with the medial antebrachial cutaneous nerve ulnar branch.

**Medial Antebrachial Cutaneous Nerve**

This cutaneous nerve branches from the medial cord of the brachial plexus with C8 and T1 contribution. It passes down the anteromedial side of the upper arm and innervates a portion of the cutaneous skin over the anterior upper arm, specifically the skin overlying the biceps brachii.

**Intercostal Brachial Nerve:**

The intercostal brachial nerve arises typically from the second intercostal nerve and supplies a cutaneous area in the axilla.

**Dermatomes:**

Nerve cutaneous distribution can also divide into dermatomes, which breaks sensation into nerve root patterns. Although there is significant overlap between the dermatomes, the general guidelines listed below for dermatome distribution refer to the location at which the nerve root innervation can reliably be isolated from the other nerve roots.

- C4 nerve root: the superior aspect of the shoulder

- C5 nerve root: lateral shoulder

- C6 nerve root: thumb

- C7 nerve root: third digit

- C8 nerve root: fifth digit

- T1 nerve root: medial arm

- T2 nerve root: axilla