**Dosage Forms**

- Intravenous solution as cefepime hydrochloride: 1 g / 50 mL (50 mL), 2 g / 100 mL (100 mL)

- Injection powder for reconstitution as cefepime hydrochloride: 500 mg (each vial), 1 g (each vial), 2 (each vial)

- Intravenous, Solution for reconstitution, as cefepime hydrochloride: 1 gm cefepime per 50 ml ( 5% w/v ) dextrose USP in water for injection

**Dosing**

Cefepime is not well absorbed by the gastrointestinal tract and must be administered intravenously (IV) or intramuscularly (IM). The most common method is by IV — typical administration is 1 to 2 g every 8 to 12 hours depending on the infection treated. Infusions are usually administered over 30 minutes. Studies have looked at extended infusions of 4 hours, showing lower overall mortality and reduced intensive care unit (ICU) lengths of stay compared with the standard 30-minute rate; however, other studies have failed to confirm these findings. Extended infusion rates for febrile neutropenia have been studied and appear feasible for treatment.

Urinary Tract Infections: Mild / Moderate, Uncomplicated / Complicated

Urinary Tract Infections: Severe, Uncomplicated / Complicated

Skin and Skin Structure Infections: Moderate / Severe, Uncomplicated

**Specific Patient Population**

**Pediatric Patients:**Pediatric administration is usually 50 mg/kg (up to a 40 kg child) every 8 to 12 hours.

**Hepatic Impairment:**No adjustment in dosing is necessary for hepatic impairment.

**Renal Impairment:**The dose requires adjustment for patients with renal dysfunction, defined as a creatinine clearance less than or equal to 60 mL/min. Either daily dose is reduced, or dose is given at extended intervals for these patients.

**Pregnancy/Breastfeeding Implications:**Cefepime is listed as pregnancy category B medicine, and it gets excreted in breast milk. Caution is necessary with cefepime in pregnant or breastfeeding women and should only be used if absolutely needed.