The history and data obtained during routine prenatal care and perinatal care will help establish a cause of stillbirth in the majority of cases regardless of the availability of autopsy.

**History**

The maternal history includes age, gravidity, parity, any history of hypertension, diabetes, hypercoagulability, autoimmune disease, or cancer: exposure to infection (Zika, parvo, CMV, toxoplasmosis, syphilis, malaria): family history of genetic disorders, recurrent miscarriages or stillbirth: paternal age and history of genetic disorders.

The current pregnancy history includes abnormal uterine bleeding, trauma, reproductive treatment, exposure to drugs or radiation, weight gain, infections, sexually transmitted diseases, hypertension, preeclampsia, diabetes, anemia, fetal anomaly, or growth restriction.

The past obstetrical history includes preterm delivery, stillbirth, or a fetus affected by growth restriction, as well as any pregnancy complicated by preeclampsia, diabetes, deep venous thrombosis, pulmonary embolism, or a blood transfusion.

The immunization record includes the record of all completed immunizations.  Testing for immune status may be indicated for endemic diseases such as measles.

The social history includes employment, nutrition, substance use, domestic violence, travel history, and exposure to any animal exposures.

Prenatal lab test results include CBC, type and screen, HbsAg, syphilis, HIV, rubella, prenatal testing for aneuploidy, urine toxicology, diabetic screening.

**Physical Findings**

Examine the patient for whom fetal well-being is a concern as expeditiously as possible to allay concerns and to initiate care in a timely fashion.  Attempt to auscultate fetal heart tones with the fetal doppler and, if indicated, initiate electronic fetal monitoring.   If unable to doppler fetal heart tones, perform an abdominal ultrasound to confirm the presence or absence of fetal heart tones as soon as possible.

- Vitals- weight, blood pressure, heart rate, respiratory rate, temperature

- Mental status-alert, oriented, confused, agitated

- Skin- turgor and quality of the pulse

- Abdomen- signs of blunt or sharp trauma including bruising or bleeding, contour, pain including uterine pain, guarding, rebound tenderness, contractions, symphysis fundal height,  Leopold maneuver

- Back- pain, CVA tenderness

- Extremities- reflexes, edema, rash, itching, petechiae

- Skin- rash or signs of drug abuse

- Pulmonary- shortness of breath, tachypnea, rales or crackles

- Cardiac- rate and rhythm

- Pelvic- bleeding, discharge, cervical assessment, cultures, wet mount, ferning

**After Delivery**

Perform a gross examination of the umbilical cord and the placenta and record findings, including measurements.  Photograph the placenta and cord.

Culture the placenta as indicated by swabbing between the chorionic and the amniotic membrane with aerobic and anaerobic culture swabs.

**Examination of the Baby**

The birth attendant should perform a complete examination of the baby shortly after birth and by a pathologist.  A chart should be available to guide the examiner to record each of the following bullets.

- Measurements: weight, length, head circumference, foot length (if less than 23 weeks, foot length may be used to estimate gestational age)

- Facial features: ears, eyes, nose, mouth, cranium.

- Neck and back: cystic hygroma, spina bifida, abnormal pigmentation

- Skin: maceration, sloughing, color

- Cord insertion: central, marginal, membranous

- Abdominal wall

- Gender: ambiguous, female, male

- Extremities, digits, palmar creases

- Photograph the head, face, whole body, hands, and feet. Take detailed photos of the baby from the anterior, posterior, and lateral directions. Photograph and record any abnormality.

Obtain consent to photograph the baby and be aware that some cultures, such as the Amish, may not consent to photography.

**Examination of the Placenta**

The placental examination is the single most important study, other than an autopsy.  It may contribute to a diagnosis of stillbirth in 53% of cases.

The macroscopic placental evaluation may be performed by the delivery attendant,  a pathologist, or both.  A ruler, to reference dimensions, should be included with all images.

- Reconstitute the membranes for completeness. Take photographs of the fetal and the maternal sides of the placenta.

- Measure the shortest distance from the membrane rupture to the edge of the placental disc.  Note the membrane insertion type (normal, circummarginate, or circumvallate), color, and sheen.

- If the pregnancy is multifetal,  describe the thickness and attachment of the dividing membranes to the disc.  Note the location and type of umbilical cord insertion by measuring the distance from the disc edge to the insertion of the cord.

- Note the length of unprotected umbilical vessels, intravascular umbilical thrombi, and the total length of the cord.

- Describe how the cord coils.  If the coiling is uniform, count the number of 360-degree coils over a 5-centimeter length of cord. If the coiling is non-uniform, count all 360-degree coils in the cord and divide by the entire cord length.

- Document any false or true cord knots or twists.  Comment on cord edema, hemorrhage, laceration, or avulsion.

- Cut the cord every 5-centimeters and record the thickest and thinnest diameter and the number of arteries/ veins in every segment.

- Cut the cord leaving only a 1-centimeter stump of cord attached to the placenta. Weigh the placenta after it is drained of blood.

- Measure the longest and the shortest placental dimension and note any extra lobes or unusual shape

- Cut the placenta in strips 1-centimeter wide, leaving 1-centimeter on either side of the umbilical stump.  Measure the full thickness of each cut and record the thickest and thinnest measurement. Examine all surfaces.

- Note any lesions found and take photographs of them.