# Continuing Education Activity

Entropion is an inversion or inward turning of the eyelid margin. This can result in trichiasis, where the eyelashes are directed posteriorly toward the globe. It is one of the most common eyelid malpositions. This malposition can cause corneal and conjunctival damage leading to corneal abrasions, scarring, corneal thinning, or corneal neovascularization. Entropion may be unilateral or bilateral. There are four types of entropion: congenital, involutional, acute spastic, and cicatricial. Lower eyelids are often involutional while the upper eyelid is cicatricial. Lower eyelid entropion is much more common than upper eyelid entropion. This activity aims to help clinicians identify and manage entropion by reviewing the pathophysiology, evaluation, and management of this eyelid malformation. This activity reviews the role of the interprofessional team in caring for patients with entropion.

**Objectives:**
- Identify the etiology of entropion.
- Summarize the presentation of a patient with entropion.
- Explain the treatment and management options available for entropion.
- Describe interprofessional team strategies for improving care and outcomes in patients with entropion.

# Introduction

Entropion is an inversion or inward turning of the eyelid margin. This can result in trichiasis, where the eyelashes are directed posteriorly toward the globe. It is one of the most common eyelid malpositions. This malposition can cause corneal and conjunctival damage leading to corneal abrasions, scarring, corneal thinning, or corneal neovascularization.  Entropion may be unilateral or bilateral. There are four types of entropion: congenital, involutional, acute spastic, and cicatricial. Lower eyelids are often involutional while the upper eyelid is cicatricial. Lower eyelid entropion is much more common than upper eyelid entropion.

# Etiology

Entropion can be caused by horizontal eyelid laxity, attenuation or disinsertion of eyelid retractors, overriding by the preseptal orbicularis oculi muscle, previous surgeries, infection, inflammation, or congenital origins. Involutional changes are the most common etiology of entropion. As we age, the canthal tendons relax, and the eyelid retractors attenuate, causing misposition of the eyelid margin

# Epidemiology

The older an individual is, the greater the chances of developing an entropion

# Pathophysiology

Pathophysiology is dependent on the type of entropion seen. In general, the lower lid is stabilized from, the lower lid retractors,orbicularis, tarsus, and canthal tendons. The canthal tendons and tarsal plate horizontally stabilize the lid. The weakening of these structures, permits the inversion of the lid. The lower lid retractors stabilize vertically. In the upper lid, the levator aponeurosis and Mueller's muscle provide this role. The lower lid retractors connect to the orbicularis muscle and overlying skin. As these extensions weaken, the preseptal orbicularis can travel superior and override the pretarsal muscle causing the eyelid margin to rotate against the eye. Inversion of the lid margin is also thought to be due to tarsal atrophy with the loss of support from the verticle lid and orbital fat atrophy.

Involutional entropion is caused by horizontal laxity of the eyelid, attenuation or disinsertion of eyelid retractors, and overriding by the preseptal orbicularis oculi muscle. Acute spastic entropion is a condition that arises following ocular irritation or inflammation.  Sustained orbicularis oculi muscle overwhelms the oppositional action of the lower eyelid retractors causing inward rotation of the eyelid margin. A cycle of increasing frequency of spasm caused by corneal irritation perpetuates the problem, often only interrupted by intervention. Cicatricial entropion is caused by vertical tasoconjunctival contracture and internal rotation of the eyelid margin.

# Histopathology

The tarsal plates of an involutional entropion demonstrate collagen degeneration, disorganized collagen fibers, and abnormal elastogenesis. Tensile strength is provided to the tarsus via the collagen fibers, and elastic fibers provide the tarsus with resiliency. As we age, the tarsus begins to change from mainly collagenous fibers to elastic fibers

# History and Physical

Signs and symptoms can often include symptoms of eye redness and pain, sensitivity to light and wind, sagging of skin around the eye, epiphora, ocular irritation and decreased vision, especially if the cornea is damaged. Involutional entropion can be detected by the snapback test and distraction test. The snapback test can be performed when the eyelid margin is pulled away from the globe, with poor resultant snap back to the globe's surface. It is important the patient does not blink the lid back into the proper position. The distraction test is when the lower lid is pulled from the globe and distance is measured. If the distraction is greater than 6 mm, it is considered abnormal. Further, a slit lamp can be conducted to assess for eyelid retractor disinsertion. Several clinical clues may indicate disinsertion of the retractors. These include

- A white, subconjunctival line several millimeters below the inferior tarsal border caused by the leading edge of the detached retractors

- D(2) deeper-than-normal inferior fornix

- Reverse ptosis of the lower eyelid (lower eyelid margin sits higher than normal)

- Diminished inferior movement (excursion) of the lower eyelid on downgaze.

Cicatricial entropion usually displays scar tissue of the conjunctiva. Eversion of the eyelid margin is often difficult in cicatricial but can be performed with ease involutional. Spastic entropion commonly arises following ocular irritation or inflammation following surgical procedures. Congenital can be considered in dysgenesis of the lower eyelid retractors and may be present creating instability in the eyelid with sequential entropion formation.

# Evaluation

Usually, laboratory tests are not required for the diagnosis of entropion. If a patient is found to have a cicatricial entropion, an infection or autoimmune disease workup needs to be performed before treatment of the entropion. The source of the entropion needs to be identified. If an involutional entropion is found, consider an exophthalmometry reading to determine if relative enophthalmos is present.

# Treatment / Management

Management of entropion should be directed at the specific etiology. Medical management is often ocular lubrication, artificial tears, or contact lenses. These can be used to protect the ocular surface from damage secondary to eyelash irritation. These simple techniques can often break the cycle in spastic entropion. Botulinum toxin injection can also be considered in a patient with spastic entropion

Surgical management can be considered in all types of entropion and provides definitive treatment. Suture techniques, such as Quickert sutures, are occasionally helpful and can be performed at bedside or in office

# Differential Diagnosis

Entropion should be differentiated from epiblepharon, trichiasis, trachoma, and distichiasis.

# Enhancing Healthcare Team Outcomes

While the ophthalmologist is almost always involved in the care of patients with an eyelid malformation,others can be consulted to assist in management. A facial plastics surgeon can be consulted to manage this procedure as well. The nurses are also a vital member of the interprofessional group as they will monitor the patient's vital signs and monitor for worsening appearance.