Bone metabolism is a complex mechanism that revolves around the needful bone turnover involving bone formation (osteoblastic activity) and resorption (osteoclastic activity). This cycle continues throughout life and has phases of rapid bone formation to phases of increased resorption. This complex process takes weeks to months. It can be simplified for the purpose of a better understanding of bone mineralization and formation.

The whole process goes through a continuous phase of activation, resorption, formation, mineralization, followed by a period of quiescency. These five factors are called stages of bone modeling.

- For better conceptual understanding, let us describe things from the quiescent phase, which describes the inactive phase of bone before initiation of remodeling.

- As a result of mechanical loading, low calcium from primary or secondary causes leads to microfractures beginning the activation phase. In this phase, pre-osteoclasts are attracted to remodeling sites that fuse to form multinucleated osteoclasts.

- These are subsequently activated by RANKL and M-CSF to help them attach to the bone surface. This begins the resorption phase with so formed osteoclasts degrading the bone resulting in releasing of trapped growth factors within the matrix, before entering in apoptosis that is the programmed cell death.

- As a result of all this, a resorption pit is formed, followed by clearance of debris from activated macrophages and a transition to the formation phase. A collagenous matrix (osteoid) is deposited to fill the void of the cavity or pit.

- The complete mineralization of this matrix takes roughly 3-6 months and is helped by secreting vesicles from osteoblasts in an environment helped by increased calcium and phosphorous ion concentrations.

For successful remodeling, the existing bone matrix should be completely removed prior to new bone formation. The other molecular details to mention are beyond the scope of this learning module.

Factors that contribute to osteoporosis are as follows:

- Osteoporosis has significant hormonal influence, especially in postmenopausal women, where decreased estrogen levels have a negative impact on bone formation by increasing the sensitivity to the bone resorption effect of parathyroid hormone. This can lead to rapid bone loss as compared to bone formation leading to osteoporosis.

- There are other risks and environmental factors that can potentiate this bone loss, including smoking, diet, lifestyle, and climate.

- At the molecular level, the RANK (Receptor activator of nuclear factor-κB) pathway and its role in the pathogenesis of osteoporosis can be a potential target for new therapies.RANK is a receptor expressed by osteoclasts and its precursors.RANKL is the ligand that binds to the RANK receptor, which acts as a common final pathway in controlling osteoclast differentiation, proliferation, and survival.

Current challenges in treatment with judicious use of oral corticosteroids had led to a very increased surge of osteoporosis from prolonged use of these medications. Steroids decrease the peripheral calcium ion concentration resulting in PTH release and very rapid bone loss, especially in the first three months of steroid use. This also results in impairing bone quality because of increased osteoblastic activity, not able to measure or quantify by normal bone measuring techniques like DEXA scan.