**Prenatal Techniques**

**Non-Sonographic Methods for Determining Gestational Age**

- Naegele’s Rule: Establish the date of the last menstrual period by obtaining a history from the patient. From this date, add 1 year and 7 days, then subtract 3 months. This will approximate the estimated delivery date. The date of the last known menstrual period will give the approximate start date for age of the fetus.

- Uterine Size: The uterus has been described as a soft and globular pelvic organ. In pregnancy, the uterus increases in size to accommodate the developing fetus. At approximately 12 weeks gestation the uterus becomes large enough to be palpable just above the pubic symphysis. At 16 weeks gestation, the fundus of the uterus can be palpated at the midpoint between the umbilicus and the pubic symphysis. At 20 weeks gestation, the fundus can be palpable at the level of the umbilicus. After 20 weeks of gestation, the pubic symphysis to fundal height in centimeters should correlate with the week of gestation.

**Sonographic Methods for Determining Gestational Age
**

- First Trimester Dating: Sonographic assessment within the first 13 weeks and 6 days will provide the most accurate estimate of gestational age. Both transvaginal and transabdominal approaches may be used. However, the transvaginal approach may provide a more clear and accurate view of early embryonic structures. Although the gestational sac and yolk sac are the first measurable markers visible on ultrasound, these poorly correlate with gestational age.

- The crown-rump length (CRL) is the most accurate measurement correlating with gestational age. Using the mean of three measurements, CRL can be determined by using the calipers on the ultrasound machine, measuring a straight line from the outer margin of the cephalic pole to the rump of the embryo. This measurement can be plugged into numerous validated tables and formulas that correlate well with gestational age.

- Second Trimester Dating: If gestational age is not determined within the first trimester, alternate sonographic techniques may be used to estimate gestational age. These techniques are generally not recommended as first-line options for dating but are more helpful in determining if fetal size is within normal range. These measurements should not change the gestational age or delivery date if a previous CRL has been calculated within the first trimester. 

- Biparietal Diameter (BPD): This biometric parameter is recommended as a strong modality for dating because it has been extensively studied and is well reproduced. The technique involves a transabdominal approach by positioning the phased array or curvilinear transducer perpendicular to the fetal parietal bones. The calvarium should appear as a hyperechoic (bright white) structure that is smooth and symmetric. The BPD is measured along a plane that intersects the third ventricle and the thalami. Using the caliper function, cursors are placed on the outer edge of the proximal skull and the inner edge of the distal skull. This value will give the biparietal diameter.
- Head Circumference (HC): This biometric parameter has been regarded as a good estimator of gestational age with some studies suggesting superiority to the biparietal diameter. This parameter may also be useful clinically in assessing for growth disorders. A similar sonographic approach as the BPD is used here. A phased array or curvilinear transducer is used to visualize a plane that intersects the third ventricle and thalami. However, to achieve the greatest anterior-posterior diameter, the cavum septum pellucidum must be visualized anteriorly, and the tentorial hiatus must be visualized posteriorly. The cerebellum and lateral ventricles should not be visualized in a standard HC view. Using the calipers, mark the cursors on the outer margins of the calvarium bilaterally. The ultrasound should have an elliptical measuring tool that will generate a measurement of the perimeter of the calvarium.
- Femur Length (FL): The femur can be visualized as early as 10 weeks gestation due to its size and density on ultrasound. Using a phased array or curvilinear transducer, align along the long axis of the closest femur. Proximally, visualize either the femoral head or greater trochanter and distally, visualize the femoral condyle. Using the calipers, measure the length of the diaphysis, at the junction of bone and cartilage, taking care not to include the femoral head, greater trochanter, or femoral condyle.
- Abdominal Circumference (AC): The biometric parameter is more difficult to measure and is less able to predict gestational age than the other described techniques accurately. However, it may be useful in fetuses with cranial or limb abnormalities and to estimate a fetal weight and note interval growth. Using the phased array or curvilinear transducer, position the transducer perpendicular to the fetal abdominal wall and visualize the symmetric appearance of the lower ribs. This view should be at the largest diameter of the fetal liver. Note, the fetal stomach is often visualized at this level. The umbilical portion of the left portal vein in its shortest view is another hallmark of appropriate positioning. Using the calipers, obtain four calibration points around the abdomen on the skin edge making sure not to include the rib cage. The elliptical tool may also be used to calculate circumference.

- Third Trimester Dating: If gestational age has not been determined by the third trimester multiple parameters are correlated with estimated age and fetal maturity. For example, femoral epiphyseal ossification centers are often noted at 32 weeks. Proximal tibial ossification centers are visualized at 35 weeks. The proximal humeral ossification centers appear in the late trimester and have been correlated with fetal lung maturity.

**Postnatal Techniques**

- Dubowitz Method: This was the historically standard method of determining postnatal gestational age based on 34 physical and neurologic assessments. These assessments are divided into 6 categories: tone, tone patterns, reflexes, movements, abnormal signs, and behaviors. Scores are assigned based on a detailed illustration sheet. Higher scores correlate with greater maturity. The total score can be plotted on a graph that also correlates with gestational age.

- New Ballard Score: This improved scoring system is used to determine postnatal gestational age in infants as preterm as 20 weeks. The system is divided into 6 physical maturity components and six neuromuscular components. The physical maturity components include skin, lanugo, plantar creases, breast, ear/eye, and genitals. The neuromuscular components include posture, square window/wrist, arm recoil, popliteal angle, scarf sign, and heel to ear. Detailed illustrations have been created to assist the examiner in determining appropriate scores which correlate with gestational age. This exam is quicker to perform and may be more tolerable for sicker infants.