**Hard Palat**e

The hard palate comprises the anterior two-thirds of the palate and is an immobile hard bony segment whose underlying bony structure consists of the palatine processes of the maxilla and the horizontal plates of the palatine bones. Situated anteriorly, the palatine processes of the maxilla comprise most of the hard palate and cover the area between the two sides of the maxillary dental arch. The palatine processes of the maxilla meet the two horizontal plates of the palatine bones posteriorly, which fuse down the midline. The hard palate formally separates the oral cavity from the nasal cavities, forming the floor of the nasal cavity and the roof of the oral cavity. The hard palate is covered superiorly by ciliated pseudostratified columnar epithelium (respiratory mucosa) and inferiorly by stratified squamous epithelium (oral mucosa). Anteriorly, the hard palate has irregular ridges or rugae, called rugae palatinae, on the mucous membrane that facilitates the passage of food posteriorly towards the pharynx. The hard palate contains three foramina/canals that serve as passageways for critical neurovascular structures that supply the oral cavity. These important landmarks include the incisive canal, the greater palatine foramen, and the lesser palatine foramen. The incisive canal is located at the anterior midline of the maxilla, directly posterior to the central maxillary incisor teeth, and contains the nasopalatine nerve and the descending palatine artery. The greater palatine foramen is located in the posterior hard palate medial to the third molar tooth and is traversed by the greater palatine vessels and nerve. The lesser palatine foramen is located posterior to the greater palatine foramen on the base of the pyramidal process and is traversed by the lesser palatine nerve. Structurally, the hard palate provides a rigid floor to the nasal cavity that prevents changes in pressure within the mouth from closing off nasal passages. Historically, infants with a cleft palate could not suckle and often died from malnutrition; this is because infants cannot effectively create negative sucking pressure without a properly formed hard palate. The hard palate is also essential for phonation and contains rugae that aid in mastication and digestion.

**Soft Palate**

The soft palate makes up the posterior third of the palate and is a posterior continuation of the hard palate. The soft palate consists of muscle fibers and connective tissue covered by a mucus membrane consisting of a stratified squamous epithelium with secretory salivary glands. Unlike the hard palate, the soft palate is very flexible and does not contain any bony structures. The soft palate serves to elevate the nasopharynx, effectively closing the communication from the oropharynx to the nasopharynx. The soft palate is comprised of five muscles that play essential roles in breathing, phonation, and swallowing.

Anteriorly, the soft palate is continuous with the hard palate and the palatine aponeurosis. Posteriorly, the soft palate ends as a midline projection called the uvula that projects into the oral cavity. The soft palate forms the roof of the oropharyngeal isthmus, an area connecting the pharynx and oral cavity. Two arches bind the soft palate to the tongue and pharynx, the palatoglossal arches, and palatopharyngeal arches, respectively. The palatine tonsils appear between these arches in the tonsillar fossa of the oropharynx.

The soft palate has five muscles that are innervated by the pharyngeal plexus of CN X, except for the tensor veli palatini muscle, which receives innervation from a branch of the trigeminal nerve called the medial pterygoid nerve. The muscles that make up the soft palate include the palatoglossus, palatopharyngeus, tensor veli palatini, musculus uvulae, and levator veli palatini muscles. The tensor veli palatini muscle attaches to the palatine aponeurosis from its origin at the medial pterygoid plate of the sphenoid. The tensor veli palatini muscle functions to tense the soft palate during swallowing, preventing the entry of food into the nasopharynx. The levator veli palatini muscle emerges from the eustachian tube and the petrous temporal bone before attaching to the palatine aponeurosis, this muscle functions to elevate the soft palate during swallowing to prevent the entry of food into the nasopharynx. The palatoglossus muscle arises from the palatine aponeurosis and travels inferiorly, anteriorly, and laterally to attach into the side of the tongue—the palatoglossus muscle functions to pull the soft palate towards the tongue and initiates the act of swallowing. The palatopharyngeus muscle emerges from the hard palate and the palatine aponeurosis and attaches to the superior border of the thyroid cartilage. The palatopharyngeus muscle tenses the soft palate and draws the pharynx superiorly and anteriorly during the act of swallowing. The palatopharyngeus muscle closes the laryngeal airway during swallowing to prevent the aspiration of food. The musculus uvulae muscle derives from the palatine aponeurosis and the posterior nasal spine and attaches to the mucous membrane of the uvula. The musculus uvulae muscle functions to shorten the uvula. Ipsilateral contraction of the musculus uvulae muscle draws up the uvula on the same side.

During the act of swallowing, the levator veli palatini muscle elevates the soft palate, approximating it with the posterior pharyngeal wall and completely blocking off the airway and nasal passages. As a result, the soft palate forms a vacuum in the oral cavity, keeping food from entering the respiratory tract. Breathing ceases briefly during swallowing; this is because of the physical closure of the airway by elevation of the soft palate. During a sneeze, the soft palate protects the nasal passage by diverting some secretions to the oral cavity. The soft palate plays a role in the gag reflex, touching the end of the soft palate or uvula evokes the gag reflex in the majority of people.