Eustachian tube dysfunction (ETD) is a broad diagnostic category that involves the inability of the ET to open or close appropriately. ETD is often due to an inflammatory response of the epithelium within the lumen caused by two main etiologies; irritant and infectious reactions. Irritant reactions include the response to allergens and chemicals such as smoke, while infectious reactions typically involve a viral or bacterial infection. Both processes release proinflammatory cytokines that promote edema of the epithelium in response to injury. Inflammation resulting in the inability of the Eustachian tube to open results in the failure of gas equilibrium between the middle ear and nasopharynx, leading to hearing impairment or a feeling of fullness in the ear. Whether cause or effect, inflammation of the Eustachian tube also leads to an inability to clear middle ear secretions, resulting in stasis and the potential for developing otitis media.

Common Eustachian tube disorders include:

**Patulous Eustachian Tube (tuba aperta) Dysfunction**

- A condition in which the ET remains patent (open). While this condition is benign, it can be relatively distressing for the patient, as they experience hearing their voice abnormally loud (autophony) and hearing their own breathing (aerophony). The diagnosis of this condition is made by a history of the symptoms mentioned above and a feeling of ear fullness. These symptoms typically arise during periods of stress or exercise, and patients will typically state that their symptoms resolve with lying down. A patulous ET is usually unilateral, with the ipsilateral eardrum atrophic and moving with respiration. The typical patient scenario is an individual who has undergone severe weight loss, which causes a loss of the fatty tissue surrounding the ET and loss of support. In addition, one-third of women diagnosed with patulous ET dysfunction were pregnant or taking estrogen.

**Obstructive Eustachian Tube Dysfunction**

- A condition caused by either a functional or anatomical obstruction in which the patency of the ET is decreased. Obstructive ETD typically involves inflammation and mucosal edema caused by environmental allergies, sinusitis, upper respiratory tract infections, or gastroesophageal reflux disease. Due to anatomic differences in the ET between children and adults, acid reflux leading to ETD is found more frequently in infants and children. Repeated exposure to acidic contents can lead to ET inflammation, edema, and obstruction.

- Neoplasms, such as nasopharyngeal carcinoma, can present with unilateral ET obstruction and must be excluded. Benign anatomical obstructive causes may include nasal polyps or adenoid hypertrophy.

- Impaired muscle coordination may also contribute to obstructive ET dysfunction and can be seen in patients with cleft palate.

**Baro-Challenge-Induced Eustachian Tube Dysfunction**

- A condition caused by failure of the ET to adequately open and regulate middle-ear pressure during ambient pressure changes.