Mirabegron is a once-daily orally administered drug.

In addition to monotherapy, combination therapy with low dose mirabegron (25 mg) and a low dose of solifenacin (5 mg), an anti-muscarinic, has been shown to significantly improve urinary urgency and urgency incontinence when compared to monotherapy. Three large double-blind, randomized controlled trials (SYMPHONY, BESIDE, and SYNERGY) have shown the safety and efficacy of combination therapy.

**Use in Specific Patient Populations**

**Patients with Hepatic Impairment**

For mild(Child-Pugh Class A  starting dose is 25 mg, and the maximum dose is 50 mg. For moderate hepatic impairment(Child-Pugh Class B). starting, and the maximum recommended dose is 25 mg. The use of mirabegron is not recommended for severe hepatic impairment (Child-Pugh Class C)

**Patients with Renal Impairment**

- eGFR 30 to 89 mL/min/1.73 m^2 -  maximum dose is  50 mg once daily

- eGFR 15 to 29 mL/min/1.73 m^2 -  maximum dose is 25 mg once daily

- eGFR < 15 mL/min/1.73 m^2 or patient requiring dialysis- Use is not recommended

**Pregnancy Considerations**

In preclinical studies, decreased fetal weight and increased fetal mortality were observed, and, in rabbits, fetal cardiomegaly was observed. No studies have been conducted regarding the use of mirabegron in pregnant patients to inform a drug-associated risk of miscarriages, significant congenital disabilities, or adverse maternal or fetal outcomes. Use with caution.

**Breastfeeding Considerations**

There is a lack of safety data regarding using mirabegron during breastfeeding. Hypothetically, mirabegron has moderately high protein binding and relatively low bioavailability, so exposure to the breastfed infant is likely to be low. If the mother requires mirabegron, discontinuing breastfeeding is not a reason. Still, until more data become available, an alternate drug may be preferred while nursing a newborn or preterm infant. Hence, the risk-benefit analysis should be considered while prescribing mirabegron to nursing mothers.