Acute gastroenteritis commonly causes dehydration in children. This causes vomiting, diarrhea, or reduced oral fluid intake and is, therefore, can develop dehydration.

This causes extracellular fluid depletion through either diarrhea or vomiting. Oral fluid replacement is preferred in children with mild to moderate dehydration unless any contraindication exists. The intestinal solute transport mechanisms develop the osmotic gradients due to the movement of electrolytes and nutrients through the cell. The passive movement of water follows this. The transport of sodium and glucose occurs at the intestinal brush border.

Oral solutions contain adequate sodium, glucose, and osmolarity to maximize this co-transportation and to avoid problems of excessive sodium intake or additional osmotic diarrhea. Oral rehydration is a safe and cost-effective method for the management of children with dehydration. However, oral rehydration therapy has been underused.

Research demonstrates ORT is as effective as intravenous hydration in children with moderate dehydration.

The administration of intravenous fluid usually occurs when oral rehydration has failed. In such situations, an IV fluid administration may be more efficient for rehydration. This may be more relevant in infants and young children, especially if there is vomiting associated with diarrhea. Oliguria also indicates that dehydration is severe, and requires intravenous fluids.

The presence of severe dehydration and children in shock should be given IV fluids due to the need for rapid restoration of intravascular volume.