A complete history should take place focusing on specific ocular and systemic associations of high myopia. A review of systems focused on joint, hearing, and heart problems should be conducted to screen for an underlying connective tissue disorder. Family history and previous ocular surgery should also be elicited, paying attention to any previous retinal detachments, corrective lens wear, or refractive surgery. New complaints of metamorphopsia, scotoma, flashes, and onset of new floaters suggest retinal pathology.

Physical examination should begin with measuring visual acuity, intraocular pressure, and assessing pupillary reaction. Next, a dilated fundal examination focused on the macula, optic disc, and peripheral retina should be performed. Finally, an assessment of visual fields can be requested if glaucoma is suspected.

In 2015, a universal classification system for pathological myopia was developed by a specialist panel of researchers.

Tessellated fundus

- Visible choroidal vessels

Diffuse chorioretinal atrophy

- Yellowish white appearance to the posterior pole

Patchy chorioretinal atrophy

Discrete atrophic areas in the macula and peripapillary region

Macular atrophy

Atrophy in the foveal region

Plus Lesions



Lacquer cracks

Choroidal neovascularisation

Fuchs spots

Proposed Classification of Myopic Maculopathy. Proposed by Meta-analysis for Pathologic Myopia (META-PM) Study Group.

**Findings**

- Staphyloma is an outpouching of the wall of the eye. Posterior staphyloma is unique to pathological myopia. Posterior staphylomas associated with pathological myopia have been classified into ten different types based on shape and location.

- Lacquer cracks are irregular yellow linear lesions in the macula. They represent mechanical linear breaks in Bruch’s membrane and serve as potential foci for choroidal neovascularisation. Newly formed lacquer cracks may be associated with hemorrhage.

- Myopic choroidal neovascular membrane (CNV) is a common cause of visual impairment in patients with pathological myopia. The incidence of myopic CNV is estimated to be 10%, but it is even higher (35%) if the fellow eye was previously affected. Myopic CNV typically appears as a small, gray subretinal lesion beneath or near the fovea, and it may be associated with subretinal fluid or hemorrhage. Fuchs spots are pigmented gray scars that correspond to sites of regressed myopic CNV.

- Myopic tractional maculopathy results from vitreoretinal traction with manifestations that include retinoschisis, foveal retinal detachment, and lamellar or full-thickness macular hole.

- A dome-shaped macula is an inward bulge around the foveal region associated with scleral thickening. It is present in 20% of eyes with high myopia.

- Structural anomalies and atrophy around the optic nerve fibers and optic disc pits can result in visual field loss.

- Peripheral retinal holes or breaks.