No laboratory test may help suggest the diagnosis of brachial plexitis. However, MRI of the shoulder, electromyography, and nerve conduction studies may provide important clues toward the diagnosis.

In the acute phase of the disease, MRI of the shoulder can reveal diffuse T2 signal hyperintensities as a consequence of the edema secondary to nerve demyelination. In the subacute or chronic phases, the T2 signal changes persist, and new T1 linear hyperintensities may develop, corresponding with fatty infiltration of the affected muscles. MRI of the brachial plexus is not sufficiently sensitive for appreciating changes related to the disease, but magnetic resonance neurography of the brachial plexus may show thickening and hyperintensity in the acute phase. This hyperintensity may persist into the chronic phase.

Electromyography (EMG) is the best study for evaluation of demyelination of the brachial plexitis. It has to be performed three weeks after the onset of symptoms to show any significant findings. EMG may show positive sharp waves and fibrillation potentials consistent with acute denervation. If performed late into the disease (three to four months), it may show chronic denervation and early reinnervation. Nerve conduction studies are usually normal but may show proximal conduction blocks.

It is important to note that brachial plexitis is a diagnosis of exclusion, which means practitioners have to rule out other possible pathologies before making the diagnosis. Most of these tests are good at ruling in or out other diagnoses but not at confirming a diagnosis of brachial plexitis.