# Continuing Education Activity

Polydactyly or supernumerary digit is a common malformation. It involves mostly the upper limbs. Classifications have been established to ease its management. This activity reviews the evaluation and treatment of supernumerary digits and highlights the role of the interprofessional team in the care of patients with this condition.

**Objectives:**
- Describe the etiology of supernumerary digits.
- Review the appropriate evaluation of supernumerary digits.
- Outline the management options for supernumerary digits.
- Summarize the importance of improving care coordination amongst the interprofessional team to enhance the care of patients with supernumerary digits.

# Introduction

Supernumerary digit, or polydactyly, is an autosomal dominant congenital defect of the upper and/or lower extremity that is typically discovered immediately after birth.

Polydactyly is categorized based upon its location. Preaxial polydactyly involves the radial or great toe side of the extremity, whereas postaxial polydactyly involves the ulnar or 5th toe side of the extremity. Central or meso axial polydactyly involves the 2-4 digits.

# Etiology

Polydactyly is primarily thought to be a failure in digit control during development.

SHH is vital to digit number and type development.

Glioma-associated oncogene homolog 3 (Gli3) is an SHH antagonist, which has been shown in a group of people with Greig cephalopolysyndactyly to have a missense mutation in Gli3. This missense mutation can lead to an upregulation of SHH, which can contribute to polydactyly due to disrupted definition of the radial-ulnar axis.

# Epidemiology

Polydactyly is estimated to occur in 1.6 to 10.7 in 1,000 live births. Males are twice as often affected as females.

# Pathophysiology

During limb development in an embryo, the typical pattern of digit development is controlled by the interactions of multiple signaling molecules. When one or more of these signaling molecules has upregulation or downregulation, supernumerary digits can occur on one or both hands and/or feet. This up or down-regulation typically occurs due to genetic errors in a number of possible chromosomal regions. Most commonly, polydactyly of the hand occurs, involving the ulnar side of the hand more than the radial side.

# History and Physical

As a congenital disorder, polydactyly may be commonly seen in familial patterns, so it is important to obtain a good family history. Patients presenting with polydactyly will have an extra finger and/or toe, and this is most often discovered in the immediate post-natal period of life for a neonate.

Physical exam findings include the observation of a supernumerary digit. Imaging, including radiographs, is useful for possible surgical planning and to further classify the specific pattern of polydactyly.

The Wassel classification is used for preaxial (radial) polydactyly of the hand. There are seven classes of polydactyly in this system. Type I involves a bifid distal phalanx. In type II the distal phalanx is duplicated. Type 3 is characterized by bifid proximal phalanges. The most common is type IV, with duplicated proximal phalanx. With type V, a bifid metacarpal exists. Duplicated metacarpals are the finding in type VI. Type VII consists of triphalangia.

Postaxial polydactyly is duplications of the small finger (ulnar border) of the hand or along the lateral border of the foot. The Stelling and Turek classification is used to describe postaxial polydactyly of the hand. This classification is divided into 3 types. Type 1 involves soft tissue duplication. Type 2 has bony duplication, while type 3 includes a full ray, including the metacarpal.

Central polydactyly is a duplication of the index, long, or ring fingers, or toes 2,3, or 4. It accounts for a much smaller proportion of polydactyly.

When describing polydactyly of the foot, the main classification used is the Venn-Watson, which has 6 subdivisions based upon metatarsal anatomy. Class 1 involves distal duplication with a normal metatarsal. Class 2 has a block metatarsal, whereas class 3 has a Y shaped metatarsal and class 4 a T shaped metatarsal. Class 5 exhibits a normal metatarsal shaft with a widened head, and class 6 involves complete duplication, including the metatarsal.

# Evaluation

Polydactyly can be detected on anatomic ultrasounds done prenatally. However, it is typically diagnosed at birth. To properly treat polydactyly, the provider must fully understand the exact type of polydactyly involved. This must include a thorough understanding of the musculoskeletal components involved. Part of the evaluation must include radiographs and physical examination to assess stability, motor function, and cosmesis.****

Practitioners must also consider and evaluate if polydactyly is presenting as part of a syndrome. Syndromes that are reported with a higher incidence include Holt-Oram syndrome and Fanconi anemia.

# Treatment / Management

Treatment aims to improve hand function and cosmesis.

Some authors recommend that preaxial polydactyly be surgically managed in patients between 7 and 12 months old.

The Bilhaut-Cloquet procedure involves zig-zag incisions on the volar and dorsal surfaces of the bifid thumb portions. Then a resection of the central portions of the two thumbs via osteotomy is performed. The remaining osseous structures are encircled with K wires allowing the healing of the bone and soft tissues. This technique allows the creation of a typically more normal-sized and functional thumb. The On-top plasty is reserved for triphalangeal thumbs. In this procedure, the most functional distal thumb portion is transferred to the most suitable metacarpal of the thumbs available.

Postaxial polydactyly is usually managed with surgical excision or suture ligation when no bony structures exist. If bony structures are present, surgical management with similar goals to preaxial polydactyly is important. The creation of a structurally sound and functional digit is key to good outcomes. Typically the more ulnar and less developed digit is removed. When partial duplication exists, it is important to transfer tendinous and ligamentous structures to the remaining digit for good function.

Central polydactyly is often treated between 6-12 months of age. Again, the focus is on aesthetics and function. Surgical options most often used include excision or ligation of the more rudimentary digits. One guiding principle advocated by small studies of surgical outcomes for central polydactyly is to create an opposable thumb and 3 functional digits over creating a 5 fingered hand.

Treatment of polydactyly of the foot again focuses on function and cosmetic outcome. Guiding principles for surgical treatment include recreating a normal foot contour, maintaining physeal alignment, and keeping proper soft tissue tension around the joints of the toes.

# Differential Diagnosis

Typically the diagnosis of polydactyly is readily apparent when the extra digit includes bony and soft tissue features. However, when a more rudimentary digit exists with possibly only soft tissue, a differential must include acquired digital fibrokeratoma.

# Prognosis

Polydactyly has aesthetic and functional implications. The primary concerns with polydactyly center around its impact upon fine motor development and function. With appropriate and well-timed intervention, the vast majority of cases of polydactyly have good functional outcomes, and the overall prognosis is favorable.

# Complications

Surgical treatment of polydactyly has multiple potential complications. When suture ligation is used, a painful neuroma often ensues.

# Deterrence and Patient Education

It is important to have early conversations with the parents of a patient with polydactyly. As early intervention can lead to more optimal outcomes, parents should be educated about the etiology, outcomes, and potential complications of polydactyly and its management. Parents need to understand that while surgical complications are generally uncommon, painful scarring, growth disturbances, and neuroma formation can occur.

# Enhancing Healthcare Team Outcomes

The clinical workup, management, and follow-up of patients with supernumerary digits require an interprofessional team approach. Typically the diagnosis is made early in life by a primary clinician. Prompt referral to an orthopedic specialist can allow for early intervention when necessary. If surgical intervention is pursued, one of many specialists may be involved, including orthopedic surgeons, plastic surgeons, and anesthesiologists. All medical professionals involved should be aware that polydactyly may present as part of a syndrome, and referral to a genetic specialist may be necessary. In addition, other team members can include occupational therapists and physical therapists for strengthening and development of motor skills. As in all areas of interprofessional management, communication between team members is important to optimize outcomes for patients.