Historically, there has been limited data on the treatment of palmoplantar psoriasis, as patients had been excluded from clinical trials of psoriasis because less than 10% of their BSA was affected. Though no standardized treatment exists for patients with palmoplantar psoriasis or palmoplantar pustulosis, increasing data on treatments, especially biologic agents, has been released in recent years. Most patients will require systemic agents given the recalcitrant nature of these skin diseases. In fact, one study reported that just 27.4% of patients showed improvement with topical agents, whereas the remaining patients required systemic treatments.

The key reason for the failure of topical agents to work is the thick stratum corneum on the soles and palms, which acts as a barrier to the penetration of drugs.

First-line therapy begins with potent to superpotent topical corticosteroids applied twice daily with or without occlusion, with a gradual reduction in frequency over weeks to months. Calcipotriene is often combined or alternated with potent topical corticosteroids. It is important to remember that calcipotriene should not be combined with salicylic acid, which deactivates the molecule.  First-line systemic treatment includes acitretin at a dose of 10 mg to 50 mg per day, with a maximal effect seen between three and six months after initiation of treatment. Acitretin is contraindicated in pregnancy.

Second-line therapy begins with light therapy, including PUVA and NB-UVB or monochromatic excimer laser. Second-line systemic agents include methotrexate and cyclosporine. Methotrexate is dosed at 7.5 mg to 20 mg per week over three to six weeks. Cyclosporine can be used in immunocompetent patients with severe recalcitrant palmoplantar psoriasis. Doses start at 2.5 mg/kg to 5.0 mg/kg per day for a maximum of one year and should be decreased by 0.5 mg/kg to 1.0 mg/kg if hypertension or abnormal renal function test results are seen.  Methotrexate is contraindicated in pregnancy, while cyclosporine can be used with caution.

There are also reports that laser and other excimer light therapies may work. These novel treatments require a low cumulative dose to ease symptoms and consequently, fewer treatments.

Biologics are reserved for patients who fail or cannot complete treatment with topical or other systemic medications. Etanercept is a TNF-a inhibitor that showed a statistically significant reduction in PPPASI with 50 mg twice weekly for 24 weeks of therapy.

Many patients with psoriasis have other comorbidities such as renal failure, liver disease, malignancy or heart failure, which also predispose them to adverse effects from the medications. Hence, a careful risk versus benefit ratio must be performed for each patient before initiating treatment.

Overall, it appears that oral retinoids with or without photochemotherapy, plus low dose corticosteroids/cyclosporine work best for symptom relief.  Systemic retinoids and oral PUVA appear to be the initial regimen of choice.