# Definition/Introduction

First described by Thomas B. Fitzpatrick in 1972, the Fitzpatrick skin phototypes were developed based on an individual's skin color and their tendency to burn or tan when exposed to sunlight. More specifically, classification was based on a patient's responses to the following questions regarding their skin's reaction to a 45-60 minute, early summer, noon sun exposure in northern latitudes (20-45 degrees): "how painful is your sunburn?" and "how much tan will you develop in a week?" Initially enumerated as skin types I through IV to classify patients with white skin, the Fitzpatrick phototype classification scale was later modified to include types V and VI for persons with darker skin.

By nature of the criteria, Fitzpatrick's skin type classifications are subjective; however, use of the scale has proven valuable as a diagnostic and therapeutic evaluation tool for many situations. Specifically, these classifications are commonly employed to estimate dosages of particular ultraviolet B (UVB), psoralen with ultraviolet A (PUVA), and laser treatments, as well as to predict skin cancer risk and guide sun protection advice.

# Issues of Concern

**Objective Determination of Fitzpatrick Skin Types**

Given the relative ease of implementation of Fitzpatrick skin typing, it is understandable why this classification system has been so widely applied. However, numerous studies have criticized this system scientifically, and validated objective alternatives have been sought, to achieve a similar outcome of predicting ultraviolet (UV) sensitivity.

Currently, spectrophotometers are the primary tool in which melanin density in the epidermis can be estimated and implemented in evaluating the accuracy of self-reported skin types.

**Inconsistencies with Self-Reporting and Ethnic Skin**

It is important to highlight that the Fitzpatrick skin type is a classification intended to reflect sun sensitivity and not a proxy for racial or phenotypic features. The description of the skin by color – white, brown, black – was meant to denote complexion rather than a self-identification of ethnic origin.

The difficulty in assessing ethnic skin with the current Fitzpatrick skin type system can be traced to the origin skin types V and VI. When these additional types were created in 1988, the initial intention was to place all black individuals into the type VI category. However, people with mixed heritage or races who identify as black often self-report in a variety of categories, ranging from type IV to type VI.

**Laser Therapy in Ethnic Skin**

Structural and functional differences between darkly pigmented and lightly pigmented skin are important considerations when performing laser or light-based procedures. In general, darker skin types possess increased epidermal melanin, larger and more widely distributed melanosomes, and reactive fibroblasts.

There are a number of factors to consider when treating individuals with Fitzpatrick skin types IV through VI. Melanin in the epidermis acts as a chromophore, absorbing more laser energy and increasing the risk of adverse events from epidermal injury in those with darkly pigmented skin. To circumvent this risk, longer wavelength lasers are recommended. Deeper penetration of the laser allows for an increased ratio of the temperature of the hair bulb to the temperature of the epidermis, leading to follicular destruction with little epidermal damage.

With regards to laser or light procedures, the risk of post-procedural hyperpigmentation or hypopigmentation is greater in patients with Fitzpatrick skin types IV through VI. In general, dyschromia is one of the most common reasons why individuals with skin of color visit dermatologists, stemming from their tendency for injury or inflammation to alter pigment production.

# Clinical Significance

Fitzpatrick skin types have long been the favored method of classifying an individual’s skin color based on their specific reactions to sun exposure. Clinically, these designations have been employed to estimate dosages, assess cancer risk, or guide counseling (Figures 1 & 2). However, this system has been recognized as ineffectual in certain populations, especially those with darker, non-Caucasian ethnic skin. These individuals are at greater risk of post-procedural pigmentary and scarring-related adverse effects. Thus the accurate determination of Fitzpatrick skin types has important therapeutic consequences. Numerous attempts to create an objective determination of an individual’s skin type have been made; while none are yet considered a gold standard, reflectance spectrophotometers constitute an efficient and noninvasive alternative with a proven record of success.

# Nursing, Allied Health, and Interprofessional Team Interventions

While the determination of Fitzpatrick skin types is almost always done by a physician, the administration of laser treatments is a process that may involve many healthcare workers. Physicians, physician assistants, nurse practitioners, nurses, and medical assistants are all involved with laser treatments, and an interprofessional team approach is essential to prevent and/or mitigate pre-, intra-, and post-treatment complications. A detailed education regarding side effects, careful management of expectations, and thorough counseling about results are all essential interprofessional team interventions that will improve outcomes for patients of any Fitzpatrick skin type.[Level 5]