Another Florida Statute, Chapter 456, discusses general provisions of health professions and occupations and is an issue of concern. A healthcare professional must be aware of the laws outlined in this chapter of legislation. The Florida Legislature covers these laws in sections 456.001 to 456.50. Below, we will highlight some of these Florida Statutes underscored in Chapter 456. A comprehensive list and reference found on the Florida Senate website.

**456.001 Definitions**

- Board: Any commission or board, or other statutorily created entity to the extent such entity is authorized to exercise regulatory or rulemaking functions, within the department, except that, for ss. 456.003-456.018, 456.022, 456.023, 456.025-456.033, and 456.039-456.082, “board” means only a board, or other statutorily created entity to the extent such entity is authorized to exercise regulatory or rulemaking functions, within the Division of Medical Quality Assurance.

- Healthcare practitioner: Any person licensed under chapter 457; chapter 458; chapter 459; chapter 460; chapter 461; chapter 462; chapter 463; chapter 464; chapter 465; chapter 466; chapter 467; part I, part II, part III, part V, part X, part XIII, or part XIV of chapter 468; chapter 478; chapter 480; part II or part III of chapter 483; chapter 484; chapter 486; chapter 490; or chapter 491.

- Profession: Any activity, occupation, profession, or vocation regulated by the department in the Division of Medical Quality Assurance.

- More definitions found on the Florida Senate Website.

**456.003 Legislative Intent And Requirements**

- The intent of the Legislature is that persons desiring to engage in any lawful profession regulated by the department shall be entitled to do so as a matter of right if otherwise qualified.

- The Legislature further believes that such professions shall be regulated only for the preservation of the health, safety, and welfare of the public under the police powers of the state.

- Unless expressly and specifically granted in the statute, the duties conferred on the boards do not include the enlargement, modification, or contravention of the lawful scope of practice of the profession regulated by the boards. This subsection shall not prohibit the boards, or the department when there is no board, from taking disciplinary action or issuing a declaratory statement.

- This list in its entirety found on the Florida Senate Website.

**456.004 Department Powers and Duties**

- Work cooperatively with the Department of Revenue to establish an automated method for periodically disclosing information relating to current licensees to the Department of Revenue, the state’s Title IV-D agency. The purpose of this subsection is to promote the public policy of this state relating to child support as established in s. 409.2551. The department shall when directed by the court or the Department of Revenue under s. 409.2598, suspend or deny the license of any licensee found not to comply with a support order, a subpoena, an order to show cause or a written agreement with the Department of Revenue. The department shall issue or reinstate the license without additional charge to the licensee when notified by the court or the Department of Revenue that the licensee has complied with the terms of the support order. The department is not liable for any license denial or suspension resulting from the discharge of its duties under this subsection.

- Work in cooperation with the Agency for Health Care Administration and the judicial system to recover Medicaid overpayments by the Medicaid program. The Department of Health shall investigate and prosecute health care practitioners who have not remitted amounts owed to the state for an overpayment from the Medicaid program under a final order, judgment, or stipulation or settlement.

- This list in its entirety found on the Florida Senate Website.

**456.008 Accountability and Liability of Board Members**

- Each board member held accountable to the Governor for the proper performance of duties as a member of the board.

- The Governor shall investigate any legally sufficient complaint or unfavorable written report received by the Governor or by the department or a board concerning the actions of the board or its members.

- The Governor may suspend from office any board member for malfeasance, misfeasance, neglect of duty, drunkenness, incompetence, permanent inability to perform his or her official functions, or commission of a felony.

- This list in its entirety found on the Florida Senate Website.

**456.012 Board Rules; Final Agency Action and Challenges**

- The State Surgeon General has legal standing to challenge any rule or proposed rule of a board under its jurisdiction under s. 120.56.

- This list in its entirety found on the Florida Senate Website.

**456.0135 General Background Screening Provisions**

- An application for initial licensure received on or after January 1, 2013, under chapter 458, chapter 459, chapter 460, chapter 461, chapter 464, s. 465.022, part XIII of chapter 468, or chapter 480 shall include fingerprints under procedures established by the department through a vendor approved by the Department of Law Enforcement and fees imposed for the initial screening and retention of fingerprints.

- This list in its entirety found on the Florida Senate Website.

**456.014 Public Inspection of Information Required From Applicants; Exceptions and Examination Hearing**

- All information required by the department of any applicant shall be a public record and shall be open to public inspection according to s. 119.07, except financial information, medical information, school transcripts, examination questions, answers, papers, grades, and grading keys, which are confidential and exempt from s. 119.07(1) and shall not be discussed with or made accessible to anyone except the program director of an approved program or accredited program as provided in s. 464.019(6), members of the board, the department, and staff thereof, who have a bona fide need to know such information. Any information supplied to the department by any other agency which is exempt from the provisions of chapter 119 or is confidential shall remain exempt or confidential under the applicable law while in the custody of the department or the agency.

- This list in its entirety found on the Florida Senate Website.

**456.017 Examinations**

- For each examination developed or administered by the department or a contracted vendor, an accurate record of each applicant’s examination questions, answers, papers, grades, and grading key kept for a period of not less than two years immediately following the examination, and record shall thereafter be maintained or destroyed as provided in chapters 119 and 257. This subsection does not apply to national examinations approved and administered under this section.

- This list in its entirety found on the Florida Senate Website.

**456.018 Penalty for Theft or Reproduction of an Examination**

- In addition to, or instead of, any other discipline imposed under s. 456.072, the theft of an examination in whole or in part or the act of reproducing or copying any examination administered by the department, whether such examination is reproduced or copied in part or whole and by any means, constitutes a felony of the third degree, punishable as provided in s. 775.082, s. 775.083, or s. 775.084.

**456.019 Restriction on Requirement of Citizenship**

- A person not disqualified from practicing an occupation or profession regulated by the state solely because she or he is not a United States citizen.

**456.021 Qualification of Immigrants for Examination to Practice a Licensed Profession or Occupation**

- It is the declared purpose of this section to encourage the use of foreign-speaking Florida residents duly qualified to become actively qualified in their professions so that all people of this state may receive better services.

- This list in its entirety found on the Florida Senate Website.

**456.025 Fees, Receipts, and Disposition**

Legislative intent dictates that all costs of regulating health care professions and practitioners shall be borne solely by licensees and licensure applicants. It is also the intent of the Legislature that fees should be reasonable and not serve as a barrier to licensure. Moreover, it is the Legislative intent that the department operates as efficiently as possible and regularly report to the Legislature additional methods to streamline operational costs.

- If a duplicate license is required or requested by the licensee, the board or, if there is no board, the department may charge a fee as determined by rule not to exceed $25 before issuance of the duplicate license.

- This list in its entirety found on the Florida Senate Website.

**456.026 Annual Report Concerning Finances, Administrative Complaints, Disciplinary Actions, and Recommendations**

- The department is directed to prepare and submit a report to the President of the Senate and the Speaker of the House of Representatives by November 1 of each year. In addition to finances and any other information the Legislature may require, the report shall include statistics and relevant information, profession by profession

- This list in its entirety found on the Florida Senate Website.

**456.028 Consultation With Postsecondary Education Boards Before the Adoption of Changes to Training Requirements.**

- Any state agency or board that has jurisdiction over the regulation of a profession or occupation shall consult with the Commission for Independent Education, the Board of Governors of the State University System, and the State Board of Education before adopting any changes to training requirements relating to entry into the profession or occupation.

- This consultation must allow the educational board to provide advice regarding the impact of the proposed changes regarding the length of time necessary to complete the training program and the fiscal impact of the changes.

- The educational board consulted only when an institution offering the training program falls under its jurisdiction.

**456.032 Hepatitis B or HIV Carriers**

- The department and each appropriate board within the Division of Medical Quality Assurance will have the authority to establish procedures to handle, counsel, and provide other services to healthcare professionals within their respective boards infected with hepatitis B or the human immunodeficiency virus.

- Any person licensed by the department and any other person employed by a healthcare facility who contracts a blood-borne infection shall have a rebuttable presumption that the illness was contracted in the course and scope of his or her employment, provided that the person, as soon as practicable, reports to the person’s supervisor or the facility’s risk manager any significant exposure, as that term is defined in s. 381.004(1)(f), to blood or body fluids.

- The employer may test the blood or body fluid to determine if infected with the same disease contracted by the employee.

- The employer may rebut the presumption by the preponderance of the evidence. Except as expressly provided in this subsection, there shall be no presumption that a blood-borne infection is a job-related injury or illness.

**456.0361 Compliance with Continuing Education requirements**

- The department will establish an electronic continuing education tracking system to monitor licensee compliance with applicable continuing education requirements and to determine whether a licensee is in full compliance with the requirements at the time of his or her application for license renewal. The tracking system will integrate into the department’s licensure and renewal process.

- The department may not renew a license until the licensee complies with all applicable continuing education requirements. This subsection does not prohibit the department or the boards from imposing additional penalties under the applicable professional practice act or applicable rules for failure to comply with continuing education requirements.

- The department may adopt rules to implement this section.

**456.0495 Reporting Adverse Incidents Occurring in Planned Out-of-Hospital Births**

For purposes of this section, the term “adverse incident” means an event over which a physician licensed under chapter 458 or chapter 459, a nurse-midwife certified under part I of chapter 464, or a midwife licensed under chapter 467 could exercise control and which associated with an attempted or completed planned out-of-hospital birth, and results in one or more of the following injuries or conditions:

- A maternal death that occurs during delivery or within 42 days after delivery

- The transfer of a maternal patient to a hospital intensive care unit

- A maternal patient experiencing hemorrhagic shock or requiring a transfusion of more than four units of blood or blood products

- A fetal or newborn death, including a stillbirth, associated with an obstetrical delivery

- A transfer of a newborn to a neonatal intensive care unit due to a traumatic physical or neurological birth injury, including any degree of a brachial plexus injury

- A transfer of a newborn to a neonatal intensive care unit within the first 72 hours after birth if the newborn remains in such unit for more than 72 hours or any other injury as determined by department rule

Beginning July 1, 2018, a physician licensed under chapter 458 or chapter 459, a nurse-midwife certified under part I of chapter 464, or a midwife licensed under chapter 467 who performs an attempted or completed planned out-of-hospital birth must report an adverse incident, along with a medical summary of events, to the department within 15 days after the adverse incident occurs.

- The department shall review each incident report and determine whether the incident involves conduct by a healthcare practitioner who is subject to disciplinary action under s. 456.073. Disciplinary action, if any, must be taken by the appropriate regulatory board or by the department if no such board exists.

- The department shall adopt rules to implement this section and shall develop a form used for the reporting of adverse incidents.

**456.057 Ownership and Control of Patient Records; Reports or Copies of Records to be Furnished and Disclosure of Information**

Except as otherwise provided in this section and in s. 440.13(4)(c), such records may not be furnished to, and the medical condition of a patient may not get discussed with, any person other than the patient, the patient’s legal representative, or other health care practitioners and providers involved in the patient’s care or treatment, except upon written authorization from the patient. However, such records  furnished without written permission under the following circumstances:

- To any person, firm, or corporation that has procured or provided such care or treatment with the patient’s consent.

- When a necessary physical examination made under Rule 1.360, Florida Rules of Civil Procedure, in which case copies of the medical records furnished to both the defendant and the plaintiff.

- In any civil or criminal action, unless otherwise prohibited by law, upon the issuance of a subpoena from a court of competent jurisdiction and proper notice to the patient or the patient’s legal representative by the party seeking such records.

- For statistical and scientific research, provided the information is abstracted in such a way as to protect the identity of the patient or provided written permission received from the patient or the patient’s legal representative.

- To a regional poison control center for purposes of treating a poisoning episode under evaluation, case management of poison cases, or compliance with data collection and reporting requirements of s. 395.1027 and the professional organization that certifies poison control centers per federal law.

- To the Department of Children and Families, its agent, or its contracted entity, for investigations of or services for cases of abuse, neglect, or exploitation of children or vulnerable adults.

- This list in its entirety found on the Florida Senate Website.

**456.0575 Duty to Notify Patients**

- Every licensed health care practitioner must inform each patient, or an individual identified under s. 765.401(1), in person about adverse incidents that result in serious harm to the patient. Notification of outcomes of care that result in injury to the patient under this section does not constitute an acknowledgment of admission of liability, nor can such notifications be introduced as evidence.

- This list in its entirety found on the Florida Senate Website.

**456.068 Toll-free Telephone Number for Reporting of Complaints**

- The Agency for Health Care Administration will establish a toll-free telephone number for public reporting of complaints relating to medical services or treatment provided by healthcare professionals.

**456.0721 Practitioners in Default on a Student L****oan or Scholarship Obligations, Investigation, Reporting**

- The Department of Health shall obtain from the United States Department of Health and Human Services information necessary to investigate and prosecute health care practitioners for failing to repay a student loan or comply with scholarship service obligations under s. 456.072(1)(k).

- The department shall obtain from the United States Department of Health and Human Services a list of default healthcare practitioners each month, along with the information necessary to investigate a complaint by s. 456.073.

- The department may obtain evidence to support the investigation and prosecution from any financial institution or educational institution involved in providing the loan or education to the practitioner.

- The department shall report to the Legislature as part of the annual report required by s. 456.026, the number of practitioners in default, along with the results of the department’s investigations and prosecutions, and the amount of fines collected from practitioners prosecuted for violating s. 456.072(1)(k).

**456.38 Practitioner Registry for Disasters and Emergencies**

- The Department of Health may include on its forms for the certification or licensure of health care practitioners, as defined in s. 456.001, who could assist the department in the event of a disaster a question asking if the practitioner would be available to provide health care services in special needs shelters or to help staff disaster medical assistance teams during times of major disaster or emergency. The names of practitioners who answer yes maintained by the department as a health care practitioner registry for disasters and emergencies.