**Boston KPro Type 1**

Generally, patients will have had maximal medical and surgical management already, and KPro Type 1 surgery is the only option available for vision preservation and improvement. Baseline best-corrected visual function should be documented, including evidence of glaucoma surgeries, previous corneal grafts, history of steroid response, and posterior segment disease. Biometry should be undertaken if open sky cataract extraction will be performed. Risk factors such as herpetic disease, active ocular surface inflammation will need to be optimized before surgery.

**OOKP**

During the preoperative assessment, baseline visual acuity of at least light perception in the eye is necessary to proceed to OOKP. Ultrasonography, A-scan biometry, and electrodiagnostics also help to predict visual potential postoperatively. Intraocular pressure can be challenging to measure and sometimes may need to be recorded subjectively via digital estimation. A thorough ocular surface examination and documentation of dryness, as well as the assessment of the patient's oral health, is needed. Sometimes radiological imaging of the patient's teeth is necessary to choose a suitable donor tooth.

The patient is started on antiseptic and antifungal mouthwash a day before stage I surgery. During this stage, a BMM is harvested from the patient and grafted to the ocular surface bed, and the prepared osteo-odonto-acrylic lamina is implanted into a subcutaneous pouch in the contralateral lower lid. Preparation of the second stage involves careful monitoring for mucosal complications (thinning, ulceration, infection) and infection or extrusion of the implanted lamina.