Both minimum alveolar concentration (MAC) and lipid solubility vary among different volatile anesthetics. The most commonly used anesthetics follow the order of nitrous oxide > desflurane > sevoflurane > isoflurane > halothane, for highest to lowest MAC. This order follows the Meyer-Overton rule and has a direct correlation with oil/gas partition coefficient.

When combining inhaled anesthetics, it is important to note that there is a roughly additive effect for MAC.

When looking at a normal distribution, MAC represents one point on the dose-response curve and is the equivalent of a median effective dose (ED50). In addition, the standard deviation (SD) of MAC is approximately 10%. Following the properties of a normal distribution, MAC + 1 SD (1.1 MAC), would produce immobility in roughly 68% of the population, and MAC + 2 SDs (1.2 MAC) should produce immobility in approximately 95% of patients.

Besides immobility, MAC can be used clinically to assess unconsciousness, amnesia, eye-opening, and autonomic response, using the concepts of MAC-awake, MAC-amnesia, and MAC-bar. MAC-awake is defined as the anesthetic concentration needed to suppress a voluntary response to verbal command (i.e., eye-opening) in 50% of patients.

MAC-amnesia is the anesthesia concentration required to suppress recollection or explicit memory of a noxious stimulus. Within the brain, volatile anesthetics act on the amygdala, hippocampus, and cortex, which are responsible for the formation of explicit episodic memory. Anterograde amnesia is achieved at roughly 0.25

The MAC for endotracheal intubation (MACEI) is defined as the end-tidal concentration of inhaled anesthetic agents at which 50% of patients can be intubated smoothly.

The MACEI/MAC ratio for sevoflurane is about 1.3 in children and 3 in adults. Thus, if only inhaled anesthetic agents are used in adults, intubation will require a very high concentration of volatile agents which might result in hemodynamic instability. So, muscle relaxants and opioids are used to facilitate intubation as a part of balanced anesthesia.

The concept of MAC-bar is an estimate of the MAC of volatile anesthetic that blocks autonomic responses to surgical incision in 50% of patients. The autonomic responses commonly used to define MAC-bar are changes in pupil dilation, heart rate, and blood pressure.