Understanding the molecular behavior of hepatic adenomas deepened with the discovery by Chen et al. of the role of beta-catenin from the Wnt signaling pathway in the formation of hepatic adenomas in 2002. In 2007, Bioulac-Sage and associates from Bordeaux came up with a classification scheme for hepatic adenomas based on molecular behavior patterns called phenotypic-genotypic classification.

**HNF-1alpha Inactivated Mutations (35% to 40%)**

It involves biallelic mutations of the TCF-1 gene that encodes the hepatocyte nuclear factory family transcription factor HNF-1alpha. HNF-1alpha is associated with hepatocyte differentiation and liver development, as well as glucose and lipid metabolism. This type occurs mostly in women and is often associated with mature-onset diabetes of the young (MODY3). Ninety percent of the mutations are somatic, although those associated with MODY3 can be germline and common in patients with adenomatosis.

**Beta-catenin Activated Mutations (15% to 20%)**

These are frequently associated with exposure to male hormones, glycogenesis, and familial adenomatous polyposis. Mild cytological or architectural abnormalities in the liver parenchyma lead to an acinar pattern. It is rarely detected in patients with steatosis and those with inflammatory changes in the liver. This group has a higher risk of malignant transformation, and the Wnt pathway has been implicated in 10% to 25% of the cases of hepatocellular carcinomas. On immunohistochemical staining, these adenomas tend to stain for glutamine synthetase rather than beta-catenin, which stains patchily.

**Inflammatory Hepatic Adenomas (40% to 50%)**

Predominantly seen in women with a high body mass index, alcohol consumption, and systemic inflammatory syndrome. It is associated with the activation of the IL-6 inflammatory pathway with dystrophic vessels (thickened wall arteries with sinusoidal dilatation called peliosis) and telangiectasia. These were formerly called “telangiectatic focal nodular hyperplasia.”  These tumors stain with serum amyloid A (SAA) and with C-reactive protein.

**Unclassified Type (10%)**

These adenomas do not stain for C-reactive protein, SAA, beta-catenin, or glutamine synthetase. They also have typical liver fatty acid-binding protein (L-FABP) staining.