An incision along the right subcostal margin is made, which crosses the left rectus abdominis muscle and extends into the flank. Adequate exposure can also be obtained with a large, midline incision extending to the xiphoid process. This right, subcostal incision extends from the xiphoid to well into the flank region and is typically made 2 fingerbreadths below the costal margin. Once the peritoneal cavity is opened, routine exploration is carried out. The diagnosis of portal hypertension is then confirmed. This is done by catheterization of an omental vein, preferentially towards the stomach. This measurement is useful even if the splenic pulp pressure was measured preoperatively as this will allow for a more valid comparison of the pressure’s pre-shunt versus post shunt. The pressure typically measures 30 cm of saline or greater above the portal vein level. If pressures are considerably lower, this would not indicate the necessity or even desirability of a shunting procedure to be performed. If a prior splenoportogram has identified a suitable portal vein, dissection begins to mobilize the duodenum.

When the presence of a suitable portal vein for a portacaval shunt is in doubt, the portal vein should be first isolated and then surveyed with a portal venogram before exposure of the inferior vena cava is undergone.

Once the entrance is gained into the peritoneal cavity, retractors are then placed, and an incision of the posterior peritoneum overlying the inferior vena cava is incised with electrocautery by an extended Kocher maneuver. Any fibro areolar tissue that covers the anterior surface of the IVC is cleared, and the vessel is isolated circumferentially by both blunt and sharp dissection from the entrance of the left and right renal veins, below, all the way to the point where it disappears posteriorly to the liver above. To accomplish this, tributaries must be ligated with fine silk ligatures and then subsequently divided. Often included tributaries are the right adrenal vein, pairs of lumbar veins, and hepatic veins from the caudate lobe of the liver.

Over the posterior peritoneum, collateral venous networks are typically enlarged considerably and are thus subject to increased pressure. This is important as this normally avascular area may, in fact, be quite the opposite, and while performing dissection during the Kocher maneuver, progress should be made by clamping and ligating peritoneal surfaces instead of a usual simple incision lateral to the descending portion of the duodenum. Precautions like these apply to all dissections performed during the procedure located in the retroperitoneal space as well as in the hepatoduodenal ligament. The inferior vena cava usually is exposed without much difficulty. If additional exposure is required, it may be obtained by resection of a portion of the enlarged caudate lobe of the liver. Through and through mattress sutures of 0-0 silk are placed to control bleeding prior to division of the liver. Next, the caudate lobe of the liver is freed from the IVC and any veins encountered or subsequently ligated. The use of argon beam electrocoagulation may be helpful in this circumstance. Using careful dissection, the portal vein is identified within the hepatoduodenal ligament. During the dissection process, it can be helpful to place tape or rubber tissue drain around the common bile duct. This will facilitate exposure of the portal vein.

Exposure of the portal vein should extend from the hilum of the liver to the pancreas on the superior surface, where pancreatic tributaries should not only be located but also protected. Once all 3 structures within the hepatoduodenal ligament have clearly been identified, the leftover fatty adipose tissue containing enlarged venous and lymphatic channels can be divided to allow the portal vein to be brought into closer proximity with the inferior vena cava.

Once the inferior vena cava has completely been mobilized, it can be lifted upwards toward the portal vein. If complete isolation of the IVC circumferentially is not accomplished, failure of the procedure can ensue and may not be able to be completed as the separation between the portal vein and IVC is too wide. Next, a superior retractor is positioned medially to retract the liver at the point of the entrance of the portal triad.

In the postero-lateral aspect of the portal triad lies the portal vein, and it is approached posteriorly. Division by blunt and sharp dissection of fibrofatty tissue on the posterior lateral aspect of the triad, which contents include nerves, lymph nodes, and lymphatics, is performed. Importantly, there is no portal venous tributary on this aspect of the triad, so this technique is safe in nature. Once the surface of the portal vein has been exposed, a vein retractor or Gilbernet retractor is inserted to medially retract the common bile duct. Next, the portal vein is circumferentially mobilized at the midportion. An umbilical tape is used to encircle the portal vein. The vein is isolated up to its bifurcation into the hilum of the liver. The portal vein and IVC can then be brought together using traction via the surrounding umbilical tapes. This will elucidate adequate mobilization of the portal vein and the inferior vena cava. This is crucial to show that the vessels can be approximated without excessive tension. The inability to do so provides evidence that the vessels have not been mobilized adequately and necessitates further dissection of such vessels.

It is suggested that to facilitate the approximation of the vessels, resection of part of an enlarged caudate lobe in a cirrhotic liver can be performed, but sources are conflicting. Tributaries located on the medial aspect are ligated in continuity with silk and then divided. The umbilical tape was used to pull the portal vein out of its bed to clear it to the point where it disappears posteriorly to the pancreas. There is a tough, fibrous fatty tissue that connects the portal vein to the pancreas that requires division. Tributaries located on the medial aspect of the portal vein and the posterior lateral aspect are divided. It is typically unnecessary to divide the splenic vein.

In order to perform a side-to-side portocaval anastomosis, wide mobilization of the portal vein is a reason for a difficulty that surgeons may encounter to complete a side-to-side shunt is the failure of mobilization of the portal vein posterior to the pancreas. In certain patients, it may be necessary to divide part of the head of the pancreas in between right-angle clamps to allow for adequate mobilization of the portal vein. Suture ligatures can be used to trolled bleeding from the edges of the pancreas that is divided. Prior to incision of the pancreas, it is imperative that the surgeon inserts his/her index finger in the tunnel between the pancreas and the portal vein in order to palpate to detect the presence of a replaced common hepatic or right hepatic artery off of the superior mesenteric artery and to cross the portal vein. With a portacaval shunt, the portal vein blood flow provided to the liver is diverted. Hence ligation of the hepatic arterial blood supply can be lethal.

Prior to the formation of the portocaval anastomoses, pressures within the portal vein and inferior vena cava are measured via a saline manometer by means of direct needle puncture. If the pressure gradient of the portal vein-inferior vena cava is greater than or equal to 150 mm saline, this is representative of a clinically significant portal hypertension. Typically, patients who have bleeding esophageal varices have a gradient of 200 mm saline or more.

Where the portal vein crosses closest to the IVC is commonly just proximal to the entrance of the renal veins. If a side-to-side portacaval shunt has been decided, 2 non-crushing clamps are applied onto the portal vein for it to be rotated to expose the inferior surface. This step is necessary as it helps prevent twisting or angulation of the portal vein as the anastomosis is being accomplished. In preparing the anastomotic sites, 2 points must be borne in mind. The first point is that the inferior vena cava and portal vein are not parallel in relation to each other. Hence openings in the longitudinal axis of each would lead to twisting of the anastomotic site upon releasing the clamps. It is crucial to incise the portal vein in an oblique fashion to avoid twisting of the site.

A second point to keep in mind is that a simple longitudinal window either in the IVC or portal vein will not be adequate for a satisfactory shunt due to the low pressures within the venous system. In this manner, a simple slit opening will tend to close as it will behave more like a valve, thus resulting in a high incidence of portacaval shunt failure. A definite portion of the veins should be excised in an elliptical fashion to create an anastomosis between windows. It is not commonly necessary cross clamped the IVC completely.

To perform a side-to-side portocaval anastomosis, a Satinsky clamp is placed in an oblique fashion across and approximately 5 cm segment of the IVC on the anterior medial wall parallel to the overlying portal vein. The clamp is placed in order to exclude a portion of the lumen, which is satisfactory for this purpose. In general, the anastomosis should be created, so it is at least as large as the diameter of the patient's portal vein. Continuous suture of fine, nonabsorbable suture material on atraumatic needles helps accomplish the anastomosis itself. The IVC is then lifted towards the direction of the portal vein. An approximately 5 cm segment of the portal vein is then isolated in between 2 angled vascular clamps, and then the portal vein is depressed forwards inferior vena cava. This allows for the vessels to be in apposition with one another. An approximate 2 to 2.5 cm strip of the inferior vena cava, as well as a 2 to 2.5 cm in length strip of the portal vein, is excised using scissors. The excision is performed in a longitudinal segment of the walls of each of the vessels. 5/0 silk is used as a retraction suture, placed in the IVC on the lateral wall opening, and a hemostat is used as a weighted attachment to keep the orifice open.

Clamps over the portal vein are released briefly to facilitate flushing out of any clots. Both vessel’s openings are next irrigated with saline. To begin the anastomosis, a posterior continuous over and over suture of 5/0 vascular suture material is used. This is tied at each end of the anastomosis site. Beginning at each end of the anastomosis site, an anterior row of sutures, which consists of everting continuous horizontal mattress stitch of 5/0 vascular suture material, is performed. This suture is started at the most the site and is stopped after about 3 to 4 throws and left in a loose fashion so that the anterior surface of each vessel be the completion of the anastomosis is being performed. This helps prevent inadvertent inclusion of the posterior wall into the anterior row of sutures. This suture is begun at the superior end of the anastomosis site and is with a continuous level of tension until the inferior suture is encountered. Once this meeting occurs, her suture is drawn tight. Subsequently, prior to neatly drying the inferior suture, released momentarily to again flush out irrigated using saline. Once the anastomosis is completed, a single interrupted tension suture placed just distal to each of the ends of the anastomosis. Remember that the IVC and the portal vein are both very fragile. This necessitates caution during suturing to avoid trauma to the venous walls. This precaution applies to the surgeon as they are suturing as well as to the assistant who is holding the clamps.

Even a small slight shearing force that is created by shifting the vascular clamps patient to one another can disrupt a partly completed anastomosis. Notably, leaks from the anastomotic site, especially the left side, can be rather difficult to expose for any subsequent re-suturing. Once the anastomosis is finished, one at a time is the occluding clamps released to check the suture line for adequacy. Even though the portal vein represents a higher-pressure system in the anastomosis, it can be convenient to release one of the portal clamps first as they tend to be easier to reapply if there is unsatisfactory hemostasis. Once all clamps are released, it is often possible to detect the proper function of the shunt just by visible turbulence in the inferior vena cava. Help to aid the opening that lies between the two veins via invaginating the portal vein on the anterior wall can be used to make certain of the patency of the anastomotic site. If a repeat measurement of pressure within the portal system is taken, this tends to show that there has been a reduction to about half of the preoperative measured level.

To relieve tension off of the anastomotic suture line. The overlying clamp on the inferior vena cava is first removed, followed by the hepatic side of the portal vein, and then the last clamp removed is that on the intestinal side. Bleeding around the anastomosis does not frequently occur, but it can be controlled to well-placed interrupted sutures of the same 5/0 vascular suture material used. As the pressures in the inferior vena cava and portal vein are measured prior to the anastomosis, post shunt pressures are measured. The post shunt pressures in the inferior vena cava and the portal vein are usually identical. Of note, a pressure gradient that is greater than 50 mm saline between the vessels, is indicative of an obstruction within the anastomosis even if the obstruction cannot be appreciated on palpation. In these cases, the anastomosis should be opened to remove any existing clots, and if required, the entire anastomoses may have to be taken down and redone. It is critical that there be a saline gradient no greater than 50 mm between these vessels to permanently achieve adequate portal decompression and avoid thrombosis of the portacaval shunt. In terms of closure, the incision is closed in layers. Ordinarily, drainage of the right upper quadrant is not a requirement unless unusual trauma to the liver, biliary system, or pancreas has occurred. The employment of retention suturing can be useful.

A side-to-side anastomosis and a portacaval shunt have been preferred by some surgeons in the presence of portal hypertension with no evidence of an increase in pressure on the hepatic and of the temporary occluded portal vein. This is suggestive that the arterial supply was going to the liver and that decreasing the portal pressure via this anastomosis with the inferior vena cava will not result in the diversion of arterial supply provided to the liver. An advantage to type of shunt is the fact that it provides decompression to the hepatic sinusoids, which have the potential to be beneficial in treating patients who have intractable ascites coinciding with variceal hemorrhage. Using the portacaval shunt in treatment for refractory ascites is not a universally accepted indication for the procedure, although several studies suggest that it may, in fact, be an effective model for therapy. A side-to-side portacaval shunt is preferred when attempting to control refractory ascites.

If an end-to-side portacaval shunt is desired, this is done by dividing the portal vein and in as close proximity to the liver hilum as possible. A key factor is to ensure that the proximal stump of the portal vein is not left to short, as this is a large vein and under a considerable amount of pressure. Enough room should be left for a double ligature, the second of which being a transfixion suture ligature with several millimeters of vein cuff to assure proper and adequate control of the hepatic side of the portal vein. Note that a longer length stump of the portal vein must be retained if a double end to side shunt is indicated.

The placement of a non-crushing vascular clamp will be as close in proximity to the pancreas as possible on the portal vein to leave the maximal amount of portal vein freed for the anastomotic site. Yet again, the appropriate side on the inferior vena cava is chosen and then excluded by the usage of a partially occluding vascular clamp, and an elliptical excision of the vein wall is performed. As with the side-to-side portocaval anastomosis, a single layer continuous anastomosis of the arterial synthetic suture is performed for an end-to-side portacaval shunt. This anastomosis may be easier to accomplish, but again note the fragility of the vein walls when approaching this. Once the anastomosis has been completed, individually, the clamps are removed. If the hemostasis achieved a satisfactory, the procedure is then concluded as described above.