**Nonoperative**

Indications for nonoperative management is reserved for stable, minimally displaced, and non-articular fractures.  Management consists of a hinged kneed brace with emphasis on immediate range of motion to prevent stiffness and non-weight bearing for six weeks.

Chemical prophylaxis should be offered for all eligible patients to diminish the risk of venous thromboembolism, as early as permitted. The elderly population, especially, is at risk for high mortality and poor quality of life. An early conversation with patients, in non-equivocal terms about death and loss of autonomy, should be initiated immediately. Surgical treatments with the role in pain control is not a contraindication to palliation. Practitioners who are not educated or not comfortable should seek assistance to support patients, family, and team members.

**External Fixation**

External fixation is a temporizing measure for prompt restoration and stabilization of limb length, alignment, and rotation until the soft tissue can tolerate internal fixation.

**Open Reduction Internal Fixation**

Options for open reduction internal fixation include fixed angled blade plate, sliding barrel condylar plate, condylar buttress plate, and locking plate. Indications for open reduction internal fixation include fracture displacement, intra-articular fractures, and fractures that have gone on to nonunion. Goals include anatomic reduction of the articular surface, restoration of limb alignment, length, and rotation with preservation of vascularity. The usual determination of surgical exposure and implant of choice are by fracture configuration and surgeon preference.

Accurate fracture reduction is critical for successful outcomes; this is achievable through direct or indirect methods.  Indirect reduction of the fracture offers some advantages through minimal soft tissue stripping that improves fracture biology.  Examples of indirect reduction methods include manual traction, pointed reduction forceps, universal femoral distractor, and using the periarticular plate to reduce the bone to the anatomically contoured plate with screws.  The latter may be achieved by first using cortical screws to aid in reducing the bone to the plate, followed by locking screws to create a fixed angled device to increase stability. A combination of direct and indirect methods is also an option.  For OTA 33 type B and C fractures with intraarticular displacement, a lateral arthrotomy may be used for direct anatomic joint reduction and restoration of the joint surface, followed by indirect reduction of the articular block to the femoral shaft.  The use of fluoroscopy to reference Blumensaat's line can aid in plate placement on the distal femur. When placing the most distal and posterior screws, if the plate is too dorsal to Blumensaat's line, the screw has a high risk of violating the intercondylar notch.

Blade plate and Sliding barrel condylar plate

The 95-degree blade plate is a useful implant for fracture fixation of OTA 33 type A patterns, as well as for the stabilization of malunions and nonunions.  The placement of the blade plate is often a technically demanding procedure because three planes must simultaneously be corrected. Condylar malalignment may result if the chisel and plate are incorrectly inserted. Sliding barrel condylar plates are devices based on the compression screw used for hip fractures. These devices allow for the ability to apply compression across the femoral condyles. They allow better purchase in osteoporotic bone and only need two planes of correction when compared to the blade plate. Potential disadvantages with this construct include its bulky size and the requirement to remove a large amount of bone from the lateral femoral condyle. Due to its bulky size, the plate may cause symptomatic hardware and knee symptoms. Clinical studies have generally shown good results with fixed angled blade plate and sliding barrel condylar plate devices with 82% reporting satisfactory to excellent results at 9.5 years for condylar plate and 81% good or excellent results for the dynamic condylar screw.

Condylar Buttress Plating

A condylar buttress plate utilizes multiple lags screws for the treatment of condylar fractures.  Advantages to these plates allow for the treatment of OTA 33 type B fractures.  Disadvantages to these plates include not being a fixed-angle device and thereby relying on the friction of the bone-plate interface.  Due to the eccentric mechanical axis of the femur, screw loosening can occur, causing the typical varus deformity.

Locking Plates

Locking plates have more recently become the workhorse for open reduction internal fixation. Modern plate designs have various screw fixation options, including unicortical or bicortical screws, cannulated locking and nonlocking screws, solid locking screws, and attachments of radiolucent targeting devices that allow for percutaneous fixation.  Locking screws offer advantages because each screw is a fixed-angle device, thus augmenting the stability of the construct by securing the plate at multiple points and eliminating motion at the plate-bone interface. Studies have shown locking plates to be biomechanically superior to blade plates in both cyclic loading and ultimate strength.

**Intramedullary Nailing**

Intramedullary nail fixation has the benefit of providing a stable construct with minimal soft tissue and periosteum disruption. Antegrade and retrograde options are available depending on fracture characteristics. Pearls to successful intramedullary nailing include obtaining an optimal starting point to pass the reamer and maintaining reduction throughout the procedure. Blocking screws may be placed in the proximal or distal fragment to guide the trajectory of the nail and obtain satisfactory reduction.

Antegrade Nailing

Antegrade nailing is a good option for extraarticular OTA 33 type A fractures and some type C1 and C2 fractures.

Retrograde Nailing

Retrograde nailing is a viable option for the treatment of distal femur fractures. The advantages of retrograde nailing include: the intramedullary nail is a load-sharing device compared to plate fixation, the nail may be inserted through smaller incisions causing less soft tissue disruption, and it allows for the treatment of ipsilateral hip and ipsilateral tibia fractures in the polytrauma patient.  Retrograde nails of standard-length should extend to the level of the lesser trochanter to prevent a stress riser in the subtrochanteric region.  Newer implants with options for multiple distal screw fixation allow for the restoration of the articular surface for simple intra-articular fractures.  Biomechanical studies demonstrate that the number, orientation of the distal locking screws, and quality of distal screw purchase are essential components in determining the strength of a nail.

**Bone Cement and Bone Grafts**

Bone cement may serve as a useful adjunct for stable internal fixation of supracondylar distal femur fractures with severe osteoporosis.