The prevalence of trinucleotide repeat disorders can be studied by assessing the distribution of each disorder, specifically.

Friedreich ataxia is the most commonly encountered autosomal recessive ataxia in a clinical setting and accounts for 50% of all cases of hereditary ataxia. The incidence ranges anywhere between 1 in 22,000 to 2 in 100,000, with most studies yielding an incidence among Europeans and North Americans of European descent of approximately 1.5 per 100,000 per year. Overall, the FA carrier rate has been estimated to be between 1 in 60 to 1 in 90 with a disease prevalence of 1 per 29,000.

Studies on a full mutation Fragile X syndrome, in males, demonstrates that the number of fragile X cases among Tunisian Jews is 10-times the numbers in the Caucasians population. A lower prevalence of the syndrome is documented among Native Americans, due to fewer CGG repeat sequences found among them. Similar results are documented among the Spanish Basque population. Elbaz et al. studied the Afro-Caribbean population, and Crawford et al. examined an African-American population in metropolitan Atlanta, Georgia, USA. Both studies suggested that the point estimate of disease is 1 in 2,500 in their respective general population, which is higher than that observed among the Caucasians.

Spinocerebellar ataxias have a global prevalence of 3 in 100,000, with a wide regional variation. While SCA3 is the commonest subtype around the globe, SCA2 is more prevalent in Cuba than SCA3. SCA7 is the most frequent subtype in Venezuela, SCA6 is one of the most common autosomal dominant cerebellar ataxias in Northern England. Other similar studies in Germany, United Kingdom, France, United States, Japan, and Taiwan confirm the relative rarity of SCA with prevalence rates of 8, 23, 35, 36, and 42 per 100,000. SCA subtypes are each responsible for less than 1% of undiagnosed autosomal dominant cerebellar ataxia (ADCA).

Huntington disease (HD), today, results from CAG repeat expansions usually of paternal origin. The frequency of these expansions was highest in Hispanic Americans and Northern Europeans, and lowest in black Africans and East Asians. The prevalence of HD in these populations could be correlated with the frequency of intermediate alleles ('borderline alleles') in the population.

The Myotonic Dystrophy(DM) gene frequency is 1 in 1,100 among a study in the Finnish population, equally divided between DM1 and DM2. A study indicated that DM1 was the most common genetic disease of skeletal muscle in England. A gene frequency of 1 in 7,400 is estimated in the Europian population. DM1 is very rampant in certain populations, for example, the frequency was 1 in 550 among residents of Northeastern Quebec. The epidemiology of DM1 in the United States has not yielded conclusive results. However, unlike DM1, DM2 does not have a strong bias for intergenerational expansion, and correlations between disease severity and expansion size are relatively weak, which also leads to less anticipation in DM2 than in DM1.