Clinical examination focused on lymph nodes in the supraclavicular and axillary regions is fundamental. Clinicians may choose to start with barium studies on those patients with clinical suspicion, but upper endoscopy with minimally invasive biopsy should be performed to confirm the diagnosis. Multiple biopsies should provide sufficient histological material with a higher accuracy of obtaining a correct diagnosis (one biopsy has 93% accuracy, four biopsies have 95% accuracy, and seven biopsies have 98% accuracy). In vivo staining with Lugol’s iodine is not established.

Computed tomography (CT) of the thorax and abdomen should be performed to evaluate the extent of the primary tumor and search for potential liver metastases and celiac lymphadenopathy. However, CT is inconsistent to differentiate tumor depth, has poor lymph node sensitivity, and occasionally fails to detect small metastases, particularly within the peritoneum.

Endoscopic ultrasound (EUS) has become the standard of therapy technique for locoregional staging, with up to 90% accuracy in assessing tumor depth and locoregional and mediastinal lymph nodes involvement. Additionally, EUS allows a fine needle aspiration biopsy of suspicious lymph nodes (more than 1 cm) to confirm the presence of lymph node metastasis which is paramount for appropriate staging. A limitation of EUS is that it cannot transverse tumor stenosis, clinically seen in a third of cases, which can result in an understated tumor. EUS may be used after neoadjuvant therapy to restage local disease before surgery but lacks sensitivity to assess complete response.

To evaluate distance metastases, positron emission tomography CT (PET/CT) has become part of the routine pretreatment diagnostic workup. Adenocarcinoma frequently metastasizes to intrabdominal sites, whereas squamous cell carcinoma is usually intrathoracic. PET allows the detection of occult sites of distant metastatic spread and spares the patient the morbidity of an aggressive local-regional treatment approach when unnecessary, as in up to 20% of cases. PET/CT may be clinically useful in patients after induction therapy for the locally advanced disease to help exclude patients from sequential surgery if metastatic disease is found. This occurs in 8% of patients.

The use of diagnostic laparoscopy for resectable disease continues to be controversial and not routinely recommended. Prior tumor, node, metastasis (TNM) staging provided separate esophageal squamous cell carcinoma and adenocarcinoma staging, but the eighth edition in 2017 grouped them back together. A major change is that EGJ tumors will be staged as esophageal if epicenter in origin and less than 2 cm into the proximal stomach (previously 5 cm). EGJ are sub-classified by Siewert et al. depending on the distance to the anatomic junction into type I (less than 1 cm), II (1 to 2 cm), and III (more than 2 cm), the last occurring in more than 66% of cases. The number of lymph nodes is more important than location. Regardless of the histology, half of the patients will present with locally advanced or metastatic disease.