The concepts of quality and safety in vascular medicine overlap with other branches of medicine and with non-medical industries. Standards and evaluation of healthcare quality, safety, and person-centered care and the quality improvement tools and approaches that should be used in vascular medicine are reviewed elsewhere.

**Regulation, Administration, Fragmentation of Care, and Ethical Problems in Vascular Medicine**

Individual state medical boards and court systems uphold standards for vascular medicine healthcare providers (VHCP), with medical boards primarily enforcing VHCP ethics standards and courts primarily judging issues of VHCP negligence in adherence to state laws.

However, most healthcare practice standards in vascular medicine are not established through the regulatory processes described above but are instead determined by guidelines from national medical specialty organizations. Organizations that publish standards for VHCPs include the following:

- Society for Vascular Surgery (SVS)

- American Venous Forum (the latter two organizations work in conjunction with the American College of Surgeons (ACS))

- Society of Interventional Radiology (an organization that works in conjunction with the American College of Radiology)

- Cardiovascular and Interventional Radiology Society of Europe

- European Society for Vascular Surgery

- American College of Cardiology (ACC)

- American Registry of Radiologic Technologists

- American Society of Radiologic Technologists

These organizations at times interact with each other to set quality guidelines. Some facets of vascular medicine quality may be addressed by only one of these organizations (e.g., an organization in Europe but not in the US). Although sometimes different types of invasive and non-invasive VCHP organizations combine to provide a comprehensive approach to publishing evidence-based guidelines, they often remain in their silos, which raises some questions about how much their guidelines are driven by evidence vs. promotion of their own society's political and financial agendas.

Healthcare facility administrators and policymakers who impact the practice of vascular medicine often pay lip service to the notion that they promote quality. Medicare, Medicaid, and private insurers (payers) manage hospitals using cost containment incentive payments, and HCP employers manage HCPs using productivity incentive metrics. Physicians who perform invasive procedures are incentivized to recommend invasive procedures that have not been shown to outperform less invasive therapies but earn the physician higher wRVUs, which translates to increased payment. Research studies confirm that cost containment and productivity-based financial incentives lead to cost-reduction and incentive-related output-increasing behaviors, respectively.****Neither type of behavior results in improved quality per se; on the contrary, both types of behavior often result in decreased quality.

VHCPs' decision to overtreat (i.e., to offer treatment when a patient does not meet a pre-treatment predictive threshold corresponding to a high likelihood of obtaining a measurable health outcome improvement) is a common problem in vascular medicine. This is due to the factors discussed above (e.g., primarily productivity-based incentives), along with the following:

- There is misappropriation of work relative value units (wRVUs) by the persons determining wRVU values (e.g., to overvalue or undervalue types of HCP work).

- Incentives to perform services to achieve short-term benefits that have not been shown to outweigh the long-term costs or outperform alternate services. For example, a sponsored graded walking program for lower extremity chronic arterial insufficiency / supervised exercise therapy (SET)) can produce equal long-term benefits with less risk and cost than an invasive vascular procedure but more slowly.

- Pressure by a patient to take action. There are some situations in vascular medicine where invasive procedures have not improved outcomes even compared to watchful waiting.

- The belief that treating is a way to reduce the chance of legal liability for failure to treat

- Fragmentation of care. Unlike in oncology, where committees ('tumor boards') made of representatives from different specialties debate the merit of what each type of therapy various specialist physicians can offer a patient based on published literature and personal experience, patients with vascular disease typically do not benefit from similar types of inter-profession dialogue regarding what therapy is best suited for them.

- No oath that VHCPs take or code of ethics that they agree to follow, inducing them either to know the latest evidence-based treatment options or to adhere to them even if they did.

- Numerous other causes.

The largest American healthcare insurer for persons with vascular disease, Medicare began compensating vascular healthcare providers for quality in the early 2010s. The current penalty for performing in the lowest tier of HCPs nationally with respect to Medicare performance criteria is a payment reduction of 9% from the mean payment. Whether quality incentives will approach or overtake volume incentives as the primary driver of HCP decision-making in vascular medicine remains to be seen.

**Research Problems**

Research in vascular medicine poses several challenges. Technology, such as stent technology, changes quickly; demonstration of the technology's efficacy on a composite basis over time is often inadequate before the technology is offered to persons at a high cost with truly unknown safety vs. efficacy ratios (as in the case of inferior vena cava filters). The generalizability of research for determining treatment efficacy in vascular medicine is limited by myriad disease patterns that affect arteries and veins differently in different persons. The natural history of disease in persons who present with arterial insufficiency syndromes of the lower extremity and/or carotid distribution or with aneurysms tends to have a fairly high risk.

Since almost any type of treatment -- including conservative measures such as SET or the medical treatment of hypertension, cholesterol, and triglycerides -- will improve these situations, it is sometimes difficult to sort out the quality and safety issues among treatments. Although vascular medicine lends itself to randomized controlled trials (RCTs), figuring out the complexity of the disease in the research process can be sacrificed for the "easier" route of simply isolating a new treatment group and a control group and measuring a difference between them.

**Safety Problems**

Safety in vascular medicine (as in medicine at large) in the United States became an issue of widespread concern only after the National Academy of Medicine (at that time called the Institute of Medicine) published a report for the US Congress called "To Err is Human."

Issues that uniquely relate to vascular medicine can be divided into two categories: conservative (non-invasive) management and interventional (invasive) management.

**Interventional Treatment Setting**

In the interventional setting, complications include:

- Hemorrhages

- Thromboses

- Embolisms

- Pseudoaneurysms

- Fistulas

Downstream effects of vascular injuries include damage to the tissues supplied or drained by the injured vessels secondary to ischemia or infarction.

Safety-preserving measures in the interventional setting are numerous. Three categories of safety measures are provided here.

- Communication: Verbal re-confirmation should be performed (in a team setting) with the patient that the patient identification, type of treatment, and treatment site are correct.****

- Image guidance: Invasive vascular procedures continue to make greater use of image guidance to reduce the degree of invasiveness, but endovascular image-guided therapies carry their own sets of hazards. Fluoroscopic-guided procedures use radiation, which can cause tissue injuries that progress to burns and even cancer, which is reviewed in greater detail elsewhere.****They also use iodinated contrast (which can injure glomeruli, known as acute kidney injury (AKI)) or carbon dioxide (which can cause tissue ischemia from air emboli).****Intravascular ultrasound (IVUS)-guided procedures show promise as an alternative for fluoroscopy-guided procedures that could reduce fluoroscopy-related safety hazards, especially when the costs of IVUS technology decrease to enable it to be used more often from a practice management standpoint.

- Human factors engineering (HFE): HFE strategies are methods for tailoring job tasks to better match the ability of the person performing them so that tasks are as easy as possible to perform. HFE strategies can reduce wasted motion and time and make human actions more reliable and poka-yoke (mistake-proof). An example of this in vascular medicine is designing coaxial sheaths, dilators, catheters, guidewires, and stopcocks in a system that has seamless interchangeability of items without the ability for HCPs to connect or interchange the tools improperly.

**Conservative Treatment Setting**

The conservative management of vascular health includes medication, physical therapy, and diet modification. In this setting, hemorrhages, thromboses, and other drug adverse reactions are the main complications.

Patients presenting for treatment by VHCPs tend to have multiple underlying comorbid conditions, particularly hypertension, diabetes mellitus, and cardiac dysfunction. Medications for vascular conditions, such as statins, often cause side effects and affect the therapeutic window of other drugs. Although statins offer an evidence-based therapeutic advantage for reducing arterial cholesterol and inflammation and have become almost universal for treating atherosclerosis (representing one of the significant advances in clinical medicine since 1987), they frequently cause hepatotoxicity and myositis. The ACC recommends that, prior to starting a patient on a statin, a VHCP should determine the patient's baseline alanine aminotransferase (ALT) level to enable the detection of increases in this level attributable to the statin to guide future management decisions.

The ACC stated that it does not consider there to be high-quality evidence for any other particular drug side effect monitoring algorithm. It recommended lowering the intensity of statin therapy based on patients' muscle aches or other symptoms of muscle injury severity and that creatine kinase levels could be used as an adjunct management aide.

Automated alerts based on software algorithms in electronic health records and medication ordering systems can improve safety.