When a corneal foreign body (FB) is suspected, obtaining a thorough history is essential. Determine the mechanism of the traumatic event, including which materials may be embedded in the cornea. Consider the patient's occupation, the location of the accident, and whether eye protection was in use at the time of the trauma. Investigate how the injury ensued. A forceful event with projectile debris increases the suspicion for intraocular involvement. Obtain best-corrected entrance visual acuities. Perform a careful pupillary examination with attention to whether any anisocoria is present or if there is an abnormally shaped pupil.

Before performing the procedure review, the possible risks including the potential for infection, corneal scarring, corneal perforation, or vision loss. A signed informed consent form should be obtained and included in the documentation.

The use of the slit-lamp biomicroscope enables a detailed evaluation of the superficial ocular structures. However, when a slit-lamp is not available, a variety of light and magnification systems can serve to identify most FB. Initially, the location and depth of any foreign bodies should be determined. Eyelid eversion is necessary to establish whether any additional debris is hidden beneath the eyelids. Carefully evaluate the ocular surface of both eyes, with and without sodium fluorescein. Confirm that the fluorescein staining pattern is stable without observing any dark downward streaming disruption (Seidel sign). If the Seidel sign is positive, discontinue preparation. Intraocular penetration has occurred, and the patient must be sent for immediate ophthalmologic evaluation.

The patient must be properly anesthetized by placing one or two drops of topical anesthetic into the lower fornix at least 30 seconds prior to any potential contact with the cornea. It is necessary to communicate to the patient how the procedure should proceed and what is expected of them. The patient must be stabilized at the biomicroscope. Care team members should assist in immobilizing patients who are at risk for disruptive reflex head movements. A fixation target should be identified to facilitate a safe and direct approach to the foreign body while reducing the potential for eye movements during the procedure. Infrequently an eyelid speculum will be necessary to account for a strong blinking reflex. When approaching the corneal surface with a needle or a spud, stabilizing the operative hand on a boney facial structure is helpful.