Hemorrhages within cerebral parenchyma are often categorized into primary injury, i.e., the immediate tissue injury from the hematoma and secondary injury - the subsequent pathological change that results from the hemorrhage. Although ICH is commonly considered a single event disease, it is more recently being considered as a dynamic condition with multiple phases, these being:

- The initial extravasation of blood into the parenchyma

- Subsequent bleeding around the clot causing expansion

- Swelling or edema around the hematoma

An acute ICH causes a sudden increase in mass within the parenchyma of the brain, which causes compression and disruption of the surrounding neuronal tissue, leading to a potential compromise of the nearby cell signaling pathways and causing a focal neurological deficit

When the hematoma is within the brainstem, the initial manifestation can be a decreased level of consciousness, along with cardiorespiratory distress or even arrest. One important factor in predicting patients' prognosis and functional outcome is the expansion of the initial hematoma, which is defined on repeat CT scanning as a volume increase of 33 to 50%.

Over 70% of ICHs have been noted to expand in the first 24hours from the onset due to continued or repeat bleeding. Studies by Brott et al. revealed that 26% of patients with ICH had hematoma expansion within 1 hour of the first CT scan**.**

Following the vascular bleeding phenomenon, other pathological events occur, which results in secondary brain injury. As a consequence of acute bleeding, the brain parenchyma recruits inflammatory cytokines and thrombin, which causes edema or tissue swelling around the acute hemorrhage.****The potential mechanism of early edema around the clot is considered to be a vasogenic reaction to pro-osmotic substances such as electrolytes and protein, which are released from the acute hematoma. This is followed by activation of the coagulation cascade and increased thrombin expression, which may propagate swelling. After the first week, any further edema is related to the cytotoxic effects of hemoglobin breakdown and the formation of reactive oxygen species**.**The cause of cerebral ischemia following a hypertensive bleed was considered secondary to the compression of cerebral tissue by adjacent hematoma and oedematous tissue under raised pressure. However, studies have now found necrotic tissue in the region around the ICH, thus suggesting apoptosis caused by the expression of nuclear factor-kB within neural-cell nucleoli.