**Normal Craniofacial Development**

As an infant grows into childhood and adulthood, the craniofacial proportions change. To illustrate how normal growth occurs, the craniofacial region is broken up into three general regions: the neurocranium (further divided into the calvaria and basicranium), the nasomaxillary complex, and the mandible. In infants, the neurocranium is much larger relative to the nasomaxillary complex and the mandible. As demand for the masticatory and respiratory systems grows, the nose, mouth, and mandible grow considerably to more closely resemble the proportions of the adult face.

The calvaria forms the roof of the skull, while the basicranium forms the floor. The bones of the calvaria are initially separated by soft fontanelles, which will eventually form sutures and fuse in the adult. As the brain grows, the calvarial bones slowly separate from one another, stimulating new bone growth. The calvaria is fully formed by about four years of age. Craniosynostosis results when the fusion of the calvarial sutures occurs too early. The basicranium grows more slowly than the calvaria; it reaches 95% of its adult size by the age of 10.

The nasomaxillary complex normally grows anterior and inferiorly from the basicranium as a result of soft-tissue growth. Midface maturity is reached at about 12 years. As the nasomaxillary complex grows, the mandible concomitantly protrudes in the downward and forward directions. This results from the increasing size of the muscles of mastication and the developing oropharynx. The mandible does not reach adult size in males until well after puberty, into their early twenties.

**Osteogenesis**

Osteogenesis occurs by the initial formation of primary bone. Primary bone is immature and lacks strength; its collagen fibers are arranged in a random pattern. Primary bone is gradually replaced by stronger secondary bone, which has an orderly collagen pattern. Osteogenesis can occur either through endochondral ossification of existing cartilage or intramembranous ossification in the mesenchyme. The latter is employed in distraction osteogenesis: undifferentiated mesenchymal cells are signaled to differentiate into osteoblasts, which create the osteoid of primary bone. This ossifies to become secondary bone.

**Osteogenesis in Fracture Healing**

There are three stages to fracture healing: inflammation, repair, and remodeling.

**Inflammation Stage**: A hematoma forms at the fracture site and growth factors are secreted by hematopoietic cells in the hematoma. Fibroblasts migrate to the fracture site in response to transforming growth factor-beta (TGF-Beta) and other cytokines and granulation tissue forms at the fracture site. Fibroblasts and osteoblasts then proliferate at the fracture site.

**Repair Stage:**Formation of the primary soft callus begins. Ossification occurs as fibroblasts differentiate into chondrocytes expressing type 2 collagen, which are gradually replaced with type 1 collagen (woven bone). This process is dependent upon many cytokines, particularly tumor necrosis factor-alpha (TNF-Alpha). This is the stage utilized by distraction osteogenesis. The initial soft callus is allowed to form, and then a mechanical force is applied to stretch the callus without breaking it, resulting in lengthening. Rates of distraction (stretch) tolerated depend on the age and health of the patient and of the bones being distracted. A rate of 1mm/day is frequently employed in mandibular distraction, for example. The maximum distance a bone can be distracted also differs according to the bone involved but is usually constrained most by the surrounding skin and soft tissue. If a callus is immobilized fracture healing will proceed to the remodeling stage, ergo, once the desired length of distraction has been achieved, the bone segments must be held in rigid fixation to allow ossification and subsequent remodeling.

**Remodeling Stage:**Chondrocytes present undergo terminal differentiation involving numerous signaling pathways, some involving parathyroid hormone-related peptide (PTHrP) and bone morphogenetic protein (BMP). The extracellular matrix becomes calcified, and type X collagen is expressed as chondrocytes undergo apoptosis. New blood vessel ingrowth is stimulated by vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF), and the resultant woven bone enters organized osteoblast/osteoclast remodeling.