**Retinal Ganglion cells**

It is important to appreciate that the exact cause of glaucoma is not fully known, but the underlying pathology lies in the apoptosis of retinal ganglion cells. Retinal ganglion cells (RGC) are the third class of photoreceptors that have recently been noted in the scientific literature for their intrinsic photosensitivity. RGCs form functional microcircuits with rods, cones, amacrine cells, and bipolar cells that help transmit both image forming and non-image forming information to the brain. RGC axons target the suprachiasmatic nucleus (SCN), intergeniculate leaflet (IGL), and olivary pretectal nucleus (OPN), ventral division of the lateral geniculate nucleus (LGv), and the preoptic area. RGCs have been found to play a role in modulating circadian rhythm and the release of melatonin, regulating pupil size, and forming an important relay in on-off centers of the retina. It is also important to note that RGC axons remain unmyelinated until they have passed through the lamina cribrosa and have converged to form the optic nerve (cranial nerve 2). Only after passing through the lamina cribrosa do we see oligodendrocytes myelinating the axons of the RGCs. Iatrogenically induced ocular hypertension in mice, cats, and monkeys have shown blockade of both orthograde and retrograde axonal transport, which also plays an integral role in transporting growth factors such as brain-derived neurotrophic factor. Regardless of whether intraocular pressure is elevated, normal, or decreased- it is the death of RGCs that underlies the pathology of glaucoma.

**Lamina Cribrosa**

The lamina cribrosa is a sieve-like fenestration at the back of the sclera that allows for a conglomeration of retinal axons and blood vessels to exit the posterior of the eye. Changes in the three-dimensional structure of the lamina cribrosa have been implicated in the pathogenesis of glaucomatous optic atrophy. The superior and inferior channels of the lamina cribrosa contain larger pores and thinner connective tissue support for the passage of nerve-fiber bundles than the nasal and temporal parts of the lamina. It is interesting to note that the most common pattern of glaucomatous optic nerve thinning occurs at the inferior and superior portions of the optic nerve. Also, the superior and inferior laminar zones of the lamina cribrosa is where the arcuate area ganglion cell axons travel through and these axons are the most susceptible to glaucomatous damage. It is thought that mechanical damage to axons and the prevention of essential trophic factors, such as brain-derived neurotrophic factor (BDNF) being appropriately delivered is conducive to the disease process. Studies have found that statistically significant depth variability exists among the superior and inferior lamina cribrosa of healthy patients and those with OAG. Patients suffering from OAG were found to have greater depth at the optic cup floor, possibly as a result of increased IOP pressure. One study looked at the lamina cribrosa using Heidelberg Retina Tomograph and found a greater level of topographic variability and "spikiness" when looking at the lamina cribrosa of OAG patients. This is most likely a sign of fragility in the lamina, as increased spikiness was inversely related to Humphrey mean deviation (P<0.05), and cup-disc ratio (P<0.004) and was directly related to nerve fiber layer thickness (P<0.005).

**Elevated Intraocular Pressure**

High IOP is an important risk factor for the progression of glaucoma. Of the risk factors causing open-angle glaucoma, the most studied risk factor had been elevated IOP, as it is modifiable. It has been shown that once IOP rises above 21 mmHg, there is a significant increase in the risk of developing visual field loss (even with only small increases in IOP), especially once IOP rises above 26 mmHg to 30 mmHg. The high fluctuation of IOP may also lead to glaucoma progression. Reduction of IOP leads to less progression or stabilization of the glaucomatous optic nerve changes and visual field changes. About 40-50% of all OAG cases have IOP below 22 mm Hg in a single screening.

**Aqueous Outflow**

The two main proposed mechanisms by which an elevated IOP is thought to contribute to glaucomatous damage includes vascular dysfunction resulting in ischemia to the optic nerve, and mechanical dysfunction as a result of compression of the axons. When open-angle glaucoma in a patient is attributed to elevated IOP, the cause of this increase in IOP is commonly thought occur due to dysfunction in aqueous outflow through the trabecular meshwork of the eye. This may occur as a result of partial obstruction due to foreign material (e.g., accumulated mucopolysaccharides, in the trabecular meshwork), a reduction in the number of trabecular endothelial cells, a decreased density of trabecular pores, number of vacuoles, or size of the inner wall endothelium of the canal of Schlemm, loss of phagocytic activity, or dysfunction in the neurological feedback loop involved in drainage of aqueous humor. Other proposed mechanisms for obstruction of aqueous humor outflow include oxidative damage to the meshwork, abnormal corticosteroid metabolism, adrenergic dysfunction, or an immunological process. It is important to note that unlike angle-closure glaucoma, the drainage angle between the iris and cornea remain open in open-angle glaucoma. Finally, it has been proposed that certain individuals may have a genetic predisposition to cell death of individual axons in the eye, resulting in the release of potentially cytotoxic substances such as glutamate, calcium, nitric oxide, and free radicals, as well as apoptosis of neighboring cells.