Clinical presentation can vary from asymptomatic to patients with disabling disease as per the WMLs etiology. Elderly patients with small punctate cerebral vascular white matter lesions (WMLs) are usually asymptomatic, but they progress to large confluent lesions and can present with subtle functional decline, cognitive impairment, dementia, urinary incontinence, or gait and balance impairment and neuropsychiatric disorders.

Within the group of vascular WM diseases, the distribution of lesions varies greatly, and consequently, the clinical aspects. For instance, in SVD, the WMHs are mainly found in basal ganglia and frontotemporal and periventricular WM. It may induce cognitive impairment, loss of balance or coordination, vision loss, and dizziness. Severe headaches can be present in different types of WMLs.

Patients with non-vascular etiology of WMLs like MS can have heterogeneous presentations, including fatigue, unilateral visual blurring, sensory changes, motor abnormality, urinary incontinence, speech and swallowing difficulties, pain, anxiety, depression, numbness and tingling, cognitive dysfunction. Nevertheless, the clinical scenario varies from patient to patient as well as the evolution of the disease. In some patients, indeed, there is a progressive and rapid deterioration, while in others, an alternation between relapses and remissions can be observed.

Clinical aspects of NMOSD include acute attacks of bilateral optic neuritis with significant visual loss or transverse myelitis, inducing limb weakness, sensory loss, and bladder dysfunction. Other symptoms can include episodes of intractable nausea, vomiting, hiccups, excessive daytime somnolence or narcolepsy, and seizures. There are a commonly relapsing course and variable degrees of recovery within weeks to months.

Children with WMLs presenting with progressive symptoms of declining developmental milestones, cognitive impairment, and motor abnormalities should be suspected for leukodystrophy. However, patients in their first or second decade with WMLs secondary to ADEM present with acute onset and rapidly progressive symptoms of fever, headache, vomiting, confusion, or altered sensorium. Although migraine was associated with structural changes in the brain WM, these lesions are generally not linked to any neurological issues as well as an increased risk of cognitive decline.