The proposed etiological mechanism for PDS is the concave iris configuration, which results in rubbing the iris's posterior surface against the zonular fibers anteriorly during pupil dilatation and constriction.

The pigments are released with pupillary movement, and irido-zonular contact is necessary for the same. The maximum irido-zonular contact is noticeable during blinking. It has been hypothesized that with blinking, aqueous humor is shunted from the posterior chamber to the anterior chamber, thus increasing the pressure in the anterior chamber.

With the ciliary muscle contraction during accommodation, the irido-lenticular contact increases as the lens surface move forward. The concave iris configuration has been documented more in myopic eyes without any evidence of pigment dispersion and even in normal eyes.

**Risk Factors for Pigment Dispersion Syndrome**

- **Male gender**-Previous literature has reported a male to female ratio between 2 and 5 to 1 for PG, but for PDS, the male predominance is slightly less 1 to 1.

- **Age**- PDS, and PG are more common in young males in the third decade, and females are typically older in their 40s. PDS has also been reported in young patients in the second decade. In young patients, the lens is not thick, and accommodation is very active; hence concave iris configuration is usually not seen. In contrast, the reverse is applicable for more incidence of PDS and PG in later age groups. In Caucasians, PG is reported in the age group of 40 to 50 years compared to African Americans, where it is reported in younger males.

- **Refractive error**- PDS and PG is more common in myopes with a mean spherical equivalent of -3 to -4 D.

- **Race**- PDS, and PG are more common in African American ancestry. These patients of African ancestry have thick iris, and thus it becomes challenging to identify the transillumination defects.

- **Corneal configuration**- PDS and PG are more common in flat corneas. The excessive gush of aqueous humor from the posterior chamber to the anterior chamber.

- **Iris configuration**- PDS and PG patients have posterior iris insertion and concave iris configuration, which leads to more irido-lenticular contact and more pigment dispersion.

- **Family history**- PDS and PG can run in families. These patients have an autosomal dominant mode of inheritance with incomplete penetrance. The disease can run in multiple generations.

**Risk Factors for Progression to Pigmentary Glaucoma**

- **Trabecular meshwork pigmentation**- More pigmentation is more excellent than the severity of PDS, especially in bilateral cases.

- **Iridolenticular contact**- More the irido-lenticular contact more severe is the PD and PG.

- **Intraocular pressure**- An intraocular pressure of more than 21 mmHg is a high-risk factor for progression from PDS to PG.