When planning reconstructions involving a paramedian forehead flap, conceptualizing the forehead in three distinct regions is helpful. The forehead can be divided into central, lateral, and temporal zones, with differing blood vessels in each one. The central forehead tissue can be transferred as a paramedian forehead flap based upon a unilateral pedicle with enough skin to resurface an entire nose. The flap is perfused entirely by the supratrochlear artery and drained by its corresponding vein, thus giving the flap a specific axial blood supply rather than requiring it to rely upon random perfusion via the subdermal plexus.

Perfusion of the forehead skin comes from the supratrochlear, supraorbital, superficial temporal, and dorsal nasal arteries (from the angular artery). The supratrochlear artery exits the orbit through the orbital septum and passes between the orbicularis oculi (superficially) and the corrugator supercilii (deeply). The supratrochlear artery arises from the internal carotid arterial system, exits the superior medial orbit between 1.7 and 2.2 cm lateral to the midline, and continues vertically, with the glabellar crease at the medial eyebrow approximating where the artery crosses the superior orbital rim. It follows, therefore, that the paramedian forehead flap should be designed to include the supratrochlear blood supply, including deep tissue at the most inferior 2 cm, where the vessels course deep to the frontalis muscle, and more superficial tissue superior to that point because the vessels run in a subdermal plane towards the vertex of the scalp.