**Laboratory Studies**

Patients with lymphangioleiomyomatosis do not have an abnormal complete blood count (CBC) or comprehensive metabolic panel (CMP) unless they have other medical conditions. No definitive tests or biomarkers can definitively establish the diagnosis of LAM. However, some studies suggest that measuring vascular endothelial growth factor D (VEGF-D) in patients suspected of LAM is reasonable as levels greater than or equal to 800 pg/mL have a high sensitivity and specificity for pulmonary lymphangioleiomyomatosis.

**Pulmonary Function Testing**

Airflow obstruction is the most common presentation of LAM, but restrictive or mixed patterns can also occur. Most patients with LAM have increased airflow resistance, reversible airflow obstruction, and obstructive pulmonary pattern. Therefore they are expected to have decreased FEV1/FVC and decreased DLCO on pulmonary function testing. Some reversibility can be noticed upon administering bronchodilators during testing, which is why some patients with respiratory symptoms could be diagnosed initially as having asthma. In clinical practice, a six-minute walk test can be used to assess for hypoxia and oxygen requirements in patients with LAM.

**Imaging**

Chest x-ray shows no specific findings in patients with LAM. The cystic disease is difficult to recognize on a plain chest X-ray, and it may see only non-specific findings of pneumothorax or pleural effusions if present. High-resolution computed tomography (HRCT) has high sensitivity and specificity in detecting the disease and has been suggested as a modality for screening patients suspected of having LAM (strong recommendation).

Septal thickening may be seen; usually, there is no associated lymphadenopathy. However, as LAM progresses, reticulonodular opacities, pleural thickening, or hyperinflation can be seen. In addition, focal ground-glass opacities can be found due to the proliferation of smooth muscle cells, pulmonary hemorrhage, and lymphatic congestion. Other thoracic radiological findings could include septal thickening, chylothorax, pericardial effusion, thoracic duct dilatation, and mediastinal lymph node enlargement.

Imaging of the kidneys is also strongly recommended due to the frequently associated finding of renal angiomyolipomas in patients with LAM. It is reported that 45% to 60% of all LAM patients will develop renal angiomyolipomas.

A screening CT scan is recommended if women resenting with spontaneous pneumothorax during childbearing age, recurrent pneumothorax, or bilateral pneumothorax, and the presence of TSC.

**Biopsy**

Biopsy remains the gold standard for diagnosing LAM, where the characteristic abnormal smooth muscle-like cells can be seen under microscopy. The best approach for biopsy is surgically through either video-assisted thoracoscopy, trans-bronchial lung biopsy, or surgical wedge resection. There are no guidelines on the best approach for the biopsy. Trans-bronchial lung biopsy has a lower yield and higher false-negative rate than surgical biopsy. However, the decision is based on local experience, patient comorbidities, and wishes. The diagnostic yield and safety of transbronchial lung biopsy and transbronchial cryobiopsy require further investigation.

**Pathology and use of biomarkers**

The characteristic pathological findings of pulmonary LAM are smooth muscle cell proliferation in the walls of the alveoli and vascular bed in lung tissue on a hematoxylin-eosin stain (H and E) slide. Pathology can also show cystic spaces. The diagnosis is established by immunohistochemical staining, which will be positive for HMB-45, actin, myosin, estrogen, and progesterone. There have been cases with a diagnosis of LAM through cytology by seeing the smooth muscle-like cells and positive stains, but this remains a low yield compared to tissue biopsy evaluations.

Traditionally to confirm LAM diagnosis, a histopathological test after surgical lung biopsy is required, but the diagnosis can be made clinically through the presence of CT imaging and the presence of one of the following: a diagnosis of TSC, a chylous effusion, lymphangioleiomyoma, renal angiomyolipoma or elevated VEGF-D (strong recommendation).