Alterations in systemic vascular resistance and cardiac output are responsible for changes in MAP.

The most influential variable in determining systemic vascular resistance is the radius of the blood vessels themselves. The radius of these vessels is influenced both by local mediators and the autonomic nervous system. Endothelial cells lining the blood vessels produce and respond to vasoactive substances to either dilate or constrict the vessels depending on the body’s needs.

When MAP is elevated, shearing forces on the vessel walls induce nitric oxide synthesis (NO) in endothelial cells. NO diffuses into vascular smooth muscle cells where it activates guanylyl cyclase and results in the dephosphorylation of GTP to cGMP. The cGMP acts as a second messenger within the cell, ultimately leading to smooth muscle relaxation and dilation of the vessel. Other vasodilating compounds produced locally are bradykinin and the various prostaglandins, which act through similar mechanisms to result in the relaxation of vascular smooth muscle.

Endothelin is a local vasoactive compound that has the opposite effects as NO on vascular smooth muscle. A reduced MAP triggers the production of endothelin within the endothelial cells. Endothelin then diffuses into the vascular smooth muscle cells to bind the ET-1 receptor, a Gq-coupled receptor, resulting in the formation of IP3 and calcium release from the sarcoplasmic reticulum, which leads to smooth muscle contraction and constriction of the vessel.

The autonomic nervous system also plays a vital role in regulating MAP via the baroreceptor reflex. The arterial baroreceptors found in the carotid sinus and aortic arch act through a negative feedback system to maintain the MAP in the ideal range. Baroreceptors communicate with the nucleus tractus solitarius in the medulla of the brainstem via the glossopharyngeal nerve (cranial nerve IX) in the carotid sinus and the vagus nerve (cranial nerve X) in the aortic arch. The nucleus tractus solitarius determines the sympathetic or parasympathetic tone to either raise or lower MAP according to the body’s needs.

When MAP is elevated, increasing baroreceptor stimulation, the nucleus tractus solitarius decreases sympathetic output and increases parasympathetic output. The increase in parasympathetic tone will decrease myocardial chronotropy and dromotropy, with less pronounced effects on inotropy and lusitropy, via the effect of acetylcholine on M2 muscarinic receptors in the myocardium. M2 receptors are Gi-coupled, inhibiting adenylate cyclase and causing a decrease in cAMP levels within the cell. The result is a decrease in cardiac output and a subsequent decrease in MAP.

Conversely, when the MAP decreases, baroreceptor firing decreases, and the nucleus tractus solitarius acts to reduce parasympathetic tone and increase sympathetic tone. The increase in sympathetic tone will increase myocardial chronotropy, dromotropy, inotropy, and lusitropy via the effect of epinephrine and norepinephrine on beta1 adrenergic receptors in the myocardium. Beta1 receptors are Gs-coupled, activating adenylate cyclase and causing an increase in cAMP levels within the cell. In addition to this, epinephrine and norepinephrine act on vascular smooth muscle cells via alpha1 adrenergic receptors to induce vasoconstriction of both arteries and veins. Alpha1 receptors are Gq-coupled and act via the same mechanism as the ET-1 receptor mentioned above. The combination of these events increases both cardiac output and systemic vascular resistance, effectively increasing MAP.

Increased sympathetic tone also occurs during exercise, severe hemorrhage, and in times of psychological stress.

The renal system helps to maintain MAP primarily through the regulation of plasma volume, which directly affects the cardiac output. A drop in renal perfusion triggers the release of renin, launching the renin-angiotensin-aldosterone cascade. Aldosterone acts on the distal convoluted renal tubules to increase sodium reabsorption and therefore increase water reuptake and plasma volume. Angiotensin II acts on the vasculature via the AT1 receptor to induce smooth muscle contraction, resulting in vasoconstriction. The AT1 receptor is Gq-coupled and works via the same mechanism as the ET-1 and alpha1 receptors mentioned above. Together these changes will increase both cardiac output and systemic vascular resistance to increase MAP.