Evaluation of patients is guided by the clinical presentation and severity of the patient's symptoms. All patients with a history of vaping product use in the last 90 days should at least get a chest X-ray, even if the symptoms are mild. Those having significant respiratory distress and low oxygen saturation (less than 95%) should be evaluated with a chest computed tomography (CT) scan if the suspicion of e-cigarette or vaping product use associated with lung injury (EVALI) is high. It is important to note that EVALI is a diagnosis of exclusion. Therefore it is necessary to rule out other possible causes of lung injury, such as viral pneumonia, community-acquired pneumonia, and any ongoing chronic inflammatory process that might affect the lungs.

Locally appropriate and clinically indicated diagnostic evaluation should be performed, including respiratory viral panel, influenza polymerase chain reaction or rapid test, RT-PCR for SARS-COV2, urine antigens of Streptococcus pneumoniae, and Legionella species., sputum culture, bronchoalveolar lavage, blood culture, and testing for HIV-related opportunistic infections.

Diagnostic imaging demonstrates a variety of radiographic presentations. Plain chest radiographs commonly show hazy bilateral opacities with central and peripheral sparing. Likewise, the most common CT finding is diffuse bilateral ground-glass opacities, with a basilar predominance and sometimes subpleural or lobular sparing.

Laboratory evaluation should include a complete blood count with differential liver transaminases and inflammatory markers (e.g., erythrocyte sedimentation rate and C-reactive protein). Moreover, urine toxicology testing, with informed consent, including testing for THC, should be carried out on all patients. The primary role of bronchoscopy is to exclude alternative diagnoses, especially when the imaging findings are atypical and suggestive of an alternate etiology. Other potential candidates for bronchoscopy include patients with a high suspicion of infection, e.g., immunocompromised patients and those on invasive mechanical ventilation.