The rearranged during transfection (RET) protein is a receptor tyrosine kinase that is localized to chromosome 10q11.2. It appears to transduce growth and differentiate signals in several tissues, particularly those arising from neural crest cells. Some cytogenetic mutations have been reported; these may involve intracellular and extracellular domains of the RET protein signaling pathway. The germline RET mutations in MEN2 result in a gain of function of this tyrosine kinase receptor. This is different from many other inherited predispositions to neoplasia that are due to heritable "loss-of-function" mutations that inactivate tumor suppressor proteins.

**Structure of RET Proto-Oncogene and Associated Mutations**

This RET tyrosine kinase protein consists of an extracellular part with a ligand-binding domain, a cadherin (calcium-dependent cell adhesion)-like domain, and a cysteine-rich domain close to the cell membrane. It has a single transmembrane domain and an intracellular part with two tyrosine kinase subdomains, TK1 and TK2. RET activation occurs by the binding of one of its four ligands, glial cell line-derived neurotrophic factor (GDNF), neurturin (TNT), artemin, or persephin. Interaction of these molecules results in dimerization of RET, cross-autophosphorylation, and subsequent phosphorylation of intracellular substrates. The number of different mutations causes MEN2A. The majority of the mutations in MEN2A variants occur in the cysteine-rich region of RET protein's extracellular domain (coded by the genes in exon10 and 11), while mutations in the intracellular TK2 domain cause MEN2B-associated tumors. A single 918 Met to Thr mutation (M918T) in exon 16 is responsible for over 95% of cases of MEN2B. Their are other less common mutations associated with both MEN2A and MEN2B divided into high-risk, moderate-risk and low-risk categories