Since NCS is uncommon, management over the recent decades has been a subject of debate, and it varies a lot depending on the symptoms and age of the patient. Young patients who are in their adolescence with short periods of mild hematuria and insignificant pain can be observed without any treatment for at least 2 years as with physical development the increase in fat and fibrous tissue relieve the LRV obstruction.

Pastershank did the first surgical procedure in 1974. It involved renal vein release via cutting through the fibrous tunnel between aorta and SMA. The most reported procedure was LRV transposition which included separation of the LRV at its convergence with the inferior vena cava and reanastomosis of the excised LRV at a lower level of IVC incision aside from the SMA. Transposition of SMA has the similar type of principal as LRV transposition has that is the division of SMA from its origin of aorta and reanastomosis at a lower level away from LRV, but it has a risk of intestinal ischemia which explains its avoidance nowadays.

Intravascular and extravascular stenting have been applied recently. Extravascular stenting utilizing a ring polytetrafluoroethylene graft is used by open surgery after mobilization of the duodenum the PTFE ring is applied around the LRV. During Intravascular stenting the endograft is being delivered to the narrow portion of the LRV via the femoral vein. Some of the complications of stenting include stent migration, restenosis, and embolization.