Hypercalcemia of malignancy is usually associated with severely elevated calcium levels and often presents as an oncologic emergency.

Adequate hydration and fluid resuscitation are essential in every patient presenting with severe hypercalcemia. Due to diabetes insipidus induced by hypercalcemia, extracellular volume loss requires judicious fluid resuscitation with about 3 to 4 L of 0.9% sodium chloride within 48 hours. Hydration improves urinary calcium excretion and decreases tubular reabsorption of sodium and calcium.

Antiresorptive agents have proven to be effective in the management of resistant hypercalcemia. Severe hypercalcemia occurs from the increased mobilization of calcium from bone, regardless of the etiology. Bisphosphonates act to prevent osteoclastic action directly. Intravenous (IV) administration of zoledronic acid, 4 mg/5 ml, over 15 min or IV pamidronate, 90 mg in 500 ml/0.9% saline or 5% dextrose in water administered (D5W) over 4 hours.

Renal function should be closely monitored during therapy. Another significant side effect of bisphosphonates is osteonecrosis of the jaw. Calcitonin is used for its rapid onset of action and safety in acute settings.

Gallium nitrate is used for the management of MHCM. It reduces osteoclast activity and bone remodeling.

Hydrocortisone 200 to 300 mg IV with a duration of 3 to 5 days may be administered for resistant hypercalcemia often related to hematologic malignancies such as lymphoma, myeloma, or in cases of vitamin D intoxication and granulomatous diseases.

Calcimimetics such as cinacalcet can be used for the emergent treatment of severely elevated calcium levels. Cinacalcet acts on the calcium-sensing receptors, hence decreasing PTH secretion.

**Criteria for surgery in primary hyperparathyroidism:**

Measurement



Total Serum calcium

Skeletal

Renal



Age



Criteria

1.0 mg/dL above the upper limit of normal (0.25 mmol/L)



-BMD: T-score <–2.5 at the lumbar spine, total hip, femoral neck, or distal 1/3 radius

-Vertebral fracture confirmed on Imaging.



-Creatinine clearance <60 mL/min

-24-hour urine calcium >400 mg/day and increased risk of nephrolithiasis

-Presence of stone formation or calcifications on radiograph, ultrasound, or CT



<50 years



Patients only need to meet one of these criteria to be recommended for parathyroid surgery. They do not have to meet more than one.



BMD: Bone mineral density; DXA: Dual Energy X-ray Absorptiometry; CT: computer tomography