These drugs are administered through the inhalation route directly to their sites of action. This mode of administration decreases the dose required for the desired effect as it bypasses the first-pass metabolism in drugs taken orally. The reduced systemic bioavailability also minimizes side effects.

Nebulizer

- Advantages: Coordination with the patient not required, high doses possible

- Disadvantages: Expensive, more time required (10 to 15 minutes per dose), contamination of the machine

Metered Dose Inhalers (MDI)

- Advantages: Less expensive than nebulizers, convenient, faster to use, has a dose counter.

- Disadvantages: Coordination is essential if not using a mask, pharyngeal deposition, difficult to deliver high doses

Dry Powder Inhaler (DPI)

- Advantages: Portable, dose counter, less coordination needed compared to MDI

- Disadvantages: Needs higher inspiratory flow to use effectively, pharyngeal deposition of medication, cannot use in mechanically vented patients

Drug deposition of inhaled corticosteroids in children older than five is similar to that of adults, so the method of administration of ICS in these age groups should be decided based on patient and family preference. However, toddlers and infants cannot reliably generate a sufficient inspiratory flow rate to use dry powder inhalers, so this method of delivery is not recommended for this age group. The recommendation is that young children either use a nebulizer or MDI with a mask and spacer to deliver inhaled corticosteroids.

Many different brands of inhaled corticosteroids are available on the market with similar efficacy between the formulations. Widely used inhaled corticosteroids include budesonide, fluticasone, beclomethasone, flunisolide, mometasone, and triamcinolone.