The various subtypes of xeroderma pigmentosum may have differing clinical history and physical findings. All patients with xeroderma pigmentosum will present with skin changes secondary to severe sun sensitivity. Patients may also present with oral, ophthalmologic, and/or neurologic manifestations of the disease. Given that XP inheritance is in an autosomal recessive pattern, patients do not typically have a family history of XP, and the parents are healthy. History of consanguinity may be present.

Patients born with xeroderma pigmentosum are born with normal skin; however, with increased sun exposure, the patients develop pigmentary changes that typically start before the age of two. Patients usually present with hyperpigmented and hypopigmented macules over the face, neck, chest, and dorsal hands and forearms. They also present with other skin changes secondary to actinic damage such as telangiectasias and actinic keratoses and also develop progressive premature aging of the skin, including atrophy, xerosis, and wrinkling.

The median age for the development of their first non-melanoma skin cancer is about 9.

Patients with xeroderma pigmentosum may also present with oral malignant tumors, especially of the anterior tongue. Patients with XP have been found to develop squamous cell carcinomas of the anterior tongue.

Additionally, patients with xeroderma pigmentosum typically present with multiple ophthalmologic manifestations of their disease. Patients typically complain of progressive eye symptoms over several years. Patients may have photophobia or dry eye symptoms. Patients with XP may develop hyperpigmentation of the eyelid and/or conjunctiva. Patients may also develop telangiectasias, as well. Patients with XP can also present with an ectropion, corneal vascularization, or opacification. Patients can also present with both benign and/or malignant ocular and periocular lesions, including benign lid papillomas, basal cell carcinomas of the eyelid, or malignant melanoma.

Some subtypes of xeroderma pigmentosum also present with progressive neurologic symptoms. These symptoms are most commonly seen in XP subtypes XPA and XPD and occur in about 20% of patients with XP. Neurologic symptoms are progressive over the patient’s life regardless of sun exposure. Neurologic manifestations are secondary to loss of neurons, cortical atrophy, and dilation of the ventricles. Neurologic symptoms may include neurodevelopment deficiency and/or sensorineural deafness. Additionally, patients may also present with microcephaly, hyporeflexia, spasticity, or ataxia.