Flibanserin is administered as a once-daily 100 mg oral tablet taken at bedtime.

It is essential to be aware of what other medications the patient is currently taking, paying particular attention to any moderate or strong CYP3A4 inhibitors such as azole antifungals and protease inhibitors.

Using of these medications is contraindicated in combination with flibanserin. If a patient is taking a moderate or strong CYP3A4 and would like to begin flibanserin, it is imperative to wait two weeks from the last dose before beginning flibanserin.

If the patient needs to discontinue flibanserin and will be beginning a moderate or strong CYP3A4 inhibitor, they may begin two days after the last dose of flibanserin.

Healthcare providers should also be cautious when prescribing flibanserin with potent CYP2C19 inhibitors. These medications, in combination with flibanserin, have been linked to increased adverse reactions, likely due to presumed increased levels of flibanserin.

If patients take digoxin or sirolimus, increased drug concentrations should be monitored due to flibanserin's ability to inhibit p-glycoprotein.

Another consideration for administering flibanserin is if the patient is a poor CYP2C19 poor metabolizer. Poor CYP2C19 metabolizers will be exposed to higher levels of flibanserin, thus increasing their risk for the adverse events of hypotension, syncope, and CNS depression.

Alteration of the dose for patients who are poor metabolizers is not recommended. Due to multiple drug interactions and significant side effects, FDA approval of flibanserin required strict precautions and the initiation of a Risk Evaluation and Mitigation Strategy (REMS) program that requires both physician prescribers and pharmacists to complete a certification to be allowed to prescribe and distribute the medication.

Contraindications:

Due to the increased risk of hypotension and syncope, flibanserin is contraindicated to be used in combination with alcohol and patients with hepatic impairment.

Flibanserin is contraindicated in pregnancy and breastfeeding, as its effects are not known in these populations.