It is important that a CPB be performed with some form of imaging guidance to facilitate identification of the target and surrounding structures. Most providers perform the CPB under CT or fluoroscopic guidance. However, some studies show that endoscopic ultrasound guidance has better outcomes, a longer duration of pain control, and reduced costs.

In a team setting, closed-loop communication must exist. All consents should be signed after specific risks, benefits, and expectations have been explained in detail to the patient. All patients should have a proper procedural timeout performed. The patient's name, date of birth, pertinent allergies, and procedure should be confirmed by all providers and the patient. Site verification and laterality must be confirmed. Implementing guidelines and checklists has proven to reduce the occurrence of adverse outcomes such as surgeon-anesthesiologist miscommunications and wrong-site or wrong-side regional anesthesia procedures.

All team members must communicate their concerns, responsibilities, and activities with all other team members contemporaneously and as indicated throughout the perioperative period, based on their professional discretion. All team members should respect the free flow of information and concerns among team members without allowing or producing an environment of hostility. All interprofessional team members should consider it their duty to neither disrupt the work done by other team members nor to, through their actions or inaction, create additional issues or increase the workload for other team members. [Level V]