Porphyria cutanea tarda is seen in patients with the reduced or absent enzymatic activity of uroporphyrinogen decarboxylase, which leads to a build-up of highly carboxylated porphyrinogens like uroporphyrinogen. These compounds get oxidized to their respective porphyrins, uroporphyrin, and heptacarboxyl porphyrins. The accumulation of these toxic compounds in different organs, especially the liver and skin, leads to the clinical manifestations seen in patients. An important point to note is that the enzymatic activity should drop below 20% before clinical manifestations can be seen.

**Classification of PCT**

- Type I PCT: This is the sporadic type of PCT and is the most common form accounting for 80% of cases. The UROD enzyme levels will be normal, with decreased activity confined to the liver likely caused by a UROD inhibitor and the susceptibility factors listed below.

- Type II PCT: This is the familial type of PCT, which is inherited in an autosomal dominant fashion. It constitutes about 20% of all PCT cases. The important difference in this type is the reduction of enzymatic activity in all cells by 50%.

- Type III PCT: This rare type of PCT is very similar to type I because of normal UROD genes. Yet, this type is observed in more than one family member suggesting the presence of a genetic mechanism other than UROD mutation.

**UROD Inhibitor**

The importance of iron in the pathogenesis of PCT has been realized due to alteration in iron metabolism with iron overload and elevated ferritin levels.

Other susceptibility factors are also thought to be contributing to the development of UROD inhibitors.

**Susceptibility Factors**

The following is a list of factors that can trigger the clinical manifestations of PCT, and in most cases, a combination of two or more is required to do so:

- Alcohol: Alcohol downregulates hepcidin and also increases the absorption of iron. It increases the ALA synthase (delta-aminolevulinic acid synthase) activity while inhibiting uroporphyrinogen decarboxylase. About 80% to 90% of patients with PCT manifestations have a history of heavy alcohol consumption.

- Hepatitis C Virus (HCV): There are several proposed mechanisms for HCV contributing to PCT, including increased hepatocyte iron, increased oxidative stress on hepatocytes, decreased intracellular glutathione concentration, and the formation of a UROD inhibitor. But it is important to note that the pathogenesis here is not related to a reduced enzyme activity but direct damage to the liver cells.

- Estrogen: Although the mechanism by which estrogen exposure causes PCT manifestations is unknown, 66% of PCT patients report exogenous estrogen use.

- HIV: 13% of PCT patients report HIV infection.

- Hemochromatosis: 53% of PCT patients have a hemochromatosis gene mutation.

- Smoking: The percentage of patients with PCT who have admitted to smoking at some point is very high (81%).  The mechanism here is the induction of CYP1A2 synthesis, which in turn induces synthesis of the UROD inhibitor.

Chemical Porphyria: Clinical presentation is similar to PCT. This variant was most famously seen in Turkey during the 1950s famine, where thousands of children and adults consumed wheat treated with the fungicide hexachlorobenzene.