**Anesthesia Technique**

Anesthesia technique varies depending upon the surgeon, pathology, length of surgery, and patient factors. It may be

- Conscious sedation throughout (Awake–awake–awake)

- General anesthesia with an intraoperative awakening for brain mapping.  General anesthesia may be used for both the beginning and the end of the procedure (i.e., asleep-awake-asleep) or only for the beginning (i.e., asleep-awake).

**Conscious Sedation (Awake–awake–awake)**

Moderate sedation is administered during the initial stimulating portions of the procedure like application of the Mayfield Pins, skin incision, removal of the bone flap.  Sedation is stopped or decreased during cortical mapping and restarted during closure. The goal of sedation is to keep the patient responsive to verbal or tactile stimulation with competent airways (moderate sedation). Excessive sedation may result in airway obstruction, hypotension, respiratory depression, and apnea.

Low-dose propofol (50 to 150 mcg/kg/min) and/or  remifentanil (0.01 to 0.05 mcg/kg/min) infusions titrated to desired effect are an excellent choice for moderate sedation in these patient. Benzodiazepines should be avoided during awake craniotomy that involves electrocorticography.

Dexmedetomidine, a highly selective α2-adrenergic receptor (α2-AR) agonist, has emerged as a suitable sedative agent for awake craniotomy. It was approved for sedation in 1999 by the Food and Drug Administration (FDA). It is used in dose of 0.5 to 1 mcg/kg IV bolus  followed by infusion of 0.3 to 0.7 mcg/kg/hour.  The primary advantage of Dexmedetomidine is that it does not cause respiratory depression. Also, it does not interfere with electrocorticography like benzodiazepines. However, it may result in hypotension and bradycardia.

General anesthesia with intraoperative awakening (asleep-awake-asleep technique ): General anesthesia is induced at the start, and the airway is often secured with endotracheal intubation or supraglottic airway device. The patient is kept under General anesthesia during the stimulating part of the surgery, i.e., skull pinning, craniotomy, and dural opening. Once the dura is open, the patient is awakened so that he or she can participate during cortical mapping.

Once the mapping is completed, general anesthesia is induced again. If the airway is secured with endotracheal intubation, the patient may cough or be agitated during the awake phase resulting in brain swelling and interference with surgery. LMA produces less stimulation and a smoother transition from one phase to other and so preferred over endotracheal intubation. However, LMA may get displaced during positioning or intra-op, requiring emergency intubation.

Total intravenous anesthesia using propofol and remifentanil infusion is commonly used. Dexmedetomidine may be used along with propofol. During the sleep phase, rapid-acting inhalation agent like sevoflurane has been used successfully.

**Regional Scalp Block**

Before pinning the head in Mayfield Pins, a bilateral scalp block is commonly done to provide effective analgesia during awake craniotomy. Scalp block provides hemodynamic stability, decreases the stress response to painful stimuli, and thus makes the procedure tolerable, particularly during the awake phase when cortical mapping is done. The scalp block is performed by infiltrating a local anesthetic to seven nerves on either side of the scalp. These nerves include the supraorbital nerve, supratrochlear nerve, zygomaticotemporal nerve, auriculotemporal nerve, lesser occipital nerve, greater occipital nerve, and greater auricular nerve.