Phenelzine is contraindicated in patients who exhibit hypersensitivity to the drug or who have pheochromocytoma, congestive heart failure, severe renal impairment or renal pathology, abnormal LFTs, or a history of liver disease.

The most concerning potential adverse event associated with phenelzine is hypertensive crisis. This can occur via the potentiation of sympathomimetic substances by MAO inhibition. Therefore, phenelzine should not be used concurrently with sympathomimetic drugs (e.g., amphetamines, cocaine, methylphenidate, ephedrine, norephedrine, and dopamine.)

Hypertensive crisis can also occur when taking phenelzine when patients consume foods with high levels of tyramine. During phenelzine therapy, patients should avoid high-protein foods that have undergone protein breakdown through fermentation, aging, smoking, pickling, or bacterial contamination /improper storage. Other foods to avoid include aged cheeses, pickled fish, beer and wine (including reduced alcohol products), liver yeast extract, dry sausages, salamis, pepperoni, Lebanon bologna, pods of broad beans (e.g., fava beans), and yogurt or buttermilk. Excessive intake of chocolate or caffeine can also potentiate hypertensive reactions. While complete elimination of tyramine is often unrealistic, the patient should avoid high-tyramine foods as much as possible.

Phenelzine therapy should not be combined with CNS depressants like alcohol and opioids; concurrent use of phenelzine and meperidine is mostly contraindicated; there are reports of seizures, delirium, circulatory collapse, hyperpyrexia, coma, and death in patients on MAOI therapy who received a single dose of meperidine. The combination of phenelzine and opioids is strongly discouraged.

The list of potential drug interactions for phenelzine, as with other MAOIs, is extensive; therefore, thorough medication reconciliation is necessary before initiating phenelzine therapy. The following includes some of the more commonly encountered interactions that can contraindicate using phenelzine:

- Phenelzine may potentiate the vasopressive effects of direct-acting alpha or beta-agonists; therapy modification is recommended.

- With indirect-acting alpha or beta-agonists, phenelzine may increase the hypertensive effect, and the combination is contraindicated.

- Phenelzine may increase the CNS neurotoxicity of atomoxetine; this combination should be avoided.

- Concurrent use with buspirone may enhance the toxic effects of MAOIs and should be avoided.

- Serotonergic agents should be avoided in conjunction with phenelzine or other MAOIs because of the possibility of serotonin syndrome. This includes but is not limited to:

- SSRIs, other MAOIs
- Serotonin 5-HT1D agonists
- TCAs
- Cyclobenzaprine
- Meperidine
- Propoxyphene
- Sibutramine
- St. Johns Wort

Phenelzine should be avoided during pregnancy; the drug is a Category C pregnancy risk agent. There is no human data available establishing the safe use of phenelzine during pregnancy and breastfeeding; clinicians must weigh the potential benefit of using phenelzine against the possible harm to the mother or fetus.

Phenelzine may increase the risks associated with electroconvulsive therapy (ECT); clinicians should consider halting therapy prior to ECT.