From the moment we enter life, our aging process begins. It is a slow, chronic process, the origins of which are not necessarily well understood but universally accepted. Several theories have emerged as to the origin story of our aging processes. Some hold that aging is a sort of biologically “programmed” mechanism that occurs because extremely advanced age holds little evolutionary benefit, the idea being that if organisms could age for some prolonged-time period, they would be yet another competitor for scarce resources that are also being pursued by a younger generation of organisms mostly thought of as being more capable of reproduction than their aged counterparts.

By extrapolating this idea of programmed senescence to human beings, it has been proposed that our aging results from genetically pre-programmed hormonal mediation. That is, growth hormone and the insulin pathway, which are well-understood to be associated with development, are controlled by the neuroendocrine system and can play a central role in the mediation of an organism’s aging process via various forms of gene expression and subsequent hormonal fluctuance.

Yet another theory that underpins the development of aging is that of accumulations of damage at the cellular level throughout our lifespan. More specifically, to this point, the suggestion is that the generation of reactive oxygen species and the resulting methylation changes in our DNA could be the underlying mechanism by which we progress into aging.