- FA is the most common hereditary ataxia accounting for roughly 50% of all ataxia cases.

- The disease causes neurodegeneration that manifests as a combination of difficulty ambulating, muscle weakness, impaired speech, and loss of sensation and proprioception.

- FA has an autosomal recessive inheritance pattern, and symptom onset is usually in childhood or early adolescence, most commonly in children 8 to 15 years old.

- The global prevalence is 1 in 40,000.

- In the United States, FA affects 1 in 50,000 people and is most common in people of Western European descent.

- Symptoms worsen as time progresses, so most people affected by this disease end up requiring mobility aids such as wheelchairs, lose their vision and hearing, and develop other medical complications such as diabetes mellitus and scoliosis.

- Patients with FA have an abnormal amount of trinucleotide repeats on the frataxin gene on chromosome 9.

- Frataxin is a mitochondrial protein essential for ATP production, regulating iron stores, and preventing oxidative phosphorylation.

- Genetic testing is the cornerstone of the evaluation of patients with FA.

- A repeat expansion of the trinucleotide GAA (guanine-adenine-adenine), typically in the gene's first intron, is the leading cause of this disease.

- There is still no cure for FA. Treatment is centered around the management of symptoms and complications such as diabetes mellitus and heart failure.

- Overall, the prognosis of FA is poor.

- The mean duration of the disease is 15 to 20 years. Since the disease presents in childhood or adolescence, most patients live to 25 to 30 years of age.

- Cardiac dysfunction with hypertrophic cardiomyopathy is the most frequent cause of death. Two-third of patients will die from congestive heart failure or arrhythmia.

- Close cardiologist monitoring is vital throughout a patient's life.

- Gene therapy is considered the best chance of altering the disease course.