Chondroblastoma – These are cartilaginous tumors typically found in the epiphyses (95%) and apophyses of long bones. Chondroblastomas are nonmalignant and usually discovered when a child has constant pain and swelling in an extremity that is unrelated to activity. Radiographically, they demonstrate sclerotic, well-circumscribed lesions located in the epiphysis that may be crossing the growth plate. A central region of intermediate to high signal on T2/STIR images are visible on MR, as well as central enhancement post-gadolinium. Peritumoral edema is frequently associated, as evidenced by surrounding hyperintense areas on T2 images.

Fibrous dysplasia – Predominantly a process found in children and young adults, fibrous dysplasia is a benign, tumor-like process in which healthy bone becomes replaced with fibrous connective tissue and immature trabecular bone. These lesions are due to an error in osteoblastic differentiation and maturation. Usually found incidentally, patients with fibrous dysplasia are typically asymptomatic and require no intervention.  However, morbidity can arise when the lesion is expanding and pressing upon nearby structures. They can be monostotic (involving only one bone) or polyostotic (involving multiple bones). Radiographically, the lytic lesions show cortical thinning with endosteal scalloping and well-circumscribed borders. A ground glass matrix is present, and, occasionally, a “rind sign” is present (a thick layer of sclerotic reactive bone around the lesion).

Giant cell tumor (GCT) – GCT is a nonmalignant tumor of the bone that typically presents in adults who have reached skeletal maturity. They are aggressive osteolytic neoplasms that may have distant metastases to the lungs; these metastases are usually benign. Although the majority are nonmalignant, up to 8% of GCTs will undergo malignant transformation.

Telangiectatic osteosarcoma (TOS) – TOS is similar in presentation and appearance to aneurysmal bone cysts. MRI with gadolinium can help differentiate the two by demonstrating a nodular appearance to the tissue surrounding the cavities in TOS, which corresponds to sarcomatous tissue. TOS will also reveal cortical destruction and a corresponding soft-tissue mass.

Unicameral bone cyst (UBCs) – Appearing in the first two decades of life, UBCs are fluid-filled lesions surrounded by a fibrous lining of mesothelial cells. Patients will commonly present with pain due to a pathological fracture located in the metaphysis of a long bone. Radiography will reveal an expansile lesion that extends across the entire diameter of the involved bone.