# Continuing Education Activity

Immersion pulmonary edema (IPE) is used as an umbrella term for scuba divers pulmonary edema (SDPE) and swimming-induced pulmonary edema (SIPE). Both of these conditions share similar presenting symptoms, diagnostics, and treatment. The pathophysiology is not completely understood, and both conditions are likely underdiagnosed since postmortem exams with pulmonary edema exhibit non-specific findings of heavy edematous lungs and frothy sputum in the airways. These same findings can be found following drowning and prolonged resuscitation efforts. This activity illustrates the evaluation and management of immersion pulmonary edema and reviews the role of interprofessional team members in managing patients with this condition.

**Objectives:**
- Identify the etiology of immersion pulmonary edema.
- Describe the pathophysiology of immersion pulmonary edema.
- Outline the treatment and management options available for immersion pulmonary edema.
- Summarize interprofessional team strategies for improving care coordination and communication to improve outcomes for the patients affected by immersion pulmonary edema.

# Introduction

Scuba diving is considered to be a safe sport when an individual is properly trained and takes appropriate precautions. However, there can be disastrous complications if circumstances are unfavorable or appropriate precautions are not taken. One such potential complication is immersion pulmonary edema. Immersion pulmonary edema (IPE) is used by many as an umbrella term for scuba divers’ pulmonary edema (SDPE) and swimming-induced pulmonary edema (SIPE). Both of these conditions share similar presenting symptoms, diagnostics, and treatment. Case studies from the 1980s to the present time highlight differences in pathophysiology and certain predisposing factors. The pathophysiology is not completely understood, and both conditions are likely underdiagnosed since postmortem exams with pulmonary edema exhibit non-specific findings of heavy edematous lungs and frothy sputum in the airways. These same findings can be found following drowning and prolonged resuscitation efforts.

# Etiology

There are numerous predisposing factors to immersion pulmonary edema, for example, overhydration, cold water, negative inspiratory pressure, asthma, diabetes, drugs (such as beta-blockers), underlying cardiac pathology, physical exertion, previous episodes of IPE, and systemic and pulmonary hypertension.

# Epidemiology

Based on case studies in Europe, IPE incidence is about 1.1%.

# Pathophysiology

Many factors contribute to the hemodynamic and cardiorespiratory changes that induce leakage of fluid from the capillary into the interstitial space and eventually, into the alveolar airspace. IPE is likely due to stress failure secondary to increased pulmonary vascular resistance, transudative edema, and pulmonary capillary leak. With immersion, there is an increase in pulmonary and systemic arterial pressure caused by passive redistribution of venous blood from the extremities to the heart and pulmonary vessels. This increase in intrathoracic blood volume results in a measured decrease in vital capacity. Cold water will augment this further with a reduction in vital capacity to 91% of baseline and increased shunting centrally as a means of heat conservation. This cold water effect is primarily seen with exposure to the torso and limbs rather than the head. Extreme physical exertion will also increase peripheral vascular resistance (PVR) causing increased afterload as well as increased pulmonary artery pressure (PAP), pulmonary artery wedge pressure (PAWP), and pre-load from redistribution of blood from peripheral to thoracic vessels which are augmented further in cold water immersion.

# History and Physical

Symptoms typically start within 10 minutes of a swim and have been reported to start at various times throughout a dive; however, there is a worsening of symptoms upon ascent. IPE is believed to originate with myocardial ischemia beginning early in the session with decompensation when divers surface. Symptoms range widely from mild shortness of breath with frothy sputum to frank hemoptysis, hypoxemia, and death.

# Evaluation

IPE can be confirmed radiographically; although, it may be so mild that a computed tomography (CT) scan is a more definitive test. SDPE may have some transitory respiratory or cardiac disorders underlying it, so respiratory function tests and blood gases are indicated. A thorough cardiac investigation including troponins, creatine kinase-MB, B-type natriuretic peptide (BNP), serial electrocardiograms, and early echocardiogram is also important. Coronary artery assessments may be required, and cardiac pathology addressed. Abnormal cardiac tests should be repeated to demonstrate reversibility or if they are transitory, as seen with Takotsubo cardiomyopathy and reversible myocardial dysfunction. With IPE, BNP is typically high. Antidiuretic hormone (ADH) can be monitored by measuring copeptin (stable C-terminal domain of precursor hormone to ADH). Natremia and albuminuria were typically lower. Ischemia-modified albumin is typically elevated and decreases after normobaric oxygen treatment that reduced hypoxemia. Biomarkers are helpful in the early diagnosis and distinction of IPE from decompression sickness.

# Treatment / Management

Removal from the water will reverse the hydrostatic effect of immersion decreasing filling pressures. Keeping swimmers or divers warm after removal from the water will decrease vasoconstriction and central blood pooling. Patients should be kept upright if they are conscious. For most, a full recovery can be seen within 1-2 days with rest, normobaric oxygen for hypoxemia, and/or beta-mimetic therapy.

# Differential Diagnosis

IPE can co-exist or be mistaken for other diving-related diseases. These include pulmonary barotrauma and decompression sickness. While there is no known association between decompression illness and SDPE, there have been many cases of SDPE with symptoms beginning with ascent resulting in some confusion. There are a number of reasons ascent is associated with worsening of symptoms in IPE. Reasons include damage to pulmonary capillaries from increased pulmonary hypertension caused by pulmonary filtration of bubbles during decompression, hydrostatic positional effects causing negative inspiratory pressures, the natural progression of the disease, expansion of intrathoracic gas redistributing pulmonary edema fluids (Boyle’s Law), or a decrease in pulmonary oxygen pressures during ascent (Henry’s law). It is critical to differentiate SDPE from decompression sickness and arterial gas embolism because a hyperbaric chamber is not indicated in SDPE and could potentially cause harm. In older swimmers and divers, reversible stress cardiomyopathies have been recorded which may explain recurrences triggered by the physiologic effects of immersion. Due to its similarity and potential overlap, aspiration pneumonitis should be excluded.

# Prognosis

Upon removal from the water, there is typically a rapid improvement, although some patients need intensive resuscitation. There have been reports of unconsciousness and even death. With supportive treatment, there is complete resolution of symptoms and normalization of imaging and labs within a couple of days.

# Complications

With a recurrence rate of 30% with immersion, underlying pathologies, and the potential for severe or fatal outcomes, a diagnosis and reversal of underlying causes of IPE should occur before participation in further diving, snorkeling, or energetic swimming. A delay in an investigation for underlying cardiac pathology such as reversible cardiomyopathies may result in normalization of the transitory anomalies. If these tests are performed many days after the event, they may be misleading, resulting in medical and cardiac “clearance to resume diving” with potentially unfortunate subsequent incidents and deaths. If individuals continue to dive and snorkel, there should also be an emphasis on limiting contributing factors by using thermal protection, not overhydrating, ensuring minimal equipment resistance, avoiding excessive exertion, avoiding beta-blockers, or sympathomimetics, using companion divers, and always having emergency oxygen and medivac capability.

# Enhancing Healthcare Team Outcomes

Scuba diving is considered to be a safe sport when an individual is properly trained and takes appropriate precautions. However, there can be disastrous complications if circumstances are unfavorable or appropriate precautions are not taken. One such potential complication is immersion pulmonary edema. Immersion pulmonary edema (IPE) is used by many as an umbrella term for scuba divers’ pulmonary edema (SDPE) and swimming-induced pulmonary edema (SIPE). Patients with IPE are best managed with an interprofessional team approach. The majority of patients with IPE present to the emergency department (ED) and thus healthcare professionals in the ED must be aware of this syndrome and its management. Patient education is vital before they undertake diving, snorkeling, or energetic swimming. If individuals continue to dive and snorkel, there should also be an emphasis on limiting contributing factors by using thermal protection, not overhydrating, ensuring minimal equipment resistance, avoiding excessive exertion, avoiding beta-blockers, or sympathomimetics, using companion divers, and always having emergency oxygen and medivac capability. Any patient with a prior IPE event should be referred to a cardiologist before undertaking any water-related sporting activity.