The diagnosis of selective IgA deficiency is often is one of exclusion. The following conditions are examples of what must be excluded while making a diagnosis of IgA deficiency:

- Common variable immunodeficiency (CVID), where both IgG and IgA decline significantly, although IgM is also reduced in about half the patients. The IgA deficiency can be seen early in the development of CVID. Memory B-cells decrease in number, and responses to vaccines are defective. CVID and IgA deficiency patients also share mutations in transmembrane activators, Calcium modulators, and Cyclophilin ligand interactions (TCL1, TNFRSF 13B).

- Single gene primary immunodeficiencies like X-linked hyper IgM syndrome could be easily differentiated from selective IgA deficiency (For hyper-IgM syndrome, see 'History and Physical'). Low levels of IgA can be seen with deficiencies of one or more IgG subclasses. A normal response is seen to some vaccinations. Infections by encapsulated bacteria (Hemophilus influenza and Streptococcus pneumoniae) are seen here in recurrent sinopulmonary infections as they are in IgA deficiency.

- Patients with thymoma may also present with moderate hypogammaglobulinemia and may have no circulating B cells. Thymoma can present with immunodeficiency (AKA Good Syndrome).

- Chronic lymphocytic leukemia (CLL) and lymphoma can have a decreased level of IgA but at the more advanced stages of the disease and typically as part of a pan-hypogammaglobulinemic format.

- Myeloma; Patients with multiple myeloma can manifest an immunoparetic state where the levels of the uninvolved immunoglobulins decrease due to increasing T and B-cell dysregulation.

- A variety of anti-rheumatic (sulphasalazine, gold), antiepileptic drugs (carbamazepine, valproate), and ACE inhibitors have the potential to lower the IgA levels (See 'Etiology').

With its lack of direct signs and symptoms, IgA deficiency can be overshadowed by other ailments. The presence of clinical acumen, supplemented by suspicion, might be the only and best diagnostic weapon.