Complications associated with odontogenic cysts are also contingent on the precise type of cyst:

- Periapical cysts do not typically present with complications after excision. A residual cyst may form due to incomplete curettage during extraction and a periapical scar may develop when a lesion fills with collagenous tissue rather than bone.

- Residual cysts can cause bone destruction if left untreated, which puts the adjacent teeth at risk. In general, these cysts do not present with complications once removed and have a low to no recurrence after excision.

- Paradental cysts are associated with pericoronitis, which is a deep periodontal pocket. This may damage to the local periodontium as a consequence of the follicular expansion. Typically, they do not present with complications once removed and they do not recur after excision.

- Dentigerous cysts are associated with bony destruction due to the expansion of the cyst.

- Eruption cysts are often self-limiting and present without complications.

- Lateral periodontal cysts typically do not present with complications once removed and they do not recur after excision.

- Odontogenic keratocysts have a high recurrence rate; therefore, close follow-up is necessary. If recurrence occurs, the patient will require additional surgical treatment.

- Orthokeratinizing odontogenic cysts have a low recurrence rate and do not present with complications once removed. They do not recur after excision.

- Glandular odontogenic cysts have a high recurrence rate (20 to 30%); consequently, close interval and long-term follow-up is necessary. The potential for multiple recurrences is high.