**Peripheral Nerve Injuries**

The common neurovascular injuries associated with forearm fractures include ulnar nerve, radial nerve, and superficial branch of radial nerve injury. During operative procedures, the posterior interosseous nerve and radial nerves can get injured.

**Compartment Syndrome**

Fractures are the most common cause of compartment syndrome in the forearm; the distal end of radius fracture is the most common cause. Diagnosis is made by clinical examination and compartment pressure monitoring of the forearm compartments. It is considered a surgical emergency and has to be treated promptly by early fasciotomy of the volar or dorsal compartment. Delayed diagnosis and late management may lead to tissue ischemia and necrosis.

**Infection**

Infection is considered to be the most debilitating complication of all. The most common organism causing infection in forearm fractures is staphylococcus aureus. The incidence of infection in the forearm fractures treated with plate and screw fixation is approximately 3% (ranges from 0.8% to 6% in different studies). The common clinical findings include redness, swelling, a local rise of temperature, and tenderness at the infection site. For mild superficial infections, it can be treated with an oral antibiotic course; however, in deep infections, surgical debridement is the mainstay of treatment to prevent non-union and other complications.

**Non-union**

The incidence of non-union is estimated to be around 2% to 10% of all forearm fractures. The cause is multifactorial, including lack of mechanical stability (inadequate reduction or fixation construct) and impaired biology of bone healing such as infection and metabolic disorders.

The management principles of non-union include excision of the non-union site, the opening of the intramedullary canal, anatomic reduction, and stabilization. The surgical intervention should provide stability and functional restoration for the fracture. The addition of bone grafting procedure provides stimulation for bone formation.

**Malunion**

Malunion in forearm fracture is common, but the exact incidence is not stated in the literature. In a cadaveric study, Mathew et al. demonstrated that angulation of 10 degrees or less did not affect the forearm rotation significantly, even if both bones were mal-aligned. However, angulation of 20 degrees in the ulna or radius in either direction causes loss of pronation-supination of around 30 degrees.

The loss of pronation is greater for angulation at the distal third radius, while the loss of supination is greater for the angulation at the middle third radius. Similarly, deformity of the middle third of the ulna affects more in forearm rotation.

**Radioulnar Synostosis**

Post-operative radioulnar synostosis commonly occurs in a single incision approach for both bone forearm fracture fixation. It is rarely seen with separate approaches. Bone grafting in the interosseous space increases the risk of synostosis. Therefore it is usually recommended to put the bone graft on the opposite side of the interosseous space. Various risk factors for the development of radioulnar synostosis include proximal third fracture, infection, head injury, and soft tissue trauma. Few proposed adjuvants to prevent radioulnar synostosis are early commencement of range of motion exercise, indomethacin, low dose radiation, and anconeus muscle interposition and interposition fat grafting.

**Refracture**

Refracture is one of the least common complications after forearm fractures. The incidence of refracture is more in a patient who had got an implant removed after the union. The forearm fracture fixation with plate osteosynthesis forms a rigid construct that causes stress shielding, reduces vascularity, and causes osteopenia, leading to refracture.