In the majority of cases, cervical ribs are discovered incidentally on a chest or cervical X-ray. In rare cases, individuals may complain of symptoms caused by compression of local structures including the lower brachial plexus, subclavian artery, or subclavian vein; this is thoracic outlet syndrome. In the majority of thoracic outlet syndrome cases, neurological manifestations are the chief complaint. The result is numbness and tingling sensation in the little and ring finger in the distribution of the ulnar nerve (nerve roots C8 and T1). When the subclavian artery is compressed, the individual will experience diminished pulse and change of color and temperature in the affected arm. When the subclavian vein is compressed, the affected limb will be swollen and blue, as blood cannot return to the heart.

Cervical ribs are usually detected in middle-aged adults. Factors that predispose individuals to symptoms are trauma, overuse and poor posture. The compression of these structures by the cervical rib is usually against the scalene muscles. When the subclavian artery is compressed, turning the neck on the contralateral side may result in the loss of pulse in the affected arm (Adson maneuver). CT scan, nerve conduction studies, and an MRI may be needed to assess thoracic outlet syndrome further. Treatment of nerve compression is physical therapy. When conservative treatment fails, one may need to remove the cervical rib and excise the scalene muscles. A bypass graft may be required if the subclavian artery is completely occluded.

To be noted, in patients with abnormalities in Hox gene expression leading to cervical anomalies, the mutation has also been linked to oncogenesis. Germ cell tumors, astrocytoma, and acute lymphoblastic leukemia (ALL) were diagnosed in children with a higher rate of cervical rib and other cervical anomalies