Every child with an ear deformity should have comprehensive hearing diagnostics within the first few months of life. Auditory brainstem response (ABR or BAER) testing is generally the first step in evaluating patients with either unilateral or bilateral aural atresia because both conductive and/or sensorineural hearing loss may be present in either ear. Although conductive hearing loss accounts for up to 90% of the hearing loss, up to 15% of cases may have sensorineural hearing loss requiring further workup.

If the hearing test in the unaffected ear is normal, speech and language development will occur normally, and further testing can be delayed until 6 months of age. However, thorough routine examination and prompt treatment of middle ear effusion are critical to preserving normal hearing in the unaffected ear.

An otherwise abnormal hearing test requires ABR testing to ensure the normal function of at least one ear to allow for normal language development. Genetic testing may also be warranted in suspected syndromic patients. A temporal bone computed tomography (CT) scan is generally not indicated in the initial workup until age 5 or unless surgery is warranted, as suggested by the Jahrsdoerfer grading scale. The Jahrsdoerfer grading scale attributes 2 points for the presence of a stapes bone and 1 point each for the presence of an open oval window, middle ear space, facial nerve, malleus-incus complex, mastoid pneumatization, incus-stapes connection, round window, and external ear. There are ten possible points.