NAFL and NASH are in the spectrum of NAFLD. They both involve steatosis which is defined as more than 5% liver fat. The mechanism of NAFLD can be explained by the "two-hit" hypothesis that involves steatosis (first hit), followed by oxidative stress and injury (second hit).  Increased hepatic fat deposition results from an imbalance between energy supply and consumption. NAFLD is thus the hepatic manifestation of adipose tissue dysfunction secondary to energy surplus.

The three main sources of free fatty acid (FFA) in the liver are plasma nonesterified fatty acids (NEFAs) from adipose tissue (60%), de novo lipogenesis in the liver (25%), and dietary free fatty acids from chylomicrons (15%). The liver gets rid of the fat either via beta-oxidation of FFA (which predominantly occurs in the mitochondria, and in peroxisomes and cytochrome P-450 when there is energy surplus) or via exporting them as very low-density lipoproteins (VLDLs).

The NEFAs in plasma increase when the adipocyte is overtaxed leading to increased lipolysis. The adipose tissue releases FFAs in response to hormones such as glucagon, epinephrine, and adrenocorticotropic hormone. Insulin inhibits adipose tissue lipolysis after meals. When there is adipocyte insulin resistance, there is inappropriate postprandial lipolysis in adipose tissue. Prolonged starvation causes an appropriate release of fat from adipocytes which may cause NASH if the hepatocyte's ability to handle the fat is overwhelmed. Excess calorie intake and parenteral nutrition cause hepatic lipotoxicity due to increased de novo lipogenesis by the liver in an attempt to discard the excess carbohydrates. Monounsaturated fatty acids (MUFAs) are needed to synthesize triglycerides, which prevents cellular injury by keeping excess fatty acids in the liver in the esterified, inert form. Deficient synthesis of MUFAs in the liver or any impairment in the secretion of VLDLs can cause toxic fat accumulation within the hepatocyte. Mitochondrial dysfunction can also cause steatosis due to impaired beta-oxidation of fatty acids (as in alcoholic steatosis, NASH, acute fatty liver of pregnancy and use of medications such as valproic acid).

Different lipids have different potential to cause toxicity. Accumulation of liver triglycerides helps to buffer toxic lipids to lipid droplets enriched with inert triglycerides. Thus, hepatic triglyceride accumulation, which typically manifests as hepatic steatosis, is perhaps a defense mechanism to handle energy surplus in the liver. Toxic fat accumulation in the hepatocytes is caused by nontriglyceride metabolites of free fatty acids. Triglyceride in the lipid droplet form is a non-toxic mechanism to store fatty acids in the inert form. The lipotoxic metabolites of FFA have not been fully identified yet; these likely include saturated fatty acids, free cholesterol, ceramides, lysophosphatidylcholine, and diacylglycerol. The linearity of the two hit hypothesis is questionable as it has not always been shown that isolated steatosis precedes NASH, and the type of fat that typically accumulates in the liver with isolated steatosis (neutral fat or triglyceride) is different from the toxic fat (accumulation of which leads to NASH). The two-hit model does not explain why the first hit (steatosis) occurs. The presence of steatosis in itself might be a marker of hepatotoxic stress, and it is likely that NASH follows when the adaptive responses to the hepatocyte stress fail to maintain hepatocyte viability.

The cascade of events results in mitochondrial dysfunction which impairs oxidate phosphorylation and the ability of the cells to synthesize ATP and provide the energy they need to maintain their structure and function. This leads to the production of reactive oxygen species (ROS), leading to injury of the endoplasmic reticulum and lipid peroxidation. In turn, lipid peroxidation damages DNA, proteins, and membranes with the result of cell ballooning and disruption of its cytoskeleton, driving cells to go into apoptosis and local necrosis. In response to cell injury and necrosis, inflammatory cytokines are released which causes inflammation and activate stellate cells which deposit collagen resulting in fibrosis. Thus the hepatic lipotoxicity secondary to energy surplus leads to other injurious processes such as adipose tissue dysfunction, oxidative stress, endoplasmic reticulum stress, ineffective autophagy and dysbiosis of the gut flora, all of which cause sterile hepatocyte inflammation. Apoptosis, necrosis, and necroptosis of the hepatocyte is the net result of eventual progression to fibrosis and liver cirrhosis.