The formation of the hip joint is highly dependent on the dynamic relationship between femur and acetabulum. Any interference with proper contact between these two in utero or infancy leads to DDH.

Lower limb buds develop around four weeks, chondroblasts aggregate to form the future bones of the hip joint. At six weeks of life, cartilage develops into femur diaphysis, precartilage into the future femoral head, which can’t be differentiated from the acetabulum. Blastemal cells form trochanteric projection.

In the 7th week, Interzone differentiates the sides of the hip joint. Proximally acetabulum is formed as a shallow depression at 65 degrees; this later must deepen to 180 degrees, distally the femoral head and articular cartilage. The middle layer undergoes autolysis to form joint space, synovial membrane, and ligamentum teres. By 11th-week, the hip joint is recognizable. But in utero femoral head growth is faster than acetabulum, which results in under coverage of the femoral head, so any disturbance in the contact will lead to abnormal development.

Swaddling in extreme position (extended hip, adducted, immobile) resulting in maligned contact between the acetabulum and femur prevents proper development of the hip. Acetabulum continues to grow up to age 5.

Maligned contact for a prolonged period leads to chronic changes like hypertrophy of capsule, ligament teres, the formation of thickened acetabular edge (neolimbus), which further prevents the contact, and prevents the relocation of the femoral head.