The nucleus ambiguus is associated with both motor functions involving the muscles of the soft palate, throat, and tongue, as well as autonomic processes such as the gag reflex and cardiac parasympathetic activity. Lesions and ischemic events that affect the lateral medulla may compromise the nucleus ambiguus.

Lateral medullary syndrome, also known as Wallenberg syndrome or PICA syndrome, is a constellation of neurological symptoms that occurs due to ischemia in the lateral part of the medulla. The blockage most often occurs in the vertebral artery or PICA, a branch of the vertebral artery that supplies the lateral medullary region. The classic presentation includes dizziness, loss of balance, difficulty swallowing, and slurred speech. Unilateral lesions that affect the nucleus ambiguus cause an ipsilateral paralysis of the soft palate, larynx, and pharynx. Specifically, the symptoms of dysphagia, dysphonia, and dysarthria are due to the loss of the nucleus ambiguus. Although hoarseness can occur, speech is usually intelligible. Dysphagia is typically not severe; however, a feeding tube might be necessary for transient aphagia resulting from the lesion. During gag reflex testing, the palatal muscles are unable to contract and the uvula contracts away from the affected side.

Besides motor loss, lesions affecting the nucleus ambiguus can also disrupt the sympathetic and parasympathetic cardiac reflexes, resulting in orthostatic hypotension.

The long-term outlook for patients with lateral medullary syndrome depends on the size and location of the area damaged by the infarct. For example, the severity of dysphagia following a lateral medullary stroke was dependent on the extent of damage and location in the lateral medulla.

Bilateral lesions of the nucleus ambiguus completely paralyze the larynx, and the inability to move vocal cords during inspiration can cause death. Bilateral lesions are rare and most often seen in severe amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS).

Sandifer syndrome is a lesser-known disorder mainly seen in infants that also implicated the nucleus ambiguus in its reflex arc. This syndrome results in reflex torticollis in infants with gastroesophageal regurgitation syndrome or a hiatal hernia. This reflex is under the mediation of the afferents traveling to the nucleus solitarius, which reaches the nucleus ambiguus and the dorsal vagal nucleus. From these nuclei, visceral efferent nerves travel via anastomosis to reach the accessory nerve and thus contract the trapezius and sternocleidomastoid muscles. The head positioning from torticollis is hypothesized to provide relief from acid regurgitation.

Cardiac vagal neurons, such as the nucleus ambiguus and dorsal motor neuron, regulate cardiac parasympathetic tone. However, in disease states such as myocardial infarction, cardiac vagal activity is reduced. This situation causes undue stress on the heart, while restoration of parasympathetic function can decrease cardiac work and lessen the risks of ischemia and arrhythmias.

The nucleus ambiguus, therefore, is implicated in a wide range of clinical pathologies due to its critical control of speech, swallowing, and autonomic functions.