Galactoceles usually resolve on their own in most cases, as the hormonal changes linked to lactation settle down. However, in some cases, desquamated epithelial cells and the stagnated milk form an inspissated cyst which further forms crystals. This leads to forming a crystalizing or solid galactocele, with at least ten reported cases in the literature.

FNA shows thick, chalky white material with a gritty sensation during aspiration. Hematoxylin & Eosin staining of the aspirate shows many well-defined purple crystals. Leishman's staining shows discrete and polymorphic refractile crystals. These crystals show positive birefringence. Amorphous proteinaceous material is seen around the crystals. This crystallized galactocele cannot be emptied by aspiration alone and may require further intervention like excision.

The rich nutrient content of milk in galactocele with a possible unsterile technique of aspiration or excision may lead to acute mastitis, which can get further complicated by the formation of breast abscesses.****Clinically it becomes swollen tender with signs of inflammation present. Staphylococcus aureus is the most common causative organism, followed by Streptococcus species. These common pathogens are present in the nose and throat of the nursing babies and infect the breast via the damaged epithelial interface of the nipple-areola complex. It is seen on ultrasound as a complex cyst with thickened walls. Its treatment includes intravenous antibiotics and aspiration or surgical drainage. Sometimes, a breast implant, which is a known predisposing factor, may also get infected with an infected galactocele, necessitating implant removal along with incision and drainage of the abscess.

Breastfeeding should continue because it promotes drainage. A milk fistula is a rare complication of incomplete surgical excision of galactocele.