To recognize hydrazine toxicity, it is essential to be familiar with occupational and environmental risk factors known to be commonly exposed to hydrazine and its derivatives. The occupations most commonly exposed to hydrazine are facilities producing or storing rocket fuels, such as propulsion testing facilities, rocket launching sites, aerospace facilities, hazardous waste sites, and military installations.

A medical history of concurrent tuberculosis may include isoniazid (INH), which metabolizes into hydrazine. Mushroom foragers may be exposed to the false morel, Gyromitra, which contains the mycotoxin gyromitrin that metabolizes into monomethylhydrazine (MMH).

Hydrazine toxicity can occur through inhalation and oral and dermal exposures. Exposures may be categorized as acute (<14 days), intermediate (15 to 364 days), and chronic (>365 days).

Dermal exposure has been mostly linked to occupational injuries through the gold-plating industry, chicken feed additives, herbicides, or steam power plants.

Acute inhalational hydrazine exposure has been associated with pulmonary edema and pleural effusions.****Respiratory arrest in toxic inhalational exposures may be more attributed to hydrazine's neurotoxic and convulsive effects.

Neurotoxicity from acute exposures to hydrazine, monomethylhydrazine (MMH), and 1,1-dimethylhydrazine (UDMH) may range from central nervous system (CNS) depression to seizures.

Hydrazine and its derivatives may cause hemolytic anemia and methemoglobinemia. MMH has been described as having the most severe hemotoxic effects.

Hydrazine exposure has been shown to cause an elevation in alanine aminotransferase (ALT) and aspartate aminotransferase (AST) within 5 hours and lasting up to 1 week, with resolution after 4 to 5 weeks.

Chronic exposure to hydrazine can lead to similar symptoms in the acute setting but also includes additional carcinogenic risk.