Measles is an acute and extremely contagious viral disease that has caused approximately 2.6 million deaths before the introduction of the vaccine. The intensification of vaccination activities has had a decisive influence on the 75% reduction in measles deaths. In countries where measles has been virtually eliminated, cases imported from other countries remain an important source of infection. The vast majority of cases around the world occur in countries with poor health systems. In 2012, a Global Strategic Plan against Rubeola (measles) and Rubella was presented for the period 2012 to 2020, which sets out the following objectives: (1) reduce global measles mortality by at least 95% by the end of 2015 and (2) achieve the elimination of measles and rubella in at least five WHO regions by 2020.

Measles is an exclusively human disease caused by a virus that belongs to the Paramyxovirus family, genus Morbillivirus, which infiltrates and grows within the epithelial cells of the pharynx and lungs. Its mode of transmission is mainly from person to person, by dissemination of droplets of flügge through the air. When the virus is in the air or on an infected surface, it remains active and contagious for periods of up to two hours. The virus can then be transmitted by an individual infected from four days before to four days after the appearance of the rash. The measles virus incubation period varies from 7 to 18 days from exposure to the onset of fever, and about 14 days until the rash appears. The measles virus seems to be antigenically stable, and there is no evidence that viral antigens have changed much over time. In temperate climates, outbreaks usually occur in late winter and early spring, however in tropical climates, the transmission occurs after the rainy season.

Measles most often affects preschoolers between four and five years of age. It can take a more devastating course in certain special populations.  For example, children living in developing countries are at risk for malnutrition and weaker healthcare systems; pregnant women (which increases the risk of complications including abortion, preterm labor, and low birth weight); and immunosuppressed patients with alterations of either cellular or humoral immunity.