- **IgA Nephropathy:**usually occurs after an upper respiratory tract or gastrointestinal infection, but it differs from PSGN in the shorter latency period it takes to appear after the episode of infection. It can also be described as synpharyngitic hematuria- hematuria and infection coincide.

- **Membranoproliferative glomerulonephritis:**also presents with a nephritic picture and hypocomplementemia following respiratory tract infection. Complement levels take a longer time to return to normal than in PSGN or persistently low C3 levels.

- **Lupus nephritis:**sometimes PSGN presents with a picture similar to lupus nephritis. Laboratory testing for antibodies specific to each of the diseases can help in the diagnosis. Positive ANA, ds-DNA, cytopenia, and multi-organ involvement.

- **Nephrotic syndrome: 2**4-hour urine protein excretion is more than 3.5 gram/day along with hypoalbuminemia, edema, hypogammaglobulinemia, and increased risk of thrombosis (due to loss of pro-coagulants).

- **Henoch Schonlein purpura (HSP):**The typical presentation is palpable purpura, renal failure, gastrointestinal and musculoskeletal manifestations. Have normal complement levels.

- **Hemolytic uremic syndrome (HUS):**Labs consistent with Hemolysis (schistocytes, LDH, reticulocyte count, indirect bilirubin), bloody diarrhea, thrombocytopenia, stool culture for Escherichia coil O157: H7

- **ANCA:**Have normal complement levels.

- **Goodpasture disease:**Involves lung and kidneys. Have anti-glomerular basement antibody and normal complement levels.