Thermal burns are common in the United States, and approximately 2 million people are injured every year, with about 155 per million patients needing admission to a hospital, and 6500 cases resulting in death. Burns are complex and dynamic injuries that cause profound activation of platelets and white cells, destruction of the microvasculature by coagulation or thrombosis, and accumulation of edema.

The characteristic of a burn is described as a zone of coagulation, surrounded by an area of stasis, and bordered by erythema. The destruction and obstruction of microvascularization impede cellular and humoral immunity and alters macrophage function. The microcirculation is compromised to the greatest extent during the first 12 to 24 hours after the burn has occurred. The injury can remain in a state of flux for 72 hours, and the lack of oxygenation causes ischemic necrosis rather quickly. The burn also causes extensive edema, which is caused by an increase in capillary permeability, leading to hypoproteinemia.

Goals of treating burns are minimizing the edema, keeping tissue viable in the stasis zone of the burn, protecting the microvasculature, and enhancing host defenses to stave off infection.

The most concerning element to a thermal burn is an infection which is the leading cause of death from burns. This is due to a loss in the integumentary barrier that leads to bacterial invasion and growth as well as obstructed or compromised microvasculature that prevents cellular and humoral elements from reaching the burn site. The immune system is dampened, limiting immunoglobulins and macrophage function in chemotaxis, phagocytosis, and other antibiotic properties.  Besides infection, burns can lead to a myriad of different comorbidities as well, which include pneumonia, respiratory failure, cellulitis, urinary tract infection (UTI), and sepsis.

Since 1965, HBO therapy has been suggested to improve outcomes in thermal burns after it was observed to heal second-degree burns faster in a group of coal miners being treated for carbon monoxide therapy. The skin adjacent to second and third-degree burns is more hypoxic than normal skin, and continued studies have shown that hypoxic tissue surrounding the burn site can be returned to normal oxygen levels with oxygen administration under pressure. It has shown to decrease edema through vasoconstriction and preserve microcirculation and enhance oxygen delivery by a direct osmotic effect. HBO also aids in the deactivation of white cell adhesion.

Most studies of hyperbaric treatment of burns have been reported using a variety of animal burn models, showing that HBO therapy is beneficial in reducing edema, decreasing fluid requirements, preserving dermal structures with improved vascularity, and increasing immune response.  In human studies, the results have varied but support the potential benefit of HBO therapy as an adjunct therapy.