The initial evaluation should begin with an inspection of the patient and a physical exam. Clinicians should evaluate for additional injuries visually and by palpating along with other bones and joints. On evaluation, the injured extremity should be inspected for open fractures, swelling, skin changes, and neurovascular status. Palpation along the injured extremity should be done to make sure all compartments are compressible. If a compartment is too full to compress, then the examiner should be concerned for compartment syndrome, which is an operative emergency. If the patient has compartment syndrome, their neurovascular status will be diminished. Vascular status can be examined by observing the color of the extremity, palpating the temperature of the skin, the radial and ulnar pulses at the wrist, and capillary refill of the fingers. Neurological status can be evaluated by checking for sensation along the length of the extremity and having patients perform tasks to demonstrate motor function. Compartment syndrome, an open fracture, or neurovascular compromise all warrant emergent evaluation by an orthopedic surgeon.

The most common nerves injured during an elbow dislocation are the median and ulnar nerves. The median nerve sensation can be evaluated by light touch to the palmar aspect of the thumb and index finger. The motor function of the median nerve can be tested by observing the strength of thumb opposition.

After the physical exam, radiographic images should be obtained. Initial radiographic evaluation of the injured extremity should begin with anterior-posterior, lateral, and oblique views. It is also important to get anterior-posterior and lateral X-rays of the forearm, wrist, and shoulder to evaluate for any other injuries.