Many severe adverse effects of ofloxacin treatment are avoidable by supporting patients with diverse interprofessional teams of healthcare providers. A nurse or clinician (MD, DO, NP, or PA) taking the patient's history may identify patients at high risk due to previous hypersensitivity reactions, tendon disorders, cardiovascular disorders, Marfan syndrome, Ehlers-Danlos syndrome, or risk factors that lower the seizure threshold. Pharmacists may notice red flags for patients already taking corticosteroids, antiarrhythmics, or CNS medications whose adverse effects would be compounded by ofloxacin treatment.

In these cases, the patients benefit from proactive interprofessional teams capable of working together to devise alternative drug treatment plans or ensure proper monitoring to ensure successful treatment and avoid adverse effects. The pharmacist should assist the team by verifying dosing, and in severe cases, an infectious disease board-certified pharmacist can provide antibiogram data to direct agent selection. Nursing can monitor for adverse events and treatment effectiveness. All interprofessional team members must document any changes in the patient's status immediately in the permanent health record, so all team members have access to the same patient data and reach out to other team members as appropriate so therapeutic changes can occur, if necessary. This type of interprofessional team paradigm enhances positive results while minimizing adverse effects. [Level 5]