Initial treatment should focus on the ABCs with the goal of maintaining cerebral perfusion and oxygenation.

**Airway**

TBI patients with a GCS less than or equal to 8 likely require intubation, as may those who are agitated to the extent of preventing necessary treatment. Perform rapid sequence intubation (RSI) using an induction agent with minimal effect on blood pressure or ICP, such as etomidate. The use of ketamine for induction remains controversial due to conflicting opinions regarding its effect on intracranial pressure, though recent evidence suggests it is safe to use in TBI. Succinylcholine and rocuronium are both safe and effective paralytic agents, though, with succinylcholine, the neuromuscular paralysis will resolve more quickly. Pretreatment with lidocaine or fentanyl was traditionally recommended for intubation of the neurotrauma patient. Though the evidence for fentanyl is better than that for lidocaine, neither has been shown to improve patient-centered outcomes. If facial trauma or basilar skull fracture is suspected, avoid nasotracheal intubation. It is recommended that in-line C-spine stabilization be maintained throughout intubation.

**Breathing**

The goal should be normoxia and normocarbia, with a goal O2 sat >90%, PaO2 >60 mm Hg, and PaCO2 35 to 45 mm Hg. Hypoxemia is associated with a significant increase in mortality, and prolonged hypocapnia can cause cerebral vasoconstriction and subsequent ischemia.

**Circulation**

The goal of circulation management is to maintain adequate CPP.  As CPP = MAP - ICP, CPP is best preserved when MAP is high, and ICP is low. Though isolated head trauma is unlikely to cause hypotension, hypotension may be present secondary to bleeding from polytrauma, scalp lacerations, or subgaleal hematomas in children. Since hypotension may lead to brain ischemia and subsequent increases in edema, hypotension should be treated aggressively. Initiate fluid resuscitation to maintain systolic blood pressure at ≥100 mm Hg for patients 50 to 69 years old or at ≥110 mm Hg for patients 15 to 49 years old or >70 years old.

**Positioning**

Though it is unclear whether elevating the head of the bed is clearly beneficial, elevation to 30 degrees is recommended in the setting of suspected increased ICP.

**Glucose**

In patients with moderate to severe TBI, avoiding hyperglycemia is recommended. An insulin drip may be needed to maintain a goal of 100-180 mg/dL.

**Temperature**

As fever can increase the metabolic demand of the brain, and may increase ICP, treat fever aggressively with a goal of normothermia. At this time, therapeutic hypothermia for TBI is not recommended.

**Seizures**

Since seizures are a common sequela of CHI and may worsen secondary injury, treat acute seizures with benzodiazepines. Seizure prophylaxis is more controversial but is recommended in patients with GCS <10, penetrating injury, depressed skull fracture, cortical contusion, intracranial hematoma, or seizure within the first 24 hours of head injury. Levetiracetam has shown to be as effective as phenytoin, but there is currently no recommendation as to the superiority of either agent to prevent seizures.

**Elevated ICP and Herniation**

Early consultation with neurosurgery in the setting of moderate to severe TBI is recommended. Neurosurgery will help to direct surgical interventions and ICP assessment and monitoring with devices such as an intracranial bolt or external ventricular drain (EVD). A sustained ICP >20 mmHg is associated with increased morbidity and mortality,  The Brain Trauma Foundation lists the following indications for invasive intracranial pressure monitoring: 1) Moderate to severe TBI in patients who cannot be accurately serially assessed by physical examination (for example intubated patients); 2) Severe head injury with abnormal CT scan; 3) Severe head injury with a normal CT if 2 of the following: age >40, systolic BP <90 mmHg, or abnormal motor posturing. If an intracranial bolt or EVD is not in place, herniation may be suspected clinically based on the signs and symptoms mentioned in the History and Physical section above. If there is concern for increasing ICP based on history, physical, or readings from an ICP monitor, mannitol and/or hypertonic saline can be used as treatment. Mannitol is an osmotic agent that can be delivered by repetitive boluses. As an osmotic diuretic, its use is relatively contraindicated in the presence of hemorrhage and hypotension, but it has also been shown to transiently reduce life-threatening elevations in ICP until other interventions may occur. Hypertonic saline, carried in most emergency departments in the form of 3% NaCl and in most ICUs in concentrations up to 23.4% NaCl, can be used as an alternative to mannitol, especially in those who are not adequately fluid resuscitated or have systemic hypotension.