**Why Do 24-Hour Urine Testing?**

There is no question that 24-hour urine for nephrolithiasis prevention analysis is considered the "standard of care" by many national experts and professional organizations. It can find and identify kidney stone chemical risk factors that are amenable to dietary or medical therapy and may have other medical or health-related benefits. It avoids preventable complications, pain, and surgeries. Future stone production can be reduced by 90% or more. It can identify underlying medical problems not easily diagnosed by any other means, such as hypercalciuria, renal tubular acidosis, renal phosphate leak, cystinuria, hyperoxaluria, and hypocitraturia. 24-hour urine testing is recommended by the American Urological Association (AUA Guidelines) and other professional organizations, even for first-time stone formers. Such testing can be kidney-saving or life-saving in some patients. There are also potential medical/legal implications. Finally, the testing, interpretation, and treatment selection can be greatly simplified, making it easy to perform and interpret in any medical practice by using the previously presented guidelines.

**What to Do After Testing**

After the patient has been on therapy for at least several months, performing another 24-hour urine test is advisable. The purpose is to ensure the treatment effectively controls the problem it is intended to correct and that the patient is compliant with therapy. This also allows for dosage adjustments and/or a change in therapy. Sometimes, a new problem will become evident. Most of the time, final adjustments are made, and a yearly 24-hour urine collection is recommended for maintenance. This visit can be combined with an annual KUB and/or the renal US to check for any newly formed stones. The yearly 24-hour urine recheck allows for reminding and reinforcing patient instructions, review of previously recommended therapies, and the annual renewal of any medications with possible dosage adjustments.  In complicated cases, repeating the 24-hour urine testing and treatment modifications every three months is recommended until optimal results are achieved, then usually yearly.

**When it Isn't Possible to Optimize the 24-Hour Urinary Chemistry**

Optimizing every 24-hour urine chemistry in some patients is not always possible. Hyperoxaluria is particularly difficult as there is currently no specific drug for this particular problem. In these cases, optimize as many chemistries as possible and try to achieve the best result possible for the rest.  24-hour urinary fluid volume is usually the first place to start with optimization. Maintaining good patient compliance is necessary, so a positive attitude is helpful when discussing results with patients.

**How to Increase Long-Term Patient Compliance With Therapy**

There is no magic formula to ensure patient compliance with treatment. Start at the very beginning by informing patients that 24-hour urine testing will only be effective if they are committed to long-term compliance with treatment recommendations. If they miss a treatment, cheat on their recommended diet or fail therapy in some other way, they will not notice any immediate painful penalty. A bad diabetic who forgets to take their morning insulin will likely be in the Emergency Department for treatment of hyperglycemia that afternoon. They would be unlikely to forget their insulin treatment again. There is no immediate or obvious penalty for cheating or forgetting their therapy in kidney stone prophylaxis. But six months or a year later, they may develop a kidney stone they could have avoided. Inform prospective patients that it's human nature to take advantage of the lack of any immediate harm or penalty to "cheat" on their treatment. For many, this progresses to the point where they no longer follow prophylactic recommendations. Informing patients of this fact early in treatment seems to help long-term compliance, but this remains a common problem without a good solution.

Repeating the 24-hour urine test yearly also helps remind patients of the importance of their treatment and its effectiveness and assists the clinician in fine-tuning the patient's therapy.

**Summary of Treatments for Abnormal 24-Hour Urine Tests**

**Hypercalciuria**: If the serum calcium is normal and hyperparathyroidism is ruled out, moderate any excessive dietary calcium. Do not overly restrict calcium intake to avoid a reactive increase in oxaluria and possible osteoporosis. If the dietary calcium intake is reasonable and hypercalciuria persists, add indapamide 2.5 to 5 mg daily, chlorthalidone 25 to 50 mg per day, or a similar thiazide.  If the urinary sodium is elevated, the salt intake will have to be restricted, or the thiazide therapy will not effectively lower urinary calcium. If thiazides are unsuccessful, try oral phosphate therapy, as the patient may have a Vitamin D-dependent hypercalciuria.

**Hyperoxaluria**: Dietary measures are the primary treatment for hyperoxaluria. Add vitamin B-6 as it helps some patients with their liver metabolism of oxalate. If these steps are inadequate, a calcium citrate supplement can be added to the evening meal to help increase intestinal oxalate binding since most oxalate is ingested at that time. If the patient has chronic diarrhea, a history of bariatric surgery, or colitis, they may be prone to enteric hyperoxaluria, which requires calcium citrate and potassium citrate to control the oxaluria. Cholestyramine can help reduce bile acid effects, especially when other measures are insufficient. A probiotic can be added as it may help intestinal digestion of dietary oxalate by optimizing the gut bacteria.

**Hypocitraturia**: Lemonade made with real lemon juice will help a little, but most patients will need concentrated potassium citrate supplements, either tablets or liquid. The liquid version is preferred in patients with IBS or post-bariatric surgery. The optimal 24-hour urinary citrate is 300 mg/L or about 600 mg daily. Increase citrate supplementation as much as possible until the patient reaches tolerance, serum potassium reaches the normal upper limit, optimal citrate levels are achieved, or the urine pH reaches 7. Consider adding sodium bicarbonate or a similar urinary antacid product as necessary for patients who cannot take more potassium citrate but have not yet reached their "target" levels of urinary citrate or pH.

**Low Urinary Volume**: Patients will need to increase their fluid intake. Use the “low urinary volume” guide listed earlier. It is possible to use a mild diuretic to help, but this can lead to further dehydration if patients still fail to increase their fluid intake.

**High Urinary Sodium**: Reducing dietary salt is the most effective treatment for this problem. Control of urinary sodium is necessary to allow the hypocalciuric effect of thiazides to be realized.

**High Uric Acid**:****Ask patients to reduce their dietary purine (meat, fish, beef, poultry, pork, seafood) intake. Consider using allopurinol for elevated serum or urinary uric acid levels. If starting allopurinol, start at 100 mg and then gradually increase it. Use whatever dosage is needed to obtain optimal uric acid levels. For most patients, this is likely to be around 300 mg of allopurinol daily, but it can vary. Add vitamin B-6 if the patient is being started on allopurinol, as it prevents possible neuropathy, an uncommon but reported side effect. If the patient is making uric acid stones, the preferred therapy is to use potassium citrate to optimize urinary pH to around 6.5 or more, but allopurinol can be used selectively if either serum or urinary uric acid levels are elevated.  Febuxostat can be an option for patients who are intolerant or allergic to allopurinol.

**General Advice**: It may not be possible for every patient to obtain an "optimal" level in all major 24-hour urine test chemistries, and some problems may prove stubbornly resistant to treatment. In such cases, try to "optimize" as many other chemistries as possible. Patients need to accept that treatment significantly reduces their kidney stone risk but does not entirely eliminate it. Increasing fluid intake is universally recommended, as this will always be correct. Pentosan polysulfate has been used in difficult or resistant nephrolithiasis cases to help reduce stone formation. The medication coats urinary crystals with a mucopolysaccharide layer that helps prevent their aggregation, reducing stone production and growth.