Assuming a stable airway and no developing complications, the treatment and management are guided by the type of foreign body, the location, the degree of obstruction, and the duration. Endoscopic removal is the procedure of choice and is successful in more than 90% of cases with less than a 5% complication rate. Endoscopic management can be divided into emergency, urgent, and nonurgent.

**Emergency**

- Esophageal obstruction: Inability to handle oral secretions

- Disk batteries in the esophagus

- Sharp-pointed objects in the esophagus

**Urgent (within 12 to 24 hours)**

- Esophageal objects that are not sharp-pointed

- Food impactions without complete obstruction

- Sharp-pointed objects in the stomach or duodenum

- Objects greater than 6 cm in length above the duodenum

- Multiple magnets (or single magnet plus another ferromagnetic object within endoscopic reach)

- Coins in esophagus

**Nonurgent**

- Objects in the stomach greater than 2.5 cm diameter

- Disk battery in stomach up to 48 hours if asymptomatic

- Blunt objects that fail to pass stomach in 3 to 4 weeks

Several types of medical management have been studied. In theory, medications that relax the smooth muscles of the LES might allow smooth, blunt objects to pass spontaneously into the stomach. Glucagon is the most commonly discussed agent; dose 0.25 mg to 2 mg intravenously (IV) over 1 to 2 minutes in a sitting patient. This is followed by oral water or carbonated beverage in 1 minute to promote esophagus distention along with LES relaxation. Glucagon can cause nausea and vomiting. Vomiting may dislodge the object but also may increase the risk of esophagus rupture. Unfortunately, most studies looking at glucagon have a variety of weaknesses, including small sample size, exclusion criteria making them non-generalizable, or are underpowered for evaluating side-effects, so most results show slight or no benefit over placebo.

Papain (an ingredient in meat tenderizers) is not recommended for meat bolus impactions because of possible complications and a theoretical risk of damage to the esophagus.

A disc battery impacted in the esophagus is a true emergency and needs immediate removal. The greatest concern is the potentially fatal complication of an aortoesophageal fistula with the highest risk in children less than five years old, battery size 20 mm or greater, impaction at the aortic arch level, prolonged impact, and any degree of hematemesis. In these specific cases, an interprofessional approach potentially including pediatric gastroenterology, pediatric surgery, cardiothoracic surgery, anesthesia, and radiology with management in the operating room or cardiac catheterization lab may be indicated.

Asymptomatic children with a coin impacted in the esophagus can be managed urgently with the observation of up to 24 hours without risk of further complications. Coin location is important, with 10% of proximal esophageal coins, 26% middle esophagus coins, and 43% of distal esophagus coins passing spontaneously within 16 hours of ingestion.