The airway begins at the nasal and oral vestibules, continuing into the nasopharynx and oropharynx, respectively, transitioning into the laryngopharynx before reaching the larynx. Located at the levels of C3 to C6, the larynx is the most superior section of the lower respiratory tract; existing as a cartilaginous, hollow opening to form a continuous connection between the pharynx and trachea.

The larynx is a vital structure, providing functions that are often overlooked, despite its multifaceted importance. The larynx functions as a mechanical barrier to protect the lungs from aspiration, vibrates vocal folds to produce sound, fine-tunes ventilation, assists in the cough reflex, and provides a closed valve to facilitate the production of a voluntary Valsalva maneuver. During respiration, the larynx widens the diameter of the airway via abduction of the true vocal folds, exponentially decreasing airway resistance while maximizing flow.

The larynx is sub-divided into three sections: supraglottis, glottis, and subglottis.

The supraglottis comprises the section between the inferior boundary of the hyoid bone, epiglottis, and the vestibular folds, also known as the false vocal cords.

The glottis is the portion of the larynx responsible for phonation; it consists of the true vocal cords, laryngeal ventricle, and the arytenoid cartilages, which adjust the width of the glottis.

The subglottis exists between the inferior boundary of the glottis to the inferior margin of the cricoid cartilage, at which the trachea joins.

**Cartilaginous Structures**

The larynx comprises of a cartilaginous skeleton conjoined by muscles and ligaments to provide a rigid yet flexible structure. From superior to inferior, the main cartilaginous structures include epiglottis, thyroid cartilage, corniculate cartilage, arytenoid cartilage, and cricoid cartilage.

- Unpaired cartilages: epiglottis, thyroid, cricoid

- Paired cartilages: arytenoid, corniculate, cuneiform

The epiglottis attaches to the larynx inferiorly, angled superior and posteriorly to protect the airway from aspiration during swallowing. During the swallowing reflex, food pushes down the epiglottis, while contracting muscles move the larynx superiorly towards the non-muscular epiglottis, to protect the laryngeal inlet and encourage food particles towards the open esophagus. Although exposed posteriorly, the thyroid cartilage protects the airway externally from anterior trauma; existing as two separate laminae before joining to form the laryngeal prominence, a projection commonly known as Adam’s apple.

**Ligaments and Membranes**

The cartilaginous structures of the larynx derive physical support from soft tissue connections in the form of ligaments (folds) and membranes; most easily understood in terms of extrinsic and intrinsic representations. The larynx relies on these fibroelastic tissues to surround its cartilaginous skeleton, to provide support during mechanical movements. The rima glottidis is the potential space between the vocal ligaments contained within these intrinsic ligaments and membranes. Serving as the primary conduit for airflow within the larynx, the rima glottidis may be open or closed secondary to abduction or adduction of the vocal folds, respectively.

Extrinsically, the larynx is bound by the thyrohyoid membrane, hyoepiglottic, and cricotracheal ligaments. Conjoining the anterior aspect of the thyroid cartilage to the hyoid bone superiorly, the thyrohyoid membrane houses the superior laryngeal vessels and nerve, which provides the general somatic afferent signal for the cough reflex.

Intrinsically, the larynx relies on the quadrangular membrane, cricothyroid ligament for support. The upper and lower portions of the intrinsic laryngeal structures consist of the quadrangular membrane and cricothyroid ligament, respectively. The quadrangular membrane connects each arytenoid cartilage to its respective ipsilateral aspect of the epiglottis, serving as a fibroelastic barrier to prevent the spread of laryngeal cancers.

The true vocal folds modify the frequency and amplitude of vibrational forces sustained during phonation through rotational and abduction/adduction movements of the arytenoids.  At the base of the quadrangular membrane resides a collection of fatty, glandular tissue known as the vestibular (false) vocal folds. Between the true and false folds sits the laryngeal ventricle, a potential space existing as a collapsible outpouching of excess tissue.