Treatment of CRE depends on the site of infection, pathogen isolated, resistance profile, and species-specific native resistances (see Table 1). Since CRE have developed resistance to preferred antibiotics, second-line therapies are necessary. Due to the complexity and variability of possible treatments, plans should be driven by in vitro susceptibility testing.

Combination therapy with multiple unrelated antimicrobial agents has been shown to decrease mortality in the setting of high-risk infections where death is a likely outcome. These data are best described in bloodstream infections (BSI) and septic shock with Class A carbapenemase-producing organisms. Typically treatment is centered on a polymyxin backbone coupled with other targeted antibiotics (see Table 2). This data has its basis from meta-analyses of different CRE therapies, which demonstrated lower mortalities when using polymyxin based treatment, and researchers found synergy between the triple combination of polymyxin, carbapenem, and rifampin or tigecycline.

Relative contraindications for specific dual therapy include polymyxin with an aminoglycoside due to increased kidney injury. Antibiotics from the same class may be contraindicated due to an increase in toxic side effects without added therapeutic benefit. Less data is available for the treatment of infections due to Class B and D carbapenemases. Limited data suggest targeted dual and triple therapy with a similar polymyxin backbone for the treatment of OXA and MBL producing CRE

Polymyxin-resistance CRE (see Table 1) should have treatment with a tigecycline backbone and either an aminoglycoside, fosfomycin, or polymyxin and rifampin depending on susceptibilities.in vitro resistance to individual antibiotics due to presumed synergistic activity, though data in this subgroup is poor.

Treatment of non-life threatening CRE infections continues to be driven by susceptibility testing. Although no randomized control trials have been done in this population strictly comparing monotherapy to combination therapy, there is little evidence demonstrating decreased mortality with polymyxin based combination therapy to targeted monotherapy.

Complicated urinary tract infections (cUTI) with CRE present in patients with recurrent UTI who have had repeated exposure to multiple antibiotics. Susceptibility and urine drug concentrations should drive effective antibiotic therapy. Aminoglycosides and fosfomycin are preferred therapies for cUTI if susceptible.

When treating complicated intra-abdominal infections (cIAI) and soft tissue infections, tissue perfusion, and susceptibility testing help to guide therapy. Tigecycline is often useful as initial therapy for antibiotic-resistant cIAI, but newer BLBLI are becoming increasingly popular.in vitro during animal studies against KPC and OXA-48 producing CRE.

When treating bloodstream infections (BSI), it is important to note that standard dose tigecycline does not usually reach therapeutic blood levels. Doubling the dose to 200 mg for loading and continuing therapy with 100 mg twice daily has been recommended.

Polymyxin B or inhaled colistin are possible antibiotics for the treatment of localized pneumonia due to CRE, and commonly used in cycstic fibrosis patients.