The clinical presentation of this syndrome is consistent with most brainstem stroke presentations – cranial nerve findings with crossed signs. There have been different clinical variants due to an array of possible lesions, and, as a result, there can be some phenotypic heterogeneity. The classic syndrome involves the inferiomedial pons which would present with ipsilateral sixth nerve palsy, seventh nerve palsy and/or eight nerve palsy, fifth sensory nuclear palsy, and long tract signs: contralateral hemiparesis and hemisensory loss. Other symptoms include ataxia and Horner syndrome due to the involvement of afferent white matter fibers heading to the middle cerebellar peduncle and sympathetic fibers, respectively.

The cranial nerve findings can present as follows:

- Sixth nuclear palsy: this presents as an inability to abduct the ipsilateral eye. With the involvement of the PPRF, this presents as a conjugate gaze palsy, meaning the inability to move the eyes towards the affected side; this becomes important here since conjugate gaze palsy can localize to more than one area in the neuroaxis. In this case, the eyes will classically not cross the midline with vestibulo-ocular reflex testing (VOR) due to nuclear involvement. On the other hand, if the conjugate gaze palsy is due to damage to the frontal eye fields to the midline is crossed with VOR testing.

- Seventh nerve palsy: this presents as a lower motor neuron ipsilateral facial weakness involving the upper and lower face.

- Eighth nuclear palsy: this presents with ipsilateral sensorineural hearing loss.

- Fifth nuclear palsy: this presents with ipsilateral loss of crude touch, pain, and temperature facial sensation due to the involvement of the spinal tract of V nucleus that runs caudally from the pons.

The long tract findings can present as follows:

- Corticospinal tracts: this presents with contralateral hemiplegia as these fibers are uncrossed yet at that level of the pons.

- Medial lemniscus: this presents with contralateral hemisensory loss (fine touch, vibration, and proprioception) as these fibers are ascending and crossed at this point.

- Descending sympathetic nerves: this can present as Horner’s Syndrome with ptosis, miosis, and anhidrosis ipsilateral to the lesion.

Afferent fibers through the middle cerebellar peduncles: this can present with ipsilateral appendicular ataxia. These corticopontocerebellar pathways are involved in the coordination and planning of movement.