Uric acid calculi are predominantly caused by highly acidic urine, excessive urinary uric acid and relative dehydration, but they have a multifactorial etiology with multiple determinants as well which are outlined below:

- Idiopathic uric acid lithiasis (gouty diathesis) encompasses people who have no identifiable cause for uric acid stone formation. The biochemical profiling of such people typically shows a low urine pH accompanied by a very low fractional excretion of urate (little urine uric acid in the presence of a significantly elevated serum uric acid). These findings are very similar to primary gout. Thus idiopathic uric acid lithiasis is assumed to be an underlying abnormality of primary gout.

- Approximately 10% to 20% of patients with primary gout produce uric acid nephrolithiasis. The biochemical profile of these patients is similar to idiopathic patients, including low urine pH and low excretion of uric acid. The mechanism responsible for high levels of uric acid in these patients is reduced uric acid urinary excretion. Consumption of alcohol, a high fructose diet, and high animal protein diet can increase the risk of gout and uric acid stones. Low urine pH is also one of the significant contributing factors.

- People with metabolic syndrome are predisposed to the formation of uric acid stones. Metabolic syndrome comprises diabetes, high waist circumference, and high cholesterol levels due to insulin resistance. There is an inverse correlation between the pH of the urine and body weight. The entity responsible for the low urinary pH is a deficit in buffering of urinary acid by ammonium due to impaired renal NH4+ production.

- People with inflammatory bowel disorders like Crohn disease and people who have ileostomies are at considerable risk for uric acid stone formation. They experience chronic diarrhea, which can lead to loss of fluid and bicarbonate ions, producing low urine volume (hypovolemia) and systemic metabolic acidosis.

- Genetic disorders that lead to hyperuricemia, including X linked recessive Lesch-Nyhan syndrome and Type 1 collagen storage disorder, are also etiological causes. Renal disorders, including Hartnup disease, Wilson's disease, and familial hypouricemic hyperuricosuria, can also lead to increased urinary uric acid excretion.

- Acquired causes include diet, malignancy, lymphoproliferative disorders, and drugs that compete with uric acid in the kidneys. These drugs lessen uric acid reabsorption, adding to increased urinary uric acid and renal stone formation. Patients with malignancy exhibit high levels of uric acid due to the rapid cell turnover. They are particularly predisposed to uric acid stone formation when they are on chemotherapy due to tumor cell necrosis.