Infections in X-linked CGD have often been caused by catalase-positive microorganisms. Infections most prevalently occur in the lungs, skin, lymph nodes, and liver. Granuloma formation, which is a complication of inflammation, often causes problems for the lungs, gastrointestinal tract, and urinary system. CGD associated colitis have been observed in 30% to 40% of the patients (6). Hepatomegaly, splenomegaly, and lymphadenopathy can be observed in the patients depending on granulomas.

The characteristics of X-linked Hyper IgM syndrome vary depending on the nature of the genetic defect. CD40 ligand and CD40 deficiency are within the combined immunodeficiency class. CD40 ligand or CD40 deficiency is X-linked and is the most prevalent form of the disease. CD40L or CD40 deficiency reveal similar clinical characteristics because in both cases, the interaction between the CD4 (+) T cells and antigen-presenting cells are disrupted. Patients are presented with frequent and recurrent upper respiratory tract infections with encapsulated microorganisms. Furthermore, opportunistic infections such as pneumocystis, cryptosporidium, and Histoplasma can be observed. Forty percent of the patients have been reported Pneumocystis jirovecii pneumonia.

The most prevalent phenotypes of XLP are fulminant infectious mononucleosis, dysgammaglobulinemia, and B-cell lymphoproliferative disease. Patients develop an apparent cytotoxic cellular response during EBV infection. B and T-cell counts are normal or increased, but functions thereof are abnormal. IgG levels are low and lgM levels are often increased. NK cell activity is reduced.

Mutations in the WAS gene result in various clinical phenotypes. The clinical phenotype may vary over time, and the clinical profile may not be established fully under 2 years of age.  In the classic WAS, male children typically suffer from bleeding disorder due to thrombocytopenia, recurrent bacterial, viral, and fungal infections, and common eczema. Lymphadenopathy and hepatosplenomegaly can also be detected. However, adenoid tissue is not prevalently encountered. Patients with WAS are prone to autoimmune complications and lymphoma or other malignancies, and this causes premature mortality.

Patients with X-SCID who have not been diagnosed with the neonatal screening program are suffered from recurrent opportunistic infections, chronic diarrhea, oral candidiasis, otitis media, and growth retardation as of the first year of life. X-SCID patients are diagnosed by the scantiness or absence of the T-cell receptor excision circles in the neonatal screening program (Trecs). T-B+NK- phenotype is available in the majority of the patients. T-cells are either absent or in few numbers (less than 300 cells/microL). The naive CD4+ T-cell rate is less than 20%. B-cells are mostly normal but non-functional. NK cells are either less in number or absent.

The only characteristic physical examination finding of XLA is the absence of secondary lymphoid tissues rich in B cells, such as tonsils and adenoids. Also, palpable lymphoid tissue is not available in certain patients. However, peripheral nodes can be observed depending on the hypertrophy of the T-cell areas. Although it is diagnosed at an early stage due to the existence of a previously affected individual in the family, many patients are presented with recurrent infections. Diagnosis is established at the age of 2.6 in male children with family history, it is the age of 5.4 years in male children with no family history. Term neonates are under a passive control due to immunoglobulin transferred from mother in the last trimester and thus, the clinical symptoms in the patients may not be observed in up to 3 months.

The clinical symptoms of the IPEX in a male patient are autoimmune-induced life-threatening chronic diarrhea, autoimmune endocrinopathy (neonatal type 1 diabetes mellitus or thyroiditis), and often eczematous dermatitis, respectively. Growth retardation is quite prevalent in children. Besides, autoimmune-induced cytopenias and food allergies can be encountered accordingly.