- SARS-CoV-2 and its variants continue to cause havoc across the world and have overwhelmed many healthcare systems and economies of many countries. Two vaccines have been approved for use in the US by the FDA and one vaccine has been authroized for use under an Emergency Use Authorization (EUA), and other approvals have been issued worldwide.

- Until most of the world’s population gets completely vaccinated (including booster shots), COVID-19 will continue to remain a threat to global public health with the emergence of potentially treatment-resistant variants.

- Prevention and management of this highly transmissible respiratory viral illness require a holistic and interprofessional approach that includes physicians' expertise across specialties, nurses, pharmacists, public health experts, and governmental authorities. There should be closed-loop communication between the clinical providers, pharmacists, and nursing staff while managing patients with COVID-19.

- Clinical providers managing COVID-19 patients on the frontlines should keep themselves periodically updated with the latest clinical guidelines about diagnostic and therapeutic options available in the management of COVID-19 especially considering the emergence of new SARS-CoV-2 variants, which could have a huge impact on morbidity and mortality.

- Clinicians should maintain a high index of suspicion in patients from a high risk of exposure area or recent travel to a high exposure area who present with extrapulmonary manifestations in the absence of pulmonary symptoms. These patients should be appropriately triaged and tested for SARS-CoV-2.

- Resources for contact tracing and testing must be enhanced to limit the spread of this virus. Patients must be educated and encouraged to adhere to social distancing guidelines, travel guidelines, and the use of facemasks as per CDC guidelines and COVID-19 protocols of state and local authorities.

- Clinical pharmacists must also keep themselves updated about the emergence of novel therapeutics that have been approved or granted emergency use authorization in the management of COVID-19.

- There must be a strong focus to educate the public about the importance of receiving the vaccination against COVID-19, and consideration must be made to establish mass vaccination sites.

- Continued viral surveillance of new variants is crucial at regular intervals with viral genomic sequencing given the possibility that more highly transmissible, more virulent variants and treatment-resistant variants could emerge that can have a more catastrophic effect on global health in addition to the current scenario.

- Such a multi-pronged approach enhances improved patient care and outcomes. It also reduces the burden of hospitalizations that could potentially lead to the exhaustion of healthcare resources.

- Hospitals and communities should have in place a plan to triage moderate and high-risk patients for additional therapy, such as monoclonal antibodies, on an outpatient basis.

- Such interprofessional team measures could immensely change the dynamic of healthcare infrastructure and go a long way in eradicating or eliminating this virus and limiting its devastating effect on socioeconomic and healthcare situations across the entire world.

The interprofessional healthcare team will include all public health authorities, clinicians, specialists, mid-level practitioners, nursing staff, pharmacists, and even the patients and potential patients of this illness, all working collaboratively and openly sharing information bring about positive outcomes both for individual patients as well as society as a whole.