The underlying mechanism in the development of coronary artery spasm is multifactorial. One mechanism that might generate the spasm is an increased reactivity of the vessels to vasoconstrictive stimuli and subsequent high-grade stenosis in a segment of the coronary or diffusely, creating low coronary flow and with this myocardial injury due to ischemia. The etiology of the hyperreactivity of the coronary vessels is unclear but could be related to endothelial dysfunction and primary smooth muscle cells of the coronary vessels that might have impaired regulatory mechanism for vasoconstriction and vasodilation. Balances within the sympathetic and parasympathetic tone is also an important factor that regulates flow in the coronaries. Imbalance in this system can predispose exaggerated vasoconstriction under normal circumstance and during exposure of acetylcholine and methacholine.

**Risk Factors**

Typical cardiovascular risk factors have not directly been associated with the presence of vasospastic angina, except for cigarette smoking and inflammatory states determined by high hs-CRP levels. A metabolic disorder such as insulin resistance has also been associated with vasospastic angina.

**Precipitating Factors**

Multiple triggers have been associated with the development of vasospastic angina.

Several drugs such as ephedrine and sumatriptan can cause typical chest pain due to coronary spasm. Recreational drugs like cocaine, amphetamines, alcohol, and marijuana are also possible precipitating factors.

Environmental factors such as cold water can cause spasms in the coronaries. Valsalva maneuver, hyperventilation, and coronary manipulation through cardiac catheterization also can produce hyperreactivity of the coronaries.