# Continuing Education Activity

Lipemia retinalis (LR) is characterized by creamy white discoloration of retinal vessels. It is a feature of chylomicronemia. Proper ophthalmic evaluation and correct diagnosis of this condition are needed for targeted systemic evaluation of such patients. This activity describes the evaluation and treatment of LR and highlights the role of the interprofessional healthcare team in evaluating and managing care for patients with LR.

**Objectives:**
- Identify the etiology of lipemia retinalis.
- Outline the appropriate evaluation of lipemia retinalis.
- Review the management options available for lipemia retinalis.
- Describe interprofessional team strategies for improving care coordination and communication for lipemia retinalis and improve outcomes.

# Introduction

Lipemia retinalis (LR) is a retinal manifestation of chylomicronemia (hypertriglyceridemia). Ophthalmoscopic features are creamy-white discoloration of the retinal vessels, which start in the peripheral vessels in mild cases and involves central retinal vessels in established cases. In severe cases, the fundus takes salmon color. Though lipemia retinalis does not affect the visual acuity, the associated severe but easily treatable metabolic disorders merit discussion.

# Etiology

Heyl, in 1880 described a case of lipemia retinalis (LR) in detail.**chylomicrons**, very-low-density lipoproteins (VLDL), intermediate-density lipoproteins (IDL), low-density lipoproteins (LDL), and high-density lipoproteins (HDL) and their sizes are 100 to 1000 nm, 34 nm, 27 nm, 22 nm, and 5 to 12 nm respectively. Smaller lipoprotein molecules do not scatter light and are transparent. Chylomicrons are the largest lipoprotein macromolecules. Most of the dietary triglyceride is transported from intestine to the systemic circula­tion via chylomicrons. Chylomicrons are normally rapidly removed from the plasma. It is likely the high proportion of triglycerides in chylomicrons, which leads to the association of raised triglyceride levels and lipemia retinalis. If a sample of hyperlipidemic serum is allowed to stand, chylomicrons form a hazy surface layer. Circulating blood with a high level of chylomicrons gives the appearance of lipemia retinalis due to the light scattering effect of the chylomicrons in the retinal vessels.

Chylomicronemia has been noted to occur when the plasma triglyceride level is higher than 1000 mg/dl.

- Eruptive xanthoma

- Lipemia retinalis

- Abdominal pain and/or pancreatitis

However, some authors consider a triglyceride level of 2000 mg/dl as a lower cutoff while defining chylomicronemia and chylomicronemia syndrome.

- Lipemia retinalis in 23%

- Flushing with alcohol in 25%

- Documented pancreatitis in 28%

- Eruptive xanthoma in 40%

- Objective dyspnea in 46%

- Abdominal pain and/or pancreatitis in 63%

- Recent memory loss in 85% of patients

Elevation of plasma triglycerides is the main etiology of LR. HTG can be familial or secondary to other diseases.

Familial HTG occurs due to:

- The presence of endogenous circulating lipoprotein lipase ( LPL ) inhibitor

- Deficiency of LPL

- Deficiency of apoprotein of LPL i.e., APOC-II. LPL deficiency is an autosomal recessive transmission due to a number of LPL gene mutations like Asp9Asn, Gly188Glu, Pro207Leu, Asp250Asn, Asn291Ser, Ser447X, Pro214Ser, and others.

Secondary causes of HTG include

- Uncontrolled type 1 or type 2 diabetes mellitus

- Endocrine disorders (obesity, metabolic syndrome, hypothyroidism, hypercortisolism)

- Medications (corticosteroids, estrogen, antipsychotics (clozapine and olanzapine), antidepressants, rosiglitazone, thiazides, beta-blockers, bile acid sequestrants, sirolimus, antiretroviral therapy,13-cis-retinoic acid, tamoxifen)

- Pregnancy

- Renal disease (nephrotic syndrome, renal failure, renal dialysis)

- Liver disease (acute hepatitis)

- Dietary intake (high in saturated fats and carbohydrates, excessive alcohol intake)

- Systemic diseases (Human immunodeficiency virus infection, acute spinal cord injury, anorexia nervosa, organ transplant, sarcoidosis, systemic lupus erythematosus, myeloma)

# Epidemiology

Though the exact epidemiology of lipemia retinalis is not known, that of the associated risk factors have been mentioned. The deficiency of lipoprotein lipase results in familial HTG and high levels of chylomicrons in the serum. The incidence of LPL deficiency is less than 1 in 1 million.

# Pathophysiology

Hyperlipidemia without accompanying hypertriglyceridemia does not present lipemia retinalis.

At triglyceride levels of:

- 2500 to 3499 mg/dL- the peripheral vessels look creamy and thin

- 3500 to 5000 mg/dL- posterior pole vessels have a creamy color

- At levels more than 5000 mg/dL, the fundus has salmon-color. Differentiation of retinal arteries and veins may be difficult by color (both have creamy color). Though clinical differentiation of the retinal artery and vein is difficult in such cases, the caliber of the vessel may give a clue.

# Histopathology

The creamy appearance of the retinal vessels is due to the presence of triglyceride-laden chylomicrons in the plasma. Optical coherence tomography (OCT) scan through the retinal vessels gives evidence of the enlarged caliber of retinal vessels and back shadowing due to the presence of hyperreflective material inside the vessel lumen.

# History and Physical

The patient is visually asymptomatic and lipemia retinalis is most often detected during a routine ophthalmic workup or workup of a referral case related to lipid abnormalities. Neonates and infants have been diagnosed as LR during screening and treatment for retinopathy of prematurity (ROP ).

The physical examination should be done to look for evaluation of the cardiovascular system, the integumentary system, the abdomen, and the eye. Examination of the cardiovascular system includes the examination of heart sounds, carotid or renal bruits, and peripheral pulses. Characteristic skin lesions include xanthomas which are small yellowish papules, with an erythematous base, appearing predominantly on the buttocks and elbows due to deposition of large amounts of chylomicron triglycerides in cutaneous histiocytes.

- Examination of the periorbital area may reveal:

- Xanthelasma,
- Tuberous palpebral xanthomas

- Anterior segment findings, though rare, include:

- Conjunctival xanthomas,
- Corneal arcus senilis, and arcus juvenilis,
- Lipid keratopathy,
- Anterior chamber lipemia
- Iris xanthomas

- The dilated fundoscopic exam is needed for the diagnosis and staging of LR.

- Additional rare posterior segment findings of hyperlipoproteinemia include:

- retinal xanthomas
- choroidal xanthomas
- Adult-onset Coat disease

# Evaluation

Laboratory evaluation of the fasting lipid profile is needed to diagnose HTG. The blood specimen for laboratory evaluation is lipemic, with a creamy white lipid layer seen in a standing tube of blood.

# Treatment / Management

Lipemia retinalis is sometimes transient and resolves within hours.

**Dietary Restriction and Primary Prevention**

Strict adherence to a low-fat diet without breast milk supplementation may be effective in treating infants with severe lipemia retinalis associated with HTG.

**Medical Treatment**

No treatment is required for the lipemia retinalis itself. However, LR is an important ocular sign of a life-threatening but easily treatable metabolic disorder. The treatment is to reduce the serum triglyceride levels to below 500 mg/dl. This can be accomplished by a number of medical treatments for lowering triglyceride and cholesterol. Several lipid-lowering drugs are used to treat HTG. First-line triglyceride-lowering medications include fibric acid derivatives (fibrates) and n-3 polyunsaturated fatty acids (i.e., fish oil).

**Surgical Treatment**

Surgery is not specifically indicated for the treatment of lipemia retinalis. However, exchange transfusion has been used in the setting of severe hypertriglyceridemia to reduce triglycerides in the acute setting.

# Differential Diagnosis

The differential for lipemia retinalis includes 1) leukemia

# Staging

Staging of lipemia retinalis was given by Vinger and Sachs, which is as follows

- Grade I (early LR)- White and creamy appearance of peripheral retinal vessels

- Grade II (moderate LR)- Creamy colored vessels extending towards optic disc

- Grade III (marked LR)- Salmon colored retina, all vessels having a milky color

# Prognosis

Retinal changes secondary to lipemia retinalis improve once serum triglyceride levels are normalized. Visual acuity is neither or minimally affected but improves well after the correction of the HTG. Reduced photopic and scotopic responses in electroretinogram are noted to improve after the correction of HTG.

# Complications

Systemic complications of lipidemia retinalis due to hyperlipidemia include cardiovascular diseases, systemic hypertension, acute myocardial infarction, and stroke. Chylomicronemia may be associated with acute pancreatitis, abdominal pain, hepatosplenomegaly, dyspnea, and recent memory loss.

Ophthalmic complications are less frequently reported. These include retinovascular occlusions, retinal ischemia, causing neovascularization and vitreous hemorrhage.

# Enhancing Healthcare Team Outcomes

The diagnosis and management of lipemia retinalis are not only important from an ophthalmological point of view but serious underlying genetic and metabolic disorders. The prompt diagnosis and management of hyperlipidemia results in the reversal of most of the symptoms and can prevent life-threatening complications like acute pancreatitis. The detection of a mutation of the LPL gene can help in genetic counseling of the parents of the affected child. Secondary causes like diabetes, hypothyroidism, obesity, chronic alcoholism, etc. need to be diagnosed and promptly treated. This management is possible only if there are proper communication and referral of the case between physicians, pediatricians, geneticists, endocrinologists, and ophthalmologists. The team can also include optometrists, laboratory technicians, and ophthalmology nurses. The laboratory technicians identify the unprocessed sample of blood in the test tube for any abnormal discoloration. The nurses participate in patient education and follow up, informing the ophthalmologist of any issues.