There are two main ways cellular receptors are involved with human pathophysiology: microorganisms binding human cell receptors for survival or resulting in disease and cellular receptor dysfunction resulting in the failure of normal physiologic processes, which results in disease.

Viruses need to bind to cell-surface receptors on the host cell to gain access. In this way, viruses have hijacked human cell receptors for their use. For example, the HIV surface protein GP-120 must bind to the CCR5 receptor to enter human macrophages.

The influenza virus infects the epithelial cells of the upper and lower respiratory tract. The virus cells have a protein on their surface called hemagglutinin, which binds to sialic acid. Sialic acid is a sugar found on the cell surface. By the virus binding sialic acid, the sugar is acting as a cell receptor for influenza, which is necessary for the virus to infect a cell.

This list is not meant to be exhaustive but merely summarizes some conditions caused by a defect in a cell receptor:

Pseudohypoparathyroidism refers to a heterogeneous group of disorders defined by target organ unresponsiveness to parathyroid hormone (PTH). This condition is due to any dysfunction in the PTH signaling pathway. One specific cause for pseudohypoparathyroidism is a missense mutation in the PTH gene sequence, which results in reduced PTH-receptor binding.

McCune-Albright syndrome is a rare disorder that presents with the triad of peripheral precocious puberty, café-au-lait spots, and fibrous dysplasia of bone. Children with McCune-Albright syndrome have a somatic mutation of the alpha subunit of a stimulatory G protein, which activates adenylyl cyclase. The mutation in this protein results in continued stimulation of its signaling cascade regardless of receptor binding.

The American Heart Association criteria for the clinical diagnosis of familial hypercholesterolemia is an LDL level above 190 mg/dl and either a first-degree relative with an LDL level above 190 mg/dl or known premature coronary heart disease. In about 80% of patients with confirmed FH, there is a mutation in one of three genes involved with LDL-receptor-mediated LDL catabolism. Of the 80% with a known mutation, 85 to 90% of the mutations are in the LDL-receptor. The most common etiology of FH is a mutation in the apo B/E cellular receptor for LDL. Normally, LDL particles bind to the LDL-receptor on hepatic cell surfaces. When these LDL particles are bound, they are internalized and catabolized, removing them from the blood. Researchers have identified over 1600 different mutations in the LDL-receptor, resulting in four classes of alleles based on the mutant receptor’s resulting phenotype.[6] Class I is where the protein is not synthesized. Class II is when the intracellular transport of receptors from the ER to the Golgi is impaired. Class III is where the receptor makes it to the cell's surface but cannot bind to LDL, Class IV is where the LDL binds normally, but the receptors do not cluster in coated pits, and LDL particles do not become adequately internalized. Regardless of the classes, when someone does not have a properly functioning LDL-receptor, they cannot properly clear LDL from their blood. The result is early-onset atherosclerosis and associated pathology.

Myasthenia gravis is a disease that often presents in the second and third decades of life with a female predominance or the sixth to eighth decades of life with a male predominance. The most common feature of myasthenia gravis is fluctuating muscle weakness. The disease results from autoantibodies against the acetylcholine receptor.

Androgen insensitivity syndrome is a condition affecting sexual development both before birth and during puberty. When a fetus is genetically male, with an X and a Y chromosome, the fetus should develop as a male and undergo male changes during puberty. During development, the fetus will develop internal male organs due to the SRY gene on the Y chromosome, but without androgen signaling, the external phenotype of the patient will be female. This is the state in patients with androgen insensitivity syndrome as they have a loss-of-function mutation in the gene that encodes for the androgen receptor.

Achondroplasia is an autosomal dominant condition and the most common bone dysplasia in humans. Patients with achondroplasia have a gain-of-function mutation in the FGFR3 gene, which results in a permanently activated FGFR3 receptor.