After the patient has been appropriately positioned, the seroma should be examined to plan the aspiration point. This reduces the need for further palpation after skin preparation and minimizes the risk of introducing infection. An entry point through the surgical scar can be used to minimize the pain if feasible. If there is suspicion of infection, the clinician should be prepared to collect a sample for microscopy and culture.

The skin is prepared with a disinfectant wipe/device. A sterile drape with a central gap can be placed to isolate the aspiration site from surrounding unprepared skin. The needle entry point should be in the central aspect of the collection, and the needle advanced at a 45-degree angle to the skin and parallel to underlying structures. Once through the skin, the needle is gently advanced while aspirating on the syringe until there is a reduction in resistance and fluid is aspirated. If the seroma has not fully resolved but fluid stops withdrawing, the needle can be carefully re-positioned as there may be locations. If a repeated attempt is required, a new needle should be used, but multiple attempts should be limited to reduce the risk of infection.

Once the seroma has resolved, the needle can be removed and gentle pressure applied with gauze to the injection site until hemostasis is achieved. A sterile dressing can then be applied. Seroma fluid should be clear in nature; if the collected sample is cloudy or purulent, the sample should be sent for analysis, and broad-spectrum antibiotics may be considered if an infection is suspected.

Following the procedure, arrangements should be made for an early follow-up to review for resolution or need for further aspiration.