In general, bursitis is encountered equally in the male and female population. However, some types of bursitis have a documented female predilection, specifically pes anserine and trochanteric bursitis. Furthermore, these forms of bursitis are more common individuals who are obese. Men are more often affected by olecranon bursitis due to the increased rate of men who perform manual labor for a living (plumbers, gardeners, mechanics, construction workers, among others). Since certain occupational stressors increase one's risk for developing bursitis, many colloquial terms for specific types of bursitis have been coined to reflect these epidemiologic connections. For example, prepatellar bursitis is also known as "housemaid's knee," while olecranon bursitis is sometimes referred to as "student's elbow."

Likewise, infrapatellar bursitis is often called "clergyman's knee," while ischial bursitis is called "weaver's bottom." Bursitis of the subcutaneous calcaneal bursa can be provoked by footwear that is too tight or ill-fitting, and this is frequently encountered in dancers and figure skaters. In each of these cases, the cause of the bursitis is usually prolonged pressure over the affected bursa. While bursitis affects people of all ages, the elderly may be at greater risk given that many elderly people are afflicted by osteoarthritis and other chronic diseases which can increase the risk of bursitis. For septic bursitis, immunocompromised patients, such as people with diabetes, those with certain rheumatologic disorders, people who suffer from alcoholism, or those with HIV are at increased risk.