The spasm of the lateral pterygoid muscle can be painful and result in trismus (locked jaw), and the patient may require analgesics or muscle relaxants. Some authors believe that during temporomandibular disorders, this muscle plays an important role. This involvement may be due to the absence of coordination between the muscle's superior and inferior bellies. This lack of coordination leads to disturbance in the horizontal positioning of the intra-articular disc relative to the condyle.

**Clinical Significance in Prosthodontics**

Long-term completely edentulous patients wearing dentures with worn-out occlusal surfaces of the artificial teeth tend to position their mandible in the forward and lateral position. The dentist may notice different anteroposterior/lateral teeth contact positions during subsequent appointments, which poses difficulty in fabricating a new complete denture, particularly during the recording of the maxillomandibular relations. There have been suggestions that this variation in the position of the mandible during resting jaw posture is a result of an attempt to attain a reasonable bite with worn-out dentures. Some authors believe that the lateral pterygoid muscle's lower and upper belly plays a significant role in maintaining the mandible at this new anterior position. The variations in the activity levels between the two bellies on each side determine the lateral and anteroposterior positioning of the jaw.

The origin of both the bellies of the lateral pterygoid muscle is medial to their insertions. Thus, the wide opening of the mandible may temporarily result in the mandible undergoing distortion in the transverse plane. Therefore, during impression making of the lower arch, if the mouth is widely open, it may result in an impression that is not accurate in the transverse dimension due to mandibular flexion.