**Clinical Examination**

The diagnosis of Millard-Gubler syndrome (MGS) is confirmed by a clinical examination of VI and VIII CN along with hemiplegia of upper and lower extremities. Because various etiologies might cause MGS, take a detailed history to exclude other causes like infection (fever) or vascular insult (presence of other neurologic deficits).

**Imaging**

Neurological Imaging, i.e., computed tomography (CT) and magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) are helpful in identifying the lesion. However, MRI of the brain is more sensitive and specific than CT scan to identify the infarcts at an early stage of onset, especially in the setting of small pontine lesions. Ischemic stroke of pons on CT brain shows a hypodense lesion in the anteromedial side of the pons. MRI brain shows a lesion in one side of the anteromedial pons, which is hypointense on T1 sequences and hyperintense on T2 /FLAIR sequences.[5] The Magnetic resonance imaging also shows diffusion restriction in the pontine ischemic lesion. However, there have been some reported cases presenting as MGS with no imaging findings.

**Angiography**

Vertebral angiography is helpful in cases if the lesion is caused due to the occlusion of the basilar artery.

Pontine-crossed syndromes are Foville, Raymond, Raymond–Cestan syndrome, Gasperini syndrome, and Brissaud-Sicard syndrome. These syndromes are unique as the lesion involves the brainstem above the decussation of the pyramidal tracts. Therefore, the clinical signs of the cranial nerve are ipsilateral to the lesion, and the long tract signs contralateral, resulting in crossed syndrome.

- Foville syndrome: This syndrome is caused due to a unilateral lesion involving the dorsal pontine tegmentum in the caudal third of the pons and manifests as ipsilateral facial palsy and horizontal gaze palsy, and contralateral hemiparesis, Hemi sensory loss, Internuclear ophthalmoplegia.

- Raymond syndrome: This syndrome is caused due to a lesion involving the ventral medial pons. It usually presents as two subtypes - Classical and common. Classical Raymond syndrome manifests as ipsilateral abducens palsy, contralateral central facial paresis, and contralateral hemiparesis. The common subtype of Raymond syndrome presents as ipsilateral lateral gaze paresis and contralateral hemiparesis sparing the face.

- Raymond–Cestan syndrome: This syndrome is caused due to the lesion involving the upper dorsal pons. It manifests as ipsilateral ataxia and coarse intention tremor, ipsilateral paralysis of muscles of mastication and sensory loss in the face, contralateral sensory loss in the body and contralateral hemiparesis of the face and the body.

- Gasperini’s syndrome: This is a rare syndrome caused due to a lesion of the caudal pons tegmentum and mostly presents as ipsilateral impairment of the cranial nerves V, VI, VII, VIII and contralateral sensory loss.

- Brissaud-Sicard syndrome: This is a very rare pontine syndrome caused due to damage of the anterolateral and inferior pons involving the corticospinal tract and CN VII nucleus and the nerve root. Classically this syndrome presents as ipsilateral facial cramps and contralateral hemiparesis.