Haloperidol is used widely in different countries. It is available in various formulations. For oral administration, it is available in tablets ( 0.5 mg, 1 mg, 2 mg, 5 mg, and 10 mg ) and oral concentrate ( 2 mg/mL ). It is also available in a nasal spray formulation. Haloperidol lactate is available in a short-acting parenteral solution (5 mg/mL) injected intramuscularly. Haloperidol decanoate is available for long-acting intramuscular preparation.

- **Psychosis**: In this instance, the oral and intramuscular forms can be administered. For moderate symptomology: 0.5 to 2 mg 2 to 3 times a day orally. Up to 30 mg/day may be necessary in some resistant cases. For prompt control of acute agitation, an intramuscular injection can be given as a 2 to 5 mg dose every 4 to 8 hours. The maximum intramuscular dose is 20 mg/day.

- **Schizophrenia:**In moderately severe patients, dosing is 0.5 to 2 mg haloperidol orally 2 to 3 times a day. It should not exceed 30 mg daily in case of severe cases. To control acute agitation in a schizophrenic patient, dosing is 2 to 5 mg haloperidol intramuscularly every 4 to 8 hours.

- **Tourette syndrome**: Dosing is 0.5 to 2 mg orally 2 to 3 times a day in moderately symptomatic cases, and for severe cases, it can be higher: 3 to 5 mg, 2 to 3 times a day.

**Specific Patient Population**

- **Pediatric considerations**: Haloperidol is no longer routinely used as initial therapy for behavioral disorders but may be necessary in refractory or complex cases. Dosing of haloperidol is 0.05 to 0.075 mg/kg/day.

- **Geriatric considerations**:  Haloperidol is identified as a high-risk medication according to Beer criteria; hence lowest effective dose should be used for the shortest duration possible.

- **Pregnancy Considerations**: There are no well-controlled studies for haloperidol use in pregnant women. But there are several reports of limb malformations in newborns whose mothers used haloperidol, but causal relationships were not appropriately established. Since these experiences do not exclude the possibility of a fetal anomaly due to haloperidol, this drug should be used only if the benefit outweighs the potential risk to the fetus.

- **Breastfeeding Considerations:**As haloperidol gets excreted in human breast milk, lactating women taking haloperidol should not nurse their infants.

- **Hepatic Impairment:**Haloperidol plasma levels may increase in patients with liver impairment because it is primarily metabolized by the liver.

**Drug Interactions**

- **CYP3A4 inhibitors and/or CYP2D6 Inhibitors:**The haloperidol plasma concentrations and hence adverse reactions increases when CYP3A4 inhibitors and/or CYP2D6 inhibitors are coadministered with haloperidol. Monitor patients taking these medicines concomitantly, and if signs and symptoms of increased haloperidol pharmacologic effects appear, then reduce the dose for haloperidol as clinically needed.
- CYP3A4 inhibitors – alprazolam, ketoconazole, itraconazole, ritonavir, nefazodone.
- CYP2D6 inhibitors – chlorpromazine; promethazine, paroxetine, quinidine, sertraline, and venlafaxine.
- CYP3A4 and CYP2D6 inhibitors – fluvoxamine, fluoxetine, and ritonavir.
- QTc prolongation was observed when haloperidol was administered with a combination of the metabolic inhibitors paroxetine (20 mg/day) and ketoconazole (400 mg/day).

- **CYP3A4 Inducers:**Coadministration of potent enzyme inducers of CYP3A4 (carbamazepine, phenobarbital, phenytoin, rifampin, St John's Wort) with haloperidol may gradually decrease the serum concentrations of haloperidol which can decrease its efficacy. In this scenario, patients are recommended to be monitored and increase the haloperidol dose as required. In addition, after stopping the CYP3A4 inducer treatment, haloperidol concentration may gradually increase, and hence it may be needed to reduce the dose or adjust the dosage interval for haloperidol.

- **Effect of Haloperidol on Other Drugs:**Being an inhibitor of the CYP2D6 enzyme, it may increase plasma concentrations of tricyclic antidepressants (desipramine or imipramine) when co-administered with haloperidol.