**Indications for Enteral Feeding**

Enteral tube feeding is indicated in patients who cannot main adequate oral intake of food or nutrition to meet their metabolic demands. Healthcare professionals commonly use enteral feeding in patients with dysphagia. Patients with dysphagia sometimes cannot meet their daily nutritional needs, even with modification of food texture and/or consistency.

For enteral feeding to be successful, the GI tract should be accessible and functional. Inaccessible GI tracts, malabsorption, and severe GI losses might make enteral feeding a challenge. The alternative is parenteral feeding.

**Indications**

- Comatose patients on mechanical ventilation or with a severe head injury

- A neuromuscular disorder affecting swallowing reflex: Parkinson's disease, multiple sclerosis, cerebrovascular accident.

- Severe anorexia from chemotherapy, HIV, sepsis

- Upper GI obstruction esophageal stricture or tumor

- Conditions associated with increased metabolic and nutritional demands include sepsis, cystic fibrosis, and burns

- Mental illness like dementia

**Enteral Nutrition in Critical Illness**

In critically ill patients there is overwhelming evidence that enteral feeding is the best approach for nutrition in critically ill patients. The GRADE system working group came up with the following recommendation based on the level of evidence 16.

- Enteral nutrition has been associated with an improvement in nutrition variables, a reduction in the length of hospital stay, and a lower incidence of infection Level of Evidence A

- Critically ill patients who cannot tolerate oral feeding for greater than 72 hours should receive specialized nutritional support. Level of Evidence C

- Enteral nutrition is the preferred mode of feeding when compared to parenteral nutrition. Level of Evidence B

- Enteral nutrition should be started within 48 hours of admission Level of Evidence A

- It should provide between 25 to 30 kcal/kg per day. Level of Evidence C

- The goal caloric intake should be achieved within 48 to 72 hours. Level of Evidence C

- Enteral nutrition should be deferred until the patient is stable hemodynamically. Level of Evidence C

- The presence of flatus, stool passage, or bowel sounds should not be a prerequisite for starting enteral nutrition. Level of Evidence B

**Caloric Consideration**

Resting energy expenditure can be calculated using indirect calorimetry. This method calculates the caloric requirements in patients requiring enteral feeding. When indirect calorimetry is unavailable, approximately 25 kcal/kg per day is the approximate energy requirement. Clinicians can calculate caloric intake for patients on mechanical ventilation using the Penn State equation.

Carbohydrate intake should be approximately 4 gm/kg daily with a target glucose level below 180 mg/dl. Lipid intake should be between 0.7 to 1.5 gm/kg per day. Amino acid should be adjusted to 1 to 1.8 g/kg per day with an adequate supply of micronutrients.

It is highly recommended to start enteral feeding as early as possible in critically ill patients.

Hypocaloric enteral intake is beneficial at the initial stage of critical illness as this can help to prevent hyperglycemia which is linked to a higher risk of mortality. Some authorities recommend around 80% of nutritional needs in the first 7 to 8 days of illness, which can gradually increase during the recovery phase.