Arterioles are considered the primary resistance vessels as they distribute blood flow into capillary beds. Arterioles provide approximately 80% of the total resistance to blood flow through the body and are considered vital regulators of hemodynamics, contributing to the upstream pressure and the regional distribution of blood.

**The Adventitia**

The adventitial layer consists of fibroblasts, an extracellular matrix, and thick bundles of collagen fibers organized along the longitudinal axis of the blood vessel.

Historically, the function of the adventitial layer has been considered only as a structural support and scaffold for the anchored nerve endings. Recently, however, research into the role of adventitial fibroblasts has been dramatically expanded. Adventitial fibroblasts have a potential role in reactive oxygen species (ROS) production to modulate the activity of smooth muscle cells residing in tunica media, which, in turn, initiate vascular remodeling.

**The Media**

The medial layer of arterioles predominantly consists of smooth muscle cells and an internal elastic lamina. The internal elastic lamina primarily consists of degradation-resistant elastin molecules. The presence of an internal elastic lamina is restricted to the feeding arterioles of skeletal muscle, mesentery, and cerebrum. The enriched elastin content of the internal elastic lamina provides a potential recoil property to deal with pulsatile blood pressure when necessary. This function is apparent in conduit arteries and less evident in arterioles due to less pronounced pulsatile pressure. Besides, the internal elastic lamina in arterioles is not smooth/fully stretched, evident by the wavy appearance with evenly distributed ridges.

Vascular smooth muscle is the most abundant component of the media that is primarily delegated to control vascular diameter by the contraction-relaxation process. They are arranged circumferentially to the longitudinal axis of the vessel. Smooth muscle in feeding arterioles is arranged in one to two layers, which appear to wrap around the vascular circumference. Intercellular connections between medial smooth muscles are not continuous; instead, they are in the form of appositions, inter-digitations, intermediate junctions, and nexus junctions. These intercellular connections involve several junctional molecules such as integrins, cadherins, and connexins.

Under physiological conditions, smooth muscles of the arteriole remain partially contracted to exert tone. Vascular smooth muscle can sense physical forces that primarily transmit to cells of the vascular wall through the adhesive contacts with the extracellular matrix (ECM) and one another. Additionally, it has previously been shown that the blockade of integrins or cadherins can inhibit myogenic vasoconstriction. Thus, intercellular connections and cell-extracellular matrix interactions are essential for myogenic phenomena and mechanotransduction.

**The Intima**

Traditionally the intima is considered a physical barrier between blood components and extravascular tissues. In arterioles, the intima predominantly consists of endothelial cells (ECs) and their basement membrane. Endothelial cells are longitudinally arranged with the direction of flow and have an overall thickness of 0.2 to 0.5 µm, except at the area of the cell nucleus. In feeding arterioles, ECs are approximately 100 µm in length and approximately 10 µm in width with a 10:1 ratio that reduces as downstream arterioles with a smaller diameter.

Functionally, endothelial cells control vessel tone by synthesis and release of vasoactive factors that exert their potential effects on neighboring smooth muscle cells. The functional properties of endothelial cells interlink with their structure. ECs have an excellent capacity to sense and transduce mechanical forces and produce vasoactive compounds that can fine-tune the tone of adjacent smooth muscle cells for the appropriate regulation of arteriolar diameter.

An additional functional characteristic of endothelial cells is their association with vascular permeability. Morphological changes of ECs from toxin and inflammation allow variations in microvascular permeability.

The basement membrane underneath ECs in arterioles is primarily composed of collagen type IV, laminin, heparan sulfate, and proteoglycans. Additional constituents are collagens type I, III, and V and fibronectin.

**Physiologic Role**

The arterioles play a principal role in flow regulation and intravascular pressure. Arterioles are the site of the highest resistance across the vascular tree and thus act as the most significant contributor to total peripheral resistance and eventually mean arterial pressure. By maintaining total peripheral resistance, or mean arterial pressure, arterioles contribute to upstream perfusion pressure for all organs. Most commonly, arterioles branch into capillary beds and then collect into small venules and control the volume of blood distribution in a given capillary bed. They are the gatekeepers to the capillary network that supplies cells and tissues with oxygen and nutrients and removes waste products. They have a unique feature compared to other blood vessels defined by their active response to physical stimuli. They constrict and maintain a smaller diameter in response to high intravascular pressure (the myogenic response) and undergo a dilated state when flow increases (flow-included dilation). Furthermore, arterioles respond to changes in the chemical environment, including dilation in response to local hypoxia or secondary to various mediators during periods of high metabolic activity of the parenchyma. It has been evident that meaningful communication resides among the venules and adjacent arterioles, providing a feedback system to control arteriolar tone according to local metabolic needs.