There are two primary ways to reduce the labia minora: the wedge excision or the trim technique.

Asymmetric or protuberant labia minora can be corrected by excising or trimming the excess areas with a knife, scissors, or a laser and over-sewing for closure.

The wedge technique, championed by Dr. Gary Alter, preserves the natural edge of the labia, resecting only a wedge or 'V' of the most protuberant labia minora, preserving the natural labial edge. The only disadvantages are a longer operative time, the required surgical expertise, and the occasional persistence of darker labial edge pigment.

Other variations of the above techniques, as well as de-epithelialization and pedicled flap methods, have been described but have failed to produce consistent and desired outcomes.

Preoperatively, the woman is examined in the lithotomy position with the head elevated. While using a mirror, or a real-time camera, to visualize her genitalia, the surgeon and patient can discuss the desired areas of correction and the surgical markings for excision. Given the degree of labia minora length, thickness, and shape. The surgical markings will vary depending on each patient's specific anatomy. The clitoral hood is evaluated to determine protrusion, symmetry, location of problematic darkened skin, the presence of extra folds, and the amount of clitoral glans size and exposure. Next, the surgeon should evaluate the posterior introitus for a high posterior lip or gaping due to a previous episiotomy. A large wedge or 'V-shaped marking is made at the area of maximal labial protrusion and darkening. Excellent symmetry can usually be achieved even in asymmetric patients.

In the operating room, the patient will again be in the lithotomy position, and general or regional anesthesia can be used. The upper labial incision of the wedge is usually placed at or just posterior to the convergence of the glans frenulum and clitoral hood. The degree of labium excised should achieve a straight, non-redundant labium that is approximated under no tension. Care should be taken to ensure that you do not over-resect and cause an overly tight introitus, which is usually ensured by placing two fingerbreadths in the vagina. The medial 'V' extends internally to terminate distal to the hymeneal ring. The lateral 'V' is curved anterior in a hockey-stick design to eliminate a 'dog-ear' and to excise a redundant lateral clitoral hood or lateral hood folds. Thus, the medial and lateral V's are asymmetrical. On rare occasions, another unilateral or bilateral posterior 'V' is necessary to achieve symmetry or adequate reduction.

The subcutaneous tissue of the anterior and posterior labia is re-approximated in two layers using a 5.0 Monocryl or Vicryl on a small TF needle. The internal and external subcutaneous 'dog ears' are excised if present. The labial edges and medial and lateral closures are re-approximated with interrupted, horizontal mattress 5-0 Monocryl on a TF needle. The lateral clitoral hood is closed with running subcutaneous 5-0 Monocryl and a running subcuticular 5-0 Monocryl. There should only be one small transverse incision line on the leading edge of the labium. Although not always achievable, the labia should protrude only slightly past the introitus.

If the clitoral hood has extra vertical medial folds or medial hypertrophic skin, these can be excised with vertical ellipses. In this case, the lateral 'V' labial excision can stop at the lateral labium. If the patient were to have redundant horizontal folds, you could perform vertical transverse ellipses to excise. Keep in mind that this can result in overexposure of the glans clitoris that can cause hypersensitivity, or an unacceptable aesthetic appearance, so conservative excision is advised.

If the introitus is too tight or if there is a high riding posterior lip, a midline incision can be made at the 6 o'clock position with aesthetic closure of the resulting dog ears. If a perineoplasty, posterior vaginal repair, or introital tightening procedure is performed during the same operation of a large labial reduction, care must be betaken to ensure that the introitus is not overly tight. This is prevented by delaying the perineal and vaginal repair distal to the hymeneal ring until the labia reduction is complete, allowing for introital adjustments during the closure.

Patients are seen at three weeks post-op to remove any retained sutures and to evaluate healing. Itching can be intense as sutures dissolve, and patients should be educated beforehand. Post-operative restrictions include no vaginal penetration for six weeks, avoidance of any pressures on the suture lines, and refraining from any activities that could lead to tension on the incisions. Patients must be aware and tolerant of the significant swelling that can follow, as it may take weeks to resolve. Revisions can be considered once full healing has occurred, typically no sooner than six months from surgery. Patient opinions of the outcome should be respected, and if something is fixable, patients should be offered the opportunity for a revision. A common complaint is of persistent, albeit less, asymmetry of the labia.