Given the devasting effect that Fournier gangrene has on patients and the high mortality, complications can present both in the short and long term.

Short-term systemic complications of Fournier gangrene are a result of the inflammatory response mounted by the body against this aggressive infectious process. These systemic complications include acute renal failure, acute respiratory distress syndrome, cardiac arrhythmias, heart failure, multiple organ failure, and bacteremia. This bacteremia can cause acute thromboembolic events such as strokes and arterial occlusion in the lower extremities, which can lead to amputations. Also, patients can develop ileus due to the multiple surgeries they undergo. Wound infections following debridement can also occur; however, as previously discussed, adjunctive treatments such as hyperbaric oxygen are aimed at lowering the rate of wound infections.

Patients who suffer from significant disease involvement of the perineum can often develop fecal incontinence due to the involvement of the anal sphincter, which requires debridement. These patients will require a colostomy to decrease fecal contamination of the wound. The formation of a colostomy itself comes with multiple associated complications. These complications include the evisceration of the stoma and stomal infection. As the penis is often involved, urinary tract infections are common complications of the disease. Urinary retention results from periurethral swelling, which prevents the patient from voiding; treatment includes urinary catheterization and cystostomy in specific patient groups.

Psychological complications are prevalent in patients who suffer from Fournier gangrene. Due to the devastating effect the disease has on the genitals; many patients have long-term pain as a result. This condition leads to a decreased quality of life, which can cause depression. The disfiguring scars associated with the recovery process also contribute to patients’ psychological problems. Patients will often suffer from sexual dysfunction from impaired penile function, penile deviation, and penile torsion. Loss of penile skin sensitivity and pain associated with erections are two other factors that lead to sexual dysfunction.