Opportunistic pathogens such as Mycobacterium, fungi, viruses, parasites can cause latent or subacute infections in HIV/AIDS patients. Due to an immunodeficient state and lack of inflammatory response, the patient can remain asymptomatic. Following the initiation of HAART, however, there is an anticipated improvement in an immune-mediated inflammatory response. This hyper-inflammatory response is the hallmark of IRIS. The clinical presentation depends on the underlying pathogen and organ/system involved and the severity of the inflammatory response.

There is no universal definition of IRIS and broad consensus on diagnostic criteria, but the following criteria usually need to be met before the diagnosis of the IRIS in HIV positive patients:

- The patient should be HIV-positive.

- The patient should be receiving HAART with either a decrease in HIV-1 RNA level from baseline or an increase in CD4+ cells from baseline or both.

- Clinical symptoms should be consistent with an inflammatory process.

- Clinical course not consistent with:

- Expected course of previously diagnosed OI.
- Expected course of newly diagnosed OI.
- Drug toxicity or side effects.

The most common organism-specific clinical manifestations of IRIS are as follows:

**Organism**

**Clinical features**

**Mycobacterium Tuberculosis**





Pulmonary TB: Cough, shortness of breath, increased work of breathing.

Extrapulmonary TB: Tender lymphadenopathy, cutaneous lesions.

Systemic symptoms: Malaise, fever, chills, unintentional weight loss, night sweats.

**Mycobacterium Avium Complex**

Tender lymphadenopathy.

**Cryptococcus Neoformans.**



The central nervous system (CNS): Confusions, seizures, raised intracranial pressure.

Pulmonary symptoms: Cough, shortness of breath.

**Cytomegalo Virus (CMV)**



Ocular symptoms related to immune reconstitution mediated uveitis such as blurred vision, decreased visual acuity, ocular pain.

Extraocular symptoms: Shortness of breath due to pneumonia, diarrhea due to CMV colitis.

**Pneumocystis Jirovecii**



Systemic symptoms: Fever, chills, malaise, unintentional weight loss.

Pulmonary symptoms: Worsening shortness of breath, cough.

**JC Virus**



Can present with progressive multifocal leukoencephalopathy (PML) which is a potentially life-threatening condition that involves cortical neurons and demyelinating disease frequently involving gray matter. Patients usually present with subacute neurologic deficits, including confusions, visual symptoms such as double vision, blindness, or gait ataxia.

**Hepatitis B and C Viruses**



Fever, chills, lack of appetite, unintentional weight loss, nausea, jaundice.

**Kaposi Sarcoma**



Worsening of skin and mucosal lesions with increased tenderness and swelling, peripheral edema.

**Herpes Zoster**





Cutaneous manifestations: Herpetic lesions in typical dermatomal distributions.

Ocular lesions: Eye pain and red eye due to keratitis or iritis.