**Malignant Optic Nerve Glioma**

It is important to recognize a rarer type of glioma, which is seen in older patients. Since Hoyt et al. first described aggressive optic nerve glioma in adults which behaved in a malignant manner, there have been some 60 additional reported cases.

**Clinical Course**

These patients present with a rapid loss of vision, first presenting on one side and then both. When first seen, these patients show vision deterioration in both eyes in 63% of cases. The condition may be misdiagnosed as anterior ischemic optic neuropathy or optic neuritis because of the presentation. Most patients will show optic disc edema, going on to develop optic atrophy if the patient survives. Unlike optic pathway gliomas, proptosis is only seen in 20% of patients.

**Evaluation**

In 80% of cases, CT or MRI will show optic chiasm enlargement and enhancement. Intracranial portions of the nerves will also show involvement.

**Diagnosis**

This is only possible with a biopsy and histopathology.

**Histopathology**

These are anaplastic astrocytomas (WHO grade III) or glioblastomas (WHO grade IV). Malignant astrocytes with pleomorphic nuclei, necrosis, and vascular proliferation are seen. Invasion into the surrounding brain is seen.

**Treatment**

Neither surgery nor radiotherapy has been found to change the prognosis of this condition. In a few patients, survival may be improved by a few months with an aggressive combination of radiotherapy, chemotherapy, and surgery.

**Prognosis**

All patients progress to complete vision loss within months of presenting. The mortality rate is 100%, with a mean survival of less than 1 year.