Hepatoblastomas originate from primitive hepatic stem cells that give rise to the epithelial components of the liver. Classically, these tumors are divided into 2 broad categories: epithelial type (E-HB) and mixed epithelial and mesenchymal type (MEM-HB). Revision of this original classification system resulted in the pathology consensus of the pediatric hepatoblastoma classification system, which retained the subdivision of the histologic types into 2 broad categories, as described above. The E-HB includes fetal, pleomorphic, embryonal, macrotrabecular, small cell undifferentiated (SCU), cholangioblastic and mixed epithelial variants. The MEM-HB is subdivided into tumors with teratoid features and tumors without teratoid features.

The fetal subtype is further stratified into 4 categories: well-differentiated; crowded or mitotically active; pleomorphic, poorly differentiated; and anaplastic. The well-differentiated variant is characterized by a low power view demonstrating alternating light and dark areas due to variable cytoplasmic glycogen content. Assessment at higher power reveals a uniform population of hepatocytes arranged in trabeculae that are 2 to 3 cells thick. Extramedullary hematopoiesis is a typical finding, and mitotic rate is low. Description of the other variants is beyond the scope of this article.

The embryonal subtype is the most commonly encountered subtype and consists of basophilic cells with scant cytoplasm and increased mitotic rate that is arranged in nests, trabeculae, acini, pseudorosettes, or sheets. The macrotrabecular subtype is arranged in trabeculae that are more than ten cells thick. The SCU subtype consists of dyscohesive, uniform round cells arranged in sheets with increased mitotic activity. Some cases of SCU have a loss of INI1, suggesting a possible association with primary rhabdoid tumors of the liver. The cholangioblastic variant has bile ducts, typically located at the periphery of epithelial sheets.

The MEM-HB comprises 20-30% of tumors and contains a variable combination of epithelial and mesenchymal components. Most commonly, the epithelial component is fetal or embryonal, and the mesenchymal component is osteoid. Stromal derivatives include spindle cells, osteoid, skeletal muscle, and cartilage. Teratoid features include primitive endoderm, neural derivatives, melanin, squamous and glandular elements.