In EMPD, the proliferative neoplastic cell is the Paget cell (PC). These cells have ample pale cytoplasm and large pleomorphic nuclei, sometimes with a prominent nucleolus. Mitoses are commonly present. Occasional cells have an eccentric nucleus and the appearance of a signet ring.

In early lesions, the cells are arranged singly or in small groups, sometimes with the glandular formation in the basal layer of the epidermis. The entire thickness of the epidermis can be involved, although the greatest concentration of tumor cells is in the lower part of the epidermis. The pagetoid cells usually spread into the contiguous epithelium of eccrine ducts and hair follicles. Uncommonly, Paget cells may invade the dermis.

Unlike the majority of cases of mammary Paget disease, the Paget cells in extramammary Paget disease contain ample mucin, which may be confirmed by staining with Alcian blue, mucicarmine, Periodic acid–Schiff (PAS), and colloidal iron. Immunohistochemistry is often used to diagnose Paget disease and to identify the likely cell of origin. Paget cells usually stain for markers of eccrine and apocrine derivation including low molecular weight cytokeratins (CK), periodic acid-Schiff (PAS), gross cystic disease fluid protein (GCDFP-15), and carcinoembryonic antigen (CEA). S100 staining is negative.

Extramammary Paget disease and mammary Paget disease and show characteristic, although slightly different immunophenotypes. Primary intra-epidermal Paget disease is GCDFP-15 positive, CK7 positive, and CK20 negative. Paget disease that has spread from an underlying internal carcinoma (EMPD) stains GCDFP-15 negative, CK7 negative, and CK20 positive. The main histological differential diagnoses to exclude in the vulva are superficial spreading malignant melanoma (PAS negative, S100 positive, cytokeratin negative, CEA negative) and anogenital intraepithelial neoplasia (S100 negative, PAS negative).