The composition of CSF is clear and colorless, with a density of between 1.003 to 1.008 g/cm.

CSF appears to have several important functions. One of these functions is to provide a buoyant force to support the brain and spinal cord. The brain has a significant amount of mass (approximately 1500 gm) while at the same time being relatively malleable. However, since the CSF surrounds the brain, it dissipates much of the downward force that would normally act on the organ. This dissipation reduces the stress on the brain and allows it to maintain its shape. When surrounded by adequate CSF, the brain exerts significantly less tension on exiting nerve roots.

Since there is continuous production of CSF, it also helps clear waste products from around the central nervous system and regulates intracranial pressure. This dynamic process can be controlled by either increasing or reducing production to match the central nervous system's needs at any given time. A similar regulatory mechanism can also reduce ischemia in the central nervous system (CNS) tissues. In times of ischemia, the volume of CSF can decrease and, therefore, decrease intracranial pressures. This decrease in intracranial pressure reduces the mechanical stress on blood vessels and may reduce ischemia.

CSF also acts like a lymphatic system, allowing the movement of nutrients, metabolites, and toxins, and additionally has a role in neurodevelopment, chemical buffering, and homeostatic hormonal signaling mechanisms.

Once formed, the CSF passes from the lateral ventricles through the foramen of Monro into the third ventricle. From the third ventricle, CSF then flows through the cerebral aqueduct of Sylvius into the fourth ventricle. From the fourth ventricle, the majority of the CSF exits the ventricular system through the paired lateral foramina of Luschka and the single medial foramen of Magendie into the various basilar cisterns and subarachnoid spaces, while a minority of CSF will continue into the central canal of the spinal cord. In the subarachnoid spaces, the CSF flows over the surface of the cerebral cortex. CSF is then drained back into the blood circulation via the arachnoid granulations into the cerebral venous sinus system.