Dilated cardiomyopathy is a progressive heart disorder with no cure. Eventually, most patients progress to heart failure and close to 50% are dead within five years. Today many treatments have been devised for the treatment of dilated cardiomyopathy, but for most of them, there is a lack of evidence to support their use. There is no longer any question that this disorder is best managed by an interprofessional team that specializes in heart disease. The three single most important factors that determine the prognosis are 1) diet, 2) medication compliance, and 3) an exercise program. The disorder should be risk-stratified and managed accordingly.

A dietitian or a nurse is vital because one of the best ways to prevent progression to heart failure is by restricting fluid and salt intake. The family must be told to weigh the patient and offer foods that are low in salt. The pharmacist must ensure that the patient remains compliant with the medications. There is ample evidence indicating that participating in an exercise program can reduce symptoms and lower all-cause mortality. If the patient is deemed to be a candidate for a heart transplant, the heart transplant team should be consulted early on. Close communication between the team is vital if one wants to improve outcomes.

**Outcomes**

The outcomes of patients with dilated cardiomyopathy depend on the cause, ejection fraction, and comorbidity. At least 50% are dead within five years, and many others go on to develop heart failure. Despite many treatments available, the majority remain experimental. In view of the lack of data on treatments, it is imperative that the education of the patient and family be done to ensure that they comply with fluid and salt restriction.