Gonadal dysgenesis is a genetic condition due to errors in cell division and or alterations in genetic material, leading to complete or partial loss of gonadal development. The development of gonadal dysgenesis begins early either at fertilization or shortly after in the early stages of the embryo and fetus. Complete gonadal dysgenesis genotypes are known as either 46, XX or 46, XY. These patients with full gonadal dysgenesis exhibit streak gonads, female external genitalia, and hypogonadotropic hypogonadism with associated amenorrhea and lack of secondary sexual characteristics but none of the other features of Turner syndrome described below

Multiple genotypes have been discovered among Turner syndrome patients. The typical 45X type and mosaic types, such as 45X/46XX, 45X/46XX/47XXX, 45X/46XY, are considered partial gonadal dysgenesis. Additionally, some mosaics contain isochromosomes, ring chromosomes, and Xq deletions. Studies have found that as suspected, mosaic forms of the disease tend to have decreased symptoms and phenotypic presentation due to some cell lines having normal genetic information

The development of Turner syndrome stems from meiotic and mitotic errors that lead to a lack of a second X chromosome. Turner syndrome is known for a collection of symptoms including short stature, webbed neck, widely spaced nipples, amenorrhea and infertility, fetal hydrops, and cardiac problems such as a bicuspid aortic valve or coarctation of the aorta. Turner syndrome can cause a multitude of other conditions as well, such as horseshoe kidney and sensorineural hearing loss. Most girls with Turner syndrome tend to have a normal intelligence level but may have issues with verbal and social skills