No specific physical examination findings indicate hypercalcemia. However, patients can present with a wide spectrum of symptoms. Depending on the acuity and severity, patients can either be asymptomatic or can have involvement of multiple organ systems such as the gastrointestinal tract (GI), musculoskeletal system, cardiovascular system (CVS), renal involvement, and central nervous system (CNS) or psychiatric disturbances.

The renal manifestations can vary from polyuria, polydipsia, nephrogenic diabetes insipidus, and renal insufficiency to distal renal tubular acidosis (RTA) secondary to nephrolithiasis. If left untreated, hypercalcemia and hypercalciuria can lead to tubular atrophy, interstitial fibrosis, and renal calcification, which can cause nephrocalcinosis. GI symptoms can vary from anorexia to nausea and constipation. Excessive calcium deposition in the pancreatic duct can cause pancreatitis. Hypercalcemia can also enhance the secretion of gastrin levels, which can contribute to peptic ulcer disease.

Musculoskeletal symptoms can manifest as muscle weakness and bone pain. CVS manifestations are subtle and include short QTc intervals and, in rare cases, more serious arrhythmias. Excess calcium can deposit in the heart valves and the coronary arteries and increase cardiovascular morbidity. CNS symptoms depend on the levels of calcium. Patients with mild hypercalcemia are usually asymptomatic, whereas patients with more severe hypercalcemia can present with lethargy, confusion, or even coma, which is more commonly seen in the elderly population. Common psychiatric disturbances include anxiety, depression, or cognitive disturbances.