There is currently no treatment available to halt the deposition of PEX material in affected eyes. Management of this condition is primarily aimed at regular (at least annual) eye examinations for early detection and treatment of glaucoma.

Local eye drops: The first-line treatment of PEG is medical. IOP-lowering topical medications that are effective in PEG include prostaglandin analogs, beta-blockers, carbonic anhydrase inhibitors, or a combination of these. Pilocarpine is not recommended due to the risk of worsening angle-closure glaucoma and posterior synechiae formation. PEG is generally more resistant to medical therapy than POAG. Considering the aggressive nature and the risk of faster progression in PEX, the target IOP should be lower than those used to manage POAG.

Selective laser trabeculoplasty (SLT): Laser treatment may be used as a first-line treatment or to avoid more invasive surgery. It is very successful in PEG eyes, reducing IOP by 30%. The increased effectiveness of SLT may be due to the increased pigmentation of the trabecular meshwork, which leads to increased absorption of laser energy. SLT, however, is not permanent, and a significant proportion of patients may require further surgery in the long term. Argon laser trabeculoplasty (ALT), which induces a greater histopathological effect on the trabecular meshwork due to the stronger energy laser applied for a longer time, has also been reported to be useful as a temporary regulation treatment of IOP in PEG.

Surgery: Similar to POAG, surgical management of PEG may be considered following the failure of maximal medical therapy and/or SLT.

Cataract surgery may be challenging in PEX eyes due to poor mydriasis, corneal endotheliopathy, zonular instability, and lens subluxation.

Current studies in the literature have shown that new treatments for PEG are constantly being studied. These alternatives to traditional treatment are still being performed in preclinical and animal models, and include magnetic phage display,