Tizanidine is an imidazoline derivative and a centrally acting alpha-2 receptor agonist. Tizanidine inhibits the release of excitatory amino acids like glutamate and aspartate from spinal interneurons. Consequently, tizanidine enhances the presynaptic inhibition of motor neurons. Tizanidine has significant action on spinal polysynaptic pathways.

The overall effect of these actions is to reduce the facilitation of spinal motor neurons. Similarly, alpha-2 receptor-mediated inhibition of inter-neuronal activity appears to underlie tizanidine's additional anti-nociceptive and anti-convulsant activities. Spasm frequency and clonus are also reduced by tizanidine.

Tizanidine also has an affinity for the alpha-1 receptors but to a lesser degree, which may explain its mild and transitory effect on the cardiovascular system compared to clonidine despite their structural and biochemical similarity.

**Pharmacokinetics**

Absorption: Tizanidine has a significant, first-pass hepatic metabolism with an oral bioavailability of 20% to 34%. Tizanidine attains the steady-state concentration within 24 to 48 hours after administration. There is no noticeable change in its pharmacokinetic behavior with repeated intake.

Distribution: Tizanidine has extensive tissue distribution; the volume of distribution is 2.4 L/kg. The plasma protein binding of tizanidine is approximately 30%.

Metabolism: Tizanidine is metabolized extensively in the liver by cytochrome P450-1A2 to inactive metabolites.

Excretion: Tizanidine has an elimination half-life of 2.5 hours, follows linear pharmacokinetics, and is excreted 60% through urine and 20% through feces.