# Continuing Education Activity

Acute DVT and chronic venous disease are common conditions with a significant burden on patient morbidity, mortality, and quality of life. Duplex ultrasound of the peripheral venous system is an easily accessible and reliable method of diagnosis, evaluating the extent and severity of the disease and monitoring progression and planning treatment. This activity describes how to perform a complete duplex ultrasound exam of the peripheral venous system and highlights the interprofessional team's role in evaluating and managing care for patients with these conditions.

**Objectives:**
- Review the general pathophysiology of venous thrombosis, post-thrombotic syndrome, and chronic venous insufficiency.
- Explain how to perform a complete duplex ultrasound exam of the lower extremity peripheral venous system, including assessing for thrombosis as well as valvular insufficiency.
- Describe the typical imaging findings of acute versus chronic deep venous thrombosis and valvular insufficiency.
- Outline how interprofessional team coordination can improve diagnostic results when using vascular sonography to evaluate conditions for which it is indicated.

# Introduction

Peripheral venous ultrasound (US) is commonly used to diagnose and evaluate venous disease, including acute thromboembolism, postthrombotic syndrome, and chronic venous insufficiency. Venous duplex ultrasound is quick to perform and easily accessible. It is noninvasive and offers no radiation risk to the patient. When evaluating acute deep venous thrombosis (DVT), ultrasonography is 97% sensitive for proximal DVT and 57% sensitive for calf DVT.

Venous thromboembolism refers to the formation of blood clots in the venous structures. The annual incidence of DVT is 1 in 1000, and DVT is responsible for > 250,000 hospitalizations a year in the United States.

Postthrombotic syndrome (PTS) refers to the late complications of venous thromboembolism. The cumulative incidence after symptomatic DVT is 15% to 50%, with most cases developing in 1 to 2 years.

Signs and symptoms of PTS often overlap with chronic venous insufficiency (CVI), a term denoting impaired venous return usually reserved for the superficial system. CVI arises from a combination of genetic predisposition and risk factors such as age, female gender, obesity, and prolonged standing.

Common clinical symptoms shared with PTS and CVI include pain, cramps, itching, swelling, skin changes, and venous ectasia. The Villalta score is specific for PTS and informs diagnosis, severity, and management stratification.

# Anatomy and Physiology

Peripheral venous drainage consists of a deep system below the investing muscular fascia and a superficial system above the fascia. Communicating or perforator veins bridge the two systems, directing blood to the deep venous systems.

The lower extremity superficial venous system's main veins include the great and lesser saphenous veins. The great saphenous vein (GSV) arises from the dorsal venous pedal arch, courses anterior to the medial malleolus and medially in the lower leg, anteromedially in the thigh, and joins the common femoral vein (a deep vein) at the femoral triangle.

The lower extremity deep venous system consists of the anterior tibial, posterior tibial, and peroneal veins in the calf.

There are approximately 150 perforator veins with one-way valves that direct blood from the superficial to the deep venous systems.

The upper limb veins have variable anatomy in regards to both number and position. The brachial vein is the predominant deep venous drainage structure. The brachial vein can be single or duplicated.

The upper extremity superficial system's main veins include the cephalic and basilic veins. The cephalic vein has an anterolateral course in the forearm before giving off the medial cubital vein, draining into the axillary vein.

# Indications

For evaluation of acute thromboembolic disease: suspicion for DVT or PE (such as likely pretest probability of DVT via pulmonary embolism rule-out criteria or Wells score), positive D-dimer.

For evaluation of chronic venous insufficiency: symptomatic varicose veins, asymptomatic varicose veins in patients considering treatment, symptoms of venous hypertension with outward manifestations, recurrence post-treatment.

# Equipment

A 5.0 to 7.5 MHz or higher linear transducer is preferred. A curved 3.5 to 5.0 MHz transducer may benefit in challenging cases as it would provide a deeper and wider field view.

# Personnel

Ultrasound technicians perform the majority of peripheral ultrasound examinations. Any appropriately trained physician is qualified, and point-of-care ultrasound provided by competent providers can help triage care.

# Technique or Treatment

When evaluating deep venous thrombosis, duplex ultrasound with segmental compression every 2 cm is the preferred modality. The patient is positioned supine with the patient's head slightly elevated to promote venous pooling. The patient's leg is externally rotated, and the knee is slightly bent (frog-leg positioning), optimizing the conspicuity of the femoral and popliteal veins. The exam should extend from the common femoral vein at the inguinal ligament to the distal calf veins (anterior tibial, posterior tibial, and peroneal veins).

Proper compression is paramount.

Only color and spectral Doppler are used at the proximal common femoral and popliteal veins since satisfactory compression is technically infeasible at these areas. At the common femoral vein, spectral Doppler evaluates for cardiac pulsatility and respiratory phasicity, which indirectly suggest patency between the common femoral vein and the heart as an occlusive disease would prevent the expected propagation of these cyclical changes. Similarly, augmentation of the calf veins by manual compression should manifest as a sharp peak in the popliteal waveform, indicating at least partial patency of the deep venous structures in the calf.

The upper extremity deep venous system can similarly undergo interrogation. The patient is positioned supine, with the patient's head rotated away from the side being evaluated to delineate the internal jugular and subclavian veins better. An infraclavicular approach often identifies the subclavian vein, while the central portion is often best seen from a supraclavicular approach. The arm is externally rotated and repositioned as needed to assess the arm veins. In areas where compression is not feasible due to overlying bony prominences such as the subclavian vein, the patient can be asked to take a sniff of air or Valsalva. The vein is watched in real-time during the maneuver to ensure a proper venous response (venous collapse during inspiration or sniffing and enlargement during Valsalva). It is helpful to distinguish between acute venous thrombosis and chronic postthrombotic change. Acute thrombus manifests as hypoechoic or anechoic material within the vessel lumen.

After an acute episode, the vein may completely heal and appear normal or scar down. Over time, the thrombus becomes more echogenic and adherent to the wall.

Several technical and interpretative errors require monitoring: lack of adequate compression, mislabeling of the venous structures by the sonographer, and incorrect ultrasound gain and color settings. While color flow is often absent in acute thrombus, flow can be seen in a partially occlusive or recanalized thrombus. Further, slow flow can appear as mobile low-level echoes that could be mistaken for thrombosis.

When evaluating venous insufficiency, an attempt is made to recreate the conditions contributing to venous insufficiency. The patient, if able to, is asked to stand with weight over the leg not being evaluated. The patient is asked to relax the musculature in the leg of interest. The knees are in slight flexion. The greater saphenous vein is best evaluated by first finding the saphenofemoral junction.

Average measurements are up to 5 mm for the greater saphenous and up to 3 mm for the smaller saphenous veins.

The saphenofemoral junction is assessed for reflux in longitudinal and short-axis views. The first competent valve can be identified by asking the patient to perform a Valsalva maneuver. The increased intraabdominal pressure will cause reflux past any damaged or incompetent valves. Each vein is then evaluated with color Doppler while sequential compression and relaxation are applied to a more peripheral segment. This can be performed manually or with a sequentially inflated and deflated blood pressure cuff. For example, one could position an automatic blood pressure cuff distal to the vein segment being interrogated, inflate the cuff to 80 mmHg, wait 4 seconds, and then deflate the cuff. The duration of reversed color flow after relaxation is measured. Pulsed Doppler helps quantify the reflux time and volume. Any reflux or reversed flow lasting longer than 0.5 seconds in the superficial system or 1.0 seconds in the deep system is considered clinically significant.

When monitoring for progression, it is essential to keep any confounding factors to a minimum and perform the exam with similar positioning, reflux-eliciting maneuver, and time of day.

# Clinical Significance

Acute DVT and chronic venous disease are common conditions with a significant burden on patient morbidity, mortality, and quality of life. The Venous Insufficiency Epidemiological and Economical Study (VEINES) showed a correlation between varicosities, venous disease, and decreased life scores.

# Enhancing Healthcare Team Outcomes

Diagnosing and treating venous disease requires cooperation and communication between multiple healthcare providers. There is often overlap between who is medically managing and treating the patient. Peripheral venous disease is at an interface involving interventional radiologists, interventional cardiologists, vascular surgeons, hematologists/oncologists, and primary care physicians. This interplay can lead to confusing and sometimes counterproductive recommendations. A collaborative effort such as a specialized vein clinic with clearly defined roles is one of the current solutions to ensure the best possible outcomes.