**Positional (non-synostotic)/Deformational Brachycephaly**

The cranial sutures or fibrous joints that separate the cranium bones do not fuse or ossify at birth. This ensures the essential event of volumetric growth and development of the brain postnatally. As a result, a newborn skull retains its ability to mold in the initial months of life and is, therefore, susceptible to the deformational effects of external force. The frequent practice of placing an infant in a supine sleeping position can lead to a symmetrical flattening of the occipital bone resulting in positional or deformational brachycephaly.

A unilateral flattening of the occipital bone in infants may result in deformational plagiocephaly, a related positional skull deformity. Positional brachycephaly may also be observed at the time of birth in some infants. This may be attributable to prolonged labor or intrauterine fetal head constraint due to factors such as abnormal intrauterine position, multiple gestations, oligohydramnios, and congenital or acquired structural anomalies of the uterus.

**Brachycephaly Due to Craniosynostosis (Synostotic Brachycephaly)**

The skull consists of the neurocranium and the viscerocranium (also known as splanchnocranium). The neurocranium forms a protective shell surrounding the brain and the brain stem, while the facial bones form the viscerocranium (or facial skeleton).

Premature abnormal mineralization of the cranial sutures, which can occur between the calvaria bones, results in craniosynostosis. Bilateral premature mineralization of the coronal sutures leads to bi-coronal craniosynostosis, referred to as anterior brachycephaly.FGFR-2), FGFR-3, twist homolog-1 (TWIST1), and ephrin-B1 (EFNB1) gene mutations may predispose an infant to craniosynostosis.