As with any nerve, damage can occur through direct trauma or iatrogenic injury. Specific to the tibial nerve, however, are two conditions of interest.

**Tarsal Tunnel Syndrome**

Tarsal tunnel syndrome results from tibial nerve compression within the tarsal tunnel, quite analogous to the more well-known carpal tunnel syndrome of the wrist. After coursing inferomedially within the leg, the tibial nerve enters the foot through the tarsal tunnel. This compartment is fairly narrow at baseline, thus any etiology of increased pressure in this region can cause compression of the tibial nerve. Etiologies are often broken down into intrinsic and extrinsic sources. Intrinsic causes include abnormal growths (ganglion cysts, osteophytes, osteochondromas, schwannomas), peri-neural fibrosis, and hypertrophic tendinopathies. Extrinsic causes include trauma (ankle sprains, post-surgical scarring), edema, obesity, and tight shoes.

Patients often present with burning, numbness, or tingling in the plantar surface of the foot and toes. Symptoms may also be experienced in the heel through radiation to the medial calcaneal nerve, which branches proximal to the tarsal tunnel. The pain is often most pronounced with prolonged standing and manual pressure over medial side of the ankle. Tinel sign, which is tingling upon percussion of the nerve, is positive in more than half of patients. In severe cases, patients may experience muscle weakness and muscle wasting.

Management includes lifestyle modifications for extrinsic causes (weight loss, change of shoes), and initial conservative treatment for other cases. This includes resting of the foot and ankle, and potential use of corticosteroid injections. It is recommended that conservative treatment is attempted for six months before progressing to surgery unless the case is due to direct trauma or prior surgery.

**Compartment Syndrome**

Many muscle groups within the human extremities are enveloped in fascial membranes. In the leg, there are four fascial envelopes or compartments: anterior, lateral, superficial posterior, and deep posterior. Compartment syndrome is described as an acute or chronic increase in pressure within a fascial compartment that leads to a compromise of the blood supply to structures within the compartment. Anterior compartment syndrome is the most common of these four, but each of the four compartments can be involved. Compartment syndromes occur most commonly following trauma due to progressive limb swelling which increases pressure within the compartment resulting in venous hypertension and eventual tissue ischemia.

Untreated compartment syndrome of the deep posterior compartment can result in motor and sensory deficits in the foot and ankle due to tibial nerve ischemia.