Management of hyperpituitarism will depend on the cause and the hormone or hormones affected.

**Pharmacological Treatment**

It includes the use of somatostatin analogs and competitive receptor antagonists. For prolactinomas, medical therapy is the usual choice and consists of dopamine agonists such as bromocriptine and cabergoline.

Prolactinomas are the only pituitary adenomas in which long-term pharmacological therapy is satisfactory. Unless there is an acute threat, medical management should always be preferred to surgical intervention in such cases. Dopamine agonists suppress prolactin effectively and decrease serum prolactin levels. They also reduce galactorrhea and recover the gonadal function. Dopamine agonists have also been found to cause tumor shrinkage.

In cases of Cushing's disease, medical management has only an adjunctive role as the cornerstone of management is surgical intervention. The drugs used in this regard are adrenal enzyme inhibitors, such as metyrapone, aminoglutethimide, and ketoconazole.

Somatostatin analogs have been effectively used in patients with GH excess. Octreotide reduces circulating levels of growth hormone and IGF-1. Long-acting octreotide and lanreotide suppress GH and IGF-1 consistently as they act for a longer time.

**Surgical Management**

Resection of the pituitary gland and its tumors is technically challenging because of the anatomical location. Minimally invasive procedures are increasingly utilized. These include trans-sphenoidal surgery for acromegaly, prolactinoma-macroadenoma, and Cushing syndrome with an adenoma. However, as many patients with pituitary tumors often present late with large tumors, complete resection is often not possible.

**Radiotherapy**

Conventional radiotherapy may be used to reduce tumor size; however, pituitary damage and resultant hypopituitarism may occur.