**Pheochromocytomas and Pregnancy**

It is a rare but anxiety-provoking clinical condition in pregnant patients. Various studies have reported the prevalence anywhere between 1 per 15000 and 1 per 54000 pregnancies.

In a large international multicenter retrospective cohort study, authors provided constructive evidence for helping the clinicians.

Authors reported that severe maternal complications occurred in 7% of and death occurred in 1% of pregnancies associated with untreated pheochromocytoma paragangliomas (PPGL). Overall fetal mortality of 9% was reported. These rates of complications appeared significantly lower when compared to previously published literature. Abdominal and pelvic PPGL were associated with higher adverse events either due to compression by the uterus or higher catecholamine release. Tumor size was not reported to have higher complications at delivery time. The type of delivery was not found to be associated with adverse outcomes.

Antepartum surgery was not associated with better outcomes; adverse events occurred in 8% of such pregnancies. In case of surgery has to be performed, 2nd trimester is considered safer when compared to the first trimester. Metastatic PPGL was not associated with adverse outcomes; these were thought to be likely related to closer monitoring and treatment. Authors reported lower adverse outcomes in syndromic PPGL; this was thought to be secondary to earlier diagnosis and treatment.

In conclusion, undiagnosed and untreated PPGL was associated with a several-fold higher risk of maternal and fetal complications compared to excellent outcomes among patients treated with alpha-adrenergic blockade agents, including phenoxybenzamine and doxazosin during pregnancy. The transperitoneal approach is recommended for laparoscopic resection instead of extraperitoneal because prone positioning is contraindicated in pregnancy.