**Scapholunate Dissociation**

It may be seen as an isolated injury or associated with distal radius fracture or carpal bone fracture. Injury to the scapholunate ligamentous complex should be considered in any patient with persistent wrist pain following a fall onto an outstretched hand. During the acute injury phase, the patient may have decreased grip strength and experience popping or clicking during activities that axially load the wrist. Pain may be exacerbated when the wrist is placed into extension and radial deviation. Wrist motion may be limited secondary to pain. In chronic cases, wrist motion may be within normal limits until significant degenerative changes occur. The presentation of such injury has a broad spectrum, depending on the Watson stage. According to Watson staging, stage 1 is predynamic, stage 2 is dynamic, stage 3 is static, and stage 4 is osteoarthrotic.

On physical examination, the patient will be tender to palpation dorsally over the scapholunate joint. Also, there will be localized swelling seen in acute cases. The scaphoid shift test, when positive, is considered diagnostic. Also known as the Watson shift test, this examination maneuver involves deviating the wrist from ulnar to radial while applying pressure over the scaphoid tubercle volarly. A palpable clunk or presence of dorsal wrist pain is considered a positive test. Pathophysiologically, the clunk and/or pain occur as the proximal pole becomes subluxed over the dorsal ridge of the radius.

**Lunotriquetral Dissociation**

An isolated injury to the lunotriquetral ligament may cause no symptoms. When it is associated with other extrinsic ligament injuries, the typical symptoms are seen. Also, it is often associated with injuries to the triangular fibrocartilage complex. A history of falling on the wrist and landing on the hypothenar area with continued wrist pain suggests a possible lunotriquetral ligamentous complex injury. The patient may complain of ulnar-sided wrist pain and decreased grip strength.

On physical examination, pain can be elicited by palpation over the lunotriquetral joint. Ulnar deviation with pronation and axial compression of the wrist can result in a painful snap.