The spleen is an intraperitoneal organ located in the left upper quadrant of the abdomen. The spleen is maintained in its normal anatomic position by two ligaments, the gastrosplenic and splenorenal ligaments. Without these ligamentous supports, the spleen can move around the abdomen, a condition known as wandering spleen. A wandering spleen is at increased risk for torsion.

The normal adult spleen generally measures no greater than 12 cm x 7 cm x 4 cm. Splenomegaly is loosely defined as a spleen larger than 13 to 14 cm in the craniocaudal dimension, although the splenic index is the most accurate measure of splenic volume. This metric is a volumetric index calculated as a product of length x width x height. Various pathologic conditions can lead to splenomegaly, such as portal hypertension and lymphoma.

Normal anatomic variants are commonly encountered when imaging the spleen. Splenic clefts are invaginations of the splenic capsule, which create septations in the splenic parenchyma. Splenules are round masses of splenic tissue measuring up to several centimeters in size that are separate from but regional to the spleen, most commonly at the splenic hilum. It is essential to recognize these anatomic variants so as not to mistake them for pathologies, such as a splenic laceration or enlarged lymph node.

The splenic artery conventionally arises from the celiac axis and travels along the superior aspect of the pancreas to reach the splenic hilum. The splenic vein originates from the splenic hilum and courses along the posterior pancreas, joining the superior mesenteric vein to create the main portal vein. In the setting of portal hypertension or splenic vein occlusion, there are numerous collaterals for splenic venous outflow, including venous connections between the short gastric and coronary vein as well as left and right gastroepiploic veins. A splenorenal shunt is an abnormal connection between the splenic vein and the left renal vein. Splenic vein thrombosis occurs in about 20% of patients with chronic pancreatitis.

The spleen is composed of red and white pulp. The white pulp is the site of lymphoid tissue, while the red pulp functions to filter the blood, removing old or damaged red blood cells and pathogens.