**Bone Scan**

The use of radioactive substances in the evaluation of the musculoskeletal system has a relatively long history. Early researchers explored the metabolic activity of bone using phosphorus-32 and autoradiography.

Bone scan, or bone scintigraphy, uses radiopharmaceuticals consisting of a radionuclide bound to members of the phosphate family, the most common form being 99mTc-methylene diphosphonate (99mTc-MDP). Bone scintigraphy is exquisitely sensitive to bone turnover, detecting as little as a 5% change.

Uptake can be seen with multiple conditions, including fracture, malignancy, and infection. Other disorders of bone turnover can also be seen, such as fibrous dysplasia and avascular necrosis. Soft tissue conditions such as cellulitis and complex regional pain syndrome can be seen in certain phases of the scan. “Cold spots” may be caused by areas of decreased bone turnover seen with certain tumors and bone abscesses or caused by decreased blood flow such as in frostbite, gangrene, or avascular necrosis.

Single-photon emission computed tomography (SPECT), which can also be combined with conventional CT images (known as SPECT/CT), is an adjunct to bone scintigraphy and typically allows for more accurate anatomic localization of lesions.

**Gallium – 67 Scintigraphy**

Gallium-67 citrate emerged as one of the earliest tracers used in musculoskeletal tumor and infection imaging. It was commonly used in combination with bone scintigraphy, and results are based on the uptake patterns of the two tracers.

**In Vitro Labeled Leukocytes and Bone Marrow Imaging**

The radiolabeling of leukocytes to localize musculoskeletal infection has been used for the past three decades with great success. Indium-111 and 99mTc labeled hexamethylpropylene amine oxime (99mTc-HMPAO) are the most commonly used radiotracers. There are several differences between the two isotopes used for labeled leukocyte scintigraphy. Advantages of In are a limited normal distribution and stability of the label, which allows delayed imaging. 99mTc-HMPAO, in contrast, has a large normal distribution, including liver, lungs, spleen, gastrointestinal system, and urinary tract, but offers higher resolution images. Radiation exposure to the patient is significantly lower when using 99mTc-HMPAO.

Variability in intramedullary bone marrow distribution from fractures or hardware can lead to difficulty differentiating infection from normal active marrow when investigating infection of the bone. In these instances, utilizing a 99mTc-Sulfur Colloid scan can differentiate the two. Both labeled leukocytes and 99mTc-sulfur colloid will show activity in the normal bone marrow. Still, infection changes the intraosseous environment so that 99mTc-sulfur colloid is not taken up by phagocytes and is cleared from the marrow in these areas, therefore showing no activity in areas of infection.

When the labeled WBC scan shows activity that is absent on the 99mTc-sulfur colloid scan, the test is positive. Drawbacks to leukocyte scintigraphy include delayed results and in-vitro blood handling for the labeling process. This is described in more detail below.

**FDG PET - Fluorodeoxyglucose F 18 (FDG)**

Positron emission tomography (PET) is a nuclear medicine imaging modality that uses 18F-FDG (or FDG) as a tracer. It is based on the detection of photons that are produced during radionuclide decay. Positrons are emitted from the nucleus of the radionuclide during decay, producing two annihilation photons which are detected by the scanner. After administration, the tracer enters cells by glucose transporters (GLUTs) and is phosphorylated to FDG-6-phosphate. Uptake is primarily dependent on glucose transporter concentration and cellular metabolic activity. FDG-6-phosphate is unable to be further metabolized in the glycolytic pathway and therefore accumulates in the cell.

Glucose-6-phosphatase normally dephosphorylates FDG allowing it to leave the cell. Tumor cells commonly exhibit decreased glucose-6-phosphatase concentrations, which may cause cells to retain tracer for longer periods, leading to detection on the delayed scan technique.

FDG is a non-specific tracer, showing uptake in many tissues with increased glucose transporters such as the muscles, heart, GI tract, urinary tract, and brain. Uptake in other organs and the bony skeleton is normally low. Normal bone marrow does not exhibit significant uptake; therefore, active inflammatory infiltrates can be easily distinguished from hematopoietic marrow. States of active inflammation will show increased uptake due to the increased concentration of glucose transporters in active inflammatory cells.

FDG/PET provides some advantages to other forms of nuclear musculoskeletal imaging. It provides prompt results, typically around two hours after tracer injection. It is not distorted or affected by metal implants and offers a relatively high resolution of 4 to 5 mm. When in the form of PET/CT, three-dimensional localization and anatomic correlation improve.