Risk factors for caput succedaneum included a protracted active labor course, operative vaginal delivery, oligohydramnios, primigravida pregnancy, Braxton-Hicks contractions, and premature rupture of membranes. Vacuum-assisted vaginal delivery is the most significant risk factor for developing caput succedaneum and scalp injury, even in comparison to forceps-assisted vaginal delivery. Indications for vacuum-assisted vaginal delivery include but are not limited to a prolonged second stage of labor, nonreassuring fetal heart patterns, and maternal exhaustion.

Protracted active labor course: This diagnosis is made when there are less than 1.2 centimeters of cervical dilation per hour in nulliparous women and less than 1.5 centimeters of cervical dilation per hour for multiparous women.

The prolonged second stage of labor: This differs for nulliparous and multiparous mothers. A diagnosis of "prolonged second stage of labor" is made in a multiparous mother when there is no dilation after three hours using anesthetics or no dilation after two hours without the use of anesthetics. This diagnosis is made in a nulliparous mother when there is no dilation after two hours with the use of anesthetics or no dilation after one hour without the use of anesthetics.

- Operative vaginal delivery: vacuum-assisted and forceps-assisted delivery.

- Primigravida pregnancy: Mothers who are pregnant for the first time.

- Braxton-Hicks contractions: irregular contractions also known as false labor pains.

- Premature rupture of membranes: Rupture of fluids before regular contractions that result in cervical dilation (onset of labor).