Patients presenting with sleep-associated disturbances should undergo a thorough assessment of their sleep history, as well as medical and psychiatric history. Ideally, a 'sleep history outline' will be obtained, which analyzes the patient's banal sleep patterns. The medical history should include prescribed and recreational drug use. Medications that reportedly induce or exacerbate parasomnias include selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors, tricyclic antidepressants, venlafaxine, monoamine oxidase inhibitors, beta-adrenergic blocking agents, zolpidem, and zopiclone.

Furthermore, patients are encouraged to initiate a sleep log to document their sleep patterns. When possible, the patient's bed partner should be interviewed, as well, to investigate the incidence of breathing difficulties, leg jerks, and snoring. The gold standard diagnostic tool in sleep medicine is polysomnography. This procedure implements the trifecta of electroencephalography (EEG), electromyography (EMG), and electrooculographic (EOG) tracings during sleep. Polysomnography provides objective means to assess sleep continuity, REM physiology, sleep architecture, oxygen restoration, cardiac arrhythmias, sleep-related breathing impairment, and periodic movements. A somnologist should see patients with complicated sleep behavior.

The DSM-V identifies specific criteria to distinguish individual sleep-wake disorders. NREM sleep disorders, which include sleepwalking and sleep terrors, normally occur during the first third of the sleep episode. The events tend to be amnestic in nature as little to no dream content is recalled. These episodes cause significant distress, and lastly, are not attributable side effects of an exogenous substance. Nightmare disorder is identified by the presence of extremely dysphoric well-remembered dreams that are often thematic related to threats to survival; persons suffering from nightmare disorder awake and rapidly become oriented and alert. The taxon 'nightmare disorder' is assigned when the intensity of the nightmares and subsequent distress indicates the need for clinical attention.

REM sleep disorders consist of episodes of arousal during REM sleep; this has been described as if the patient were acting out his or her dream, which can ultimately be dangerous for both the patient and their bed partner. These typically occur more than 90 minutes after sleep onset. Individuals are completely awake, alert, and oriented upon awakening from an episode. EEG and EMG will identify REM sleep patterns without atonia.

Although polysomnography can be useful to investigate most parasomnias, only REM sleep behavior disorder is readily distinguishable through this procedure. Readings will reveal sustained EMG activity in REM sleep.