A detailed description of the seizure event is essential for the evaluation of a possible febrile seizure patient. Historical information regarding the exact appearance and length of the event is vital. Information regarding the symptoms of a central nervous system (CNS) infection, underlying structural abnormalities, personal history of neurologic problems, personal immunization history, and personal or family history of prior seizure is essential in deciding whether an event of concern constitutes a febrile seizure or rather constitutes a more severe illness presenting with a seizure.

Once a seizure is qualified as a febrile seizure, the examiner should seek additional information to differentiate whether it is simple or complex.

Simple febrile seizures occur more commonly than complex febrile seizures and are characterized by a seizure that is generalized, lasts less than 15 minutes, and does not recur within 24 hours.

Complex febrile seizures are characterized by the presence of at least one of the following features: focality, duration of longer than 15 minutes, and recurrence within a 24-hour period. In either instance, a general physical exam and neurologic exam are necessary. Post-ictal drowsiness is not abnormal in febrile seizures but typically resolves within a few minutes. A patient recovering from a febrile seizure will rapidly return to baseline and towards a normal neurologic exam. If a patient does not return to baseline, remains completely unresponsive to noxious stimuli after the seizure, or has other symptoms of acute neurologic dysfunction before the seizure (such as acute headaches, alteration of mental status, or concern for weakness), other complicating etiologies should be a consideration.