There are multiple methods of elevating and transferring a latissimus flap. If a pedicled flap is planned, then initially, the length of muscle required and location of a skin paddle (if needed) can be measured. A simple way of marking the distal edge of the flap to be harvested is to use a gauze strip. Gauze can be laid from the wound's farthest edge to be reconstructed to the pivot point, the area between the scapula and axilla. Then, holding one end of the gauze at the pivot point, the other end can be rotated to the back, and the edge marked to denote the edge of the flap that must be raised. The wound can also be measured, and a similar-sized skin paddle can be marked on the back. In free tissue transfer, the skin paddle harvest site is judged based on the needed pedicle length and location. The thoracodorsal artery enters the latissimus muscle approximately 10 cm beyond the muscle's attachment at the humeral head, and this entrance point must be included in any flap to ensure tissue viability.

In some cases, an initial incision is made in the mid-axillary line extending from the armpit inferiorly to the anterior-superior iliac spine. Dissection then proceeds deeply to identify the lateral edge of the latissimus muscle. The serratus anterior and rhomboids are encountered in this dissection and should be separated from the muscle. The avascular plane deep to the muscle is entered and gently elevated with blunt instruments or the surgeon's hand, permitting visualization of the thoracodorsal vessels that run along the muscle's deep surface. After verifying the vessels' location, a medial incision delineates the skin paddle to be harvested, ensuring the paddle overlies the vessels. If a skin paddle is not needed, monopolar electrocautery is used to elevate the skin and subcutaneous tissue free of the superficial surface of the muscle, and then a medial incision through the muscle, again ensuring the thoracodorsal vessels are included, is completed.In a different technique, the flap paddle's location is marked based on the approximate entry point of the thoracodorsal vessels into the muscle itself. The skin paddle is incised, and dissection is carried down to the surface of the latissimus muscle. The superficial surface is then exposed using electrocautery laterally and superiorly. The medial and inferior aspects of the skin paddle incision are then continued to reach the deep surface of the latissimus muscle. After this, the muscle is bluntly elevated in a superolateral direction until the thoracodorsal vessels are visualized. The muscle surrounding the pedicle can be narrowed as necessary so long as the vessels themselves are not violated. In facial reanimation, the thoracodorsal nerve, which runs parallel and lateral to the vessels, is then coapted to the masseteric nerve and/or a cross face nerve graft with micro sutures.

For free tissue transfer, the thoracodorsal vessels can be dissected proximally to extend the pedicle length, which requires ligation of the branches to the serratus anterior muscle and scapula. After sufficient length is dissected, the pedicle can be ligated and the flap transferred to its new position for microvascular anastomosis. In the case of pedicle flap transfer to the head and neck, it is particularly important to separate the humeral head's latissimus attachment. Further, the vessel branches to the scapula should be ligated to permit improved flap rotation and prevent vessel kinking that could compromise flap viability after transfer. A subcutaneous plane superficial to the pectoralis muscle can be developed for pedicled flap transfer to the anterior torso; for transfer to the head and neck, a similar tunnel superficial to the pectoralis muscle, superficial to the clavicle, and deep to the platysma can be developed. An intermediate incision parallel and superior to the clavicle can aid flap transfer to the head and neck. In all pedicled flap transfer cases, the tissue tunnel should be generously wide to easily accommodate the flap and not risk vascular compression.

After flap transfer, the latissimus can be inset with layers of absorbable and non-absorbable suture. Meticulous hemostasis at the inset site and donor site are necessary to prevent the development of a hematoma. If a muscle-only flap has been transferred, it should be covered by split-thickness skin grafts and a bolster. The donor site should, ideally, be closed primarily. In the case of a large skin paddle transfer, significant subcutaneous undermining may be necessary to allow advancement and closure. If the donor site's primary closure cannot be achieved; however, the remaining open wound can be covered with split-thickness skin grafts and a bolster. After pedicled latissimus transfer, patients are often placed in an arm sling post-operatively to limit the shoulder and arm movement on the flap side while initial healing is taking place.