Bacilli tubers invade the upper respiratory tract and cause infection after they are carried in small (5 to 10 microns) droplets to enter the alveolar spaces. When the host's immune system fails to eradicate the bacteria, the bacilli propagate within macrophages and ultimately destroy the cells. Infected macrophages attempt to prevent this by generating inflammatory cytokines for the recruitment of other phagocytes to effectively create a nodular caseating granuloma known as a tuber. The granuloma serves to wall off the infection and prevents its spread to other areas of the lungs.

If bacterial proliferation is not regulated, the tuber may expand seeding infection by invasion to other areas, including the localized draining lymphatic system. This activity results in mediastinal lymphadenitis, a clinical embodiment of TB. The cyst, caused by the growth of the tuber into lung tissue and resultant lymphadenopathy, is called the Ghon complex and is a classic finding on radiographic imaging for primary tuberculosis infection.

Interferon-γ is the primary cytokine released in response to infection by Mycobacterium tuberculosis. Macrophages are the first immune cells to respond and react to the site of infection, but require additional aid from other components of the immune system to effectively destroy intracellular pathogens. Following engulfment of foreign bacteria through phagocytosis, macrophages secrete cytokines to attract T helper cells, the primary mediators of interferon-γ. Interferon-γ, in turn, allows for greater activation of the macrophages by ramping up defense mechanisms designed to kill intracellular bacteria. This activation-reactivation process between macrophages and T helper cells occurs over and over as a positive feedback mechanism until the infection is eradicated or becomes dormant.

Interferon-γ release assays (IGRAs) depend on this immune reaction involving T helper cells to detect latent TB through quantification. Fresh blood samples are mixed with antigens and controls to test to determine if an individual has indeed contracted an infection.