# Introduction

Essential and fundamental to all organisms, transcription is the process for RNA synthesis from template DNA. At the heart of this activity is the large multisubunit enzyme called RNA polymerase. RNA polymerase, abbreviated RNAP and officially known as DNA-directed RNA polymerase, is found in all living organisms as well as many viruses. Present in bacteria, archaea, and even eukaryotes, these RNAPs all share similar protein core structures as well as mechanisms.

# Fundamentals

RNAP is the multisubunit enzyme that transcribes template DNA into RNA. While bacteria (prokaryotes) and archaea contain only one RNAP, eukaryotes contain three RNAPs: RNAP I, RNAP II, and RNAP III. Though there are drastic differences between these multisubunit RNAPs, they are also many significant similarities. Clearly related and forming a family, these RNAPs have three highly conserved subunits. Though archaea RNAP is more complex than bacterial RNAP and is more closely related to eukaryotic RNAP II, about 50% of the enzyme is still conserved.

All RNAPs contain a core. This RNA-synthesizing core generates 5’ to 3’ RNA chains by hydrolyzing pyrophosphate from nucleoside triphosphates. Bacterial core RNAP is the simplest, comprised of five subunits: beta, beta prime, two alphas, and omega. Together, the large beta and beta prime subunits form a claw with the reactive magnesium ion.

# Issues of Concern

Issues of concern arise when RNAP mistranscribes, also known as transcription infidelity. However, this area of research has been difficult to study since the error of translation is significantly higher, obscuring phenotypic results.

# Cellular Level

RNAP is a highly abundant enzyme which catalyzes the formation of phosphodiester bonds linking nucleotides together, subsequently producing linear chain. The growing RNA chain is extended by one nucleotide at a time in the 5’ to 3’ direction using nucleoside triphosphates (ATP, CTP, UTP, and GTP) as substrates. Estimates are that about 20 nucleotides undergo synthesis for each gene with over a thousand transcripts formed in an hour from one gene. Unlike DNA polymerase, RNAP has increased infidelity. One mistake is made every 10,000 nucleotides while DNA polymerase makes one mistake every 10,000,000 nucleotides. Despite lower accuracy, RNAP does have a proofreading mechanism. RNAP can back up, excise the misincorporated ribonucleotide, and insert the proper ribonucleotide.

# Molecular Level

RNAP is a multisubunit enzyme that contains both protein-protein as well as protein-DNA interactions. The specificity factors of bacterial RNAP, sigma, contain four distinct regions: region 1, region 2, region 3, and region 4. Except for sigma factors belonging to the sigma54 family, all sigma factors contain a highly conserved region 2 and region 4 while some also additionally contain a conserved region 3.

Along with sigma-DNA interactions, sigma also makes various extensive protein contacts with core RNAP. Important interactions include residues within Regions 2.1 and 2.2 with the beta prime subunit as well as residues with region 3.2 threading through a channel comprised of beta and beta prime.

The overall structure of RNAP resembles that of a crab claw. The beta and beta prime subunits form two opposing pincer-like structures, bordering the main channel.

# Function

RNAP’s function is to transcribe DNA into RNA. The template stranded DNA is read from 3’ to 5’ fashion while RNA synthesis occurs in a 5’ to 3’ manner. Many different kinds of RNA get produced: mRNA, tRNA, rRNA, sRNA, snoRNA, and other noncoding RNAs.

# Mechanism

RNAP’s mechanism of transcribing DNA into RNA is highly conserved across prokaryotes, archaea, and eukaryotes. To begin the process of bacterial transcription, along with core polymerase, an additional specificity factor is also necessary. These specificity proteins recognize certain elements in the promoter DNA and determine the start site of transcription. In bacteria, these specificity factors have the name of sigma subunits. Sigma, together with core, form the bacterial RNAP. Though research has now identified hundreds of sigma, the main sigma factor, sigma70 in Escherichia coli or sigma A in other bacteria, is responsible for exponential growth and regulation of housekeeping genes.

To initiate the process of bacterial transcription, sigma and core together first binds to double-stranded DNA.

# Testing

Antibodies to RNAP can be commercially purchased and are routinely used in the laboratories to detect the presence of RNAP subunits. Furthermore, anti-RNAP III antibodies are considered to be highly sensitive and specific for systemic sclerosis or scleroderma and are also associated with diffuse cutaneous scleroderma and scleroderma renal crisis.

# Pathophysiology

Though mutations in eukaryotic RNAP have not been solely implicated in disease, dysregulation of ribosomal RNA synthesis via RNAP I has lead to a variety of different diseases. The most well-recognized diseases result from a loss of function mutations in ribosomes or factors associated with Pol I.

# Clinical Significance

Prevention of gene expression is one way in which antibiotics can kill bacteria. Since transcription is an essential process for all organisms, the transcription machinery is an extremely attractive target for the development of new antibiotics. Rifampicin is a commonly used antibiotic against Mycobacterium tuberculosis. Belonging to the ansamycin class of antibiotics, rifampicin binds to the beta subunit of RNAP within the DNA/RNA channel and prevents the formation of the second or third phosphodiester bond, inducing the release of short abortives and subsequently blocking nascent RNA extension.Clostridium difficile RNAP. Instead of the beta subunit, fidaxomicin binds to the switch region of RNAP.

Along with prokaryotic transcription inhibition, researchers have discovered several compounds that target eukaryotic RNAP. Actinomycin D is a bacterial antibiotic used as an antitumor reagent. It intercalates DNA, thereby preventing the progression of both bacterial and eukaryotic RNAP I.