Back pain is a common complaint in medicine and is the number one cause of occupationally related-injury.

Occupational workers older than the age of 40 are at a greater risk of developing back pain as compared to younger workers. A detailed, occupationally relevant medical history and physical examination are essential in accurately diagnosing and developing an appropriate treatment plan for back pain in the occupational setting.

Often, an MRI of the lumbar spine is needed to make a definitive diagnosis in cases of persistent back pain. It is important to try correlating the patient’s symptoms with the imaging findings. The different types of back pain are local, referred, radicular, and spasmodic. The most common cause of back pain is a lumbar muscle spasm. In severe persistent back pain cases, lumbar disc disease with disc herniation/protrusion is more likely if there is an associated motor deficit. Nerve root entrapment from disc herniation/protrusion causes pain, possibly muscle spasms, and in many cases, an accompanying sensory and motor deficit is also seen.

Imaging findings may not correlate with the patient’s symptoms. For example, a significant imaging finding of a right disc bulge at L5-S1 in a patient with symptoms of left L4-L5 nerve root distribution is a discordant finding. The anatomic correlation of disc protrusion with the affected spinal root or spinal nerve depends on the laterality of the disc protrusion. For example, a lateral disc protrusion at the L1-L2 vertebral level will most likely affect the L1 spinal nerve, whereas a central disc protrusion at the same level will most likely affect the L2 nerve root. This is due to the centrally traversing spinal nerve roots in the vertebral column and the lateral position of the exiting spinal nerves.

The likelihood of a disc protrusion or extrusion causing radicular symptoms or motor nerve deficit increase when there is preexisting central canal stenosis or intervertebral foramen narrowing. One example of radicular low back pain is sciatica (pain radiating from the low back down the posterior aspect of one or both lower extremities) which results from compression of the L5 and/or S1 component of the sciatic nerve (L5-S1).

The cause of central canal stenosis is multifactorial. Vertebral canal stenosis can result from facet hypertrophy, ligamentum flavum hypertrophy, disc bulge, and congenital canal stenosis. Approximately 95% of disc protrusions and extrusions occur at L4-L5 and/or L5-S1.

The differential diagnoses for back pain include but are not limited to degenerative disc disease, spinal tuberculosis or other infections, tumor, and abdominal aortic aneurysm. Although compression of the L4 spinal nerve is most likely secondary to disc herniation, the cause of nerve compression could also be from a different etiology, such as a spinal cord meningioma. A distinguishing imaging characteristic that can help to differentiate between disc bulge versus tumor or infection is leptomeningeal enhancement. Disc bulges would not show leptomeningeal enhancement, whereas a spinal tumor or discitis may show leptomeningeal enhancement.