Because the herald patch is a feature of pityriasis rosea, the same treatment is advised for both. The eruption of pityriasis rosea is a benign, self-limited papulosquamous process. No treatment is necessary, and the eruption of both the herald patch and pityriasis rosea should resolve within 8 weeks. Reports of a variant of pityriasis rosea known as persistent pityriasis rosea have been described, with some lasting longer than 12 weeks. The herald patch is seen in most cases, and a higher association with systemic symptoms, oral lesions, and increased HHV-6 and HHV-7 viral loads also were found in association with this form. There have been numerous reports of adverse outcomes in the newborns of pregnant women who developed pityriasis rosea during pregnancy. In an article reviewing the literature, most adverse events occurred when the mothers developed pityriasis rosea in the second trimester, followed by the first trimester. Reported adverse events include prematurity, stillbirth, low gestational weight, and hypotonia.

Patients typically seek treatment for the pruritis that occasionally is associated with pityriasis rosea, or because they are disturbed by the appearance of the rash. Most cases of pityriasis rosea are asymptomatic or minimally pruritic, but approximately 25% of patients experience severe pruritis. For these patients, topical steroids, calamine lotion, zinc oxide, oral antihistamines, and oral steroids may be used. If the patient is disturbed by the appearance of the rash and desires treatment, ultraviolet B phototherapy or a 2-week course of oral erythromycin may be used. Both have been shown to shorten the duration of the eruption.