# Introduction

The medial brachial cutaneous nerve, also known as medial cutaneous nerve of the arm, provides sensation to the medial cutaneous aspect of the arm. It is the smallest and most medial branch of the brachial plexus, originating from C8 and T1 nerve roots.

# Structure and Function

The brachial plexus originates in the cervical spine, from the anterior divisions of spinal nerves C5 to T1. It divides into roots, trunks, divisions, cords, and branches. The medial brachial cutaneous nerve arises from the medial cord of the brachial plexus, originating from the nerve roots of C8 and T1, the lower trunk, and the anterior division of the plexus.

# Embryology

The brachial plexus, and therefore the medial brachial cutaneous nerve, have an ectodermal origin, with the bones, blood vessels, and muscles of the limbs arising from mesoderm. The limb buds are paddle-shaped structures that grow outwards gradually, starting in the fifth week of development.FGF), sonic hedgehog (SHH), and homeobox (Hox) genes.FGF signaling molecules are important for anterior-posterior patterning of limb development and induce the formation of the apical ectodermal ridge at the limb bud, which controls cell death. The loss of this gene leads to the webbing between digits. The SHH signaling molecule regulates the growth of limbs and is secreted at the zone of polarizing activity on the posterior side of the limb buds. The Hox genes contribute to proximodistal limb patterning, and mutations lead to limb formation in abnormal locations.

# Blood Supply and Lymphatics

Vasa nervorum are thin, tortuous arteries that provide blood supply to peripheral nerves, especially to the inner parts of nerves and their coverings. They are an irregular source of nutrients that supplies each peripheral nerve from the neighboring blood vessels. The medial brachial cutaneous nerve gets its blood supply from the vasa nervorum arising from the axillary vein and basilic veins, respectively, along its path.

# Nerves

The nerve conduction velocity of the medial brachial cutaneous nerve is about 61 +/- 4 m/s. It is possible to record the conduction velocity about 2 centimeters above the medial condyle of the humerus.

# Muscles

The nerve pathway is traceable as a line between the axilla and the medial condyle of the humerus. The nerve touches the coracobrachialis muscle and the medial area of the brachial biceps. The nerve may have functional abnormalities in the absence of direct trauma, if anatomical abnormalities are present, such as accessory coracobrachialis muscle or biceps brachialis.

# Physiologic Variants

There are many anatomic variants in the course of the medial brachial cutaneous nerve.  In most individuals, proximal to the medial epicondyle, there is an arborization of two to three cutaneous branches, although few have been found to have four or five.

The variability in the course of this nerve is important for surgical dissections of the medial part of the arm. The course of the medial brachial cutaneous nerve is quite variable. One study done on ten fresh cadaver specimens showed that in 9 out of 10 cadavers (18 arms), there was a link to the intercostobrachial cutaneous nerve (ICBCN).

Additionally, research has found some variants in the brachial plexus where there is an absence of the posterior cord, causing the lateral and medial cords connecting with the communicating branches and that course in front of the axillary artery.

# Surgical Considerations

The medial brachial cutaneous nerve has a significant clinical role in brachioplasty surgeries. With the rise of bariatric surgery procedures, there has also been an increased demand for plastic surgery focusing on the upper arm. Brachioplasty procedures emphasize correcting the soft tissue laxity of the middle to the upper third of the arm. Traditional procedures involve incisions from the axilla to the medial epicondyle, with the elevation of cutaneous tissue proximal to the medial epicondyle. One of the complications of brachioplasty is an injury to cutaneous nerves within the tissues dissected, mainly the ulnar nerve and terminal branches of the medial brachial cutaneous nerve and medial antebrachial cutaneous nerve. Unfortunately, the medial antebrachial cutaneous nerve and medial brachial cutaneous nerve's anatomic path makes it necessary for these nerves to cross the area where the older skin incision is typically placed.

# Clinical Significance

The medial brachial cutaneous nerve plays a role in upper extremity nerve entrapment syndromes, especially following axillary lymph node dissections and breast augmentation. Entrapment of this nerve should be a consideration with complaints of paresthesia over the upper arm.

# Other Issues

The medial brachial cutaneous nerve crosses the brachial fascia. The pectoralis major muscle, latissimus dorsi muscle, and the deltoid muscle with some muscle fibers manage and influence the tension of the brachial fascia. Each arm movement influences the force vectors on the band.