Pulmonary embolism (PE) is a treatable disease caused by thrombus formation in the lung vasculature, commonly from the lower extremity's deep veins compromising the blood flow to the lungs. Undiagnosed massive PE can be fatal if not diagnosed and treated in a timely fashion. The diagnosis of PE is based on imaging. Computed tomography of pulmonary arteries (CTPA) and ventilation-perfusion (V/Q) scan are the two most common and widely practiced testing modalities to diagnose pulmonary embolism. Pulmonary ventilation (V) and Perfusion (Q) scan, also known as lung V/Q scan, is a nuclear test that uses the perfusion scan to delineate the blood flow distribution and the ventilation scan to measure airflow distribution in the lungs. The primary utilization of the V/Q scan is to help diagnose lung clots called pulmonary embolisms. V/Q scan provides help in clinical decision-making by evaluating scans showing ventilation and perfusion in all areas of the lungs using radioactive tracers. PIOPED I study by Vreim CE et al. showed that 65% of the V/Q scans were non-diagnostic for pulmonary embolism.

V/Q scan faced a setback because of this study since 1990 until later studies and EANM guidelines based upon holistic principles and modern imaging techniques for V/Q scintigraphy showed a rate of non-diagnostic PE equal to or less than 3% with excellent sensitivity and specificity.

In conventional scintigraphy, a radiolabeled agent like technetium 99m-diethylenetriamine pentaacetic acid (99mTc-DTPA) in aerosol form and gamma-emitting 99mTc-macro aggregated albumin (MAA) in the intravenous form are given to the patient to assess ventilation and perfusion, respectively. Then gamma camera is used to register their distribution into the alveoli and pulmonary arteries. One segmental or two sub-segmental perfusion defects with a normally ventilated area (V/Q mismatch) is the definition of a high-probability scan for PE.