Anterior cord syndrome (also called anterior spinal artery syndrome) most commonly occurs due to an interrupted supply of the anterior spinal artery or the Artery of Adamkiewicz (its major supplier), which has a less efficient supply compared to the 2 posterolateral spinal arteries. This commonly is caused by atherosclerotic disease, trauma (surgical instrumentation or direct injury by a disc or bone fragment), hypotension (for example, from blood loss in open surgery like bowel resection), vasculitic disorders. Anterior cord syndrome can also be caused by muscular disorders including spinal muscular atrophy and multiple sclerosis, as well as infectious causes including poliomyelitis and West Nile virus.

This syndrome affects the anterior two-thirds of the spinal cord, which includes the majority of the anterior and lateral white matter funiculi, the central gray matter, the bilateral lateral and anterior horns, and the bases of the posterior horns. This results in bilateral loss of motor function (flaccid paralysis at the level of the lesion and spastic paralysis below the lesion) from loss of the corticospinal tract and anterior horn, bilateral loss of pain, and temperature one level below the lesion from loss of the spinothalamic tract, and sexual dysfunction and urinary and fecal incontinence from loss of descending autonomic tracts. Sensations of touch, vibration, and proprioception remain intact since the posterior white matter columns are spared. Motor recovery occurs in less than half of patients with anterior cord syndrome, and treatment is generally supportive and focuses on addressing the underlying cause. Successful recovery involves enrolling patients in physical therapy, occupational therapy, and mental health support.

Subarachnoid hemorrhage, which typically occurs intracranially, can also originate from the spine (less than 1% of all cases). Etiologies include arteriovenous malformations and fistulae, as well as isolated spinal artery aneurysms. Spinal subarachnoid hemorrhage should be on the differential diagnosis of patients who present with sudden-onset back pain, myelopathy, and radiculopathy.