The femoral nerve, which supplies the muscles of the anterior compartment, travels inferiorly from the lumbar plexus and passes through the psoas major. It is after it passes through the psoas major that the nerve goes in through the pelvis where it travels posteriorly to the inguinal ligament into the thigh. It is after passing the inguinal ligament that the femoral nerve divides into its anterior and posterior divisions.

The posterior compartment of the thigh is innervated by divisions of the large sciatic nerve. The sciatic nerve comes from the sacral plexus and introduces itself through the greater sciatic foramen. As it passes through the greater sciatic foramen, it emerges with the piriformis muscle being anterior to its exit point and then descends inferiorly. The nerve moves through the gluteal area and begins to enter the posterior compartment of the thigh by traveling posterior to the long head of the biceps femoris. Recent literature has described the sciatic nerve as two individual nerves, the tibial nerve and the common fibular nerve, that have been bundled together in a common connective tissue sheath. While authors agree that the sciatic nerve separates into the two individual nerves at the apex of the popliteal fossa, it has been discussed that approximately 12% of people have separation of the sciatic nerve as it leaves the pelvis.

The obturator nerve gets its major contributions from the lumbar plexus. The obturator nerve travels inferiorly through the psoas major and exits on the medial border of the muscle. It then moves laterally along the pelvis towards to obturator foramen and then crosses into the obturator canal. The obturator nerve then splits into its anterior and posterior divisions and innervates surrounding structures in the medial compartment of the thigh.