- Significant healthcare disparities exist in the healthcare of the AIAN people compared to NHW.

- Many of these disparities are because of the poor economic situation and literacy levels in the AIAN community.

- An unfortunate history and a series of misdoings have resulted in a chronic mistrust of the AIAN community in the Indian health services. Hence, building trust to serve this community is an important first step.

- Indian health services have been serving the AIAN community since 1955. The improvement in the immunization rates has led to a significant reduction in deaths from infection and improved maternal and infant mortality rates.  Their efforts have reduced the burden of communicable diseases within the AIAN community.

- Non-communicable diseases like obesity, cancer, substance, and alcohol abuse have risen in incidence and now are the major health issues plaguing the AIAN community.

- A large number of psychiatric and mental health diseases are prevalent in the AIAN community. Post-traumatic stress disorder is very common in the AIAN community and should be first on the list of differentials.

- The AIAN community has been afforded more sovereignty and independence in managing their own health care issues through a series of acts enacted by the federal government. However, significant issues still exist in providing them optimal healthcare.

- Some tips for managing a patient from the AIAN community:

- Know the history of the tribe/ indigenous people, and respect the differences. 
- Have an interpreter ready to understand the health issues.
- Be patient and listen, and respect their strong belief in their culture.