**Victim-Centered Approach**

A victim-centered approach is paramount in delivering care to a victim of human trafficking. In victim-centered care, the provider precisely focuses attention on the victim, catering to the patient's needs to ensure the delivery of care in a compassionate, culturally sensitive, linguistically appropriate, nonjudgmental, and caring manner. A victim's wishes, safety, and well-being are important considerations.

The heart of a victim-centered approach ensures a victim does not suffer re-victimization or re-traumatization. Trauma, as it relates to an individual from an initial insult, is a series of events or stressors that the individual experiences as either emotionally or physically life-threatening and has lasting ramifications on social, physical, mental, and spiritual well-being.

**Trauma-Informed Approach**

Human trafficking care must involve a trauma-informed approach where the healthcare provider recognizes the scope of the impact of the trauma on an individual victim’s lifespan and lessens any chance of inflicting more injury on this victim. Provider understanding of the signs of trauma, verbal and nonverbal cues, and their response by following predetermined protocols for identification, treatment, and appropriate referrals are essential elements of trauma-informed care.

Trauma-informed care involves the entire healthcare team and the incorporation of shared decision-making practices using an interdisciplinary, collaborative approach. Safety, transparency, and collaboration with peers and agencies are vital. The approach must account for culture and gender equality, LGBTQ considerations and support, and most importantly, center around an empowering environment.

**Empowerment**

Empowerment allows the victim to seek resources and take the first steps toward self-identifying. Educating staff to recognize the red flags of human trafficking, feel adequately trained, have the knowledge to offer appropriate resources, and provide follow-up care to trafficking victims is essential.

The goal is for providers to enable others to champion change and advocate for protocol development. The Power and Control Wheel for Human Trafficking may be used in protocol development and is a tool to help identify the different types of abuse that can occur in labor and sex trafficking situations and the subsequent polytrauma complex care that is needed. The entire interprofessional team must work together to empower the survivor to become a productive, functioning member of the community.

**Human Trafficking Protocols**

Providers must know the local resources available ahead of time and establish a human trafficking protocol much like the one for intimate partner violence or alleged sexual assaults.

Local resources such as Project Help, rape crisis centers, women's shelters, homeless shelters, addiction centers, and churches can provide needed materials and support services for these victims and clarify any rules, such as pet policies.

Know the resources available for potential victims of human trafficking through local law enforcement or task forces?

Human trafficking protocols need to include specific vital elements such as indicators and red flags; ways to separate the potential victim from the trafficker; interview procedures; ways to maintain and ensure safety for the victim, staff, and potentially other victims; and referral information.

Mandatory reporting requirements that address local, state, and federal laws need to be incorporated into protocols. Referral information must be accurate and easily understood by the victim and translated appropriately based on language needs.

Provide NHTRC Hotline information. Incorporate follow-up data into a protocol. Another part of a protocol might include a critique of staff performance and ways to improve. Mandatory staff education will play a vital role in protocol implementation.

Recognize that everyone on the interprofessional team plays a role in stopping human trafficking and identifying those at risk: social workers, case managers, customer service representatives, nurses, physicians, physician assistants, nurse practitioners, nursing assistants, medical assistants, nursing students, medical students, educators, dental assistants, law enforcement, security guards, support staff, and the community.

**Referral Considerations**

Long-term psychological impacts must be taken into consideration when referrals for treatment of these complex-trauma patients are incorporated into the treatment plan. Multifarious conditions exist emotionally and physically, rendering approaches to future care a challenge for healthcare providers.

According to a study of male and female survivors of trafficking in England conducted between 2013 to 2014, healthcare, including physical, mental, and sexual healthcare, was a fundamental component of successful post-trafficking care. Follow-up care coordinated with multiple disciplines is essential. Basic needs of clothing, food, safe shelter, and transportation must be discussed. Ensure language barriers are addressed and provide resources on free classes to learn the local language. Discuss medical issues and refer to appropriate subspecialists.

**Transitioning from Victim to Survivor - Potential Referrals**

- Dietician consults in cases of severe malnutrition.

- Infectious disease consults for communicable diseases and sexually transmitted infections.

- Referral to obstetrics/gynecology for infertility concerns related to forced abortions, repeated trauma, or frequent miscarriages or medical problems such as prenatal concerns, addiction issues, torch infections, originating from lack of preventative care or poor access to care may need investigation. Hormone replacement therapy concerns must be met for lesbian, gay, bisexual, transgender and questioning (LGBTQ) victims.

- Surgical or dermatology referrals for removal of unwanted tattoos or brands or to treat burns and other injuries.

- Consultations with gastroenterologists for stress-related issues.

- Children often suffer developmental delays and need assistance with transitioning into a healthy life.

- Social stigma implications of forced homosexuality can play a role in future psychological care. Crisis intervention teams and case managers will have a role in successful integration practices.

- Perpetrators often use substance abuse to control victims, or victims use it as a form of escape from the abusive environment. Addiction and sobriety considerations will need implementing into daily routines. Community-based organizations, support groups, and faith-based programs may ease this transition period and lessen the impact of psychological stressors.

- Legal services referrals made for child custody issues, immigration assistance, protective/restraining orders, assistance with any offenses, and with the successful prosecution of the trafficking entity.

**Survivor's Role**

Cultural shock impacts and language barriers play a role in the recovery period and successful transition into society as a survivor and not a victim. Survivors of human trafficking can offer much-needed insight into the thoughts, feelings, and interactions with members of the healthcare team and guide care and training programs going forward with this vulnerable patient population.

In 2015, a study conducted in New York City’s Rikers Island jail suggested that survivor-based input was essential in addressing healthcare concerns and improving care in this patient dynamic. Survivors shared that when cared for or interviewed by healthcare providers, they felt intimidated, judged, and stereotyped. They suggested providers and front-line personnel pay attention to their body language and the nonverbal cues they are displaying as they walk into the treatment room, up to the front desk, or after disclosure. This patient-provider interaction, if negative, can negatively impact the comfort of the victim to feel safe enough to open up and not be judged. These victims stated that instead of an interview, they preferred an approach in which the provider asks straightforward, normalized, direct questions in a compassionate, nonjudgmental way that reinforces a feeling of safety and confidentiality.

Further research is needed in this area for conclusive results as this crime comes "out of the shadows," and researchers look beneath the surface, but survivors should play a role in the education of healthcare providers.