From an etymological perspective, the word “epidemiology” can be divided into the Greek roots “epi,” “demos,” and “logos,” which respectively mean “upon,” “people,” and “the study of.” Historically, epidemiology has focused on population-level factors regarding communicable infectious diseases, but it has evolved to include non-communicable infectious diseases, chronic diseases, infant health, and environmental and behavioral health. Today, it is a wide-encapsulating umbrella that encompasses any health-related issues that may influence the overall health of a population, such as environmental exposures, injuries, natural disasters, and terrorism, to name a few. It is a multifaceted branch of medicine, fundamentally guided by systematic scientific inquiry via ratios, probabilities, and other statistical calculations, focusing on the incidence, distribution, and factors concerning diseases and health outcomes within a specific population.

Epidemiologists work in conjunction with other health professionals to study patterns, mediums of transmission, or determinants of a specific health event within a particular population. They also work proactively to learn about diseases not previously studied, such as Legionnaire disease and severe acute respiratory syndrome (SARS). For example, the World Health Organization (WHO) met in Geneva, Switzerland, in 2003 to discuss the epidemiology of SARS and learn about the disease’s risk factors, mediums of transmission, and reservoirs. These proactive studies better equip health professionals with the knowledge necessary for a robust response if a health-related event occurs, and in these cases, a disease outbreak. Other notable instances in which epidemiologists have played a role include historical, biological warfare, eradicating smallpox, relief efforts to victims of hurricanes and terrorist attacks, and, most recently, Ebola and Zika virus outbreaks. When responding to these health events, epidemiologists utilize previously collected, analyzed, and verified data to create, advise, and implement informed and targeted solutions to monitor and prevent the occurrence, worsening, or recurrence of population-level health-related events. Epidemiologists play an integral part in the maintenance of the overall health and wellness of many specific populations.

Lastly, the field of epidemiology works continuously with public health surveillance, creating a system in which patterns and health outcomes of health-related events undergo continuous monitoring; this is especially important in the fields of medicine focusing on upstream factors and preventative health issues. Legionnaire disease, for example, was surveilled by the Chinese Center for Disease Control and Prevention in 18 Chinese hospitals between 2014 to 2016. This study showed correlational data identifying cities, gender, age group, and seasons with the highest prevalence rates. It also identified L. pneumophila as the pathogen of interest in pneumonia-causing Legionnaire disease in China. The team acknowledged China’s lack of Legionnaire disease reporting and suggested establishing routine diagnostic methods to decrease the likelihood of misdiagnoses and underreporting.

Two measures commonly used for epidemiological surveillance are morbidity and mortality. These measures describe the progression and severity of a given health event. They are useful tools to learn about risk factors of diseases and compare and contrast health events and between different populations. While similar and often related, morbidity and mortality, however, are not identical. Morbidity is the state of being symptomatic or unhealthy for a disease or condition. It is usually represented or estimated using prevalence or incidence. Prevalence describes the proportion of the population with a given symptom or quality. It is calculated by dividing the number of affected individuals by the total number of individuals within a specific population. It is usually presented as a ratio or as a percentage. On the other hand, incidence shows the frequency at which individuals within a specific population develop a given symptom or quality. It is calculated by dividing the number of NEW cases within a designated, particular period by the number of individuals within the population. When making this calculation, it is essential to remember to subtract the number of individuals already affected by the total number of individuals within a population.

On the other hand, mortality is related to the number of deaths caused by the health event under investigation. It can be communicated as a rate or as an absolute number. Mortality usually gets represented as a rate per 1000 individuals, also called the death rate. The calculation for this rate is to divide the number of deaths in a given time for a given population by the total population. To keep these values concise and for ease of comparison to other health events, this number can be multiplied by 1000 to reflect the “per 1000” rate of the target population.

Morbidity and mortality are two types of retrospective information that allows for continuous evaluation of the efficacy of either a specific health care system or an implemented intervention in place. For example, the use of maternal morbidity and mortality to gauge the risks of pregnancy and childbirth, as well as the efficacy of the health care they receive, are of vital importance.