Hypertyrosinemia is broadly divided into two categories:

1. Congenital enzyme deficiency

- Hereditary tyrosinemia type 1 (HT2)

- Hereditary tyrosinemia type 2 (HT2)

- Hereditary tyrosinemia type 3 (HT3)

2. Acquired Hypertyrosinemia

- Transient tyrosinemia of the newborn

- Hypertyrosinemia due to liver disease

- Miscellaneous: Hyperthyroidism, scurvy

Hereditary tyrosinemia type 1, also known as hepatorenal tyrosinemia, is an autosomal recessive disorder caused by a deficiency of the enzyme fumarylacetoacetate hydrolase (FAH). Mutations in the FAH gene located on locus 15q23-q25 are responsible for this disease.

The buildup of FAA decreases tyrosine aminotransferase (TAT) activity, the first enzyme in tyrosine metabolism (as shown in the image). This eventually results in elevated tyrosine levels. However, tyrosine levels are not as high as in HT2 patients. FAA has a short half-life and quickly degrades to succinyl acetoacetate (SAA) and succinylacetone (SA). The elevated levels of these metabolites may aid the diagnosis and are utilized in the NBS programs.

Hereditary tyrosinemia type 2 or oculocutaneous tyrosinemia is also known as Richner-Hanhart syndrome. It is an autosomal recessive disorder caused by a deficiency of the enzyme TAT.

Hereditary tyrosinemia type 3 is the rarest of the three types of inherited tyrosinemia, caused by a deficiency of 4-hydroxyphenylpyruvate dioxygenase (HPD).

Acquired forms of hypertyrosinemia are notably more common than inherited varieties. Transient tyrosinemia of the newborn is the most common cause of hypertyrosinemia encountered in clinical practice.