Viral infections have a preference for targeting the oral mucosa.

Patients may experience oral pain and systemic symptoms such as fever, lymphadenopathy, and generalized malaise. These symptoms prompt patients to seek medical attention, usually through a primary care physician, dentist, or otolaryngologist. Potential complications of these conditions, including decreased oral intake and dehydration, may lead to visits to the emergency department.

In immunocompetent individuals, most viral infections of the oral mucosa resolve after two weeks with symptomatic treatment. However, in some cases, an interprofessional team of physicians may be needed to establish a definitive diagnosis, initiate therapy and refer high-risk patients appropriately. This team involves several clinicians (MDs, DOs, NPs, and PAs), including primary physicians, dentists, otolaryngologists, pathologists, nurses, and pharmacists.

While clinicians will determine the overall course of diagnosis and management, nursing will help coordinate communication between the various clinical entities, provide patient counsel, and assist in examinations and monitoring patient progress. Pharmacists will verify appropriate agent selection and dosing, as well as perform medication reconciliation. An infectious disease specialty pharmacist may be necessary in more challenging cases to optimize treatment. Open communication between all interprofessional team members is crucial to optimizing the management of these infections.

Proper coordination and communication of the interprofessional healthcare team will minimize morbidity associated with prolonged, severe, or untreated disease.[Level 5]