Healthcare providers prescribe medications for various diseases. These medications can be divided into two sub-categories: non-controlled and controlled substances. Most prescriptions for infections or chronic conditions are non-controlled, including over-the-counter medications. For example, blood pressure and cholesterol medications, cold and cough medications, diabetes mellitus medications including insulin, asthma inhalers, and antimicrobials are all non-controlled medications.

Controlled substances are medications or illicit drugs primarily active in the central nervous system and can potentially cause a relative physical and mental dependence leading to addiction.

Controlled substances are prescribed for the treatment of insomnia, anxiety, severe pain, and even attention-deficient/hyperactivity disorder (ADHD), among other conditions as well. For example, benzodiazepines and opioids with high abuse potential are used to treat anxiety and seizures.

Controlled medications require prescriptions from a healthcare provider, as do many non-controlled medications. However, controlled substances require special prescription paper or specific protocols if prescribed through other means such as telephone, fax, or digital, and refills are not available under certain circumstances.

Schedule I medications have the highest potential to be abused. These medications currently have no medical use due to the lack of accepted safety data from the U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA). Some examples of Schedule I medications include LSD, marijuana, heroin, mescaline, and methylenedioxymethamphetamine (MDMA).

Schedule II medications are also considered to have a high potential for abuse but less than Schedule I medications.

Schedule III medications have less abuse potential than Schedule I and II drugs. These medications are currently accepted for medical use where abuse may lead to moderate to low physical dependence or high psychological dependence.

Schedule IV medications have less potential to be abused than Schedule I, II, or III drugs.

Schedule V drugs are considered the least potential for abuse among the other scheduled drug classes. Any level of Schedule V drug abuse may potentially lead to limited physical or psychological dependence.

Although these schedules occur on a federal level, differences also occur on a state level. Significant state regulatory variations occur; differences may occur between state and federal regulations.

Any individual or entity involved in disseminating controlled substances, from manufacturer to pharmacy, requires registration with the Drug Enforcement Agency (DEA), the primary organization responsible for regulating these substances at the federal level.