Carbon tetrachloride(CCl4) induced cellular damage may result from either covalent bond formation between reactive intermediates and cellular components or from enhanced lipid peroxidation triggered by free radical intermediates. It causes intracellular and intramembranous lipid destruction.

The break-down products such as reactive aldehydes lead to further damage like increased membrane permeability, which is one indicator of impending cell death. Free radical formation of CCl4 induced hepatotoxicity depends on the partial pressure of oxygen. CCl3* and CCl2* radicals form in low partial pressure that leads to covalent metabolite binding, which mostly affects the metabolism of lipids(decreased transport out of the hepatocyte, increased synthesis) and ultimately causes steatosis or fatty liver. In contrast, CCl3- OO* radical forms in high oxygen partial pressure with consequent lipid peroxidation that push the cell from steatosis to apoptosis. Hepatocyte protein synthesis is also suppressed by CCl4, which leads to loss of structural and functional integrity of cells. Another product of CCl4 metabolism is phosgene that might be another cause of hepatotoxicity.

In the liver, the metabolism of CCl4 to other toxic metabolites is catalyzed by cytochrome P450, especially by its isoenzyme CYP2E1. This enzyme is also a part of the hepatic microsomal ethanol-oxidizing system (MEOS), which is involved in the hepatic metabolism of ethanol. Both of these enzymes are inducible by prolonged alcohol use, and even a single dose of alcohol may induce MEOS activity. That's why an alcoholic person develops severe manifestation if associated with CCl4 toxicity.

The liver, kidneys, and lungs suffer damage in the majority of cases of CCl4 poisoning. Experimental CCl4 poisoning shows that the glycogen loaded hepatocyte is much more resistant to injury than one in which fatty infiltration is present, and glycogen becomes depleted. That is why chronic misusers of alcohol are prone to develop more significant symptoms of CCl4 induced hepatotoxicity because their liver cells have glycogen depletion and are full of fat. Pulmonary damage is constant when CCl4 is inhaled but not significant with the oral ingestion of CCl4.

At the molecular level, CCl4 activates multiple factors, including tumor necrosis factor (TNF)α, transforming growth factors (TGF)-α and -ß in the cell, and nitric oxide (NO). These factors appear to direct the cell toward self-destruction or fibrosis. TNFα directs the cells toward apoptosis, whereas the TGFs directs the cells toward fibrosis.