# Continuing Education Activity

Kidney transplantation is performed to prolong and improve the lives of those with end-stage renal disease. Open and laparoscopic surgery are the two approaches for both procurement and transplantation. The main surgical indication is end-stage renal disease. This activity reviews the evaluation and treatment of end-stage renal disease and highlights the role of the interprofessional team in evaluating and treating this condition.

**Objectives:**
- Describe the epidemiology of kidney transplantation.
- Review the evaluation of kidney transplantation.
- Outline the management options available for end-stage renal disease.
- Summarize some interprofessional team strategies that can be employed to ensure optimal outcomes for patients who need kidney transplantation.

# Introduction

Kidney transplantation is often the preferred treatment for those with end-stage renal disease.

Furthermore, those who undergo transplantation often experience a better quality of life and a projected survival benefit of 10 years over those who remain on dialysis.

# Anatomy and Physiology

The kidneys are one of the paired retroperitoneal organs in the body. The diaphragm abuts the kidneys superiorly and posteriorly, along with the 12th rib.

In the classical anatomic position, the kidney's hilar structures are organized from anterior to posterior in the following order: renal vein, renal artery, and ureter/renal pelvis.

The renal vein is most often found anterior to the renal artery. Similar to the arterial distribution, the venous plexus capillaries coalesce into arcuate veins, which then drain into interlobular veins, trunks, and finally the renal vein.

# Indications

The incidence of end-stage renal disease (ESRD) is rapidly rising. The most common etiologies of renal failure are diabetes and hypertension.

In the absence of contraindications for transplantation, the nephrologist will refer the patient to a transplant center, in addition to setting in motion the necessary interventions for possible initiation of dialysis. There is a clear survival benefit for kidney transplant recipients over those who remain on dialysis.

# Contraindications

Absolute contraindications for kidney transplantation are the inability to tolerate surgery due to severe cardiac or pulmonary disease, active malignancy, active infection, active drug abuse, and uncontrolled psychiatric disease.

Relative contraindications are more variable and may differ depending on the institution and geographic region: morbid obesity with a recommended body mass index (BMI) less than 40 kg/m, history of noncompliance with dialysis schedule or medication regimen, frailty, psychiatric problems, and limited life expectancy (defined as less than the anticipated waiting time for a kidney).

# Preparation

**Patient Selection**

Most ESRD patients have multiple co-morbidities and complications resulting from their kidney disease. As such, they are carefully screened for their ability to tolerate surgery and the subsequent immunosuppression which accompanies transplant surgery. Below is a summary of the evaluation of comorbid conditions:

Cardiovascular Disease: Most ESRD patients require careful cardiovascular evaluation with noninvasive testing for those at high risk or who have symptoms. For example, a dobutamine stress echocardiogram has been shown to have superior accuracy for predicting perioperative cardiac events.

Cerebrovascular Disease: Any patient with a history of a cerebrovascular accident, including a transient ischemic attack, should be evaluated for carotid artery disease, if not already done.

Frailty: Several frailty tests exist to determine candidates’ fitness for transplant. The frailty test is a short physical performance battery from which an objective score is calculated. The Fried frailty criteria can also be used, and its domains include unintentional weight loss, self-reported exhaustion, weakness (grip strength), slow walking speed, and low physical activity. These scales are particularly useful in the elderly demographic, particularly those potential recipients above years of 60.

Gastrointestinal Disease: Anyone with a family or personal history of colon cancer or above the age of 50 should have a screening colonoscopy per USPSTF recommendations. Anyone with active viral hepatitis or chronic liver disease should consult with a hepatologist for possible consideration for a combined liver-kidney transplant.

Hematologic Disorder: Patients with a history of thrombosis should be evaluated for possible hypercoagulable disorders which may require treatment with anticoagulation. For those with bleeding diathesis, a full coagulation panel should be done.

Infections: As stated above, active infection is an absolute contraindication to a kidney transplant. Most centers will send a comprehensive serology panel to test for many viral infections and tuberculosis, etc. Vaccinations should also be up to date.

Malignancy: Most transplant centers will require a cancer-free period of 2 to 5 years, depending on the type of cancer, to minimize the risk of post-transplant recurrence/metastasis potentiated by immunosuppressive therapy.

Pulmonary Disease: For higher-risk patients such as those who have been on dialysis for an extended period, those with heart dysfunction, known diagnosis of COPD or history of extensive tobacco use, obstructive sleep apnea, or history of pulmonary embolism should undergo pulmonary function testing and possibly an echocardiogram to rule out pulmonary hypertension.

**Donor Selection/Allocation**

There are two types of kidney donors: living or deceased.

Deceased donors are broken down into those that are brain dead (DBD) and those that donate after cardiac death (DCD).  As the term would indicate, brain dead donors are those that have satisfied formal criteria for brain death testing.  DCD donors are patients who, while they do not meet the criteria for formal brain death, are deemed by neurologists as being unlikely to experience a meaningful neurologic recovery.

SCD and ECD classification were ultimately replaced in 2014 by the kidney donor profile index (KDPI), a more objective graft quality measure.  KDPI is derived from the kidney donor risk index (KDRI), the percentage of donors in a reference population (as defined annually by the OPTN) that have a KDRI score less than or equal to the donor’s KDRI score.  Factors used in determining the KDPI are donor age, ethnicity, creatinine, history of HTN or DM, cause of death, height and weight, HCV status, and DCD status.  Multiple studies have shown that kidney transplant using high-KDPI kidneys is still associated with a substantial reduction in morbidity and improvement in life expectancy and remains a cost-saving treatment strategy compared with patients who remained on maintenance dialysis.

Living kidney donation offers the best graft and recipient survival, even when considering paired kidney exchange, which involves organ transport before implantation.more than 1 medication, pelvic or horseshoe kidneys, and psychiatric disorders.

Regarding long-term consequences to living kidney donors, much research has been done; initially, it was felt that eventual development of ESRD or long-term survival was not affected by living donation.

# Technique or Treatment

Transplant surgery always involves two surgeries, the donor and the recipient. The approach can be performed in a minimally invasive fashion or, less commonly nowadays, via open surgery for the living donor. Implantation in the recipient is performed in an open fashion, where the kidney is placed heterotopically in the pelvis, anastomosing the vessels to the external iliac vessels and the ureter to the bladder. The iliac vessels are preferentially exposed retroperitoneally as the peritoneum is retracted medially. However, intra-peritoneal placement is also acceptable.

Laparoscopic and/or robotic surgery are both considered minimally invasive and can be used to procure either kidney. Access is gained to the intraperitoneal space for port placement. For the left kidney, the ureter and gonadal vein are identified at the pelvic brim after the left colon is freed from its peritoneal attachments and traced cephalad to identify and isolate the renal vein and artery. The adrenal gland is separated from the upper pole of the kidney, and the adrenal vein is divided. Once the kidney is fully mobilized and only attached via the artery, vein, and ureter, a slightly larger incision (often the Pfannenstiel) is made to prepare for expedient extraction. The distal ureter is divided between clips, and the hilar vessels are divided with a laparoscopic vascular-load stapler. Some differences in dissection exist depending on which kidney is procured. For the right kidney, the liver is retracted, and the right colon and duodenum are partially mobilized to access the kidney. Following extraction, the organ is then passed off of the field and prepared for implantation on the back-table.

In the open surgical technique for living donor procurement, a subcostal incision is made, and the retroperitoneal space is exposed. The ureter is followed down to the iliac vessels and ultimately divided there before extraction. The kidney is isolated on its vascular pedicle, and once the recipient team is ready, the renal artery and vein are transected, and the organ is delivered to the back-bench. The tributary stumps are then ligated or oversewn. Any residual perinephric fat is pruned as the kidney is prepared for implantation.

**Organ Preservation**

Once the kidneys are procured, they must be preserved before eventual implantation. During this process (and as soon as the heart stops beating in the donor and normal circulatory perfusion is halted), the kidneys experience ischemia. Cold ischemia time begins as soon as normal perfusion stops and ends when the kidney is reperfused in its recipient – the kidney should be on the ice for as much of this time as possible to diminish metabolic demand and minimize injury.  Warm ischemia time is considered more harmful to the organ. It is classically described as the “sew-in” time when the organ is removed from cold storage until it is ultimately reperfused following vascular anastomosis.  It is important to remember that there is also a period of upfront warm ischemia involved in the DCD donation process between when the patient experiences circulatory arrest and the aorta is cannulated and flushed with the preservative solution and the organs are topically cooled with ice.

During cold ischemia, the organ is stored in a static cold solution commonly used in the United States known as the University of Wisconsin Preservation Solution.

Organs can also be placed on machine perfusion for preservation. This is a newer technology, and studies suggest an improved risk of delayed graft function with the use of pulsatile machine perfusion.

# Complications

Hemorrhage – As with any vascular surgery, hemorrhage is always possible, both on-the-table and in the early postoperative period. Classical signs of bleeding may not be seen. Patients may not demonstrate classical tachycardia in response to hypovolemia as they are often on beta-blockers. Additionally, they can be hypertensive rather than hypotensive as a result of parenchymal compression. They often will complain of new-onset acute flank pain, and there may be a palpable mass or bulge near the incision. High clinical suspicion should be maintained and may warrant a return to the operating room. It’s important to remember that bleeding may be tamponaded by the kidney’s compartmentalized space in the retroperitoneum, an effect that would not be expected following intra-peritoneal placement of the allograft.

Thrombosis – Renal vein thrombosis is fortunately rare but is associated with a high risk of graft loss. This phenomenon may manifest in the early postoperative period with new-onset hematuria, sudden-onset oliguria/anuria, and/or graft dysfunction. Arterial thrombosis is rarer still but is often equally devastating and may manifest similarly in the recipient. Ultrasound is often diagnostic and should be ordered in the event of a precipitous decline in UOP in a previously functioning allograft. High suspicion for vascular complications should be maintained in the early postoperative period due to technical errors and/or clamp injury.

Infection – Infections are common as patients are placed on immunosuppression immediately postoperatively. They are most heavily immune-suppressed in the first 3-6 months post-operatively, putting them at heightened risk of infection during that window. Conventional nosocomial and bacterial infections are seen most commonly in the first month post-transplant and include UTIs and surgical site infections (SSI). High suspicion must be maintained for unconventional or opportunistic pathogens, particularly in the months that follow. Commonly tested viral pathogens include cytomegalovirus, Epstein-Barr virus, and polyomavirus (BK-type). Patients are often placed on prophylactic antivirals and antibiotics to decrease the risk of infection in the first 3-6 months – most commonly Bactrim for PCP, Valcyte for CMV, as well as some form of anti-fungal coverage.

Arterial Stenosis – This is a late complication and is often asymptomatic. Its discovery is often prompted by ultrasound examination in the setting of diminished graft function (elevated serum creatinine). Angiography is both diagnostic and therapeutic, and transluminal angioplasty may be attempted.

Lymphocele – This complication occurs due to the disruption of associated lymphatics during the exposure of the iliac vessels. Careful ligation of lymphatic tissue should thus be performed where possible during this dissection.  Patients may present with pain and bulging overlying the transplanted kidney. Alternatively, the collection can become infected or cause graft compression and diminished function. The treatment for symptomatic lymphoceles is percutaneous drainage. Drain aspirate should also be checked for fluid creatinine to rule out a urine leak.  Persistent lymphocele may be surgically treated with peritoneal window drainage.

Urinoma – Usually occurs within the first week of transplantation. Like lymphocele, patients may present with pain and swelling at the incision, compromised graft function as a result of compression, or infection. An elevated creatinine level typically confirms the diagnosis in the fluid aspirate. Many centers preemptively place a ureteral stent at the time of anastomosis to guard against this complication as well as the delayed complication of ureteral stenosis. In the event of a urine leak, bladder decompression with Foley catheter placement is typically all that is needed. However, surgical intervention and revision of the ureteroneocystostomy may be necessary.

# Clinical Significance

Before transplantation was an option, patients with end-stage kidney disease didn't have excellent treatment options. Once the design of hemodialysis was established, survival was improved. Once the advent of kidney transplantation was set into gear, patients with ESRD were seen to have better long-term survival if they were placed on the waiting list and eventually underwent kidney transplantation than those who stayed on dialysis. Additionally and importantly, those who underwent transplantation experienced a better quality of life and a projected survival benefit of 10 years over those who remained on dialysis.

# Enhancing Healthcare Team Outcomes

Transplant is a multidisciplinary practice. Their nephrologists and hepatologists initially see the patients before referral to a transplant surgeon. Once a referral is made, and the patient is placed on a transplant list, there are many more steps before an organ is allocated. When an organ becomes available, the transplant coordinators help with matching and allocating. The patient is then admitted for surgery, which involves the surgeons, anesthesiologists, operating room technicians, and afterward, the intensive care unit doctors, nurses, pharmacists, and social workers. This large team of healthcare professionals, each specialized in their field, working together, and communicating effectively is the only way transplantation is a reality.