Treatment is primarily supportive as no current antidote for hypoglycin A exists. Patients require close monitoring for hypoglycemia and should be treated with dextrose. Boluses of dextrose may be given initially followed by an infusion which may be titrated to maintain euglycemia. Intravenous fluids should be provided to prevent dehydration and antiemetics from alleviating symptoms. Vomiting and dehydration may lead to electrolyte abnormalities which should be repleted. Benzodiazepines may be used for the treatment of seizures, but again it is prudent to rule out hypoglycemia as the cause of the seizures. GI decontamination, including activated charcoal and gastric lavage, may be considered if there is a concern for potential toxicity if the patient presents within a few hours of ingestion. There is not sufficient evidence to suggest GI decontamination consistently improves patient outcomes. There is no role for syrup of ipecac following acute ingestions. Riboflavin and glycine have been used for treatment as they are thought to antagonize hypoglycin A. Methylene blue has also been proposed as a treatment option for potentially fatal encephalopathy. The true efficacy of these supplements is unknown. A medical toxicologist may assist in providing management and may be reached through the local Poison Control Center. Patients with persistent hypoglycemia, seizures, metabolic acidosis, altered mental status, or poor perfusion will most likely require admission to an intensive care unit (ICU). Education focusing on the health hazards of eating unripe Ackee fruits may decrease the future incidence of the disease.