Rehydration is the mainstay of treatment of bacterial diarrhea. This strategy is possible through the administration of oral or intravenous fluids. The use of ORS containing sodium, potassium, and glucose delivered in small, frequent volumes is the recommendation in patients who can tolerate this intake, and intravenous (IV) rehydration reserved for those that fail oral rehydration.

All patients should be encouraged to eat nutrient-rich foods to counter diarrhea as soon as dehydration is adequately managed; rather than restrict dietary intake. Breast-fed infants should continue their usual feedings if possible. Zinc supplementation is reported to reduce both the stool volume and stool frequency by 30 percent and is a consideration in severe cases.

Avoid symptomatic treatment with antimotility agents, as their use decreases peristalsis and prolongs the presence of bacteria and toxins in the gut, therefore potentially worsening the disease. Treatment with antimotility agents and reduction of stool volume does not alleviate the need for supportive rehydration.

Some patients with bacterial diarrhea will need antibiotic therapy.

Lactobacillus GG and Saccharomyces boulardii and other probiotics might be used in infectious diarrhea and traveler's diarrhea, although the effects are modest at best.

Admission is necessary in dehydration, shock, severe nausea and vomiting, the need for intravenous antibiotics, the possibility of complications, and on a case by case basis. Scoring systems have been proposed to facilitate recognizing those with severe diarrhea based on temperature, arterial pressure, white blood cell count, and stool white cells.

Vaccination for specific travelers against cholera and typhoid may be recommended, based upon the travel destination and country of origin. Vaccination is also available against rotavirus in infants.