The radial artery is an excellent place to palpate during the physical examination to count pulse rate and compare both sides bilaterally to see if there are any discrepancies between the blood flow to either arm or hand. The pulse from the radial artery can also be used to examine any differences with the blood flow to the lower extremities such as in the coarctation of the aorta or Buerger disease, a vasculitis affecting the middle size vessels. The radial pulse can be useful in the diagnosis of thoracic outlet syndrome with Adson's test. Adson's test is done by abducting the arm while palpating the radial pulse then extending and rotating the head to the ipsilateral side as the radial pulse to determine if the blood supply is affected. A positive test is when there is a decrease in pulse strength or the complete absence of the pulse, which would indicate thoracic outlet syndrome.

Allen's test is a test for collateral blood flow in the hand before arterial blood gas sampling or arterial line placement in the radial artery. The test is performed by occluding both the radial and ulnar arteries then releasing the ulnar artery to see if the hand will turn pink again from collateral blood flow; this would indicate that it is safe to sample the blood in the radial artery or place an arterial line in the radial artery. This test can also be used to evaluate the collateral blood flow from the radial artery by releasing the radial artery while still occluding the ulnar artery.

The radial artery also gives off a small branch that will be the sole blood supply to the scaphoid bone. Patients that come to seek medical attention after falling on outstretched hands and pain in the anatomical snuffbox may have fractured the scaphoid bone. This bone is vulnerable to avascular necrosis and nonunion if the damage affects the blood supply or the healing of the bone itself since the blood supply is retrograde for the scaphoid bone.