**DNA Viruses**

**Herpetoviridae**

**Primary herpetic gingivostomatitis (PHGS)**

Diagnosis of primary herpetic gingivostomatitis is based on history and physical exam findings.

Recurrence in immunocompetent individuals is rare, and underlying conditions such as acute leukemia should be investigated.

**Herpes Labialis**

Similar to primary herpetic gingivostomatitis, the diagnosis of herpes labialis is based on clinical findings. The anatomical location of herpes labialis allows for clinical distinction from recurrent aphthous ulcers.

**Chicken Pox**

Diagnosis is usually based on a classic clinical presentation and physical exam findings.

**Shingles**

Reactivated herpes zoster infections are diagnosed based on clinical findings. The most typical clinical sign is the unilateral distribution of the lesions along a specific dermatome.

**Infectious Mononucleosis**

The diagnosis of infectious mononucleosis is established when there is EBV-specific IgM in the serum; this is often performed via a mononuclear spot test (heterophile antibody).

**Oral Hairy Leukoplakia**

Diagnosis of oral hairy leukoplakia is often established clinically. The histopathological evaluation of the lesion may also detect EBV. It may be performed with PCR, direct immunofluorescence, or in situ hybridization techniques.

**Cytomegalovirus**

Cytomegalovirus infection is usually seen in patients with HIV/AIDS with CD4 counts of <100cells/mm3.

**Kaposi Sarcoma**

Kaposi sarcoma is diagnosed via biopsy, and a PCR identifies the HHV-8.

**Papillomaviridae**

**Human Papilloma Virus**

**Verruca Vulgaris, Oral Squamous Papillomas, Condyloma Acuminatum, and Heck's Disease**

Oral lesions associated with HPV infection, including verruca vulgaris, squamous papilloma, condyloma acuminatum, and Heck's disease, usually require a biopsy to establish the diagnosis. Specific HPV subtypes are identified with in situ hybridization DNA techniques.

**Poxviridae**

**Molluscum Contagiosum**

Molluscum contagiosum is diagnosed histopathologically. The lesions demonstrate Henderson-Paterson bodies and inclusion bodies in cytoplasm, which are classic findings. Viral identification in the specimen is then performed with in situ hybridization.

**RNA Viruses**

**Enteroviruses**

**Herpangina, Hand, Foot, and Mouth Disease, and Acute Lymphonodular Pharyngitis**

Herpangina, acute lymphonodular pharyngitis, and hand, foot, and mouth disease (HFMD) are diagnosed clinically. Serum antibodies may be present and detected on serologic testing. If the diagnosis is questionable, the virus may be cultured from samples of intact vesicles.

**Paramyxoviruses**

**Measles or Rubeola**

Infection is usually diagnosed according to clinical findings. Confirmation with serologic testing may be helpful if the diagnosis is questionable.