Alcoholic hepatitis has repercussions beyond the liver and is best managed by an interprofessional team that includes physicians, physician assistants, and nurse practitioners. The primary care provider and nurse practitioner should educate patients on the harms of alcohol and if alcoholic hepatitis is suspected, quickly refer them to a gastroenterologist for further workup. The disorder can affect the functioning of multiple organs, and early diagnosis is important.

At every opportunity, the key to treatment is patient education about the health risks of alcohol.  Patients with severe alcoholic hepatitis with an MDF greater than 32 have 30-day mortality of 30% to 50%. Forty percent of the patients with severe alcoholic hepatitis die within 6 months after the onset of the clinical syndrome. Jaundice and hepatic encephalopathy at the time of presentation indicate a poorer outcome.

Nurse practitioners, pharmacists, and primary care providers should urge patients to enter AA and take their family members; there is evidence that this program can help some patients with alcoholism become sober. Other patients may need mental health counseling and cognitive behavior therapy.

The combination of systemic illness, malnutrition, concurrent renal injury, infections, lack of response to glucocorticoids or pentoxifylline result in poorer outcomes in severe AH. Further understanding of the pathophysiology of alcohol-induced liver injury, early recognition, including complications and potentially better pharmacological approach could in the future improve clinical outcomes in patients with severe AH. A better understanding of alcohol-related liver injury, inflammation, liver fibrosis, and liver regeneration and associated gut-barrier permeability and dysfunction, along with newer pharmacological breakthroughs to treat AH would likely improve our present management strategies.

Those with end-stage liver should be referred to a transplant nurse to determine eligibility. The transplant nurse should assist in coordination for transplant and report findings to the clinical transplant surgeon and hepatologist managing the case. Due to the complexity of care, an interprofessional team of specialty-trained nurses and clinicians should coordinate the long-term care of these patients.