There are three main splinting options for the ankle. The most stable splint is the stirrup plus posterior slap splint. This is the most ideal splint for bimalleolar, trimalleolar, or ankle fracture-dislocations. The other options include a stirrup splint or a posterior slab splint. These two splints do not provide sufficient stability for anything other than an isolated medial, lateral, or posterior malleolar fracture. The posterior slab provides stability in the antero-posterior direction as well as preventing ankle dorsiflexion and plantarflexion. The stirrup wraps around the medial and lateral malleoli providing medial-lateral stability.

It is important to determine the length of the plaster required for splinting before beginning. For patient comfort, the uninjured leg may be used as a substitute to measure length. The length of the posterior slab should begin just distal to the metatarsal heads and end below the popliteal fossa. It is important that the posterior slab is not too long as this can cause skin irritation and breakdown in the popliteal fossa especially as the knee is flexed. The stirrup portion wraps from the medial aspect of the leg, around the heel, and up the lateral aspect of the leg. It should begin around the proximal third of the tibia medially and below the fibular head laterally. Plaster needs to be at least eight sheets thick to provide adequate strength but no more than 12 sheets thick to avoid thermal injury. Plaster produces heat as it hardens, and care must be taken to prevent thermal injury.

Before splint application, any fracture-dislocation should be reduced. Stockinette is cut to cover the leg so that there is extra past the toes and past the knee.  The extra stockinette will be folded down over the plaster which allows the creation of padded cuffs at the ends of the splint for patient comfort. Cast padding is used to wrap directly over the stockinette, beginning from the metatarsal heads and continuing all of the way up to the tibial tubercle. Care must be taken to sufficiently pad the medial and lateral malleoli and heel to prevent pressure ulcers from developing in the splint. The plaster splinting material for the posterior mold is wet, wrung, bonded, and placed on the plantar aspect of the foot, extending up to below the popliteal fossa. Cast padding may be used to wrap over the plaster to hold it in place while the remainder of the plaster is applied. The plaster splinting material for the stirrup is wet, wrung, bonded, and placed starting on the medial aspect of the leg, wrapping around the plantar aspect of the heel and up the lateral aspect of the leg. Cast padding may be used to wrap over the plaster splinting material once more, and the excess stockinette at the ends of the splint may be folded down to produce a cuff. An elastic bandage is used to wrap over the splint. Once wrapped with the elastic bandage, molding may begin. Molding is necessary for ankle dislocations or subluxations to produce a buttress to keep the ankle joint reduced. It is also important to ensure that the ankle joint is in neutral dorsiflexion. Splinting the ankle in a plantarflexed position will result in an equinus contracture of the heel cord.