- Amoxicillin-clavulanate is largely safe and well-tolerated in the general population, with the vast majority of adverse effects being only mild gastrointestinal symptoms. The single most common complaint is diarrhea, but others include nausea, vomiting, loose stools, and abdominal discomfort. The incidence of diarrhea is higher in amoxicillin-clavulanate than with amoxicillin alone. Additionally, there is a moderately increased risk of secondary Clostridioides difficile colitis when compared with other classes of antimicrobials. Females taking this medication can also develop vaginitis secondary to vaginal mycosis or candidiasis.

- Dermatologic effects are less common and generally related to hypersensitivity reactions. These reactions can present anywhere on the spectrum of disease, ranging from simple pruritis or urticaria to severe and life-threatening manifestations, such as anaphylaxis, Steven-Johnson syndrome, or toxic epidermal necrolysis. Classically, a morbilliform rash will present shortly after initiation of amoxicillin in patients misdiagnosed as strep pharyngitis when, in fact, they have infectious mononucleosis.

- Very rare complications of amoxicillin-clavulanate use include prolonged prothrombin time, vasculitis, thrombocytopenia, cholestatic jaundice, elevated serum alkaline phosphatase, hepatitis, and hepatotoxicity.

- Penicillins in high doses can cause seizures which is a concern, especially in patients with poor renal function.

**Drug Interactions**

- Probenecid (Risk D): Concurrent use of probenecid and amoxicillin/clavulanate result in prolonged and increased blood concentrations of amoxicillin. Therefore, coadministration of probenecid is not recommended.

- Oral Anticoagulants: Coadministration of amoxicillin and oral anticoagulants may lead to abnormally prolonged prothrombin time. Appropriate monitoring and dose adjustment of oral anticoagulants are recommended to achieve the desired level of anticoagulation.

- Allopurinol: Coadministration may increase allergic or hypersensitivity reactions associated with amoxicillin.

- Oral Contraceptives: Intestinal flora responsible for the reabsorption of estrogen may be affected by amoxicillin-clavulanate administration. This may lead to reduced efficacy of oral estrogen/progesterone contraceptive combination.