MPFL injuries occur most frequently in young athletes secondary to a sports accident or traumatic event and are a leading cause of traumatic knee hemarthroses.

In cases of patellar dislocation, the MPFL is ruptured over 90% of the time. In cases of repeat dislocation, it is ruptured nearly 100% of the time. This is the most common cause of MPFL injury, and its incidence is 2 to 3% of all knee injuries. It most often occurs when an internal force is applied to a slightly flexed knee in the valgus position. Patients with an MPFL rupture will present with pain and tenderness to palpation over the medial retinaculum and the medial border of the patella. Often, lateral displacement of the patella can be visualized. Additionally, in patients with a recurrent dislocation, cartilage damage of the trochlea, patella, and lateral femoral condyle are also appreciated on imaging.

An axial image plain film radiograph is sensitive to revealing patellar dislocation. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) is the most sensitive for evaluating MPFL injuries. Common injury patterns seen on MRI with MPFL injuries include a tear on the patellar attachment, a tear on the femoral attachment, a tear on both attachments, or attenuation. However, most tears occur on the femoral attachment. MRI in these patients may also show other injuries. Guerrero et al. found that these patients often have loose bodies present and may suffer from patella avulsion fracture, meniscal tears, medial collateral ligament tears, and osteochondral lesions.