**Laboratory Workup**

As opposed to most of the non-pregnant patients with appendicitis who have a preoperative leukocytosis (greater than 10000 cells/microL) and a neutrophilic predominance, leukocytosis as high as 16900 cell/microL may be a normal finding in pregnant women, and during labor, the count may rise as high as 29000 cells/microL, with a slight neutrophilic predominance.

Microscopic hematuria and pyuria may occur when the inflamed appendix is close to the bladder or ureter, but these findings are not specific and are generally reported in less than 20 percent of patients.

Mild elevations in serum bilirubin (total bilirubin over 1.0 mg/dL) have been described as a marker for appendiceal perforation (70% sensitivity and 86% specificity). However, clinicians should not use this finding alone as a diagnostic tool.

**Imaging**

Due to the risks of negative appendectomies, routine imaging is recommended in all pregnant patients with suspected appendicitis to obtain accuracy in diagnosis. The initial study of choice is ultrasound with graded compression of the right lower quadrant starting at the point of maximal tenderness and scanning between the border of the pelvis, iliac artery, and psoas muscle. Ultrasound has the advantage of being pregnancy-safe and easily available.

If ultrasound findings are inconclusive, magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) without gadolinium contrast remains a safe alternative for confirmation or exclusion of appendicitis during pregnancy, as it provides good soft-tissue resolution and lacks ionizing radiation with excellent sensitivity and specificity that remains intact in the pregnant patient. Routine use of MRI in pregnant patients reduces the negative appendectomy rate by almost 50% and does not increase the rate of perforation. When available, the liberal use of MRI in pregnant patients suspected to have acute appendicitis is recommended for these reasons. When MRI is not available or is available only on a limited basis, the decision about any delay in appendectomy to obtain an MRI study requires all available clinical and imaging information available, as the potential consequences associated with both negative appendectomy and appendiceal perforation are severe.

Although debatable, the use of CT scanning might be permissible when ultrasound is inconclusive, and MRI is not available. The use of CT scanning reduces the rate of negative appendectomy significantly compared to clinical assessment alone or combined with ultrasound imaging, and some authors conclude that it should be used if ultrasound findings are equivocal. Arguably, the amount of radiation during a limited CT scan is below the threshold required to cause fetal malformations, and most cases of appendicitis in pregnancy occur in later stages of pregnancy when organogenesis is already complete. If it is decided to use CT during pregnancy for inconclusive cases, care should be taken to perform a study as limited as possible with no intravenous administration of contrast material.