To achieve neutral wrist extension movements, the extensor carpi radialis brevis (ECRB), extensor carpi radialis longus (ECRL), and the extensor carpi ulnaris (ECU) muscles act synergistically based on each muscle's insertion and dynamic function. Thus, in various clinical pathologies that may cause a dynamic imbalance between the radial-based extensors (ECRL and ECRB) versus the ulnar-based extensor (ECU), wrist extension will occur with simultaneous and involuntary radial/ulnar deviation.

Thumb extension is carried out by abductor pollicis longus (APL), extensor pollicis brevis (EPB), and extensor pollicis longus (EPL).

Extension of the second (index finger), third (long finger), fourth (ring finger), and fifth (small finger) digits occurs via the extensor digitorum communis (EDC) muscles. Independent index finger extension can be carried out by the extensor indicis proprius (EIP) muscle. Independent small finger extension is accomplished by the extensor digiti minimi (EDM) muscle.

Extensor tendon zones are a helpful way to identify the region where injuries to the extensor tendons occur in the hand and wrist. Below is a description of the extensor tendon zones:

- Zone I: covers the fingertip to the distal interphalangeal (DIP) joint

- Zone II: covers the middle phalanx

- Zone III: located at the proximal interphalangeal (PIP) joint

- Zone IV: covers the proximal phalanx

- Zone V: situated at the metacarpal phalangeal (MP) joint

- Zone VI: covers the metacarpals

- Zone VII: covers the wrist

- Zone VIII: proximal to the wrist

The thumb zones are classified differently from the tip of the thumb to the carpal-metacarpal joint. Below is a description of the extensor tendon zones of the thumb:

- Zone I: covers the fingertip to the DIP joint

- Zone II: covers the interphalangeal joint

- Zone III: covers the proximal phalanx

- Zone IV: located over the MP joint