Providers can perform this block with the patient in the sitting, lateral, or prone position. Provider familiarity and patient comfort should guide positioning. For inexperienced providers, having the patient in the prone position will likely provide the easiest access to the necessary landmarks. Placing a pillow under the upper abdomen or placing the bed in a slight jack-knife can help open the posterior intercostal space. Having the patient dangle their arms over the edge of the bed will retract the scapula laterally, which should help expose the rib angles for the underlying ribs. These maneuvers improve the ability to palpate the landmarks necessary to perform this block safely. After the patient has been properly positioned, it is good practice to mark each level to be blocked as it can be easy to skip a level or perform more than one block on a single level, especially if multiple levels are planned. Palpation of ribs is easiest, approximately 6 cm lateral to the midline, as this should be lateral to the overlying paraspinal musculature. The paraspinal musculature prevents tactile differentiation of rib levels in most healthy patients.

The inferior border of the scapula (which sits over the seventh rib) and the 12th rib are good landmarks to determine the desired intercostal levels. If wishing to provide coverage for abdominal surgery, the fifth to 12th intercostal spaces should be marked. For breast surgery, the second to sixth intercostal spaces should be marked. For thoracic incisions, 1 to 2 levels above and below the planned level should be sufficient. The inferior border of the rib to be blocked should be marked at the angle of the rib to ensure sufficient lateral placement. This can help prevent accidental injection into paravertebral space or inadvertent dural sac puncture. The use of ultrasound can facilitate safe injection closer to the midline if this is necessary.