Differential diagnoses of radial tunnel syndrome include lateral epicondylitis, PIN compression syndrome, brachial plexopathy, cervical stenosis, and cervical foraminal stenosis. Electrodiagnostic studies can be helpful in cases of PIN compression syndrome and spinal pathology but are normal in radial tunnel syndrome.

**Brachial Plexopathy**

Patients with a brachial plexus injury have a variety of presentations depending on the location of the injury. A detailed physical exam and EMG can help make this diagnosis. An MRI of the neck/shoulder may be considered to differentiate stretch injuries from true nerve disruptions.

**Cervical Foraminal Stenosis**

Compression of cervical nerve roots as they exit the spinal cord and pass through neural foramina. These patients present with radicular type pain, numbness, tingling, and weakness depending on which level is affected. An MRI can assess for foraminal stenosis, and targeted injections can be useful in determining symptomatic levels.

**Cervical Stenosis**

Compression of the cervical cord in the spinal canal. The hallmark of cervical stenosis is myelopathy or hand clumsiness with or without gait disturbances. Positive Hoffman reflexes should raise suspicion for cervical stenosis.

**Lateral Epicondylitis ("Tennis Elbow")**

This is inflammation or tendinitis of the common extensor tendon on the lateral condyle of the distal humerus. These patients are point tender over the lateral condyle and have severe pain with resisted wrist/finger extension.