SLE is a multisystemic disease with an unknown etiology. However, several genetic, immunological, endocrine, and environmental factors play a role in the etiopathogenesis of SLE.

Familial segregation and high concordance rates in identical twins suggest a strong genetic contribution in SLE, although there is no obvious inheritance pattern. Concordant rates for identical twins have been reported as high as 50%. Over 100 gene loci with polymorphisms (or, rarely, copy numbers or mutations) have been identified to be associated with polygenic SLE (majority of cases), and more than 30 genes causing monogenic forms of SLE or SLE-like phenotype have been identified. These genes are associated with activation of the immune system in response to foreign antigens, self-antigen generation, and activation of innate and adaptive immune systems. Some gene mutations that are rare but are considered very high risk for the development of SLE include deficiencies of early complement components C1q, C1r, C1s (>90% risk), C4 (50%), C2 (20%), and TREX1. Some of the other genes associated include HLA-DRB1, HLA-DR2, HLA-DR3, HLA-DRX, TNFAIP3, STAT-4, STAT-1, TLR-7, IRAK1/MECP2, IRF5-TNPO3, ITGAM, etc. The most common genetic predisposition is located at the major histocompatibility (MHC) locus. The MHC contains genes for antigen-presenting molecules (class I human leukocyte antigens [HLA-A, -B, and -C] and class II HLA molecules [HLA-DR, -DQ, and -DP]).

In addition, women are at ten times more risk of developing SLE than men, and the risk of SLE is 14 times more in Klinefelter syndrome (47, XXY). This suggests an association with genes on the X-chromosome. However, despite several studies, the exact genes have not been identified.

Female sex and hormonal influence are significant risk factors for SLE. Estrogen stimulates CD8+ and CD4+ T cells, B cells, macrophages, thymocytes, the release of some specific cytokines (e.g., IL-1), and the expression of HLA and endothelial cell adhesion molecules (VCAM, ICAM). In addition, estrogens and prolactin promote autoimmunity, increase the B-cell activation factor production, and modulate lymphocyte and plasmacytoid dendritic cells (pDC) activation. The use of estrogen-containing contraceptives and postmenopausal hormone replacement therapy can cause flares in patients with SLE and have been associated with a higher incidence of SLE. In addition, elevated levels of prolactin are seen in patients with SLE. Androgens, on the other hand, are immunosuppressive.

Several environmental triggers of SLE have been identified. Several drugs have been implicated in causing a lupus-like phenomenon by causing demethylation of DNA and alteration of self-antigens. While procainamide and hydralazine have the highest incidence of causing drug-induced lupus, more than 100 drugs have been associated with drug-induced lupus. Further, several drugs such as the sulfa-drugs are well known to cause flares in patients with SLE. Ultraviolet rays and sun exposure lead to increased cell apoptosis and are well-known triggers for SLE. Several viral infections have been implicated, and the underlying mechanism is thought to be molecular mimicry. Antibodies against Epstein-Barr virus (EBV) are more prevalent in children and adults with SLE compared to the general population. Smoking is also thought to be a risk, with a dose-response. Other potential risk factors include silica exposure, other viral infections, vitamin D deficiency, alfalfa sprouts, and foods containing canavanine.