Formulating a safe and effective anesthetic plan for patients with cerebral palsy requires the anesthesiologist to have a thorough understanding of how this spectrum of disorders affects the physiology of multiple organ systems.

**Neurologic**

Approximately two-thirds of patients with cerebral palsy have some degree of intellectual disability. Visual and hearing impairments are also common.

Patients with cerebral palsy have a lower minimum alveolar concentration (MAC) to volatile anesthetic agents and also frequently have delayed emergence from general anesthesia. The exact explanation for this is unknown but is likely multifactorial and related to increased baseline sensitivity to anesthetic agents, usage of anti-convulsant and anti-spasmodic medications, and perioperative hypothermia.

Assessment of pain in patients with cerebral palsy can be particularly difficult in the setting of intellectual disability and poor communication skills. The patient’s primary caregiver is often a valuable source of information in this context as the caregiver is often very familiar with the patient’s behaviors and mannerisms.

**Musculoskeletal**

Patients with cerebral palsy typically have a thin body habitus with little subcutaneous fat and an increased surface area to body weight ratio.

Neuromuscular blockers are not contraindicated in patients with cerebral palsy. These patients have a slightly increased sensitivity to depolarizing neuromuscular blockers such as succinylcholine. However, they appear to display relative resistance to non-depolarizing neuromuscular blockers such as vecuronium. This is likely due to the up-regulation of extra-junctional acetylcholine receptors and interactions of neuromuscular blockers with anticonvulsant medications.

**Respiratory and Airway**

Respiratory complications remain the most common cause of morbidity and mortality in patients with cerebral palsy. Underlying chronic lung diseases such as bronchopulmonary dysplasia may be present from birth. Recurrent respiratory infections are extremely common and are due to various factors, including oro-motor dysfunction leading to aspiration, poor immune function, and chronic carriage of pathogenic bacteria.

Patients with cerebral palsy often have a pooling of saliva in the upper airway. This is caused by overproduction by salivary glands as well as motor dysfunction such as pseudo-bulbar palsy, which can lead to an impaired ability to swallow.

**Cardiovascular**

Hypotension is one of the most common complications encountered in the intra-operative setting in patients with cerebral palsy. The explanation for this phenomenon is unknown and may be related to either the increased sensitivity to anesthetic agents or a diminished central adrenergic response.

**Gastrointestinal**

As mentioned previously, patients with cerebral palsy are often malnourished and have a thin body habitus. Pseudo-bulbar palsy and oro-motor dysfunction are common, predisposing patients to sialorrhea and poor feeding with resultant dehydration, malnourishment, and a weakened immune system that predisposes the patient to recurrent infections.

Poor nutrition and frequent use of laxatives for chronic constipation place these patients at risk for potentially significant electrolyte derangements.

**Allergies**

An increased incidence of latex allergy has been reported in patients with cerebral palsy. This may be in part due to recurrent and prolonged exposures to the healthcare setting. A thorough list of allergies should be elicited from the patient’s chart or caregiver during the preoperative assessment.