There are many different opinions on the treatment of hemorrhagic stroke. There are many trials on the optimal management of hemorrhagic stroke - Antihypertensive Treatment in Acute Cerebral Hemorrhage(ATACH), Intensive Blood Pressure Reduction in Acute Cerebral Hemorrhage Trial (INTERACT), Factor VIIa for Acute Hemorrhagic Stroke Treatment (FAST), and Surgical Trial in Intracerebral Haemorrhage (STICH).

**Blood pressure (BP) Management**

BP should be reduced gradually to 150/90 mmHg using beta-blockers (labetalol, esmolol), ACE inhibitor (enalapril), calcium channel blocker (nicardipine), or hydralazine.

**Management of Raised Intracranial Pressure (ICP)**

The initial treatment for raised ICP is elevating the head of the bed to 30 degrees and using osmotic agents (mannitol, hypertonic saline). Mannitol 20% is given at a dose of 1.0 to 1.5 g/kg.

**Hemostatic Therapy**

Hemostatic therapy is given to reduce the progression of hematoma.

**Antiepileptic Therapy**

Around 3 to 17% of patients will have a seizure in the first two weeks, and 30% of patients will show electrical seizure activity on EEG monitoring.**C**ontinuous EEG monitoring is indicated in patients with a decreased level of consciousness. Otherwise, prophylactic anticonvulsant medication is not recommended, according to ASA guidelines.

**Surgery**

The different types of surgical treatment for hemorrhagic stroke are craniotomy, decompressive craniectomy, stereotactic aspiration, endoscopic aspiration, and catheter aspiration.

Minimally invasive surgery plus recombinant tissue plasminogen activator(rt-PA) for Intracerebral Hemorrhage Evacuation (MISTIE) was a randomized, prospective trial that tested image-guided catheter-based removal of the blood clot.

The Clot Lysis: Evaluating Accelerated Resolution of IntraVentricularr Hemorrhage (CLEAR IVH) trial showed that low-dose rt-PA can be safely administered to stable intraventricular clots and can increase lysis rates.

**Cerebroprotection**

The secondary injury of hemorrhagic stroke comprises inflammation, oxidative stress, and toxicity of erythrocyte lysates and thrombin. So, strategies to reduce these are being tried. Pioglitazone, misoprostol, and celecoxib are tried to reduce inflammatory damage. Edaravone, flavanoid, and nicotinamide mononucleotide can reduce oxidative stress. The iron chelator deferoxamine is also in the experimental phase. The safety and neuroprotective efficacy of the cell membrane component citicoline (cytidine-5-diphosphocholine) has been shown in some studies.

**General Care**

Good medical care, nursing care, and rehabilitation are paramount.