Other headache disorders (primary and secondary) are part of the differential diagnosis of TTHs.

- Migraine is the second most common cause of primary headache disorders and requires differentiation from TTH because of different treatment options. Migraine headaches are moderate to severe in intensity and last for 4 to 72 hours in duration. Migraine headaches may be unilateral in location and typically have a pulsating or throbbing quality. They are also aggravated by routine physical activity. Nausea, vomiting, photophobia, and phonophobia are commonly associated with migraine headaches. A preceding aura may also be present in some of these patients.

- Medication overuse headache is another important headache type to exclude. It may be present in concomitance with TTH or other headache disorders. It may mimic chronic TTH, therefore, making the diagnoses and treatment more difficult. The patient often takes analgesic medicines > 10 to 15 days a month. Patients may complain of headaches upon awakening that transiently responds to analgesics and returns as the drug effect wears off. These patients may also appear anxious, irritable, and restless. Discontinuing the overused analgesics medication is the primary treatment, which the patient needs to understand.

- Hypnic Headache is a less frequent occurrence, which tends to have an onset of >50 years. These headaches will only occur during sleep and will typically wake the patient up. Since older adults also have a higher risk in general of developing secondary headaches, it is important to distinguish primary from secondary headaches within this subset of patients; this should be done in all age groups with risk factors, as discussed below.

Secondary headache disorders should always be considered and evaluated by looking for "red flags." Some causes of secondary headaches include giant cell arteritis, sleep apnea headache, cardiac cephalgia, cervicogenic headaches, etc. Discussing each secondary headache disorder is beyond the scope of this article.