The anatomy of the foot is divisible into the hindfoot, mid-foot, and forefoot. The hindfoot is composed of two bones, the talus, and the calcaneus.  The talus has an anterior, middle, and posterior facet that articulates with the calcaneus inferiorly to form the subtalar or talocalcaneal joint. The talus articulates with the navicular distally, and the calcaneus articulates with the cuboid distally. The two bones of the hindfoot function together and are responsible for inversion and eversion. Some dorsiflexion and plantar flexion occur through these articulations as well. The talonavicular joint is a highly congruent ball and socket joint formed by the convex anterior margin of the talar head and the concave posterior contour of the navicular. The calcaneocuboid joint is a condyloid joint formed by the vertically oriented concave anterior facet of the calcaneus and the transversely oriented posterior convexity of the cuboid. The talonavicular and calcaneocuboid joints are also known as Choparts joints. Because of the shape and orientation of the talonavicular joint, it is responsible for the majority of the motion of the hindfoot. Together, the talocalcaneonavicular joint, known as the acetabulum pedis, and the calcaneocuboid joint allow for motion in all 3 cardinal planes (frontal, transervere, and sagittal).

The midfoot is composed of five irregular shaped bones including the navicular, medial cuneiform, middle cuneiform, lateral cuneiform, and the cuboid. The midfoot connects to the hindfoot via the mid-tarsal joint (Choparts joint).

The forefoot consists of five metatarsals and respective phalanges. Phalanges are further divided into three separate phalanges (a proximal, middle, and distal phalanx) for each of the toes with the exception for the big toe, which only contains a proximal and distal phalanx. The phalanges are composed of metatarsophalangeal and interphalangeal joints. Each toe possesses a proximal and distal interphalangeal joint while the big toe only has one interphalangeal joint. The forefoot connects to the midfoot through the tarsometatarsal joint, also known as the Lisfranc joint. The Lisfranc joint is a complex articulation involving the anterior margins of the cuboid and three cuneiform bones with their respective metatarsals, none more important than the articulation between the middle cuneiform and second metatarsal base. The Lisfranc joints are gliding joints and make up the transverse arch of the foot, and its contiguity is paramount for the stability of the foot during ambulation.

The joints of the foot have two essential roles including weight-bearing and propulsion during walking, running and jumping. The foot requires a high degree of flexibility and stability to be able to perform these functions. The vast number of joints in the foot is what provides this flexibility while stability results through the articulation of the joints and the ability of the foot to act both as a rigid lever and a flexible lever during the normal gait cycle. The midtarsal joint plays a role during ambulation, and its function is dependent on the position of the subtalar joint. During eversion of the subtalar joint, the talonavicular and calcaneocuboid joints are parallel to each other and permit motion between them. This motion is important during the early stance/heel strike stage of ambulation. Conversely, with inversion of the subtalar joint, the joints are not parallel, and no motion is permitted allowing the foot to act as a rigid lever for the late stand/toe-off phase of ambulation. Metatarsal phalangeal joints are condyloid joints that allow for flexion and extension as well as abduction and adduction. Interphalangeal joints are hinge joints allowing for flexion and extension.