Management of complex wounds should be carried out in an interprofessional team approach. This is crucial to optimize the wound healing environment and control any pre-existing conditions. Regular communication between team members is mandatory for optimal wound healing. This team can include wound care specialists such as tissue viability nurses, plastic surgery nurse specialists, and plastic surgeons. The involvement of the diabetic team, vascular surgeons, lymphedema care team, dietitian, and microbiology should be assessed on an individual basis. Moreover, pain team and occupational therapist involvement are essential, especially in the interim phase before discharging the patient to the community.

Early involvement of tissue viability or other wound-care nurse is advisable, especially in wounds that show deterioration or no improvement after the first two weeks of management. Medical photography is also important to monitor wound healing progress. Cases that require urgent surgical debridements, such as necrotizing fasciitis, or cases that may need complex reconstruction should be discussed with a plastic surgeon.

The involvement of a plastic surgery nurse specialist may be helpful in the postoperative management of reconstructive surgery such as skin grafts of flap-based reconstruction. They can also provide support to the nursing team when special dressing techniques are used, such as topical negative pressure therapy or if larvae have been used for wound debridement.

In the case of infected wounds, the choice of antibiotic should be selected in line with the antimicrobial policy and after discussion with the microbiology team to prevent unnecessary prolonged antibiotic administration. Patients with evident lymphedema should be referred to the lymphedema team to optimize and apply compression dressing if possible.

Adequate analgesia is pivotal for patient compliance, and the early involvement of a pain management specialist is beneficial. Occupational therapists and psychological support are needed throughout the hospital admission and after discharge to the community.