Of the agents in the class of chemical compounds called oximes, pralidoxime (2-PAM), used in the United States, and obidoxime, used in a few European nations, are the primary drugs that find clinical use. P2S and HI-6 are also used in some parts of the world. These drugs were collectively developed in the 1950s with a vision to develop an antidote that could reverse the inhibition of acetylcholinesterase enzyme brought about by the exposure to organophosphate compounds.

Developed in Germany in the pre-WWII era, the initial intent for organophosphate compounds was for use as insecticides. However, it did not take long for these compounds to be weaponized, given how harmful they were due to their property of irreversibly inactivating the acetylcholinesterase enzyme. This usage of organophosphate compounds as pesticides and as weapons of mass destruction continues to this day, forming a basis for the FDA approved indications of drugs like pralidoxime:

- Pralidoxime has approval as an antidote for nerve agent poisoning. Reports indicate that chemical weapons like sarin, tabun, soman, and cyclosarin were used in the 1980 Iran-Iraq war, the 1995 Tokyo subway attack, the Gulf war, and the 2013 Syrian civil war.

- Pralidoxime also has approval as an antidote for organophosphate-based pesticides. Today organophosphate-based pesticides are widely used in agriculture all over the world. Poor yield, drought, debt, and extreme working hours often drive farmers into depression.

- Pralidoxime has also received approval to manage an overdose of acetylcholinesterase drugs prescribed for myasthenia gravis and Alzheimer dementia.

A non-FDA approved but under-evaluation use for pralidoxime is:

- Pralidoxime shows promise when used as a universal electrochemical marker to detect the type of compound organophosphate causing the poisoning.

At present, there is some ambiguity regarding whether all organophosphate toxicity cases should receive oximes. The recommendation is for oximes to be administered within 48 hours in these cases. This is covered in greater detail in the Mechanism of Action section.