**Application to Development of High-Performance Teams**

Simulation and healthcare leaders often share the perspective that the healthcare macro-system represents one unified team with the overarching goal of safely delivering optimized patient care. The skillset attained by simulation leaders is directly applicable to addressing institutional readiness and disaster preparedness. After completing a needs assessment, directors can review existing policies and procedures, many of which they likely formulated to assess resources and create a bidirectional flow of information regarding the capacity of services. During the Ebola crisis, for example, simulation leaders at the University of Pittsburgh Winter Institute for Simulation, Education and Research (WISER) worked to coordinate and collaborate with multiple microsystems of healthcare to respond to operational needs regarding personal protective equipment training and disaster preparedness.

Communication and teamwork dynamics fundamentally affect an institutions' readiness to deliver highly reliable patient care. Simulation program directors are uniquely suited to support this aspect of systems improvement. Not only do they have access to and training on the equipment necessary to deliver realistic simulation sessions, but they are also trained in the assessment and evaluation of team dynamics. In addition to assessing team performance as a whole, this must also involve assessing team composition and the impact of individual team members on team function. Familiarity with the specific team member attributes that are associated with highly effective teams creates a foundation on which targeted interventions can undergo development to affect change. In one study following six anesthesia teams that participated in four high-fidelity simulation sessions together, they were able to show that explicit coordination decreased while implicit coordination increased. This suggests that within the realm of crisis resource management, simulation can be utilized to train the skill of adaptive coordination, and therefore can influence team performance.

According to relational coordination theory, the following three attributes of relationships support the highest levels of coordination and performance: shared knowledge, shared goals, and mutual respect. Shared knowledge transcends role-specific functional goals.  Shared goals allow participants to see the interrelation of role-specific tasks to the whole process. Mutual respect transcends status barriers that interfere with the ability to see and take others' work into account. When these relationship attributes are reinforced by additional aspects of high quality communication such as frequency, timeliness, and accuracy, this further supports coordination and high performance.

Multiple studies have noted that clear role definition and identification is a teamwork behavior that influences high reliability. One study showed that the establishment of a team leader was the most reliably achieved behavioral marker, and the absence of an explicit leadership transfer process was noted as the most active failure. The second and third most active failures noted were a lack of situational awareness and a lack of a shared mental model. This implies that the communication skills of the team leader himself or herself definitively affect team performance.

Simulation program leaders can positively influence team dynamics by creating an environment that allows both team members and team leaders to meet on the same page. When simulation scenarios are targeted towards teaching leadership behaviors that engender inclusiveness, and coaching behaviors including thinking aloud, team members feel their effort and input is valued. By helping team members to reframe success and failure in a way that supports mastery learning, simulation leaders model behaviors that support team efficacy. In these circumstances, teams are more likely to demonstrate a focus on problem-solving instead of blaming when problems do arise.

Simulation directors can further influence patient safety by using the debriefing process as a method to promote team reflexivity

**Affect on Patient Perceptions and Outcomes**

There are multiple current and potential applications of simulation that can directly enhance education and experience to improve patient-centered care. One group of simulation leaders created a nomenclature of patient-related simulations based on the specifics of the approach. "Patient-driven" simulations developed through a collaborative process where a partnership with patients allows interventions to be created with an authentic patient voice. Patient-driven interventions consist of a mastery learning model much like traditional medical simulation training, but tailored to the learning needs of individual patients and families. "Patient-specific" simulation utilizes a particular patient's unique anatomy and/or physiology to inform patients and families about the healthcare process expected. Through simulation methodologies like 3D printing, the providers are able not only to determine the best approach to patient care but practice it safely before the actual intervention, which will be performed on the patient. By creating and sharing these analyses, simulation leaders can help to provide a common language by which simulation research and education are assessed.

Simulation directors can utilize partnerships with other healthcare leaders to affect change in the outcomes of whole patient populations as well. After creating a collaborative, multi-professional simulation-based crisis resource management training course, obstetric teams were able to link their training intervention to the improvement of five patient-reported scores related to feelings of safety during labor. This suggests that skillful simulation training design can translate into improvements in patient-reported outcomes.

By partnering with healthcare leaders to assess the strengths and challenges of the healthcare system, simulation leaders can apply their knowledge of education, research, patient safety, and implementation science to develop targeted and meaningful simulated healthcare experiences. The psychologically safe environment provided in the debriefing of the simulation sessions allows simulation leaders to facilitate the ability of individuals, teams, patients, and families to reflect on their journey through the healthcare process. By transcending hierarchical clinical status through the development of mutual respect, they promote collaborative problem-solving opportunities, identify gaps, highlight best practice, and enhance inter-professional and multidisciplinary relationships. By communicating these findings to decision-makers, they inform the development and refinement of policies and procedures. They can then use targeted simulation strategies to bring the system improvement initiatives back to the front lines to evaluate how work, as imagined, translates to work performance and ultimately, how it improves the ability to provide safe and optimized patient care.