With the advent of newer and better screening tools, CRC related mortality rate has decreased, on average, by about 2.7% between 2004 and 2013. It is expected to decrease further to about 38% for 50 to 74-year-olds and about 45% for those older than 75 years by 2030.

Recently, a gradual shift towards right-sided or proximal colon cancers has been seen both in the United StatesBRAF-V600E mutations, cause lesions that are flatter and difficult to visualize endoscopically and are more common in the right colon.

**Pathogenesis**

Most CRCs begin as protuberances tethered to the inner surface of the colon or rectum, clinically known as “polyps.” These are mainly of two types: flat or raised, relative to the inner-epithelial lining.

Raised polyps show two distinctive growth patterns of mushroomed growth:

- With a stalk (pedunculated polyps)

- Without a stalk (sessile polyps)

About 10 percent of CRC patients carry one or more pathogenic “non-Lynch syndrome mutations,”  including mutations in high-penetrance genes such as APC, bi-allelic MUTYH, BRCA1, BRCA2, PALB2, CDKN2A, and TP53.

Right-sided CRCs tend to be diagnosed in advanced stages compared to left-sided, as the cecum and right colon have a larger caliber, and stool is more liquid, causing fewer symptoms of partial obstruction such as pain, swelling, and constipation. Blood in stools (hematochezia or melena) isn’t readily observed and comes much later as compared to the left side, making screening tools pivotal in management for early detection and therapy.

**Risk factors for CRC**

Risk factor assessment helps to categorize the patient as high, average, or low-risk. Aggressive multiple interval-based testing starts as early as the teenage years

1.) Family history (especially first-degree relatives)

- Colorectal carcinoma

- Pre-cancerous adenomas

2.) Genetic cancer syndromes

- Familial adenomatous polyposis (FAP and its variants Gardner and Turcot syndrome)

- Lynch syndrome

- Hereditary non-polyposis colorectal cancer (HNPCC)

- Peutz-Jeghers syndrome

- Juvenile polyposis

3.) Medical history

- Previously resected or diagnosed adenomatous colorectal polyps; or any of the above mentioned genetic-cancer syndromes

- Cystic fibrosis

- Inflammatory bowel diseases like Crohn disease or ulcerative colitis

- Diabetes mellitus and insulin resistance

- Abdomino-pelvic radiation for an earlier cancer in childhood or adolescence (as suggested by Children Oncology Group- COG)

- HIV infection in men

4.) Personal history

- Chronic alcohol use disorder

- Smoking

- Physical inactivity

- Obesity

- Poor diet (low fiber; high amounts of red and processed meat consumption)

5.) Race

- Higher incidence and mortality among African-Americans, particularly men. CRC occurrence is higher in African-Americans less than 50 years of age. Hence earlier screening, starting from the age of 45 years, is recommended by USPSTF.