Dental extractions, much like any surgical procedure, are not without risk. These risks must be discussed with the patient before the procedure. Frequently occurring risks after dental extraction includes pain, bleeding, bruising, swelling, and infection. Damage to the adjacent structures, like neighboring teeth, should always be mentioned, especially when adjacent teeth have restorations. Site-specific risks such as oroantral communication and inferior dental nerve injury must be mentioned if appropriate.

**Pain**

Pain after a dental extraction is a commonly occurring postoperative risk. This is usually managed sufficiently with over-the-counter analgesics such as paracetamol and ibuprofen.

If the clinician is satisfied that there is no other diagnosis for the patient's pain, then conservative management would be advisable. Reassurance should be given to the patient that post-operative pain can take 3 to 7 days to settle.

Another common reason for patients returning with post-operative pain is alveolar osteitis, known as dry socket. Alveolar osteitis occurs due to the breakdown of the blood clot in a socket before wound organization has occurred.

Alveolar osteitis is usually treated with irrigation with saline along with the placement of a medicated dressing in the socket. Alvogyl is a commonly used dressing that acts as a local analgesic, an antibacterial, and an obtundent.

Patients may also complain of pain associated with the temporomandibular joint following an extraction. This pain is usually myofascial in nature and can be resolved with conservative management advice and time.

**Bleeding**

Post-operative bleeding is a normal occurrence after tooth extraction. Any medical factors in the patient's history predisposing them to prolonged post-operative bleeding should be identified early and managed according to the relevant guidelines. If a patient does continue to bleed after a prolonged period of pressure is placed on the area, then local hemostatic agents should be used to arrest bleeding. If these are unsuccessful, localized use of tranexamic acid can also be considered.

Clear safety net instructions should be provided to the patient that should they experience prolonged bleeding at home that cannot be stopped with pressure; they should seek urgent attention from a dental or medical professional.

**Bruising**

Some patients can experience bruising following dental extraction. However, this is more common with surgical extractions than simple ones.

**Swelling**

Swelling, similar to bruising, is more common with surgical exodontia. However, a patient can experience swelling after a simple extraction. Swelling should resolve in 3 to 7 days post-extraction. However, it is possible to develop a post-operative infection, which can present as facial swelling. Therefore, examining a patient who presents with post-operative swelling for all signs of systemic infection and airway patency is crucial. Clear post-operative advice surrounding facial swellings is key. Patients should be reassured that some degree of facial swelling is normal, but also be aware of signs that a post-operative infection has developed and should seek review with a healthcare professional.

**Infection**

As discussed, patients must be warned about post-operative infection. Despite the risk of this developing, the evidence does not suggest there is a role for routine post-operative antibiotics.

**Damage to Adjacent Teeth**

The risk of damage to adjacent teeth should be minimized as much as possible through thorough pre-operative preparation and avoiding luxation or elevation adjacent to a heavily restored tooth.

**Inferior Dental Nerve Injury**

This risk usually pertains to mandibular third molars, although mandibular second molars can occasionally present close to the IDN. The patient should always be warned of the risk of temporary or permanent altered sensation to the lip, cheek, tongue, and teeth on the relevant side. The incidence of IDN injury is between 0.35% to 8.4%, with a permanent injury to the nerve being rare.

Should a patient suffer an IDN injury, they should be followed up closely in the initial period. In most cases, recovery is seen in 6 to 8 weeks, which can take up to two years. Ideally, complete recovery should be seen within two months, as the chance of permanent deficit increases after this period.

**Oroantral Communication**

Oroantral communication (OAC) most commonly occurs with maxillary molars. The primary reason for the formation of an OAC or oroantral fistula (OAF) is the proximity of a tooth's apices to the antral floor or the projection of the roots into the sinus. OAC can also occur following the displacement of a root or apex into the sinus during extraction by the operator. Most defects less than 2 mm can close spontaneously and be managed conservatively. However, defects that are larger than this are likely to epithelialize if left and form an OAF. This can lead to the patient developing sinusitis. These defects require surgical closure, ideally within 24 hours.

**Wrong-site Tooth Extraction**

Removal of the wrong tooth is one of dentistry's most regrettable complications. Poor communication, referrals, and operator exhaustion are common reasons for wrong-site surgery.

This does not represent an exhaustive list of all possible complications following a tooth extraction, but the above described are the most commonly experienced complications and make up the bulk of a routine consent discussion with patients.