Upper limb development initiates with the activation of a group of mesenchymal cells in the lateral mesoderm towards the end of the fourth week, with the limb buds becoming visible around day 26 or day 27. Each limb bud comprises a mass of mesenchyme covered by ectoderm. This mesenchyme remains undifferentiated until it is ready to develop into bone, cartilage, and blood vessels later in development. Meanwhile, at the apex of each limb bud, the ectoderm thickens to form the apical ectodermal ridge, which stimulates the growth and development of the upper limb bud in the proximal-distal axis. Other signaling centers and primary morphogens such as the zone of polarizing activity, derived from an aggregate of mesenchymal cells in the limb bud, and the Wnt pathway, expressed from the dorsal epidermis of the limb bud, also contribute to the development of the upper limb buds by regulating growth along the anteroposterior axis and the dorsoventral axis, respectively.

At the end of the sixth week of development, digital rays form in the hand plate. By the seventh week, the carpal chondrification process begins. The capitate and the hamate carpal bones are the first chondrogenic centers to appear as immature cartilage early in the eighth week while the pisiform is the last to appear later in the eighth week. The hamulus, otherwise known as the “hook of the hamate,” also appears as an immature cartilaginous tissue towards the end of the eighth week and does not complete its development until the thirteenth week. Last, in the fourteenth week, a vascular bud penetrates the lunate cartilage mold, an early sign of the osteogenic process that will complete during the first year of life.