The pathophysiology of preeclampsia is complex and discussed elsewhere. In brief, abnormal placentation leads to placental ischemia. The ischemia results in the release of hypoxia-induced factors into circulation that are both angiogenic and anti-angiogenic and decrease circulating nitric oxide and hydrogen sulfide. This leads to subsequent endothelial dysfunction, hypertension, vasodilation, proteinuria, and platelet/red blood cell hemolysis.

Very little is known about cortical visual pathology in pregnancy and preeclampsia. Gilbert, Prassad, and Mallory have published an excellent review of the effect of pregnancy on neuro-ophthalmologic diagnoses, which include pathophysiologic changes of the brain, the eye, and the visual pathway. Still, there are scarce data regarding many of these conditions for preeclampsia.

Visual evoked potentials (VEP) have been used to determine the effect of preeclampsia on cortical vision even without visual symptoms. One study by Brusse et al. (2018) evaluated VEP comparing pregnant patients with chronic hypertension, preeclampsia, or normal blood pressure, most of which did not have visual symptoms. They found that VEP latency and amplitude decreased in normotensive mothers and did not change throughout pregnancy. At the same time, patients with preeclampsia, especially severe preeclampsia, had higher VEP latency and were affected by blood pressure alterations. This change was not appreciated in chronically hypertensive mothers. This small study may indicate cerebral changes that are prominent in patients with preeclampsia even without visual symptoms.

One of the most common causes of cortical visual pathology in preeclampsia is progressive reversible encephalopathy syndrome (PRES). PRES is a radiographic and clinical diagnosis of a constellation of central nervous system findings, including visual disturbances. Vasogenic edema in the posterior cerebral lobes can lead to numerous neurologic syndromes involving visual pathways.

Although the posterior circulation and associated cerebral lobes (occipital and parietal) are involved, the involvement of the frontal lobes, temporal lobes, basal ganglia, brain stem, and cerebellum has also been demonstrated. The predominant theory that explains why hypertensive changes preferentially affect the posterior cerebral pathways is that the anterior cerebral circulation contains significantly more sympathetic innervation than posterior cerebral circulation. Thus, when there are sudden changes to intraarterial fluid pressure, the posterior circulation is slower in its physiologic response. Preeclampsia can lead to sudden changes in blood pressure. This likely is why up to a third of patients with preeclampsia who have neurological symptoms are shown to have PRES.

Additionally, cortical visual loss can be caused by ischemic cortical disease. Patients with uncomplicated pregnancies experience a hypercoagulable state related to dehydration, hemoconcentration, and markedly upregulated clotting factor levels and experience stroke at three times the rate of age-matched non-pregnant women. Although the incidence of stroke is much lower in reproductive-age women, 7.7% of pregnancy-related deaths in the United States are caused by strokes, and worldwide this number ranges from 2.7 to 20% of pregnancies. Preeclampsia and eclampsia subsequently increase the risk of both hemorrhagic and ischemic stroke, increasing the risk between 2- and 5-fold.

Strokes associated with preeclampsia and eclampsia have been shown to occur most frequently after delivery.

Diplopia is an uncommon neuro-ophthalmologic presentation in pregnancy, but one of its principal causes is abducens nerve palsy. The sixth cranial nerve, the abducens nerve, runs a long intracranial course and is the most exposed cranial nerve that runs through the cavernous sinus.

Recent studies have shown intraocular pathology in preeclampsia with and without visual symptoms in addition to specific presenting diseases. In addition, significant data identify chorioretinal changes that can be recognized on imaging and ophthalmoscopy. The retina has a dual circulation and is supplied anteriorly by the intraretinal vasculature, while the posterior retina is fed by choroidal circulation.

Studies of the retina are mostly comparative, and the pathophysiology of disease in patients with preeclampsia is limited to correlation with other diseases and observational studies utilizing clinical imaging equipment. Because of this, there are no studies of histopathological specimens from retinas of patients with preeclampsia. Fundus photography and optical coherence tomography (OCT) imaging of patients with hypertensive retinopathy and those of patients with preeclampsia have shown that both sets of patients develop serious retinal detachments (SRD), subretinal drusenoid deposits (SDDs), and choroidal vascular abnormalities at similar rates and that are clinically indistinguishable.

Histopathologic specimens of patients with malignant hypertension show significant choroidal arteriole fibrinoid necrosis and subsequent bullous SRD.

Choroidal ischemia has been demonstrated in 30 to 100% of patients with preeclampsia. The choroid supplies the highest blood flow per area in the body. Choroidal blood flow abnormalities lead to retinal pigment epithelium (RPE) pathology and subsequent retinal pathology due to loss of RPE function. Choroidal thickness- and implied subsequent dysfunction- is increased as measured by OCT in patients within one week after delivery. This thickness resolves postpartum. These changes are specific to preeclampsia and are not seen in an uncomplicated pregnancy.

This change has been postulated to be related to the increased vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF) production in preeclampsia, and that choroidal vasculature is VEGF-responsive.

In contrast to choroidal measurements, retinal structural and functional pathology has been less well-documented. Peripapillary retinal nerve fiber layer (RNFL) measurements are no different during pregnancy when compared with and without preeclampsia. Still, two months post-delivery, RNFL measurements are significantly lower in patients with preeclampsia. RNFL measurements during pregnancy are likely thickened secondary to fluid retention in pregnancy. The difference in RNFL thickness may only be appreciated after resolving the fluid shifts expected during pregnancy.

Specific pathophysiologic mechanisms are dependent on the cause of pathology. Retinal vasculature changes are not routine in uncomplicated pregnancies, but between 40-100% of pregnancies complicated by preeclampsia show retinal vascular abnormalities, including arterial tortuosity, vessel narrowing, vasospasms, or occlusion. Measurements of retinal artery caliber show that for every 10 mmHg increase in systolic blood pressure, the luminal volume of retinal arteries decreases by 1.9 µm.

Despite earlier evidence of exudates, retinal hemorrhages, vitreous hemorrhages, and cotton-wool spots, recent prospective OCT analysis of patients with preeclampsia shows that these retinal findings are not associated with blood-pressure measurements in these patients. Data in these studies find that fundus changes are related to changes in vascular structure as opposed to those induced by hypertension.

Therapy for preeclampsia may also cause visual disturbances. Magnesium sulfate can cause visual changes due to impaired accommodation, impaired convergence, and ptosis.