Septic arthritis is an uncommon orthopedic emergency that requires a high level of suspicion for diagnosis in a patient with risk factors. There are high morbidity and mortality in elderly patients and those with previous arthritis or intra-articular prosthesis even with adequate treatment. Septic arthritis usually presents as an acute monoarticular joint inflammation which has a broad differential diagnosis. Because of the high morbidity and mortality, the infection is best managed by an interprofessional team.

Arthrocentesis is a crucial component in the diagnostic algorithm. Joint drainage either by daily needle aspiration, arthroscopy or arthrotomy is usually done as soon as possible by orthopedic surgery, but interventional radiology consultation may be required for axial joint drainage. Infectious disease consultation early in treatment ensures adequate antibiotic coverage and duration of therapy based on culture results. The pharmacist should monitor culture results and ensure that the patient is on organism sensitive antibiotics.

Patients with septic arthritis are usually managed initially in the inpatient hospital setting and require an interprofessional team of caregivers including the primary care provider, nurses, wound care team, physical and occupational therapist. Other pre-existing comorbid conditions are managed by the primary care provider who coordinates the patients care across various disciplines. A wound care nurse must follow these patients until complete healing has occurred. At the time of discharge, some patients can return home while others with increased debility may need ongoing physical therapy at either an acute or subacute rehabilitation facility. The social workers in the hospital help to ensure a smooth transition from inpatient to outpatient care. It is essential that patients complete the required antibiotic therapy and follow up. Members of the team should communicate with others to ensure that the patient is receiving the optimal standard of care.