The pathogenesis of coronary artery vasospasm (CAVS) remains to be multifactorial. Originally the autonomic nervous system was thought to play an important role in the development of CAVS. However, later endothelial dysfunction, oxidative stress load, magnesium deficiency, and respiratory alkalosis were also elucidated to contribute to the pathogenesis. Most recently, genetic mutations that may play a role have also been discovered. Nevertheless, the coronary vessel's smooth muscle hypertonicity and reactivity play a pivotal role in the development of CAVS.

- Autonomic Nervous System: An increase in both the parasympathetic and sympathetic activity had been found to play a role in inducing CAVS. CAVS usually occurs during the night when the parasympathetic nervous system is activated. Also, acetylcholine has been shown to induce CAVS, which supports the notion that parasympathetic activity can induce CAVS. However, studies have shown CAVS at night frequently occurs during rapid eye movement when there is a reduction in vagal tone with a surge in adrenergic activity. Furthermore, clinical studies have also shown that elevated catecholamine levels can also induce CAVS. Thus, the autonomic nervous system relationship with CAVS is complex and something that is still being investigated.

- Endothelial Dysfunction: Dysfunctional endothelial nitric oxide (NO) synthase and the decreased release of NO have been associated with the development of CAVS. Acetylcholine, serotonin, and histamine induce endothelium-dependent vasodilatation by releasing NO from normal endothelium but they can provoke CAVS in the presence of endothelial dysfunction. However, endothelial dysfunction is not always seen in patients with CAVS. Thus, other factors are also likely associated with manifesting CAVS.

- Oxidative Stress: Oxidative stress is known to have a detrimental effect on vascular wall health. The reactive oxygen species (ROS) cause inflammation, endothelial damage, and vasoconstriction. Thus increased levels of ROS lead to vascular dysfunction and remodeling. Smoking has been shown to reduce acetylcholine-endothelium-dependent relaxation, which means NO can be destroyed by ROS. However, the role of this relationship in the development of CAVS is complex as not all patients with CAVS have endothelial NO deficiency or dysfunction.

- Smooth Muscle Cell Hypercontractility:****Shimokawa et al. discovered that enhanced myosin light-chain phosphorylation plays a central role in CAVS.  They further elucidated hydroxyfasudil-sensitive Rho-kinase-mediated pathway may be responsible for the enhanced myosin light-chain phosphorylation. Thus, a Rho-kinase inhibitor can potentially inhibit vasospastic activity. Further studies have shown other pathways, which may impact CAVS such as in K mutant or SUR2 K knockout mice. Loss of function of K channels has been shown to cause smooth muscle cell hyper contraction in the absence of atherosclerotic disease. These studies have opened pathways to understand the implication of smooth muscle hypercontractility in developing CAVS in humans.

- Genetics:****No direct genetic link has been uncovered to date linking CAVS to genetic polymorphism. However, mutations or polymorphisms in the endothelial NO synthase gene and paraoxonase I gene have been seen in patients with CAVS. Other genetic mutations in adrenergic and serotoninergic receptors, angiotensin-converting enzyme, and inflammatory cytokines have also been described. However, the direct genetic link has yet to be discovered in all CAVS cases.