Different treatment options are available based on the underlying tumor pathology, immunohistopathology. No prospective comparative trials yet exist that might provide evidence for prolonging survival by surgery or chemotherapy, or radiation. There are no randomized, controlled trials yielding evidence that would help decide whether to treat pulmonary metastases with surgery, radiotherapy, or chemotherapy (or some combination of these).

**Chemotherapy**

Chemotherapy is usually not curative for pulmonary metastases, except few tumors. e.g., first-line cisplatin-based therapy for germ cell testicular tumors produces a high long-term cure rate.

It plays a significant role in the treatment of osteogenic sarcomas. Neoadjuvant administration of chemotherapeutic agents can reduce tumor burden and help to control systemic metastases. Neoadjuvant agents, e.g., methotrexate, cisplatin, doxorubicin, and ifosfamide, decrease the preoperative tumor burden. About one-third of all lung nodules disappeared after preoperative chemotherapy. Patients also received treatment with postoperative adjuvant chemotherapy. 2-year disease-free survival after chemotherapy and surgery was 56%

Similar results occurred in patients treated with chemo and surgery in osteosarcoma with pulmonary metastasis compared to chemotherapy alone. In another study, patients received treatment with neoadjuvant ifosfamide, surgical resection. After surgery, the postoperative adjuvant was with high-dose methotrexate, ifosfamide, doxorubicin, and cisplatin. Patients with fewer than eight metastatic deposits confined to the lung had a 5-year disease-free survival rate of 66.7%.

Cure rates of non-metastatic high-grade osteosarcomas have increased to 60 to 70% by the addition of adjuvant and neoadjuvant multiagent chemotherapy. In the treatment of metastatic osteosarcoma patients, surgical removal of all metastatic foci is essential. In re-recurrences, repeated thoracotomies and metastasectomies for resectable lesions are necessary. Some studies found a positive survival effect of second-line chemotherapy. Radiotherapy may be a consideration in patients without second complete remission.

Chemotherapy failure is usually due to drug resistance and toxicity. However, by isolated lung perfusion, one can deliver high-dose chemotherapy to the lung metastasis only, thereby avoiding systemic toxicity. Studies in the rodent model found that high-dose melphalan delivered via isolated lung perfusion eradicated metastatic pulmonary sarcoma with acceptable toxicity.

**Immunotherapy**

Tumors such as malignant cutaneous melanoma and renal cell carcinoma are highly immunogenic and known to respond to immunotherapy.

A multivalent vaccine against melanoma is now available. Research has demonstrated that surgical resection and postoperative vaccine immunotherapy used for melanoma had significantly better survival than did patients treated non-surgically. Vaccine therapy offers the advantages of long-term efficacy and low toxicity when compared with traditional cytotoxic chemotherapy. Underway is a phase III multicenter trial of the vaccine as adjuvant therapy following surgical resection of metastatic melanoma.

Naturally occurring cytokines such as tumor necrosis factor (TNF)-alpha, interferon (IFN)-γ, and interleukin (IL)-2 can produce excellent response rates to a variety of solid organ tumors but have high systemic toxicity that requires reducing the dose or stopping treatment.

The National Cancer Institute (NCI) performed a feasibility study of cytokine therapy delivered by isolated lung perfusion with moderate hyperthermia. Fifteen patients with nonresectable pulmonary metastases from various malignancies had treatment with single-lung isolation perfusion of TNF-alpha and IFN-gamma, a synergistic combination. Only 20% of patients had a temporary decrease in perfused nodules.

Inhaled IL-2 on pulmonary metastases from renal cell carcinoma with or without low-dose systemic IL-2 resulted in 70% cases, regression or stabilization of disease, with a median response duration of 8 months. Only moderate dose-dependent local toxicity, such as a dose-dependent cough, but there were no reports of significant systemic toxicity.

**Radiation**

Radiation is thought to increase the expression of major histocompatibility complex (MHC) class I and II molecules on tumor cells and tumor antigenic markers, enabling the immune system to increase antitumor activity and T-cell-mediated tumor immunity.

Radiation therapy does not significantly increase survival rates in patients with pulmonary metastasis, except in patients with lymphomas. Unfortunately, the dose required for effective tumor control exceeds the tolerance of normal lung tissue. The present convention is to deliver a fraction of 200 to 300 cGy daily. The current challenge is increasing the radiosensitivity of pulmonary metastases relative to the surrounding normal lung tissue to avoid damage to healthy lung tissue while treating pulmonary metastasis with adequate radiation dose. Intratumoral placement of radioisotopes or brachytherapy has shown some benefits in patients unsuitable for other therapeutic approaches.

The role of radiation is mostly palliative in lung metastasis. It can be beneficial to control pain from metastases that invade the chest wall or mediastinum. When combined with other therapies, external beam radiation to the lung can improve outcomes and decrease relapses. About a third of patients with metastatic Ewing sarcoma present with lung and/or pleural nodules as their only metastatic site. The addition of whole-lung radiation of 1400 to 1800 cGy to conventional chemotherapy in patients with pulmonary metastases from Ewing's sarcoma resulted in more prolonged survival and a reduced rate of pulmonary recurrence when compared with patients receiving only chemotherapy.

A murine renal cell carcinoma model was used to demonstrate a synergistic relationship between radiation therapy and immunotherapeutic agents.

Patients with papillary thyroid carcinoma with pulmonary metastases have a poor prognosis. Radioactive iodine is the only non-surgical therapy effective in reducing metastatic tumor burden and improving survival.