Bacteriostatic antimicrobials, a term generally used to describe antimicrobials that function via inhibition of bacterial protein synthesis, have many indications in medicine according to their mechanisms of action. Due to merely inhibiting further growth of bacteria, bacteriostatic antimicrobials require a functioning host immune system to fully clear overgrowth. Due to this effect, however, observational studies have shown that there is a lower incidence of toxic shock and more tolerable side effect profiles.

The indications for tetracycline antimicrobials are extremely broad. As one of the oldest classes of antimicrobials, tetracyclines have demonstrated good activity against gram-positive, gram-negative, atypical, and spirochete bacteria.

The indications for macrolide antimicrobials are dependent upon the specific macrolide antimicrobial in question. There are three primary antimicrobials within this class: erythromycin, clarithromycin, and azithromycin.Neisseria spp. Clarithromycin has a similar spectrum of activity to erythromycin, with additional activity against some staph and strep species.

Clindamycin is an antimicrobial that has gained many indications. In a 1996 review of the literature concerning the drug, indications for it include the following uses: skin and soft tissue infections (including diabetic foot), osteomyelitis and septic arthritis, recurrent streptococcal pharyngitis, anaerobic lung infections, and as an alternative for intra-abdominal and pelvic infections.

Trimethoprim/sulfamethoxazole previously saw use as the primary outpatient antimicrobial for a wide variety of infections. However, due to the emergence of widespread resistance, it has lost its utility for empiric coverage of infection in the outpatient setting.

Additionally, trimethoprim/sulfamethoxazole is one of the agents of choice to prevent HIV/AIDS-associated infections, specifically pneumocystis pneumonia (P. jiroveci). Its recommendations include its use as a prophylactic agent in patients with CD4 count less than 200 cells/microliter.

Linezolid, first gaining widespread use in the 2000s, has broad activity against most gram-positive organisms.