Patients with GSD I may develop bleeding disorders from impaired platelet function. There is also an increased risk of osteoporosis and fractures from vitamin D deficiency. Therefore, routine monitoring of vitamin D levels along with dual-energy x-ray absorptiometry (DXA) scans is recommended to monitor the bone density and the need for vitamin D supplementation.

Renal failure may occur due to proximal renal tubular or renal glomerular dysfunction. Erythropoietin (EPO) production is decreased with worsening of renal function especially when the glomerular filtration rate (GFR) drops below 50 ml/min/1.73 m. Thus patients then develop anemia of chronic kidney disease that may be further exacerbated by iron deficiency, chronic metabolic acidosis or bleeding diathesis. Anemic patients are treated with EPO therapy after screening them for iron deficiency and replenishing their iron stores. Patients with uncontrolled blood lactate, serum lipids, and uric acid levels are also at an increased risk for nephropathy that may need renal transplantation. Therefore, an annual ultrasound examination of the kidneys is recommended after the first decade of life.

Severe hyperlipidemia and hypertriglyceridemia (greater than 1000 mg/dL) increase the risk of xanthoma formation, acute pancreatitis, and early atherosclerosis.

Other complications include menorrhagia and polycystic ovaries in females, and gout from hyperuricemia.

Additionally, patients with GSD Ib have an increased risk of Crohn’s disease-like enterocolitis and hypothyroidism.