# Introduction

The slightest alteration in water homeostasis can have a profound effect on cell size and function. Different cells depending on their role and space restriction, have varying capacity to accommodate such osmolar stress.

# Cellular Level

Osmoreceptors classify into central and peripheral osmoreceptors based on their location. The central receptors are primarily present in the anterior hypothalamus, including two of the circumventricular organs named the organum vasculosum laminae terminalis (OVLT) and the subfornical organ (SFO).

These central receptor cells have an osmotically activated ion channel called transient receptor potential vanilloid channel (TRPV1) as well as another receptor sensitive to angiotensin II called angiotensin receptor type 1(AT1R).

One of the central receptor organs, SFO, has two distinct types of neurons with opposing actions. A glutamatergic population (SFO-GLUT) that promotes thirst and sodium intake, and a GABAergic population (SFO-GABA) that inhibits thirst.

OVLT, the other central receptor, is close to the median preoptic nucleus (MnPO). Hence its exact cellular diversity is not clear at the moment.

# Development

**Organum Vasculosum Laminae Terminalis (OVLT)**

The OVLT neurons exist within a thin layer of neuroepithelium towards the anterior wall of the third ventricle called lamina terminalis, which is embryologically positioned medial to the preoptic aspect of the anterior neural plate. The proper development of OVLT is managed by various signaling centers surrounding the lamina terminalis. When the neural tube closes during the early embryonic life, a commissural plate forms by the folding anterior neural border. This folding places the lamina terminalis between the fibroblast growth factor (FGFs) secreting signaling center and sonic hedgehog (SHH) secreting the prechordal plate. To keep this domain of FGF and SHH signaling within the limits of normal development, a cross-regulation occurs with the bone morphogenic proteins (BMP) and wingless-related integration sites (WNT) from the dorsal midline. In addition to these domains, Puelles and Rubenstein discovered a central strip of neuroepithelium connecting the anterior ends of the roof and floor plates, called the acroterminal hypothalamic domain (ATD) in 2015. One may note that the OVLT, neurohypophysis, and the median eminence originates within this ATD.

**Subfornical Organ (SFO)**

In a fully developed adult brain, the SFO is in the dorsoanterior end of the third ventricle in the roof plate. Based on this location, the precursor cells to the SFO are expected in the roof plate near to the eminentia thalami. With the border between the diencephalon and the telencephalon on one side and the mid-diencephalic zona limitans intrathalamica on the other, a subdivision of the neural tube here differentiates to form the eminentia as mentioned above limitans. It also bears mention that the paired box/homeobox gene Pax2, a marker of the eminentia thalami, is also expressed in the SFO.

# Function

Osmoreceptors maintain the osmolality of the blood through a coordinated set of neuroendocrine, autonomic, and behavioral feedbacks. These responses aid cellular function by maintaining the osmolar gradient of various ions. Another crucial role of the osmoreceptors is to aid in perfusion, as the deranged osmolality can lead to a decrease in the blood volume, thereby increasing the work required to maintain adequate circulation. The receptors initially act on the renal system, which modulates the rate of water and salt excretion.

# Mechanism

The two sensory circumventricular organs (CVO), SFO, and OVLT are in direct contact with the systemic circulation; this is because, unlike other neural parenchymal structures, these organs lack a normal blood-brain barrier.

- When the serum osmolality increases above the threshold limit, the TRPV1 and the TRPV4 receptors in the central and peripheral osmoreceptors respectively are stimulated, either by dehydration or by negative suction pressure.

- The variation in blood volume either stimulates the sympathetic nervous system or the release of renin from the kidney. As a result, the angiotensin II levels increase in blood. This angiotensin II activates the AT1R receptor in the SFO and OVLT, thereby regulating AVP release, thirst, and sodium intake.

Arginine vasopressin

Arginine vasopressin (AVP) is synthesized in the magnocellular cell bodies of the paraventricular nuclei and the supraoptic nuclei of the posterior hypothalamus. It then travels to the posterior pituitary along the supraoptic hypophyseal tract.

Thirst

When the SFO and OVLT neurons sense an increase in the serum osmolality above the permissible levels, they relay this signal to the insula and cingulate cortices via the paraventricular and mediodorsal thalamic nuclei. The cortex perceives these stimuli as thirst, a primal, and homeostatic inner feeling essential for survival - this further invokes emotional and behavioral responses to attain satiation or the need to quench thirst. As a result, the individual is conscious of the demand for water. Upon drinking, this emotion is satisfied by the effect of water on the tongue and the buccal mucosa, as well as the cognitive perception of fluid intake. The peripheral osmoreceptors via TRPV4 channels are also known to play a role in quenching thirst.

# Pathophysiology

Osmoreceptors are in potential danger of being damaged during surgery of the neighboring structures or from any cause of ischemia due to vascular pathologies. Also, exposure to certain toxic chemicals can reach these centers due to the lack of a blood-brain barrier.

# Clinical Significance

**Physiological Variation**

Age can have an impact on the basal serum osmolality as children tend to be more susceptible to hypo-osmolality due to their limited intracranial volume, but on the contrary, atrophy of brain neurons in elderly puts them at a lower risk of complications from acute hyponatremia. Another non-modifiable determinant is sex, as an increased fatality caused by hyponatremia occurs in postpartum and postmenopausal women.

**Adipsic Diabetes Insipidus**

Arteries arising from the anterior communicating artery is the source of blood supply for the osmoreceptors in the hypothalamus.

**Liver Transplant**

Some studies show that patients who have had liver transplants in the past have a significant elevation in plasma osmolality; this is attributable to the denervation of the transplanted liver, which in turn affects the functioning of the peripheral osmoreceptors present in the portal veins.