Even though IgA nephropathy is a benign disorder, it does worsen in about 20% of patients leading to end-stage renal failure, which may require dialysis or renal transplant. Today, the goal is to prevent the condition from worsening because end-stage renal disease is not only associated with its serious complications but leads to a significant increase in healthcare costs.

Thus, an interprofessional team approach is being used to manage and monitor IgA nephropathy from progressing. Besides the nephrologist and pediatrician, the nurse and pharmacist play a critical role in patient education. The patient must be educated about the importance of blood pressure control and compliance with antihypertensive medications. Patients must be taught how to monitor their blood pressure regularly and see a clinician if it is uncontrolled. At all times, the nephrologist must be informed of any decision making so that the goals of the treatment remain unchanged.

A dietitian should educate the patient on a low salt diet and eating foods that are low in fat and carbohydrates. The patient should be encouraged to join a rehab program and maintain a healthy body weight. Finally, smoking cessation is vital to prevent the progression of the disease. Those patients managed with corticosteroids must be monitored for side effects. Only through such an approach can be morbidity of the disease be lowered.

**Outcomes**

In the majority of patients, Berger disease has a benign course, but about 10-20% will develop end-stage renal failure within ten years. Predictors of poor outcomes include hypertension, ongoing proteinuria, high serum creatinine, and CD4 staining on biopsy.