Treating trauma patients can challenge healthcare professionals in many ways. One challenge is organizing the interprofessional healthcare team members to work together to address the medical issue. When dispatching a rescue team to the scene of a traumatic injury, it initiates a chain of care is, and the process of treating the patient begins. When an emergency medicine physician receives the call from rescue, they do not act in isolation; many individuals need to be notified for the department to receive the patient properly. Examples of the personnel that may be involved in ensuring the survival and successful treatment of a trauma patient are as follows:

Trauma surgeons require involvement to provide a surgical evaluation and operative intervention, if necessary. The radiology technician must be notified to stand by for immediate imaging when prompted. A respiratory technician must be available if ventilatory support is required and, depending on the facility, the pharmacy team should be available to provide clinical drug assistance. Blood bank personnel are required if transfusion is indicated. The largest group to get involved in most facilities, however, is the nursing staff. Many nurses are typically involved in a trauma case. They perform tasks such as documenting the assessment and treatment course, obtaining vascular access, collecting vital signs, administering medications, and assisting with wound care. The nurses should have an open line of communication to report abnormalities and concerns to the team leader. The nurses should also assist in the coordinated education of the family. Although it may seem as if a trauma bay is operating in chaos, each member of the healthcare team is focused on performing their individual tasks. It is the responsibility of the team leader to maintain order by directing the team and monitoring everyone's performance to ensure the delivery of optimal care.

Many things can lead to unwanted patient outcomes. Poor communication and weak collaborative efforts are two areas that can negatively impact a patient. As part of a team, each member should understand their colleagues’ capabilities and role in the care of a trauma patient; this will help establish clear responsibilities for everyone to follow and promote inter-professional respect. Using recursive approach data analysis with information gathered from narrative surveys and ethnography data, Dr. Victoria Brazil has found that a hospital can see growth in the collaborative culture of its interprofessional trauma team by implementing simulation training. According to Dr. Brazil, this will lead to more timely and accurate communication, which can have a positive, tangible impact on patient care.

The outcomes of a trauma case depend on many factors. However, the one thing that the interprofessional healthcare team can control is their ability to work as a cohesive unit. Proper training, prompt organization, and effective communication can help eliminate human error and vastly improve patient outcomes. [Level 5]