Neuroleptic agents, otherwise known as 'antipsychotics,' are a broad category of medications initially developed to treat psychosis arising from a large spectrum of psychiatric and organic causes. Over the last two decades, the use of neuroleptics in the treatment of non-psychiatric disorders has increased, and these medications are now used in the treatment of a variety of conditions, including nausea and vomiting, vertigo, headaches, Tourette syndrome, and post-herpetic neuralgia. Neuroleptic medications can be broadly divided into two categories based largely on their pharmacologic properties, and, therefore, their side effect profiles: first-generation antipsychotics (FGAs), also known as 'typical' antipsychotics, and the more recently developed second-generation antipsychotics (SGAs), termed 'atypical antipsychotics.' The SGAs have largely supplanted their first-generation counterparts in the treatment of primary psychosis, but the use of FGAs is still common in the treatment of non-psychiatric conditions. Unfortunately, just as the spectrum of the clinical use of neuroleptics is broad, so too are their adverse effects, which range from merely inconvenient to eminently life-threatening. Thus, as the use of these agents becomes more widespread, knowledge of the toxicity and adverse effects associated with their use is becoming paramount. Understanding these effects will aid medical providers not only in preventing and treating these toxicities but also in providing anticipatory guidance and patient counseling. The following is a brief review of the most common and life-threatening toxicities associated with the use of neuroleptic agents. Of note, each neuroleptic medication has a different side effect profile and unique toxicities; this article is intended to provide an overview of the toxicities of neuroleptic agents as a therapeutic class, rather than a comprehensive review of the toxicities of each antipsychotic medication.