The goal of medical and surgical therapy in brucellosis is to control the disease as quickly as possible in order to prevent complications and relapses.

**Antibiotics**

Doxycycline is used in conjunction with either streptomycin, rifampin, gentamicin, or sulfamethoxazole/trimethoprim to treat brucellosis; because the bacteria reside within cells, several weeks of treatment are needed. Treating with a single antibiotic should be avoided, as there is a high rate of relapse when a combination regimen is not used. For uncomplicated infections, doxycycline (100 mg PO twice daily for 6 weeks) may be the most appropriate monotherapy; however, relapse rates with such monotherapy approach 40%; hence rifampin (600-900 mg/day) is usually added. In children, a regimen of trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole and rifampin for 4 to 6 weeks may be used since children should not be treated with doxycycline. Pregnant women may be treated with rifampin during pregnancy, with trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole added postpartum. In spondylitis or sacroiliitis, doxycycline and rifampin combined with an aminoglycoside (gentamicin) for the initial 2-3 weeks, followed by 6 weeks of rifampin and doxycycline, is usually recommended.

**Additional Drugs**

Symptomatic treatment with antipyretics and analgesics must also be administered. Corticosteroids may be used in patients with brucella meningitis, but the evidence is lacking.

**Surgical Intervention**

The main roles of surgery in patients with brucellosis lie in the treatment of endocarditis and in the drainage of pyogenic joint effusions or paraspinal abscesses.