Normal saline is a cornerstone of intravenous solutions commonly used in the clinical setting. It is a crystalloid fluid administered via an intravenous solution. Its indications include both adult and pediatric populations as sources of hydration and electrolyte disturbances. It can come in various concentrations; the two specifically addressed are 0.9% and 0.45%.

The following are primary indications for the use of normal saline infusion that have been approved by the FDA:

- Extracellular fluid replacement (e.g., dehydration, hypovolemia, hemorrhage, sepsis)

- Treatment of metabolic alkalosis in the presence of fluid loss

- Mild sodium depletion

Additionally, it has a use as a priming solution for various procedures (e.g., hemodialysis procedures) and to initiate and terminate blood transfusions. Indications for sodium chloride infusions also include pharmaceutic aids and diluents for the infusion of compatible drug additives.

**0.9% Sodium Chloride (Normal Saline)**

An isotonic concentration of sodium chloride is best suited for the parenteral replacement of chloride losses that exceed or equal the sodium loss. Within each 100 mL of 0.9% sodium chloride Injection USP, there is 15.4 mEq of sodium ions and 15.4 mEq of chloride ions. Additionally, the osmolarity is 308 mOsmol/liter, and it has a pH range of 4.5 to 7.

**0.45% Sodium Chloride**

A hypotonic concentration of sodium chloride. Hypotonic concentrations of sodium chloride (0.45%) are best for parenteral maintenance fluids rather than aggressive intravascular volume repletion. Within each 100 mL of 0.45% sodium chloride Injection USP, there is 7.7 mEq of sodium ions and 7.7 mEq of chloride ions. The osmolarity is 154 mOsmol/liter and a pH range similar to the 0.9% concentration.