There are a wide variety of treatment options for notalgia paresthetica. Oral and topical medications, botulinum toxin A, transcutaneous electrical nerve stimulation (TENS), and physical therapy have been used with varying levels of success. Before treatment, be sure to reassure the patient and explain that their condition is benign. Often, this provides enough relief, and patients with mild or intermittent pruritus may require no treatment.

The most common method of treatment for notalgia paresthetica is an oral agent. Oral medications that target gamma-amino-butyric acid (GABA), serotonin, histamine, and inflammation have been investigated. Gabapentin, which targets GABA, has been reported to be the most efficacious medication in reducing pruritus. Patients with notalgia paresthetica treated with gabapentin may report mild gastric discomfort, but this usually does not result in discontinuation of the medication.

Topical medications include capsaicin, steroids, anesthetics, amitriptyline/ketamine, and doxepin.

Like all other treatments in notalgia paresthetica, botulinum toxin A has varying reports of success. Early reports suggest botulinum toxin was a viable option with significant improvement in the patient's reported itch. Later studies attempted to replicate these findings, but little to no improvement was reported.

Treatment with TENS was reported to be successful in a Turkish study of notalgia paresthetica.

Physical therapy, specifically targeted at strengthening upper paraspinal muscles and stretching pectoral muscles, has been reported effective in a few cases. This approach may be especially useful in patients with atrophied paraspinal muscles or a shoulder with a reduced range of motion. These strengthening and stretching exercises decrease the angle at which cutaneous nerves pierce the paraspinal muscles resulting in a reduction of irritation and pruritus.

Referral to a specialist for further workup should be reserved for patients with recalcitrant pruritus or those with related musculoskeletal or neurological symptoms in addition to notalgia paresthetica.