Treatment for acute ethanol toxicity is mostly supportive. The first priority, as always, is airway protection. The main life-threatening complication of alcohol intoxication is respiratory depression. Although most patients who present for alcohol intoxication receive intravenous fluids, there is no solid evidence to support this. Alcohol does act as a diuretic; thus, most patients who receive intravenous fluids are in an attempt to treat dehydration. As mentioned above, checking a point of care glucose is important, as many patients with alcohol use disorder will have depleted glycogen stores, and treating hypoglycemia is important, especially before replenishing vitamins such as thiamine. Few studies have shown vitamin deficiencies in intoxicated patients; thus, the routine use of IV multivitamins should be considered on a case to case basis. In contrast, routine use of thiamine is recommended for patients with alcohol use disorder, especially in the setting of altered mental status. Detecting occult thiamine deficiency and Wernicke encephalopathy is difficult, and this condition has a high mortality. Thus, the cost/benefit analysis falls in favor of administering thiamine. Patients with alcohol use disorder may not benefit from IV fluids, and consideration must be made for alcoholic cardiomyopathy in this patient population before administering fluids. Some patients may become agitated or violent. In these situations, sedative substances may be required, including droperidol or haloperidol, keeping in mind the potential interaction between the drug and alcohol. Depending on the severity of the intoxication and complications such as Wernicke encephalopathy, alcoholic hepatitis, or dysrhythmias, patients may have to be admitted to the hospital for further treatment.