Blood donation contraindications center around donor ineligibility. These criteria are updated on the recommendation of the American Association of Blood Banks (AABB) and can be found online at any time for the most current criteria. The AABB and Food and Drug Administration (FDA) should be consulted for any questions or concerns regarding current blood donation regulation and practices.

According to AABB at the time this review, to be eligible to donate blood potential donors must be at least 16 years of age (though this age may be older in some states), weigh at least 110 pounds (50 kg) and not be currently ill, have unregulated hypertension, diabetes, or be anemic. The donor's vital signs should also be monitored. The minimum allowable hemoglobin level for blood donation in the United States set forth by the United States Food and Drug Administration for men and women is 13.0 and 12.5 g/dL, respectively.

Low hemoglobin is the number one cause for donor deferral, accounting for deferral in as many as one out of 10 attempted blood donations. The causes of low hemoglobin may vary, but one of the most common is low dietary iron consumption. A large amount of iron is lost each time a person donates blood. According to one source, 56 days is insufficient time to re-build iron stores lost from blood donation in the majority of the population, and this may contribute to low-hemoglobin deferrals in repeat blood donors. Therefore, repeat donors may benefit from iron supplementation to rebuild iron stores more quickly. The amount of iron-depleted by a single donation also varies from person to person and between males and females, and the ability to replenish iron stores also differs between individuals. Infrequent donors, especially men and post-menopausal women, who are deferred for low hemoglobin may have an underlying medical condition causing the low iron and should follow up with their primary care manager for evaluation.

Contraindications to donating blood according to the AABB include:

- "Anyone who has ever used needles to take drugs or any substance not prescribed by a clinician

- Men who have had sexual contact with other men in the past 12 months

- Anyone with a positive test for HIV

- Men and women who have ever engaged in sex for money

- Anyone who has had hepatitis since their eleventh birthday

- Anyone who has had babesiosis or Chagas disease

- Anyone who has taken Tegison for psoriasis

- Anyone who has risk factors for variant Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease (CJD) or who has a blood relative with the disease

- Anyone who has risk factors for CJD, including:

- Anyone who spent three months or more in the United Kingdom from 1980 through 1996
- Anyone who received a blood transfusion in the United Kingdom or France from 1980 to the present
- Anyone who has spent five years in Europe from 1980 to the present."

Additionally, the AABB lists the current infectious disease testing performed on donated blood as follows:

- "Hepatitis B surface antigen (HBsAg)

- Hepatitis B core antibody (anti-HBc)

- Hepatitis C virus antibody (anti-HCV)

- HIV-1 and HIV-2 antibody (anti-HIV-1 and anti-HIV-2)

- HTLV-I and HTLV-II antibody (anti-HTLV-I and anti-HTLV-II)

- Serologic test for syphilis

- Nucleic acid amplification testing (NAT) for HIV-1 ribonucleic acid (RNA), HCV RNA and WNV RNA

- Nucleic acid amplification testing (NAT) for HBV deoxyribonucleic acid

- Antibody test for Trypanosoma cruzi, the agent of Chagas disease"

Any donors with the above infections are deferred from blood donation. There are, however, infectious agents which may be at too low a titer to detect, may produce a false negative screening test, or for which there is not an approved test. There are also many infectious agents which are simply not tested for due to factors such as cost, availability, prevalence, etc. Unfortunately, the list of at-risk pathogens tested for in the blood supply only grows with time, adding cost to each donation event and limiting the number of eligible donors.

One of the relatively recent developments in blood donation and the practice of blood banking/transfusion is pathogen reduction or inactivation. Pathogen reduction refers to the proactive practice of eliminating potential pathogens from donated blood. Currently, the most widely used method for limiting transfusion-associated infections is testing blood for certain pathogens and removing the units (or deferring the donors) which are positive for that specific agent (a reactive process). Pathogen reduction modalities, however, target all nucleic acids in a proactive process as a means to prevent transfusion-transmitted infections. Pathogen inactivation has not been yet been adopted universally in blood banks, but in those institutions where it has been adopted, the same donor eligibility and deferral criteria regarding infection history are still enforced. Pathogen reduction, therefore, is meant to augment the prevention of transfusion-associated infection and is not used as a replacement for the testing and screening processes. There is hope that, eventually, testing and deferrals may be greatly decreased if pathogen reduction is proven to be safe and effective at removing pathogens. Pathogen inactivation holds great promise for creating a safer blood supply and even increasing the volume of the blood supply and donor pool, although concerns remain and further data and trials are required regarding cost, safety, and efficacy.

In addition, certain immunizations and medications have temporary deferral periods. The American Red Cross maintains an updated list of medications, other medical conditions and immunizations, and the necessary deferral period.