Zafirlukast (empirical formula C31H33N3O6S) is a leukotriene receptor antagonist, a highly selective and competitive blocker of the cysteinyl leukotriene-1 receptor (CYSLTR1). Zafirlukast competes with proinflammatory cysteinyl-leukotrienes C4, D4, and E4 (LTC, LTD, and LTE) at CYSLTR1 to prevent leukotriene-induced inflammation. Leukotriene binding to CYSLTR1 causes inflammatory reactions associated with the underlying disease process of asthma. Therefore, limiting proinflammatory leukotrienes through competitive inhibition leads to decreased neutrophil and eosinophil migration, neutrophil and monocyte aggregation, leukocyte adhesion, airway edema, inflammation, and bronchial aggregation constriction.

In addition, zafirlukast is a selective receptor antagonist of leukotriene D4 and E4 (LTD4 and LTE4), components of the slow-reacting substance of anaphylaxis (SRSA). Zafirlukast inhibits bronchoconstriction caused by several kinds of inhalational challenges. Pretreatment with zafirlukast inhibited the bronchoconstriction caused by cold air and sulfur dioxide in patients with asthma. Pretreatment also attenuated the early- and late-phase reaction caused by inhaling antigens such as cat dander, ragweed, grass, and other antigens in patients with asthma. Zafirlukast also reduced the increase in bronchial hyperresponsiveness to inhaled histamine that followed inhaled allergen challenge.

**Pharmacokinetics**

**Absorption:**Zafirlukast is rapidly absorbed after oral administration. Peak plasma concentration (Cmax) is approximately 3 hours after oral administration. When taking the medication with food, the bioavailability is reduced by 40%. Zafirlukast takes 2 to 6 weeks for optimal effect and has a half-life of 10 (8 to 16) hours.

**Distribution:**Zafirlukast has a high plasma protein binding (99%). It binds predominantly to albumin. The volume of distribution of 70L suggests moderate tissue distribution. In preclinical studies, zafirlukast did not significantly cross the blood-brain barrier.

**Metabolism:**Zafirlukast is metabolized primarily by hepatic CYP2C9.

**Excretion:**The oral clearance of zafirlukast is approximately 20 L/h. Preclinical studies suggest that the biliary route is the major route of excretion. Urinary excretion accounts for approximately 10% of the dose following oral administration, and the remainder is excreted in feces.