**Squamous Cell Carcinoma**: Squamous cell carcinoma is the most common histologic subtype of vulvar cancer. The precursor lesion for SCC is vulvar intraepithelial neoplasia (VIN) and can be subdivided into two categories: HPV dependent usual type (uVIN) and HPV independent differentiated type (dVIN).

Image 1. Vulvar cancer presenting as vulvar ulcer, gross image. (DermNET NZ. https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/3.0/nz/legalcode) Image 2. Histopathology Image of Vulvar Squamous Cell Carcinoma Low Power Field, H&E stain, showing keratinized pearls. Image 3. Histopathology Slide of Vulvar Squamous Cell Carcinoma, High Power Field 40X, H&E stain, showing keratin pearls and high Nuclear to Cytoplasmic Ratio. Image 4. Histopathology Slide of Vulvar Squamous Cell Carcinoma with P16 stain, showing positivity for Human Papilloma virus(HPV 16). (Images 2, 3, 4 contributed by Wendy L. Ward, M.D. Pathologist at Northwestern Hospital McHenry IL)

**uVIN:**(LSIL, HSIL). This is the HPV-dependent usual type that typically affects younger patients and is less likely to progress to SCC than dVIN.

**dVIN:**HPV-independent differentiated type typically progresses to keratinized SCC. This subtype arises mostly from chronic dermatoses, with lichen sclerosis and lichen planus being the most common.

Vulvar SCC can be categorized into three histological subtypes: warty, basaloid, and keratinizing. A warty and basaloid subtype is found mostly in patients ages 40 to 44 years and is associated with HPV. The keratinizing subtype is associated with older patients and is HPV-independent. This type accounts for 60-80% of all SCC subtypes. It may occur anywhere on the vulva but is most commonly found on the labia majora and perineum.

**Basal Cell Carcinoma:**Basal cell carcinoma is a relatively rare vulvar malignancy. Approximately 2% of BCC affect the vulva, and vulvar BCC is diagnosed in only 8% of all vulvar malignancies.

**Description:**Basal and Squamous Cell Carcinoma, Gross Image.**Attributed To:**Contributed by DermNET NZ. https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/3.0/nz/legalcode

**Paget Disease:**Extramammary Paget's disease is a rare skin malignancy affecting the apocrine gland-bearing skin, with 65% of all cases occurring in the vulva

Image 5. Paget s Disease of the skin of the Vulva Image 6. Pathology, Histopathology, extra mammary Paget s disease, obstetrics, gynecology, vulvar cancer. (Images 5, 6 DermNET NZ. https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/3.0/nz/legalcode)

**Vulvar Melanoma:**Three types of vulvar melanomas exist. The mucosal lentigous subtype is most common, followed by the nodular and superficial spreading subtypes. This differs from cutaneous melanoma, where the superficial spreading subtype is most common.

**Verrucous Carcinoma:**The etiology of vulvar verrucous carcinoma (VC) is unknown, and no precursor lesions to this disease have been described. However, an association with lichen simplex chronicus and lichen sclerosus have been reported.

**Sarcoma:**Although rare, cancers of mesenchymal origin have been described in the setting of vulvar cancer. The most common sarcoma of the vulva being leiomyosarcoma (LMS), followed by dermatofibrosarcoma protuberans (DFSP), epithelioid sarcoma, malignant fibrohistiocytomas, and synovial sarcomas. Synovial sarcomas are further divided into monophasic, biphasic, and undifferentiated histologic types. Monophasic contains only spindle cells, biphasic type contains both epithelial and spindle cell types, while undifferentiated share characteristics of both. Vulvar sarcomas are slow-growing tumors most commonly of the clitoris and labia minora, have a younger age at diagnosis (median age 41 years), and rare lymph node invasion.

Image 7. Vulvar Sarcoma Gross Image (Contributed by Dr. Huma Shiekh, Consultant Obstetrics/Gynecologist at Maternity Hospital, Pakistan)

**Bartholin Gland and Other Adenocarcinomas:**The Bartholin gland's primary cancer is exceedingly rare and arises from either the gland or duct. Presentation is usually the growth of a painless mass in the labia majora during the 5 to 6 decades. Cancer of the Bartholin’s gland most commonly exhibit either SCC or adenocarcinoma histologic subtypes.