Upon confirmation of diagnosis, patients should be initiated on a pancreatic enzymatic replacement. This is shown to generate a good response in these patients. Levels of fat-soluble vitamins should also be checked regularly (every 6 to 12 months) and replaced as necessary. The exocrine pancreatic function should be checked as it improves with time, and enzymatic replacement may need to be discontinued. Additionally, patients should have dietary counseling provided by a certified dietitian with regular monitoring of growth by serial height and weight measurements.

Transfusions of packed red blood cells (PRBC) and platelets are the mainstay of management for anemia and thrombocytopenia, respectively. In patients requiring extensive PRBC transfusions, initiation of iron chelation needs to be considered.

Infections are the feared complication of leukopenia. Prompt treatment with antibiotics is the mainstay of therapy. Granulocyte colony-stimulating factor (G-CSF) can be used to increase the white blood cell (WBC) count. However, it is not needed in most patients. It can be used in patients with severe neutropenia or patients with frequent invasive infections. The goal of G-CSF administration is to reduce the incidence of infections and not to achieve normal laboratory hematological values. There is some concern about G-CSF use causing myelodysplastic and leukemic transformation in the bone marrow, but there is a lack of strong evidence to prove it.

Patients should have routine blood monitoring every 3 to 4 months with a hematologist for detection of marrow failure, myelodysplastic syndrome, or leukemia. Due to the rarity of the disease, there is no particular chemotherapeutic regimen approved for these patients. Chemotherapy only serves to contain the disease process and is not curative in SDS patients with leukemia. Hematopoietic stem cell transplant (HSCT) is the only curative treatment in these patients. The indication for receiving HSCT determines survival. Patients receiving HSCT for bone marrow failure (e.g., aplastic anemia) have been reported to fare better than patients receiving HSCT for leukemia.

Patients with SDS are more likely to have complications from chemotherapy and HSCT than patients with isolated hematological problems requiring similar treatments. These include infections, persistent aplasia, cardiotoxicity, and renal failure.

Follow-up of the skeletal system is determined by the findings of the initial skeletal survey performed at the time of diagnosis. Patients with SDS should be monitored for osteoporosis. Vitamin D levels should be checked and maintained within normal limits.

Patients with SDS should have regular developmental neuropsychological evaluations from ages 5 to 18 to assess for adequate brain maturation.