In pregnancy, thrombocytopenia usually does not lead to an increased risk of bleeding. Even in patients with ITP, where thrombocytopenia is often quite severe, the risk of bleeding remains low. The obstetric indication decides the mode of delivery. Vaginal delivery is preferable from a hematologic standpoint due to the lower risk of bleeding; however, this is not a deciding factor. Administration of neuraxial anesthesia (epidural anesthesia) is a challenge. The American College of Obstetrics and Gynecology recommend a platelet count of 80 x 10^9/L (level C recommendation) as the goal of administering epidural anesthesia. The platelet goal for delivery is more than 50 x 10^9/L, especially if planning a cesarean section.

- Gestational Thrombocytopenia: The platelet count rarely goes below 70 x 10^9/L in patients with gestational thrombocytopenia. No intervention is required in such patients as the condition resolves spontaneously 4 to 8 weeks after delivery. In patients whose platelet counts drop below 70 x 10^9/L, a component of ITP merits consideration. The use of steroids and intravenous immunoglobulins does not benefit patients with gestational thrombocytopenia. However, it may help those who have ITP superimposed on gestational thrombocytopenia. The neonatal outcomes are excellent, and neonates of mothers with gestational thrombocytopenia never develop thrombocytopenia.

- Immune thrombocytopenia (ITP): ITP is a very complex and heterogeneous disease. Although many treatment options exist for adult patients with ITP, pregnancy offers a unique challenge in terms of minimizing the fetal-maternal risk. Usually, an intervention is not necessary unless the platelet counts drop below 20 to 30 x 10^9/L in the first two trimesters or if thrombocytopenia is complicated with bleeding, regardless of the platelet count. Treatment in the third trimester depends on the mode of delivery and candidacy for epidural anesthesia.

- Thrombotic Microangiopathy: The management of TMA in pregnancy focuses on the antecedent cause. The thrombocytopenia is a consequence of the TMA and hence improves with the resolution of the underlying condition. It is critical to differentiate between the pregnancy-specific TMA (PEC/HELLP/AFLP), and non-pregnancy specific TMA as the management of the two conditions is very different. 

- PEC/HELLP syndrome/AFLP: The goal of treatment is the delivery of the fetus, with supportive care provided for the management of the underlying condition.
- TTP: prompt initiation of plasma exchange helps remove the inhibitor to ADAMTS-13 and supply the patients with fresh plasma to restore the function of ADAMTS-13, resolve hemolysis.
- Atypical HUS: Plasma exchange is not useful in patients with atypical HUS. The FDA has approved eculizumab for patients diagnosed with atypical HUS.

- PNH: Eculizumab is a humanized monoclonal IgG antibody that prevents cleavage of C5 into C5a and C5b, eventually blocking the formation of membrane attack complex. It leads to a reduction in complement-mediated hemolysis and improvement in platelet count.

- Disseminated intravascular coagulation: DIC is a consumptive coagulopathy where the primary goal is to treat the underlying cause. However, patients in severe DIC may require supportive measures. Patients in DIC present either with a bleeding phenotype or overt thromboembolism. In a bleeding patient, the goal for platelet transfusion is 30 to 50 x 10^9/L.

- Heparin-induced thrombocytopenia: HIT rarely complicates pregnancy, unless the patient receives heparin products. After confirming the diagnosis via a platelet activation assays (serotonin release assay is the most commonly used assay), patients should not receive heparin products anymore. In such patients, direct thrombin inhibitors (argatroban and bivalirudin) serve for immediate management.