The issues of concern would include perceived or actual decreased fetal movement. Historically, cases of a compromised fetus or infant have usually been preceded by decreased fetal movement. Therefore, the assumption is that if a woman notices a decrease in fetal movement and has it evaluated, then a possible adverse event with the fetus might be avoided by the use of interventions. Many studies have attempted to verify a correlation between decreased fetal movement and placental functioning, abnormalities of the uterus, fetal growth restriction, twin to twin transfusion, tight nuchal cords, or to demonstrate that kick counts can prevent intrauterine fetal demise. Although this type of monitoring is often recommended, tracking does not always prevent complications. However, due to the low cost and potential benefit, it is recommended. Decreased fetal movement can indicate a need for more evaluation and has the potential to save lives. There is a worse outcome in pregnancies with reduced fetal movement, with one study demonstrating the highest incidence of poor outcomes in small for gestational age fetuses.

One potential side effect of routine monitoring of fetal movement could be an increase in prenatal visits, either outpatient or inpatient. However, most research has not found this type of increase to be true. Usually, the fetal movement count (FMC) is reassuring to pregnant women and prevents unnecessary visits. The healthcare provider should remember that some women are more vigilant at fetal movement monitoring than others. Therefore other methods of surveillance might be needed if the mother of the baby is less likely to comply with the fetal movement count. Numerous studies are trying to determine various new methods to track fetal movements while the pregnant woman is at home or work. Some methods could allow a more consistent and objective method of measuring frequency and possible strength of movements. The advance of three-dimensional ultrasound has allowed researchers to study normal movements of the fetus throughout pregnancy. This includes facial expressions and rapid eye movement (REM) during sleep. The arm movements of twins compared to singleton births are being studied and evaluated. Researchers find that fetal movement changes throughout pregnancy and can indicate normal or abnormal development. It is of note that studies have shown that obese women can feel fetal movement as well as women with normal body mass index (BMI). However, due to more common maternal and fetal complications, obese women will likely notice decreased fetal movement more often than their lower BMI counterparts.