Initial management begins in the emergency department. Patients can lose up to 1 liter of blood from proximal femoral fractures, and thus fluid replacement and blood transfusion should be early considerations.

Prolonged periods of preoperative fasting should be minimized, and nutritional supplementation should be made available until a likely time of operative intervention is known. Prolonged fasting is associated with increased catabolism, hypoglycemia, immunosuppression, and dehydration.

Oral or intravenous analgesia should be administered, but achieving adequate pain control can be challenging. It is now recommended that a fascia-iliaca nerve block be used in the preoperative period to reduce analgesia requirements and associated morbidity.

The definitive management is largely dependent on the fracture location and configuration. The pre-morbid function and medical background of the patient are also considered, as well as their personal preferences. The approach, as with assessment, should involve the wider interprofessional team. The primary aim is to restore the patient’s mobilization status as swiftly as possible, and therefore operative intervention is normally preferred. Conservative management for fractured hips is associated with a higher 30 day and 1-year mortality and is generally reserved for patients who are not fit for surgery.

**Intracapsular Fractures**

The blood supply to the femoral head plays an important role when deciding the management of hip fractures. The main arterial supply to the femoral head is from the medial and lateral circumflex femoral arteries. These vessels give branches that pass proximally through the joint capsule to supply the femoral head. In intracapsular fractures, these vessels can be damaged, which results in avascular necrosis of the femoral head.

Arthroplasty is shown to be superior to fixation in elderly patients with displaced intracapsular hip fractures with regards to pain, postoperative function, and complications.

The arthroplasty options for displaced intracapsular hip fractures are either a total hip replacement (THR) or a hemiarthroplasty. Both modalities demonstrate similar mortality rates, but there is evidence that suggests that THR improves postoperative pain and reduces acetabular wear.

For patients with low functional demand, hemiarthroplasty is generally recommended due to the simplicity and speed of the procedure while still providing a good functional outcome.

With regards to a hemiarthroplasty, there is thought to be little difference in functional outcome between unipolar and bipolar prostheses.

Undisplaced intracapsular fractures can be managed conservatively or surgically. Conservative management is associated with poor function and fracture displacement.

Following fixation of an intracapsular hip fracture, many surgeons will opt for protected weight-bearing in the immediate postoperative period to prevent fracture displacement. Avascular necrosis can still occur following fixation of undisplaced intracapsular fractures. Should this occur, further surgery in the form of core decompression or arthroplasty may be necessary. Patients must be counseled about this prior to undergoing fixation.

In patients with low functional demand or those who are unlikely to be able to comply with protected weight-bearing postoperatively, arthroplasty may be preferred as a primary operation for undisplaced intracapsular hip fractures. Arthroplasty removes the risk of avascular necrosis, thus reducing the rate of re-operation. The risks and benefits of both options should be discussed with the patient or their next-of-kin. Arthroplasty may also be preferred in patients with preexisting arthritis: there is little point attempting to preserve an already damaged articular surface.

**Extracapsular Fractures**

In extracapsular fractures, the blood supply to the femoral head is rarely compromised, and therefore fixation is the management of choice. The method of fixation is dependent on the fracture pattern. Sometimes the fracture pattern is not clear until it is screened on the operating table, and the surgical plan may need to be changed accordingly.

For stable trochanteric fractures (A1), intramedullary nails (IMN) and sliding hip screws (SHS) both demonstrate favorable postoperative outcomes.

IMNs are SHSs are both good options for fixing unstable trochanteric fractures (A2). IMNs are associated with better postoperative functional scores and are therefore recommended by the AAOS.

Subtrochanteric and reverse oblique trochanteric (A3) fractures are particularly challenging fractures to manage due to their instability. These fracture patterns are associated with a higher rate of non-union and failure of fixation when compared to other hip fractures.