Hepatic hemangiomas can be characterized, and diagnosis can be made by computed tomography (CT), magnetic resonance imaging (MRI), or ultrasound (US). It is important to note, though, that multiple modalities are required for definitive diagnosis. Percutaneous biopsy is generally not recommended due to the risk of fatal hemorrhage. Diagnosis can be complicated further in the setting of cirrhosis or extra-hepatic malignancy. Thus additional testing/imaging may be required.

Imaging with ultrasound demonstrates a homogenous, well-defined, hyperechoic mass. If the patient has hepatic steatosis, the hemangioma may appear as hypoechoic. Color Doppler does not add additional diagnostic value. When lesions are larger than 5 cm, some heterogeneity may be demonstrated. Giant hemangiomas are lobulated, heterogeneous masses with a hyperechoic border. The imaging characteristics of hemangiomas on ultrasound are not diagnostic. Therefore, additional imaging is usually required.

On a non-contrast CT, a hemangioma may appear as a well-circumscribed mass that is generally the same density or hypodense to blood vessels and liver. When large enough, there may be some heterogeneity and a low-density central scar. Calcifications are rarely seen.

Contrasted CT demonstrates 88% sensitivity and 84% to 98% specificity for diagnosing a hemangioma. On contrasted CT, the typical hemangioma demonstrates peripheral, discontinuous, nodular enhancement on arterial phase images with progressive centripetal filling on venous phase images. On delayed phase images, there is persistent complete filling. Giant hemangiomas follow a similar pattern. However, there may be a central scar, which does not fill/enhance.

**Other Variations Include**

Atypical hemangiomas may appear to enhance in a centrifugal pattern from the inside.

In the background of hepatic cirrhosis, the hemangioma may lose the characteristic enhancement pattern, and the flash-filling of small hemangioma can often mimic a hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC).

MRI is 90% sensitive and 91% to 99% specific for diagnosing hepatic hemangiomas. The typical hemangioma appears hypointense on T1-weighted images and hyperintense on T2-weight images. They are well-circumscribed and homogenous. On postcontrast imaging, the lesions demonstrate the typical peripheral, discontinuous, nodular enhancement with a delayed centripetal filling of the lesion, similar to that of CT. Smaller hemangiomas demonstrate flash-filling and, again, may mimic HCC in the setting of hepatic cirrhosis.

Another modality employed is the Technetium-99m pertechnetate-labeled red blood cell scan with single-photon emission CT (SPECT). There is similar sensitivity to MRI for lesions greater than 1 cm but has not been proven to have the same diagnostic value. Hemangiomas show hypoperfusion or a focal defect during the early dynamic scan with increased tracer uptake peaking approximately 30 to 50 minutes post-injection. The tracer remains within the lesion on delayed phase images. False negatives may occur secondary to fibrosis or thrombosis.