To evaluate arrhythmias, different types of ECG (surface 12-lead, Holter, event recorder, intracardiac) and finally electrophysiologic studies using targeted stimuli are available. There are helpful ECG features to distinguish between AVNRT and AVRT. Features favoring AVRT include delta wave, lengthening of the tachycardia cycle length when bundle branch occurs ipsilateral to the accessory pathway, and the finding of QRS alternans. On the other hand features such as pseudo s in lead II or pseudo r' in lead V1 favor AVNRT.

The entrainment technique is required to diagnose reentry. It is useful to diagnose, ablate and map reentry. Mapping allows for identification of reentry circuit elements such as entry, exit, conduction barriers, bystanders, inner and outer loop, isthmus site, and zone of slow conduction (SCZ).

Waldo formulated three criteria for entrainment. These are fixed fusion with constant pacing rate, progressive fusion at faster pacing, and resumption of tachycardia with captured not fused beat on termination of pacing.

To entrain the tachyarrhythmia the paced cycle length needs to be 10 to 20ms shorter than the tachycardia cycle length (TCL). A fusion beat is the appearance of a QRS complex being formed by the addition of a paced or premature stimulus and the physiologic action potential. Constant fusion, progressive fusion, and variable fusion can be distinguished.

Electrophysiologic studies are indicated for supraventricular or ventricular tachycardias. Several measurements help to investigate the pathophysiologic mechanism of arrhythmias and might reveal reentry as a cause. The A-H jump, which is a sudden increase of the atrial-hisian interval to more than 50ms with a prior stimulus, indicates dual AV node physiology and together with inducible tachycardia suggest AVNRT.

The Wolff-Parkinson-White (WPW) syndrome and Lown-Ganong-Levine (LGL) syndrome belong to the group of atrioventricular reentry tachycardias (AVRT). Depending on the direction the accessory pathway is used, orthodromic (antegrade conduction via AV node-His bundle and retrograde conduction via AP) or antidromic (retrograde conduction via AV node-His bundle and antegrade conduction via an accessory pathway) AVRT are differentiated. Accessory pathways are muscle bridges connecting the atria and the ventricle along the tricuspid and mitral annulus spanning the fibrous cardiac skeleton thus offering additional conduction routes beside the AV node-His bundle. Atrioventricular accessory pathways are called Kent bundles, and atriofascicular accessory pathways are called Mahaim fibers.

The surface ECG algorithm helps to localize the accessory pathway. A positive delta wave in V1 and negative in I and aVL proposes a left-sided (posterior) AP otherwise a right-sided AP. A positive delta wave in III and aVF indicates superior location, contrariwise inferior location. Right atrial septal AP show R/S ratio larger than one in V3 or earlier. If it is not the case, free wall AP should be suspected. 60% of APs are located at the left atrial free wall, 25% at the septum, and 15% right free wall.

Veenhuyzen describes how to differentiate types of SVT such as AVNRT, AT and AVNRT using entrainment technique and observing manifest or concealed entrainment. Ventricular stimulation of SVT showing manifest entrainment suggests AVRT whereas ventricular stimulation of SVT showing concealed entrainment proposes AVNRT. The PPI-TCL is shorter in AVRT as compared to AVNRT. A post-pacing interval of A-A-V is specific for AT, whereas A-V indicates AVRT and AVNRT. The same applies to the atrial-hisian response. A-A-H response pattern indicates AT whereas A-H response pattern indicates AVRT or AVNRT. Concealed entrainment (AVNRT) is not the same as entrainment with concealed fusion (AVRT with pacing site close to AP). Entrainment pattern depends on the pacing site. Therefore, the response should be measured with different pacing locations (differential entrainment).

Almendral examined resetting and entrainment phenomena in ventricular tachycardias. Resetting is the singular interaction between a stimulus and a given rhythm. Entrainment is the continuous resetting of the rhythm to repetitive stimuli. Almendral describes the concept of resetting a cardiac rhythm comparing the effect of a ventricular premature beat on continuous stimulation with V00 or VVI pacemaker. In V00 stimulation there will be no influence of the premature beat. Thus no resetting occurs. In contrast, in VVI the premature beat is sensed, a compensatory pause made, and thus the following stimuli are reset. Josephson described entrainment as the continuous resetting of a tachycardia.