Neutrophils are considered as the first line of defense against pathogens, and during phagocytosis, they undergo a process termed the respiratory burst in which most bacteria are killed and digested in the phagosomes. The MPO-enriched azurophilic granules in neutrophils fuse with the phagosome and are released into the phagosomes when the common membrane is ruptured. These neutrophils, after encountering pathogens, generate a respiratory burst via activation of NADPH oxidase that leads to the production of superoxide, hydrogen peroxide, and other reactive oxygen derivatives such as HOCI, a primary product of MPO activity. The antimicrobial activities of MPO-HOCl not only restricted to killing bacteria but also fungi, viruses, erythrocytes, tumor cells, natural killer (NK) cells and platelets indicates its role in the innate immune response. Reports have also shown that MPO is involved in terminating the respiratory burst since individuals with MPO-deficient neutrophils have a prolonged respiratory burst, and an increase in hydrogen peroxide production.

MPO-derived HOCl has been shown to be the required source of ROS for neutrophil extracellular traps (NETs), that are DNA structures released due to de-condensation of chromatin formation, that not only trap bacteria, but also regulates both the innate and adaptive immune response in many ways.

MPO is believed to play a role in suppressing of the adaptive immune response as demonstrated by two models of enhanced T cell-mediated skin delayed-type hypersensitivity and antigen-induced arthritis in Mpo−/− mice. Mechanistically, MPO released from neutrophils inhibits LPS-induced DC activation as measured by decreased IL-12 production and CD86 expression consequently, limiting T cell proliferation and proinflammatory cytokine production. In contrast, a pathogenic role for MPO in driving autoimmune inflammation was demonstrated using MPO-deficient mice in the K/BxN arthritis and collagen-induced arthritis (CIA) models exhibiting reduced disease severity. Also, increased MPO levels and activity have been observed in many inflammatory conditions and autoimmune diseases including multiple sclerosis (MS) and rheumatoid arthritis (RA).

MPO plays a role in modulation of vasculature functioning, associated with chronic vascular diseases such as atherosclerosis. In the extracellular matrix (ECM), MPO works as a nitric oxide(NO)-scavenger consuming  NO that leads to impaired endothelial relaxation. MPO and its oxidative species present in the atherothrombotic tissue, promotes lipid peroxidation, conversion of LDL to a highly-uptake atherogenic form, selectively modulates Apolipoprotein A-I (apoA-I) generating dysfunctional HDL particles more susceptible to degradation and impairs the ability of apoA-I to promote cholesterol efflux. Moreover, elevated systemic levels of MPO and its oxidation products are associated with increased cardiovascular risk. However, the measurement of MPO as a cardiovascular risk marker has not generally been accepted like the more standardized assay for high sensitive C-reactive protein.