Eales disease was considered a form of vasomotor neurosis by Sir Henry Eales, but it was Wardsworth, in 1887, who explained the disease's association with retinal inflammation.

The etiology of Eales disease still stands to be controversial and, to date, is very poorly understood. Its etiology is purportedly multifactorial in origin. It is presumed that Eales disease is an immunological reaction in response to an exogenous agent.

One study hypothesized that Mycobacterium chelonae and M. fortuitum, which are rapidly growing nontuberculous mycobacteria (RGNTM), are associated with Eales disease.M. fortuitum has been isolated from the aqueous humor of a patient with Eales disease.M. chelonae and M. fortuitum.

A highly immunogenic protein is translated by the MPT64 gene in M. tuberculosis. PCR (polymerase chain reaction) for this gene has been diagnostically used successfully.

Another prospective case-control study was done on 65 patients (31 with Eales disease and 34 controls).M. tuberculosis in patients having Eales disease. The results of polymerase chain reaction (PCR) were compared using the clinical symptoms of patients, their erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR), and tuberculin skin test (TST) values. In patients having Eales disease, the PCR positivity was 38.7%. There was a strong corroboration between the PCR positivity and high TST and ESR values. Interestingly, 6 from 34 control vitreous samples were also PCR positive for MPT64.

Another study reported the presence of Mycobacteria in the vitreous humor of patients having Eales disease.M. tuberculosis (MTB).Mycobacterium tuberculosis.

Enucleated eyes were subjected to a nested polymerase chain reaction for the detection of the M. tuberculosis genome, and positive results were noted, suggesting a possible correlation between the Eales disease and tuberculosis.

Nested polymerase chain reaction utilized for the demonstration of the genome of M. tuberculosis in the epiretinal membranes of many patients having Eales disease underlines the possible association between Eales disease and tuberculosis.

Eales disease may be associated with ocular tuberculosis, which may show its signs in the late stages of Eales disease.

It is quite possible that patients having Eales disease may not carry viable organisms, or they may just be having the DNA of M. tuberculosis. The role of tuberculosis in the pathology of Eales disease is still questionable. It is postulated that the incidence of Eales disease is low in western countries, possibly due to the low prevalence of tuberculosis in those countries. Mantoux positivity has been reported in a significant number of patients having Eales disease in several studies. However, one case-control study in India concluded that there isn't any statistically significant difference as far as Mantoux positivity is concerned between the cases and the controls.

Neurological manifestations have been reported in some cases of Eales disease.

Experimental studies have demonstrated other immunity-related mechanisms, like the predominant involvement of T-cells in the disease etiology. HLA B5, DR1, DR4, and several autoimmune diseases have been thought of as playing a role in the etiology of Eales disease.

Levels of haptoglobin and galectin-1 in the serum may be used as biomarkers of Eales disease. Retinal neovascularization is supposed to be because of increased vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF).