**Disc Herniation:**

Intervertebral disc herniation is a common problem in the lumbar and cervical spine that can cause varying symptoms such as pain, numbness, and weakness of both the upper and lower extremities. Intervertebral disc herniation is defined as a condition in which the nucleus pulposus is protruding past the annulus fibrosus. This herniation can be on a spectrum of partial to complete depending upon how much of the NP herniates through the AF.

Many significant changes in an intervertebral disc can occur that cause a disc to weaken and the NP to herniate through the AF. Of these changes, the most common is an increase in type I collagen and a decrease in type II collagen in the NP and inner AF, less water retention by the NP, and degeneration of various constituents of the IVD such as other types of collagen as well as the extracellular matrix. Additionally, specific systems activate that contribute to the degeneration of the IVD. These include apoptosis, inflammatory pathways, and upregulation of matrix metalloproteinase expression.

While the biological causes of disc herniation itself are well known, the biological causes of the symptoms of disc herniations are still under investigation. Current thought is that while mechanical compression of spinal nerves is an important cause of pain in disc herniation, another possible factor in the perception of pain is the effect of the nucleus pulposus on nervous tissue.

A recent study showed that when peripheral nerves and dorsal root ganglia suffered exposure to the contents of the NP, there was a considerable increase in neuronal activity in these neuronal tissues starting at 9 hours and lasting for up to a couple of days. Similar changes also showed in the spinal cord in this same study. This study also revealed that when applying the nucleus pulposus in the absence of mechanical compression, the neural activity in the ventral posterolateral (VPL) nucleus of the thalamus increased quickly.