The most commonly fractured metatarsal in adults is the fifth metatarsal. As mentioned in the clinical significance discussion, conservative treatment including protected weight-bearing in a stiff-soled shoe, boot, or cast or non-weight bearing for six to eight weeks is generally the treatment choice for Zone 1 injuries. However, for Zone 2 and Zone 3 fractures in elite or competitive athletes, surgery with intramedullary screw fixation is indicated to minimize the risk of nonunion and/or prolonged restriction from activity.

Lisfranc injuries can be managed operatively through open reduction and internal fixation (ORIF), primary arthrodesis of the involved tarsometatarsal joints, or by midfoot arthrodesis. An ORIF is indicated if there is evidence of instability. ORIF in Lisfranc injuries tends to have better outcomes in bony fracture-dislocations as opposed to strictly ligamentous injuries. A primary can be considered in cases of instability as an alternative to an ORIF and have demonstrated equivalent functional outcomes with a reduced rate of return to the operating room for hardware removal. Midfoot arthrodesis merits consideration if there are chronic Lisfranc injuries that have failed conservative therapy or in the setting of midfoot collapse.

In severe cases of Frieberg’s disease, surgical intervention may be necessary. The surgical options include metatarsophalangeal arthrotomy with the removal of loose bodies, dorsal closing-wedge osteotomy, and DuVries arthroplasty (partial metatarsal head resection). The first option is rarely necessary, but the other options may be indicated if the disease involves more of the dorsal bone and cartilage or in later-stage disease.