Clinical signs of the condition depend on the organ system that is affected the most. Patients usually are asymptomatic until adulthood, and often a diagnosis will not be made until multiple systems are affected. Symptoms are related to the organ affected, but almost all patients complain of severe fatigue. Patients are typically symptomatic for up to ten years before diagnosis. A high index of suspicion, combined with a thorough family history, is required to diagnose this condition. Women with hemochromatosis become symptomatic later in life than men due to the blood loss and consequent iron excretion associated with menstruation.

Early manifestations include arthralgias, fatigue, and lethargy.

Late manifestations occur when iron starts getting deposited in the tissue progressively.

- Koilonychia: Koilonychia affecting the thumb and index finger has been observed in 50% of patients while 25% of patients tend to have it in all nails.

- Secondary diabetes: Looking at the lateral aspects of the nails during the examination may reveal finger prick marks indicating diabetes and abdominal examination may be suggestive of lipodystrophy as a clue towards insulin administration.

- Discoloration of the skin (diffuse hyperpigmentation) is seen in more than 90% of patients with idiopathic hemochromatosis and is one of the earliest manifestations of the disease. Although it may be mild, it is more evident in the sun-exposed areas of the skin. Other cutaneous manifestations may involve ichthyosiform changes and skin atrophy on the anterior aspects of the legs.

- Arthropathy: This occurs due to calcium pyrophosphate crystal deposition in the joints (pseudogout). It can present with arthritis, chondrocalcinosis, and joint swelling commonly involving metacarpophalangeal and proximal interphalangeal joints. Other commonly affected areas include knees, wrists, hip, back, neck, and feet.

- Liver involvement: Jaundice may or may not be present; however, liver function abnormalities are encountered in 75% of patients. Jaundice is usually absent earlier in the course of the illness. Liver disease can present with abdominal pain, hepatomegaly, cirrhosis, portal hypertension, ascites, and splenomegaly. While cirrhosis only occurs in 10-15% of patients, the risk of hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) increases in patients with coexisting hemochromatosis and cirrhosis. The risk of HCC may amount to 30% of patients. A hepatic bruit may indicate hepatocellular carcinoma, and hepatic hum may suggest portal hypertension in such patients.

- Cardiac involvement: This can lead to restrictive or dilated cardiomyopathy, arrhythmias, and cardiac failure. One must listen for the third and fourth heart sounds in suspected cases.

- Endocrine dysfunction: This can lead to diabetes mellitus, pituitary hypogonadism (as manifested by decreased libido and impotence in men and amenorrhea in women), hypopituitarism, thyroid dysfunction, adrenal dysfunction, parathyroid defects, and osteoporosis.

- Cancers: When compared with the general population, the risk of liver cancer is increased by 20 fold in patients with hemochromatosis.

- Infections: Patients with iron overload are at increased risk of infection from Yersinia enterocolitica, Listeria monocytogenes, and Vibrio vulnificus.