Spinal stability is the spine's ability to maintain its structure and anatomical relationship with normal physiological loading. In the 1990s, Manohar Panjabi postulated that the following three interacting systems were responsible for the maintenance of spinal stability

- The passive system comprising of the vertebral bodies, the intervertebral discs, the zygapophyseal joints, the zygapophyseal joint capsules, and the spinal ligaments

- The active system comprising of the muscles and

- The neutral system that interacts between these two systems

In a normal healthy spine, the above three systems interact and allow normal function and a pain-free range of movement. With stress loading of the passive system (vertebrae, disc, ligaments, and joints), the active system (muscles) come into play and prevent abnormal deformation. The contribution of the passive system in the neutral spine is minimal. Cadaveric experiments show that when the muscles are removed, and only the bones, discs, and the ligaments are left in situ, the spine buckles under low loads of 20 lbs (9 kg).

The neural control subsystem receives input both from the passive and the active subsystems and then direct the spinal musculature to stabilize the spine. The neural system should act at the right time and the right amount to protect the spine from injury and to allow the desired movement.

An inability of the active system to maintain the relationship between different elements of the passive system during physiological loading can lead to spinal pain. Based on this, clinical instability can be defined as the abnormal displacement that occurs within the motion segment when a normal physiological load is applied.