The etiology of recurrent pregnancy loss (RPL) is broadly classified into the following:

- Genetic

- Anatomic

- Endocrine

- Antiphospholipid antibody syndrome

- Immunological

- Environmental factors

**Genetic:**Aneuploidy is one of the most common causes of RPL. Balanced, reciprocal, and Robertsonian translocations in the fetus can predispose to spontaneous miscarriages.

****Anatomic:****Congenital Mullerian tract anomalies can cause RPL. Some of the uterine abnormalities which can predispose to RPL are septate, unicornuate, bicornuate, didelphic, and arcuate uteri. Septate uterus is considered to be the most common congenital uterine anomaly. A meta-analysis of several studies concluded that congenital uterine defects were present in about 12.6 percent of the patients with recurrent pregnancy loss.

**Endocrine:**Maternal endocrine disorders like diabetes and thyroid dysfunction can cause RPL and must be evaluated and appropriately treated in patients with RPL. Hyperprolactinemia may be associated with RPL but is not proven.

****Antiphospholipid antibody syndrome (APLS):****accounts for about 8 to 42 percent of patients with RPL. APLS causes an increased risk of thrombosis and placental insufficiency, causing RPL.

**Environmental factors:**Cigarette smoking is suggested to affect trophoblastic function and is linked to an increased risk of RPL. Obesity is independently associated with an increased risk of recurrent pregnancy loss in women who conceive naturally. Other lifestyle habits such as alcohol consumption (3 to 5 drinks per week), cocaine use, and increased caffeine consumption (more than 3 cups of coffee per day) are also associated with an increased risk of spontaneous miscarriages.

**Immunological:**Routine testing of women with RPL for inherited thrombophilias is not currently recommended.