Treatment varies with the pathogen.

- Influenza is usually self-limited. Otherwise, treatment regimens include Oseltamivir or Baloxavir.

- Salmonella is usually managed supportively. Quinolones, azithromycin, trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole, and ceftriaxone are all available options.

- Plague is classically managed with aminoglycosides, tetracyclines, and quinolones as a last resort.

- A combination treats brucella of doxycycline and an aminoglycoside or rifampicin in non-pregnant adults.

- COVID-19  is currently managed per the latest guidelines on remdesivir, dexamethasone, and supportive measures.

- Lyme disease is treated by doxycycline or a beta-lactam depending on the stage and presentation.

- RMSF is managed by doxycycline as the drug of choice.

- Psittacosis is recommended to be treated by tetracyclines, with azithromycin as an alternative.

- Coxiella is managed with doxycycline, with the addition of hydroxychloroquine in vascular complications.

- A combination lately treats anthrax of quinolones, carbapenems, linezolid, and immunoglobulin for systemic infections. Quinolones or doxycycline are utilized for limited cutaneous infections.

- Dermatophytes: Topical or systemic antifungals in addition to animal treatment as well.

- WNV, Rabies, and Rift Valley Fever are managed through supportive treatment only.

- Ebola is suggested to be managed with the new agents atoltivimab, maftivimab, odesivimab (REGN-EB3), and ansuvimab.

Government strategies to decrease zoonoses include ensuring safe food products of animal origin, scaling back economic development in the wild, the shift from reactionary to pre-emptive approach on zoonoses, and availability of travel medicine guidelines.

The ‘One Health 2006 Initiative’ focuses on the collaboration between human (physicians, nurses, and public health practitioners), animal (veterinarians), plants (agricultural workers), and environmental (ecologists, and wildlife experts) sectors to achieve optimal health since they are all interconnected.