Complications of plant alkaloid toxicity may be acute or chronic. Each of the toxidromes reviewed entails the potential to produce grave consequences if not identified or managed appropriately. The anticholinergic toxidrome that may result from belladonna alkaloid poisoning may be complicated by seizures or agitated delirium. Cardiac dysrhythmias that result may deteriorate into fatal dysrhythmias. Ingestion of one-hundred jimsonweed (Datura stramonium) seeds, which delivers about 6 mg of atropine, can prove fatal. Synephrine is a plant-derived alkaloid chemically related to ephedrine found in bitter orange (Citrus aurantium) that can also produce central nervous system stimulant activity. Like ephedrine, this toxin has been linked to deaths and drug interactions.

The pyrrolizidine alkaloids are converted to highly reactive pyrroles by the hepatic cytochrome P450 enzymes, which result in hepatocellular toxicity in the acute setting. In about 30% of acute poisonings, a pyrrolizidine-alkaloid-induced proliferation of the hepatic vasculature intima leads to veno-occlusive disease. Death occurs in approximately 2 out of 10 cases. Toxicity with opioids and coniine may lead to respiratory depression, failure, and arrest. Berberine, derived from goldenseal (Hydrastis canadensis) and barberry (Berberis spp), has produced both respiratory and myocardial depressant effects.

The muscle spasms, rigidity, and weakness produced by strychnine may lead to respiratory failure and death. Consumption of sanguinarine may induce heart failure and myocarditis.