The differential diagnosis for thrombocytopenia includes but is not limited to the following:

- Leukemia, specifically acute lymphocytic leukemia (ALL), however, will have corresponding clinical and laboratory findings, including systemic symptoms (i.e., fever, joint pain, or weight loss), hepatosplenomegaly, lymphadenopathy, leukocytosis, and significant anemia (Hg <10).

- An active infection, including Epstein-Barr virus, cytomegalovirus, hepatitis C, and HIV-1.

- Autoimmune hemolytic anemia (AIHA) will have corresponding clinical and laboratory findings, including anemia, jaundice, elevated reticulocyte count, spherocytes, and polychromasia.

- Systemic autoimmune disease, in which thrombocytopenia can be the presenting manifestation of an autoimmune disease, specifically for systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE) or autoimmune lymphoproliferative syndrome (ALPS).

- Some immunodeficiency syndromes, specifically common variable immunodeficiency (CVID), present with thrombocytopenia in the presence of recurrent infections.

- Certain drug exposures, specifically heparin, quinidine, phenytoin, sulfonamides, valproate, and vancomycin, can cause thrombocytopenia.

- Bone marrow failure, as seen in aplastic anemia, can have associated thrombocytopenia. Hemolytic uremic syndrome (HUS) presents with hemolytic anemia, thrombocytopenia, acute kidney injury, and a recent history of gastrointestinal symptoms.

- Thrombotic thrombocytopenic purpura (TTP) presents with severe microangiopathic hemolytic anemia, thrombocytopenia, and neurologic symptoms (i.e., confusion, somnolence, or headache). Disseminated intravascular coagulation (DIC) presents with thrombocytopenia in the context of hemorrhage and thrombosis with end-organ damage due to sepsis, trauma, or malignancy.