The presenting symptoms direct management of hemorrhoids. Treatment strategies can divide into medical management, office-based procedures, and operative management. Initial therapy should be medical and focuses on modifying the stool. Constipation should receive treatment by increasing dietary fiber and fluid intake.  A high-fiber diet (25g/day for women and 38g/day for men) and daily consumption of a minimum of 64oz of water should is the recommendation. Regular exercise and maintenance of a regular bowel habit could also help reduce symptoms. Bulk-forming agents work in combination with fluids to soften the stool and are best taken in the morning and fluids consumed through the remainder of the day. Stool softeners can also be helpful. This therapy can be trialed for 4 to 6 weeks after which time the practitioner should reevaluate the patient’s symptoms. The appearance of the hemorrhoids may be unchanged, but the determination of success is by resolution of the patient’s symptoms. Dysfunctional toileting behaviors such as excessive straining, pushing, and prolonged time on the toilet contribute to hemorrhoids. Patients should be instructed to limit time on the toilet to 3 to 5 minutes. Excessive wiping should also be avoided, and patients should be encouraged to only wipe until clean. Sitz baths can help with hygiene and can provide relief for itching, pain, burning. They should be warm (approximately 40 degrees centigrade) and soak time should be limited to 15 minutes. Patients should be instructed to avoid adding salts, lotions, or oils to the water as these can cause inflammation.

Office treatments for internal hemorrhoids include rubber band ligation, bipolar diathermy, injection sclerotherapy, dilation, cryotherapy, and infrared coagulation. The basis for the mode of treatment is entirely on a combination of surgeon experience, patient preference, availability of equipment, and the patient’s medical status. Of the listed procedures, rubber band ligation is the most commonly performed as it is safe and cost-effective. The patient is positioned in the prone jackknife position or left lateral decubitus position. A formal anoscopic exam is performed after which the grasping instrument is used to bring the redundant mucosa at the proximal aspect of the internal hemorrhoid the barrel of the banding instrument. The band is then applied (approximately 2cm proximal to the dentate line), and this allows reduction and fixation of the hemorrhoid. The band causes ischemia of the tissue which sloughs in 5 to 7 days. An ulcer forms which when healed causes fibrosis and scarring leading to fixation of the internal rectal mucosa to the underlying sphincter. This therapy is effective for first, second, and third-degree hemorrhoids. Multiple treatments may be necessary for large and bulky hemorrhoids. Infrared photocoagulation, bipolar diathermy, direct-current electrotherapy are less frequently used procedures. These procedures also work by causing scarring and fixation. Energy delivery is to the tissues at the apex of the internal hemorrhoid - this coagulates proteins and causes inflammation, and the subsequent scarring causes fixation. Sclerotherapy is another technique of hemorrhoid fixation in which a chemical agent creates fibrosis and fixation of the hemorrhoids. Commonly used agents include 5% phenol in an oil base, hypertonic saline, 5% quinine, and urea. The sclerosing agent is injected 1 to 2 cm proximal to the dentate line at the base of the internal hemorrhoid. Sclerotherapy can be safely used in patients on anticoagulation as it only causes fibrosis and it involves no sloughing. Cryotherapy is another method of fixation that uses freezing to cause local tissue destruction. A probe cooled with liquid nitrogen is applied to the apex of the internal hemorrhoid. Employment of this technique is rare.

Operative hemorrhoidectomy is an option when nonoperative management fails or for treatment of large hemorrhoids as this provides a more durable and longer lasting result. Surgical management includes excision hemorrhoidectomy, stapled hemorrhoidectomy, doppler-guided trans-anal devascularization. In closed hemorrhoidectomy (Ferguson), the patient is positioned in the prone jackknife position, and the buttocks are taped apart for maximum exposure. An elliptical incision is made encompassing the hemorrhoidal column. The surgeon should be mindful of excising too much tissue, and to preserve sufficient anoderm to avoid anal stricture. Incision closure follows, with absorbable suture in a running fashion. Open hemorrhoidectomy (Milligan-Morgan) is performed similarly but differs in that the excision site is left open. In stapled hemorrhoidopexy, a circular trans-anal stapler circumferentially excises mucosa and submucosa proximal to the dentate line, lifting and securing the redundant mucosa and internal hemorrhoids in the normal anatomic position. This procedure causes less pain when compared to the Ferguson or Milligan-Morgan techniques. Trans-anal hemorrhoidal dearterialization entails doppler-guided suture ligation of the arterial inflow to the hemorrhoids (the superior hemorrhoidal arteries).  Four to six arteries typically get identified and ligated, which reduces the size of the hemorrhoids.