All newly diagnosed patients with rectal cancer should be universally screened for DNA mismatch repair/microsatellite status present in up to 13% of all sporadic rectal cancer cases.

The initial evaluation may involve barium enema or computed tomography (CT) colonography, but endoscopy is ultimately required for tissue biopsy. Flexible sigmoidoscopy is no replacement for a complete diagnostic colonoscopy; still, it is a screening modality that reduces CRC mortality. The Federal Drug Administration (FDA) has approved PILLCAM 2 for those non-obstructed patients with incomplete colonoscopy, and not for routine screening. CRC screening modalities and recommendations for average and high-risk patients are discussed in a different StatPearls article. Routine laboratory workups with complete blood count (CBC), iron panel, basic metabolic panel, liver function test, and coagulation tests are not diagnostic but often useful for management. CEA greater than five ng/mL has a poor prognostic value when present but lacks diagnostic sensitivity 46% (95% CI 0.45 to 0.47) and has limited specificity 89% (95% CI 0.88 to 0.92). Pre-operative CEA is indicated on all newly diagnosed CRC, normalization after surgical resection expected, and serial assays monitor on follow-ups.

Baseline CT of the chest, abdomen, and pelvis with intravenous (IV) and oral contrast is the preferred cost-effective staging imaging study before surgical resection. CT abdomen and pelvis provides a moderate specificity for initial assessment of accurately staging T (50%) and N (73%) but rather provide immediate high screening sensitivity for distant metastasis (87%). CT chest remains controversial, as 9% will show indeterminate lesions, of that 11% represent metastatic lesions. MRI and CT triple-phase imaging have improved the detection of liver metastasis. Positron emission tomography (PET) is not routinely indicated in the preoperative staging of CRC. A biopsy of a suspicious metastatic site should be performed to confirm the diagnosis.

Rigid sigmoidoscopy measures the distal extension of the tumor from the anal verge and is further divided into low (less than 5 cm), middle (less than 10 cm), or high (less than 15 cm) rectal cancer. Loco staging of Rca will require optimal imaging by transrectal ultrasonography (TRUS) and pelvic magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) to accurately determine T, N and predicting CRM optimal candidates for upfront surgery, radiation therapy, or CRT. TRUS accuracy for T ranges from 80% to 95% and N from 70% to 75%; however, it carries CRM limitations on posterior tumors. MRI accuracy ranges are as follows: T from 81% to 92%, N from 69% to 84%, and CRM 57% to 90%. In clinical practice, the information obtained with TRUS and MRI is often complementary and center-dependent directed. Although TRUS may be comparable to MRI for initial stating, it has shown significant limitations evaluating pre-operative treatment tumor response (re-stage) whereas MRI has greater post-treatment anatomical accuracy with the newer acquisition methods (sensitivity 88%), allowing a more precise surgical plan.