Clinicians and healthcare providers should have a high index of suspicion and be familiar with the clinical symptoms and presentation of multiple pterygium syndrome (MPS), regardless of its rarity. Diagnosing MPS can be challenging due to overlapping symptoms with other medical conditions, necessitating the need to rule out other differential diagnoses through additional genetic testing to reach a definitive diagnosis.

Early confirmation of MPS is crucial for effective management and favorable patient outcomes. Children with multiple organ system involvements should be referred for evaluation and appropriate treatment. Parents and caregivers should be actively involved, supported, and provided with extensive counseling on managing MPS, particularly if other siblings are affected.

While the primary care physician plays a central role in managing and following up on the child's care, an interprofessional team is essential. This team may include geneticists, orthopedic surgeons, developmental pediatricians, physical and occupational therapists, pulmonologists, cardiologists, audiologists, ENT specialists, radiologists (if necessary), endocrinologists, and urologists.

Nurses should possess familiarity with MPS, and those trained in genetics can provide optimal patient education, facilitate communication regarding appointments and referrals, and coordinate care with other healthcare professionals. Pharmacists dispensing prescribed medications should review therapeutic options and communicate the best treatment choices to the primary care physician and other relevant specialties. Delivering excellent and high-quality healthcare is crucial in determining patients' survival and long-term outcomes with multiple pterygium syndrome.