Once the diagnosis of familial short stature (FSS) is established, its management follows. Support care and reassurance for both the child and family are required and may need a team effort. Family expectations must be addressed, and realistic outcomes should be emphasized.

One study of recombinant growth hormone (rGH) for short normal children (FSS) showed a marginal increase in final height (2.5 cms). In such cases, the authors concluded that it did not justify either the exorbitant costs or the hazards of long-term exposure to rGH.

In only two studies, which divided the GH treated children with SS into FSS and non-FSS subgroups, was the height increment in FSS compared to the non-FSS subgroups and was determined to be much lower.

The studies conducted thus far on rGH therapy in SS, which have included children with FSS, have had several limitations like insufficient numbers, lack of control groups, different dosages of rGH, and undiagnosed conditions producing pathological SS.

Given the lack of definitive evidence of the benefits of rGH in FSS, especially a lack of benefit in self-esteem and/or quality of life, the FDA has not approved treatment with rGH for this indication. The treatment cost is prohibitive, and the response in both familial and non-familial ISS is very unpredictable. More well-designed studies are needed in this area, and any attempt to use GH for FSS should be considered as "off-label."

Recombinant IGF1 is useful in IGF1 deficiency due to gene deletions or mutations.

Attention must be given to detect psychological problems in children with FSS, which may be the result of teasing, bullying, and discrimination by peers as well as society. Although it is generally believed that such problems are universal in children with SS, there may be a selection bias. This is because the majority of the data are from pediatric clinics, where children with problems are seen. In the Wessex growth study, a large sample of community-dwelling children whose only problem was SS was studied. Results did not show increased cognitive, psychosocial, or maladaptive dysfunction, thus dispelling the myth that SS universally has psychosocial issues.