The evaluation and diagnostic process of small bowel cancer consist of laboratory, imaging, and endoscopic evaluations. Unfortunately, the diagnosis is often delayed due to the nonspecific nature of presenting symptoms and low suspicion in evaluating generalized abdominal pain for small bowel cancer.

**Laboratory Studies Evaluation**

Initial workup generally includes an evaluation with complete blood cell count and differential, chemistry studies, and liver function tests. Depending on the location of the lesion, patients may present with evidence of anemia due to fecal occult blood loss. Neuroendocrine tumors require further workup that includes assessing markers to determine the functionality of such lesions and establish the diagnosis of carcinoid syndrome. Minimum workup to be completed once other common causes of noted symptoms have been ruled out include measuring 4-hour urinary excretion of 5-HIAA, chromogranins level, and blood serotonin level.

**Imaging**

The pathway to arriving at the diagnosis of small bowel cancer includes significant variability in how tests are completed. There are multiple radiographic as well as endoscopic evaluations that are available to assist in the process of diagnosis, and due to the low incidence of such malignant lesions, patients undergo multiple evaluations and imaging studies before a diagnosis is established.

**Computer Tomography Scan (CT scan):**It is estimated that a CT scan can help note abnormalities in about 70 to 80% of patients with small bowel cancer. However, these rates of detection can be quite variable based on the location of the lesion.****This modality is often utilized when determining if there is evidence of metastatic spread of disease to distal sites or regional lymph nodes. CT tomography enterography involves evaluating the small bowel with the addition of a contrast agent that enhances images by causing distension of the small bowel and allowing for better visualization of more occult malignant lesions.

**Upper GI Series with Small Bowel Follow Through vs. Enteroclysis:**Involves barium administration, which coats the lining of the GI tract, and follow-up X-rays are obtained. The contrast allows for an outline of the esophagus, stomach, and small intestines to be visualized, which can assist in evaluating mucosal abnormalities from neoplastic processes.

Enteroclysis is a similar imaging study that involves X-ray imaging as the main modality. However, it has been found to have higher sensitivity than the standard upper GI series as it involves the administration of barium into the small intestine via a nasogastric tube. While more invasive than an Upper GI series, this particular study does provide higher sensitivity, as mentioned previously.

**Endoscopic Evaluation:**Endoscopic evaluation of small bowel cancers helps identify mucosal lesions that may not be identified on routine imaging modalities. It can assist in the diagnosis of lesions that are up to the proximal duodenum. Push enteroscopy can help access the GI tract beyond the ligament of Treitz using push or double-balloon enteroscopy techniques. This allows for the traditional scope to visualize a more extensive portion of the small bowel which can help in identifying more distal lesions. Wireless video capsule endoscopy can also be utilized to evaluate the distal small bowel. However, it only allows for tissue visualization and no tissue sampling, which requires more invasive procedures for final diagnosis to be established.

The followings are specific recommendations for small bowel adenocarcinoma according to the National Comprehensive Cancer Network (NCCN). More than half of small bowel adenocarcinomas originate from the duodenum. The remaining 30 and up to 13% of SBAs arise in the jejunum and ileum, respectively.

Patients who are suspected to be affected by small bowel adenocarcinoma should be exclusively evaluated with comprehensive staging measures, including tissue sampling and pathological examination, CBC, imaging, and endoscopy measures, and specific tumor markers, including carbohydrate antigen 19-9 (CA19-9), and carcinoembryonic antigen (CEA). Further evaluations might be requested according to the specific tumor’s location and any history suggestive of a malabsorptive disorder, including celiac disease.

Specific evaluations with Esophagogastroduodenoscopy (EGD) and endoscopic ultrasound (EUS) should be undertaken in patients with suspicious duodenal adenocarcinoma for both primary stagings, differentiating duodenal from other peri-ampullary tumoral lesions, and tissue sampling purposes. In patients with complicated obstructive duodenal adenocarcinoma, palliative measures with stent placement and surgical diversion might be considered. Further endoscopic measures, including double-balloon and capsule endoscopy, might be indicated in selected patients with small bowel cancers. The mentioned endoscopic methods are specifically advantageous in the diagnostic and therapeutic management of complicated patients with strictures. Despite the plenty of explicit information obtained from performing capsule endoscopy, the inability to proceed with tissue diagnosis with this method should not be underestimated. Moreover, in patients who are complicated with small intestinal strictures and/or obstructions, performing capsule endoscopy is contraindicated, which is typically due to the potential need for a surgical intervention to remove the capsule.

The local and metastatic tumor burden would be evaluated by performing abdominopelvic CT or MRI. Additional details of the tumor characteristics might be explored by performing CT or MR enterography or enteroclysis, which involve using oral or nasogastric instilled contrast, respectively. A prospective study has demonstrated the superiority of MR enterography in comparison with CT enterography to diagnose neoplastic small bowel lesions accurately.

Positron emission tomography (PET)-CT scans are rarely indicated to diagnose metastatic disease in the few cases of equivocal CT or MRI findings.