Several conditions exist that necessitate the need for surgery within or very close to the precentral gyrus. Glioma resection and resection to decrease the number of seizures in refractory epilepsy are two discussed here. In both cases, the potential for postoperative motor deficits needs to be kept in mind, when determining the risk-benefit ratio for patients.

Tumors located within the primary motor cortex of the precentral gyrus are frequently considered unresectable due to the likelihood of creating new neurological deficits. However, the primary goal of glioma surgery is to achieve the maximal safe resection because the extent of this resection has been shown to increase survival for both low- and high-grade gliomas. New neurosurgical techniques have been introduced to achieve the maximal safe resection while decreasing the consequences seen postoperatively. One technique showing promise is the use of intraoperative stimulation mapping, which has been shown to decrease the incidence of severe neurological deficits by 60%. Even with new techniques, the risks of resecting gliomas in the precentral gyrus are still present. Up to 20% of patients who have undergone a resection involving the primary motor cortex or precentral gyrus have reported postoperative permanent motor deficits. The risk of a patient developing a motor deficit can still be up to 30% even with experienced hands, direct cortical stimulation, and intraoperative neuromonitoring. Given the potential for risks during precentral gyrus resections, patients should be counseled prior to surgery on the high probability of having a new or worsened motor dysfunction. However, these deficits usually partially or completely resolve with time. Several techniques have been found to help neurosurgeons perform safer resections. Surgical planning assistance is available with the use of preoperative transcranial magnetic stimulation (TMS), which is also useful to aid with functional MRI and diffusion tensor imaging (DTI)-based tractography and is beneficial when ruling out if there is functional involvement of the primary motor cortex. Using TMS may lead to greater gross-total glioma resection. Continuous motor mapping with direct cortical stimulation is being tried as a new technique to help make precentral gyrus resections safer.

Surgical resection can be a treatment for frontal lobe epilepsy that is refractory to antiepileptic drugs. A subset of these patients have seizures that begin in the primary motor cortex, making the precentral gyrus an important target for resection. However, finding the precentral gyrus during surgery can be challenging due to a layer of arachnoid mater and being occupied by large veins. Sulcal anatomy should be verified preoperatively through imaging and then confirmed by gyral anatomy and stereotactic navigation intraoperatively. At greater depths, the sulci become more visible. The best way to identify the precentral gyrus during surgery is through the precentral “knob,” as it is the most common aspect of the precentral gyrus between individuals. This portion of the precentral gyrus functions as the hand area of the primary motor cortex and appears as looking like an omega sign. When this aspect is not visible, the central sulcus can also be utilized to locate the precentral gyrus.

Resections in the motor cortex have demonstrated effectiveness as a treatment option for patients with refractory epilepsy that begins within the precentral gyrus. Out of 280 patients, 85% showed some seizure improvement. These improvements did not come without deficits, as 58% of patients had an immediate postoperative motor deficit, and 23% had a long-term motor deficit. These motor deficits display a certain pattern of recovery. Immediately after surgery, there is paresis of the affected area for about two weeks. Following those two weeks, recovery begins in the proximal aspect of the limb and travels distally over the next couple of months. For the upper extremity, shoulder movement is seen first, followed by elbow flexion, elbow extension, wrist flexion, and finally return of hand function. The lower extremity strength tends to recover better than upper extremity strength, with the most common functional outcome being the return of ambulation without assistance. For resections involving the facial area of the primary motor cortex, the functional outcomes are facial symmetry and language function. In 37 patients, 20% noted a facial weakness, and 40% reported immediate postoperative dysphagia. Most patients had a resolution of postoperative dysphagia, with only 8% reporting long term dysphagia.