Antipsychotics are widely used medications for a variety of mental health disorders. While effective, these drugs do have many potential side effects. Healthcare workers, working as an interprofessional team, need to be aware of the adverse effects because they can seriously affect the quality of life. To avoid the metabolic effects of these drugs, the patient needs to receive information regarding lifestyle changes. Regular exercise, discontinuation of smoking, and eating a healthy diet are essential. Also, at each clinic visit, the patient's body weight, blood cholesterol, blood sugar, and blood pressure should be recorded. If the patient is on clozapine, then regular monitoring of the white cell count is required. Only through strict monitoring can the high morbidity of these drugs be limited.

When the clinician initiates therapy, they should explain the treatment to the patient. Nursing can reiterate this education, answer questions, and assess patient progress and adherence to subsequent visits. Lack of drug adherence can be a significant cause of treatment failure. The pharmacist needs to check for all potential drug-drug interactions and verify appropriate dosing. A board-certified psychiatric pharmacist can also consult on the case with the clinician, offering possible alternatives if treatment does not progress as hoped, e.g., recommend a long-acting dosage form. With these interprofessional interactions, antipsychotic therapy can achieve optimal outcomes for the patient. [Level 5]