Multiple medications can reduce airway resistance through various mechanisms. Many of these drugs are used to treat obstructive lung diseases like asthma and COPD.

Albuterol is an inhaled short-acting beta-2 agonist that stimulates beta-2 receptors on the surface of airway smooth muscle. The increased sympathetic tone causes the relaxation of airway smooth muscle, which causes dilation of the bronchi and bronchioles, reducing airway resistance.

Heliox is often an adjunctive therapy alongside albuterol for reducing airway resistance. With severe airway narrowing, gas velocity increases, and airflow becomes turbulent. This turbulent airflow increases airway resistance. Helium is seven times less dense than air, and when mixed with oxygen to form heliox, the lower density causes the turbulent airflow to revert to a state of laminar flow, decreasing airway resistance. This return to laminar flow and reduced resistance helps albuterol get to the distal airways, where it can act on distant beta-2 receptors and also helps to maintain ventilation to the distal airways, preventing progression to respiratory failure.

Ipratropium is another inhaled agent that works in the opposite way of albuterol. Ipratropium is an anticholinergic agent that works by blocking parasympathetic cholinergic receptors, which results in decreased parasympathetic tone on the airway smooth muscle, which prevents stimulation and contraction of airway smooth muscle, dilating bronchi and bronchioles, and resulting in decreased airway resistance.

Inhaled corticosteroids are a common therapy option in the treatment of persistent asthma. They act to decrease airway inflammation and mucus production. This reduction in inflammation and mucus increases the caliber of airways, reducing airway resistance. Since these are inhaled corticosteroids, they have few, if any, systemic side effects.