Papillary thyroid cancer is ideally managed by an interprofessional team that consists of an endocrinologist, general surgeon, oncologist, radiation oncologist, nuclear medicine clinician, internist, pharmacist (oncology and/or nuclear medicine specialized), and specialty care nurse. Most patients present to the primary care provider or nurse practitioner with a painless mass in the neck. Once the FNA is performed, the patient should be referred to an endocrinologist and a surgeon. Patients need to know that the sole treatment for PTC is surgery.

Patients treated with radioactive iodine need to be educated about this therapy and warned about the potential adverse effects. Following surgery, all patients require long-term monitoring for recurrence. Most patients will require long-term thyroid hormone replacement. Specialty care nurses in endocrinology or oncology assist with treatment, monitor and educate patients, and provide updates to the team. Pharmacists will assist with nuclear medicine and chemotherapy, as well as hormone replacement therapy following treatment measures. Best practices require open communication among all team members, particularly if they note a change or deterioration in the patient's condition. This includes accurate and updated patient records, so everyone involved in care can access the latest patient data. This interprofessional care model will yield the best patient results. [Level 5]

With early diagnosis and prompt treatment, the prognosis for most patients with PTC is excellent.