The administration of pancreatic enzyme replacement therapy requires the efficient functioning of an interprofessional team to ensure the best benefit to the patient. The team usually comprises a clinician, nurse practitioner, pharmacist, nutritionist/dietician, physiotherapist, and nurses. The primary provider may additionally involve physicians from oncology, gastroenterology, surgery, pulmonology, or pediatrics, depending on the etiology of the enzyme insufficiency. The primary care provider is involved in the diagnosis of insufficiency. The PCP is then responsible for managing the symptoms, deciding the supplementation requirements of the patients, monitoring progress, and managing any side effects that might result thereof. Nurse practitioners are required to alternate with physicians to monitor patient progress with the medications. Pharmacists should provide patients and families with information on the drug, side effects, precautions, and contraindications. They are also responsible for dose alterations as the case demands. Dieticians and nutritionists should assess the patient's nutritional status and determine the calorie requirement. They are also required to determine the need for vitamin supplements, growth hormone, and appetite stimulants. Physiotherapists are required to help with the ambulation of patients with chronic illnesses like pancreatic cancer and chronic pancreatitis. They should also be on board when dealing with cases of cystic fibrosis. Nurses are an integral part of the team, especially in the inpatient setting, to ensure that all orders are executed. They are also an essential link in communication between physicians and patients. No evidence is available for the effectiveness of an interprofessional approach to pancreatic enzyme replacement therapy.

Various studies have shown the benefit of involving an interprofessional team for patients with cystic fibrosis.