Patients should be closely monitoring for potential complications owing to ineffective erythropoiesis, bone marrow (BM) overstimulation, and blood transfusion. The complications of the transfusion are of two types.

- Acute (e.g., severe allergic reactions, septic shock, hemolysis), and

- Chronic (e.g., diseases associated with iron overload (i.e., cardiomyopathy, endocrinopathy, and hepatotoxicity), alloimmunization, and transfusion-related infections.

**Transfusion-related Complications**

**Iron overload**: It is the primary chronic complication associated with long-term RBC transfusion in patients with beta-thalassemia. Transfused RBCs contain the iron load. Iron accumulates over time, and when the body's excess iron eliminating function is overwhelmed, iron starts depositing in various organs, commonly the heart, pancreas, liver, and brain. Cardiac failure secondary to cardiac IO is the leading cause of death in patients with TDT. Usually, the patient dies at a young age (<20) if not promptly addressed.

Iron overload (IO) in the liver results in liver fibrosis, cirrhosis, and eventually hepatocellular carcinoma. Furthermore, the deposition of iron leads to diabetes, hypogonadism, hypothyroidism, and hypoparathyroidism secondary to pituitary gland disruption. Also, it can manifest as bronze skin, growth, and developmental delay. Therefore, ICT is essential in preventing these complications.

**Alloimmunizations:**It is the production of antibodies against specific RBC antigens or alloantigen (e.g., ABO, Rh, C, c, E, e, D, and Kell antigens) resulting from chronic transfusion. As per the international consensus recommendation, donated blood should be screened and crossmatched, and patients with thalassemia should receive antigen-compatible blood to avoid alloimmunization.

**Transfusion-related infections:**Viral, bacterial, and parasitic infections are common transfusion-related infections. Donated blood should be screened for HBV, HCV, and HIV as per World Health Organization (WHO) and Thalassemia International Federation (TIF) guidelines. Screening for endemic infections is also recommended in some countries.

**Thrombosis/hypercoagulable state:**Hypercoagulability is seen in patients with beta-thalassemia major (BTM) and beta-thalassemia intermedia (BTI) who are either poorly transfused, non-transfused, and splenectomized individuals.

**Others include:**Transfusion-related acute lung injury (TRALI), febrile non-hemolytic transfusion reaction, and delayed hemolytic transfusion reactions.