The metric system is essential in all healthcare settings. Patients are weighed at each clinical encounter. Scales used in the US have double marking indicators: metric and non-metric markings. Metric weight values are used in medication calculation, radiation dosing, and weight compliance in equipment use, such as the maximum weight of a CAT-SCAN unit or a surgical table that may hold a person. On the other hand, individuals not having a STEM background may have a minimal understanding of the metric weight system. The American tradition for weight is based on ounces or pounds.

When babies are born, their weight is one of the most important things recorded; metric weight is recorded in the electronic health records by clinicians and hospitals, and the family records non-metric weight for newborn announcements. Nowadays, all medications are based on weight for dose calculations for all populations, specifically children and infants. Adults have their weight recorded mainly by doctors at each physical patient-clinician encounter. Commonly, most adults monitor their weight for weight management. Clinicians record it in electronic health records in both kilograms and pounds. However, communication with patients is generally in pounds by health care providers for weight reduction education. In non-medical areas, such as in identifying suspects by American law enforcement, the pound unit in body weight is used for approximation for a better understanding of a person's estimated size and weight.

The medication dose in routine practice is calculated by mg/kg. The conversion to ideal body weight(IBW) should be used to calculate the accurate dosing.

- IBW for men in kg= 50 kg + 2.3 kg x (height-60)

- IBW for women in kg = 45.5 kg + 2.3 kg x  (height-60). Height is in inches, and height is ≥60 in.

The limitation of the abovementioned formula is that it overestimates body weight at taller heights and underestimates body weight at shorter heights.

Once the IBW has been derived, it can also estimate the tidal volume.

- Tidal volume target = 6-8 (mL/kg)*IBW.

The other issue is the calculation of the correct dose of antineoplastic agents. The weight-based formula may not be appropriate; the American Society of Clinical Oncology recommends Body Surface Area(BSA) to calculate the dose of the majority of antineoplastic agents. Additionally, ASCO recommends that the dosage of immune checkpoint inhibitors such as nivolumab and pembrolizumab be calculated based on FDA-approved prescribing information.

For pediatric patients, Clark's rule is used. The Clarks formula should not be used for pediatric patients with obesity due to the concern for toxicity or sub-therapeutic dosing.

- Pediatric Dosage=Adult dose x [weight of the child (lbs)/150]

Pediatric liquid formulations prescribed by teaspoons or tablespoons can lead to dosing errors.