There is a tendency to oversimplify the potential health benefits of all nutrients and dietary supplements having a high content of “antioxidants.” The Selenium and Vitamin E Cancer Prevention Trial (SELECT) clinical trial illustrates this point. This large-scale, prospective, randomized, placebo-controlled trial evaluated the potential effect of “vitamin E” and/or selenium supplementation on prostate cancer. The form of vitamin E used in this study was all-rac-alpha-tocopheryl acetate (not the same as dl-alpha-tocopheryl acetate). As detailed above, all-rac-alpha-tocopheryl acetate is not the naturally occurring form of dietary vitamin E from both a stereochemical view and a chemical point of view, since naturally occurring vitamin E is not esterified. Any unesterified form of vitamin E is a powerful antioxidant capable of inhibiting lipid peroxidation. The SELECT study found that neither all-rac-alpha-tocopheryl acetate nor selenium supplementation decreased the incidence of prostate cancer or any other cancer followed in the trial. Moreover, a subsequent follow-up to the initial SELECT trial found a significantly increased risk of developing prostate cancer in men taking all-rac-alpha-tocopheryl acetate. The SELECT trial showed that not all antioxidants are good for human health. Whether or not other forms of vitamin E, such as tocotrienols, have an anticancer effect has yet to be determined. Tocotrienols modulate some of the signal transduction pathways important in cancer in ways distinct from that of tocopherols.