**Toxicity**

The estimated lethal dose of IV dronabinol is 30 mg/kg (note this is for illustrative purposes as dronabinol dosing is oral). As such, the CNS toxicity (adverse CNS effects) of dronabinol is more applicable as a measure for monitoring dose-limiting toxicity. Signs and symptoms of toxicity include:

Mild Intoxication: sleepiness, feelings of joy, heightened sensory vigilance, time perception difficulties, conjunctival injection, dry oral cavity, and elevated heart rate.

Moderate Intoxication: Memory difficulty, feelings of detachment, mood changes, retention of urine, and decreased bowel motility.

Severe: Decreased coordination of motor function, lethargy, slurring of speech, and orthostatic hypotension.

Panic attacks in those with apprehension and seizures in those with a history of seizures can also occur.

**Management of Serious Ingestion**

There is no specific antidote for the treatment of dronabinol toxicity. If there is a history of recent excessive ingestion, the patient should have gut decontamination with activated charcoal (at a dosage of 30 to 100g for adults, 1 to 2 g/kg in infants). Delivery through a nasogastric tube may be necessary for an unconscious patient with a secure airway. Patients with intense psychiatric complications (such as depressive episodes, hallucinations, or psychosis) may need to be isolated in a quiet and peaceful area and frequently reassured by the provider or staff. Benzodiazepines, such as diazepam (5 to 10 mg PO), can be utilized for extreme agitation. Hypotension is manageable with Trendelenburg positioning and isotonic IV hydration.