If hemolytic disease of the fetus and newborn is identified or suspected in utero, a consult with maternal-fetal medicine should be placed as early as possible in the pregnancy. Affected pregnancies can be managed by monitoring antibody titers, and fetal middle cerebral artery velocities, intrauterine transfusions, and possibly early delivery, as infants with severe anemia may not tolerate term labor well.

Hemolytic disease of the newborn is managed by treating hyperbilirubinemia with phototherapy and exchange transfusions if needed. Routine universal screening with transcutaneous bilirubin (TcB) often occurs at 24 hours of life, but screening should be conducted as soon as hyperbilirubinemia is suspected. An elevated TcB should always be verified with a serum total bilirubin (TB). The hour-specific Bhutani nomogram is then used to risk stratify the amount of bilirubin in the infant's blood.

Phototherapy was introduced in the 1970s and has become the mainstay of hyperbilirubinemia management in newborns. Photo isomerization causes the transformation of bilirubin into a water-soluble isomer that can then be excreted by the kidneys and stool without the need for processing in the liver. The main determinants of phototherapy efficacy are the wavelength of light used, the intensity of that light, the total light dose (time exposed and surface area exposed), and the threshold at which phototherapy is initiated. The AAP recommends the use of intensive phototherapy in HDFN. The optimal light used for phototherapy has a wavelength of 460-490nm. The light should be at a close distance (about 20cm above the infant), and double phototherapy has proven to be more efficacious than single. There is limited data on the efficacy of continuous versus intermittent phototherapy for infants >2000g.

An exchange transfusion may be needed for severely anemic newborns, which involves replacing infant RBCs with antigen-negative RBCs, thereby preventing further hemolysis. 5mL/kg aliquots are removed and replaced over several minutes for a total of 25-50mL/kg exchange of RBCs. Exchange transfusions are recommended by the AAP if total bilirubin levels remain above the transfusion threshold despite intensive phototherapy or if signs of bilirubin encephalopathy are present. If an exchange transfusion is being considered, an albumin level should be measured. Albumin of 3.0 g/dL or less is considered an independent risk factor for hyperbilirubinemia and lowers the phototherapy threshold. Without sufficient albumin to bind bilirubin, the amount of free, unconjugated bilirubin increases, thereby increasing the risk for kernicterus.

Anemic infants may require blood transfusions with ABO-matched packed RBCs. If immediate transfusion is thought to be needed, O-type, Rh-negative blood that has been leukodepleted and irradiated should be available at delivery.

Other treatment modalities have been considered but are still controversial. Intravenous immunoglobulin (IVIG) in the infant may block Fc receptors on macrophages, thereby decreasing the breakdown of antibody-coated RBCs. IVIG is recommended by the AAP if total serum bilirubin continues to rise despite intensive phototherapy or is within 2-3 mg/dL of the exchange transfusion level. Administration of IVIG to mothers prior to delivery has not been shown to be efficacious and is not currently recommended. Other agents such as albumin, phenobarbital, metalloporphyrins, zinc, clofibrate, and prebiotics have been studied as possible treatment options for hyperbilirubinemia, but none are currently recommended.