Individuals can broadly classify into the following clinical categories:

- Endemic normals (EN) – subjects living in endemic areas but free of infection and not showing any symptoms of the disease

- Chronic (CH) – individuals with chronic sequelae of the disease such as elephantiasis, hydrocele or both for more than four years

- Asymptomatic carriers (AS) – individuals with microfilaremia and antigenemia not showing any clinical symptoms.

Clinical manifestations can subdivide into acute and chronic:

Acute presentations include:

- Acute adenolymphangitis - occurs as a result of the host’s immune response to the antigens released by dying worms - it is characterized by repeated bouts of sudden-onset fever and painful lymphadenopathy. Genitals are commonly involved in males, resulting in painful epididymitis.

- Filarial fever - characterized by episodes of self-limiting fever without any associated lymphadenopathy.

- Tropical pulmonary eosinophilia - characterized by repeated bouts of dry nocturnal cough and wheeze

Chronic presentations include:

- Lymphedema - the most common presentation that develops over a long period due to chronic lymphatic damage. It characteristically presents with swelling of the limbs either upper or lower depending on the involvement of inguinal or axillary lymphatic vessels. Pitting edema develops in the early stages of the disease, which later progresses into brawny non-pitting type. Elephantiasis is the most severe type of lymphedema characterized by severe swelling of the limbs, genitalia, and breasts. The skin becomes thick and hard, owing to hyperpigmentation and hyperkeratosis.

- Hydrocele - this is one of the debilitating morbidities associated with chronic disease. It can be unilateral or bilateral, leading to enlargement of the scrotum. It can be very large, reaching up to 40 cm.

Other manifestations include chyluria, hematuria, inguinal and axillary lymphadenopathy, testicular or inguinal pain, and skin exfoliation.