Women ages 21-24 with HSIL cytology are recommended to undergo colposcopy.  If CIN2 or greater is not diagnosed on biopsy, it is recommended the patient follow-up with cytology and colposcopy every six months for a 24 month period, as long as her exams are adequate and reveal no squamous intraepithelial lesions or at most LSIL.  If HSIL cytology or a high-grade colposcopic lesion is found during this time, a biopsy should be taken.  In patients where HSIL cytology persists for 24 months, but no high-grade lesion is identified on biopsy, a diagnostic excisional procedure is recommended.  If colposcopy is inadequate, CIN3 is specified on biopsy, or CIN2 or CIN2-3 persists for 24 months, then a diagnostic excisional procedure is recommended. If CIN2 is specified on biopsy, observation for 12 months using both cytology and colposcopy every six months is recommended.  This is because CIN2 has a higher regression rate and less risk of progression to cancer than CIN3, especially in younger women. Once the patient has two consecutive negative results on cytology and no evidence of a colposcopic abnormality, a co-test is recommended a year later.  If negative, a second co-test is recommended after three years.  If either co-test is abnormal, colposcopy is recommended.

Pregnant women found to have HSIL cytology should not undergo excisional treatment; only colposcopy is acceptable.  If a histologic diagnosis of a high-grade lesion is made, she may have additional cytologic and colposcopic exams up to every 12 weeks.  If cytology results are suggestive of invasive cancer or if the colposcopic appearance of the lesions worsens, a repeat biopsy is recommended. It is also considered acceptable to defer re-evaluation until the patient is at least six weeks postpartum.  A diagnostic excisional procedure is only recommended if there is a concern for invasive cancer.

For women >24 years old without special circumstances and with a HSIL Pap test result, either immediate excisional procedure or colposcopy is recommended, regardless of HPV results at co-testing.  If the colposcopic exam is inadequate, a diagnostic excisional procedure is recommended. If the colposcopy is adequate and HSIL (CIN2, CIN3 or CIN2-3) is confirmed on biopsy, ablation of the transformation zone or excision is considered acceptable. However, only a diagnostic excisional procedure is acceptable if the colposcopy is inadequate or the endocervical curettage shows a high-grade lesion.

Once the patient is treated, regardless of age, her recommended follow-up is HPV co-testing at 12 and 24 months post-treatment.  If both are negative, she can be retested in 3 years.  If this test is negative, she can return to routine screening for at least the next 20 years. An abnormal test should result in colposcopy with endocervical sampling.