Patients are usually asymptomatic at presentation, with suspicion of glaucoma raised by an optometrist on routine eye testing or an incidental finding with an ophthalmologist.

A family history of glaucoma and blindness should be obtained. Past medical history should include assessing risk factors for glaucoma, such as the history of steroid use, ocular trauma or surgery, and contraindications to treatments, including allergies. Medication usage should be reviewed.

A relative afferent pupillary defect is typical, though it may not be present in the early or symmetrical disease. Colour vision is usually preserved, except in advanced disease. By definition, the IOP will be in the normal range.

Slit-lamp examination and gonioscopy are essential to determine an open iridocorneal angle status and to exclude secondary causes of glaucoma. In particular, evidence of angle-closure, uveitis, pigment dispersion, and pseudoexfoliation syndrome should be sought, as these are common causes of glaucoma presenting with an IOP in the normal range.

Dilated fundus examination reveals glaucomatous optic disc changes. There is a progressive loss of ganglion cell neurons, leading to enlargement of the cup-to-disc ratio. This may be a focal (notch, retinal nerve fiber layer (RNFL) defect) or concentric defect (excavation, senile sclerotic disc). Disc pallor occurs in advanced disease. Measurement of the optic disc size can help identify hypoplasia, physiological disc cupping, and disc asymmetry. Optic disc hemorrhages are more common in NTG than POAG.