Apart from clinical diagnostic, EE is confirmed by imaging and lab investigations. Every case warrants a detailed slit lamp and dilated fundus evaluation. Sometimes the diagnosis is delayed since the clinical picture can have a lot of differentials, and multiple assessments are required before reaching a conclusive diagnosis. The prime importance should be given to systemic evaluation and management.

**Imaging Modalities**

**B Scan Ultrasound**

B scan ultrasound is an essential diagnostic modality to pick up vitritis, membranes, exudates in the vitreous cavity, retinal detachment, choroidal detachment, and choroidal abscess. The exudates in the vitreous cavity are present as echoes on the B scan. EE is also known to cause a choroidal abscess, which appears as dome-shaped elevation on B scan similar to choroidal detachment.

**Optical Coherence Tomography**

Optical coherence tomography (OCT) is an important imaging modality to delineate the retinal and subretinal space. OCT can help localize the exudates within subretinal layers, lesions of the retinal pigment elevation, retinal edema, vitreous cells and exudates, and choroidal involvement.

**Anterior Chamber and Vitreous Tap**

An anterior chamber aqueous tap of 0.1-0.2 ml can be performed with a 23 G needle. Vitreous tap of 1-2 ml is performed with the help of a 25 G needle. The sample can also be obtained while performing vitrectomy and subjected to culture, sensitivity, and histopathological examination. Lingappan et al. proved that samples obtained with vitrectomy showed a better culture positivity (92%) than vitreous tap (44%). Similarly, Zhang et al. showed that the sample obtained needle biopsy had a lower diagnostic yield than vitrectomy as the vitrectomy samples were closer to the retinal surface.

**Polymerase Chain Reaction**

The samples obtained through aqueous and vitreous tap can be subjected to a real-time polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR), with very high sensitivity and specificity. RTPCR has proven high sensitivity and specificity for fungi as per the analysis by Sugita et al. In culture-negative cases of EE; it has proven to be a better diagnostic modality for detecting microorganisms. PCR results are obtained within 90 minutes, with better diagnostic yield than culture results with no risk of contamination. The major limitation of PCR is that an antibiotic susceptibility pattern cannot be obtained through this.

**Blood Culture**

Blood culture is an important diagnostic modality for the diagnosis of systemic infection. Three consecutive samples can be obtained on three days under aseptic precautions for a better diagnostic yield. Besides blood culture, it is vital to obtain urine culture to identify occult microorganisms. According to a few previous studies, blood culture has shown a higher culture positivity than the vitreous sample, probably due to the sample volume obtained. Culture at extraocular sites has yielded a 21-100% positivity rate as per previous reports.

**Upcoming Modalities**

**2-Deoxy-2-[18F] Fluoro-Dglucose Positron Emission Tomography/Computed Tomography Scan**

Mehta et al. recently documented using 2-Deoxy-2-[18F] fluoro-D-glucose positron emission tomography/computed tomography scan for systemic assessment of patients with presumed fungal EE  in patients with COVID-19 infection.