**Renal Function Studies**

Laboratory studies to assess renal function include blood urea nitrogen (BUN) and creatinine. Although clinical evidence of renal involvement with lymphoma is only seen in 2% to 14 %of patients, an elevated serum creatinine is reported in 26% to 56%. An elevated BUN or creatinine level may indicate bilateral ureteral obstruction subsequent to massive retroperitoneal lymph nodes or as a adverse effect of nephrotoxic chemotherapeutic agents.

**Renal Biopsy**

The diagnosis of primary renal lymphoma requires biopsy in most cases as imaging findings are nonspecific. Although fine-needle aspiration is a useful technique, core tissue biopsy with flow cytometry and immunohistochemical staining is recommended as it has a higher diagnostic accuracy according to several studies.

With regard to secondary renal lymphoma (SRL), renal biopsy is usually not required in the presence of disseminated disease. However, it is reported that patients with lymphoma have a higher incidence of renal cell carcinoma (RCC) than the general population. Differentiating SRL presenting as a solitary mass (typically hypovascular) from clear cell RCC (mostly hypervascular) on imaging may be straightforward. Nonetheless, other histologic subtypes of RCC, like papillary and chromophobe RCCs, can also appear hypovascular on imaging, making it harder to differentiate from SRL. In such cases, a renal biopsy may be validated.

**Imaging**

There are several patterns of lymphomatous involvement of kidneys; the most common on imaging is multiple parenchymal nodular masses of variable size, typically 1 to 4.5 cm in diameter. This presentation is seen in approximately 50 to 60% of cases. The lesions are usually bilateral, but unilateral renal presentation can also be seen. The second most common pattern of involvement constitutes a contiguous extension to the kidneys or perinephric space from large retroperitoneal nodal masses (seen in 25% to 30% of cases).

Renal lymphoma presenting as a solitary mass is encountered in 10% to 25% of patients. On non-enhanced CT scan lymphomatous mass is slightly more hyperattenuating than the surrounding normal renal parenchyma. At contrast-enhanced CT, the mass is hypovascular and characteristically demonstrates minimal enhancement. This feature is invaluable in differentiating renal lymphoma from RCC, which mostly manifests moderate to avid enhancement in the arterial phase. Isolated perinephric lymphoma is rarely seen (less than 10% of cases). Contrast-enhanced CT scans are important for demonstrating a ring of homogeneous perinephric tissue which encases the normal parenchyma, with contrast-enhanced causing any significant renal dysfunction. Diffuse renal enlargement without distortion of the reniform shape of the kidneys or formation of any discrete masses presents in 6% to 19% of cases. Nephromegaly is almost always bilateral. If both kidneys are extensively infiltrated, acute renal failure. Contrast-enhanced CT demonstrates heterogeneous enhancement of the kidneys, loss of the normal corticomedullary differential enhancement, encasement and deformation of the pevicalyceal system, and infiltration of the renal sinus fat. Alternatively, the renal parenchyma is replaced by poorly defined low-attenuation lesions. The collecting system is encased and stretched instead of being displaced. The sonographic picture of infiltrative renal lymphoma is globular enlargement of the kidneys with heterogeneous echotexture and effacement of renal sinus.

**Nuclear Imaging**

Gallium-67 citrate has been used for diagnosing and staging lymphoma. This radioisotope concentrates in lymphoma. and is taken up by lymphomatous tissue in the kidneys. It also is concentrated in the inflammatory masses of the kidney. The degree of sensitivity increases in case of high grade lymphoma.18F-fluorodeoxyglucose (FDG) positron emission tomography (PET) scanning has been commonly used for staging and follow-up after treatment. The use of another agent, technetium-99m (Tc)-labeled antibody (LL2), has been advocated in imaging and staging lymphomas, especially in cases of low-grade lymphoma.