**Pleomorphic adenoma**consists of varying amounts of epithelial and mesenchymal components. The epithelial elements give rise to ducts, whereas the mesenchymal elements give rise to cartilaginous, osseous, hyaline, and myxoid tissues. The mesenchymal component develops from a metaplastic process of the myoepithelial cells.

**Warthin tumor**presents with a classic bi-layered eosinophilic, oncocytic epithelium with papillary projections and interspersed goblet cells. The epithelium is surrounded by a stroma of varying amounts of lymphoid tissue and germinal centers.

**Myoepitheliomas**are well-circumscribed, encapsulated masses of myoepithelial cells with spindle, epithelial, plasmacytoid, and clear cytoplasmic features.

**Lymphadenoma**is a well-circumscribed, encapsulated tumor of epithelial and lymphoid components. The non-sebaceous lymphadenoma variant contains epithelial (squamous or basaloid) cells surrounded by an intense lymphoid stroma. The sebaceous variant is more common (60%) and has epithelial cells with sebaceous differentiation. Lymphadenoma can be misdiagnosed as metastatic adenocarcinoma or lymphoepithelial carcinoma.

**Sebaceous adenoma**is a well-circumscribed, encapsulated mass with solid nests of sebaceous cells in a fibrous stroma. Occasional oncocytic metaplasia and foreign body giant cells can be present.

**Oncocytoma**is a well-circumscribed tumor with large epithelial, oncocytic cells with granulated eosinophilic cytoplasm surrounded by fibrovascular stroma nests, sheets, trabeculae, or ductal structures.

**Cystadenoma**is a well-circumscribed, non-encapsulated, multi-cystic mass. It contains a proliferative, papillary, and oncocytic epithelium and with papillary projections into the lumen. The lumen is filled with inflammatory, squamous, and foamy cells. There is no cellular atypia, mitotic figures, or invasive growth.

**Sialadenoma papilliferum**is a non-encapsulated, biphasic tumor consisting of an exophytic, hyperplastic squamous epithelium overlying deeper ductal elements (often creating cleft-like cystic spaces where both cell types are fused) in a papillary growth pattern. These tumors most commonly (>80%) occur in the oral cavity.

**Ductal papilloma (intraductal type)**consists of a papillary network of vascular fronds lined with the same columnar-cuboidal cells found on dilated salivary ducts. The papilla is often filling part of the cystic cavity. Cellular atypia and mitosis are usually absent.

**Ductal papilloma (inverted type)**presents with epithelial cells that form a broad papillary projection. Columnar cells, mucous cells, and microcysts can be present. There are few mitotic figures, and it is similar in histology to sinonasal inverted papilloma.

**Canalicular adenoma**consists of a bi-layered strand formed by columnar and cuboidal cells with eosinophilic cytoplasm. A vascular stroma separates the strands. squamous balls (morules), microliths, and tyrosine crystals may be present.

**Basal cell adenoma**is an encapsulated mass comprised of uniform basaloid epithelial cells and inner ductal epithelial cells with 4 distinct growth patterns: solid, trabecular, tubular, and membranous.