**Skin Biopsy**

Skin biopsy can be completed in multiple ways, including excisional biopsy, incisional biopsy, shave biopsy, punch biopsy, curetting, fine needle aspiration.

- An excisional biopsy: the entire lesion of interest is cut out.

- An incisional biopsy: a segment of a lesion is removed.

- A shave biopsy: a horizontal section is removed.

- A punch biopsy: a round specimen (2 to 6 mm in diameter) is removed, curetting fragments of tissue.

A fine-needle aspiration: drawn from the lesion for direct examination.

The biopsy type is chosen based on the type of lesion.

Following the skin biopsy, the sample must be placed in a fixative solution of neutral buffered formalin to preserve the tissue structure. In the laboratory, the sample is placed in formol saline for at least 24 hours before being processed.

The specimen is then placed in a small cassette initially in fixative, but later in paraffin blocks. The cassette is a support for the paraffin block and helps cut the tissue into thin sections. Alcohol dehydration to eliminate water from the preparation takes place by the use of an automated processor followed by clearance of the alcohol by using dimethyl benzene and allows the tissue to become incorporated in paraffin wax.

The tissue is removed from the cassette, put in a mold, and covered with hot liquid paraffin wax. When the wax cools, it becomes solid and forms the block for sectioning. Finally, the block is sectioned before being stained, typically with hematoxylin & eosin (H&E) with special stains later used if needed. Hematoxylin has bluish hues staining nucleic acids, and eosin will stain cytoplasmic components pink.

**Hair and Nail Examination**

Hair and nails may be studied in microscopy without performing a biopsy. Usually, a hair sample is collected by either clipping or plucking for microscopy, and clipping for nails. Clipping****of hair is recommended when hair shaft disorders are suspected, while plucking****is recommended when examination of the root is needed, as in alopecia areata and nails when infectious or immune-mediated conditions are suspected.

There are mainly two types of tissue preparation clinicians use.

- A dry mount: hair samples are put on a glass slide and covered with a coverslip.

- Wet mount: uses KOH for suspected fungal infection (hair and nails).