**Affordable Care Act**

Recent challenges have been posed by the passing of the Affordable Care Act (ACA) of 2010 which represents areas of concern for healthcare providers. The ACA has many excellent benefits, yet at the same time, it has increased the workload of healthcare team members who provide care for patients and their families. The ACA has increased the availability of health care coverage for millions. While very much needed, the coverage has created an abundance of newly insured patients with chronic disease diagnoses. Brindis & Freund reported approximately 133 million adults suffering from chronic diseases in 2018.

**Negative Healthcare Trends**

Major negative healthcare trends identified in the literature include a shortage of primary providers, increased patient-to-nurse ratios, high turnover rates among nursing and ancillary staff, and difficulty finding primary care providers that accept Medicare, Medicaid, and the ACA insurance according to Dickstein, Duggan, Orsini & Tebaldi's 2015 report.

The increase in patient-to-nurse ratios has significantly added to the work stressors for the bedside clinician. The bedside clinician continues to advocate for an increased load of patients and families regardless of whether additional help in staffing or an increase in benefits is received. The extra workload can lead to higher stress and burnout and drive higher turnover rates among staff clinicians, leading to the question: “Who is advocating for the nurse?”

**Self Advocacy**

A literature search was conducted to establish a framework for researching and promoting self-advocacy within the profession using the Cumulative Index to Nursing and Allied Health Literature (CINAL), Medscape, and Google Scholar.

The reviews document only a few controlled studies on nursing and self-advocacy. In addition to the traditional curriculum, nursing does not necessarily include a predetermined theoretical framework for how to care for oneself but instead focuses on advocating for the patient as described by Fukada. While this statement holds great truth for the profession as a whole, there is an identified gap in the literature that addresses the need for the nursing profession to research the practice of self-advocacy. Before implementation is proposed, self-advocacy must be defined.

Nursing self-advocacy can be defined as the ability to communicate the needs of self to make informed decisions about the essential elements necessary to meet those needs. Success in any endeavor requires nurses to possess the tools to promote self-advocacy. One way to address the issue would be to establish a theoretical framework that is derived from evidence-based practice (EBP) and easily related to many health domains.