Imaging is vital for the diagnosis of an acquired diaphragmatic hernia. Various imaging modalities are used to diagnose or aid the diagnosis of a diaphragmatic hernia, including chest radiographs, ultrasonography, and magnetic resonance imaging, with computed tomography (CT) being the modality of choice.

In patients with equivocal diagnosis, diagnostic laparoscopy or thoracoscopy are recommended. Moreover, open surgical exploration has been introduced to diagnose highly suspicious cases with equivocal imaging results.

The diagnostic measures and required evaluations for **congenital CDH**have been classified into two main categories of pre and post-natal.**Prenatal**diagnosis in up to 60% of neonates with CDH is described by routine antenatal ultrasound screening during 18 to 22 weeks of gestation. Non-specific sonographic findings, including polyhydramnios or hydrops, are predicted in antenatal ultrasonography. However, the presence of abdominal organs in the fetal chest would characterize the diagnosis of CDH. Large diaphragmatic defects will optimize the diagnostic potential of the sonography.

**Left-sided CDH:**the presence of a heterogeneous lesion in the left hemithorax and right mediastinal shift characterizes the prenatal left-sided CDH. The heterogeneous mass implies the herniated intestines. The fluid within the mentioned mass and, more importantly, peristalsis assist in differentiating CDH from other pre-natal intrathoracic lesions. The other diagnostic marker of congenital left-sided CDH is the absence of the stomach in the abdominal cavity. The displaced stomach is usually identified close to the left pericardial border or in the posterior cardiac space. Homogeneous hypoechoic mass in the chest close to the heart implies the herniated liver, and the intrahepatic vascular anatomy can be further characterized by Doppler sonography.

**Right-sided CDH**– the presence of a homogeneous mass in the right chest suggests the right-sided CDH. The herniated liver may or may not cause the left mediastinal shift. The sonographic appearance of the liver is quite similar to the lungs and, therefore, may not serve as a reliable diagnostic marker.

**Postnatal**—Any term infants presenting with symptoms of respiratory distress should be evaluated for CDH. Chest radiography indicating herniation of the abdominal organs (usually intestines characterized by air- or fluid-containing structures) into either the right or left hemithorax with minimal visible aerated lung on the affected side suggests the diagnosis of CDH.