The adverse effects of felodipine classify as either dose-dependent or dose-independent.

- The common dose-dependent adverse effects of felodipine include peripheral edema, flushing, palpitations, and headaches. The most common clinical side effect of felodipine use is peripheral edema. The frequency of peripheral edema is higher in individuals taking a higher dose of felodipine and elderly individuals. The incidence of peripheral edema is about 30% in elderly patients taking 20 mg of felodipine daily. Felodipine selectively dilates the arterioles, which leads to an increase in intra-capillary pressure, thus causing extravasation of fluid into the interstitial space and resulting in peripheral edema. ACE inhibitors or angiotensin receptor blockers can prevent peripheral edema. Flushing and headaches also occur because of the vasodilatory effects of felodipine. Palpitations may occur because of reflex tachycardia.

- The dose-independent adverse effects of felodipine include fatigue, nausea, and gingival hyperplasia. Gingival hyperplasia occurs in less than 1% of patients and is more common in individuals with poor dental hygiene. The mechanism of gingival hyperplasia is overexpression of growth factors due to high concentrations of calcium ions (Ca), leading to fibroblast proliferation and chronic inflammatory cell infiltration.

**Drug interactions:**Cytochrome P450 3A4 metabolizes felodipine.

- The plasma level of felodipine increases when used in conjunction with CYP 3A4 inhibitors such as azole antifungals (itraconazole and ketoconazole), macrolide antibiotics (clarithromycin and azithromycin), HIV protease inhibitors, immunosuppressants (cyclosporine), cimetidine, or grapefruit juice.

- The plasma level and efficacy of felodipine decrease when co-administered with CYP3A4 inducers such as anticonvulsants (phenytoin and carbamazepine), Saint John’s wort, or rifampicin.

- When metoprolol is subsequently administered with conventional felodipine formulation in treating essential hypertension, the plasma concentration of metoprolol increases while that of felodipine remains unchanged.

- If felodipine is co-administered with theophylline, it results in a decrease in the plasma concentration of theophylline.

- Calcium channel blockers and statins are frequently prescribed in patients with cardiovascular risk factors. In a study, acute kidney injury, hyperkalemia, acute myocardial infarction, and acute ischemic stroke were increased due to interaction between CYP3A4-metabolized statins and CCBs that inhibit CYP3A4, like felodipine.