**Levator Ani Syndrome**

It results from the spasmodic contraction of the levator ani muscle. It is characterized by recurrent and chronic burning pain, pressure, tenesmus, or discomfort without any obvious detectable organic pathology. It is felt in the rectal, sacral, and coccygeal regions, sometimes radiating to the thigh or the gluteal region. The diagnosis is mostly clinical, where the pain exaggerates on sitting and is relieved on lying down or standing up. It is a diagnosis of exclusion and is diagnosable by the Rome III criteria for Diagnosis of Levator Ani Syndrome:

- 
Chronic or recurrent rectal pain or aching

- 
Episodes lasting for 20 min or longer

- 
Exclusion of other causes of rectal pain such as ischemia, inflammatory bowel disease, cryptitis, intramuscular abscess, anal fissure, hemorrhoids, prostatitis, and coccygodynia.

- 
Criteria fulfilled for the last three months with symptom onset at least six months before diagnosis

- 
Tenderness during posterior traction of the puborectalis muscle

Points 1 to 4 mentioned above is the diagnostic criteria for chronic proctalgia, whereas tenderness of the puborectalis muscle (point no. 5) is the differentiating factor. The Rome IV update on Colorectal Disorders hasn't changed the above mentioned diagnostic criteria.

Treatment

There is no specific single treatment successful for all patients. Reassurance regarding the benign nature of the disease should come first. Then, the range of treatment would include digital massage, muscle relaxants, sitz baths, biofeedback, and electro-galvanic stimulation.

**Pelvic Organ Prolapse**

It is the descent of one or more of the pelvic organs out of the pelvis; it can either be the anterior vaginal wall with the bladder as its contents, the posterior vaginal wall with the rectum, the uterus, or the vaginal vault. Prolapse can cause dysfunction in activities of daily living, exercising, and sexual functioning. Its cause is multifactorial, but the most common factor would be pregnancy. Other risk factors include prior obstetric procedures or pelvic surgeries, chronic cough or straining, repeated heavy lifting, genetics, and ethnicity. The weakening of the levator ani muscle is the most common pathophysiology, where the funnel shape is altered and is more vertically oriented, causing the widening of the opening for the vagina.

Clinical Features

- Urinary stress incontinence

- Defecation symptoms: Fecal incontinence and constipation

- Altered sexual function and may cause dyspareunia

- A sensation of bulge or pressure symptoms in the vaginal vault

Treatment

As most cases of pelvic organ prolapse are asymptomatic, observation can be the treatment of choice, with lifestyle modification regarding smoking cessation, avoiding heavy lifting, and correcting constipation being helpful. Pelvic floor muscle training, also known as Kegel exercises, is performed by repeatedly contracting and relaxing the muscles of the pelvic floor made up of the levator ani and coccygeus muscle. It is done several times a day, lasting for a few minutes each time, for between two and three months, to strengthen the pelvic floor muscles.

Invasive methods like pessaries and surgical correction can be options for the treatment of a severe form of prolapse.