Due to potentially serious problems regarding safety issues with MRI, each patient needs to answer an MRI safety screening form before the scan. This screening is done during a verbal interview with the patient to ensure there is no contraindication for MRI. Patients need to be asked about any foreign substance that might interfere or with MRI acquisition. If a patient has devices or implants, the make and model of the object requires a check against relevant databases and MRI safety websites. Discussion with a radiologist or referring physician might be helpful to determine whether an MRI scan is the most suitable imaging modality or not. It is recommended that patients wear gowns in the MRI environment, To avoid metallic components of clothing. It is also recommended that the patient be informed about the details and the time of the procedure before the scan.

Although gadolinium chelates are generally well tolerated, MRI technologists and physicians need to be aware of adverse reactions to these contrast agents. MRI departments should provide appropriate medications and facilities to deal with possible reactions to contrast in patients. MRI scanner makes loud knocking noise during the procedure, which can cause damage to the hearing system. These noises could be attenuated by the patient using headphones and earplugs during the scan. During the MRI procedure, the personnel on hand must monitor the patient. With the help of an intercommunication system, the patient can speak with the MRI technologist or radiology nurse specialist, squeeze the communication ball, and also get commands.