The exact etiology of chronic diarrhea is quite broad as there are many different causes.  Any process which causes increased water into the stool can produce diarrhea. These typically categorize into inflammatory and secretory diarrhea.  The prevalence of the different causes will vary depending on the socioeconomic status of the individual. Individuals in a lower socioeconomic status will be more likely to have chronic bacterial, mycobacterial, and parasitic infections causing, whereas mid to high socioeconomic status individuals with chronic diarrhea are more likely to be afflicted with irritable bowel syndrome, inflammatory bowel disease, and malabsorption syndromes.

**Irritable Bowel Syndrome (IBS)**

This is defined as chronically abnormal bowel habits (diarrhea and/or constipation) associated with abdominal pain in the absence of any pathology.  Females are more likely to be diagnosed with IBS than males. Symptoms of IBS are usually worsened by stress. The symptoms are generally described as crampy lower abdominal pain with associated diarrhea, constipation, or alternating diarrhea and constipation.  Symptoms are often alleviated by defecation, although this is not necessary for diagnosis. For patients with diarrhea, they usually describe their bowel movements as being small or moderate amounts of loose stool. Usually, the bowel movements are associated with urgency.

**Medications**

Certain medications are known to induce diarrhea in patients. Currently, there are greater than 700 drugs which are associated with diarrhea.  Medical practitioners must look to the addition of new medications which may be associated with diarrhea.  When the offending agent is discontinued, diarrhea may stop within as little as a day but may take longer if there is an injury to the intestinal mucosa.  Patients who are receiving chemotherapy can have diffuse or segmental colitis.

**Crohn Disease**

Crohn disease is one of the inflammatory bowel diseases which is an autoimmune disease.

**Ulcerative Colitis**

Ulcerative colitis is the other major component of inflammatory bowel disease.  This disease has an unknown etiology. Patients often present with abdominal pain, diarrhea, and hematochezia.  Other signs that may aid diagnosis are weight loss and pallor secondary to anemia.

**Microscopic Colitis**

This is a common cause of chronic watery diarrhea.  There are two subtypes of microscopic colitis: collagenous and lymphocytic colitis.  It is diagnosed based on an endoscopic biopsy.

**Celiac Disease**

This disease process occurs in individuals who develop an immune-mediated reaction triggered by the ingestion of gluten.  Celiac disease occurs in only about 1% of the population, but the incidence is rising. Symptoms include abdominal cramping, diarrhea, and weight loss.  Diagnosis requires a biopsy of the intestine showing villous atrophy. Most patients will produce the antibody against tissue transglutaminase.

**Chronic Pancreatitis**

Pancreatic enzymes are essential for proper digestion of fats, proteins, and carbohydrates.  Patients with chronic pancreatitis will develop recurrent bouts of acute pancreatitis and chronic abdominal pain.  Chronic pancreatitis will eventually lead to scarring and fibrosis of the pancreas, which will decrease the number of pancreatic enzymes, and malabsorption.  This will lead to steatorrhea and weight loss.

**Lactose Intolerance**

The ability to digest lactose comes from an enzyme present in the intestine called lactase.  This allows the lactose to be broken down into simple sugar and be absorbed. When this enzyme is absent, the lactose is not able to be absorbed by the intestine.  This will increase the osmolality within the lumen of the intestine producing watery diarrhea shortly after the ingestion of lactose-containing foods.

**Malabsorption Syndromes**

This term is very nonspecific and encompasses any disorder where the intestine has a decreased ability to absorb nutrients while not requiring intravenous supplementation for health and/or growth.

**Post-cholecystectomy Diarrhea**

Diarrhea after a cholecystectomy occurs in up to 12% of patients.  Over time, symptoms generally resolve on their own without intervention.

**Chronic Infections**

Certain long-lasting infections of the gastrointestinal tract can be linked to chronic diarrhea.  A few of these infections include C. difficile, Vibrio cholerae, Salmonella, Shigella, Entamoeba histolytica, E. Coli, Giardia, Cryptosporidium, Whipple Disease, and Cyclospora.