The management of ACLF consists of the prevention of precipitating factors leading to acute hepatic decompensation, supportive care, and early initiation of specific therapy, prevention, and management of complications. It also includes determining the prognosis and the need for liver support including possible liver transplantation. All patients should be hospitalized preferably at a center that has facilities and expertise for a liver transplant.

**Prevention of Precipitating Factors Leading to Acute Hepatic Decompensation
**

- Have a high degree of suspicion for, evaluate, and treat any infection as early as possible.

- Attain sustained viral suppression of HBV and HCV.

- Administer intravenous albumin in patients with diagnosed spontaneous bacterial peritonitis to prevent accelerated renal dysfunction characterized by hepatorenal physiology. Intravenous albumin has no proven benefit in other bacterial infections.

- Start prophylactic antibiotics for low ascetic albumin.

- In patients with severe acute alcoholic hepatitis, early initiation of both Pentoxifylline or a combination of prednisolone and intravenous N-acetylcysteine has been shown to reduce the incidence of type-1 hepatorenal syndrome.

- In patients with severe sepsis, a combination of granulocyte colony-stimulating factor (GCSF) and darbepoetin has been shown to improve 1-year survival in decompensated cirrhotics.

**Supportive Care
**

- Access hemodynamic stability and the need for intravenous fluids and maintenance of acid-base levels and normal electrolytes. Vasopressors are indicated to maintain a mean arterial pressure of greater than or equal to 75 mm Hg to ensure adequate renal and cerebral perfusion.

- Monitor hematocrit for any bleeding, as the patients have coagulopathy and poor platelet functions. Blood products of platelets and fresh frozen plasma for coagulopathy are only indicated in patients with active bleeding or before an invasive procedure. Patients should be empirically started on proton pump inhibitors for prophylaxis of gastrointestinal bleed.

- Monitor hepatic encephalopathy and protect the airway (aspiration risk) should the patient show signs of worsening encephalopathy. This patient should be intubated and should be on a protocol to avoid cerebral edema.

- Maintain adequate nutrition with 1.0 to 1.5 grams of protein per kilogram per day.

- Monitor for hypoglycemia and maintain blood glucose between 160 to 200.

- Discontinue all home medications except the ones we identify essential to continue.

**Specific Treatment when Etiology is Known   **

- Patients with hepatitis A and E associated ACLF should receive supportive care, as no specific anti-virals are known to be effective.

- Patients with acute or reactivation of hepatitis C should receive appropriate anti-virals based on the prior treatment administered.

- Patients with acute or reactivation of hepatitis B should receive nucleos(t)ide analogs.

- Patients with acute decompensation in known Wilson’s disease or development of hepatic vein thrombosis as the etiology for ACLF should be considered for a liver transplant.

**Management of Complications
**

Every attempt should be made to avoid the development of multi-organ dysfunction.

Renal Failure: It may occur due to hypovolemia, acute tubular necrosis, or hepatorenal syndrome. Vasopressor therapy with norepinephrine or dopamine is indicated in severe hypotension. Renal replacement may be considered a bridge for a possible liver transplant. Continuous renal replacement therapy is preferred to hemodialysis in critically ill patients.

Sepsis (including from aspiration pneumonia): Address it with broad-spectrum antibiotic coverage. Obtain surveillance cultures of the blood, sputum, and urine in all patients with ALF.

Metabolic Disorders: Hypoglycemia occurs due to impaired glycogen production and gluconeogenesis, and requires continuous infusions of 10% or 20% glucose. Hypophosphatemia due to ATP consumption in the setting of hepatocyte necrosis necessitates aggressive repletion. Alkalosis in ALF is due to hyperventilation, and acidemia with a pH below 7.3 portends 95% mortality in acetaminophen overdose if the patient does not undergo a liver transplant. Hypoxemia may occur due to aspiration, acute respiratory distress syndrome, or pulmonary hemorrhage. Patients with encephalopathy greater than grade 2 should undergo endotracheal intubation for airway protection. Seizure-like activity may be treated with phenytoin or benzodiazepines.

Cerebral Edema: The most common cause of death in ALF is cerebral edema which leads to intracranial hypertension, ischemic brain injury, and herniation. Patients with arterial ammonia levels higher than 200 micromoles per liter are at an increased risk for intracranial hypertension. Triggers for cerebral edema include hypoxia, systemic hypotension, decreased cerebral perfusion pressure (CPP), and astrocyte swelling which occurs due to increased ammonia levels and glutamine production in the brain. Abnormal pupillary reflexes, muscular rigidity, and decerebrate posturing when present indicate the onset of intracranial hypertension. Measures to keep the intracranial pressure (ICP) below 25 mm Hg and CPP above 50 mm Hg, if an ICP monitoring device is placed, should be undertaken. Such measures include elevation of the head of the bed to 30 degrees, avoiding unnecessary stimulation such as suctioning of the oropharynx and background noise, endotracheal intubation, and sedation in a patient with grade 3 encephalopathy and above, prompt initiation of vasopressor therapy, and renal replacement therapy, hyperventilation, and intravenous mannitol therapy.

Encephalopathy: Encephalopathy is a key feature of ALF. CT of the head should be done in patients with grade 3 encephalopathy and above to assess for intracranial bleeding and cerebral edema.

Coagulopathy: Like encephalopathy, coagulopathy is also a defining feature of ALF. Bleeding events are rare despite the presence of severe coagulopathy. Hence, routine correction of coagulopathy is not recommended unless in the setting of overt bleeding or before invasive procedures. Transfusions of platelets, plasma, and cryoprecipitate, may be given if indicated. Recombinant factor VII administration can cause thrombosis; parenteral vitamin-K therapy (slow intravenous infusion) may be considered if a nutritional deficiency is suspected or in cases of prolonged cholestasis.

**Liver Support and Transplantation
**

The grading of ACLF and the progress of hospital stay helps physicians ascertain whether a particular patient is likely to improve or not, and subsequently need a liver transplant. Though a liver transplant is the only definitive treatment for ACLF, no guidelines exist regarding selection criteria. Also, infection disqualifies almost half of patients from receiving a liver transplant. Out of half of the patients with ACLF who are awaiting a liver transplant, only 10% to 25% receive it, while 50% to 75% die in wait.

Extracorporeal liver-assist devices have been used in clinical trials in patients with ACLF and are a potential treatment. Extracorporeal liver-assist devices aim to target detoxification and restore synthetic functions. Tumor hepatocyte (also known as the porcine hepatocyte line), Vital therapies ELAD, and Alliqua HepatAssist 2000 systems are the only available bioartificial liver support systems available. Recent multicenter trials, however, have not been shown to increase survival rates.