Airway adjuncts are indicated in patients who cannot maintain an open airway or are unable to maintain adequate oxygen saturation with supplementary oxygen. Oxygenation parameters should be monitored using continuous pulse oximetry. Ventilation should be monitored with continuous capnography with an end-tidal pCO2 target of 35 to 40 mm Hg. Within the first 48 hours, prophylactic hyperventilation to an arterial carbon dioxide tension (PaCO2) <30 mm Hg should be avoided if possible.

Systemic hypotension negatively impacts the outcome in the setting of TBI. Isotonic crystalloids should be used to prevent and correct hypotension; colloidal solutions have not been shown to improve outcomes.

Post-traumatic seizures are associated with severe TBI.

Prolonged elevations of ICP greater than a threshold of 20 mm Hg are associated with poor neurologic outcomes in the pediatric population.

Approaches to reduce elevated ICP include:

- Elevate the head of the bed to 30 degrees.

- Determine that the neck is in a neutral position and that the cervical collar is not impeding venous outflow.

- Appropriate analgesics and sedation: Pain and agitation can elevate ICP. Opiates and benzodiazepines are frequently used. In refractory cases, neuromuscular blockade may be used to prevent maneuvers that increase ICP, such as coughing, straining, and fighting against the ventilator.

- Hyperventilation: Routine hyperventilation in TBI is not recommended, though, in the setting of impending herniation, it remains one of the fastest, short-term methods to lower ICP en route to the operating room.

- ICP monitoring may be considered in infants and children with severe TBI who do not have a reliable neurologic exam where elevated ICPs resulting in a decline in neurologic status would be readily detected.

- Osmotic agents: Hypertonic saline (3%) or mannitol are the common hyperosmolar agents used to reduce ICP.

- Barbiturates: Patients with elevated ICP, refractory to other therapies, may benefit from barbiturates which are thought to decrease ICP by decreasing cerebral metabolic demand.

- Decompressive hemicraniectomy: As part of a surgical procedure to evacuate hematoma or as a primary treatment of refractory ICP, decompressive hemicraniectomy can be used to reduce medically refractory ICP via the removal of part of the skull.

- Hypothermia has not been shown to improve outcomes in children and remains investigational at this period.

- Cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) diversion may be employed to reduce medically refractory ICP, typically via external ventricular drain (EVD) or lumbar drain if not contraindicated.

- Corticosteroids: There is no evidence to support corticosteroids improving neurologic outcomes.