**Parkinson Disease**

PD usually affects around 1 to 2 people in a population of 1000 at any given point in time. PD rarely occurs in individuals below 50 years of age. The prevalence rate of PD increases with an increase in age, with 1% of the population over 60 years being affected with PD. It is more commonly seen in men as compared to women, with a male-to-female ratio of 1.5 to 1.

**Vascular Parkinsonism**

Out of the total cases of parkinsonism, VP is responsible for 2.5 to 5% of these cases. The Rotterdam study reported that 5% of the total participants had parkinsonian features due to cerebrovascular disease. Chang et al. conducted a clinical cohort that revealed that out of the total patients with parkinsonism, 4.4% had VP diagnosed based on imaging studies and response to levodopa.

**Drug-induced Parkinsonism**

According to a community-based survey, DIP has a prevalence rate of 2.7%, whereas a population-based study suggested a prevalence rate of 1.7%.  The incidence rate of DIP also increases with age with the majority occurring between 60 and 80 years of age.

**Toxin-induced Parkinsonism**

A geographic study done in the US has revealed that there is a correlation between the areas in the US that have increased manganese emission from industries and a high incidence of manganese-induced parkinsonian features. Couper was the first to report manganese-induced parkinsonism in 1837, in workers who suffered exposure to manganese dioxide working in a manganese ore-crushing factory.

**Juvenile Parkinsonism**

The average age at which JP occurs is 17 years, and younger men are at increased risk with the male-to-female ratio being 4 to 1.