**Approach to MSK Injury**

Prior to the evaluation of specific MSK injuries, EMS providers should follow advanced trauma life support (ATLS) guidelines. The primary survey in ATLS consists of the airway, breathing, and circulation (ABCs). Any life-threatening hemorrhage found should be managed as part of the circulation exam. Severe hemorrhage from an MSK injury is best controlled with direct pressure and takes precedence over injury stabilization.

EMS providers should begin the evaluation of the MSK injury by visually assessing the injury and removing any overlying clothing or jewelry so they can fully examine the affected body part. One should look for any debris such as broken glass and dirt that can be easily brushed away and not become embedded into the skin of the patient. Also, one should assess whether there is disruption of the skin secondary to a fracture. Next, palpate the injured area for any deformity, bony tenderness, swelling, or crepitus. Evaluate the distal portion of the affected extremity to assess for proper circulation, sensation, and muscle strength. Do this by checking capillary refill, distal pulses, muscle strength testing, and skin sensation.

When an MSK injury is identified, the treatment goal of the EMS providers is to restore and maintain bone and joint alignment. By doing this, EMS providers control pain, reduce motion, prevent further soft tissue injury, and promote the tamponade effect of muscles on any injured blood vessels. This is best attained by realigning the extremity into anatomical position as soon as possible, then applying a splint to maintain its position.

There is some controversy over whether or not EMS providers should attempt reduction to realign bone fractures. The current teaching is that the MSK injury should be splinted in the position the patient is found unless there is apparent poor distal circulation. In this case, EMS providers should employ one attempt to try to reposition and realign the extremity, and then splint it in place. If their attempt is unsuccessful, they should return to splinting in the initial position found.

**Approach to Reduction**

To perform a reduction of a fracture, EMS providers start by checking for distal circulation, sensation, and motor function. Next, stabilize above and below the injury, followed by applying gentle traction to the distal extremity in the direction it is facing. While maintaining traction, move the distal extremity back toward its anatomical position. Stop immediately if there is resistance, a significant increase in pain, or when the correct anatomical position is obtained. Recheck distal circulation, sensation, and motor function. Apply an effective splint to maintain anatomical position and to protect the extremity from further damage.

Aggressive pain management is indicated if possible to help relax the patient during an attempt to reduce and realign a displaced fracture. Realignment is uncomfortable for the patient. However, it is frequently associated with a considerable reduction in pain. For this reason, realignment should not be delayed if the administration of pain medication is not readily available.