Doxorubicin has been a mainstay in treating various cancers for many years, and members of the interprofessional health care team must be aware and up to date on the indications, interaction, adverse effects, and other pharmacodynamic and pharmacokinetic factors that can affect successful therapy implementation, and lead to improved patient outcomes.

Prescribing and monitoring doxorubicin requires an interprofessional team of healthcare professionals that includes clinicians (MDs, DOs, NPs, PAs), various specialists (e.g., cardiologist, and hematologist/oncologist), nursing staff with specialized oncology and chemotherapy training, laboratory technologists, and pharmacists (preferably also oncology specialized)all working collaboratively and engaging in open communication about the patient's progress, status, and response to treatment.

Proper monitoring for complications, particularly cardiac and hepatic, is indicated as a retrospective study reported cardiotoxicity in 26%, and the 1-year mortality with doxorubicin-induced cardiotoxicity is as high as 50%.

Regularly monitor complete blood counts and metabolic panels to monitor for myelosuppression. The medical team should respond and assess significant changes to consider halting the drug when indicated. This monitoring function often falls to the clinical pharmacist, who will track the necessary lab work and inform the ordering clinician regarding situations that require alterations in the regimen. Nursing will be well versed in administration and monitoring for side effects, particularly extravasation, and inform the team of any concerns.

Team coordination is also necessary when considering using dexrazoxane to decrease the risk of cardiotoxicity.

This interprofessional paradigm leads to the best patient result for oncological care with doxorubicin while mitigating risks and preventing adverse events. [Level 5]