The disease manifests as follows:

**Bleeding**:  Thrombocytopenia is present at birth. It is the most common finding present at the time of diagnosis. Affected patients may present in the first days of life with petechiae and prolonged bleeding from the umbilical stump or after circumcision. Other manifestations may include purpura, hematemesis, melena, epistaxis, hematuria, and such life-threatening symptoms as oral, gastrointestinal, and intracranial bleeding. A subset of infants less than or equal to 2 years of age may present with "severe refractory thrombocytopenia," possibly due to antiplatelet autoantibody, a complication that is associated with poor prognosis.

**Immunodeficiency**:  The severity of immunodeficiency depends largely on the type of mutations and resulting protein expression. Patients usually present with multiple recurrent infections and failure to thrive. Patients are susceptible to encapsulated organisms asStreptococcus pneumoniae, Neisseria meningitides, and Haemophilus influenzae. Manifestations include otitis media, sinusitis, pneumonia, meningitis, sepsis, and colitis. Splenectomy, which is occasionally performed to decrease the risk of bleeding, further increases the risk of severe infections and sepsis. This immunodeficiency also predisposes patients to opportunistic infections with Pneumocystis jirovecii, Molluscum contagiosum, as well as systemic varicella and cytomegalovirus infection. Fungal infections are relatively rare consisting primarily of mucocutaneous infection due to Candida albicans.

**Eczema:**Eczema of varying severity develops in approximately one-half of WAS patients during the first year of life and resembles classical atopic dermatitis.

**Autoimmune manifestations**:  Reports exist of autoimmune diseases include hemolytic anemia, neutropenia, vasculitis involving both small and large vessels, inflammatory bowel disease, and renal diseases. A broad spectrum of autoantibodies has been observed both in classic WAS and in XLT.

**Malignancies**:  Malignancies can occur during childhood but are most frequently present in adolescent and young adult males with the classic WAS phenotype. B cell lymphoma (often Epstein-Barr virus-positive) and leukemia are common in classic WAS but do occur in XLT.

The disease has three main clinical phenotypic manifestations:

**Classic (severe) Wiskott-Aldrich syndrome**:  This is the severe phenotype of WAS. Affected boys present in early childhood with a hemorrhagic diathesis due to thrombocytopenia; recurrent bacterial, viral and fungal infections; and extensive eczema. Lymphadenopathy is frequently present, especially in those WAS patients with chronic eczema, and hepatosplenomegaly is common. Patients with classic WAS tend to develop autoimmune disorders and lymphoma or other malignancies, often leading to early death.

**X-linked neutropenia (XLN)**:  XLN presents mainly as congenital neutropenia. Patients with XLN present with infections characteristic for neutropenia but may also develop infections associated with lymphocyte dysfunction. These patients also have an elevated risk for myelodysplasia.

**X-linked thrombocytopenia (XLT)**:  XLT presents as congenital thrombocytopenia that is sometimes intermittent (IXLT).WAS gene mutations.