# Continuing Education Activity

Bile duct strictures are segments of the narrowing of the intrahepatic or extrahepatic biliary ductal system. The narrowing impedes the normal antegrade flow of bile, causing proximal dilatation resulting in significant morbidity from the clinical and pathological sequelae of biliary obstruction. The management of these strictures depends on the etiology, which could be benign or malignant. This activity reviews the evaluation and management of bile duct strictures and highlights the role of the interprofessional team in evaluating and treating patients with this condition.

**Objectives:**
- Describe the etiology of bile duct strictures.
- Outline the presentation of a patient with bile duct strictures.
- Summarize the management considerations for patients with bile duct strictures.
- Explain the importance of improving care coordination among the interprofessional team to enhance the delivery of care for patients with bile duct strictures.

# Introduction

Biliary strictures or bile duct strictures refer to segments of narrowing of the intrahepatic or extrahepatic biliary ductal system. When narrowed, they impede the normal antegrade flow of bile, causing proximal dilatation resulting in clinical and pathological sequelae of biliary obstruction. Patients with chronic biliary strictures present a unique challenge when malignancy is suspected. The diagnosis and management of patients with biliary strictures potentially encompass an interprofessional approach, including endoscopists, surgeons, interventional radiologists, and hepatobiliary specialists.

# Etiology

Bile duct strictures can be congenital or acquired.

- Chronic pancreatitis

- Primary sclerosing cholangitis

- Acute cholangitis

- Blunt and penetrating abdominal trauma

- Autoimmune diseases (pancreatitis or cholangitis)

- Mirizzi syndrome

- Ischemic cholangiopathy

- Biliary inflammatory pseudotumors

- Oriental cholangiohepatitis (Ascaris lumbricoides and Clonorchis sinensis)

- Post radiation

However, the most common etiology for biliary strictures is malignancies.

# Epidemiology

Globally, the incidence of biliary strictures is thought to be on the rise primarily because of the iatrogenic bile duct injuries resulting from the widespread practice of laparoscopic cholecystectomy. Multiple strategies like the critical view of safety have been suggested to minimize bile duct injuries and associated morbidity from bile leaks and strictures.

# Pathophysiology

Biliary strictures are characterized by narrowing of a segment of the bile duct associated with proximal ductal dilatation. Obstruction of bile flow leads to elevation of serum bilirubin levels with clinical and laboratory features of obstructive jaundice. Stasis of bile is a major risk factor for ascending cholangitis.

As observed from magnetic resonance cholangiopancreatography (MRCP) or endoscopic retrograde cholangiopancreatography (ERCP), benign strictures have tapered margins with smooth and symmetric borders. On the other hand, malignant strictures have shouldering of the margins with irregular and asymmetric borders.

The strictures can be classified according to the Strasberg-Bismuth classification. Classification helps in guiding management.

Type E injuries lead to strictures of the hepatic ducts, which are further defined by the proximal extent.

- E1: Common hepatic duct division greater than 2 cm from the bifurcation.

- E2: Common hepatic duct division less than 2 cm from the bifurcation.

- E3: Common bile duct division at the bifurcation.

- E4: Hilar stricture involves confluence and loss of communication between the right and left hepatic duct.

- E5: Involves aberrant right hepatic duct with concomitant stricture of the common hepatic duct.

# Histopathology

In general, histopathological findings in biliary strictures depend on the etiological agent or mechanism. For example, in the case of primary sclerosing cholangitis, histopathology reveals intrahepatic or extrahepatic bile duct inflammation and fibro-obliteration.

# History and Physical

The clinical presentation depends on the location and cause of the stricture.

History of fever and leukocytosis suggests an infective cause or sequelae to the strictures. History of weight loss, abdominal or back pain, worsening performance status should be taken with caution since it could warn towards a possible malignant etiology.

The previous history of hepatobiliary surgery, autoimmune disease, pancreatitis, cholelithiasis, or chemotherapy should be elicited as it can be pivotal in determining or eliminating the differential diagnosis.

Further efforts should be made during the physical examination to elicit specific clinical signs like Murphy and Courvoisier signs, as this may also help in narrowing down the diagnosis or etiology of jaundice. The presence of hard masses in the abdomen may point towards an advanced malignant process.

# Evaluation

Contributory laboratory findings are mainly drawn from a liver function test, a coagulation profile, and a complete blood count. Liver function tests may reveal elevated levels of conjugated bilirubin and liver enzymes (alkaline phosphatase and gamma-glutamyl transferase). Transaminases may be elevated nonspecifically. Immunological studies may be obtained to assess certain autoimmune etiologies of biliary strictures. Apt diagnosis and further management are based on the correlation of laboratory data, imaging findings with epidemiologic and clinical data.

Deranged liver function tests and coagulation profiles may help to determine the algorithm of subsequent imaging and minimally invasive studies.

Assay of CA19-9 and carcinoembryonic antigen (CEA) can be obtained in patients with suspected hepatobiliary malignancy as they can help with diagnosis and follow-up. Of note, these are not specific to biliary malignancy. Endoscopic ultrasound (EUS) guided fine needle aspiration cytology (FNAC) is highly sensitive and specific but not useful to rule out malignancy.

Ductal dilatation is a major feature of imaging for biliary strictures.

Computed tomography (CT) scan has higher sensitivity than trans-abdominal ultrasound for biliary malignancy, and its utility can be improved with the use of a multi-detector CT (MDCT) scan and CT-pancreatic protocol in providing more information on tumor vascular encroachment and biliary tree obstruction. It is also able to detect complications from biliary obstruction such as cholangitis and abscesses.

MRCP can provide high-quality cholangiograms, thus establishing the location and extent of biliary strictures. It provides a cross-sectional and three-dimensional reconstruction of the biliary tree.

Evaluation of biliary strictures by ERCP can determine etiology, provide tissue samples for cytology and histology, and facilitate therapeutic interventions like stenting of obstructed segments from strictures. It is, however, associated with post-ERCP pancreatitis and is also being overtaken by newer technologies like confocal laser endomicroscopy (CLE). Other emerging technologies useful in the assessment of the etiology of biliary strictures include fluorescent in-situ hybridization (FISH), direct peroral cholangioscopy, and intraductal ultrasound.

A hepatobiliary iminodiacetic acid (HIDA) scan helps to identify the level of bile leaks and bile injuries after cholecystectomy.

# Treatment / Management

Medical management of biliary strictures is largely restricted to addressing complications from biliary obstructions and sometimes treatment of the causative agent. Therefore, analgesics, empiric antibiotics, plus hemodynamic support with intravenous fluids with or without vasopressors and inotropes are often instituted where applicable.

The goal of the interventions for biliary strictures includes reestablishing patency and avoiding additional procedures.

In general endoscopic treatment is the first-line treatment of biliary strictures.

**Common Interventions for Biliary Strictures**

**Dilatation**

- The preferred approach for the management of benign biliary stricture

- Balloon dilatation used extensively for strictures resulting from primary sclerosing cholangitis

- Commonly performed endoscopically

- Tracts resulting from percutaneous transhepatic biliary drainage can be used for access during dilatation

******Stenting**

- Commonly performed endoscopically

- Useful in the management of both benign and malignant common bile duct (CBD) strictures

- Used to reduce hyperbilirubinemia or cholangitis in patients before definitive surgery

- Useful for palliation in inoperable malignant strictures

**Resection and Anastomosis**

- The decision depends on whether it’s a malignant or benign stricture and whether the desired outcome is palliative or curative

- Associated with significant morbidity and cost

**Bypass**

- Hepaticojejunostomy may make it difficult in the future to perform ERCP

- Bypass may involve choledochoduodenostomy in certain cases

Image-guided percutaneous transhepatic biliary drainage catheter may be placed for palliation of hyperbilirubinemia in patients with either inoperable disease or until completion of neoadjuvant therapy.

A biliary sphincterotomy involves the division of the biliary sphincter of Oddi and the intraduodenal segment of the common bile duct. It enables removal of stones, placement of stents, and assists endoscopic access for future ERCP. It also facilitates balloon dilatation.

Novel techniques for the management of biliary strictures include magnetic compression anastomosis (MCA), intraductal radiofrequency ablation, and biodegradable stents.

# Differential Diagnosis

In the diagnosis and management of biliary strictures, the most valuable and critical distinction that should be made is between benign and malignant etiology. This differentiation presents a major diagnostic and therapeutic challenge. Therefore, elaborate history taking, physical examination, and diagnostic workup should be completed.

A diagnosis of choledocholithiasis should also be considered in cases of suspected biliary strictures.

# Prognosis

The mortality in patients with biliary structures depends on the underlying etiology. Biliary strictures due to chronic pancreatitis, trauma, radiation, or operative injury have a good prognosis, but those resulting from malignant and primary sclerosing cholangitis may have unfavorable prognosis as well as strictures arising in patients with HIV cholangiopathy.

# Complications

Biliary strictures can get complicated by chronic low-grade biliary obstruction. The complications include:

- Recurrent cholangitis

- Ascending cholangitis

- Gram-negative septicemia

- Stone formation

- Hepatic abscesses

- Secondary biliary cirrhosis

- End-stage liver disease

- Cholangiocarcinoma

Other complications could result from interventional procedures, and these may include:

- Pancreatitis

- Cholangitis

- Bleeding

- Biliary perforation

- Additionally, there are reports of distal migration of biliary stents leading to duodenal perforation.

# Consultations

Biliary strictures frequently present a challenge in terms of diagnosis, necessitating interdisciplinary collaboration. Likewise, a significant proportion of patients with benign strictures may have a protracted, complicated course calling for multiple consultations. Therefore, teams caring for patients with biliary strictures may comprise:

- Hepatobiliary surgeons

- Medical oncologists

- Diagnostic radiologists

- Surgical oncologists

- Endoscopists

- Gastroenterologists

- Interventional radiologists

# Deterrence and Patient Education

Patients drinking alcohol should be counseled against the practice, especially those whose diagnosis is linked to drinking i.e alcoholic chronic pancreatitis. Patients who have biliary stents placed should be educated about the recognition of symptoms and signs of blocked stents. Those who have external drains should be taught about how to flush their drains using aseptic measures. Lastly, the patient and their caregivers should be informed about the prognosis of their disease.

# Enhancing Healthcare Team Outcomes

Bile duct strictures may present with nonspecific signs and symptoms of obstructive jaundice, abdominal pain, nausea, vomiting, fever, and leukocytosis. The cause of bile duct strictures may be one of the myriads of diagnosis, which includes benign and malignant etiologies. The complexity of this disease process lies in the challenges of its diagnosis and subsequent appropriate management. Inaccurate diagnosis or delay in management can have devastating outcomes for the patient. While the general surgeon is almost always involved in the care of these patients, it may become imperative to consult with an interprofessional team of specialists that include gastroenterologists, interventional radiologists, hepatobiliary surgeons, surgical oncologists, and transplant surgeons.

The society of American gastrointestinal and endoscopic surgeons (SAGES) offers guidelines for the clinical application of laparoscopic biliary tract surgery. Regarding common bile duct injuries, the guidelines suggest that the factors which have been associated with bile duct injury include surgeon experience, patient age, male sex, and acute cholecystitis. (Level II, Grade C) If major bile duct injuries occur, outcomes are improved by early recognition and immediate referral to experienced hepatobiliary specialists for further treatment before any repair is attempted by the primary surgeon unless the primary surgeon has significant experience in biliary reconstruction. (Level II, Grade A)

Nurses play a vital role during the recovery of such patients. They monitor the patient closely for changes in vital signs and mental status as the patients recuperate. The nurses help in the timely recognition of common postoperative complications such as deep vein thrombosis and anastomotic leaks. The role of the laboratory personnel and pharmacist is critical as well. The pharmacist may be involved in the management of parenteral nutrition for critically ill patients.