There is no antidote for MALA. The mainstay of therapy is supportive care aiming to restore physiologic acid-base status, treat concomitant disease, and, when indicated, enhance elimination metformin. All patients should be observed for a minimum of 12 hours for symptoms and lab findings consistent with the development of MALA in an acute overdose.

Initial resuscitation is focused on airway, breathing, and circulation. Patients may present with central nervous depression and require intubation for airway protection. Bedside glucose should be measured and corrected for all altered patients. Care must be taken when considering intubation of the acidotic patient as physiological compensatory mechanisms may be blunted by mechanical ventilation with typical lung-protective ventilation settings (i.e., lower tidal volumes and typical respiratory rates of 10 to 16). If intubation is indicated, a higher respiratory rate and/or tidal volume should be selected to target high minute ventilation to approximate the patient’s compensatory efforts in the setting of acidosis. If patients are intubated, the ventilator setting should be adjusted to compensate for underlying acidosis with frequent monitoring of arterial blood gases.

Treatment of severe acidosis can include a sodium bicarbonate infusion. Evidence-based indications are lacking, but some have advocated starting a bicarbonate infusion for a pH < 7.20 in the setting of underlying cardiovascular disease and/or hemodynamic compromise.

Enhanced clearance and correction of acid-base status can be achieved with hemodialysis or continuous renal replacement therapy in hemodynamically unstable patients. The extracorporeal treatments in the poisoning workgroup (EXTRIP) recommend initiating hemodialysis in the setting of pH <= 7.0, lactate > 20 mmol/L, and/or comorbid conditions including shock, acute or chronic renal or hepatic failure, and altered mental status.

Extracorporeal membrane oxygenation (ECMO) may be used for patients unable to tolerate clearance by hemodialysis in the setting of hemodynamic compromise.