- Allergic rhinitis - Not all snoring is OSA, which should be discussed with the parents at the time of the initial evaluation, and nasal congestion should be treated.

- Attention deficit hyperactivity disorder (ADHD) - Pediatric OSA can be mistaken for behavioral problems because it frequently manifests as hyperactivity and difficulty with focus and attention in children.

- Developmental delay - OSA can lead to learning difficulties due to compromised focus and attention and sometimes be mistaken for a developmental delay.

- Gastroesophageal reflux - When reflux occurs at night, it can cause a brief pause in breathing that may be mistaken for OSA. The two are not, however, mutually exclusive and reflux can increase the risk of OSA by worsening adenotonsillar hypertrophy.

- Nocturnal enuresis - Primary nocturnal enuresis is rarely associated with OSA, but secondary nocturnal enuresis should prompt screening for other symptoms of OSA.

- Morning headaches - These can be a consequence of carbon dioxide retention overnight, but the patient should also be screened for more concerning qualities of the headaches (waking them from sleep at night, worse when lying supine, etc.) that may require imaging or further evaluation. A typical headache from OSA is dull and generally goes away on its own shortly after getting out of bed without using medication or caffeine.

- Parasomnias - OSA can increase the occurrence of sleepwalking, night terrors, and confusional arousals but may also be unrelated.

- Narcolepsy - OSA usually does not present as excessive daytime sleepiness in younger children. Patients frequently falling asleep during the day after five years of age should prompt screening questions for narcolepsy.

- The only definitive way to distinguish between OSA and any of these is polysomnography.