The disease is more common in males. The patient is usually above the age of 50 years; if younger, other differentials may be explored, such as Buerger disease and autoimmune conditions such as vasculitis.

The central aspect of the history would be the complaints to progressive difficulty walking and pain—intermittent claudication, which is a pain in the calf precipitated by walking and relieved by rest. Rest pain is characteristically worse at night and is aggravated by lying supine and elevating the foot and is relieved by hanging the foot off the bed and sleeping in a chair.

Ulcers most commonly present on digits, as well as gangrene.

The severity requires evaluation, and the site of pain to help determine the location of the occlusion. The most common sites to ask about are mainly buttocks, knees, calves, and digits. Complaints of impotence also merit attention and abdominal pain after eating to rule in or out mesenteric ischemia. The previous history of stroke and transient ischemic attack is essential.

The examiner should query risk factors, such as the previous history of diabetes, hypertension, hyperlipidemia, and, if present, medication dosage, and compliance require assessment.

On examination, the main points are the built and general appearance of the patient to look for cachexia and muscle wasting, eyes for pallor (anemia) or jaundice, palpate all pulses including femoral, popliteal, posterior tibial, dorsalis pedis artery. Examine the abdomen for abdominal aortic aneurysm and auscultate for bruits. Asses the gait, and do special tests to determine the severity, Buerger's test to determine the angle, check for dependent erythema, ulcers, skin texture, loss of hair, pigmentation, dependent rubor, amputated digits. Check for sensation and numbness.

One of the most crucial parts of the examination and assessment is the ankle-brachial pressure index (ABPI). The normal values are 1 to 1.3. A value of less than 0.9 suggests intermittent claudication, less than 0.5 is associated with rest pain, and less than 0.3 is critical limb ischemia. The ABPI is a highly sensitive test and is essential to form a diagnosis and assess disease severity.

The ABPI may show a value of more than 1.3 in patients with diabetes due to calcification of the vessels. In that case, a segmental waveform analysis or toe-brachial index is an alternative.