**Nerve Gas**

Pioneers in the study of nerve gas include two French organic chemists, Jean Louis Lassange and Phillipe de Clermont. In the early 1930s, the German scientist Willy Lange first described the toxidromes associated with exposure to nerve gas as a choking sensation and dimming of vision. These are the cholinergic effects of exposure of the nervous system to organophosphates. Gerhard Schrader conducted experiments to harvest the use of these substances as insecticides. The Nazis in pre-World War II Germany saw the potential use of this chemical for warfare and later produced the G series of nerve gas during World War II, specifically sarin, tabun, and soman. The British were able to synthesize the VX nerve gas, more powerful and more potent than the G series.

The postwar period witnessed the entry of the United States into the synthesis of organophosphates after some American companies gained access to the works of Gerhard Schrader. The organophosphates produced were used as insecticides, with parathion and malathion being the first organophosphates pesticides to be synthesized in the US.

Nerve gas has been used from World War I to the present day as a chemical warfare agent. It was used extensively in World War II and the Gulf War. The most recent use of nerve gas was in the current war in Syria in 2013.

In peacetime, the most extensive use of nerve gas was in 1994 and 1995 when Sarin was used for terrorism in Japan.

The effects of nerve gas on the body can be profound.

Chronic exposure to nerve gas like sarin can lead to the following neuroendocrine manifestations

- Delayed neurotoxicity

- Chronic neurotoxicity

- Endocrine disruption

**Pesticides**

The most commonly used organophosphate pesticides are the following:

- Parathion

- Chlorpyrifos

- Diazinon

- Dichlorvos

- Phosmet

- Fenitrothion

- Tetrachlorvinphos

- Azamethiphos

- Azinphos-Methyl

- Malathion

- Methyl Parathion

**Carbamates**

Another class of insecticides is carbamates which are chemically similar to organophosphate pesticides. They are derivatives of carbamic acid and cause carbamylation of acetylcholine esterase (AChE) at the level of neuronal synapses. Their binding to AChE is reversible, and the duration of action is about 24 hours.

**Nerve Gas**

Common nerve gasses are classified into three groups:

**G series**(developed by the Germans during WWII)

- Sarin

- Soman

- Tabun

**V series**(developed by the British)

- VE

- VG

- VM

- VR

- VM

- VX

**Novichok**

“Newcomer" (developed in the former Soviet Union in the late 70s and early 80s)