Laboratory analysis plays a major role in the evaluation of a patient with suspected alcoholic ketoacidosis.

- Complete blood count (CBC) - The white blood cell count (WBC), hemoglobin, and hematocrit levels may be elevated in a dehydrated patient.  An elevated mean corpuscular volume (MCV) is often seen in patients with chronic alcohol use disorder.

- Metabolic Panel - The basic metabolic panel will likely be abnormal. Potassium levels can be normal or low, as dehydration and decreased oral intake frequently decrease the serum potassium level. Bicarbonate or HCO3 will likely be decreased with the presence of metabolic acidosis. The blood urea nitrogen (BUN) to creatinine ratio may be elevated if the patient is dehydrated. Glucose levels are usually mildly elevated but are not generally above 250 mg/dl. The initial glucose levels are more likely to be in the normal range.

- Beta-Hydroxybutyrate - The serum beta-hydroxybutyrate (B-OH) level will be significantly elevated. The degree of elevation of B-OH will be much greater than the elevation of lactate. If the lactate is greater than 4 mmol/L, another cause of the acidosis should be investigated. Serum alcohol levels are often low or absent.

- Arterial blood gas (ABG) - The blood gas analysis will most likely reveal a pH that is low or normal. There will be a metabolic acidosis present with a decreased HCO3 level. If the patient is capable, a respiratory alkalosis will be mounted by the patient. The presence of a mixed disorder may also be present as significant vomiting can cause metabolic alkalosis.

- Urinalysis - Urinalysis may show an elevated specific gravity as the patient is usually dehydrated. The specific gravity of the urine can be in the normal range if the patient has been drinking recently enough for the effect of antidiuretic hormone (ADH) inhibition to be still present or if the patient has been able to tolerate oral fluids over the last 24 hours, but no significant solid food.

- Nitroprusside Test - The nitroprusside test can be used to document ketonuria by the detection of acetoacetate. It may be weakly positive despite the presence of significant ketosis as the urine nitroprusside test may vastly underestimate the presence of beta-hydroxybutyrate, which is the major ketoacid present in AKA. Glucosuria will likely be absent.

Other tests:

- Electrocardiogram (EKG) - The EKG will likely show sinus tachycardia, but atrial fibrillation or atrial flutter can be seen in a dehydrated patient with chronic alcohol abuse disorder and alcoholic ketoacidosis.

- The initial chest x-ray is usually negative.