Treatment and management of thymic tumors include chemoradiotherapy, the use of corticosteroids, immunotherapy, tyrosine kinase inhibitors, and surgical resection. The utilization of multidisciplinary tumor boards is vital in determining the correct method of treatment of these neoplasms. There has been no randomized controlled trial that provides definitive guidance for management strategies.

In the setting of resectable disease, i.e., an encapsulated tumor or a tumor invading resectable structures (the pericardium, the pleura, or an area of the lung), surgery is indicated since an R0 resection is feasible. Typical management includes total thymectomy and a lymph node dissection. The likelihood of long-term survival depends on the completeness of the resection. Of note, there is often an inflammatory fibrous reaction that mimics invasion and should be noted and marked by the surgeon on the specimen for the pathologist. In patients with myasthenia gravis who are to undergo resection, they need to complete a careful preoperative evaluation and have their disease controlled medically before resection. Anesthesia needs to be consulted and have a cautious plan in terms of induction, intubation, and extubation.

Some patients have potentially resectable disease, which is a tumor that is invading the nominate vein, phrenic nerve(s), or the heart and great vessels. These patients need multimodal therapy that includes preoperative chemotherapy and postoperative radiotherapy. These patients should be re-evaluated after neoadjuvant treatment to determine if their disease is resectable; in which case, surgery is recommended. Surgical approaches can be aggressive and include pleurectomy or an extrapleural pneumonectomy, followed by postoperative radiotherapy (PORT). If their disease is deemed not resectable, the patient should undergo tumor debulking and PORT. In cases of thymic carcinoma and postoperative residual disease, patients should receive adjuvant chemotherapy with radiotherapy.

Patients with the unresectable disease are those with extensive pleural and pericardial metastases, un-reconstructable great vessel, heart or tracheal involvement, or distant metastases. Such patients should receive systemic therapy (either radiotherapy alone or chemoradiotherapy). Patients who are medically unfit for surgery due to age or extensive comorbidities should also be considered for this. Their therapies should be individualized based on their extent of disease, their symptoms, and their performance status. Chemoradiotherapy has been shown to improve long-term survival and symptoms in some patients. Radiotherapy alone palliates thoracic symptoms such as dyspnea and cough using a total dose of 60 or more Gy. Chemotherapy is used as the primary palliative therapy for widespread disease.

Finally, in cases of recurrent disease, surgical resection is recommended in cases of localized recurrence (**drop metastases**) and has been shown to lead to prolonged survival. In other cases of more extensive recurrence, chemotherapy or palliative radiotherapy is recommended.