**Pulmonary**

Recommended treatment for adults and children with MAC infections includes azithromycin, rifampin, and ethambutol. Additional drug options are available for each drug class. Three times per week dosing is used in adult nodular/bronchiectatic disease with recommended regimens of azithromycin 500 to 600 mg, or clarithromycin 1000 mg, plus ethambutol 25 mg/kg, plus rifampin 600 mg. Daily dosing is required in cavitary disease with the additional option of three times weekly streptomycin or amikacin. Recommended daily dosages are: clarithromycin 500 to 1000 mg or azithromycin 250 to 300 mg, plus rifampin 450 to 600 mg, with either amikacin or streptomycin. The American Thoracic Society and Infectious Disease Society of America cite a study that suggests tolerated dosages of 25 mg/kg three times weekly for both drugs. They also state that certain experts recommend considering decreasing dosages to 8 to 10 mg/kg (maximum 500 mg) for patients older than 50 years or receiving treatment longer than 6 months. Antibiotics are continued until the patient has had 12 months of negative sputum cultures. The typical time to the first negative sputum culture is 3 to 6 months, with most patients obtaining negative sputum cultures within 12 months. Treatment failure is defined as the lack of sputum conversion after 12 months or the lack of sputum conversion within 6 months without any improvement clinically or on imaging. In cases of progressively worsening respiratory status where patients continue to fail sputum conversion, surgical resection of the lung parenchyma containing the cavitary disease may be required.

Mycobacterium intracellulare has demonstrated rising minimum inhibitory concentrations and overall increased resistance to anti-mycobacterial agents compared to Mycobacterium avium, making it more complicated to treat at times.

Alternative agents utilized to treat MAC/MAI pulmonary disease includes inhaled amikacin, clofazimine (as a substitute for rifampin), and moxifloxacin.

Several other atypical mycobacterial species have been shown to cause pulmonary disease and are generally susceptible to macrolides, rifampin/rifabutin, streptomycin, amikacin, doxycycline, and fluoroquinolones. Of note, the pulmonary disease caused by Mycobacterium abscessus is resistant to most antibiotics and can only be cured in a minority of patients by surgical resection. Those that are not cured are administered chronic intermittent antibiotic therapy to attempt to slow disease progression.

**Lymphadenitis**

Treatment for lymphadenitis is based on a two-drug regimen of one macrolide, azithromycin, or clarithromycin, combined with rifampin or ethambutol. Antibiotics are dosed daily and taken until the resolution of symptoms. Surgical resection of infected lymph nodes and tissue is typically used in combination with antibiotic therapy with significantly increased cure rates. The initial antibiotic regimen may be adjusted based on culture susceptibility results.

**Skin and Soft Tissue**

Skin and soft tissue infections are treated with combination antibiotic therapy with a variety of options available, including macrolides, doxycycline, fluoroquinolones, trimethoprim/sulfamethoxazole, cephalosporins, or linezolid. Empiric therapies are adjusted once susceptibility testing yields results; however, combination antibiotic therapy is continued due to inducible antibiotic resistance. Surgical debridement is required for infections that are extensive and associated with necrosis.