The management of ITP involves several goals and concepts.

- Aim to bring the platelet count to normal.

- Indication for active therapy is only when there is acute bleeding or if emergent surgery is forthcoming. If there is no significant bleeding and the platelet count is > 30,000 /dL, then transfusion may be withheld.

- The vast majority of children recover spontaneously without sequelae. In severe cases, the treatment of choice is intravenous immunoglobulin (IV IgG). A 5-day course of 400 mg/kg/d is given. Responses occur in more than 70% in 1 to 4 days, but only for a short period; many patients respond, and repeated courses may be necessary.

- Patients (children and adults) with active bleeding require corticosteroids to stop further destruction of platelets (about 60% of patients respond well within two weeks). Steroid use in pregnant women during the first trimester carries a small risk of cleft palate.

- Patients who do not respond adequately and have active bleeding after a month of being treated with corticosteroids may need splenectomy after using intravenous immunoglobulins to raise the platelet count. Therefore, splenectomy is the treatment of choice for adult patients with ITP who have persistent symptomatic thrombocytopenia. It is recommended that patients be screened for COVID prior to splenectomy.

- In adult patients with ITP, the corticosteroid preferred is prednisone 1 to 2 mg/kg/d. The response rate for a seven-day course is about 56%, with a long overall remission rate.

- It reserves plasmapheresis for cases of fulminant ITP.

- Neonatal thrombocytopenia is treatable with intravenous immunoglobulin, which raises the platelet count.  IV-IgG is favored over Anti-D immune globulin due to the increased risk of severe hemolytic transfusion reactions in the latter.

- Platelets increase after three months in untreated ITP neonates due to the catabolism of maternal anti-platelet antibodies transferred during birth.

- Vincristine (VCR) seems to be a valuable drug in adult patients that do not respond to splenectomy. However, VCR can cause neuropathy, and it is contraindicated in pregnancy.

- Hemostaticxs such as tranexamic acid and Epsilon Aminocaproic Acid are not favored in treating ITP.

- Rituximab use in ITP appears limited to second-line deployment, likely as combination therapy.

- Anti-RhD globulin is immunoglobulin directed against the D-antigen of the Rh blood group.

- Fostamatinib is a splenic tyrosine kinase inhibitor that decreases antibody-dependent phagocytosis of platelets.

- Efgartigimod and rozanolixizumab are compounds undergoing testing for use in myasthenia gravis as well as in ITP.

- Sutimlimab is a humanized monoclonal antibody against C1s, a complement pathway inhibitor.

- Rilzabrutinib is a Bruton Tyrosine Kinase-inhibitor (BTKI) with efficacy in the treatment of ITP.

- Azathioprine may take several months of therapy to exert an effect on ITP.

- Thrombopoietins (eltrombopag, romiplostim, and avatrombopag) have been shown in ITP to have upwards of an 80% response rate.

- Recent opinion appears to support the use of combined agents in the therapeutic approach to ITP.