General steps include:

- Place the patient supine with their head turned gently to the left. This central venous access technique via the right jugular vein will be successful no matter how much or how little the head can or cannot be turned. (Fig. 1)

- The practitioner's left ring finger is placed in the patient's sternal notch, and the adjoining middle and index fingertips are brought together such that they are in the midline over the trachea (Fig.2).

- This group of fingers is then rolled over the trachea and down into the space between the trachea and medial head of the medial sternocleidomastoid muscle. The pads of the three fingers must stay in contact with the trachea. When done properly, the left ring finger is now in contact with the sternoclavicular joint. The medial head of the sternocleidomastoid muscle is bunched into a mound lateral to the fingers. (Fig. 3)

- In the middle of the mound and at the level of the left index finger, insert the finder needle at a 45-degree angle to the skin, aiming toward the patient's ipsilateral nipple with gentle suction applied to the syringe. (Fig. 4)

- Once the vein has been entered, and venous blood is positively identified in the syringe, the larger introducer needle is inserted directly over the top of the smaller finder needle at the same angle and direction as the finder needle. (Fig. 5)

- Proceed to place a catheter with the Seldinger technique.

This completes the central venous access via the right jugular vein procedure.

Check the post-procedure chest radiograph or blood gas for proper central venous line catheter placement.