Aortic valve replacement by Ross procedure is done with median sternotomy and bicaval and aortic cannulation. Cardioplegia is obtained mostly with cold intermittence. Warm reperfusion is done before the aortic clamp is released. Common adventitia between pulmonary root and aorta is dissected to reach muscular infundibulum. Both the aortic and pulmonary valves are inspected first before any extraction. The pulmonary valve is extracted while making sure that the valve is in good shape, and the first septal coronary artery is preserved. The Hegar dilated is then used for the measurement of autograft. The next step is the removal of the diseased valve. The annulus is then measured to match it with the graft. Annuloplasty is done in case of any mismatch. Valve leaflets are then attached to the aorta with the help of polypropylene sutures. After the autograft implantation, the left coronary button is anastomosed first, others later. Then the surgeon performs distal anastomosis of pulmonary graft first and distal anastomosis of aortic graft later. The final part is to secure the proximal portion of the pulmonary graft with a running suture.

Homograft aortic valve replacement is also done with a median sternotomy followed by cardioplegia. During the procedure, the surgeon makes sure to remove all the infected tissue along with a damaged aortic valve. Debridement procedure may lead to mitro-aortic junction defect. Anterior mitral leaflet or a part of a leaflet from the graft is used to fil this defect. Then the atrium is sutured along with a pericardial patch if needed.