# Case Presentation

A 38-year-old African American male, who emigrated from Somalia 10 years ago, presented with a 6-month history of lower extremity swelling, 20-pound (9 kg) weight gain over 4 weeks, and new-onset microscopic hematuria. He had no prior history of edema, proteinuria, or hematuria. There was no prior history of any systemic illness or any heart, lung, or kidney disease. He reported no over-the-counter drug use, herbal medication use, or NSAID intake. His review of systems was positive for lethargy, fatigue, and edema at his lower extremities. His family history was negative for any kidney disease. He reported a monogamous relationship with his wife and no current or past alcohol or drug use. His medical history included recently diagnosed hypertension, latent tuberculosis, and anemia. His vital signs included a blood pressure of 160/90 and a heart rate of 78.

His physical exam revealed clear lungs and a normal heart exam on auscultation. His abdomen was soft and non-tender, and his skin was warm and dry with no rash. He had 2 plus pitting edema at the ankles. Initial laboratory data was consistent with acute kidney injury (AKI) with worsening creatinine from 1.2 to 1.6 over 1 month and nephrotic range proteinuria. Serologies for hepatitis B, hepatitis C, anti-nuclear antibody (ANA), c-ANCA, serine protease 3 (PR3) IgG, myeloperoxidase antibody (MPO), and complement levels were sent. He was started on losartan for proteinuria with plans for renal biopsy; however, he was lost to follow up. The patient then presented two weeks later with worsening edema to his waist, continued weight gain, mild hemoptysis, and streaks of blood in the stool. Physical examination now showed worsening pitting edema up to his waist with new non-pruritic, erythematous excoriations on the medial aspect of his thighs bilaterally. He was admitted to the hospital with concern for worsening vasculitis. He was started on oral prednisone and underwent a renal biopsy. For his edema, he was started on diuretics to which he responded well. Due to persistent leukopenia, thrombocytopenia, and anemia, human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) testing was performed to complete the workup.

# Initial Evaluation

His initial serological testing sent at the time of his first visit was negative except for low C3 levels and a positive c-ANCA and PR3 IgG, a marker for granulomatosis with polyangiitis (GPA), formerly known as Wegener granulomatosis.

# Differential Diagnosis

The differential diagnosis for acute kidney injury associated with nephrotic range proteinuria and a low C3 level and a positive cANCA was confusing as ANCA related vasculitis is not associated with low complements and his infectious and autoimmune workup typically causing low complements was negative.

His differential diagnosis included:

**Vasculitis**

Vasculitis including granulomatosis with polyangiitis, polyarteritis nodosa, Churg-Strauss Syndrome, IgA vasculitis, cryoglobulinemia, immune complex-associated vasculitis (infectious, SLE, or drug hypersensitivity), giant cell arteritis, leukocytoclastic vasculitis.

**Glomerular Disease**

Primary Glomerular Disease due to:

- Focal segmental glomerulosclerosis

- Membranous nephropathy

- Other proliferative glomerulonephritides (focal, “pure mesangial,” IgA nephropathy)

- Membranoproliferative glomerulonephritis and dense deposit disease

- Minimal change disease

Secondary Glomerular Disease due to:

- Systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE)

- Drugs (NSAIDs, penicillamine, heroin)

- Infection (schistosomiasis, malaria, syphilis, hepatitis B & C, HIV)

- Malignant disease (carcinoma, lymphoma)

- Diabetes mellitus

- Hereditary nephritis.

# Confirmatory Evaluation

HIV ELISA and confirmatory Western blot were positive for HIV-1.

# Diagnosis

Based on pathologic findings a diagnosis of HIV-associated immune complex kidney disease (HIVICK) was established.

# Management

He was discharged on trimethoprim/sulfamethoxazole and azithromycin prophylaxis and started on antiretroviral therapy (ART) once his HIV genotype was determined. Throughout the hospitalization, diuresis was continued with furosemide, and his renal function improved with his creatinine down to 1.7 before starting abacavir-dolutegravir-lamivudine.

# Discussion

Once infected with HIV-1, the development of AIDS can be delayed up to 10 to 20 years.

It is important to know the limitations of laboratory data when approaching a patient with newly diagnosed renal failure. Positivity of ANCA has been found secondary to HIV infection in up to 20% to 83% of cases, with a proposed mechanism being polyclonal activation of B cells. The sensitivity of c-ANCA for GPA is 64% with indirect immunofluorescence.

Renal disease in the setting of HIV manifests in several ways. HIV-associated nephropathy (HIVAN) is a form of focal segmental glomerulosclerosis with interstitial inflammation and microcysts involving direct infiltration of renal tubular and glomerular cells by HIV.

Another form of renal disease in the setting of HIV is called HIV immune complex kidney disease (HIVICK). It is also usually seen in advanced HIV and black race. The prognosis is also poor with 32% of patients reaching ESRD status within two years.

Before starting ART in an antiretroviral naïve patient with impaired renal function, there are several considerations to keep in mind.  First, certain ART medications require renal adjustment or are contraindicated with impaired renal function.

Having HIV is no longer a contraindication for renal transplantation. The Infectious Diseases Society of America (IDSA) strongly recommends the evaluation of HIV patients with ESRD or imminent ESRD for kidney transplantation after considering comorbidities, history of opportunistic infections, and virologic response with ART.

# Pearls of Wisdom

The initial approach to a patient with new-onset lower extremity edema can be challenging, with the initial workup, often focusing on the hepatic, cardiovascular or renal system.  Screening for a vasculitic process is often performed, particularly when it involves the renal or pulmonary systems. It is important to understand the significance and limitations of serological markers when evaluating the patient.  This case aims to highlight the potential pitfalls of positive serologic markers and the importance of keeping a broad differential in new-onset lower extremity swelling.

This review separating vasculitic renal disease from infectious etiology highlights the importance of not empirically treating a patient with positive serological markers for vasculitis with cytotoxic agents as this could be disastrous for a patient with HIV. This case also presents an atypical presentation of HIV infection and the need to have a high index of suspicion for the disease, even when risk factors are not apparent. Treatment regimens will also differ for an HIV patient with concomitant renal impairment and special considerations must be given before starting ART.

# Enhancing Healthcare Team Outcomes

This case presents an excellent opportunity to discuss the importance of an interprofessional team management in managing patients with renal failure and HIV. Having either HIV or renal failure can overwhelm patients due to the complexity of care required for proper management and the need for long-term treatment. Patients with renal failure who depend on hemodialysis experience extraordinarily high burdens of stress which adversely affect treatment compliance and subsequent outcomes. Thankfully, interprofessional management of dialysis patients delivers a multitude of benefits including better clinical outcomes, cost savings, and improved patient quality of life.