Rickettsialpox is a self-limited disease; however, the treatment with antibiotics will shorten the duration of systemic symptoms from approximately seven to ten days without treatment to less than 48 hours with therapy. The drug of choice to treat R. akari is doxycycline. Doxycycline 100 mg orally, twice daily, for 2 to 5 days or 48 hours post defervescence is sufficient. Some experts recommend seven days of therapy. Defervescence occurs within one day of therapy.

Children older than eight years of age can be prescribed doxycycline at 2.2 mg/kg per day orally in divided twice-daily doses. The duration of treatment is the same as for adults. The maximum daily dose should not exceed 200 mg. No treatment is advised in pregnancy or children less than eight years of age.

As in infections due to other rickettsial species, chloramphenicol has been used to treat R. akari infection. In vitro susceptibility studies for R. akari were done using dye uptake and plaque assays. Amongst the macrolides, josamycin has the lowest minimum inhibitory concentrations (MIC) of 0.5 microgram/m to 1 microgram/ml. Doxycycline MICs were 0.06 microgram/m to 0.125 microgram/ml. Tetracycline and chloramphenicol are bacteriostatic in mice models even though these antibiotics are used clinically to treat R. akari infections. In vitro, penicillin, aminoglycosides, and vancomycin are all bacteriostatic at very high concentrations. In experimental mice, rickettsial multiplication will not stop even at a very high concentration of penicillin.