The first step in the management of newly diagnosed brain metastases is the treatment of intracranial edema. Oral or intravenous steroids (such as dexamethasone) are commonly used. A loading dose of 10 mg intravenous (IV) dexamethasone followed by 4 mg IV every six hours is one dosing regimen. After the initial clinical response, which can occur rapidly, the dose may be tapered to avoid many of the adverse effects of long-term high dose steroid administration.

Following the initiation of steroids, definitive management may be initiated. Treatment options include surgical resection (for limited brain metastases in patients with good performance status and surgically accessible lesions), whole-brain radiotherapy, and stereotactic radiosurgery. Whole-brain radiotherapy is given by daily radiotherapy treatments (usual 10 to 15) targeting the whole brain. Radiosurgery is a more precise form of radiotherapy which delivers a large dose only to the area of the brain metastasis, usually in a single fraction. Each of these treatments has distinct advantages as well as a unique side effect profile. A multidisciplinary treatment team of a neurosurgeon, radiation oncologist, and neuro-oncologist should participate in the formulation of the treatment plan together with the patient.

The historical standard in patients with good performance status has been surgical resection. Local recurrence following surgical resection remains high, with one trial recently reporting 12-month freedom from local recurrence of 43% following surgical resection and observation.

For patients either not eligible for surgical resection of brain metastases or who elect for non-surgical therapy, stereotactic radiosurgery offers an excellent option for controlling a limited number of intracranial metastases. Although first used in combination with whole-brain radiotherapy as a way to intensify local treatment, stereotactic radiosurgery is now commonly used as a stand-alone therapy. While ultimate control of brain metastases varies with dose and lesion size

For patients with poor performance status or many brain metastases, the standard of care is whole-brain radiotherapy. Whole-brain radiotherapy provides control of individual brain metastases as well as reduces the risk of failure in the brain at a new site. These benefits must be weighed against its potential neurocognitive side effects which occur for many patients to a varying degree. Emerging data suggest that for patients with extremely poor performance status, whole-brain radiotherapy may have a minimal benefit over steroids alone.