The harvesting of fasciocutaneous flaps is quick and easy with enough practice. The indications are based on its advantages.

These flaps are reliable, thin, and easily mobilized, coming from many potential donor sites. Most of them preserve the main arterial axis. Unlike muscle flaps, the functional sequelae of the donor site are minimal. Although the fasciocutaneous flaps were considered to be not as resistant to infection as muscle flaps because fat and fascia are less vascularized than muscle, several studies concluded that fasciocutaneous flaps offer a comparable efficacy to the muscle flaps for infection treatment.

Fasciocutaneous flaps can be harvested in four different variants according to the tissue included:

- Peninsular Fasciocutaneous Flap: The adipofascialcutaneous unit is harvested, leaving the base of the flap as a hinge where it will be rotated. The peninsular flap is utilized as a rotation flap, and its possibilities of coverage are limited. Moreover, rotation at its base produces bulkiness or a dog-hear deformity, which sometimes need a secondary procedure to correct it.

- Island Fasciocutaneous Flap with an Adipofascial Pedicle: This variant is characterized by a vascular pedicle whose length confers to the flap, an arc of rotation that defines its possibilities. The fasciocutaneous unit is harvested according to the size of the defect to be covered. The pedicle is formed by an adipofascial strip or by an identifiable vascular pedicle.

- Adipofascial Flap: This variant includes the fascial plane along with a hypodermic layer.

- Fascial Flap: Its main indication is related to coverage of tendons to provide a gliding surface.

**Fasciocutaneous Flap of the Legs**

The leg was the first region in which the fasciocutaneous flap proved of great value. Several fasciocutaneous flaps have been applied to reconstruct a coverage deficit of the leg. However, preoperative planning is crucial since the stiffness of the fascia can difficult the insetting of the flap on the defect.

Flaps can be harvested at the posterior, lateral, or medial aspect of the leg and designed as proximally or distally based according to the point of the pivot, in the case of distally based flaps, a higher risk of venous congestion exits. This latter complication can be overcome by making anastomosis of the superficial vein of the flap to a superficial vein in the recipient site.

Vascularization

Cutaneous and neurocutaneous branches are few in numbers.  At the posterior aspect of the leg, in the midline, the sural artery after been in the suprafascial plane vascularized the skin. Musculocutaneous perforants are more numerous at the proximal third of the leg, going through the medial and lateral gastrocnemius muscles.

On the other hand, septocutaneous arteries are found mainly in the middle and distal third of the leg. They come from one of the three main arterial axes of the leg (anterior or posterior tibial artery and peroneal artery).

The venous return goes directly for the accompanying veins of the arterial supply.

**Fasciocutaneous Flaps Proximally Based**

The base of the flap should provide enough blood flow to allow to survive the flap. The base of the flap is not designed according to a length/width ratio; instead is designed to a defined pedicle. Based on this, the pedicle can be narrowed at the base until a true island flap can be harvested.

- 
**
**Saphenous Flap
**
**

Acland et al.

The flap dimensions can achieve 8 to 10 cm in width and 30 cm in length (10 cm above and 20 cm below the knee). The proximal third of the tibia can be covered with the distal part of the flap. However, in case of knee deficit coverage, the flap has to be harvested more proximally, and the sartorius has to be divided between raising the flap.

- 
**
**Medial fasciocutaneous Flap 
**
**

The flap is nourished by the musculocutaneous perforators of the head of the medial gastrocnemius. The anterior border of the flap is a line posterior to the medial edge of the tibia; the distal limit should not extend from a line that is located 5 cm proximal to the medial malleolus and posteriorly the flap should be designed at the posteromedial line.

The flap is useful to cover the anterior aspect of the knee, and the proximal and middle third of the leg (Figure 2, 3).

- 
**
**Lateral Fasciocutaneous Flap
**
**

As its medial counterpart, the lateral flap is nourished by the musculocutaneous perforators of the head of the lateral gastrocnemius. The anterior limit of the flap is 2 cm posterior to the posterior edge of the fibula, the posterior limit is the medial line, and the distal limit should not exceed the 10 cm proximal to the lateral malleolus tip.

- 
**
**Anterolateral Fasciocutaneous Flap
**
**

This flap is nourished by the musculocutaneous perforators of the tibial anterior and peroneal arteries. It should be designed with an anterior limit 2 cm posterior to the tibial crest, the posterior limit is posterior to the fibula, and the distal limit is located 5 cm proximal to the tip of the lateral malleolus.

- 
**
**Posterior Fasciocutaneous Flap
**
**

Described by Walton and Bunkis as a new cutaneous free flap, the blood supply to the skin of the posterior leg is derived from two sources: 1) perforating arteries that arise from the popliteal and posterior tibial arteries and 2) axial arteries originating from the popliteal, sural, and geniculate arteries that course either above or below the deep fascia.

**Fasciocutaneous Flaps Distally Based**

This kind of flap is vascularized by the septocutanous perforators located at the medial and lateral borders of the Aquiles tendon. These perforators come from the posterior tibial and the peroneal arteries.

The flap can be raised from the popliteal fossa proximally, and distally based can be designed in three different ways: 1) based on the perforators of the posterior tibial artery leaving 3 to 4 cm width base. The distal dissection should not exceed the 10 cm proximal to the tip of the malleolus medial. 2) based on the perforators of the perineal artery, with a pedicle of 3-4 cm width base. The distal limit of the dissection should not exceed beyond the 13 cm proximal to the tip of the lateral malleolus. Finally, it could be raised 3) based on both pedicles for which it should have a broad base to include them.

- 
**
**Sural Fasciocutaneous Flap
**
**

This is a variant of the distally based fasciocutaneous flaps. This flap is based on the vascularization provided by the artery that runs along with the sural nerve.