Again, standard ATLS algorithm and protocol should guide evaluation and resuscitation in the trauma patient who happens to be pregnant.

Fetal heart tones can be auscultated with a stethoscope at 20 weeks gestation; prior to this, a Doppler is needed. Evaluation of the fetus itself is best performed with toconometry, which is the most accurate means to detect fetal distress. Fetal heart tones can be detected as early as 12 weeks of gestation and are normally between 110 and 160 beats per minute (bpm). Initially, fetal hypoxia manifests as tachycardia, but as the arterial oxygen content decreases, the fetus ultimately becomes bradycardic. Therefore any sustained rate below 120 bpm should be recognized as fetal distress. If fetal distress is detected, then maternal blood loss must be suspected. Monitoring of fetal heart rate should be initiated on any woman greater than 24 weeks gestation, and is typically recommended for 4 to 6 hours duration after the initial presentation.

Radiographic imaging is often indicated in pregnant patients, especially those whom have sustained traumatic event. However, due to the fear of potential teratogenic and deleterious effects of ionizing radiation practitioners are often hesitant to order appropriate studies. The fear of radiation exposure should not take precedent over quickly establishing the correct diagnosis to allow expeditious treatment initiation. In trauma, as in all other scenario’s, the care of the patient, not the fetus should take priority, and take precedent over risk of ionizing radiation. The effects of radiation exposure on the fetus depend on the gestational age and the amount of radiation. In general the earlier the gestational age, the higher the risk. Specifically, abdominal X-rays submit 200mrad (0.1 to 0.3 rads) of ionizing radiation to the fetus while abdominal and pelvic computer tomography (CT) scan subjects the fetus to 3-4 rads. The accepted accumulated dose of ionizing radiation during pregnancy is less than 10 rads, with no single diagnostic study to exceed 5 rads. Between 8 to 15 weeks gestation high-dose radiation (>10 rads) may lead to intra-uterine growth retardation and central nervous defects. Beyond 15 weeks, there appears to be no dose dependent effects such as fetal loss or congenital defects. Stochastic effects, such as the subsequent risk of cancer or leukemia are increased with exposure of 1 rad or more. The rate of such effect is approximately 1 for every 500 high-dose exposures. Effort should be taken to decrease unnecessary scans, reduce the overlap of body sections, and avoid multiple passes when possible.

The risk of a missed injury or delay in diagnosis is much greater to the fetus than the risk of radiation. As such the American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists (ACOG) has submit the below guidelines for diagnostic imaging during pregnancy:

- Women should be counseled that X-ray exposure from a single diagnostic procedure does not result in harmful fetal effects. Specifically, exposure to < 5 rads has not been associated with an increase in fetal anomalies or pregnancy loss.

- Concern about possible effects of high-dose ionizing radiation exposure should not prevent medically indicated diagnostic x-ray procedures from being performed on a pregnant woman. During pregnancy, other imaging procedures not associated with ionizing radiation (eg, ultrasonography, MRI) should be considered when appropriate.

- Utrasonography and MRI are not associated with known adverse fetal effects.

- Consultation with an expert in dosimetry calculation may be helpful in calculating estimated fetal dose when multiple diagnostic x-rays are performed on a pregnant patient.

- The use of radioactive isotopes of iodine is contraindicated for therapeutic use during pregnancy.

- Radiopague and paramagnetic contrast agents are unlikely to cause harm and may be of diagnostic benefit, but these agents should be used during pregnancy only if the potential benefit justifies the potential risk to the fetus.

Adjunct imaging modalities include ultrasonography (US) and magnetic resonance imaging (MRI). US in form of the extended focused abdominal sonography in trauma (eFAST) should still be incorporated during trauma secondary survey. In a retrospective cohort of more than 2300 FAST exams the sensitivity and specificity showed no significant difference between detection of free fluid between pregnant and non-pregnant patients. This tool as in other trauma scenarios allows potential rapid identification of hemopneumothorax, pericardial tamponade and fluid in Morrison’s pouch or the splenorenal recess. Isolated pelvic free fluid as detected by ultrasound however is of unclear clinical significance in the pregnant patient. MRI is considered a good imaging modality in pregnancy due to its lack of ionizing radiation and specificity however its use in the emergent setting is limited by availability, and timely duration making its use in the trauma patient often non practical.