Musculoskeletal trauma and injury involve at least one of the following tissues: bone, joint, ligament, or tendon. A joint is defined as a junction where two or more bones articulate with each other. Joints are further classified by the amount of motion at the articulation. The function of a joint is to allow articulation between opposing skeletal elements. The ends of bones are covered with articular cartilage, and the joint is lubricated with synovial fluid. Ligaments encapsulated the joint in a protective fibrous layer of tissue.

The most common orthopedic joint injuries consist of sprains, subluxations, dislocations, fracture-dislocations, and fracture subluxations.

- Sprains are described as a tearing injury to one or more ligaments of a joint, which occurs when the joint is extended or forced beyond its normal plane/limits of motion.

- Subluxation is a partial disruption of a joint in which some degree of contact between the articular surfaces remains.

- Dislocations are the most extreme form of subluxation where there is a complete disruption of a joint, and the articular surfaces of the bones that form the joint are no longer in contact with one another.

The urgency of reducing a dislocation is based on neurologic or circulatory compromise, as well as the length of time since initial dislocation.

The most commonly dislocated large joint is the shoulder. It is a particularly important pathology to be able to recognize in the field due to the prevalence of the injury as well as the high recurrence rate. Around 95% of shoulder dislocations are anterior, and approximately half of patients develop recurrent shoulder dislocations within 2 years.

Specific dislocations, including the hip and knee, carry high associated risks. Hip dislocations are characterized by the femoral head being displaced completely from the acetabulum. These dislocations occur commonly with high-velocity trauma. Around 90% of these dislocations are posterior, with the other 10% being anterior. In posterior dislocations, the hip will be adducted, flexed, and internally rotated, where anterior dislocations appear abducted, flexed, and externally rotated. With hip dislocations, there is a potential for associated avascular necrosis of the femoral head. This is from the anatomy of the dislocated hip joint, disrupting the blood supply delivered through the acetabulum.

Knee joint dislocations are also concerning injuries that require prompt diagnosis and management. Knee dislocations that carry potential increased risk are high-velocity dislocations.

Because of the anatomy of the knee, any dislocation to the synovial joint can result in compromise to the neurovascular bundle in the popliteal space, specifically the popliteal artery and peroneal nerve. Severing this vessel from a knee dislocation can lead to rapid bleeding within the compartment and subsequent development of compartment syndrome. In addition, if the delay of popliteal artery repair after dislocation, there is a high likelihood of limb amputation, making prompt transport even more vital in this pathology. Peroneal nerve injury has been shown to occur in up to 33% of knee dislocations and contributes to the long-term complication of foot drop.

Fracture dislocations are particularly complex in that it is difficult to characterize the injury from external appearance and exam. For this reason, these injuries are tricky to manage in the prehospital setting, given the limited diagnostic tools available. For this reason, suspected fracture-dislocations should be splinted at a position of comfort and quickly transported to the nearest medical facility.