There are numerous sources of bias within the research process, ranging from the design and planning stage, data collection and analysis, interpretation of results, and the publication process. Bias in one or multiple points of this process can skew results and even lead to incorrect conclusions. This, in turn, can cause harmful medical decisions, affecting patients, their families, and the overall healthcare team. Outside of medicine, significant bias can result in erroneous conclusions in academic research, leading to future fruitless studies in the same field.

When combined with the knowledge that most studies are never replicated or verified, this can lead to a deleterious cycle of biased, unverified research leading to more research. This can harm the investigators and institutions partaking in such research and discredit entire fields, even if other investigators had significant work and took extreme care to limit and explain sources of bias.

All research needs to be carried out and reported transparently and honestly. In recent years, important steps have been taken, such as increased awareness of biases present in the research process, manipulating statistics to generate significant results, and implementing a clinical trial registry system. However, all stakeholders of the research process, from investigators to data collectors, to the institutions they are a part of, and the journals that review and publish findings, must take extreme care to identify and limit sources of bias and report those transparently.

All interprofessional healthcare team members, including physicians, physician assistants, nurses, pharmacists, and therapists, need to understand the variety of biases present throughout the research process. Such knowledge will separate stronger studies from weaker ones, determine the clinical and real-world applicability of results, and optimize patient care through the appropriate use of data-driven research results considering potential biases. Failure to understand various biases and how they can skew research results can lead to suboptimal and potentially deleterious decision-making and negatively impact both patient and system outcomes.