The initial course of management is the stabilization of the patient upon presentation; this includes correction of metabolic abnormalities, initiation of antibiotics if septic, stabilization of hemodynamics, and a reversal of any possible toxic ingestions or overdose. Potential interventions regarding anoxic encephalopathy include post-arrest targeted temperature management as well as management of seizures should they present. It is also essential to commence discussion with family members regarding the potential for anoxic insult in preparation for permanent neurological damage or death.

Targeted temperature management is the process of maintaining the temperature at or below 36 degrees Celsius, whereas therapeutic hypothermia involves maintaining the temperature within the range of 32 to 34 degrees Celsius. Historically, the suggested temperature range was 32 to 34 degrees Celsius;

The indication for temperature management is any patient who, after cardiac arrest, does not demonstrate purposeful movements or follow commands. Both therapeutic hypothermia and temperature management can also be useful in patients undergoing coronary catheterization or receiving thrombolytic medications, as well as pregnant patients; however, there is an increased risk of bleeding in these populations.

Initiation of temperature management is suggested after initial resuscitation in individuals with non-purposeful motor responses, no evidence of cerebral edema on CT imaging, and, if available immediately, no malignant features on EEG. The duration should be at least 24 hours, although there are studies that demonstrate a slight advantage to 48 hours, albeit with a higher risk of adverse effects.

In both targeted temperature management and therapeutic hypothermia, shivering may cause a delay in obtaining temperature goals. Sedation may suppress the shivering response. However, neuromuscular blockade may ultimately be required. Neuromuscular blockade may mask the physical manifestations of seizures, and it is recommended that the use of neuromuscular blockade should be in conjunction with continuous EEG monitoring.

After meeting the therapeutic hypothermia timeframe, the rewarming portion of the intervention begins. If automated devices controlling intravascular or surface cooling are implemented, temperature changes can be adjusted for specific targets. Rates of warming should not exceed 0.5 degrees Celsius per hour. The recommendation is that the rate is maintained at 0.25 degrees Celsius per hour instead.