In patients with clinical evidence of nasopharyngeal regurgitation and oropharyngeal dysphagia, the initial test may be a clinical swallow evaluation performed by a speech pathologist. However, this test has its limitations and may miss over 50% of patients with significant aspiration, as seen in videofluoroscopy.

The second test recommended in these patients is a modified barium swallow, which aims at assessing the degree of dysphagia and aspiration.

Patients with signs suggestive of malignancy such as weight loss, bleeding, and oropharyngeal dysphagia should undergo head and neck evaluation and a laryngoscopic examination of the pharynx and larynx, particularly look at oropharynx and Zenker diverticulum. Zenker diverticulum is typically diagnosed by an esophagogram.

Other investigations that may be used for the assessment of these patients are:

- Fiberoptic endoscopic evaluation of swallowing (FEES)

- Computed tomography of the head and neck and the chest to rule out malignancy

Fiberoptic endoscopic evaluation of swallowing and video-fluoroscopic swallowing study are both considered to be the gold standard for evaluation of Parkinson disease-related dysphagia. In addition, high-resolution manometry may be a helpful tool.

Patients with no supra-esophageal symptoms and negatively modified barium swallow, negative FEES findings, and clinical evidence of esophageal dysphagia should be referred to a gastroenterologist for a barium video-esophagogram. This assessment should cover both the anatomy (strictures or tumor) and motility function of the esophagus (such as achalasia). Esophagoscopy is mandatory in patients suspected to have achalasia to exclude pseudo-achalasia or other forms of esophageal obstruction. Endoscopic findings such as esophageal dilatation and retention of food are not diagnostic of achalasia.

A barium esophagogram is relatively simple and of low cost and is considered the first line of investigation of esophageal dysphagia.

Other investigations recommended in patients with esophageal dysphagia are:

- Esophagogastroduodenoscopy (EGD), which can help in the diagnosis of esophagitis, webs, rings, esophageal strictures, and tumors

- Esophageal manometry, which is usually needed in patients with chronic dysphagia

- High-resolution esophageal manometry is helpful in the diagnosis of achalasia (the presence of incomplete relaxation of the esophagogastric junction together with the absence of organized peristalsis is consistent with the diagnosis of achalasia).

Based on high-resolution esophageal manometry, there are three subtypes of achalasia that can be identified:

- Type I: characterized by low intra-esophageal pressure (classic achalasia)

- Type II: characterized by pan-esophageal pressurization

- Type III: characterized by high-amplitude spastic contractions

Identifying the subtype of achalasia can guide the choice of therapy.