**The Epidural Space**

Between the ligamentum flavum and the superficial dura mater is the spinal epidural space. This location contains various structures such as adipose tissue, connective tissue, nerves, the internal vertebral venous plexus, and lymphatics. It is a site commonly used for analgesic purposes and is a potential site for infection.

**The Dura Mater**

The most superficial layer of the meninges is the dura mater. While it has two layers in the cranial segment, the spinal dura mater only has the deep meningeal layer. The periosteal layer, which is the superficial layer of the dura within the calvarium, ends at the foramen magnum, with only the meningeal layer continuing down along the spinal cord.

**The Subdural Space**

The spinal subdural space is only a potential space; typically, it is not present under normal physiological conditions. It exists between the dura and arachnoid mater.

**The Arachnoid Mater**

The spinal arachnoid mater is between the dura and the pia mater. The arachnoid mater is avascular and primarily exists to help maintain cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) metabolism.

**The Subarachnoid Space**

The spinal subarachnoid space is located between the arachnoid and pia mater and is filled with CSF. Arachnoid trabeculae extend between these two layers within the subarachnoid space to give the subarachnoid space its characteristic spiderweb appearance. The choroid plexus produces CSF within the brain ventricles, and CSF enters the spinal subarachnoid spaces via the median and lateral apertures. The functions of the CSF include protection and nourishment of the brain and spinal cord.

**The Pia Mater**

The spinal pia mater is the deepest layer of the meninges and is directly attached to the surface of the spinal cord. The pia mater is composed primarily of collagen and reticular fibers.