**Elbow**

Flexion is primarily the function of the brachialis, biceps brachii, and brachioradialis muscles, which originate on various locations of the humerus and scapula and insert on portions of the radius and ulna. Extension is primarily accomplished by the triceps brachii and anconeus muscles, which originate from various locations on the humerus and scapula and insert on portions of the ulna.

**Knee**

Flexion is made possible, primarily, by the articularis genus, rectus femoris, vastus lateralis, vastus intermedius, and vastus medialis. These muscles originate from various locations on the femur and anterior inferior iliac spine. The vastus lateralis, vastus intermedius, and vastus medialis conjoin to form the patellar tendon, which crosses the knee anteriorly and inserts on the patella and tibial tuberosity. Extension is predominately the function of the biceps femoris, semitendinosus, semimembranosus, gastrocnemius, plantaris, gracilis, and popliteus.

**IP hand**

Flexion of the hand IP joints primarily occurs through the functions of the flexor digitorum profundus, flexor pollicis longus, and flexor digitorum superficialis. They originate from various locations of the radius, ulna, interosseous membrane, and medial epicondyle, and insert on portions of the phalanges. Extension of the hand IP joints is provided by the extensor pollicis longus, extensor pollicis brevis, extensor digitorum, extensor indicis, and extensor digiti minimi. They originate from various locations of the radius, ulna, interosseous membrane, and lateral epicondyle, and insert on portions of the phalanges.

**IP foot**

Flexion of the foot IP joints result from the action of the flexor digitorum longus and brevis, flexor hallucis longus and brevis, quadratus plantae, and flexor digiti minimi brevis. They originate from various locations of the tibia, fibula, and calcaneus, and insert on portions of the phalanges. Extension of the foot IP joints is primarily the function of the extensor digitorum longus and brevis, lumbricals, and extensor hallucis longus muscles, which originate on the tibia, calcaneus, flexor tendons, and fibula, and insert on portions of the phalanges.

**Ankle**

Plantarflexion and inversion result from the actions of the gastrocnemius, plantaris, soleus, tibialis posterior, and anterior. They originate from various locations of the femur, tibia, and fibula, and insert on portions of the calcaneus, navicular, medial cuneiform, and metatarsal bones. Dorsiflexion and eversion occur as functions of the tibialis anterior, extensor hallucis longus, extensor digitorum longus, peroneus brevis, and longus. They originate from various locations on the tibia and fibula and insert on portions of the phalanges, metatarsals, and medial cuneiform bones.