There are two different staging systems of macular holes i.e., clinical staging and staging based on OCT findings. Gass has clinically described the stages of macular holes in the late '90s, but it is still accepted widely.

- Stage 1 MH/impending MH: Loss of foveal depression. Stage 1A: detachment of foveola and yellow-colored spots in the center. Stage 1B foveolar detachment and yellow-colored ring surrounding detachment. Nearly 50% of Stage 1 MH undergo spontaneous resolution after vitreoretinal separation.

- Stage 2 MH: full-thickness neurosensory retinal defect in fovea but less than 400 micrometers in size. Sometimes the attached posterior cortical vitreous is evident on OCT. Almost 100% of this stage progress into stage 3.

- Stage 3 MH: full-thickness neurosensory retinal defect in fovea but greater than 400 micrometers in size. They are sometimes associated with a grayish macular rim, which indicates a cuff of subretinal fluid. Usually, PVD is started in this stage with or without operculum (but complete PVD or separation of the posterior vitreous face from the optic disc is absent), and 100% will go into stage 4.

- Stage 4 MH: stage 3 MH with complete PVD indicated by Weiss ring.

Based on OCT findings in the international vitreomacular traction study (IVTS) staging of vitreomacular adhesion (VMA), vitreomacular traction (VMT), MH has been described.

- Vitreomacular adhesion (VMA): Absence of distortion of foveal contour

- Focal: Attached posterior hyaloid and retinal interface 1500 micrometer or less

- Broad: Greater than1500 micrometers

- Vitreomacular traction (VMT): Presence of distortion of foveal contour or structural changes present in intraretinal layers without a full-thickness macular hole

- Focal: Attached posterior hyaloid and retinal interface 1500 or fewer micrometers

- Broad: greater than 1500 micrometers.

Full-thickness macular hole (FTMH): Full-thickness neurosensory retinal defect from the internal limiting membrane to the retinal pigment epithelium.

- Factor 1: Size - horizontal diameter at narrowest point: small (less than or equal to 250 micrometers), medium (250 to 400 micrometer), large (greater than 400 micrometers)

- Factor 2: Cause - primary or secondary

- Factor 3: Presence/absence of VMT