If metastasis involves multiple bony structures with no canal compromise or associated bone fracture, these patients can be managed without surgery.  However, it is important to involve a spine surgical oncologist in order to get advice regarding spinal instability related to multiple metastases to the spine.  However, most patients with multiple spinal metastases and normal neurological examinations may benefit primarily from radiation therapy and chemotherapy. If tissue for pathologic diagnosis is necessary and there is no primary or easily reachable metastasis with any other route, a patient could benefit from an image-guided biopsy of the bone lesion. Open diagnosis is very rarely necessary after several attempts at obtaining a sample through a needle biopsy.

When a tumor involves the spinal canal, then treatment strategy changes significantly, and surgical consultation should be immediate as these patients can progress to becoming bed-bound within days. Studies have shown that paralysis due to metastatic spine disease significantly shortens the life expectancy of cancer patients.  On the other hand, surgical intervention of patients with acute paralysis due to spinal cord compression from the metastatic disease will significantly reduce mortality and morbidity associated with acute paralysis

Depending upon rapidity and seriousness of neurologic compromise, treatment of these patients may involve the addition of steroids. Dexamethasone has been shown in clinical trials to decrease pain and improve symptoms. However, the exact dose that would benefit the patient the most is not known. In one study comparing bolus dose of 100 mg dexamethasone with 10 mg of dexamethasone bolus initial injection, no significant clinical benefit was observed with the higher dose. A good starting dose would be a bolus dose of 10 mg IV followed by a maintenance dose of 4 mg every six hours tapered over two weeks as the clinical scenario allows. Immediate imaging should be obtained to evaluate extension and possible surgical intervention.

If the suspicion is low for very radiosensitive tumor, if there is complete paralysis that has been present for more than 24 hours or the expected survival of the patient is less than three or four months, surgical intervention is warranted. Further treatment after surgery should involve a multidisciplinary approach of chemotherapy and focused radiation. Radiation therapy usually involves 30 Gy to 40 Gy in a ten-treatment session. Wound closure becomes a concern post radiation and chemotherapy, and the patient should be followed closely to identify wound breakdown and repair promptly.

The current algorithm for the treatment of spinal metastasis is based on the NOMS (Neurologic, Oncologic, Mechanical, Systemic) framework. The neurologic component of this framework includes the evaluation of the grade of epidural spinal cord compression (ESCC) on MRI and neurological status of patient (presence of myelopathy), oncologic component describes the radiosensitivity of the primary tumor, mechanical component involves the mechanical stability of the spinal column, as evaluated by the spinal instability neoplastic score (SINS); and systemic component describes the general systemic condition of the patient, i.e, the ability to tolerate surgery. Based on these parameters, the broad treatment categories of these patients include conventional external beam radiation therapy (cEBRT) alone or with stabilization, spinal stereotactic radiation therapy (SSRS) alone or with stabilization or as hybrid approach following separation surgery; or decompression and surgical stabilization.