Orlistat is available in oral tablets 60 mg (over the counter) and 120 mg (prescription product). The recommended orlistat prescription dose is 120 mg capsule orally thrice daily. The administration should be during or within 1 hour after the fat-containing meal. Doses of more than 120 mg have not shown any additional benefit. The recommendation is that the patient adheres to a nutritionally balanced, low-calorie diet with less than 30% of calories from fat. If the patient misses the meal, they can omit the orlistat dose. If the patient misses the dose of orlistat and it has been more than 2 hours past the fat-containing meal, then the patient can skip that dose since, by that time, most of the fat absorption has already occurred, and the medication would not work effectively. Since orlistat reduces the absorption of fat-soluble vitamins, patients should take multivitamin supplements(containing fat-soluble vitamins) daily. Administration of multivitamin supplements should be at a gap of more than 2 hours after the orlistat administration.

Healthcare professionals must rule out organic causes of obesity like hypothyroidism or Cushing syndrome before initiating orlistat therapy.

**Use in Specific Patient Population**

- **Pediatric Population:**No research has established safety and efficacy in the pediatric population. However, orlistat is safe and effective in adolescent patients with obesity.

- **Renal Impairment:**Orlistat is safe in patients with renal impairment.

- **Hepatobiliary Disease:**Orlistat use requires caution in patients with obstructed bile ducts and deranged liver function tests.

- **Pregnancy Considerations:**Orlistat is contraindicated in pregnancy. It is a former FDA pregnancy category X drug. Patients on orlistat therapy should be counseled regarding the necessity for contraception. According to USPTSF(The United States Preventive Services Task Force), limiting the gestational weight gain(GWG) in pregnancy is associated with a reduced risk of emergency cesarean delivery, gestational diabetes mellitus, and macrosomia. For limiting GWG, behavioral interventions are advised rather than pharmacotherapy.

- **Breastfeeding Considerations:**Orlistat is minimally absorbed, and a small amount has been detected in the milk. Orlistat inhibits the absorption of fat-soluble vitamins; breastfeeding mothers should take a multivitamin supplement (containing fat-soluble vitamins). It is doubtful that the infants absorb orlistat in an amount that adversely impacts the breastfed infant.