**Fluoroscopy in Pregnancy**

Trauma affects up to 8% of pregnancies; the cause varies from motor vehicle accidents to self-fall and is one of the leading causes of maternal morbidity and mortality. The National Council on Radiation Protection and Measurements and the International Commission on Radiological Protection have set a recommended maximum exposure of a fetus to radiation at 5 cGy. At this level of exposure, the assumed risk to the developing embryo is less than the spontaneous risks present during the development of any human fetus. It is observed that exposure of the maternal thyroid gland to diagnostic radiation was associated with a slight decrease in birth weight.

Guidelines for imaging in pregnancy:

- Women must be counseled that X-ray exposure from a single diagnostic procedure does not result in harmful fetal effects.

- Specifically, exposure to less than 5 rad is not associated with increased fetal anomalies or pregnancy loss.

- Concern about high-dose ionizing radiation exposure should not prevent medically indicated diagnostic procedures from being performed in pregnancy.

- Imaging procedures not associated with ionizing radiation should be considered instead of X-rays when appropriate.

- The use of radioactive isotopes of iodine is contraindicated during pregnancy.

- Radiopaque and paramagnetic contrast agents are unlikely to cause harm and may be of diagnostic benefit.

**Recent Advances**

The continuing advances in imaging have resulted in a variety of components like image intensifiers which automatically adjust the sharpness and contrast of an image irrespective of the exposure, view of the latest image to provide a continuum in pulsed fluoroscopy, and real-time radiation dose display to keep the surgeon aware of the exposure.

Flat-panel detectors are a revolution in medical imaging as they provide high image quality and dose reduction compared with a standard C-arm. Mobile flat-panel C-arms reduce intra-operative radiation dose, have an increased field of view of images due to a larger detector diameter, and give better soft-tissue resolution. Compared with standard C-arms, the source to image distance increases, and the surgeon has a larger workspace with decreased scatter.

Intra-operative three-dimensional (3D) imaging can ensure adequate fracture reduction in situations where the joint surface is not completely visible in 2D imaging, especially in joints having a concave configuration, such as the acetabulum or in joints irregularly shaped bones like the calcaneus. Cone-beam CT is a 3D data set that can be used with a flat-panel detector. It acquires a large number of images that are converted to 3D images by computational methods.