Breast pathologies, in general, are evaluated by a triple assessment approach, which includes clinical, imaging, and needle biopsy (tissue) assessment.

Imaging assessments can include bilateral mammography, ultrasound examination, CT, MRI, and occasionally others such as galactograms or the recently introduced duct endoscopy.

Ultrasound examination is the imaging of choice for those younger than 35-year-old. Mammography, with or without ultrasound, is the methodology of choice for the 35+ age group, while MRI (more rarely CT) can be used in any age to assess cases of equivocal findings of concern further. Fine-needle aspiration (FNA) cytology and tissue confirmation will also be required in suspicious lesions and may be helpful in equivocal cases.

**Mammographic Findings in MDE**

For symptomatic patients with typical clinical findings suggestive of MDE, such as nipple discharge, near areolar lobulated soft to firm swelling with mild erythema, mammography may not be needed to make the diagnosis of MDE. Much more commonly, a lesion is seen during screening mammography, and for those without previous symptoms of MDE, the mammographic features may include microcalcifications, lobulated, partially smooth masses, nipple retraction, retro-areolar duct dilatation, and rarely speculated looking mass. These are more worrisome, prompting further evaluation to exclude malignancy.

The microcalcifications may be branching, small clusters, or scattered unilateral or bilateral with or without associated nipple retraction.

In a study of 40,003 women who underwent screening mammography, 14% had some of the above features suggestive of MDE that were confirmed with cytology or tissue biopsy when felt required. In 40% of those with mammographic findings that underwent biopsy had no other pre-biopsy features to suggest MDE, and merely the biopsy was required to rule out sinister pathology. Thus incidental detection remains uncommon, though common enough to warrant consideration.

**Ultrasound (US) Findings in MDE**

Breast ultrasound is indicated in all cases of nipple discharge. The US can show mammary duct dilatation, mixed solid and cystic mass close to the areola, solid mass, and abscess collection. Not all diagnoses can be made via US imaging, particularly in cases of MDE with solid mass formation.

In a study that assessed 72 cases of symptomatic MDE, areolar and periareolar masses were evident clinically with an average diameter of 40 mm and varied in size from 6 to 120 mm. These masses were most often located in retroareolar and periareolar areas and ovoid and undefined, inhomogeneous, and hypoechoic, with increased blood flow on Doppler, and with mammary duct dilation. Abscess formation was seen in almost 49% of these symptomatic cases. These cases significantly overlapped in clinical presentation with other causes of granulomatous lobular mastitis.

Assessment with ultrasound is also required imaging for children presenting with nipple discharge. The typical US findings of MDE would show hypoechoic heterogeneous oval mass, potentially lobulated, consisting of anechoic tubular structures representing the duct ectasia. These typical findings do not require further tissue or cytology confirmation unless the discharge continues for more than a few months.

**Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI)**

Currently, there is no observable significant difference in regards to the diagnostic utility of MRI versus US in patients with MDE.

MRI is used to assess cases of MED with a mass lesion that very suspicious for undetected carcinoma.

The morphologic features on non-contrasted MRI are nonspecific, but on dynamic contrast-enhanced (DCE)-MRI, the cases of MDE will show thick-walled lesions with circular enhancement with no enhancement in the center, resembling thickened pipe, representing a thickened duct. No enhancement is noted in the delayed phase, while malignant masses reveal heterogeneity with clear irregular borders.

Some MDE may be misdiagnosed as intraductal papilloma (IDP) on MRI, and here MRI, in addition to the US images, decreases the rate of misdiagnosis.

**Galactography or Ductography**

Galactography is still being used as a second-line investigation for young patients with pathologic nipple discharge after US examination. It is used in cases without mass lesions and after excluding malignancy. It requires cannulation of the discharging duct with a very fine cannula (30 Ga) and injecting a small amount iodine-based radiopaque contrast material, and then taking CC view images. The main disadvantages of this investigation are it is time-consuming, that it may take up to 30 to 60 minute to finish the examination, in addition to it being more invasive than other modalities. Some duct openings are too small to be cannulated. Occasionally a wrong duct may be canulated and imaged, so there is a false-negative rate of approximately  6%. Mastitis or duct rupture are other rare potential complications.

MDE is diagnosed when the duct is more than 3 mm in diameter, and smooth-walled without ductal filling defects. If MDE is confirmed, this may spare the patient from duct excision for diagnosis.

**Nipple Discharge Cytology (NDC)**

NDC smears are commonly obtained in cases of pathologic nipple discharge, it may provide useful diagnostic information, It is an easy, noninvasive test to perform but challenging to the cytopathologist. Since the majority of nipple discharges are due to benign lesions, the ability to detect malignancy by examination of NDC ranges from 45 to 82% with 0.9% to 2.6% false-positive rate. In cases of MDE, there will be foamy macrophages in a proteinaceous background with few normal duct cells.

The highest diagnostic ability of this test is seen when the discharge is due to benign papilloma as the smears tend to have high cellularity and sometimes containing fragments of the papillary branching clusters.

Smears, in general, may show duct cells, foam cells, inflammatory cells, blood cells, and suspicious malignant cells. No evidence in the literature that mammary duct ectasia can be specifically diagnosed by NDC, although the cytologist can suggest the presence of a benign inflammatory condition.

**Fiberoductoscopy (FDS)**

For patients who present with pathologic nipple discharge, FDS is a more recent option to investigate the underlying cause of the discharge. It allows direct visualization of small ductal growths and other morphological changes in the major lactiferous ducts and segmental ducts. It is the only modality to visualize the intraluminal space directly.

The main disadvantage is its non-availability. It is not indicated for multiple duct discharges.

Technically, the procedure is performed under local anesthesia. As with any new procedure, it has a learning curve, which will lead to a decrease in the failure rate. The cannulation rate is usually around 90% that can reach 100% with time. The scope is very delicate with a diameter of 0.45 to 1.1 mm and is introduced after serial dilatation of the duct opening with serial dilatory probes (lacrimal probes can be used if specialized equipment is unavailable). Mammary ductal ectasia, single or multiple papillomata, complete duct occlusion can all be visualized and accurately diagnosed via this intraluminal examination. This investigation is gaining popularity and is expected to replace galactograms gradually.

FDS will help to improve the diagnosis and treatment of pathologic nipple discharge, by isolating those who need to have microdochectomy or other procedures, and also may limit additional procedures such as open biopsies.

Minor complications can occur, such as local inflammation, which is self-limiting.