The secondary structure arises from the hydrogen bonds formed between atoms of the polypeptide backbone. The hydrogen bonds form between the partially negative oxygen atom and the partially positive nitrogen atom. It is significant to point out that the only hydrogen bonds involved in secondary structure do not include any involving amino acid side chains. Most proteins have segments of their polypeptide chains that are either coiled or folded in patterns that contribute to the protein’s shape. Many of these coils and folds repeat so often that they have been given names. Two folds that are extremely common in biochemistry are the alpha-helix and the beta-pleated sheet.

The alpha-helix is a right-handed helical coil that is held together by hydrogen bonding between every fourth amino acid. Many globular proteins have multiple alpha-helical portions separated by long stretches of non-helical regions. Some fibrous proteins, including alpha-keratin, are almost completely comprised of alpha-helices. Fingernails and toenails are also made up of alpha-helices. Transmembrane proteins contain alpha-helices with specific hydrophobic properties allowing them to traverse membranes and be stable within the cell membrane. Outside the membrane, the transmembrane proteins adopt a non-helical structure and many times the alpha-helix is broken by a proline residue.

The other common secondary structure is the beta-pleated sheet. In this structure, two different regions of a polypeptide chain lie side by side and are bound by hydrogen bonds. They make up the core of many globular proteins. The two types of beta-pleated sheets are parallel beta-pleated sheets and antiparallel beta-pleated sheets. The end of a polypeptide chain can either be the N-terminus or the C-terminus. The N-terminus is the end that contains the free amino group, and the C-terminus is the end that contains the free carboxyl group. If two beta-strands run in the same direction, then it is a parallel beta-pleated sheet, and if they run in opposing directions, then it is an antiparallel beta-pleated sheet.

Another less commonly known secondary structure is the beta-barrel. This structure is composed of antiparallel beta-strands, and it is twisted and coiled into a barrel so that the first strand hydrogen bonds to the last strand. Many times, beta-barrels can be found in proteins that span the membrane. One common example is aquaporins, which selectively allow water molecules in and out of a cell while preventing the passage of other solutes and ions. Also, it is important to note that the hydrogen bonds between the binding atoms are weak, but the summation of all the hydrogen bonds allows the structure to maintain its shape.