Hormones are secreted in a negative and positive feedback manner to control the menstrual cycle. Hormone secretion begins in the hypothalamus where gonadotropin-releasing hormone (GnRH) is secreted in an increased, pulsatile fashion once puberty starts. GnRH is then transported to the anterior pituitary, where it activates its 7-transmembrane G-protein receptor. This provides a signal to the anterior pituitary to secrete stimulating follicle hormone (FSH) and luteinizing hormone (LH). FSH and LH provide input to the ovaries. Within the ovarian follicle, there are 2 cell types responsible for hormone production, theca cells, and granulosa cells. LH stimulates theca cells to produce progesterone and androstenedione by activating the enzyme, cholesterol desmolase. Once androstenedione is secreted, the hormone diffuses to the nearby granulosa cells. Here, FSH stimulates the granulosa cells to convert androstenedione to testosterone then 17-beta-estradiol by activating the enzyme, aromatase. As levels of 17-beta-estradiol or progesterone increase based on the phases of the menstrual cycle, there is negative feedback back to the anterior pituitary to lower the levels of FSH and LH being produced and subsequently, the levels of 17-beta-estradiol and progesterone produced. An exception to this is during ovulation. In this case, once a critical amount of 17-beta-estradiol is produced, it provides positive feedback to the anterior pituitary to produce increased amounts of FSH and LH. This feedback system is represented in figure 1. Additionally, within the feedback system, the granulosa cells produce inhibin and activin, which inhibit and stimulate FSH release from the anterior pituitary, respectively. This feedback mechanism is controlled by upregulating, to increase hormone production, or downregulating to decrease hormone production, the GnRH receptors on the anterior pituitary.