No matter how prepared a patient is to wean from ECMO, whether VV or VA, successfully weaning them from ECMO does not signify that the patient will survive.

- When preparing for weaning trials, you must have all necessary personnel to go directly back on full ECMO support if needed.

- The patient must be hemodynamically stable for weaning trials to begin.

- If the patient shows signs of continued cardiac or respiratory failure requiring full support, weaning attempts should be avoided.

- Patients who are deemed not good candidates for weaning should be discussed for transplant candidacy or assist device placement.

- The patient should be evaluated daily with clinical, laboratory, and transthoracic/transesophageal echo data to establish the potential for weaning. Cardiac markers require monitoring for normalization. Echocardiography plays a large role in monitoring for recovery of cardiac function along with any new problem that may arise.

- Echocardiographic findings when preparing for weaning that may indicate the patient will be difficult to wean: cardiac abnormalities with systolic or diastolic dysfunction, right or left heart ventricular failure, wall motion abnormalities, pericardial effusions or tamponade, hypovolemia, pulmonary artery hypertension.

- Patients should have a cardiac ejection fraction of greater than 25% to 30% with an aortic velocity-time interval greater than 12 cm and a lateral mitral valve peak systolic velocity greater than 6 cm while the patient is on minimal ECMO support.