The administration route for omeprazole heavily depends on the diagnosis of a medical condition and the patient's preference. It is available as a delayed-release oral suspension, capsules, tablets, and orally disintegrating tablets.

- The recommended oral dose for treating symptomatic GERD absent esophageal lesions is 20 mg daily for up to 4 weeks. However, therapy may extend to 8 weeks if erosive lesions are present.

- For H. pylori infection, the recommended adult oral regimen is 20 mg plus clarithromycin 500 mg plus amoxicillin 1000 mg plus metronidazole 500 mg, each given twice daily for fourteen days. If an ulcer is present on initial diagnosis, then it is recommended to provide an additional 18 days of omeprazole 20 mg once daily. Clinicians should expect antimicrobial resistance; if treatment fails, susceptibility testing should be performed, and the treatment should be adjusted accordingly.

- The recommendation for patients with hypersecretory diseases is to start at 60 mg once daily, followed by the individualization of dosage based on the patient's need and clinical response. If the daily dose exceeds 80 mg, they should divide the dosage throughout the day. Long-term treatment with omeprazole is not recommended; eventually, switching to an H2 inhibitor is preferred.

Omeprazole should be ingested 30 to 60 minutes before meals. It may be taken with antacids. When taken twice daily, the first dose should be before breakfast and the second dose before dinner. The capsule and tablet should be swallowed whole, not crushed or chewed. However, it is permissible to open the capsule and mix the contents with one tablespoon of applesauce, soft enough to be swallowed without chewing. The suspension should be left to thicken for two to three minutes, following reconstitution and administration within 30 minutes. Drink with a glass of cool water to ensure the complete swallowing of the pellets.

Omeprazole therapy should be at the lowest dose possible for the shortest duration; physicians have looked into deprescribing proton pump inhibitors if patients are on it long-term. One group recommends deprescribing PPIs, meaning reducing the dose, stopping completely, or using "on-demand" dosing in adults who have completed a minimum of 4 weeks of PPI treatment for heartburn or mild to moderate gastroesophageal reflux disease or esophagitis and who have achieved symptomatic resolution. The clinician should monitor symptoms at four weeks, 12 weeks, and 6 to 12 months. But these recommendations do not apply to patients who have or had Barrett's esophagus, severe esophagitis grade C or D, or documented history of bleeding gastrointestinal ulcers.

**Specific Patients Population**

- **Patient with Hepatic Impairment:**As per the manufacturer's label, the bioavailability in patients with hepatic impairment increased by 100 % compared to the I.V. dose due to a decrease in the first-pass effect. Plasma half-life also increased to 3 hours instead of 0.5 to 1 hour. Dose reduction should be considered for patients with hepatic impairment.

- **Patient with Renal Impairment:**There is no dose adjustment guidance in the manufacturer label for patients with renal impairment or with creatinine clearance ranging between 10 to 62 mL/min/1.73 m2. A slight increase in bioavailability was observed in the patient with renal impairment as a primary route of excretion of omeprazole metabolites; their elimination slowed in proportion to the decreased creatinine clearance.

- **Pregnant Women:**Omeprazole crosses the placenta and is pregnancy safety category C.

- **Breastfeeding Women: Limited information indicates**that maternal omeprazole doses of 20 mg daily would not cause any adverse effects in breastfed infants.

- **Pediatric Patients:**The dosage depends on the child's weight for pediatric patients between the ages of 1 and 16.
- Between 5 to 10 kg: 5 mg daily
- Between 10 to 20 kg: 10 mg daily
- More than 20 kg: 20 mg daily

- **Geriatric Patients:**The bioavailability is increased in geriatric patients as the rate of elimination decreases in the geriatric population. There is 76% drug bioavailable when a single dose of 40 mg oral buffered solution is administered to healthy elderly volunteers versus 58% in young volunteers at the same dose.