LMAs come in many forms and configurations. They consist of a tube attached to an inflatable, elliptical cuff designed to cover the supraglottic area, facilitating an open airway passage and allowing for either spontaneous or positive pressure ventilation. While the original LMA was a multi-use device, cleaning requirements and high cost have steered providers towards less costly, single-use LMAs. Several configurations are available from multiple vendors. The original LMA design has crossbars over the aperture designed to prevent passive herniation of the epiglottis into the opening. However, that design makes intubation through that device much more challenging. Those first-generation devices are still commonly used for routine cases due to the low cost, and they have low complication rates. Newer second-generation LMAs are now available and provide for higher seal pressures due to improved seal material or design, have no aperture bars, allowing for easier intubation using regular endotracheal tubes and providing a gastric access port to vent or aspirate gastric contents. Some even incorporate a bite block.

The LMA Fastrach, also called the ILMA is specifically designed to facilitate blind intubation. It is available in both reusable and disposable forms and has a handle designed to allow for optimal positioning and a bar designed to elevate the epiglottis out of the way to facilitate intubation. This device is designed for use with specialized endotracheal proprietory tubes made and packaged with the ILMA.

The I-Gel devices are unique in that they have a pre-shaped non-inflatable cuff. They are made from a gel-like-substance, which may be easier to insert because there is no cuff to inflate. The i-Gel also allows for the passage of standard endotracheal tubes. It may be used in patients of all ages from small infants to adults.