ADHD is a condition that can be managed, but the protocols for managing it must be followed effectively in order to achieve a fruitful result. The management involves an interprofessional team that includes the specialist psychiatrist, pediatrician, pharmacist, and other health care professionals, including nurse practitioners who help in diagnosing the disorder. The collaboration on the part of the family and the health care team becomes important so as to know the exact history of the events that the patient has gone through.

The team should then make up a management plan that may include a pharmacologic treatment, a psychosocial intervention, or both. The comorbid disorders of ADHD would have to be analyzed by the team as depression, and anxiety disorders are much more common in this set of population.  In order to make a diagnosis of ADHD, regular follow-ups with the primary caregiver of the child should be scheduled along with the child. The clinician can then ascertain and evaluate the child himself and clinically co-relate it to the findings as provided by the caregiver. This can further be taken to a specialist psychiatrist, whereby a confirmatory diagnosis can be made. This would then involve a set of other healthcare professionals such as a psychologist or a trained psychotherapist along with the psychiatrist. The treatment plan is then formulated by the team, and the caregiver himself is given an important role along with the healthcare team. The caregiver has to observe the patient and help in noticing the changes that the child may exhibit. Hence, it can be concluded that an integrated healthcare plan should be followed for the diagnosis and treatment of ADHD so that the long-term goals of the treatment can be achieved.

Open communication between the interprofessional team is the key to improve outcomes. The team should have a conference as that everyone knows what message is to be sent to the caregiver, who often gets upset with mixed messages.

**Outcomes**

Despite decades of research, the outcomes for patients with ADHD are guarded. Noncompliance with medications is common, and follow-up is difficult as many patients seek alternative treatments. Many parents do not trust the drugs and often seek alternative care. There is no question that currently available treatments do help some patients improve functionally. Still, without treatment, the individuals continue to deteriorate and eventually end up in financial, legal, and social difficulties.