# Continuing Education Activity

Assessment of gestational age with sonography is a critical element of evaluating a pregnant woman in any healthcare setting. Providers caring for pregnant women should be comfortable using basic sonographic techniques to determine the gestational age of a fetus, which helps guide the care of both the fetus and the pregnant woman. This article reviews the sonographic views, images, and parameters used to determine the gestational age in pregnancy.

**Objectives:**
- Describe appropriate probe and exam selection to confirm gestation age based on suspected or reported gestational age.
- Summarize sonographic gestational age measurement techniques for the first trimester.
- Outline sonographic gestational age measurement techniques for the second and third trimester
- Explain how the interprofessional team can use sonographic views, images, and parameters to determine the gestational age of a pregnancy, leading to better patient outcomes.

# Introduction

Sonography can be used at different levels of gestational development to determine the age of the growing fetus.  Determining the correct age impacts later care of the woman and fetus, and may affect dates that determine the viability of the fetus, expected delivery date, and appropriate growth rate. The most accurate method to determine gestational age is during weeks 8 through 12 when the crown-rump length can be determined, and the fetus is in its greatest and most consistent rate of growth.

Earlier and later developmental time periods may also remain useful in the appropriate clinical context to confirm dates.  Conveniently, portable ultrasound machines employed at the point of care may be as accurate as higher-end machines in determining gestational age.

# Anatomy and Physiology

There are three identifiable structures on ultrasound that appear sequentially during the first trimester; the gestational sac, the yolk sac, and the embryonic pole.  The gestational sac appears approximately 30 days following the beginning of the last menstrual cycle.

Appearing within the gestational sac, the yolk sac is a small, circular, hyperechoic ring that appears at about day 35, or between weeks 5 and 6, counted from the beginning of the last menstrual cycle. The yolk sac also grows at about 1 mm per day until about 9 weeks, when it begins to regress.

The embryonic pole first appears as a small linear structure congruent with the yolk sac giving the appearance of a “signet ring.”  This embryonic pole is the first structure that can be measured to obtain the crown-rump length and gives an accurate date to the gestational age. The embryonic pole will develop a cephalic and caudal portion that first appears wrapped or bent tightly to the embryo.  As these begin to unfold and the limbs appear, the first true crown-rump length measurements can be obtained. The differentiation between a fetus and embryo occurs at about 9 weeks when organogenesis has completed, and the developing fetus focuses on maturation and further development of existing structures.

# Indications

Determining gestational age is indicated in any pregnant female with an unknown date of the last menstrual cycle to confirm estimated dates or any patient with unknown dates of gestational age.

# Contraindications

There are no known contraindications to utilizing sonography to assess gestational age. However, practitioners should ensure they use the least amount of ultrasonic energy possible over the briefest time possible to determine accurate information.

# Equipment

The pre-exam estimated age of gestation should guide bedside ultrasound probe selection.  A low-frequency curvilinear probe for a transabdominal method is nearly as accurate as an endovaginal exam after 6 weeks and is preferred for gestational ages greater than 8 weeks. An endocavitary probe is best utilized at an estimated gestational age of fewer than 12 weeks. As there is some overlap from 8 to 12 weeks in the ability of the probe to detect the appropriate structures, either probe may be used during this time period, and it may be necessary to utilize both probes to adequately visualize the gestational sac yolk sac and embryonic pole.  In this scenario, it is recommended to start with a curvilinear probe and transabdominal exam.  If the operator cannot visualize necessary structures, switch to the endocavitary probe and endovaginal exam.

# Preparation

General and routine cleaning and maintenance of the probes should be done as per the manufacturer's recommended instructions for use. Images are best obtained with the patient in a supine position when using the curvilinear probe and in the lithotomy position when using the endovaginal approach with the endocavitary probe.  For a transabdominal exam, it is recommended that the patient have a full bladder or not have voided recently to use the urine-filled bladder as an echogenic window. A small amount of gel should be applied to the curvilinear probe, and the abdominopelvic region should be scanned in the longitudinal and short axes.

For a transvaginal exam, it is recommended that the patient empty her bladder just prior to the exam, as the cervix serves as an appropriate window with this approach, and a full bladder may displace uterine anatomy to the extent that detection and measurement of pregnancy may be difficult. The endocavitary probe is prepared by placing a small amount of ultrasound gel at the tip of the probe and placing a probe cover (which often has pre-placed ultrasound gel in place) over the endocavitary probe. Vaseline gel may then be placed over the cover before placement in the vaginal vault.

# Technique or Treatment

Images of the growing fetus within the uterus are obtainable in the transverse and sagittal planes from both the curvilinear and the endocavitary probes.  Once the gestation is identified and images are obtained, there are several methods to determine gestational age, utilizing the estimated age based on last-menstrual cycle dates or physical exam.

**First Trimester**

The most accurate time to determine the gestational age is in the first trimester, more specifically between 8 to 12 weeks.

Gestational sac:  The gestational sac can first be seen at around 5 weeks on a transvaginal examination and 6 weeks on a transabdominal examination. It grows approximately 1 mm per day, and measurements become less accurate once it reaches a size of 14 mm.

Crown-rump length: Of the first trimester methods, the crown-rump length is the most accurate for determining gestational age.

**Second Trimester**

Changes in growth, genetic variations, and differences in attributes of the growing fetus make the determination of gestational age within the second and third trimesters less accurate.  Using multiple methods appears to be more accurate than using a single measurement. There are five methods commonly used during these stages of development.

Crown-rump length:  Crown-rump length can be measured up to about 14 weeks of gestation.  Between weeks 12 through 14, this measurement is equivalent to biparietal measurements.

Biparietal Diameter:  This form of measurement is accurate to within 3 to 8 days in the first trimester and 7 to 12 days in the second and is influenced by different skull shapes.

Head Circumference:  Head circumference is accurate within 7 to 12 days, and in the second trimester may be the most accurate. The circumference is obtained in the same plane as the Biparietal Diameter, measuring the circumference of the skull.

Abdominal circumference: In the second trimester, this measurement is accurate to about 7 to 15 days. It is obtained in an axial, transverse plane at the point the portal vein bifurcates and should include the stomach.

Femur length: In the second trimester, this measurement is accurate to about 7 to 17 days.

**Third Trimester**

Abdominal circumference and femur length are used in the third trimester to determine gestational age.

Abdominal Circumference: During the third trimester, the abdominal circumference is accurate to between 18 to 35 days and measured using the same method as in the second trimester.

Femur length: During this trimester, the femur length is accurate to about 21 days and measured using the same method as in the second trimester.

# Complications

A meta-analysis from 2009 concluded that ultrasound during pregnancy is safe.

# Clinical Significance

Obtaining the correct gestational age may have several implications in the care of the fetus.

# Enhancing Healthcare Team Outcomes

Since gestational age is best determined in the first trimester, and particularly around week 7 of gestational age, these measurements must be documented for other providers and healthcare workers on the interprofessional team for use in the further care of the patient as the pregnancy progresses, to achieve optimal outcomes for both mother and child. [Level 5]

Point-of-care ultrasound is often utilized for this determination, and an ideal method of sharing the sonographer's finding is a transmission of the images to the patient's medical record as well as a procedure note with a detailed report of the findings. Any finding while measuring a gestational sac that that might be concerning for a pseudo-gestational sac requires further investigation to ensure an ectopic pregnancy is not present as this can be life-threatening. Interprofessional healthcare team members need to communicate and coordinate activities to ensure proper follow-up or emergent consultation if there is a concern for an ectopic pregnancy.