**What are the differences between warfarin and the newer oral anticoagulants?**

One of the major differences between warfarin and the target-specific oral anticoagulants is that the latter cannot be monitored using the INR or other blood coagulation tests. In addition, these agents also do not require modification in diet. Cost is also a factor; the newer oral anticoagulants are prohibitively expensive compared to warfarin. So far these newer oral anticoagulants have shown to be safe, but long-term data are lacking. Another important fact is that most healthcare workers who prescribe these oral anticoagulants have little idea on how to deal with them when a patient who is booked for surgery suffers trauma or has a sudden bleeding emergency. Unlike warfarin which can be reversed with plasma or vitamin K, the factor X inhibitors or direct thrombin inhibitors have reversal agents that are more expensive and less readily available.

Another difference between warfarin and the newer oral anticoagulants is the time to reach peak therapeutic effect. Warfarin often takes 4-6 days to reach the peak effects, but the newer oral anticoagulants have peak therapeutic effects in less than 24 hours. However, one area of similarity between the two classes of drugs is that they both have the potential for significant drug interactions.

Finally, after dosing with warfarin, monitoring can also be affected by the diet. Foods that contain vitamin K like kale and spinach can delay the peak therapeutic effect. On the other hand, the target-specific oral anticoagulants are highly protein-bound and this makes it difficult to remove them even with dialysis.

**Where do most adverse events regarding anticoagulants occur?**

- Medical and surgical units

- Telemetry

- Rehabilitation

- Emergency room

- Outpatient clinics

******Which oral anticoagulants are used today?**

- Warfarin

- Rivaroxaban

- Dabigatran

- Apixaban

The newer oral anticoagulants, in general, have been associated with lower rates of major bleeding and fewer intracranial hemorrhagic events. There is also one study that shows that the use of dabigatran in elderly patients and those with kidney dysfunction may increase the risk of intracranial bleeding.

**What factors are usually considered when selecting an oral anticoagulant?**

- Risk of bleeding

- Presence of a mechanical heart valve

- Renal and liver dysfunction

- Body weight

- A propensity to dyspepsia or a history of peptic ulcer disease

- Patient preference

- Patient compliance

- Past success with oral anticoagulation

**What types of medication errors have been associated with oral anticoagulants leading to adverse events?**

- Dose omission

- Extra dose

- Wrong dose/overdose

- Lab error in monitoring

- Medication is given at the wrong time

- Underdose

- Prescription refill delayed

- Wrong patient

- Drug-drug interaction

It should be noted that warfarin has been the mainstay of anticoagulant therapy for decades, while other oral anticoagulants have been introduced over the past few years. Therefore, in most of the published literature, the number of adverse events involving warfarin is much greater than the number of events involving newer anticoagulants.****

**When and why does bleeding occur after the use of oral anticoagulants?**

Studies reveal that the first 90 days are the most variable because the INR is still labile and this increases the risk of bleeding. The same dose of warfarin can have unpredictable effects on the INR in different individuals making it difficult to develop a standardized dosage. Further, many patients require alternating doses, and this makes it difficult to have a standard dose. Because the risk of bleeding is highest within the first three months,  there should be more frequent monitoring of the INR during this period to prevent bleeding episodes.

Another risk factor is the intensity of anticoagulation. When the INR is more than 2, the risk of bleeding is much greater than when the INR is less than 2. However, when the INR is less than 2, this also increases the risk of stroke in patients with atrial fibrillation. Since warfarin cannot be stopped in atrial fibrillation and an INR less than 2 is not effective to prevent a stroke, other strategies need to be employed like discontinuing platelet agents like aspirin if there is a significant concern for bleeding.

Patient characteristics can also increase bleeding. Studies show that bleeding risk is increased with the following:

- Advanced age

- Diabetes

- Anemia

- Hypertension

- Congestive heart failure

- Female sex

- Transient ischemic attack

- History of stroke

- Renal failure

- Liver disease

- Non-compliance is most common in middle-aged patients

- Lack of patient education about atrial fibrillation and the risk of stroke

- Varying INR monitoring protocols

- Diet

Further patients admitted with sepsis and other hypermetabolic state tend to have an unpredictable response to warfarin, and the bleeding potential is always present.

Drugs that can increase the risk of bleeding include the use of:

- Antidepressants

- Antibiotics

- Acetaminophen

- NSAIDs

- Fenofibrate

- Proton pump inhibitors

- Alcohol

- Influenza vaccine

**Genetic Variation**

Over the years several enzyme genetic variations that affect the metabolism of warfarin have been identified. Polymorphism of the cytochrome P4502CP enzymes slows down the metabolism of warfarin, which increases the risk of bleeding. Similarly, alterations of the vitamin K epoxide reductase complex subunit one gene and the VKORC1 enzyme also alter metabolism. The clinical significance of these genetic variations is known because there are limited data. Plus not all laboratories are established to detect these genetic changes, thus making its universal use unrealistic.