Patients presenting with mild cellulitis and displaying no systemic signs of infection should be covered with antibiotics that target the treatment of streptococcal species. Though believed to be a less common cause, consider coverage of MSSA. The duration of oral antibiotic therapy should be for a minimum duration of 5 days. In nonpurulent cellulitis, patients should receive cephalexin 500 mg every 6 hours. If they have a severe allergic reaction to beta-lactamase inhibitors, treat with clindamycin 300 mg to 450 mg every 6 hours.

In patients with purulent cellulitis, methicillin-resistant staph aureus colonization, cellulitis associated with an abscess or extensive puncture wounds, or a history of intravenous drug use, patients should receive antibiotics that cover against methicillin-resistant staph aureus as well. Cellulitis with MRSA risk factors should be treated with trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole 800 mg/160 mg twice daily for 5 days in addition to cephalexin 500 mg every 6 hours. If a patient has an allergy to trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole, treat with clindamycin 300 mg to 450 mg every 6 hours. A longer duration of antibiotic treatment may be a consideration in patients who show minimal improvement with antibiotic therapy within 48 hours.

Hospitalization with the induction of systemic antibiotics may be necessary for patients who: present with systemic signs of infection*, have failed outpatient treatment, are immunocompromised, exhibit rapidly progressing erythema, are unable to tolerate oral medications, or have cellulitis overlying or near an indwelling medical device.

Intravenous antibiotics should be initiated to cover against group A strep. Absent patient risk factors for MRSA, treat with intravenous cefazolin, and when able de-escalate to cephalexin for a total of 5 days of treatment. If risk factors for MRSA are present, initiate therapy with Vancomycin with subsequent de-escalation to trimethoprim/sulfamethoxazole.

In immunocompromised patients requiring hospitalization for parenteral antibiotics, broad-spectrum antimicrobial coverage may be necessary with vancomycin plus piperacillin-tazobactam or a carbapenem.

The clinician should obtain blood cultures if a patient is exhibiting signs of systemic toxicity, has persistent cellulitis despite adequate treatment, has unique exposures such as animal bites or water-associated injuries.

Atypical organisms can cause cellulitis in particular situations. If exposed to a dog or cat bite, patients are at risk for developing cellulitis secondary to Pasteurella multocida. If secondary to an injury involving exposure to water, such as a cut from an oyster shell, cellulitis can be caused by Vibrio vulnificus. Diabetic patients and patients with diabetic foot ulcers are at risk for Pseudomonas aeruginosa. Immunocompromised patients are at risk for Pseudomonas aeruginosa and Cryptococcus.

If patients have significant edema with a known cause for the edema, the underlying condition should receive proper treatment to decrease the amount of edema and prevent future episodes of cellulitis. Patients should be instructed to keep the affected area elevated.

* Two or more of these systemic inflammatory response criteria: fever (over 38 degrees C), tachycardia (heart rate exceeding 90 beats/min), tachypnea (respiratory rate over 20 breaths/min), leukocytosis (white blood cells in excess of 12000/mm) leukopenia (white blood cells under 4000/mm) or bandemia greater than or equal to 10%.