A dorsal penile nerve block is typically achieved through either a ring block at the base of the penis or a dorsal penile nerve block at the level of the pubic symphysis or a combination of the 2.

**Dorsal Penile Nerve Block**

This technique's objective is to inject a sufficient amount of local anesthetic into the bilateral spaces deep to the fascia on either side of the suspensory ligament. Begin by injecting a small volume of local anesthetic at the skin at the dorsum of the base of the penis with a small-gauge needle to raise a "bleb" or wheal of local anesthetic. Switch to a larger gauge needle, if required, which is inserted via the anesthetic bleb and advanced until it touches the pubic symphysis, which allows the practitioner to gauge the depth required.

The needle is then withdrawn slightly and redirected to pass below the pubic symphysis, slightly laterally and approximately 3 to 5 mm deeper to enter the appropriate space, the syringe is aspirated to ensure there is no flashback indicating the needle tip lies in an artery/vein, and the local anesthetic is infiltrated. The procedure is repeated for the contralateral space, taking care to withdraw the needle to prevent inadvertent damage to the suspensory ligaments and the dorsal venous structures.

Different practitioners advocate different approaches. Some reduce the number of needle passes by performing the entire block through a midline approach and angle the needle to avoid midline structures and reach the left and right dorsal nerves below the symphysis. Others, to minimize risk, will repeat the procedure entirely just lateral to the midline to ensure no damage to midline structures but at the expense of requiring multiple injections to achieve the block.

Due to the innervation of the frenulum of the penis, a dorsal nerve block often does not achieve total anesthesia. In these circumstances, it is advisable to instill further anesthetic at the base of the ventral penis or a partial ventral ring block.

**Ring Block**

A minimum of two injection sites is required for an effective ring block. Injections are typically positioned laterally to allow them to circumscribe the entire penis with the local anesthetic. Care must be taken not to infiltrate too deeply or injure any vasculature or the urethra, leading to a penile hematoma.