Tacrolimus is a narrow therapeutic index drug. Therapeutic monitoring of tacrolimus in transplant patients is a valuable tool in adjusting drug levels. Since tacrolimus use is typically in combination with other immunosuppressants, target levels usually decrease as post-transplant time increases to minimize calcineurin inhibitor-mediated nephrotoxicity and adverse effects.

Additional monitoring parameters include renal function, hepatic function, serum electrolytes (Mg, Phos, K), glucose, and blood pressure. Parameters should initially be measured two to three times a week post-operatively, gradually decreasing as time passes, achieving target levels, and patient stabilization.

The following are recommendations for tacrolimus level ranges per British Columbia Transplant Guidelines (http://www.transplant.bc.ca/health-professionals/transplant-clinical-guidelines). However, target levels vary by institution, induction protocols, and patient needs.

**Adult and Kidney and Kidney/Pancreas Transplant**

- Less than 1 month: 8 to 12 ng/mL

- From 1 to 3 months: 6 to 9 ng/mL

- Greater than 3 months: 4 to 8 ng/mL

**Adult Liver Transplant**

- Less than 1 month: 6 to 9 ng/mL

- From 1 to 3 months: 4 to 8 ng/mL

- Greater than 3 months: 4 to 6 ng/mL

- More than 12 months: 3 to 5 ng/mL

**Adult Heart Transplant**

- Less than 3 months: 9 to 12 ng/mL

- From 3 to 6 months: 8 to 9 ng/mL

- From 6 to 12 months: 6 to 8 ng/mL

- Over 12 months: 4 to 8 ng/mL

**Adult Lung Transplant**

- From 0 to 3 months: 10 to 12 ng/mL

- From 4 to 12 months: 8 to 10 ng/mL

- More than 12 months: 6 to 8 ng/mL

- Due to the metabolism pathway of tacrolimus, many drug-drug interactions exist. If starting medications that inhibit or induce the metabolism of tacrolimus, added monitoring is suggested to prevent a supra or sub-therapeutic level.