**History**

Hyperammonemia mainly presents with neurological signs and symptoms due to its neurotoxic effects. Early-onset hyperammonemia is seen in neonates at 24-72 hours of life. The neonate becomes symptomatic as ammonia levels rise above 100-150 micromol/L. The family usually gives a history of non-specific symptoms, including lethargy, irritability, and vomiting. As the levels rise, the child may develop hyperventilation and grunting as the ammonium ion stimulates the medullary center of the brain responsible for controlling respiration.

Late-onset hyperammonemia presents later in life and occurs as a result of multiple congenital and acquired disorders, as described above. Symptoms include irritability, headache, vomiting, ataxia, and gait abnormalities in the milder cases. Seizures, encephalopathy, coma, and even death can occur in cases with ammonia levels greater than 200 micromol/L.

Patients may develop intellectual disability, behavioral and psychiatric symptoms in chronic hyperammonemia. This has been linked to glutamine levels in the brain.

**Physical Exam**

Physical exam findings are usually non-specific, including increased respiratory rate and dehydration due to vomiting. Neurological examination may reveal impaired concentration and coordination, slurred speech, disorientation, and hand tremors. Examination findings specific to the underlying disorder may also be seen. An odor of ‘sweaty feet’ may be present in isovaleric acidemia, and fragile hair may be observed in argininosuccinic acid lyase deficiency.

Five grades of hepatic encephalopathy have been used to describe both acute and chronic clinical manifestations:

- Grade 0: subclinical or minimal hepatic encephalopathy categorized by minimal changes in concentration, memory, and intellectual function

- Grade 1: changes in sleep pattern, lack of awareness, and shortened attention span

- Grade 2: lethargy, apathy, changes in personality, asterixis, and slurred speech

- Grade 3: Somnolent but can be aroused, marked confusion, and disorientation of time and space

- Grade 4: Coma. The patient may or may not respond to painful stimuli.

In patients with hepatic encephalopathy due to cirrhosis, several physical examination findings due to hepatic dysfunction and portal hypertension, including jaundice, abdominal distension with shifting dullness, hepatomegaly, pedal edema, spider nevi, gynecomastia, and caput-medusae can also be appreciated.