99mTc-Pertechnetate scintigraphy, also known as Meckel's scan, is considered as the modality of choice to evaluate patients with suspected Meckel diverticulum, when used correctly, is an effective method for the detection of Meckel diverticulum with an approximately 100% sensitivity and specificity.

Mucoid cells of the gastric mucosa in Meckel's diverticulum secrete chloride into the intestinal lumen. This excretion is independent of the presence of the parietal cells. 99mTc-pertechnetate works like a halide anion (e.g., chloride, iodide). Normal or ectopic mucoid cells of gastric mucosa will actively accumulate the pertechnetate from the bloodstream and secrete it into the intestine.

Based on The Society of Nuclear Medicine and Molecular Imaging (SNMMI) guidelines, fasting is not necessary for the examination. Although, preexamination fasting of 3 to 4 hours may improve sensitivity for the detection of ectopic gastric mucosa. If possible, all drugs or procedures that may irritate the gastrointestinal tract should be stopped for 2 to 3 days before the study.  Patient premedicated with Histamine-2 (H2)  blocker or proton pump inhibitors and glucagon can improve the sensitivity of the study. The patient is premedicated with an H2 blocker or proton pump inhibitor before injecting the radiopharmaceutical agent.

The images are taken with the patient positioned supine with the abdomen and pelvis in the field of view. In the case of infants and small children (up to 2 years of age), the thorax should be included in the imaging field to assess for bronchopulmonary foregut malformation with ectopic mucosa. Dynamic flow images up to 1 min are taken to identify any vascular blood pool that may be confused with the ectopic gastric mucosa.

Anterior abdominal images are obtained for at least 30 min. Imaging beyond 60 min may compromise sensitivity and study interpretation due to the passage of activity from the stomach to the small intestine. Additional static images are recommended to improve study interpretation, especially, lateral view to localize renal pelvic activity. Postvoiding images may be useful to detect the activity of a Meckel diverticulum obscured by the bladder.