Before initiating buspirone therapy, it is essential to understand proper indications, dosing, adverse drug reactions, and toxicity. The clinician should prescribe buspirone and counsel the patient on the risk vs. benefit ratio. The pharmacist must educate the patient on the safe use of the drug and ensure proper dosing. Additionally, the pharmacist must communicate with the physician if there is evidence of drug misuse in rare instances. In an era where drug abuse results in high mortality, healthcare workers are responsible for ensuring that patients only use buspirone for legitimate purposes. The literature review suggests that buspirone has negligible abuse potential.

Nurses should monitor for the signs and symptoms of anxiety during each follow-up visit. Nursing staff can also provide patient counseling to reinforce the pharmacists' advice. Residents and medical students should counsel the patient not to combine buspirone with other sedatives or alcohol. Patients who continue to get refills should be encouraged to seek counseling from a psychiatrist. Encourage individuals to be patient at the initiation of therapy and follow up within a month to assess the effectiveness of buspirone therapy.

The attending psychiatrist should evaluate the patient regularly and share their findings with the healthcare team. For example, emergency physicians and triage nurses should establish patent airway, breathing, and circulation in an overdose of buspirone. Moreover, the emergency department physician should notify the psychiatrist if the overdose is deliberate.

Healthcare providers should use evidence-based medicine (EBM) and be well-informed about the latest guidelines regarding the current status of buspirone in treating generalized anxiety disorder.