Williams back exercises, also known as Williams flexion or lumbar exercises, are exercises for people with low back pain. Williams back exercises are recommended for people with low back pain to help improve lumbar flexion and strengthen the gluteal and abdominal muscles. The exercises were first developed for men younger than 50 years of age and women younger than age 40 who had moderate to severe lumbar lordosis and whose plain radiological films revealed diminished disc space between the lumbar segments L1-S1. Also, these patients had chronic low back pain that was mild to moderate in nature.

These exercises were introduced to teach the patient how to avoid lumbar extension, which worsens low back pain. Williams's back exercises are a non-surgical option for people to improve low back pain. These exercises came into being for people who do not want to undergo low back surgery. In the last two decades, Williams back exercises have seen a broad application for people with various types of low back pain, even in the absence of a formal diagnosis. Also, both physicians and physical therapists have developed many variations of these exercises.

In comparison, the McKenzie method emphasized motion with increased lumbar extension. The McKenzie extension exercises and William flexion exercises were both founded in the 1930s. The Mckenzie method is also known as the Mechanical Diagnosis and Therapy method (MDT); the goal of the McKenzie exercises to retain lumbar lordosis. Furthermore, full motion of the spine is recommended with a combination of flexion and extension exercises. Limited studies have been done showing the efficacy of the Williams or McKenzie exercises compared to placebo or versus each other in direct comparison.

There are different classifications or syndromes for the origin of back pain in the McKenzie method. Postural, dysfunction, and derangement syndromes are the most common. Treatments are often based on the position of ease, which reduces the patient's back pain.

A series of exercises seen for Williams back pain exercises include pelvic tilt, single knee to chest motion, double knee to chest motion, partial sit up, hamstring stretch, hip flexor stretch, and squat. The purpose of Williams back pain exercises is to reduce pain and restore function. Furthermore, the prevention of future injury and the development of chronic pain are critical. In an eight week study that compared Williams back pain exercises to a no-treatment control, the experimental group was found to have decreased back pain, as well as an increase in the flexibility of their hamstring muscles, hip flexors, lumbar extensor muscles. They were also found to have increased abdominal muscle strength.