The first-line treatment in the case of pure seminomas has always been chemotherapy and radiation, no matter the size of the tumor. In most cases, surgical intervention is reserved for those tumors unsuccessful with radiation, chemotherapy, or both. Nowadays, surgical excision has become the first-line treatment for small, resectable tumors with postoperative radiation for the asymptomatic patient. Cisplatin-based combination chemotherapy with etoposide and bleomycin is recommended as first-line treatment, regardless of distant tumor metastasis for 3 to 4 cycles. If the patient has pulmonary disease at baseline, Bleomycin should be avoided. Ifosfamide can then be added to the regimen of cisplatin and etoposide for 3 to 4 cycles. Chemotherapy treatment should be monitored with the trending of tumor markers to monitor the response rate of the chemotherapy. If metastatic disease is diagnosed in the beginning, the patient should undergo cisplatin-based chemotherapy for distant disease, and radiation should be administered from the local mediastinal disease. Radiation has been extremely successful in mediastinal seminomas; however, recent studies have shown chemotherapy as first-line treatment as radiation to the chest has shown many side effects, including increased cardiac/pulmonary events, secondary malignancies, and other associated toxicities due to radiation to the mediastinum.

In the case of a large tumor, chemotherapy is administered initially, and surgical excision is then performed on any remaining disease if deemed resectable on imaging. The patient may then be monitored every 6 to 12 months with serial CT scans. Good risk patients that have no sign of pulmonary metastasis and are treated with chemotherapy first line have a survival rate of >90%. If a patient has a contraindication to chemotherapy, radiation is given at a level of 35 to 50 Gy to the mediastinum and the supraclavicular fossa bilaterally.

If a residual mass is found, it should be evaluated with histologic confirmation prior to treatment because it may be a necrotic mass instead of cancer. The treatment of residual mass is a topic of debate. Masses < 3 cm can be closely monitored. When the mass is > 3cm, it has a chance of possibly harboring residual malignant disease. Multiple modalities can be used for monitoring the mass. Close monitoring with serial CT scans of the chest, PET scans of the chest with FDG, or possibly an open biopsy can be performed for actual tissue diagnosis. These approaches to monitoring residual masses can be performed eight weeks of status post-chemotherapy. If the patient does have biopsy proving residual disease or evidence of a growing mass, they can be treated with salvage chemotherapy, radiation, or even surgical resection.

After the chemotherapy is completed and a CT scan is performed showing a residual mass but normalized tumor markers, these patients can be evaluated for surgical excision. Surgical intervention depends on the location of the tumor. As the majority of mediastinal seminomas occur in the anterior mediastinum, a median sternotomy is often utilized. A sternotomy, thoracotomy, VATS, or robotic surgical technique can also be used in the removal of either an anterior or posterior seminoma.

**Surgical Technique**

Complete surgical evaluation should be performed before and after completion of their chemotherapy regimen. Attention should be placed on their lung function, especially if they received bleomycin. Patients may need to undergo DLCO and pulmonary function to make sure bleomycin-induced pulmonary fibrosis did not occur.

The surgical procedure should begin with the placement of a double-lumen endotracheal tube in case one of the lungs needs an area of resection. Access should be gained in the femoral vessels in case the superior vena cava has any involvement, and resection should be performed. The patient is placed in the supine position, and a median sternotomy is then performed as this is the surgical incision of choice for tumors located in the anterior mediastinum. Multiple approaches can be performed depending on the preoperative CT images of the tumor. If the tumor is large and extends into one of the pleural spaces, a clamshell thoracotomy can be performed. This technique allows for anatomical lung resection if needed. A hemiclamshell can also be performed with a neck incision if the tumor is extending into the neck region. A trap door incision can be performed if there is evidence of involvement of the subclavian vessels or if the proximal clavicle needs to be resected. A posterolateral thoracotomy can be performed to resect a posterior mass, but the mediastinal structures can not be accessed from this technique; therefore, the patient would need to undergo an anterior approach if any structures are needed to be resected.

Once the chest is open, and the mediastinal structures are identified along with the mass, the decision can be made if anything needs to be resected in addition to the mediastinal mass. If the mass is distorted with local structures, a frozen section can be sent to look for mass involvement in the structures. The surgeon must make a decision to resect certain structures in the chest versus leaving a possible tumor burden behind. Some of the tumor burden may be able to be peeled off important structures. If the peeled portion is sent for the frozen section and only reveals fibrotic tissue, then peeling will suffice for the treatment of removing the tissue.

If the frozen section shows a tumor, then en bloc resection should be performed. The frozen section is not always determinate of the entire mass, so any suspicion of remaining cancer should be resected when feasible. Recent studies have shown that up to 66% of the remaining tissue contains cancerous cells. There should be a very low threshold to resect any tissue that is near or looks concerning. When the tumor markers are still positive, it is likely that there are still cancerous cells present in the remaining mass. When the markers have returned to normal levels, there is likely only fibrosis remaining in the tissue mass.

Depending on the location of the remaining mass and if there is a high concern or tissue biopsy proving that cancer remains, you must decide if the nearby structures can be resected. If present in thymus tissue, it is best to excise all thymus tissue en bloc. If the pericardium is involved posteriorly, it can be fully resected en bloc as well. If the lung is involved, a non-anatomical resection or wedge resection is usually performed as long as negative margins can be achieved. Rarely do lobectomies, or entire pneumonectomies need to be performed, but occasionally need to be due to tumor size or location in the hilum of the lung. When dissecting the mass from the lung, the lung can be compressed. Positive pressure ventilation can help show the surgeon the planes of dissection between the mass and lung.

If the phrenic nerve is involved with a tumor, all attempts should be made to save the phrenic nerve. If only one of the nerves is involved and all of the mass can be cleanly resected, then the phrenic nerve should be removed with the specimen. When the phrenic nerve is resected, the surgeon must think about the plication of the diaphragm to avoid lower lobe atelectasis. Do not resect both phrenic nerves. If the right or left innominate vein is involved, they can also be resected en bloc. If both are resected, a graft will need to be placed. If the superior vena cava is involved, usually sharp dissection can remove the tumor; however, if there is a clear invasion into the vessel, it can also be resected en bloc. Once the surgical resection is complete and the chest is closed, the final pathology should be reviewed. If cancerous cells remain present in the chest, chemotherapy can be initiated again.