Since the superior vena cava traverses the superior mediastinum, any number of causes can result in obstruction. While lung cancer is the most common cause, other causes include aortic aneurysms, mediastinal fibrosis, pericarditis, thrombosis secondary to venous catheter placement, and infections like histoplasmosis. Superior vena cava syndrome most commonly presents in middle-aged individuals with edema and plethora of the head, distended neck veins, and headache. Once diagnosed, the condition requires treatment as it could progress to the brain and/or upper airway edema. Radiotherapy is often used as the initial treatment when the diagnosis is uncertain. In the past, surgery was the approach to reconstruct the superior vena cava, but today percutaneous angioplasty and stenting offer symptomatic relief within 24 to 48 hours.

Stenosis of the brachiocephalic artery is a rare but well-reported syndrome that presents due to a narrowing of the brachiocephalic trunk, leading to decreased supply to the right subclavian and right common carotid arteries. This condition has been reported secondary to aortitis syndrome, atherosclerosis, or congenital narrowing. The most commonly recommended treatment is percutaneous transluminal angioplasty with stent placement. The preferred access point for this procedure is the femoral artery.

Aneurysms of the great vessels are not uncommon in the superior mediastinum. Surgeons usually need to perform a median sternotomy incision to get access to these aneurysms. Access to the proximal left subclavian artery usually requires a very high left thoracotomy.