The Bohr effect describes red blood cells' ability to adapt to changes in the biochemical environment, maximizing hemoglobin-oxygen binding capacity in the lungs while simultaneously optimizing oxygen delivery to tissues with the greatest demand. The Bohr effect maintains significant clinical relevance within the field of Anesthesiology, as it directly influences patient outcomes throughout the perioperative process. Whether through hypo or hyperventilation, the alterations in carbon dioxide content and acid-base status results in shifts in the oxy-hemoglobin dissociation curve, either amplifying or dampening the magnitude of the Bohr Effect regarding hemoglobin re-oxygenation at the alveoli and delivery/release at peripheral tissues.

In addition to hypercarbia and acidemia described by the Bohr effect, other factors that cause a right shift in the oxy-hemoglobin dissociation curve include increases in temperature, 2,3-bisphosphoglyceric acid (2-3-BPG), certain hemoglobinopathies like sickle cell hemoglobin, sulfhemoglobin. The summation of these factors determines the level of the influence on the hemoglobin oxygen binding capacity. For example, in the setting of exercising skeletal muscle, high metabolic demands require maximal oxygen delivery for cellular respiration. Increased metabolic rates at skeletal muscle result in both carbon dioxide and lactic acid from aerobic and anaerobic cellular respiration, respectively, drastically lowering the surrounding blood pH in addition to temperature increases as a result of exothermic reactions. The environmental alterations from the summation of these factors and resulting hemoglobin conformational optimize hemoglobin oxygen delivery to peripheral tissues. Similarly, under the stress of chronic hypoxic conditions ranging from high altitude to chronic lung disease or congestive heart failure, the body relies on glycolysis to meet metabolic demands. Through increased levels of glycolysis under hypoxic conditions, the resulting 2,3-BPG byproduct further shifts the oxy-hemoglobin dissociation curve to the right in favor of oxygen unloading.