Once the diagnosis is made, the treatment depends on symptoms, patient preferences, and cost. Even though there are many treatments for warts, none is very effective, and recurrences are common with each of them. In general, one should try the least expensive and least painful treatment first.

The more expensive and invasive treatments are usually reserved for multiple recurrent warts. Observation is also a part of the treatment and should always be considered. It is known that nearly two-thirds of warts spontaneously disappear within 24 months. The only negative observation is that there is a small risk that the wart can enlarge and may even spread to other areas. In most cases, topical agents are utilized first. Salicylic acid is often a first-line agent for the common wart. It requires no prescription and can be used by the patient at home. It has cure rates of 50% to 70%. Cryotherapy, retinoic acid, podophyllin, topical 5-fluorouracil, interferon, and imiquimod are also used for treatment.

Cidofovir has been used to treat CMV infections in HIV patients and case reports suggest it may be beneficial in patients with recalcitrant warts.

5-Fluorouracil is used to treat actinic keratosis and has been used to treat warts under occlusion for 30 days.

The vitamin A derivative, tretinoin, has been used with partial success to treat flat warts.

Intralesional injections with immunotherapy (candida), bleomycin, and interferon alfa have also been reported to work in some patients.

Systemic treatments that have been tried include cidofovir, cimetidine, and retinoids.

Nonpharmacological therapies that are also used include adhesiotherapy, hypnosis, hyperthermia, propolis, and a number of plant extracts. Without controlled trials and the fact that warts do resolve spontaneously, it is difficult to say if these treatments actually work.

Surgical treatments include cryotherapy, laser, electrodesiccation, and excision.