The rate of spontaneous remission makes it difficult to assess the efficacy of a therapy. Even, leaving alopecia areata untreated is a legitimate option for many patients.

Despite limited evidence for the efficacy of therapeutic agents, intralesional and topical corticosteroids are considered first-line treatment for most patients with patchy AA.

Triamcinolone acetonide 5-10 mg per milliliter given every 2 – 6 weeks, stimulates localized re-growth in 60 – 67% of cases.

Potent topical glucocorticoids find frequent utilization in the treatment of alopecia areata; however, evidence of effectiveness is limited.  Topical steroids can be a reasonable therapeutic option in patients unlikely to tolerate intralesional injections. Utilization of occlusive dressings confers a higher response, leading to improvement in greater than 25% of patients. Glucocorticoid-induced folliculitis is a relatively common adverse effect of this approach.

Patients with extensive disease, often defined as greater than 50% scalp hair loss, may be treated with topical immunotherapy. This approach avoids the large number of injections that would be otherwise required when using intralesional corticosteroids. Moreover, one retrospective study reported superior efficacy of topical immunotherapy over intralesional corticosteroids for patients with patches of hair loss exceeding 50 cm2 in size.

Second-line therapies include minoxidil, anthralin, and PUVA.

Systemic therapies are generally only for patients with severe alopecia areata. Systemic glucocorticoids may induce hair growth. However, they are not widely used, mainly because of their side effects. Additionally, relapse occurs within a year in one-third of responsive patients, and the number of relapses increases with time.

Current investigational treatments include platelet-rich plasma, recombinant IL-2, hydroxychloroquine, JAK inhibitors (tofacitinib), simvastatin with ezetimibe, and excimer laser.