Osteoporosis is a disease characterized by loss of bone mass and integrity that can result in fragility fractures causing high morbidity and mortality. As it is clinically silent before fracture occurrence, validated methods to identify patients at increased risk of this disease are crucial in preventing fractures. Current gold standards can radiographically identify loss of bone mass once it has become significant; however, they are unable to characterize the quality of bone, an equally important component of fracture risk. BTMs show promise as a tool to identify patients with accelerated bone turnover, an indicator of bone quality, in patients without osteoporotic changes discernible on imaging or in settings where imaging may be unavailable. Moreover, BTMs have proven useful in treatment management, as they quickly respond to changes in bone physiology. This can help physicians ensure adequate response, identify those patients needing to be trialed on another therapy in the event of suboptimal response, and confirm patient adherence to medication regimen, which is particularly useful in patients on demanding regimens as seen with bisphosphonate therapy. It can also be used to identify those patients with bone turnover rates that are suspicious for secondary pathologies, allowing earlier detection and management by clinicians.

The potential of BTM as an additional tool to assess anti-osteoporosis efficacy, predict fracture risk and probe the causes of osteoporosis is promising for healthcare professionals, as it could improve outcomes and decrease costs. In very older men, however, using these BTM effectively to manage osteoporosis is still far away.

Persistent derangements in BTM in the setting of pharmacotherapy treatment for osteoporosis, persistent derangements can help identify patients needing to be initiated on a different treatment and raise suspicion for an independent underlying pathology capable of influencing the rate of bone turnover.