The most common symptom of patients with chronic bronchitis is a cough. The history of a cough typical of chronic bronchitis is characterized to be present for most days in a month lasting for 3 months, with at least 2 such episodes occurring for 2 years in a row. A productive cough with sputum is present in about 50% of patients. The sputum color may vary from clear, yellow, green, or at times blood-tinged. The color of sputum may be dependent on the presence of secondary bacterial infection. Very often, changes in sputum color can be due to peroxidase released by leucocytes in the sputum. Therefore, color alone is not a definite indication of bacterial infection.

It is of prime importance to elicit a complete history from the patient, including information regarding possible exposure to inhaled irritants or chemicals, as well as full details regarding smoking habits. Fever is uncommon in chronic bronchitis and, when present, can be suggestive of associated influenza or pneumonia. Generalized malaise is a commonly associated symptom. Rarely patients may complain of chest pain or abdominal muscle pain caused by continuous forceful coughing. When there is inflammation of the airway, there can be an associated wheeze.

Uncomplicated chronic bronchitis presents with a cough, and there is no evidence of airway obstruction physiologically. When patients have chronic asthmatic bronchitis, there is usually a wheeze present due to a hyperactive airway leading to intermittent bronchospasm. When there is obstructive bronchitis which is the more severe end of the spectrum of the disease, there is small airway disease which at times results in emphysema.