The equipment needed for tubal ligation varies based on the technique and approach. To perform a tubal ligation, the surgeon must first visualize the Fallopian tube. Following visualization, the patency between ovary/ovum and uterus must be interrupted.

During a cesarean section, the visualization of the Fallopian tube is often simple after the uterus becomes exteriorized. The surgeon can grasp the tube with a Babcock clamp and the chosen technique utilized. If the uterus is not exteriorized, or if it cannot be, visualization of the tube can be more difficult depending on the amount of adhesive disease present. Various retractors, such as a Richardson retractor, may be utilized to aid in visualizing the tube. The Bovie cautery used during the cesarean can also be used during the tubal ligation.

For a postpartum or postabortion procedure, access to the Fallopian tube is achieved using a mini-laparotomy incision. A scalpel, several small retractors (such as a Senn or Army-Navy retractor), and surgical scissors (such as Metzenbaum or Mayo scissors) will suffice. A suction tip, such as a Yankauer, may also be utilized. A clamp such as a Babcock is again used to grasp the tube once it is in the surgical incision, and the chosen technique for tubal ligation can take place.

Surgeons often perform interval procedures laparoscopically. Therefore, standard laparoscopic equipment is necessary, including the laparoscope, CO2 gas and tubing, light, video equipment, trocars, and graspers. Equipment for the chosen technique of laparoscopic entry is required, per surgeon preference. Once abdominal entry is achieved and the Fallopian tube visualized laparoscopically, the chosen method for tubal ligation can commence.

If utilizing electrocautery, as in some laparoscopic tubal ligations, a bipolar energy source and instrument (Kleppinger) are necessary. Laparoscopic bilateral salpingectomy can also be performed, for example, using a bipolar combination sealing/cutting instrument. Various clips and bands may also help occlude the Fallopian tubes during laparoscopy. Clips or bands are also options during postpartum/postabortion sterilizations or cesarean sections. Open techniques utilizing suture are common. With the increase in salpingectomy, some physicians are choosing to use laparoscopic bipolar sealing/cutting instruments at the time of postpartum or cesarean tubal ligations.

Closure of the skin incision(s) can be achieved using sutures and/or skin glue.

Hysteroscopic sterilization techniques have been described and used, though they are no longer widely utilized in the United States. If the surgeon chooses this technique, then hysteroscopic equipment (hysteroscope, distension medium, light, video equipment, etc.) is needed, along with vaginal instruments (speculum or retractors, tenaculum, dilators, etc.). Whatever method is being utilized to occlude the tubes is also necessary.