Laboratory evaluation of Pythium keratitis begins with appropriate sample collection. The samples are collected in the form of corneal scrapings under 5% proparacaine topical anesthesia with either Kimura spatula, number 15 Bard-Parker blade, 26 gauge needle, hypodermic needle, or platinum spatula. The corneal scrapings are subjected to wet mount direct microscopic examination using 10% potassium hydroxide (KOH), potassium calcofluor white, and Gram stain.

The septate or aseptate hyphae with perpendicular or obtuse lateral branching are seen. The scraping material is also used for culture analysis using blood agar, chocolate agar, Sabourad dextrose agar, or any nutritional agar where Pythium appears as white-colored creamy colonies along with zoospore formation. The zoospore also contains numerous vesicles.

The serological analysis of P. insidiosum is based on antibodies detection in serum. The various tests are immunodiffusion, hemagglutination, immunochromatography, enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA), and western blot. The reported sensitivity of immunodiffusion is 61%.

The molecular diagnostic method for Pythium is polymerase chain reaction (PCR), based on the amplification of the internal transcribed spacer (ITS) region, ribosomal intergenic spacer region (IGS), and gene cytochrome oxidase (COX2).Pythium species as isolated or from clinical specimens also. The PCR helps in the rapid diagnosis of Pythium by DNA sequencing. Another non-invasive diagnostic technique to diagnose Pythium is in-vivo confocal microscopy (IVCM). The Pythium hyphae appear as beaded branching hyperreflective structures or long slender, thin hyperreflective lines, which vary from 90 to 400 mm lengthwise and 1.5 to 7.5 mm in diameter. The branching angle of Pythium hyphae is reported to be 78.6 degrees.