Several conditions induce alterations in respiratory rate or pattern. These modifications occur due to changes in PaO2, PaCO2, or pH levels imposed by the disease process, which in turn augments the sensory drive sent from the central or peripheral control mechanisms to the brain. The adjustments manifest in the form of modified tidal volume or respiratory rate.

**Asthma**

Asthma is a chronic obstructive airway disease characterized by reversible inflammation of the conducting airways in response to various allergenic and non-allergenic stimuli. During an acute asthma attack, severe inflammation occurs, leading to airway narrowing, excess mucus production, and bronchoconstriction. Subsequently, hypoxia develops due to impaired gas exchange. Hypoxia stimulates peripheral chemoreceptors, which, in turn, transmit the signal to the respiratory control center in the brain. The respiratory center increases its firing rate leading to enhanced respiratory rate and resultant hypocapnia. It is crucial to note that in asthmatics, paradoxical normalization of carbon dioxide levels is an indication that muscular fatigue is setting in and that total respiratory failure is imminent.

**Chronic Obstructive Pulmonary Disease**

COPD is another chronic obstructive airway disease that shares many similarities with asthma. However, COPD is an irreversible process that gradually progresses over time, leading to chronic air-trapping and persistent hypercapnia. At first, central chemoreceptors sense hypercapnia as it would in a healthy individual and signal the respiratory center to increase breathing depth. As a result, a respiratory pattern of deep and slow breaths ensues. Studies have shown that supplemental oxygen during acute COPD exacerbation causes an increase in PaCO2 and a transient decrease in minute ventilation.

Previously, it was hypothesized that central chemoreceptors gradually become resistant to carbon dioxide levels in the blood such that the medullary sensors no longer respond to changes in pH as they would in a healthy counterpart. This led to the belief that hypercapnia no longer acts as the primary drive for respiration, and these patients become dependent on hypoxia for respiratory drive, causing generalized reluctance to administer supplemental oxygen during acute COPD exacerbation in the healthcare setting. This theory is no longer widely accepted as studies have shown that the transient decrease in minute ventilation in these patients is not sustained and does not consistently correlate proportionally with the degree of PaCO2 increase. Instead, administration of supplemental oxygen counteracts the reflex hypoxic pulmonary vasoconstriction that would otherwise shunt perfusion away from the damaged alveoli with poor ventilation to maximize perfusion to the "good" alveoli. The resulting dead space ventilation and ventilation-perfusion (V/Q) mismatch is likely a better explanation for the oxygen-induced increase in PaCO2. Another proposed mechanism is that supplemental oxygen causes a right shift in the hemoglobin-CO2 dissociation curve, increasing PaCO2, referred to as the Haldane effect.

COPD patients with an acute exacerbation have difficulty increasing their minute ventilation to blow off the excess CO2 and therefore struggle to normalize PaCO2 in this setting. Regardless of the specific physiologic mechanism for oxygen-induced hypercapnia, the relevant consensus is that patients with acute COPD exacerbation should be given titrated oxygen therapy with a target of 88-92% oxygen saturation to reduce both hypoxia and the risk of hypercapnia.

**Obesity Hypoventilation Syndrome**

Obesity hypoventilation syndrome, also known as Pickwickian syndrome, is a condition that affects morbidly obese individuals. Obesity alters lung and chest wall mechanics leading to hypoventilation and resultant hypercapnia. The patient initially compensates by increasing respiratory drive and work of breathing. However, respiratory fatigue rapidly ensures that hypercapnia and hypoxia occur. As the condition progresses, chronic hypercapnia results in respiratory acidosis with compensatory HCO3 retention by the kidneys. Bicarbonate decreases the sensitivity of central chemoreceptors to changes in PCO2, leading to persistent hypercapnia.

**Neuromuscular Disease**

Neuromuscular disease is the terminology used to describe the various pathologies that affect muscular function. The problem could arise anywhere along the pathway of muscle control, beginning with the CNS and ending with the muscle itself. Examples include muscular dystrophies, such as Duchenne muscular dystrophy, and motor neuron diseases, such as poliomyelitis. Respiratory muscle weakness eventually occurs in neuromuscular diseases, causing hypoventilation and resultant hypoxia and hypercapnia. The core concept is that respiratory control centers are intact and attempt to respond appropriately to changing PO2 and PCO2 levels. However, the muscles lose the ability to respond to hypoxic and hypercapnic stimuli due to muscular weakness. Unaided, this leads to hypoxia and hypercapnia and, ultimately, death due to ventilatory failure.

**Drugs**

Inhalational anesthetics, narcotics, and minor tranquilizers are the most notorious pharmaceuticals for causing respiratory depression. Inhaled anesthetics decrease response to increased carbon dioxide and decreased oxygenation, thus blunting respiratory drive adjustments. Benzodiazepines, on the other hand, act on GABA receptors in the central nervous system. They effectively decrease all neural functions, including the respiratory pacemaking system in the brainstem. Similarly, opioid narcotics act on mu-opioid receptors in the central nervous system. They primarily target the preBötzinger complex within the pacemaking system of respiration, thus reducing the underlying drive for breathing. Finally, alcohol is nonpharmaceutical that depresses respiratory drive by blunting the body's response to increasing carbon dioxide levels.

**Congenital Central Hypoventilation Syndrome (CCHS)**

Congenital central hypoventilation syndrome, sometimes known as Ondine's curse, is a rare genetic disease caused by a mutation that renders the respiratory center in the brain unresponsive to changes in PCO2. When breathing fails to happen unconsciously, the patient becomes dependent on conscious control (cortex). Patients generally have breathing problems during sleep that tend to get better while awake.