Clinicopathology correlation is essential when establishing a cutaneous lymphoma subtype diagnosis since most CLs demonstrate similar histology and immunophenotypes.

**Cutaneous T-cell Lymphoma**

MF: Presents as erythematous patches, plaques, tumors, or erythrodermic “stages,” most frequently involving non-sun-exposed “bathing suit” areas in older individuals. Lesions may accompany epidermal atrophy, scaling, or pruritis. Hypo- or hyper-pigmented patches/plaques may both be seen, especially in patients with skin of color. It rarely presents in children or adolescents (MF variants are more common in this population).

MF Variants

- FMF: Presents as grouped erythematous patches, plaques, and tumors accentuated around follicles on the neck and face (especially eyebrows). Patients often have alopecia (up to 81%), comedones, or rosacea-like skin changes. Although the mean age of onset is from 46 to 59 years old (in men more than women), FMF is a common variant of juvenile MF.

- PR: Localized PR, also known as Woringer-Klopp disease (WKD), presents as solitary, hyperkeratotic verrucous, or psoriasiform plaques on the extremities of patients between their third and sixth decades of life. Like FMF, PR may show in pediatric individuals.

- GSS: Presents as erythematous, pruritic lax skin and wrinkles, mainly in flexure/axillary regions in men during their third to fourth decades of life. Plaques may be violaceous with atrophy and have mild desquamation.

SS: Presents more frequently in older persons as generalized erythroderma (i.e., greater than 80% body surface area) with exfoliation, edema, pruritus, or lichenification. Lymphadenopathy is common.

ATL: Presents as large, rapidly growing cutaneous papules, nodules, or tumors.

Primary cutaneous CD30+ lymphoproliferative disorders

- C-ALCL: Presents as solitary, grouped, or multifocal (approximately 20% of the time) nodules or tumors that often persist for at least 3 to 4 weeks. Superficial ulceration may be present and frequently involves the extremities and face (less commonly the trunk). Cutaneous relapse may occur, and partial or complete regression happens in about 25% of patients. Most commonly, C-ALCL arises in patients between 50 to 70 years old but may occur in some pediatric populations.

- LyP: Presents as a benign, chronic, and often relapsing papulonodular eruption over the face, trunk, or limbs. Post-inflammatory hypopigmented macules and atrophic scars in sites of spontaneous resolution may occur.

SPTCL: Often presents as multiple, relapsing, self-healing subcutaneous nodules on the trunk or extremities. Nodules are painless and may appear in the same or different skin locations. About 75% of patients have multifocal skin involvement. Associations of SPTCL include serosal effusions, hemophagocytosis, and pancytopenia.

Extranodal NK-cell/T-cell lymphoma, nasal type: Often presents as ulcerating, necrotizing, or destructive lesions on the midface, nose, or upper airways. Surrounding edema and erythema may frequently occur. It is most common in Asia and Latin American geographic regions and among similar heritage groups. Positive EBV detection via in situ hybridization (ISH) is necessary to confirm the diagnosis.

CAEBV infection: According to the 2018 WHO-EORTC, this diagnosis includes EBV+ lymphoproliferative disorders (LPD) in childhood, which has two sub-classifications: hydroa vacciniform-like LPD (HV-like LPD) and severe mosquito bite allergy (sMBA).

- HV-like LPD: Presents as a papulovesicular eruption on sun-exposed skin areas (e.g., face, ear lobes, back of hands) with or without systemic symptoms (e.g., fever, lymphadenopathy). Extensive non-sun-exposed skin involvement, facial swelling, and extensive ulcers may suggest the severity of the disease.

- sMBA: Presents as ulceronecrotic lesions at the site of mosquito bites with similar systemic symptoms as seen in patients with HV-like LPD. This condition is most common in children and young adults, and patients of Asian or Hispanic descent.

Primary cutaneous peripheral T-cell lymphoma, rare subtypes

- PCGDTL (provisional): May present as diffuse superficial patches and plaques on the extremities with or without facial tumor ulceration. Lesions may appear similar to Pyoderma gangrenosum on the legs, deep nodules on the trunk, or in conjunction with MF-like plaques on non-sun-exposed skin areas. It is more likely to present in adults aged 40 to 70 and has a poor prognosis.

- CD8+ AECTCL (provisional): May present as Pyoderma gangrenosum-like lesions or PR-like patches and plaques with hyperkeratosis. Lesions may appear as annular or erythematous widespread papules, plaques, and ulcerated tumors without precursor lesions. They tend to appear suddenly and rapidly within weeks to months and may be locally aggressive. They occur most commonly on acral skin surfaces; oral involvement indicates a poor prognosis. The age of presentation is broad, from young adults to the elderly.

- CD4+SMT-LPD (provisional): Commonly presents as asymptomatic, solitary, slow-growing violaceous or erythematous papules, plaques, nodules, or tumors. Most cases involve the head and neck, followed by the trunk and upper extremities. Pain or pruritus may occur, but ulceration is rare. Although these occur predominately in elderly persons in the sixth and seventh decades of life, pediatric patients may also be affected.

- Primary cutaneous acral CD8+ T-cell lymphoma (provisional): Presents most commonly in adult males older than 50 as solitary, slow-growing nodules on the ear, although they may occur on the nose, hands, and feet. Symmetric skin involvement is not uncommon, and this disease exhibits an indolent course.

- Primary cutaneous peripheral T-cell lymphoma, NOS: May present as solitary erythematous to violaceous tumors or nodules throughout the body. Ulceration and subsequent infection may occur, and rapid dissemination with systemic symptoms is not uncommon. The prognosis is abysmal, with a five-year disease survival rate of less than 20%, and is more likely to appear in older adults/elderly persons.

**Cutaneous B-cell Lymphoma**

PCMZL: Typically presents as pink, red, or violaceous papules, plaques, or nodules. They commonly occur on the arms or trunk instead of the head and neck and predominately appear in adult males 50 to 60. However, they frequently appear as rare cases of CL among children and adolescents.

PCFCL: Presents as one or more localized, erythematous papules, plaques, or tumors on the scalp, forehead, or trunk of adult males 50 to 60 years old.

PCDLBLC, LT: Often presents as rapidly developing red to plum nodules or tumors on one or both legs of older women (median age of diagnosis is 70 years old). This condition frequently spreads to extracutaneous sites, namely lymph nodes and bone marrow, and warrants further hematopathology evaluation due to its poor prognosis.

EBVMCU (provisional): Appears as shallow, well-circumscribed mucosal or cutaneous ulcers with indolent disease progression. Most patients experience spontaneous regression. The median patient age upon presentation is around 66 years old, with a slight female predominance.

IVBCL: A rare subtype of DLBCL with intravascular involvement leading to blood vessel destruction and necrosis. Lesions may present anywhere in the body, but skin involvement is more common in persons of Western populations. Constitutional B symptoms may also occur. Disseminated disease most commonly affects elderly persons around 70 years old without gender predilection.