Patient positioning for most studies depends on the clinical condition of the patient.

Chest radiographs for stable patients are taken in the posteroanterior position with the shoulders retracted forward to abduct the scapulae. Lateral projections are also usually obtained with the arms raised overhead. These may be taken in standing or sitting positions. In unstable patients who are unable to move, portable anteroposterior views are obtained. Lateral decubitus views with the patient lying on the side may be obtained to evaluate pleural effusions. Lordotic views are obtained with the patient slightly reclined backward with the arms raised overhead to image the lung apices. Expiratory views can be considered for better evaluation of pneumothoraces. Oblique posteroanterior projections may be obtained in the sitting, supine or prone positions with one side of the body elevated, usually by 15-20 degrees, which allows for evaluating the bony rib cage.

CT and MRI studies are usually obtained with the patient in the supine position. HRCT is obtained with the patient in supine and prone positions and in the inspiratory and expiratory phases. Low radiation dose scan parameters are used for screening of lung cancer. The necessity of contrast depends upon the area of interest or clinical suspicion, e.g., evaluation of mediastinal masses, lymph nodes, vasculature, pleural disease, or new lung masses need contrast studies.

For nuclear medicine studies, the position of the patient for the ventilation scan may vary depending on institutional policies. Patients can be scanned standing or sitting, or they may be supine. For perfusion scans, the patient is in a supine position for the injection and then preferably imaged standing up as that minimizes diaphragmatic movement and allows more complete expansion of the chest.

For lung ultrasound examination, the position of the patient depends on the clinical scenario. In a stable patient, a sitting position, often starting at the point of concern, is preferred. In more critical, hospitalized patients, scanning is done in the supine or lateral positions.