Acute rhinosinusitis is a clinical diagnosis. Three “cardinal” symptoms that are most sensitive and specific for acute rhinosinusitis are purulent nasal drainage accompanied by either nasal obstruction or facial pain/pressure/fullness. This must be elucidated specifically from patients who will present with generic "headache" complaints.  Isolated headache is **not**a symptom of sinusitis (with the rare exception of sphenoid sinusitis, which can present as an occipital or vertex headache and is usually chronic), but facial pressure is. The astute clinician must elicit this history from the patient to determine the exact symptoms they are experiencing.

When cardinal symptoms persist beyond ten days or if they worsen after an initial period of improvement (“double worsening”), one may diagnose ABRS. Other symptoms associated with acute rhinosinusitis include cough, fatigue, hyposmia, anosmia, maxillary dental pain, and ear fullness or pressure. Anterior rhinoscopy may reveal mucopus emanating from the osteomeatal complex, or this may be demonstrated on formal endoscopic rhinoscopy in the clinic.

Children have a slight variance in the clinical presentation of ABRS.  In addition to the 10-day duration, cardinal symptoms, and “double worsening,” children are more likely to present with fevers. Nasal discharge may initially be watery, then turn purulent. A viral upper respiratory infection precedes approximately 80% of acute bacterial sinusitis.

Severe symptoms are more indicative of a bacterial cause.  These include high fevers (over 39 C or 102 F) accompanied by purulent nasal discharge or facial pain for three to four consecutive days at the beginning of the illness. Viral illnesses typically resolve after three to five days.

Antibiotic resistance factors should also merit consideration. These include

- Antibiotic use within the last month

- Hospitalization within the previous five days

- Healthcare occupation.

- Local patterns of antibiotic resistance known to healthcare organizations in the community

Lastly, one should assess whether a patient is at higher risk.  These characteristics include

- Comorbidities (i.e., cardiac, renal, or hepatic disease)

- Immunocompromised states

- Age under 2 years or over 65 years

Fungal acute rhinosinusitis is most commonly associated with fevers, nasal obstruction or bleeding, and facial pain in an immunocompromized patient, though it can also be asymptomatic.  Refractory or severe symptoms in an immunocompromised patient should prompt consideration of this diagnosis.