As a clinician, it is essential to counsel patients on the importance of maintaining proper gut health by moderating alcohol intake and tobacco use and intaking adequate amounts of fiber and water. In addition, patients should be educated on the importance of moderate NSAID use, as the two leading causes of ulcers in the stomach and duodenum are NSAIDs and H. Pylori. NSAIDs erode the stomach lining, leading to high stomach acid, which can leak into the duodenum and make it vulnerable to bacterial infections such as H. Pylori.

It is clinically important to understand the anatomy of the small bowel, as swallowed foreign bodies are most likely to become lodged in the most narrow parts of the intestine, which include the pylorus, the DJ flexure, and the ileocecal junction.

Malabsorption disorders can be classified as either global, involving the entire mucosa, or partial, dealing with the malabsorption of specific nutrients. Clinical features of malabsorption are relatively specific to the type of nutrient that is deficient, yet weight loss and fatty, greasy stools are classical findings of global malabsorption. Stools are typically voluminous and pale. Most patients present with nonspecific gastrointestinal symptoms such as abdominal pain, flatulence, anorexia, and distension. Patients with malabsorption issues may also be asymptomatic.

During instances of isolated malabsorption, such as celiac disease, specific manifestations, such as bone thinning or iron deficiency anemia, might be the only presentation.

Based on the clinical implications of malabsorption, it is crucial to recognize that these diseases can cause great hindrances in patients’ lives, altering their ability to go about their daily activities. It is an important topic to continue researching as more pediatric patients are reaching adulthood with diseases such as short bowel syndrome, cystic fibrosis, and inflammatory bowel disease.