**Structure**

The flexor digitorum superficialis muscle has two origins. The humeroulnar head originates off the medial epicondyle of the humerus and the coronoid process of the ulna. The radial head originates on the upper half of the volar aspect of the radial shaft. The median nerve and ulnar artery enter the forearm by passing between the humeroulnar and radial heads of the flexor digitorum superficialis muscle. The flexor digitorum superficialis courses along the volar aspect of the forearm, superficial to the flexor digitorum profundus and flexor pollicis longus muscles, and deep to the palmaris longus, flexor carpi radialis, flexor carpi ulnaris, and pronator teres.

As it courses down the forearm, the flexor digitorum superficialis separates into two planes of muscular fibers, superficial and deep:

- The superficial plane further divides to supply tendons for the middle and ring fingers.

- The deep plane provides a muscular slip to join the part of the superficial plane associated with the tendon of the ring finger and then divides to supply tendons for the index and little fingers.

The four flexor digitorum superficialis tendons pass deep to the transverse carpal ligament, constituting four of the nine total tendons in the carpal tunnel.

**Function**

The flexor digitorum superficialis flexes the middle phalanges of the medial four digits at the proximal interphalangeal joints. It also flexes the proximal phalanges at the metacarpophalangeal joints and the wrist joint. Flexor digitorum superficialis can flex each finger it serves independently.