In echocardiography, there are four basic principles utilized for the hemodynamic assessment of the heart. The foundation of hemodynamics in echocardiography revolves around the Doppler principle. Doppler describes two physical entities; flow and direction.  The Doppler effect states that as an emitting object changes direction, the frequency of the wave produced will also vary relative to the receiving object. In echocardiography, the ultrasound probe is the emitting source, and red blood cells reflect the emitted waves.

Spectral doppler provides a graphical illustration of velocity on the y-axis and time on the x-axis. Blood flow towards the probe will be a positive deflection, and there will be a negative deflection when blood flow is away from the probe. Spectral doppler can be further divided into pulsed-wave Doppler and continuous wave.

Pulsed-wave (PW) Doppler sends pulsatile ultrasound waves to a specific location then pauses to receive the reflected waves. Due to the inherent pause of PW-Doppler, it intrinsically follows a principle called pulse repetition frequency (PRF).

Nyquist limit= PRF/2

If the Nyquist limit is exceeded, PW Doppler suffers from aliasing. The advantage of PW Doppler is its ability to assess specific locations in regions of interest. The Nyquist limit has a prominent role with the principle of proximal iso velocity surface area (PISA), which will be discussed in detail later.

Continuous-wave (CW) Doppler sends continuous ultrasound waves while simultaneously receiving the reflected signals.

The principles of Doppler will be demonstrated throughout this article with various uses with each of the three major principles, as mentioned above.

**Bernoulli Equation**

The first major principle that will be discussed is the Bernoulli equation which is demonstrated in the "Bernoulli equation" image below.

h= height, p= pressure, v= velocity, g=gravity acceleration of earth, and rho= density of a fluid.

Each term will be an energy density that, if added together, are constant throughout a conduit. The first term is pressure energy (p), the second term is kinetic energy (½ Rho * V^2), and the third is potential energy (rho*g*h). In echocardiography, the potential energy component can be eliminated since it is negligible. Based on the law of conservation of energy, within a closed system, the total energy is constant. When blood transverses through a region of flow turbulence, the velocity increases, and pressure inversely decreases. Thus, the pressure gradient between two objects can be obtained using the Bernoulli equation:

Pressure gradient = 4 x ([V2]^2-[V1]^2)

V1 is upstream velocity, and V2 is the downstream velocity in meters/sec

This equation is utilized for the calculation of pressure gradients between cardiac structures. Due to the closed-loop circuit of the heart and commonly only one single area of flow turbulence, the modified Bernoulli principle can be utilized, eliminating V1, giving the following equation:

Pressure (P) = 4 x (peak velocity)^2

However, it is important to understand that if the V1 is more than 1 m/s, the above equation modification would not be applicable. This is seen in situations of tandem stenotic lesions.

This concept is used commonly in echo-hemodynamics, specifically in the assessment of chamber pressure assessment.

For example, the right ventricular systolic pressure (RVSP) can be estimated from the velocity of the tricuspid regurgitation (TR) jet when added to the right atrial pressure (RAP). This can be seen in the equation below:

RSVP = 4 x (peak TR velocity)^2 + RAP

TR peak pressure gradient= RVSP-RAP

In the setting of no significant pulmonic valve stenosis, RVSP = pulmonary artery systolic pressure. In this regard, echocardiography can be used in the initial assessment of pulmonary hypertension.

**Continuity Equation**

The formula of flow originates from the principle of conservation of mass. The basic parameters used when defining flow in echocardiography are the cross-sectional area of a circle (CSA) and the time-velocity integral (VTI). The units of VTI and CSA are cm/stroke and cm^2, respectively. VTI is a clinical doppler echocardiographic technique acquired by using both continuous and pulse wave Doppler. In VTI assessment, the area under the velocity-time curve is calculated by tracing the spectral Doppler envelope. Regions of interest (i.e., left ventricular outflow tract (LVOT)) can be assessed by this method. Using the VTI and CSA across a region of interest, stroke volume can be calculated. This principle can be shown by using pulse wave Doppler across the left ventricular outflow tract. Hence, CSA_LVOT x VTI_LVOT = stroke volume. The VTI, a mathematical representation of integration, is the area under the curve of the velocity (on the y-axis) and time (on the x-axis).

The continuity equation is as follows and as demonstrated in the "AV equation" image below:

V1 x Area1= V2 x Area2

V1 is the velocity at point 1, and V2 is the area at point 2.

In the above equation, the area has an inverse relationship with velocity. This equates to as area increases velocity decreases and vice versa. The most common instance where this equation is utilized is in assessing valve area in stenosis. For example, for aortic stenosis assessment where AV stands for aortic valve:

CSA_LVOT x VTI_LVOT = CSA_AV x VTI_AV

CSA_AV = CSA_LVOT x VTI_LVOT/ VTI_AV

The equation for stroke volume= CSA_LVOT x VTI_LVOT

Where CSA_LVOT is the area of the LVOT, VTI_LVOT is the VTI across the AV, CSA_AV is the area of the aortic valve, and VTI_AV is the VTI across the aortic valve.

The continuity equation also allows for assessing other parameters such as cardiac output via the ability to calculate stroke volume. The continuity equation can be utilized in any valve but with the assumption that the same volume will flow through all the heart chambers and across all the valves if they are all competent. Stroke volume can be assessed by multiplying the CSA of a region of interest and the VTI of the same region of interest (this is seen in the numerator of the continuity equation). Similarly, using the parameters of one valve can be utilized to calculate the parameters of another valve (i.e., stroke volume through the mitral valve should equal the stroke volume through the aortic valve in the absence of valvular regurgitation).

Example 1: A 85-year-old female underwent an echocardiogram which showed a continuous wave through the aortic valve (figure A) and pulse wave through LVOT (figure B), with a measured LVOT diameter of 1.8 cm. Figure A and Figure B can be seen below.

A continuous doppler across AV showed a peak velocity of 3.62 m/sec. From this, we can calculate peak gradient using the modified Bernoulli equation.

Pressure gradient = 4 x (V^2).

Peak gradient = 4 x (3.62)^2

Peak gradient = 52.4 mmHg.

Now we can calculate the aortic valve area using the continuity equation.

AV area x AV VTI = LVOT area x LVOT VTI

AV area = (LVOT area x LVOT VTI)/ AV VTI

AV area = [ π x (0.9)^2) X LVOT VTI] / AV VTI

AV area = [2.54 X 15.7]/93.1

AV area = 0.43 cm^2

Flow assessment via the concepts from the continuity equation is also used for parameters for valvular regurgitation assessment. This concept is applied when calculating regurgitant volume and regurgitant fraction.

Regurgitant Volume (RV)= SV - SV

SV= stroke volume

REGURGITANT FRACTION= RV/SV of regurgitant valve

EROA= RV/VTI of regurgitant valve

Regurgitant volume and fraction can be calculated via extrapolation of the continuity equation. First, the determination of LVOT diameter and VTI shall be used with the mitral valve's diameter and VTI via PW doppler.  The mitral VTI, when calculated, must include both the E and A waveforms of the flow profile. Hence, with the SV = CSA x VTI equation, we can calculate the respective SV of the regurgitant valve and the competent one and thus determine the RV as in the equations above.

The degree of regurgitation through either semilunar valve can be estimated by utilizing some of the mathematical principles demonstrated above as illustrated in the calculation of regurgitant volumes (RV) in the formula below:

RV_AV = SV_AV- SV_PVRV_PV = SV_PV- SV_AV

AV= aortic valve PV=pulmonic valve

**PISA**

As blood flows through an orifice, all equidistant points towards the orifice show the same velocity.

The Nyquist limit, a signal processing echo-doppler technique, can help in colored doppler to estimate the velocity along with the PISA. It gets an accurate PISA diameter, the Nyquist limit is moved towards the direction of the jet to get a good shell around the regurgitant jet, and the radius could be measured. If there is a regurgitant valve, then one measures the effective regurgitant orifice area (EROA). If it was stenosis, then the measure should be the effective regurgitant orifice area (EROA); thus, multiplying these parameters by VTI, one will get the RV of the valve in question.

PISA creates the illusion of multiple concentric spheres of flow convergence.

PISA flow rate = Regurgitant flow rate

CSA_PISA x Velocity_PISA = EROA_MV x Velocity_MV

MV= Mitral Valve

The following formulae can be derived from this concept that helps calculate effective regurgitant area and regurgitant volume.

PISA = 2 x  π x radius^2

Effective regurgitant orifice area (EROA) = (PISA x Aliasing velocity) / max velocity

Regurgitant Volume = EROA x MV VTI

Example 2: A 58-year-old male with shortness of breath undergoes an echocardiogram. An "apical four-chamber view shows regurgitant jet with PISA" figure and "MV VTI" figure below.

PISA = 2 x π x radius^2

PISA = 2 x 3.14 x (0.7 cm)^2

PISA = 3.07 cm^2

Effective regurgitant orifice (EROA) = (PISA x Aliasing velocity) / max velocity

EROA = (3.07 x 38.5 cm/s) / 449 cm/s

EROA = 0.26 cm^2

Regurgitant Volume = EROA x MV VTI

Regurgitant Volume = 0.26 cm^2 x 177 cm

Regurgitant Volume = 46 cc