Treatments must be tailored to suit the age of the patient, quality of life (QOL) issues, and PASI score. Broadly, treatment can be categorized as topical applications, phototherapy, systemic drugs and other modalities. Topical therapy includes the use of emollients and moisturizers, corticosteroids, keratolytics, tar, anthralin, vitamin D3 analogs and calcineurin inhibitors. A combination of topical agents is sometimes more effective than when the drugs are used alone.

Common sources of light therapy used in the management of plaque psoriasis include whole-body or targeted ultraviolet (UV) B (broad and narrow band), photochemotherapy (psoralen with UVA (PUVA)), home phototherapy and LASER.

Systemic drugs used include acitretin, methotrexate, cyclosporine, tacrolimus, hydroxyurea, 6-thioguanine, mycophenolate, fumaric acid esters, apremilast and biologic agents. Of the available biologic agents, etanercept, adalimumab, infliximab, secukinumab, ustekinumab, tildrakizumab and ixekizumab are indicated for plaque psoriasis. Etanercept can be safely used in children with proper monitoring. Other treatment modalities like fish oil rich in omega-3 fatty acids may be of benefit.

Neuropeptide-modulating agents, newer NSAIDs like WBI-1001, LAS41002, and LAS41004, Janus-associated kinase inhibitors, MEK1/MEKK1 inhibitor, phosphodiesterase inhibitors, pan-selectin antagonists, and fibroblast growth factor 23 (FGF 23), are under research.  The role of alefacept in HIV-associated psoriasis is being considered.

Extra care must be taken while treating a pregnant woman with psoriasis. UVB can be safely used, and the risk of topical PUVA is considered low in pregnancy. Adalimumab, etanercept, and infliximab come under FDA category B;  anthralin, betamethasone dipropionate, calcineurin inhibitors, cyclosporine, psoralen, methylprednisolone aceponate are category C drugs; whereas, acitretin, methotrexate, and tazarotene belong to category X.

Psoriasis is a chronic inflammatory disease with remissions and exacerbations that are often requiring prolonged therapy. The choice of therapy should take into consideration the long-term side effects of therapy with particular reference to topical steroids and other immune-suppressive agents. High-potency topical steroids like clobetasol propionate are contraindicated in young children for fear of side effects like atrophy, depigmentation, and precipitation of pustular psoriasis on sudden withdrawal (which may also occur in adults using excessive quantities over a long period). While using phototherapy and systemic drugs, a similar caution should be exercised. In children, immature hepatic andrenal systems, and the active hematopoietic system should be carefully considered when prescribing systemic drugs. Since the long-term side effects of newer drugs are not yet available, it is prudent to use them only when indicated and other treatments have failed or are contraindicated.

In summary, topical therapy and phototherapy are used in mild-to-moderate psoriasis, and systemic therapy is indicated for more severe disease. Biologics should be instituted by qualified experts only when indicated.