Acquiring a detailed history and physical exam is necessary to determine the correct diagnosis and necessary treatment. It is important to determine the patient’s age, handedness, and occupation. Knowledge of occupation may provide the physician insight into risk factors for certain exposures, and give a better understanding of the patient’s individualized needs when considering treatment and rehabilitation strategies. A full understanding of the patient’s comorbidities and past medical history should be obtained as certain medications, and medical conditions may place the patient in an immunocompromised state. A targeted review of systems should allow the physician to evaluate the patient for signs of hematogenous spread or systemic illness. Patients should also be queried regarding previous injuries or surgeries to their hands.If known by the patient, it is important to establish the time of onset and nature of the inoculation event. Understanding the chronicity and the setting of inoculation will help to guide empiric antibiotic coverage. This is especially important in the cases of penetrating trauma or bite wounds, as specific microorganisms have classical associations for particular types and settings of injury.

A complete investigation into the patient’s presenting symptoms should always be undertaken to create and narrow differential diagnosis. Location and characterization of pain, erythema, effusion, and discharge may help to determine the particular pathology present. Patients should also be assessed for signs of nerve compression. In all cases, a full inspection of the hand and upper extremity should be performed to examine for erythema or other discoloration, effusion, deformity or malalignment, and lacerations or open wounds. Erythema should be outlined with a marking pen to help determine the progression of the infectious process, which may help to differentiate superficial cellulitis from a necrotizing soft tissue infection.

The existence of an abscess may also be suggested by the failure of apparent cellulitis to resolve upon initiation of antibiotic treatment. The location of the abscess should be noted if one is present, as they may occur superficially, in the webspace between digits, or the midpalmar, thenar, or hypothenar spaces.

A patient with osteomyelitis oftentimes has risk factors predisposing them to this condition, and on a physical exam may demonstrate localized erythema, bony pain, and edema. In some cases of osteomyelitis, a draining sinus tract will also be present.