Retropharyngeal abscess is a life-threatening disorder that can quickly result in airway compromise and death. In view of the very high morbidity and mortality, an interprofessional team approach to diagnosis and treatment is recommended.

**The interprofessional team**responsibilities include the following:

The triage nurse should be familiar with the symptoms and not mistake it for a simple upper respiratory tract infection. All patients appearing toxic should be admitted, and the emergency department physician is notified.

The emergency department physician should refrain from performing an oral exam because it may lead to irritation of the upper airways and dyspnea. If the patient is toxic, both the otolaryngologist and anesthesiologist should be notified in case an emergent airway is required.

The radiologist should be consulted for the appropriate imaging test to determine the location and extent of the abscess.

The patient should be monitored by the critical care specialist and otolaryngologist.

The patient needs close monitoring of the vitals, oxygenation, and ventilation by the nurses. Any deviation from normal parameters should be immediately communicated to the interprofessional team because the risk of airway compromise is high. In addition, most patients are not able to eat for weeks or months, and thus, a dietary consult for TPN should be ordered.

Some patients may require extensive rehabilitation to regain muscle strength, joint movement, and speech. For those who undergo a tracheostomy, respiratory therapy follow-up is necessary for teaching the patient about tracheal care and the process of weaning.

Besides delivering ICU care, the nurse also plays a vital role in patient and family education. In order to prevent the disorder, the patient should be educated on proper maintenance of oral hygiene and getting regular dental checkups. More importantly, the patient should be told that he or she has symptoms of dysphagia or dyspnea and a fever, immediate medical care should be sought. Way too many people delay seeking medical care, thinking that they only have a URTI. Finally, the pharmacist should instruct the patient to discontinue smoking, eat healthily, maintain a healthy weight, and abstain from alcohol.

**Outcomes**

When the diagnosis is made early and treatment instituted, the prognosis is good. But the patient needs aggressive treatment, preferably in the ICU. If there is any delay in treatment, complications are common, and the disorder carries a mortality rate of over 40%.