Amphetamine-related psychiatric disorders can occur with acute or chronic use. Acute amphetamine use with resultant psychosis can present like a sympathomimetic toxidrome. Vital signs and a detailed history are difficult to obtain secondary to agitation, paranoia, and the extent of psychosis. The diagnosis should be considered in any patient with tachycardia, hypertension, and psychosis. If possible, the history should focus on the route of administration, dosage (amount and the number of usages), and time frame. Clinicians should also ask about co-ingestions to help distinguish mixed presentations and symptoms, as most users frequently use sedatives (alcohol, opioids, benzodiazepines, cannabis). At all times, the protection of the patient and the medical staff need to be considered if agitation or psychosis is present.

Physical exam findings usually reveal a malnourished, disheveled individual with variable mood or behavior changes. Tachycardia, hypertension, hyperthermia, and diaphoresis are some of the hallmark sympathomimetic symptoms seen with amphetamine use. Skin excoriations are very common due to delusions of parasitosis, and “skin picking” often results in prurigo nodularis, or “speed bumps.” The intraoral exam reveals decayed dental enamel and inflamed gingiva, commonly called “meth mouth.” This is due to poor oral hygiene, decreased salivation, and teeth grinding. Patients can also display choreiform movements, continuous pacing, or other repetitive actions. Acute and chronic use is associated with paranoid delusions, hallucinations, mood swings, homicidal or suicidal thoughts, and psychosis.