As discussed above, respiratory failure is a syndrome caused by a multitude of pathological states. As such, a single algorithm for evaluating respiratory failure does not exist. Appropriate diagnostic studies may include laboratory assays (i.e., complete blood count with differential, comprehensive metabolic panel with magnesium/phosphorous, procalcitonin, troponin, and thyroid-stimulating hormone), infectious workup (i.e., blood cultures, sputum cultures, respiratory pathogen panel test, and urinary antigen test), and 12-lead electrocardiography. Evaluation of respiratory failure with arterial blood gas, capnometry, radiography, pulse oximetry, and ultrasonography are discussed below.

**Arterial Blood Gas**

Arterial blood gas (ABG) is the gold standard for diagnosing respiratory failure. At a minimum, the information obtained from an ABG includes pH, partial pressure of arterial oxygen (PaO2), partial pressure of arterial carbon dioxide (PaCO2), and serum bicarbonate (HCO3). It should be noted that the HCO3 obtained from an ABG is a calculated value and may therefore be inaccurate. Analysis of an ABG should instead be performed using a measured HCO3 obtained from a basic metabolic panel.

Oxygenation is assessed through the interpretation of the PaO2. Hypoxemia is defined as a PaO2 less than 60 mmHg. Ventilation is assessed through the interpretation of the PaCO2. Hypercapnia is defined as a PaCO2 greater than 45 mmHg.

Information from the ABG can also be used to differentiate acute from chronic respiratory failure by evaluating the renal response to PaCO2. In respiratory acidosis, the kidneys respond by increasing the absorption of HCO3 in the proximal convoluted tube. As this is a slow process, the magnitude of HCO3 absorption in acute respiratory acidosis is less than the magnitude of HCO3 absorption in chronic respiratory acidosis. This difference allows for the distinction between the chronicity in acute and chronic respiratory failure.

**Capnometry**

Capnometry, the measurement of carbon dioxide in exhaled gas, may be qualitative or quantitative. Colorimetric capnometry is a qualitative measure of carbon dioxide in exhaled gas that relies on the color change of a pH-sensitive indicator. Infrared capnometry is a quantitative measure of carbon dioxide in exhaled gas that relies on measuring the partial pressure of carbon dioxide (pCO2). Quantitative capnometry provides more information than qualitative capnometry.

In the non-pathological state, the partial pressure of carbon dioxide at the end of expiration, or end-tidal pCO2 (PETCO2), approximates the partial pressure of carbon dioxide in the arterial blood (PaCO2). The PaCO2 is typically 2 to 3 mmHg greater than the PETCO2. In the pathological state, where gas exchange is impaired, the difference between the PaCO2 and PETCO2 becomes greater than 3 mmHg due to increased dead space ventilation.

Values obtained from quantitative capnometry can be plotted graphically and displayed as waveform capnography. Analysis of these waveforms allows for detecting pathological states (i.e., apnea, bronchospasm, hyperventilation, and hypoventilation).

**Radiography**

Various imaging modalities are available for the evaluation of respiratory failure. Such options include plain films, computed tomography, magnetic resonance, nuclear medicine, angiography, and ultrasonography.

**Pulse Oximetry**

Pulse oximetry relies on spectrophotometry, the process of identifying the composition of a substance via measurement of the absorption of specific wavelengths of light transmitted through the substance in question. The composition and structural configuration of hemoglobin are dependent upon molecular oxygen. In the tense state, oxygenated hemoglobin has a lower affinity for oxygen. In the relaxed state, deoxygenated hemoglobin has a higher affinity for oxygen. Pulse oximetry takes advantage of the conformational states of the hemoglobin molecule as deoxygenated hemoglobin absorbs light at wavelengths of 660 nm and oxygenated hemoglobin absorbs light at wavelengths of 940 nm. Measurement of arterial oxygenation is ensured through the analysis of pulsatile blood. Proprietary algorithms allow for the conversion of light absorption to the fraction of hemoglobin saturated with oxygen, known as oxygen saturation (SpO2). This non-invasive modality is greatly useful in diagnosing and managing respiratory failure.

**Ultrasonography**

The bedside lung ultrasound in emergency (BLUE)-protocol is the bedside gold standard for the immediate diagnosis of acute respiratory failure. The protocol, which allows for reproducible analysis, relies on standardized thoracic locations (BLUE points) and ten ultrasonographic signs or profiles. The BLUE protocol is performed by analyzing the ultrasonographic profiles obtained at each of the three BLUE points on each side of the body. The standardized BLUE points are known as the Upper BLUE point, the Lower BLUE point, and the postero-lateral alveolar and/or pleural syndrome (PLAPS)-point. In total, there are six BLUE points. The theory behind and the application of the BLUE protocol are beyond the scope of this article; however, the ten ultrasonographic profiles are grouped with their corresponding clinical states below:

- Normal lung surface: Bat sign, lung sliding, and A-lines

- Interstitial syndrome: Lung rockets

- Lung consolidations: Fractal and tissue-like signs

- Pleural effusions: Quad and sinusoid sign

- Pneumothorax: Stratosphere sign and the lung point.

Bronchoscopy, echocardiography, nocturnal polysomnography, and pulmonary function tests may also be included in evaluating respiratory failure. Pulmonary consultation is warranted if the aforementioned diagnostic studies are required.