BS is characterized by recurrent episodes of, usually bilateral, upper lid swelling. As mentioned above, the attacks begin during childhood or puberty and repeat 3 - 4 times per year. Menstruation, fatigue, upper respiratory infection, lymphocytic leukemia, fever, physical or emotional trauma, bee sting, wind exposure, or exercise, have been proposed as possible trigger factors.

The acute stage lasts hours to days (average 2 days). During this phase, there is painless non-pitting edema. Skin erythema is also frequent. The patient may complain of a red eye and tearing. Repeated episodes of eyelid swelling lead to a very characteristic appearance of the eyelids and periocular area, with upper lid ptosis, wrinkled, discolored, and atrophic skin with dilated visible subcutaneous vessels. In the late stages of the disease, it is possible to see disinsertion of the ligamentous structures of the lateral canthus, causing a rounded lateral angle and even a shortening of the horizontal palpebral aperture (known as acquired blepharophimosis). As the levator aponeurosis dehiscence progresses, the upper lid ptosis becomes more evident, especially in the medial area, and the weakening of the orbital septum facilitates the prolapse of the orbital fat and lacrimal gland in some patients. There are also a few mentions of proptosis in unilateral cases, suggesting a possible orbital involvement.

Collin attempted to classify this condition based on his observation of a series of 30 patients. He mentions an active/early phase, when the swelling episodes occur, and a quiescent/late stage when there are at least 2 years without attacks.

Blepharochalasis might also present as part of systemic disease. In these cases, an examination of other anatomical areas is needed. The most frequent association is with the Ascher syndrome (blepharochalasis, double lip, and non-toxic thyroid enlargement), or acquired cutis laxa (redundant skin, skeletal anomalies, and multi organic impairment).