There is a wide range of differential diagnoses related to chromium deficiency. These include diseases related to insulin resistance, pathologies related to neurological disturbances, and other related nutrient deficiencies. New-onset diabetes should certainly be high on the differential as it is a common cause of insulin resistance. Pancreatic processes such as pancreatic obstruction or inherent dysfunction may also be evaluated.

The neurological symptoms of ataxia, encephalopathy, tremors, etc., warrant the addition of cerebrovascular accident (CVA) work up as well. Stroke is the most acutely life-threatening differential diagnosis when exploring the diagnosis of chromium deficiency. Other neurological differential diagnoses include transient ischemic attack, vertigo, benign paroxysmal positional vertigo, malignancy, and multiple sclerosis. One important thing to note is that visual or auditory changes have not yet been described in patients with chromium deficiency, which may help narrow the differential towards the working diagnosis.

Many nutrient deficiencies overlap in their presentations which is in part due to their overlap in function and mechanism of absorption. This can make it challenging to identify one specific nutrient deficiency as the cause of patients' symptoms. For example, one case discussed the possibility of selenium deficiency in a patient with muscle weakness. While supplementation with selenium mildly relieved their symptoms, supplementation with chromium for new-onset hyperglycemia relieved the patient's hyperglycemia.

Similarly, manganese deficiency has been thought to be implicated in the development of ataxia, abnormal fat and carbohydrate metabolism in animal models, and dyslipidemia in experimental studies in humans, overlapping with the presentation of chromium deficiency.