Humans serve as the primary reservoir for K. pneumoniae. In the general community, 5% to 38% of individuals carry the organism in their stool and 1% to 6% in the nasopharynx. The main reservoirs of infection are the patient's gastrointestinal tract and the hands of hospital personnel. It can lead to a nosocomial outbreak. However, higher rates of colonization have been reported in those of Chinese ethnicity and those who experience chronic alcoholism. In hospitalized patients, the carrier rate for K. pneumoniae is much higher than that found in the community. In one-study, carrier rates as high as 77% can be seen in the stool of those hospitalized and are related to the number of antibiotics given.

Pneumonia caused by K. pneumoniae can be broken down into two categories: community-acquired or hospital-acquired pneumonia. Although community-acquired pneumonia is a fairly common diagnosis, infection with K. pneumoniae is rather uncommon. In the western culture, it is estimated that approximately 3% to 5% of all community-acquired pneumonia is related to an infection caused by K. pneumoniae, but in developing countries such as Africa, it can account for approximately 15% of all cases of pneumonia. Overall, K. pneumoniae accounts for approximately 11.8% of all hospital-acquired pneumonia in the world. In those who develop pneumonia while on a ventilator, between 8% to 12% are caused by K. pneumoniae, while only 7% occur in those patients who are not ventilated. Mortality ranges from 50% to 100% in patients with alcoholism and septicemia.