Typical postoperative pulmonary complications include atelectasis, hypoxemia, pneumonia, respiratory dysfunction, hypoventilation, and pleural effusion. The physiological changes that may occur can be related to the anesthesia, the type of incision, and the type of surgical technique.

A common postoperative complication is a lack of lung expansion, resulting from a shift in normal breathing to an increase in shallow breathing without periodic sighs or yawns. The change in breathing pattern can be caused by laying in a prolonged recumbent position, decreased mucociliary clearance, and/or impaired cough performance secondary to pain, increasing the risks associated with decreased pulmonary secretions.

Pulmonary rehabilitation plays a major role in the prevention and management of postoperative pulmonary complications. This includes deep breathing exercises, inspiratory muscle training, mobilization, postural drainage, and percussion. Mechanical breathing devices such as the incentive spirometer have been introduced into clinical practice as a tool to assist with lung expansion.

Postoperative pulmonary complications are too common and cause increased mortality and longer hospital stays, and increased hospital readmissions. Smoking and respiratory diseases, including obstructive sleep apnea, asthma, and chronic obstructive pulmonary disease, are correlated with developing postoperative pulmonary complications. Other risk factors for pulmonary complications include recent respiratory infection or low pre-operative oxygen saturation levels. Evidence has shown that smoking cessation prior to surgery may reduce pulmonary complications. Pre-operative inspiratory muscle training programs that include the use of an incentive spirometer may reduce postoperative pulmonary complications. Pre-operative exercise programs are recommended for patients undergoing surgery or patients with low levels of cardiorespiratory fitness.