There are many ways to narrow down differentials and establish a diagnosis of chronic interstitial nephritis in agricultural communities. The following is the list of investigations needed to diagnose CINAC:

**Laboratory Evaluation**

Laboratory studies include complete blood count (CBC), comprehensive metabolic panel (CMP), magnesium level, total urine protein, urine sodium range, urine potassium range, urine magnesium range, 24-hour urine, urine protein-creatinine ratio, and urine tubular proteins. The sediment neither shows significant abnormalities nor dysmorphic erythrocytes in the urine assessment. Loss of electrolytes in the early stage, low to mild proteinuria (<1 g), and high levels of beta 2 microglobulin are found.

Electrolytes: low concentrations of sodium, potassium, chlorine, and magnesium in the blood; nevertheless, blood osmolality remains normal.

Acid-base imbalance: metabolic alkalosis is predominant, starting as early as stage 2 CKD.

**Imaging**

Kidney ultrasound reveals an increased echogenicity, decreased cortical-medullary ratio, and irregular margins.

**Cardiological Evaluation**

Electrocardiogram, echocardiogram, Doppler ultrasound of the leg, and carotid doppler test might be warranted in patients varying from one case to another.

**Renal Evaluation**

Renal function tests, biopsy with immunofluorescence, electron microscopy, and light microscopy could be carried out to establish the diagnosis.

**Neurological Evaluation**

Electromyography and nerve conduction studies may be needed.