The coronary arteries split into two, main arterial branches from the base of the aorta. They are the left and right coronary arteries:****

The left coronary artery (LCA) extends along the coronary sulcus and supplies the left portion of the heart. It further branches into the circumflex artery and the anterior interventricular artery (left anterior descending artery). The anterior interventricular artery further divides into septal branches and diagonal branches.

- The septal branches supply the anterior two-thirds of the interventricular septum and bundle of His.

- The diagonal branch supplies the anterolateral papillary muscle and the anterior and lateral portions of the left ventricular wall.

- The circumflex artery follows the coronary sulcus to the left portion of the heart and further divides into the left marginal artery and posterior left ventricular artery. The circumflex artery and its branches supply the posterolateral section left ventricle.

The right coronary artery (RCA) traces along the right coronary sulcus and provides blood flow to the anterior and diaphragmatic surfaces of the right atrium and ventricle; as well as the posterior two-thirds of the interventricular septum.

- The initial two branches that come off the RCA are the conus artery which provides blood flow to the infundibulum of the right ventricle where the pulmonary artery arises and the branch of the SA node which provides blood supply to the SA node.

- As the RCA travels along the coronary sulcus, it gives off the right marginal artery which travels along the acute margin (anteroinferior border) of the heart. The right marginal artery is used in angioplasty to distinguish the inferior border of the heart, and it provides blood flow to the right ventricle.

- As the RCA travels to the posterior portion of the heart, the posterior interventricular artery (posterior descending artery) and right posterolateral artery at the crux cordis branch off. The crux cordis is used as a landmark in angiography.

- Both the posterior descending artery (PDA) and the right posterolateral artery are terminal branches. The posterior descending artery (PDA) gives off septal branches that supply the posterior one-third of the interventricular septum. The right posterolateral arteries may provide part of the left posterior atrium and ventricles.

- Eventually, at the end of the RCA course, it gives off the branch of the AV node. The branch of the AV node branches off at the diaphragmatic surface and supplies the AV node.

Anastomosis occurs in a few places of the heart even though the coronary arteries are considered end arteries.

- One anastomosis is between the branches of the LAD from the LCA and the branches of the PDA from the RCA.

- Another one is between the RCA and the left circumflex artery in the coronary sulcus.

- A third anastomosis occurs with the septal branches of both arteries at the interventricular septum.

**Coronary Venous Anatomy**

Just like the coronary arteries, there are coronary veins that drain the myocardium of deoxygenated blood. In general, there is twice the number of coronary veins as arteries, and the flow occurs during both systole and diastole.

The coronary veins are organized into two groups: greater and smaller cardiac veins. The greater cardiac veins consist of the coronary sinus, atrial veins, anterior cardiac veins, and veins draining the septum. The greater cardiac veins account for 95% of all venous drainage from the heart. The smaller cardiac veins also known as the thebesian veins are luminal vessels and drain directly into the respective cardiac chambers.

All the venous blood from the heart arrives at the coronary sinus which is located in the atrioventricular groove. The coronary sinus is the biggest cardiac vein, and it empties directly into the right atrium at the conjunction of the coronary and the interventricular grooves. The coronary sinus does have a small valve-like structure.