Fexofenadine is a commonly used medication for seasonal allergic rhinitis and chronic urticaria and is an overall safe and effective therapy when used correctly. While it is available to patients without a prescription, care is necessary when starting any new medication. Patients should discuss fexofenadine with their primary care providers and pharmacists to educate themselves on side effects, recommended dosing, and possible interactions with commonly ingested items such as fruit juices. Clinicians should ensure that renal and pediatric patients take the appropriate adjusted fexofenadine dosage. Immunologists should be consulted in refractory urticaria or allergic rhinitis. Nurses should verify the dose at each visit and reevaluate the patient periodically for the need for fexofenadine. Pharmacists should check drug interactions and perform medication reconciliation when counseling patients. In the overdose of fexofenadine, a critical care physician and medical toxicologist should be consulted.

The patient should be referred to a psychiatrist if the overdose is intentional. Collaboration and coordination between the interprofessional team of clinicians (MD, DO, NP, PA), specialists including immunologists, nursing staff, and pharmacists, would result in improved patient outcomes related to fexofenadine therapy. According to the European academy of allergy and clinical immunology, interprofessional and integrated care between clinicians, specialists, nurses, dietitians, psychologists, physician assistants, and pharmacists can enhance patient-centered care of allergic disorders in community care settings.