**Laboratory Findings**

All patients who have symptoms of ureteropelvic junction obstruction (UPJO) should have a full set of blood, including complete blood count, kidney function tests, including creatinine, GFR, and BUN. Patients will present with high levels of creatinine and decreased GFR, in case of infection, leukocytosis can be seen. A urine sample should be sent for analysis and culture as recurrent urinary tract infections are commonly seen in these patients.

**Imaging**

- 
**Ultrasonography**

Hydronephrosis can be detected as an incidental finding on antenatal ultrasound, which might reflect underlying UPJO.

In neonates who were found to have mild to moderate hydronephrosis on an antenatal scan, a follow-up scan should be done after 48 hours, to avoid transient neonatal dehydration period, however, in severe cases, a scan should be performed within the first 48 hours as it might need urgent intervention.

The society for fetal Urology (SFU) grading system is used to evaluate the severity of hydronephrosis as follows:

- Grade 0 - No hydronephrosis, intact central renal complex seen on ultrasound

- Grade 1 - Only renal pelvis visualized, dilated pelvis on ultrasound, no caliectasis

- Grade 2 - Moderately dilated renal pelvis and a few calyces

- Grade 3 - Hydronephrosis with nearly all calyces seen, large renal pelvis without parenchymal thinning

- Grade 4 - Severe dilatation of renal pelvis and calyces with accompanying parenchymal atrophy or thinning

Keep in mind that almost 20% of antenatally detected hydronephrosis is not found after birth.

- **Voiding Cystourethrography**should be used to rule out ureterovesical reflux role to hydronephrosis.

- **Intravenous Pyelography (IVP)**
- IVP gives information about the degree of dilatation of the affected renal pelvis in comparison to the contralateral side. The ureteric shape can be assessed as well to check if there is any dilatation or tortuosity in comparison to the contralateral ureter. During the excretory phase, the excretory function of the affected kidney is compared to that of the normal kidney to check if there is any delay in excretion as a sign of obstruction.

- **Computed Tomography Urography (CTU)/Magnetic Resonance Urography (MRU)**
- Urogram is a comprehensive imaging modality that can be used to diagnose multiple urologic problems in both adults and pediatrics, as it supports the provider with an accurate idea about anatomical variations such as a crossing vessel.
- CTU is more commonly used in the adult population rather than pediatrics due to the increased exposure to ionizing radiation.
- In MRU, gadolinium-based contrast is used, which saves the patient the risk of exposure to ionizing radiation.

- **Functional MRU**
- It can be used to assess differences in renal function between the affected and the contralateral kidneys, based on renal volumes or glomerular filtration, and assess the renal excretion, by taking multiple images over 15 minutes.

- **Retrograde Pyelography**is mainly used in adults to assess the exact level of obstruction; however, it has limitations as it needs to be performed under general anesthesia.

- ****Diuretic Renography****is one of the most important studies that are used to determine the split function of each kidney and identify any renal evidence of obstruction and is the gold standard for the evaluation of the severity of UJP obstruction. The most commonly used agent in renogram studies is technetium 99m mercaptoacetyltriglycine (99m Tc-MAG3), especially in the pediatric population. The agent is usually secreted by proximal renal tubules in a little amount that should be filtered by renal glomeruli. The kidney is considered to be significantly damaged if the split function in one of the kidneys is less than 40% of the total kidney function, this should be in correlation to the half-life (T1/2) of the agent. In the adult population, other agents can be used, such as diethylenetriamine pentaacetate (DTPA).