**Risk Factors**

Risk factors for AAGA may be broadly separated into those related to the 1) technical application of anesthetics, 2) surgical procedure and/or context, and 3) inherent patient characteristics.

**Risk Factors Related to Anesthetic Technique**

Among anesthetic technique risk factors, NMB stands out as simultaneously the most significant and modifiable. The vast majority of self-reported cases of AAGA in the 5th National Audit Project for awareness (NAP5) were associated with the use of NMBs (incidence 1:8200 with NMB vs. 1:135900 without NMB); this represents a more than 16-fold increase of reported instances where NMBs were used.

Total intravenous anesthesia (TIVA) is also associated with an increased risk of AAGA compared to volatile-based anesthetics.

Problems with the technical delivery of anesthetics are a contributor to AAGA, though human error is more often the culprit than the failure of a mechanical or electronic device.

**Risk Factors Related to Surgical Procedure or Context**

Risk factors for AAGA related to surgical procedure and/or context are easily understood when one considers the common characteristics: urgent or emergent procedures, rapid pace from induction to surgical incision, and the attendant objectives that necessitate reduction of anesthetics in one form or another, (e.g., trauma, hypovolemia, depressed cardiac function.) Each of these characteristics is independent of and, in addition to, the added risk when NMBs are employed, as described above.

Emergency surgery, particularly trauma and cesarean section, pose relatively higher risks of AAGA due primarily to the reduction of anesthetic doses that are often required in these situations.

Common to both the emergent trauma and obstetric populations, the potential for difficult airway placement introduces further opportunities for unintended awareness. Intravenous induction agents rapidly redistribute, resulting in lower blood and brain concentrations, while alveolar delivery of inhaled anesthetics is delayed by definitive airway placement, and necessary replacement with IV agents may be delayed amidst the focus on obtaining airway control.

Cardiopulmonary bypass (CPB) also increases the risk of AAGA. [ref] This increase in risk may be related to the altered pharmacodynamics of bypass physiology.

**Patient-Related Risk Factors**

Patients reporting a history of intraoperative awareness may be at higher risk for subsequent AAGA, as reported by at least one observational study.

While not definitively proven or identified, genetic resistance to anesthetics may contribute to increased requirements and risk of AAGA.

Chronic substance abuse may contribute to acquired resistance to anesthetics. Long-term use of commonly abused substances, including alcohol, opioids, and benzodiazepines, may increase anesthetic requirements, increasing the risk of AAGA.

AAGA is shown to be most common at induction and emergence from general anesthesia.

In addition to acute hemodynamic compromise, patients presenting with chronic cardiovascular conditions such as congestive heart failure or significant valvular disease are also shown to be at higher risk for AAGA, as dose reduction strategies are commonly employed to maintain hemodynamic stability in these settings.

**Monitoring Depth of Anesthesia and Prevention of AAGA**

Monitoring for prevention of AAGA rests upon three primary axes of data: 1) end-tidal anesthetic concentration (ETAC), 2) blockade of the neuromuscular junction with NMB, and 3) brain monitoring with raw or processed EEG. Physiologic responses to surgical stimulation, including heart rate, blood pressure, and purposeful movement, are also monitored as routine components of anesthetic care. However, the reliability of physiologic parameters as an indicator of AAGA is often compromised by variability in sympathetic responses, beta- or calcium-channel blockade, or in the case of patient movement, NMB.

Monitoring ETAC is a basic standard of modern anesthetic delivery.

Monitoring the depth of NMB is critical to avoid unnecessary paralysis intraoperatively and adequate recovery of the neuromuscular junction (NMJ) at emergence from anesthesia. Most surgery may be performed with judicious and intermittent use of NMB rather than a persistent state of complete paralysis.

Processed EEG monitors are commonly employed to assess the level of consciousness under GA. One such common monitor, the BIS monitor, translates raw EEG data into frequency bands that reflect a numeric value from 0 to 100. One randomized study demonstrated that patients targeted between a BIS value of 40 and 60 were less likely to experience AAGA. Notably, no studies have demonstrated an advantage of processed EEG monitoring over standard monitoring of ETAC concentration when available, including large meta-analyses.

Raw EEG possesses a significant advantage over processed EEG when monitoring for depth of consciousness. EEG waveforms are altered in consistent and reproducible ways when anesthetics are present at clinically relevant concentrations.