Assessing and managing toxic ingestions require a multidisciplinary and interprofessional approach that includes clinicians, specialists, nursing staff, and pharmacists.

- It is recommended to consult an institutional medical toxicologist and a local poison control center if available.

- Recommendations by a medical toxicologist and nephrologist may be necessary for managing metabolic acidosis and renal failure through hemodialysis.

- Early diagnosis of GE ingestion to prevent further toxic metabolite production is critical.

- Treatment involves blockage of alcohol dehydrogenase with fomepizole and urgent enhanced extracorporeal elimination through hemodialysis.

- Severe cases requiring intubation, mechanical ventilation, and hemodynamic support may require consultation with an intensivist.

Human data regarding glycol ether toxicity and management is primarily based on retrospective observational and case studies. Management of acute glycol ether toxicity involves prompt assessment of ABCs (airway, breathing, circulation), followed by supportive care. Patients should promptly be treated with fomepizole and urgent enhanced extracorporeal elimination by hemodialysis to remove the parent toxic GE, preventing further production of toxic metabolites.

Interprofessional care coordination is necessary between clinicians and specialists, nursing staff, who will administer medication and monitor patient responses, and pharmacists (who can perform medication reconciliation, verify dosing, and perform patient drug therapy counseling.

Management of long-term side effects such as permanent disability or reproductive defects would require consultation with their respective specialists. The interprofessional care paradigm is crucial to optimal patient outcomes. [Level 5]