Immune cells include B and T lymphocytes. B-cells transform into plasma cells that produce large amounts of antibodies. These antibodies or immunoglobulins fight extracellular microorganisms. That explains why in B-cells deficiencies, including X-linked agammaglobulinemia, there is a high susceptibility to pneumonia, otitis, and other infections caused by extracellular bacteria. SCID can be caused by RAG-1/2 deficiency and characterized by defective VDJ recombination due to a defect of recombinase activating gene RAG1 or RAG2. May present with Omenn syndrome.

T-cells differentiate into helper, cytotoxic, or suppressor T cells. Helper T cells stimulate antibody production. In T-cell deficiencies, including DiGeorge syndrome, the antibody production may be compromised to an extent. T-cells fight intracellular microorganisms, including fungi, viruses, and also tumors, which infect or proliferate in individuals with HIV/AIDS, SCID, hyper-IgM syndrome, and other T-cell deficiencies.

The innate immune response is the first line of defense against infections. It is comprised of phagocytic cells, complement system proteins, and a large number of cytokines and their receptors. Innate immunity plays a key role in helping B and T lymphocytes to accomplish their fundamental functions. Deficiencies of the innate immunity characterized by susceptibility to infections by rare and opportunistic pathogens, failure to thrive, and certain inflammatory or autoimmune disorders, for example, C4 deficiency is linked to the occurrence of lupus-like syndromes.

Most immunodeficiencies are congenital and have an X-linked or autosomal recessive inheritance pattern. For example, immunodeficiency with ataxia-telangiectasia is an autosomal recessive disease caused by mutations in the genes that encode DNA repair enzymes. The defects arise from breakage in chromosome 14 at the site of TCR and Ig-heavy chain genes.