**Divisions**

The pancreas is divided into 4 parts: head, neck, body, and tail.

The head of the pancreas is the enlarged part of the gland surrounded by the C-shaped curve of the duodenum. On its way to the descending part of the duodenum, the bile duct lies in a groove on the posterosuperior surface of the head or is embedded in its substance. The body of the pancreas continues from the neck and passes over the aorta and L2 vertebra. The anterior surface of the body of the pancreas is covered with peritoneum. The posterior surface of the body is devoid of peritoneum. It is in contact with the aorta, the superior mesenteric artery (SMA), the left suprarenal gland, the left kidney, and renal vessels.

The neck of the pancreas is short. The tail of the pancreas lies anterior to the left kidney, closely related to the splenic hilum and the left colic flexure. The main pancreatic duct carrying the pancreatic secretions joins with the bile duct to form the hepatopancreatic ampulla, which opens into the descending part of the duodenum. The hepatopancreatic sphincter of Oddi around the hepatopancreatic ampulla is a smooth muscle sphincter that controls the flow of bile and pancreatic juice into the ampulla and inhibits reflux of duodenal substances into the ampulla.

**Cell Types**

The majority of the pancreas (approximately 80%) is made up of exocrine pancreatic tissue. This is made of pancreatic acini (pyramidal acinar cells with the apex directed towards the lumen). These contain dense zymogen granules in the apical region, whereas the basal region contains the nucleus and endoplasmic reticulum (which aids in synthesizing the digestive enzymes). These enzymes are stored in secretory vesicles called the Golgi complex. The basolateral membrane of the acinar cells contains several receptors for neurotransmitters including secretin, cholecystokinin, and acetylcholine, which regulate exocytosis of the digestive enzymes.

The pancreas also contains the islet of Langerhans, which contain the endocrine cells. Unlike the exocrine enzymes, which are secreted by exocytosis, the endocrine enzymes enter the bloodstream via a complex capillary network within the pancreatic blood flow. There are 4 types of endocrine cells (A cells produce glucagon, B cells produce insulin, D cells produce somatostatin, and F cells produce pancreatic polypeptide).

Stellate cells are a direct formation of epithelial structures within the pancreas. In conditions like chronic pancreatitis, these cells promote inflammation and fibrosis.