Patient education regarding the goals and expectations for the procedure is essential, as facial reinnervation and the return of movement take several months to occur after nerve repair or transfer. Additionally, maximizing surgical results requires postoperative facial rehabilitative physical therapy. Additional minor procedures, such as botulinum toxin injections or static suspension, are often required.

When a donor graft is used, the patient must understand the expected consequences of graft harvest, typically numbness in the distribution of the nerve from which the graft is to be taken. The area where the graft will be harvested must be prepared simultaneously with the face, and the patient must be positioned and draped accordingly. The nerves most commonly used for grafting are the sural and the greater auricular nerves.

Various details unique to facial nerve reinnervation procedures warrant consideration. Preparation of the face requires the protection of the eyes with adhesive film dressings or temporary tarsorrhaphy sutures. The side affected by paralysis must be definitively marked to avoid intraoperative confusion. One marking method is to write a "P" on the cheek of the paralyzed side and an "NP" on the non-paralyzed side while the patient is awake in the holding area.

During anesthesia induction, the endotracheal tube should be placed in the midline and secured to either the lower lip or sutured to the central maxillary incisors to prevent asymmetric distortion of the lower face. If the planned procedure is either a nerve repair performed within 72 hours of the injury or a nerve transfer performed at any time, the anesthesia provider should avoid administering long-acting paralytics so that a nerve stimulator may be used during dissection. Likewise, the preoperative facial injections should consist of plain epinephrine without a local anesthetic to avoid diminishing the nerve stimulation response while providing hemostasis. A simple method of preparing plain epinephrine is to inject the contents of a 1 mL ampule of 1:1,000 epinephrine into a 100 mL bag of normal saline, thus providing 1:101,000 epinephrine; removing 1 mL of saline from the bag before adding the epinephrine will result in an even 1:100,000 concentration.