**Catheters**

A variety of catheters is available with at least two ring electrodes that can be used for bipolar stimulation and recording. The catheter may be made of woven Dacron or newer synthetic materials such as polyurethane. Woven Dacron catheters are preferred because of their greater durability and physical properties. These catheters have a variable number of electrodes, electrode spacing, and curves to provide a range of options for different purposes. Although they have superior torque characteristics, their greatest advantage is that they are stiff enough to maintain a shape and yet they soften at body temperature so that they are not too stiff for forming loops and bends in the vascular system to adopt a variety of uses.

Synthetic catheters cannot be manipulated or change shapes within the body, so they are less desirable. The synthetic catheters are cheaper and offer smaller sizes (2 to 3 French). Currently, most electrode catheters are size 3 to size 8 French. The smaller sizes are used in children. In adult patients, sizes 5 to 7 French catheters are routinely used. Other diagnostic catheters have a deflectable tip. These are used to reach and record from specific sites (e.g., coronary sinus, crista terminal is, tricuspid valve). In most instances, the standard woven Dacron catheters suffice, and they are significantly cheaper. Mapping catheters fall into two general categories:

- Deflectable catheters to facilitate positioning for mapping and delivering ablative energy.

- Catheters with multiple poles (8 to 64) that allow simultaneous acquisition of activation points.

Some ablation catheters have a cooled tip, one through which saline is infused to allow for enhanced tissue heating without superficial charring or internal cooling.

Ablation catheters deliver RF energy through tips that are typically 3.5 to 5 mm in length but may be as long as 10 mm. Catheters delivering microwave, laser, cryothermal, or pulsed-ultrasound energy to destroy tissue are currently under active investigation.

In the second category, standard catheters with up to 24 poles that can be deflected to map large and/or specific areas of the atrium (e.g., coronary sinus, tricuspid annulus). Shaped catheters as “halo” record from around the tricuspid ring or a lasso catheter on a deflectable shaft to record from 10 to 20 electrodes in the pulmonary vein ostia, and basket catheters which have up to 64 poles or prongs that spring open and which are used to acquire simultaneous data from within a given cardiac chamber.

A catheter is available from which has five flexible splines with four electrodes on each spline allowing one to acquire 20 sites of activation. The 2-mm interelectrode distance allows for high-density mapping. The floppiness of the splines sometimes makes for variable contact in misinterpretation of data.

More recently a new catheter was has been developed a 64-pole roving catheter. This mapping (mini basket) catheter has an 8 F bidirectional deflectable shaft and a basket electrode array (usual mapping diameter 18 mm) with eight splines, each spline containing eight small (0.4 mm2), low-impedance electrodes (total 64 electrodes). The interelectrode spacing along the spline is 2.5 mm (center-to-center). Mapping can be performed with the basket in variable degrees of deployment (diameter ranging 3 mm to 22 mm). The location of each of the 64 electrodes is identified by a combination of a magnetic sensor in the distal region of the catheter and impedance sensing on each of the 64 basket electrodes. The location of each basket electrode is obtained whether the basket is fully or only partially deployed.

**Junction Box**

The junction box is a rectangular box that receives the intracardiac signals from the catheters and provides the interface to the physiologic recorder. Multiple switches within the junction box are designated to a recording and stimulation channel which can be selected through the recording apparatus. To minimize noise on the channels, the junction box is mounted close to the patient foot.

**Recording Apparatus**

The physiologic recorder records, displays, and stores intracardiac and surface recordings. It consists of filters, amplifiers, display screens, and recording software. From the junction box, the physiologic signals are introduced into the recorder. These signals are typically low in amplitude and are amplified before displaying and recording. The recording system amplifies and filters each input channel separately, with most current systems supporting up to 64 or more channels. The amplifiers can automatically or manually adjust gain control. The amplifiers should be mounted as close to the patient table as possible, to reduce the cable length of the intracardiac connections and surface ECGs, which minimizes the signal noise. The amplifier is then connected to the main physiologic recorder through a channel, which, ideally, should run separately from electric power cables. Filters are used to eliminate unnecessary signals that distort electrograms (EGMs).

High pass filters eliminate signals below a given frequency while low pass filters eliminate signals above a given frequency. Most intracardiac electrograms are clearly identified when the signal is filtered between a high pass of 40 Hz and a low pass of 500 Hz.

**Stimulator**

A programmable stimulator is necessary to obtain electrophysiologic data beyond measurements of conduction intervals. Stimulators are capable of various modes of pacing, including rapid pacing, delivery of single or multiple extra stimuli following a paced drivetrain, and delivery of timed, extra stimuli following sensed beats. Stimulators are capable of delivering variable currents, from 0.1 mA to 10 mA. With the satisfactory positioning of catheters, current thresholds under 2 mA (with 2 ms pulse width) can usually be achieved in both the atrium and ventricle. Higher outputs are seen in the diseased myocardium, within the coronary sinus, and with the use of anti-arrhythmic medications. The output is usually set at twice the diastolic threshold. Pacing at higher outputs is discouraged because may led to the far-field capture and altered the QRS and EGM configuration and may mislead diagnosis, the recommendation is either to start at low amplitude until capture, or start at high output and go low until failure of capture then increase a step.

**Cardioverter/Defibrillator**

A primary and backup cardioverter/defibrillator should be available throughout all EP studies, defibrillators deliver energy in a biphasic waveform which offers enhanced defibrillation success. Defibrillation pads are attached to the patient and electrically grounded.