- With the patient adequately positioned, start building the splint, unrolling the web roll at the wrist, and extending past the elbow to the upper arm. The number of layers is determined by the amount of expected swelling, but many splints will use two to four layers. Care should be taken to accurately define the distal borders of the splint to allow for free motion of the thumb and metacarpal phalangeal joints. At the elbow, web roll must be carefully applied to ensure adequate padding of the olecranon. Frequently, the practitioner can tear pieces of web roll to lay on the posterior aspect of the elbow to provide padding without overbulking the antecubital fossa. Web roll should be extended proximally, often to the proximal one-third of the humerus. Also of note, it is important to lay on web roll with 50% overlap to maintain even padding without irregularities, which can be a source of irritation. To achieve this, anatomy, which is more cone-like than cylindrical (e.g., forearm), may require interrupting wraps rather than continuous circumferential layers.

- Next, the prepared plaster or fiberglass sugar tong is dunked in cold water and applied around the elbow to the dorsal and volar aspects of the wrist. Care should be taken to stop the material approximately 1 cm short of the distal web roll to allow for an adequate bumper for soft tissues in the hand and not to restrict metacarpal phalangeal joint motion. The sugar tong is overwrapped with one layer of web roll to prevent circumferential immobilization once the posterior mold is applied, which would not allow for expansion.

- Next, a posterior mold is applied from distal to proximal. Again, accurate distal placement is critical to allow for unrestricted motion in joints not requiring immobilization (e.g., metacarpal phalangeal joints).  The posterior mold is overwrapped with one layer of web roll to prevent adherence to the next layer.

- Finally, an elastic bandage is wrapped over the splint materials beginning distally and ending proximally. Care is taken to create a natural space for the thumb.

If fiberglass is used, the same techniques can be used, but web roll is not required for overwrapping as long as the fiberglass comes in a synthetic sheath. Additionally, it can increase patient comfort to cut a small margin of fiberglass back from the synthetic wrapping to create a soft end to the splint material. Once the materials are accurately and efficiently applied, the splint is molded to the desired shape to promote the continued reduction of the injured structures. Once the fiberglass or plaster hardens, the patient should be instructed on splint care.