**Delivery Planning**

Multidisciplinary coordination amongst all specialists involved (i.e., obstetricians, anesthesiologists, cardiologists, etc.) is highly advisable.  In general, vaginal delivery is usually the safest option without obstetrical indications for cesarean section. Vaginal delivery has a multitude of advantages, such as less blood loss, reduced thrombotic risk, and lower rates of infection. For vaginal deliveries, neuraxial anesthesia is the preferred method of analgesia/anesthesia. It is associated with lower risks of death, cardiac arrest, and anesthetic complications. However, general anesthesia may be a better option in select patients who may not tolerate or may be unable to receive neuraxial anesthesia.

Cesarean section is preferred in all patients suffering from Ehlers-Danlos Type IV, Marfan, or Loeys-Dietz syndrome with a measured aortic diameter >4.5 cm and patients with concurrent bicuspid aortic valve and an aortic diameter >5.0 cm.  Mothers with intractable heart failure typically do not tolerate labor well and should be evaluated for cesarean section.  Mothers who are on therapeutic anticoagulation and are unable to receive neuraxial anesthesia should receive general anesthesia for Cesarean sections. Otherwise, a properly placed epidural catheter or combined spinal-epidural approach is recommended in most cases.

Another option is a "cardiac vaginal delivery."  Utilizing this method involves waiting until complete cervical dilation is attained, then allowing the uterus to "labor down" the fetus instead of instructing the mother to push. Forceps or a vacuum assist device can then be utilized to complete the delivery once the head becomes low enough. Avoidance of the Valsalva maneuver is thought to be hemodynamically favorable in patients with cardiac conditions to avoid reductions in preload and increases in afterload.