There is currently no “gold standard” for conducting a post-simulation debriefing in either center-based settings or in situ settings. A review of trends for in situ simulations suggests the majority of in situ simulation debriefings use post-simulation facilitated debriefings (55%) or facilitated debriefings combined with a review of video taken during the simulation itself (31%).

Some authors recommend learner self-assessment or directive feedback as the primary method for in situ simulation debriefing; this allows facilitators to address more topics with limited time.

**Learner Self-Assessment**

A common learner self-assessment model of debriefing is the Plus/Delta model.

Another form of learner self-assessment is the SHARP method.

1. Set learning objectives: Determine what learners want to obtain from participating in the case and what the educator's goals are2. Ask, "How did it go?": Ask students to self-identify areas of strength and weakness. 3. Address concerns: Discuss with students where improvements are possible.4. Review specific teaching points: This can include basic science and pathophysiology to students' communication and teamwork. 4. Plan ahead: Have students identify what they will take away from the case and incorporate it into their practice.

Because the SHARP method includes both opportunities for teaching as well as incorporation into clinical practice, it may be a useful tool for in situ simulation debriefs.

**Directive Feedback**

Directive feedback is a form of feedback that does not depend on the assessment learners make of their own performance.

**Conversational Models**

Despite time constraints, facilitators are not limited to these learner self-assessment or directive feedback models. Conversational models of debriefing have been successful with in situ simulations. Facilitators have successfully used the “debriefing with good judgment” model during in situ debriefings while maintaining a short simulation-to-debriefing time ratio.

The advocacy-inquiry model (AIM) is another conversational debriefing model that seeks to understand a participant’s underlying thought process. This form of debriefing, though not specific to the in situ setting, is preferred by learners who are farther along in their training and thus may be more applicable to the varied experience levels in the in situ team.

Multiple other conversational models exist, as do blended models. The “Promoting Excellence And Reflective Learning in Simulation” (PEARLS) method is an example of a blended model, which combines learner self-assessment with focused facilitated discussion and directive feedback.