**Indications for Psychotherapy**

Clinicians may initiate or refer a patient to psychotherapy for reasons not limited to the following:

- Treatment of a psychiatric disorder

- Help with maladaptive thoughts or behaviors

- Support during stressful circumstances or when a chronic problem impairs functioning

- Improve a patient's ability to make positive behavioral changes, such as healthy lifestyle changes or increasing adherence to medical treatment

- Helping with interpersonal problems

Person-centered therapy can be used in various settings, including individual, group, and family therapy, or as part of play therapy with young children. There are no set guidelines on the length or frequency of person-centered therapy, but it may be used for short-term or long-term treatment. Person-centered therapy may be a good choice for patients who are not suitable for other forms of therapy, such as cognitive-behavioral therapy (CBPT) or psychoanalysis, which require homework assignments and the ability to tolerate high levels of distress that may occur when elucidating unconscious processes.

Person-centered therapy relies on the client's active participation and may not be appropriate for individuals who lack motivation or insight into their emotions and behaviors.

**Efficacy**

To examine the efficacy of person-centered therapy in the treatment of various psychiatric conditions, this article will include recent studies using any form of non-directive counseling based on Rogerian principles, including person-centered therapy/client-centered therapy (PCT/CCT), non-directive supportive therapy (NDST), and supportive counseling/therapy (SC/ST).

Important limitations exist as NDST is not a popular focus of most researchers in the field. It is often only included as a control for nonspecific therapeutic conditions, and therapists may not have administered optimal treatments. Consequently, the researcher's allegiance to a specific therapy could skew results.

**Depression**

There is evidence in the literature to support the efficacy of non-directive therapy as a treatment for depression. Three meta-analyses conducted within the past decade concluded that ST/NDST is an effective therapy for adult depression but may be less effective than other forms of therapy.

Importantly, the authors mention that researcher bias may have played a role in the superiority of the other psychotherapies. After controlling for researcher allegiance, the differences in efficacy between non-directive therapy and other psychotherapies disappeared. This was true for all three meta-analyses. One study also notes no significant difference in effect sizes of non-directive supportive therapy versus full person-centered therapy. However, this was only based on two studies.

A 2021 randomized, non-inferiority trial comparing person-centered therapy with CBT as a therapeutic intervention for depression found that person-centered therapy was not inferior to CBT at six months; however, person-centered therapy may be inferior to CBT at 12 months. The authors suggest that there needs to be continued investment in person-centered therapy to improve short-term outcomes.

In adults with depression over the age of 50, one meta-analysis found non-directive counseling to be effective, with effects maintained for at least six months. However, non-directive counseling was less effective than CBT and problem-solving therapy.

A 48-week randomized control trial compared nonspecific supportive psychotherapy with cognitive behavioral analysis system of psychotherapy (CBASP) in patients with chronic depression that were unmedicated (n=268). Both groups demonstrated a reduction in depressive symptoms. Patients who received nonspecific supportive psychotherapy had a lower response rate than patients who received CBASP.

However, there were fewer severe adverse events with nonspecific supportive psychotherapy.

**Bipolar disorder**

One randomized controlled trial (n=76) compared ST/SC to CBT in treating bipolar disorders and observed no difference in relapse rates.

**Anxiety**

Non-directive psychotherapy may be comparable to CBT and other forms of psychotherapy in treating generalized anxiety disorder in older adults.

**Post-Traumatic Stress Disorder (PTSD)**

In the treatment of PTSD, non-directive therapy may be an effective treatment.

Despite mixed evidence of its efficacy compared to other forms of psychotherapy, person-centered therapy is consistently recommended as a viable option, given the rising demand for psychological therapy.