Treatment of mastalgia varies over a wide spectrum which requires good clinical judgment and adequate patient education to optimize the outcome. Prognosis depends on making correct diagnosis which not only includes history and examination but also inculcates imaging modalities and expertise from radiologists. The role of nurse practitioners and nutritionists is crucial in instructions regarding the self-breast examination and charting out a specific nutritional diet, low in fat while enriched in vitamins and fiber to optimize pharmacological treatment. The expertise of an endocrinologist might come in handy while dealing with dose adjustments and initiation of second-line hormonal replacement therapies. Moreover, as it is seen that mastalgia also has a psychological aspect associated with it, and hence, specialists in holistic medicine and a good psychologist team should be kept on board for adequate management of this disease.

Interprofessional teamwork is required to adequately treat this disease, providing an integrated approach from making its accurate diagnosis utilizing clinical knowledge and imaging, managing patient stress and anxiety, educating them regarding dietary and lifestyle modifications, and simultaneously ruling out any dangerous underlying pathology and dealing with ongoing recurrences.

Case-control and Cohort studies have shown that patient-physician interpersonal communication and adequate reassurance from a primary care provider is what marks the best treatment outcome in up to 70% of cases. An improved outcome is seen with the use of a combination of psychological and pharmacological treatment modalities in the majority of resistant cases of mastalgia.