Pancrelipase refers to a class of medications designed to treat malabsorption and abdominal pain secondary to exocrine pancreatic insufficiency. These agents serve as exogenous versions of digestive hormones and enzymes required for normal digestion. As discussed below, these enzymes are ingested with meals to improve digestion, absorption, and abdominal pain frequently seen in chronic pancreatitis and exocrine pancreatic insufficiency. Pancrelipase can be used in all age groups.

Indications for pancrelipase are as follows:

**FDA Indications**

Exocrine pancreatic insufficiency due to any of the following conditions:

- Chronic pancreatitis

- Pancreatic surgery

- Cystic fibrosis

**Non-FDA Indications**

- As a presumptive test for pancreatic insufficiency

- Steatorrhea of post-gastrectomy syndrome

- Pancreatic insufficiency due to pancreatic cancer

**Key Clinical Background Information**

Exocrine pancreatic insufficiency (EPI) is a syndrome characterized by poor absorption of fats, proteins, and, to a lesser extent, carbohydrates. This condition occurs primarily in patients with cystic fibrosis (CF) or chronic pancreatitis (CP). Clinicians can diagnose EPI by one of three criteria: fecal elastase test, fecal fat test, or a direct pancreatic function test.

Patients with EPI in CP have worse nutritional status, vitamin levels, and quality of life when compared to patients with CP without EPI.

Manufacturers developed most PEPs before current United States Food and Drug Administration (FDA) New Drug Approval (NDA) requirements were enacted. In 2005, the FDA requested that manufacturers of PEPs now submit an NDA to approve these products.

Practitioners use the coefficient of fat absorption (CFA) to discern the efficacy of these drugs. In exocrine pancreatic insufficiency, many of the poor outcomes stem from the poor absorption of fats and fat-soluble vitamins. The administration of PEP enhances the absorption of fats and fat-soluble vitamins (A, D, E, K) and provides better outcomes for patients on therapy. Often, readers may encounter the term CFA. A simple way to understand the CFA is to know that the higher the CFA of any PEP, the better the drug will improve fat and fat-soluble vitamin absorption.

Some clinicians empirically begin patients on pancrelipase therapy when patients present with vitamin deficiencies, malabsorption, and poor nutritional status with risk factors for chronic pancreatitis, for example, chronic alcohol use disorder. The reason for this stems from the actual difficulty that one may encounter to diagnose chronic pancreatitis or exocrine pancreatic insufficiency. As mentioned above, EPI requires stool fat testing or even direct pancreatic function testing. Some clinicians may prefer to treat empirically given the immediate or rapid benefit conferred with PEP therapy; others often defer testing as testing is invasive (direct pancreatic stimulation testing) or unavailable in certain areas.