It is easiest to split complications into intraoperative and postoperative complications to manage patient expectations as well as ensure the discussion of all complications.

Intraoperative complications include general anesthesia risks, bladder perforation, ureteral orifice injury, bladder neck undermining, prostatic capsule perforation, inability to complete the case due to excessive bleeding or poor visualization, extravasation, and subtrigonal or retroperitoneal placement of the Foley catheter.

It is expected that most, if not all, post-TURP patients will develop retrograde ejaculation and have no ejaculate, but erectile function is otherwise preserved in 90% of patients.

Postoperative complications include transurethral resection syndrome (TUR syndrome), continuing urinary symptoms (which typically improve over time but may never resolve completely), retrograde ejaculation, infection including UTI and ongoing prostatitis, urethral strictures, bladder neck contractures, incontinence, urinary retention due to either obstruction or a poorly functioning bladder requiring intermittent self-catheterization or a catheter, and prostatic regrowth (which typically takes at least ten years).

Incontinence after TURP surgery typically resolves within three months of the procedure. Kegel exercises and behavioral/pelvic floor modification treatments can be helpful. Complete or intractable incontinence is, fortunately, quite rare.

Postoperative bladder neck contractures are more common after surgery on smaller prostates. It is suggested that more active management of postoperative urinary infections may help reduce the risk of bladder neck contractures.

Urethral strictures and the most common late complication of TURP surgeries. The overall risk of a urethral stricture or bladder neck contracture after TURP is 3.7%. Urethral trauma due to overly aggressive passage of the resectoscope, inadequate lubrication, or using an overly large resectoscope sheath without adequate dilation first is the most likely cause.

Severe postoperative bleeding should be treated with a return to surgery for cystoscopic re-examination with the resectoscope. Most of the time, a single arterial vessel will be found to be bleeding. If this is not successful, interventional radiology may be able to embolize the prostatic artery, and a check should be made to look for a coagulation disorder.

An unrecognized bladder perforation can lead to abdominal distension, bradycardia (as an efferent vagal response), and hypotension with abdominal or shoulder pain. Such symptoms suggest an immediate cystogram. The procedure should be terminated as quickly as possible, and any significant bladder perforation surgically repaired.

**Dilutional hyponatremia or "TUR syndrome"**is a potentially dangerous complication of transurethral prostate surgery. This condition arises due to high volumes of hypotonic irrigation fluid used during the resection being absorbed intravascularly, causing dilutional hyponatremia and various neurologic symptoms, such as confusion, nervousness, nausea, hemolysis, visual disturbances, coma, shock, and even death. Early patient-reported symptoms include a  burning or prickly sensation of the face and neck, lethargy, and fearful ideations.

Patients at high risk include those with pre-existing hyponatremia, renal failure, increased irrigation fluid pressure (>60 cm of water), prolonged surgical operating time, unrecognized bladder perforation, and excessive bleeding.

Roughly 20 mL of fluid is absorbed per minute during TURP surgery, with about one-third entering directly into the venous system. Symptoms do not generally appear until the serum sodium is 125 mEq or less and are likely at 120 mEq/L, and >115 mEq/L is considered critical. The risk is essentially eliminated in TURP surgeries that utilize bipolar technology with normal saline irrigation, compared to monopolar instrumentation, where hypotonic solutions are required.

Initial treatment of mild to moderate cases of dilutional hyponatremia is with IV furosemide and normal saline. Correction of the hyponatremia should be done gradually.

Hypertonic saline 3% may be used cautiously in severe or symptomatic cases. The dosage is usually 150 to 200 mL at a time, administered over 1 to 2 hours. No more than roughly half the estimated sodium deficit should be corrected with 3% hypertonic saline. Correction of more than 20 mEq/L of serum sodium in 24 hours is not recommended. Estimated sodium deficit = (140-current serum sodium) x (body weight in kg) x (0.6). For example, a 70 kg man with serum sodium of 120 mEq would have an estimated sodium deficit of 840 mEq. (Normal saline contains 154 mEq/L of sodium, and 3% hypertonic saline has 513 mEq/L). Increasing the serum sodium by 4 to 6 mEq/L is usually sufficient to relieve symptoms and mitigate risks.

Prophylactic doses of hypertonic saline have been given in high-risk situations successfully.

Trace amounts of ethanol (1%) can be added to the irrigation fluid, which allows for a reliable estimate of the total absorbed fluid to be made from a simple determination of alcohol in the breath.

If monopolar instrumentation is used, a postoperative sodium level should be checked if the surgical time is over 60 minutes, the pre-operative sodium is low, if the drainage for the continuous flow becomes inoperative, or if there is excessive bleeding. Severe or symptomatic hyponatremia is unlikely, with surgical operating times of 90 minutes or less. The overall risk of significant "TUR syndrome" in monopolar TURP procedures is estimated at only about 2%.

While bipolar instrumentation minimizes hyponatremia, there may still be a substantial increase in intravascular fluid volume due to absorbed irrigation fluid from the procedure, and hyperchloremic metabolic acidosis has been reported.