Nadolol administration is primarily through the oral route. Tablet formulations are available in 20 mg, 40 mg, 80 mg, 160 mg, 240 mg, and 320 mg strengths.

- According to the FDA, in patients with angina pectoris and hypertension, nadolol should be started as a 40 mg once-daily oral formulation. It should be gradually increased in 40 to 80 mg increments to achieve the required therapeutic concentration and tailored to the patient’s response.

- In patients with atrial fibrillation, the American Heart Association recommends an oral dosage range of 10 mg to 240 mg to be tailored based on the patient’s response.

- In patients with catecholaminergic polymorphic ventricular tachycardia, supraventricular tachycardia, and ventricular arrhythmia due to congenital long QT syndrome, the American Heart Association recommends an oral dosage of 40 mg to 320 mg once a day.

- In patients with ventricular tachyarrhythmia, the American Heart Association recommends a dosage of 160 mg for long-term control.

- For both primary and secondary prophylaxis in patients with gastroesophageal variceal hemorrhage, the initial dose is 40 mg per day. This dose can increase to 80 mg per day in patients with ascites and 160 mg per day in patients without ascites. Dosing should be gradually increased every 2 to 3 days to reach a maximum tolerated dose in these patients. Heart rate should be maintained at 55 to 60 bpm, and the dosage should be stopped or decreased if the blood pressure drops below 90 mmHg.

- In patients with thyrotoxicosis, the American Thyroid Association recommends an oral dosage of 40 to 160 mg.

- The American Academy of Neurology and American Headache Society recommends an oral dosage of 40 to 160 mg once a day for prophylaxis in patients with migraines.

**Pharmacokinetics**

Various animal studies in dogs and rabbits have shown that pharmacological half-life is 12 to 24 hours.

**Specific Population**

**Renal Impairment:**Nadolol reduces renal blood flow. Therefore, dosage intervals should require monitoring with creatinine clearance.

**Hepatic Impairment:**There is no information on nadolol use in patients with hepatic impairment.

**Pregnant Women:**Nadolol is considered a pregnancy category C drug. Research has shown it to reduce birth weight in infants.

**Breastfeeding Women:**It is also contraindicated postpartum as it is expressed in breast milk. It may induce hypotension and hypoglycemia in neonates and infants.