The disease is best described based on the type of the infecting organism:

In the case of  Streptobacillus**,**the incubation period varies from 3 to 20 days, but in most cases, it's less than a week. The symptoms do not manifest for two to four weeks after exposure. The symptoms include fever, migratory polyarthritis, and rigors. The fever lasts longer and is recurring, often for months. The fever may wax and wane. The joints can become painfully swollen and back pain can also develop.  As the infection progresses, the individual will develop migratory polyarthralgia and myalgia. Both the large and small joints may be involved, but most patients experience inflammation in the knee and ankle joints at some point during the illness. In some patients, the migratory polyarthralgia may last several years.  On physical examination; the site of the bite will appear to be healed with mild or no signs of inflammation. Localized lymph node enlargement is rare. If the site of the bite continues to show persistent inflammation and tenderness, another diagnosis should be suspected.

In the case of****Spirillosis, the incubation period is two to ten days. The bite site is indurated and may ulcerate and have lymphadenopathy unlike the case of Streptobacillus, where the lesions have mild inflammation and lymphadenopathy is rare.  Around 50 % of patients may have a red-brown colored violaceous, macular rash and rarely plaques

Haverhill fever presents with similar symptoms like rat bite fever with the exception of lack of history of rat bite or contact with rats. Such individuals are more prone to have headaches, dizziness, and vomiting.