**Alport Syndrome**

In Alport syndrome, basement membrane dysfunction is characterized by ocular abnormalities, sensorineural hearing loss, and progressive hereditary nephritis. In 85% of cases, the inheritance is X-linked, autosomal recessive in 10%, and autosomal dominant in 5%.

Alport has a genetic defect in the basement membrane collagen. A. Cecil Alport first described them in 1927. Homozygous males are severely affected, and females have a milder form of Alport, where symptoms are microscopic haematuria and normal renal function. Alport genetic disruption of the glomerular basement membrane is secondary to mutations in the gene COL 4A 3,4, 5. The genes code for collagen type 4 alpha 3-5 chains.

These patients can present with pain, haematuria, proteinuria, renal failure (edema and hypertension), sensorineural hearing loss, anterior lenticonus and dot, fleck retinopathy, and posterior polymorphous corneal dystrophy. The other additional ocular abnormalities are posterior lenticonus, cataract, and retinal detachment.

**Ocular Symptoms**

The patients with Alport syndrome present with pain, watering, diminished vision, and photophobia secondary to corneal erosions. Progressive vision loss can occur secondary to posterior polymorphous dystrophy.

**Slit Lamp Ocular Signs**

**More Common**

Careful oblique and retroillumination reveal an oil droplet reflex which is usually axial in a location with dimensions of 2-7 mm. Lenticonus configuration on slit lamp is described as transparent, sharply demarcated localized conical projection of the lenticular capsule and cortical matter, which is usually axial in location.

An oblique narrow slit reveals a conus. In advanced cases, subcapsular and localized cortical opacities can be observed. Retinoscopy reveals an oil droplet sign which is correlated with the scissor reflex. Scissoring is due to varied refraction in the central and peripheral areas of the lens. Retinal signs are seen as dot and fleck retinopathy with lozenge sign (dull reflex at the macular), which appear as white and yellow granulation that is located superficially.

**Less Common**

In the cornea, posterior polymorphous dystrophy is seen, and endothelial vesicles are present in clusters (doughnuts) and bands (snail track).

Corneal signs of recurrent corneal erosions occur due to defective adhesions between the epithelium and Bowman's membrane. Corneal erosions are seen in individuals with early-onset renal failure and extrarenal features. Recurrent corneal erosions can be found in members of the same family, but they are not linked to specific mutations.

Posterior Polymorphous Corneal Dystrophy Posterior Polymorphous Corneal Dystrophy can also occur due to defective adhesion between layers. These patients complain of grittiness, watering, and photophobia. Patients with advanced pathology may require corneal transplantation. The majority of patients can be managed with symptomatic conservative management.

These can be picked up on meticulous slit lamp examination, confocal microscopy, and anterior segment optical coherence tomography. Corneal arcus juvenilis can be one of the rare findings in association with Alport syndrome. Anterior Lenticonus  The defect in collagen 4 causes the lens capsule's thinning and fragility, resulting in lenticonus. Electron microscopic studies have demonstrated multiple linear breaks in the inner 2/3 of the lens capsule containing fibrillar material and vacuoles. Apart from the histological changes seen in the anterior lens capsule, the weakened capsule is stressed during accommodative effort.

This causes the anterior lens capsule to become more convex in the central portion, and occasionally the capsule may rupture. This complication can be managed by cataract surgery or lens removal. A well-centered, adequate continuous curvilinear capsulorhexis must be created during the surgery to manage the central protruded fragile lens capsule. The femtosecond laser-assisted capsule removal has been a safe procedure. The incidence of posterior lenticonus is less common. Most surgical procedures have been successful in this scenario despite the spontaneous capsular rupture before surgery.

**Retinopathy**

The type IV collagen framework is seen in the internal limiting membrane and the RPE basement membrane in Bruch's membrane. The internal limiting membrane and Bruch's membrane are thinned out in Alport syndrome. The thinned-out membranes lead to retinopathy and macular hole formation.

The retinopathy in the central part appears as scattered yellowish-white dots and flecks to a dense, confluent annulus around the region of the temporal thinned-out retina. The central and peripheral retinopathy have nearly exact pathogenesis in X-linked and autosomal recessive Alport syndrome. Retinopathy can dictate the prognosis in early onset renal failure if present. The major differential diagnosis of retinopathies is fundus albipunctatus and other causes of generalized drusen and pigmentary retinopathy. Temporal macular thinning and dot and fleck retinopathy do not affect vision. A macular hole can cause vision loss and a poor response to surgery.

**Systemic symptoms**

The patient usually presents with symptoms of sensorineural hearing loss, hypertension, edema, and chronic haematuria.

**Diagnostic Clinical Signs**

Alport Syndrome diagnosis rests on the following key clinical points

- Family history of Alport, glomerular haematuria, and no other cause for haematuria

- Bilateral SNHL, dot and fleck retinopathy, and lenticonus

- Lack of type 4 collagen in the glomerular basement membrane

**Posterior Lenticonus**

Posterior lenticonus was first reported in 1888 by Meyer. According to certain authors, lenticonus posterior is a congenital defect usually isolated and not associated with any systemic disease. In sporadic cases, it usually presents as an isolated anomaly. In autosomal dominant inherited cases, there is typically bilateral involvement. The incidence of posterior lenticonus is more as compared to anterior lenticonus. The average age of diagnosis for posterior lenticonus is 3 to 7 years.

The diagnosis of posterior lenticonus is purely clinical, but it is cumbersome to diagnose asymptomatic cases. The essential diagnostic signs are the fishtail sign, in which a lens cortex is seen in the anterior vitreous phase after posterior capsular rent. The oil droplet sign and the atoll sign, in which there is an advanced posterior lenticonus and no posterior capsule defect, appear like an atoll. The term atoll has been taken from the Maldivian word atolu.

The association of posterior lenticonus with Lowe syndrome has been explained by the Lyon hypothesis, which explains the deactivation of the X chromosome. In a mouse model, the development of posterior lenticonus with cataracts is explained by transcription of the co-activator ASC-2 molecule.

The major associations of posterior lenticonus are Duane retraction syndrome, microphthalmos, keratoconus, microcornea, iris coloboma, lens coloboma, retinochoroidal coloboma, angle anomalies, anterior lenticonus, axial myopia, persistent hyaloid artery remnants, morning glory syndrome, retinoblastoma, Down syndrome, Alport and Lowe syndrome. Another syndrome is associated with posterior lenticonus s, MPPC syndrome, in which there is bilateral microcornea, posterior megalolenticonus, persistent fetal vasculature, and chorioretinal colobomas.

The most common complication with posterior lenticonus is amblyopia. The other common associations of posterior lenticonus are amblyopia, cataract, strabismus, and loss of central fixation. Amblyopia results from optical distortions in the early oil droplet stage caused by anisometropia or cataract deprivation. It has been observed that with time, cataractous changes are seen at the level of the lenticonus, and they can spread to the adjacent subcapsular cortex quickly.

Strabismus is a common sequela in patients with posterior lenticonus, and the incidence is related to the occurrence of sensory deprivation. Leukocoria is a vital sign in patients with lenticonus, and other causes of leukocoria, such as retinoblastoma and persistent hyperplastic primary vitreous, should be ruled out in these cases. Posterior lenticonus can also severely affect the visual acuity in children and may result in amblyopia. In cases where cycloplegic agents have been used, a bifocal correction on needed for near-visual tasks.

**Lowe Syndrome**

Lowe syndrome, also called oculocerebrorenal syndrome (OCRL), is a rare genetic disorder associated with multiple male anomalies. The incidence is 1 in 500,000 population. Then systemic manifestations include mental retardation, muscular hypotonia, and renal dysfunction in the form of Fanconi syndrome.

Ocular manifestations include posterior lenticonus, congenital cataract, corneal keloid, and infantile glaucoma. Lowe syndrome is an X-linked recessive disorder with mutations in the OCRL gene. The mutations in males are transmitted from a mother with an OCRL gene copy or if there is a new mutation spontaneously without any family history. The diagnosis of Lowe syndrome is governed by genetic testing and physical examination. There is a family history of males getting affected. The mothers of affected children may exhibit radial cortical lenticular opacities in the form of snowflakes.

**Ocular Findings**

Cataracts can be present since birth, and Lowe syndrome should be kept as a differential for any child presenting with bilateral cataracts. Posterior lenticonus is another common association with Lowe syndrome. Visual prognosis is usually poor, with vision less than 20/100.

Glaucoma is seen in approximately 50% of the patients. There is increased intraocular pressure with associated buphthalmos. There is a distorted anterior chamber angle which is seen in gonioscopy. Both scleral spurs have reduced visibility, and a narrowing of the ciliary body band is noted. Despite maximal medical therapy, glaucoma is progressive and non-responsive to medical therapy. Vision loss can lead to blindness in these patients. Nystagmus is due to aphakia and possibly due to retinal abnormalities from genetic mutations. Conjunctival and corneal keloids can further reduce visual prognosis.

**Neurological Problems**

Hypotonia with loss of deep tendon reflexes. Labored and difficult breathing at birth. Reduced motor function is seen in these patients. Mental retardation is seen in these patients, along with maladaptive behavior such as irritability, temper tantrums, and non-finalized behavior. Patients can also have seizures and febrile convulsions.

**Renal Problems**

Fanconi syndrome occurs in patients with Lowe syndrome, which develops with age and may be asymptomatic at birth. Electrolyte loss can lead to failure to survive. There is bicarbonate loss along with salt and water waste. Chronic renal failure may result as time progress. The renal tubular dysfunction is characterized by aminoaciduria, hypercalciuria, low molecular weight proteinuria, and occasional renal tubular acidosis.