The majority of the cases having an alimentary tract duplication present within childhood. The type of symptoms depends on the location of the cyst, type of the cyst (cystic or tubular), and presence or absence of ectopic mucosa. Patients with cystic duplications are generally symptomatic with abdominal pain but can also be incidentally detected. Partially communicating (with only one end communicating with the adjacent bowel), tubular duplications are known to cause symptoms such as chronic constipation due to the loading of the intestinal contents in a blind loop. Cysts with heterotopic gastric or pancreatic mucosa present as abdominal pain and gastrointestinal bleeding due to ulceration and bleeding of the healthy adjacent bowel.

Clinical presentation based on the location of the cyst

Foregut duplication cyst:****Dysphagia, vomiting, epigastric pain, and upper gastrointestinal bleeding are common clinical manifestations of esophageal duplication cysts. They can also cause compression on the surrounding structures and present as a large neck mass, stridor, dyspnea, cough, etc. Patients with bronchogenic cysts also present with similar features of dysphagia, chest pain, cough, dyspnea, etc. Foregut duplication cysts can also be prenatally detected on the routine ultrasound. Features, including intrathoracic mass, polyhydramnios, mediastinal shift, and hydrops, can be observed. Gastric duplication cysts are rare and usually present with abdominal pain, vomiting, abdominal mass, and features of gastric outlet obstruction.

Midgut duplication cyst: Children with small bowel duplications usually present with abdominal pain, palpable mass, nausea, and vomiting. They may present with features of upper gastrointestinal bleeding due to heterotopic mucosa. Acute abdominal pain due to intussusception or volvulus is also reported in the literature.

Hindgut duplication cyst: Colonic duplication cysts are rare as compared to small bowel duplication cysts. They usually contain colonic mucosa; however, some cases with ectopic mucosa have also been reported. Similar to small bowel duplication cysts, these may present as abdominal pain, palpable mass, vomiting, gastrointestinal bleeding, or features of intestinal obstruction. Malignant transformation has also been seen in these cysts. In addition, rectal duplications can present with distinct clinical presentations, including presacral masses, imperforate anus with rectovaginal fistula, etc.