**Gross:**Testicular teratoma is highly heterogeneous in appearance. The tumor is firm and usually well-circumscribed, occupying a portion or the entirety of the testis. The cut surface can appear solid or cystic, and different heterologous elements are a common finding, such as hairs, teeth, adipose tissue, cystic mass filled with keratin or mucinous material; solid areas formed by cartilage or bone may be recognizable. Those appearances correspond to different histologic differentiation that is typical of teratoma.

**Microscopy****:**Any epithelial, mesenchymal, or neural-derived tissue can be seen. Less common are tissues derived from the respiratory, gastrointestinal, or genitourinary tract. Skin-derived structures such as epithelial-derived (epidermoid cyst) or appendages is a quite common finding, especially in prepubertal-type teratomas, while postpubertal-type teratomas tend to appear as multiloculated cysts lined by other tissue types such as glandular epithelium and contain solid areas formed by parenchymal structure or mesenchymal tissues. A certain element of immature tissues can also be encountered, consisting of ectodermal, endodermal, or mesenchymal structures. Neuroectodermal tissue is the most common immature type and often has several differentiation stages of embryonic/fetal nervous system tissue. Historically teratoma has been differentiated into mature and immature, but this distinction is not recommended any more due to the lack of a prognostic significance. Teratoma can occur paired with other histotypes of germ cell neoplasia, such as yolk sac tumor or embryonal carcinoma.

Teratomatous tissue can harbor various degrees of dysplasia ranging from mild cytological atypia to obvious malignancy. For instance, glandular tissue can hide areas of in situ or invasive carcinoma, and chondroid tissue can develop chondrosarcoma. Those cases are referred to as teratoma with somatic type malignancy and can behave accordingly, developing somatic-type metastases.

Careful microscopic examination is needed to define the grade of invasion of the surrounding tissues (para-testicular) and the invasion of vascular spaces. The adjacent testicular parenchyma is usually found to be atrophic with impaired spermatogenesis; finding of germ cell neoplasia in situ (GCNIS) is common. The fibrous stroma surrounding the teratomatous tissue was thought to be a physiological response to confine the tumor, but molecular analyses found the same genetic alterations of the teratoma. Therefore even the surrounding stroma is germ cell-derived and not reactive fibrosis.

The metastatic spread of testicular cancer involves the para-aortic retroperitoneal lymph nodes in 95% of cases. Mesenteric lymphatics are not a well-described metastatic pathway, but sporadic cases have been reported.

**Immunohistochemistry:**Teratomatous structures express the same antigens expected for the specific cell type. Glandular tissue is always positive for cytokeratin and epithelial membrane antigen; keratinocytes are positive for high molecular weight cytokeratins; mesenchymal tissue can express several antigens related to the mature tissue (S100 in neural-derived and adipous tissue, actin for muscular fibers, CD34 for fibroblastic cells, and so on). In mixed-type germ cell neoplasias, there might be the expression of other markers: human chorionic gonadotropin (from syncytiotrophoblastic cells), placental alkaline phosphatase, and LDH.