Glycogenic hepatopathy was first described by Pierre Mauriac in 1930 in a pediatric patient with poorly controlled type 1 diabetes (brittle diabetes) who presented with hepatomegaly, cushingoid features, and poor growth, developing a condition known as Mauriac syndrome.

**Other Causes of Glycogenic Hepatopathy**

Glycogenic hepatopathy has been observed not only in patients with diabetes mellitus but also in patients with dumping syndrome after gastrectomy, anorexia nervosa, high dose corticosteroids, azathioprine use, and high doses of insulin usage.

**Glycogenic Hepatopathy in Dumping Syndrome**

Dumping syndrome is a complication seen in gastric surgeries like gastric bypass surgery where “chyme” rapidly dumps into the small intestine from the stomach without complete absorption. There is a fluctuation between hyperglycemia from feed load and hyperinsulinemia, similar to diabetes mellitus.

**Anorexia Nervosa**

Kransdorf and colleagues reported a case of anorexia nervosa with elevated liver function tests and glycogen deposition.

**Short Term Use of High Dose Steroid Therapy**

High-dose steroids elevate glucose levels, gluconeogenesis, and glycogen deposition. Lancu and colleagues studied 141 patients who had received steroid therapy, 13% had hepatomegaly, and 3 patients had glycogenic hepatopathy.

**Insulin Overdose**

Tsujimoto et al. reported a case in which a patient with type 2 diabetes mellitus (DM) self-injected a large dose of insulin in an apparent suicide attempt.