Symptoms of chest tightness, wheezing, coughing, and dyspnea occurring with exercise can indicate pathology along the entire airway.

**Nasal Airway**

The differential includes diseases of the nasal airway, including exercise-induced rhinosinusitis, allergic rhinitis, upper airway cough syndrome, upper respiratory infection (URI), and anatomic abnormalities. The nasal airway participates in filtering, humidifying, and regulating airway resistance and, therefore, nasal airway conditions can be comorbid with EIB.

**Pharynx and Larynx**

The differential also includes diseases of the pharynx and larynx, including EILO, previously called exercise-induced vocal cord dysfunction. Athletes with EILO present similarly to EIB; however, treatment is not, and differentiation is required with appropriate testing, including visualization of the larynx with exercise.

**Lower Airways**

Lastly, the differential included diseases of the airways, including asthma, respiratory tract infection (RTI), and gastroesophageal reflux disease (GERD).

**Cardiac**

Cardiac causes of exertional dyspnea should be investigated, especially in children.

**Gastrointestinal**

GERD

**Others**

CHEST guidelines recommend the evaluation of cough in adolescent athletes include asthma, EIB, respiratory tract infection, upper airway cough syndrome, and environmental exposures.

Less common causes include exercise-induced pulmonary edema, mainly seen in water immersion sports or high-altitude winter sports, PE, saltwater aspiration syndrome, and smoking. No studies were identified by the authors of CHEST guidelines for exercise-induced cough caused by cardiac abnormalities.