**History**

HV deformity commonly presents with a chronic progressive onset. The proximal phalanx pronates and deviates laterally, while the first metatarsal head deviates medially, often becoming red and painful. Patients typically present with a chronic onset of sharp or deep pain at the MTP joint that is exacerbated by ambulation. The patient occasionally describes an aching pain at the head of the second metatarsal. As HV deformity progresses, the frequency, duration, and severity of the pain gradually increase. Frequently patients describe an associated increase in the size of the deformity. Another relatively common presentation is tingling or burning pain at the dorsal part of the deformity. This symptomatology is indicative of a medial dorsal cutaneous nerve neuritis likely caused by compression from the deformity. These symptoms are primarily a result of three different processes:

- The bunion itself centers upon the medial aspect of the first metatarsal.

- Pressure against the toes that are superiorly displaced

- Increased pressure on second through fifth metatarsal bones

Other symptoms that affect patients include blisters, ulcerations, interdigital keratosis, and irritated skin adjacent to the deformity.

**Physical**

For the physical exam, a biomechanical exam will look for possible causes of HV deformity. Common items to evaluate include forefoot/rearfoot varus or valgus, first ray hypermobility, subtalar joint stiffness, subtalar joint stiffness, midtarsal joint stiffness, resting calcaneal stance position, tibial torsion, and neutral calcaneal stance position. Assessment of the pathology is often divided into a non-weight bearing and weight bearing evaluation, as illustrated below.

**Nonweightbearing**

The position of the hallux, with respect to the second digit, should be assessed in the transverse plane. The hallux can be under-riding, overriding, or without contact. The lateral deviation of the MTP may represent subluxation at the MTP joint. The medial prominence also requires close evaluation.

The first MTP joint range of motion should undergo assessment for the maximum available motion (normal - plantar flexion less than 15 degrees and dorsiflexion 65 to 75 degrees). Next, the quality of the first MTP joint is assessed (pain, crepitation). Lastly, the MTP is evaluated for its axis of motion.

**Weightbearing**

HV deformity severity tends to be more obvious when the patient is weight-bearing. When weight-bearing, patients should be evaluated for increased hallux abduction, increase in the medial prominence, first MTP joint dorsiflexion, hallux purchase, and metatarsus varus.