There is no cure for HD. However, many therapeutic options exist for treating signs and symptoms with the aim of improving the quality of life. Treatment is mainly pharmacological as well as supportive. Surgical management does not play an important role. There are many therapeutic and surgical options that have been evaluated for their efficacy in suppressing chorea, including dopamine antagonists, benzodiazepines, acetylcholinesterase, lithium, deep brain stimulation, and glutamate antagonists. These measures typically address the hyperkinetic movement disorders associated with HD, such as chorea, dystonia, and myoclonus. Adjunctive therapies, as well as behavioral plans and cognitive interventions, may also play a role and should be considered. It is important to consider the negative impact of the agent of the psychiatric disturbances associated with HD, such as depression, mania, irritability, or apathy.

**Chorea:**

- The American Academy of Neurology guidelines recommends the use of tetrabenazine (TBZ), amantadine, or riluzole in managing chorea. TBZ reversibly inhibits the central monoamine transporter type 2, thereby selectively depleting dopamine than norepinephrine.

- The highest binding sites for TBZ are in the putamen, caudate nucleus, and the nucleus accumbens, which are known to be the most affected in HD.

- Potential side effects include depression, fatigue, akathisia, insomnia, and somnolence during titration of the drug. Depression is common in HD and can be exacerbated by using TBZ. Therefore, all patients need to be monitored for signs of depression as well as suicide ideation.

- Other medications that are commonly prescribed include dopamine antagonists, benzodiazepines as well as glutamate antagonists. Dopamine antagonists are considered in the management of chorea and psychosis. Apathy, as well as akathisia, are adverse effects of dopamine receptor blockers and therefore, can be problematic in patients with HD. Compounds containing L-Dopa might increase chorea.

- Due to their improved tolerability, atypical neuroleptics have been evaluated in the management. Olanzapine has been used in small studies to treat the motor symptoms. There are reports of risperidone in the treatment of chorea with tolerable adverse effects. Quetiapine has been tried in multiple trials with success on both the motor as well as psychiatric symptoms. Aripiprazole has been found to be of benefit in the treatment of chorea, equivalent to that of TBZ, However, similar to other typical and atypical neuroleptic agents, and it is associated with akathisia as well as tardive dyskinesia.

- Amantadine, an N-methyl D-aspartate antagonist, has been shown to significantly reduce chorea. However, a dose of 400 mg/day or higher is needed for symptomatic relief.

- Riluzole inhibits the striatal glutamate release, and its neuroprotective effects are being studied in large trials.

**Parkinsonism:**

In patients with the Westphal variant (bradykinesia and rigidity), antiparkinsonian medications can be considered, such as levodopa, dopamine agonists as well as amantadine. Botulinum injections can be considered for focal dystonia.

**Behavioral and Psychiatric disturbances:**

There is a wide range of behavioral and psychiatric issues in HD, such as aggression, depression, irritability, apathy, mania, and psychosis. Although selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors (SSRI), tricyclic antidepressants are commonly used in HD for the treatment of depression, anxiety, and obsessive-compulsive disorders, there is no convincing evidence of their use in HD.  Non-pharmacological treatment should also be considered when possible, including environmental changes and therapy.

**Non-medical interventions:**

Supportive care with attention to diet, nursing, and special equipment is recommended. Smoking and alcohol use is discouraged.Emotional support, as well as counseling, can provide relief to patients living with HD and their families.

**Gene therapy:**

- Gene therapy provides exciting and promising advances in the prevention of HD.

- The silencing of mutant genes provides an opportunity for treatment.

- This could either restore function by returning to normal neuronal circuits that are dysfunctional but not dead or could be neuroprotective with a lack of manifestation of the disease. Quantitative measures of brain regions such as striatum are good biomarkers for disease progression and are useful in the upcoming gene therapy studies.

**New therapies under investigation:**

- Pharmacological agents that are being studied include those that inhibit apoptosis, excitotoxicity, HTT aggregation as well as HTT proteolysis and phosphorylation, and oxidative damage. Compounds that modulate transcription, mitochondrial activity, and chaperone activity are also being investigated.

- Treatment options that have shown improvements in preclinical animal models and that have advanced to clinical trials include the following: minocycline, memantine, sodium butyrate, phosphodiesterase 10a inhibitor.

- Experimental therapies include pridopidine, laquinimod as well as a semaphorin-4D neutralizing antibody that are still in development.

- Gene silencing to target the cause of HD has been shown to be safe in preclinical animal studies. These aim to either silence all HTT expression non-selectively or selectively for the mutated HTT allele.

- Cell transplantation has shown variable results and safety, as well as the efficacy of intravenously injecting mesenchymal stem cells, is being tested. Recent studies suggest that the mutated HTT gene can spread into the allografted neural tissue.

**Evidence-based recommendations:**

The European Huntington disease network developed an international task force to provide evidence-based recommendations in the treatment of HD. This is to provide a standardized medical, surgical, and non-pharmacological treatment to improve the care and quality of life of patients. Their recommendations are summarized below.

**Chorea:**

- Tetrabenazine (TBZ) is usually the first line [Level 1] of treatment unless the patient suffers from uncontrolled depression or suicidal ideation.

- In the case of depression or personality or behavioral changes, second-generation neuroleptics are the preferred line of treatment. [Level 2]

- Monotherapy is generally preferred as combination therapy greatly increased the risk of adverse effects.

**Dystonia:**

- Active and passive physiotherapy is recommended to maintain the range of joint motion as well as limit the postural and musculoskeletal deformities and also prevent the development of contractures. [Llevel 3]

- Botulinum injections can be used to treat focal dystonia.

**Rigidity:**

- The rigidity can be increased or induced with the use of neuroleptics or TBZ. A reduced dose or withdrawal should be considered in the overall benefit of the chorea/behavioral symptoms vs. the severity of rigidity.

- Levodopa can provide temporary relief, especially in juvenile cases. [Level 3] The daily dose is lower than that in Parkinson’s disease.

- Physiotherapy is recommended to prevent the development of contractures and joint deformity as well as maintain mobility. [Level 3]

**Akathisia:**

- TBZ as well as neuroleptics and SSRI can induce akathisia, and reducing the dose or withdrawal may be of benefit. [Level 3]

**Swallowing abnormalities:**

- A referral to speech and language therapists is recommended at the onset of the disease. [Level 3]

- For severe disorders, the use of a percutaneous endoscopic gastrostomy may be considered.

**Myoclonus:**

- Treatment with sodium valproate or clonazepam, either alone or in combination, is recommended if functional capacity is impaired. [Level 3] Levetiracetam is an alternative. Benzodiazepines can be used with caution.

- Piracetam can be used in the case of myoclonus of cortical origin, not associated with epilepsy. [Level 3]

**Gait abnormalities:**

- Physiotherapy [Level 2], as well as the implementation of falls prevention programs, core stability, and balance interventions, are recommended. [Level 3]

- Pharmaceutical management of chorea aids in walking and therefore help in balance. [Level 3] However, they should be used with caution as the adverse effects can also aggravate walking disorders.

- The use of assistive walking devices such as a four-wheeled walker is recommended by physiotherapy or occupational therapist. [Level 2]

**Bruxism:**

- Botulin toxin into masseter muscle is usually the first line of management. [Level 3]

- Customizes mouth guards can also be used, mostly in early-stage patients.

- Bruxism can also occur as a side effect of using neuroleptics or SSRI, and reducing their dose should be considered. [Level 3]

**Manual dexterity:**

- The use of neuroleptics and TBZ may be beneficial but may aggravate bradykinesia. [Level 3]

- Physiotherapy and occupational therapy can be useful. [Level 2]

**Global motor capacities:**

- Physiotherapy is beneficial to the overall functional ability as well as independence and motor function in HD in combination with pharmacological options. [Level 2]

**Cognitive disturbances:**

- No pharmacological management is recommended.

- Rehabilitation strategies such as speech therapy, occupational therapy can improve and stabilize cognitive functions.[Level 2]

**Executive functions:**

- Treating anxiety and depression may improve executive functions. Rehabilitation helps with initiation and planning and improve cognitive stimulation. [Level 3]

- Neuroleptics and sedatives need to be monitored carefully.

**Bradyphrenia:**

- Cognitive stimulation is beneficial for the slowing down of processing of cognitive information and a prolongation in reaction time.

**Language and communication:**

- A referral to speech and language therapists early on is recommended. [Level 3]

- Communication techniques and strategies also include voice therapy, reduction of environmental distractions as well as allowing time for communication. Simple techniques, such as gestures or tools such as pens, can also be used.

**Memory impairment:**

- Establishing a daily routine may be of help.Speech therapy, as well as neuropsychology, may also be beneficial.

- Sedative drugs, neuroleptics, and TBZ may negatively impact memory.

**Visuospatial disorders:**

- Keeping the environment safe with the use of padding furniture may be useful to minimize falls and shocks.

**Psychiatric disturbances:**

- Cognitive therapy and acceptance and commitment therapy may be of use.

**Depression:**

- Psychotherapy and cognitive behavioral therapy are beneficial.

- Use of antidepressants such as selective SSRI or a serotonin noradrenaline reuptake inhibitor (SNRI). [Level 2]

- A psychiatrist should be consulted in patients with resistant depression or those with associated psychosis.

- Severe cases with resistance to oral medication, electroconvulsive therapy may be tried (level 3)

**Suicide:**

- Suicidal risk needs to be assessed in patients irrespective of the stage of the disease. Close attention should be made, especially from the time of diagnosis to when daily life is affected.

- Underlying risk factors such as depression, impulsiveness, and social isolation needs to be addressed.

**Irritability:**

- Behavioral strategies should be implemented.

- SSRI is the first line. [Level 3] If SSRI is ineffective, then a combination with Mirtazapine may be beneficial.

- Neuroleptics are recommended for patients with aggression. [Level 3]

- In the presence of overt aggression in association with depression, sedative antidepressants should be considered.

**Apathy:**

- Cognitive stimulation, as well as daily routines and programs with structured activities, is recommended.

- SSRI should be initiated in the presence of depression.

**Anxiety:**

- The first line of treatment is SSRI or SNRI, especially when depression is present.

- Neuroleptics are alternatives in case of failure. [Level 3]

**Obsessions:**

- SSRI may be used, especially in the presence of anxiety. [Level 3]

- Olanzapine and risperidone are also valuable. [Level 3]

**Hallucinations:**

- Second-generation neuroleptics are generally the first line. [Level 3]

- Clozapine is the first line in akinetic forms with Parkinsonian symptoms.

- Electroconvulsive therapy can be used in the failure of pharmacological therapies. [Level 3]

**Sleep disturbances:**

- If lifestyle modifications are ineffective, hypnotic agents can be used for short periods. Mirtazapine can be used.

**Urinary incontinence:**

- Carbamazepine may be of use in those with sudden bladder emptying without the presence of an urge.

- Antimuscarinic can be used in cases with an overactive bladder.

**Dental pain:**

- A multidisciplinary approach is advised with dietitians to avoid cariogenic food. [Level 3]

- Instructions on good oral hygiene should be given to both patients as well as caregivers. [Level 3]

**Weight loss:**

- Assessment by a dietitian is recommended. Factors such as mood, behavior as well as swallowing ability need to be considered as causes of weight loss. [Level 3]

- In cases of weight loss, high calorie, and protein supplements should be prescribed. [Level 3]

**Reduced lung function and respiratory muscle strength:**

- Home-based respiratory muscle training can be initiated. [Level 2]