The adult brain and spinal cord begin to form during week 3 of embryological development. The ectoderm begins to thicken, forming the neural plate. The neutral place then folds inwards, creating the neural groove. Neural folds that migrate laterally flank the neural groove. The neural groove then develops into the neural tube, which forms the CNS structures.

The neural tube gets separated into an anterior and posterior end. The anterior end forms the primary brain vesicles, prosencephalon (forebrain), mesencephalon (midbrain), and rhombencephalon (hindbrain), while the posterior end becomes the spinal cord. The primary brain vesicles continue to differentiate, creating secondary brain vesicles. The forebrain separates to form the telencephalon and diencephalon, and the hindbrain splits to form the metencephalon and the myelencephalon (spinal brain).

- Telencephalon to cerebrum

- Diencephalon to hypothalamus, thalamus, retina

- Mesencephalon to the brain stem (midbrain)

- Metencephalon to the brain stem (pons), cerebellum

- Myelencephalon to the brain stem (medulla oblongata)

The central part of the neural tube forms continuous, hollow cavities known as ventricles. During month 6 of gestation, the cerebral cortex changes from a smooth to wrinkled, convoluted appearance; this is due to the continued growth of the cerebral hemispheres. The elevated parts of the ridges are gyri, while the grooves have the name sulci. The convolutions allow for the increased surface area of the brain to fit within the skull. Throughout the brain, there are areas of white and gray matter. The gray matter contains neuronal cell bodies, dendrites, glia, and unmyelinated neurons. Contrary, white matter is composed of myelinated axons.

The spinal cord, formed from the caudal portion of the neural tube, is composed of both gray and white matter. At 6 weeks of gestation, the gray matter begins to aggregate, forming the dorsal alar plate and ventral basal plate. Interneurons form from the alar plate, while motor neurons form from the basal plate. Dorsal root ganglia, which brings information from the periphery to the spinal cord, arise for the neural crest cells.