As most PLM is associated with RLS, dopaminergic medications such as pramipexole, ropinirole, rotigotine, and other drugs like gabapentin, pregabalin may also cause a reduction in periodic limb movements in patients with PLMD.

Based on a few small trials, researchers have tried some medications in patients with PLMD, including clonazepam, melatonin, valproate, and selegiline. Their effects on PLMS and other sleep indices appear below.

- **Clonazepam**1 mg at bedtime: Improves sleep efficiency, sleep quality, and PLMS during wakefulness and REM sleep but no reduction in PLM index.

- **Melatonin**3 mg 30 minutes before bedtime: Improves PLM and PLM arousal indices.

- **Valproate**125 to 600 mg at bedtime: Causes a non-significant reduction in PLM and PLM arousal indices. It improves sleep efficiency and the first and third sleep stages.

- **Selegiline**was mentioned in 2004 guidelines from a study by Grewal et al. and may be an option in some patients.

Due to a lack of evidence on the pharmacological treatment of PLMD, clinical judgment is crucial before choosing the appropriate therapy.

Physicians should also be cautious in avoiding certain antidepressants like mirtazapine, venlafaxine, sertraline, fluoxetine, and amitriptyline, as they may aggravate periodic limb movements. Bupropion is the preferred medication in treating patients with concomitant depression. Other antidepressants like trazodone, nefazodone, and doxepin do not worsen PLMS.

In children, iron deficiency is a frequent finding in patients with RLS/PLMD. The primary focus should be initially on treating underlying iron deficiency anemia. Not much data is available on using dopamine agonists in children with RLS/PLMD.