**Viscosupplementation:**Viscosupplementation is currently FDA-approved for the treatment of knee OA. It is indicated for patients in whom conservative therapies such as physical therapy, NSAIDs, corticosteroid injections, and aspiration fail. Elderly patients with any stage of OA are good candidates for viscosupplementation. Younger patients with mild to moderate knee OA who have clinical symptoms but are not ready for invasive surgical intervention are also good candidates. Viscosupplementation is also useful in patients with Kellgren-Lawrence stage 1 to 3. Patients with stage 4 OA who want to delay total knee replacement are ideal for viscosupplementation. It can also be used as first-line therapy in patients with multiple comorbidities who are on multiple medications to avoid the side effects of anti-arthritic drugs. It can be considered in patients who cannot take NSAIDs due to gastrointestinal or renal disease or unstable hypertension.

**Prolotherapy:**Indications for Prolotherapy include OA and degenerative syndromes, myofascial pain syndrome, spine, and pelvic pain, refractory tendinopathies, plantar fasciitis.

The goal for prolotherapy is the stimulation of the body's healing process in the joint to facilitate improvement in the tensile strength of the joint stabilizing structures. Hypertonic dextrose acts by dehydrating the cells at the site of injections that causes local tissue trauma, which attracts granulocytes and macrophages to promote healing. Studies on human fibroblasts and chondrocytes have shown that extracellular dextrose concentrations result in the proliferation and production of essential growth factors for tissue repair. These growth factors promote the expression of type 1 and type 3 collagen in tenocytes which is essential for the growth of tendons, ligaments, and cartilage.

**Plasma-rich platelets (PRP):**Platelet-rich plasma is currently used to treat OA, ligament injury, meniscus injury, muscle injury, tendinopathy, and spine disorders. There are numerous methods of preparing PRP. Due to variability in methods of PRP preparations, there is no universal classification system. However, PRP is mainly categorized into two classifications: leukocyte-rich PRP (LR-PRP) and leukocyte-poor PRP (LP-PRP). LR-PRP has neutrophil counts above baseline and thus is associated with pro-inflammatory effects.

PRP has piqued the scientific community's interest due to its various properties such as regenerative, analgesic, anti-microbial, and anti-inflammatory.

Some of the growth factors and cytokines include PGDF-AA, TGF-B1, IGF-1, VEGF, EGF, IL-1, and many more. PRP delivers supraphysiologic concentrations of these molecules to an injury site to promote tissue remodeling, repair, and regeneration.

**Mesenchymal stem cells (MSCs):**The indications for MSCs vary depending on the harvest site. Sources of MSCs include bone marrow, adipose tissue, umbilical cord, skeletal, muscle, peripheral blood, and amniotic fluid.