**Mechanism of Action**

Loewi demonstrated in 1921 that acetylcholine (ACh) is a chemical that can transmit nerve impulses from one nerve to another via synapses. ACh is a neurotransmitter that is derived from acetyl coenzyme A (Acetyl COA). Acetyl COA is derived from glucose and choline by a reaction catalyzed by choline acetyltransferase (CAT). ACh is stored in the presynaptic membrane in packages called vesicles. Each package is released upon stimulation. Acetylcholine esterase (AChE) uses a hydrolytic process to break down the neurotransmitter ACh into choline and acetate, thereby terminating its effect on the muscarinic and nicotinic receptors.

Organophosphates have the ability to irreversibly bind to AChE and prevent the breakdown of ACh. “Liberation” of ACh leads to overstimulation of both the muscarinic and nicotinic receptors.

Nicotinic and muscarinic receptors are widely distributed in the body.

**Nicotinic Receptors**

- Nicotinic receptors are of two types: Central and peripheral

- Central nicotinic receptors Nn or N2 are located in the central nervous system (CNS). They can also be found in the sympathetic, parasympathetic ganglia of the peripheral nervous system (PNS) and the adrenal medulla

- Peripheral nicotinic receptors Nm or NI are located at the level of the neuromuscular junctions

**Muscarinic Receptors**

- All five subtypes of muscarinic receptors (M1-M5) are present in the CNS.

- The postganglionic peripheral muscarinic receptors provide parasympathetic innervation to the heart, exocrine glands, and the smooth muscles of the internal organs. Innervation of the sweat gland is via the sympathetic postganglionic fibers.

Stimulations of each of the specific receptors will cause the following clinical signs and symptoms

**Nicotinic Receptors**

- **N1**Neuromuscular junction - Fasciculation and muscular weakness

- **N2**Autonomous nervous system - Hypertension and tachycardia

**Muscarinic Receptors**

- **M2**Heart - Hypotension bradycardia

- **M2, M3**Eyes - Miosis

- **M2, M3**Gastrointestinal system - Abdominal cramps, drooling, salivation

- **M2, M3**Respiratory system - Bronchospasm, bronchorrhea, rhinorrhea

- **M2, M3**Smooth muscle of internal organ - Abdominal cramps, urinary urgency

- **M1, M2, M3, M4, M5**Central Nervous System - Seizure, anxiety, agitation

Organophosphates manifest their clinical presentation mainly on the respiratory, gastrointestinal, cardiovascular, and central nervous system

**Exposure to Organophosphates**

Data on exposure to nerve gas and organophosphate pesticides are very limited. Most of the exposure to organophosphate pesticides is in rural areas where extensive use of herbicides, pesticides, and insecticides are common. Exposure might be accidental or intentional.

Exposure can be via food products such as wheat, flour, and cooking oil. Ant and roach spray might also be a potential source of exposure. Routes of exposure include the following:

- Inhalation

- Direct contact

- Ingestion

Worldwide, approximately 3 million people are exposed to organophosphates, with about 300,000 mortalities. In the United States, about 8,000 are exposed to organophosphates, with very few deaths. Since 2013, there are stricter government regulations for the sale of OPs.

By the Geneva Convention of 1925, the sale of nerve gas is considered a war crime. The most recent reported cases of extensive use of nerve gas are in the ongoing conflict in Syria.

**Adverse Effects**

Adverse effects from exposure to organophosphate pesticides can be classified based on the length of exposure.

- Acute - Occurs within minutes to 24 hours

- Subacute - Occurs between 24 hours and 2 weeks

- Chronic - Exposure beyond weeks to years

The main effect of acute exposure to organophosphates is poisoning. Organophosphate pesticides can be absorbed via the skin and integumentary system, respiratory system via inhalation, or direct ingestion. The most rapid clinical manifestation of organophosphate pesticides is seen via inhalation. Chronic exposure to OP can cause the same effects as seen in acute exposure. However, with chronic exposure, memory, speech loss, lack of coordination, and impaired judgment are also impaired. Chronic exposure to OP can also cause flu-like symptoms like nausea, vomiting, malaise, and weakness. Peripheral polyneuropathy has been linked to chronic exposure.  Exposure to some OPs has been associated with the possible development of cancer. Based on a report by the International Agency for Research on Cancer, malathion, diazinon, tetrachlorvinphos, and parathion are classified as possible carcinogens. The hallmark of exposure to either organophosphate pesticides or nerve gas is the ability of these substances to inhibit the action of AChE, the enzyme responsible for the breakdown of ACh. Organophosphate pesticides bind irreversibly to AChE in the plasma, red blood cells, and at the level of the synapses in both the PNS and the CNS. The buildup of ACh leads to the overstimulation of both the nicotinic receptors and the muscarinic receptors.

**Complications**

The complications from exposure to nerve gas or organophosphate pesticide are related to each system that is affected. Overstimulation of both the nicotinic and muscarinic receptors is responsible for the clinical manifestation of these complications.

**Respiratory System**

- Aspiration pneumonia from excessive salivation

- Progressive respiratory failure from respiratory muscle weakness, especially diaphragmatic muscle

- Severe bronchospasm

- Noncardiogenic pulmonary edema

**Cardiovascular System**

- Arrhythmias, especially ventricular tachycardia

- Bradycardia

- Hypertension

- Hypotension

- Prolonged QTc

**Central Nervous System**

- Psychosis

- Seizure

- Change in mental status

- Hallucination

**Gastrointestinal and Metabolic Systems**

- Electrolyte abnormalities from fluid and electrolyte losses from the gastrointestinal tract

- Pancreatitis

- Hyperglycemia

- Low bicarbonate

**Renal System**

- Acute kidney injury

- There are few case reports of acute kidney injury associated with exposure to organophosphate pesticides. Treatment is usually conservative management or hemodialysis.