The main causes of death in severe malnutrition include infection, dehydration, electrolyte imbalance, and heart failure; furthermore, there is a risk of death due to the onset of refeeding syndrome.

The management of marasmus is divided into three main phases:

- Resuscitation and stabilization

- Nutritional rehabilitation

- Follow up and prevention of recurrence

**Resuscitation and Stabilization**

As the main causes of death in marasmus include dehydration and infection, the main aim during the resuscitation and stabilization phase is to rehydrate, prevent infections that may progress to sepsis, and avoid the complications of the treatment of marasmus such as refeeding syndrome. This phase lasts for approximately one week and is the phase during which patients are most susceptible.

Dehydration can be treated with an intravenous isotonic solution, in circumstances where the child is suffering from hypovolemia plasma or blood may be used. The child should be in a warm room as they are susceptible to hypothermia. Furthermore, as there is an atypical response to infections a child with marasmus may not have overt signs indicating they are suffering from sepsis, antibiotics may be given following blood cultures in those who are suspected to be suffering from sepsis.

To prevent the development of refeeding syndrome, nutrition should be delivered slowly and carefully with caloric intake between 60-80% of the calorie requirement for age. A potential risk of refeeding is the development of hypoglycemia, this can be avoided by continuous nasogastric feeding at night or small meals during the nighttime.

During this phase of treatment, the recognition of refeeding syndrome is of great importance. Electrolyte abnormalities developed as a consequence of refeeding syndrome may lead to arrhythmia or sudden death, weakness, and rhabdomyolysis, confusion, and death. Thiamine deficiency may lead to encephalopathy or lactic acidosis. Fluid overload may result in acute heart failure and edema.

**Nutritional Rehabilitation**

Once the acute complications of marasmus have been treated and the child's appetite begins to return along with the correction of electrolyte abnormalities and sepsis the nutritional rehabilitation phase can start. This includes the gradual increase of caloric intake, vaccination, and increased motor activity. Children may need 120% to 140% of their required caloric intake to maintain a growth rate similar to their peers. The nutritional rehabilitation phase may last from 2 to 6 weeks.

During this phase, it is important to encourage mother and child interaction to help reverse developmental delay.

**Follow up and Prevention of Recurrence**

As there is a risk of relapse, it is important to follow up on patients who have presented with marasmus. Education should be provided to mothers with regards to breastfeeding and supplemental feeding.

Furthermore, other ways in which marasmus can be reduced include the provision of a supply of uncontaminated drinking water, adequate food supplies, control of infectious diseases.