From a microanatomical perspective, bones are highly specialized connective tissue with a built-in ability to remodel based on the demands placed on them. The primary cell responsible for building bone is the osteoblast. Osteoblasts secrete a fluid known as osteoid, which is rich in a protein produced by the human body known as type I collagen. Another component of the osteoid is the ground substance, composed primarily of osteocalcin and chondroitin sulfate. For the bone to become hard, the osteoid must undergo mineralization with inorganic components such as calcium and phosphate.  These minerals are typically absorbed in the diet, with a familiar source being dairy products. It is for this reason that bone is a major storage reservoir for these minerals should the body should need them. Interestingly, a study published in Food & Function by Burrow et al. has suggested that the specific source of these nutrients may have an impact in the structural integrity of bone. This study demonstrated the superiority of sheep’s milk over cow’s milk for this purpose but was only conducted on rats, so its applicability to humans is questionable.

In order for the bone to be adequately remodeled based on the functional need, cells must be present to break down the mature bone. The cells responsible for this task are the osteoclasts, multinucleated cells derived from macrophages found in Howship’s lacunae on the surface of the bone. They are under the control of the osteoblast which expresses receptor activator of nuclear factor kappa B (RANK), to which the osteoclast expresses the ligand (RANKL).  The osteoblast can produce osteoprotegerin, which interferes with RANK-RANKL interaction and therefore does not allow osteoclast differentiation. Once activated, the osteoclast utilizes acid produced in a reaction facilitated by the enzyme carbonic anhydrase, along with a collagenase enzyme, to break down the bone.

From a gross anatomical perspective, most bones have a well-organized thick outer shell known as the cortex, which is made up of the osteons. The inner portion of these bones is trabecular, meaning beam-like and appearing as a meshwork, especially at the epiphyses.  It is also sometimes referred to as cancellous bone or somewhat erroneously as “spongy” bone. The mesh-like quality allows for spaces to exist in which to house bone marrow interlaced with mineralized bone tissue, which allows for utilization of the space inside the bone for the crucial task of erythropoiesis while maintaining structural integrity. In a healthy adult, the ratio of cortical to trabecular bone is approximately 80:20. The vertebrae are the only bones that lack a true cortex and are entirely covered by a dense trabecular network. All bones are surrounded by the periosteum which plays a role in perfusion and supply of nutrition to the outer third segment of bone, in addition to the innervation. The rest of the bone receives blood supply via the Volkmann’s canals, which penetrate the cortex and supply the inner two-thirds of cortical bone and the marrow cavity.

Bones fall into three general classifications: flat bones, short bones, and long bones. Long bones evolve via the process of endochondral ossification (see: embryology). Long bones vary in size from the long femur to the short digital bones of the phalanx. They are typically tubular and are longer than they are wide, having several distinct anatomical zones. These three zones are the diaphysis, or shaft, the epiphysis, or the ends, and the metaphysis, the region in between the two. The diaphysis contains the medulla of the bone, which houses bone marrow. The marrow is the primary tissue responsible for the production of erythrocytes, leukocytes, and platelets. The epiphysis is the terminal end of the long bone that is typically responsible for articulation. It is also the primary source of red bone marrow in long bones, which allows erythropoiesis. The metaphysis is the region of the bone that contains the epiphyseal plate in children, which is responsible for growth as it remains cartilaginous until after puberty. After ossification in adulthood, the metaphysis is primarily responsible for transferring load bearing from the epiphysis to the diaphysis.

Short bones evolve from the same cellular precursors as long bones, but they are not structurally similar. The short bones often take distinct shapes, for example, the carpal bones in the wrist.

Flat bones form by a process called intramembranous ossification (see: embryology). These bones also tend to have unique, plate-like shapes such as the sternum or the fused bones of the skull.