The discovery of phosphodiesterase 5 inhibitors (PDE5 inhibitors) for causing the erection of the penis was accidental, noticed as a side effect while being administered to investigate their ability to treat hypertension and angina. Erectile dysfunction has become an extremely prevalent concern, with recent figures estimating that about 320 million will encounter the disorder by 2025.

- **Erectile Dysfunction**: They are recommended as the first-line treatment for ED due to psychogenic, vascular, and neuropathic causes when combined with etiology-specific therapy.

- **Idiopathic Pulmonary Hypertension**: Abundant PDE-5 receptors in the pulmonary vasculature make PDE5 inhibitors important for managing pulmonary hypertension. These drugs are preferred in patients with NYHA class 2 or 3 with negative acute vasodilator response. They are not indicated in patients with NYHA class 4, where prostacyclin agonists like epoprostenol and iloprost are more appropriate.

- **Premature Ejaculation (PE) associated with erectile dysfunction:**PDE5 inhibitors effectively manage premature ejaculation associated with erectile dysfunction but not in patients with PE alone. PDE5 receptors get expressed throughout the contractile tissue of the male reproductive tract and the accessory glands, and their inhibition increases the ejaculatory latency.

- **High Altitude Illness:**Treatment with sildenafil has been shown to reduce the incidence of pulmonary hypertension in people with altitude-induced high pulmonary systolic arterial pressure, but no improvement in arterial oxygen saturation, heart rate, and acute mountain sickness.

- **Penile Rehabilitation after Radical Prostatectomy:**Early use of sildenafil after radical prostatectomy has been found beneficial in treating ED post RP due to neuro-regenerative effects on the cavernous nerve, which usually gets damaged in the procedure.

- **Antianginal:**Brought into the market as an antianginal initially, these drugs, through strong evidence obtained from certain studies, have been shown to reduce mortality due to major cardiovascular events in people with diabetes through their effects on endothelial function.

- **Lower Urinary Tract Symptoms (LUTS):**LUTS precipitates due to benign prostatic hyperplasia (BPH) with simultaneous erectile dysfunction. These drugs reduce the symptoms of hesitancy, urgency, and frequency due to an obstructive cause in patients with the simultaneous presence of ED. These drugs have not shown any advantage in combating LUTS symptoms alone. When used in combination with alpha-blockers, they had similar or inferior outcomes compared to alpha-blockers alone.

Following are the indications where emerging evidence has revealed the advantages of using PDE5 inhibitors, but more research, particularly on human subjects, is necessary to understand their efficacy:

- **Heart Failure:**PDE5 inhibitors have reduced cardiac hypertrophy in mouse and canine models. Due to the presence of PDE5 receptors in myocardial tissue, their manipulation can subsequently be beneficial for modifying the progression of numerous heart diseases.

- **Stroke:**Recent animal studies have observed decreased infarct size and increased protection against ischemic reperfusion injury by markedly increasing cGMP levels and angiogenesis if PDE5 inhibitors are administered 24 hours after stroke.

- **Peripheral neuropathy:**A report was published suggesting that daily use of PDE5 inhibitors, through improved blood flow through vasa vasorum, helped alleviate peripheral neuropathy symptoms.

- **Improving fertility**- Oral administration of PDE5Is has been shown to increase the motility of sperms in infertile men with oligospermia but, surprisingly, did not affect normal patients.

- **Peripheral Arterial Disease (PAD):**Chronic administration of PDE5 inhibitors has shown to improve walking distance in patients with the peripheral arterial disease (PAD), likely through manipulating the NO pathway. It has also demonstrated a reduction in the incidence of digital ulcers in patients with systemic sclerosis.

- **Diabetic Nephropathy:**PDE5 inhibitor's role in diabetic nephropathy has been the target of a few studies through improving insulin sensitivity and reducing the severity of albuminuria observed in nephropathy.