An iron panel is ordered to diagnose disorders of iron metabolism. Tests on the iron panel include; fasting serum iron, TIBC, percentage transferrin saturation, or iron saturation, and serum ferritin. In addition to this, physicians order a complete blood picture and reticulocyte count as well, usually when anemia is suspected.

**Specimen**

A whole blood sample of the patient is collected as part of an anemia workup and iron panel evaluation. The following steps should be followed by the healthcare worker when drawing a blood sample.

- Explain the procedure to the patient and ask for consent.

- Use a new pair of gloves for each patient.

- Clean the skin over the cubital fossa of the patient with an antiseptic in a spiral fashion, moving from the center to the periphery.

- Tie a tourniquet around the patient’s arm.

- Once the vein becomes prominent, insert the needle.

- After collecting the blood sample, untie the tourniquet, and remove the needle gently.

- Apply a bandaid or cotton piece dipped in antiseptic over the puncture site.

- Correctly label the blood sample before sending it for analysis.

For UIBC, the blood sample should not be hemolyzed. A fasting specimen is recommended. Bilirubin and lipemia offer no interference with UIBC.

For iron, no interferences are offered by lipemia, bilirubin of less than 30 mg/dL, or hemolysis. Serum should be separated within 2 hours after collection. It should be taken care that separated serum should not remain at +15 degrees C to +30 degrees C longer than 8 hours. In case of a delay of more than 8 hours, the serum should be stored at +2 degrees C to +8 degrees C. If the serum sample is to be stored beyond 48 hours, samples should be frozen at –15 degrees C to –20 degrees C. Frozen samples should be thawed only once. Deterioration of samples may occur if they are repeatedly frozen and thawed. It is recommended that samples be drawn in the morning due to diurnal variation. Oral contraceptives can elevate iron or TIBC values. When required, the samples should be stored in borosilicate glass or plastic containers.