Vigabatrin administration is via oral powder and tablets for adults and older children and a solution for infants and younger children.  Tablets and sachets of powder are available in a dose of 500 mg. The solution requires dissolving 500 mg powder of vigabatrin (available form in the market) in 10 ml water to achieve a 50 mg/ml concentration. The dose is then calculated for the weight in kg and is administered in two divided doses daily.

The FDA recommends an initial dose of 50 mg/kg/day for infantile spasms and can be increased to a maximum of 150 mg/kg/day over three days if not achieving adequate control of spasms.

To treat refractory complex partial seizures, the initial dose is 250 mg BID for children aged 10 to 16 years weighing 25 to 60 kg, followed by a maintenance dose of 1000 mg BID. In patients older than 16 years and weighing more than 60 kg, the maintenance dose could be increased to 3000 mg/day. The FDA has not approved an appropriate dose for children younger than ten years - the dosing can be extrapolated from that of adults depending on how well the seizures are controlled.

**Pharmacokinetics**

- Absorption: Complete absorption occurs after oral administration.

- Time of peak plasma concentration: 1 hour

- Distribution: It does not bind to plasma proteins, and is widely distributed.

- Plasma Protein Binding: Negligible

- Metabolism: Not sufficiently metabolized in the liver

- Excretion: The majority (95%) of unchanged drug is excreted in the urine.

**Specific Patients Population**

- **Patient with Hepatic Impairment:**Given that vigabatrin is almost eliminated by kidneys (80 to 95%) without undergoing hepatic metabolism, dose adjustment is not necessary for patients with hepatic failure.

- **Patient with Renal Impairment:**Caution is necessary while administering vigabatrin in patients with renal impairment since it is a drug that is eliminated by the kidneys without undergoing any prior metabolism. Creatinine clearance (CrCl) is inversely proportional to the serum concentration of vigabatrin.
- In patients with mild renal failure (CrCl 50 to 80 mL/min), the dose of vigabatrin should be reduced by 25%.
- For moderate renal failure (CrCl 30 to 50 mL/min) a further reduction to 50% is necessary.
- If renal failure is severe (CrCl 10 to 30 mL/min), the dose must be reduced by three-fourth.

- **Pregnant Women:**It is considered as pregnancy category C medicine. Due to its potential visual side effects, the therapy should start with caution after carefully evaluating risk-benefit analysis.

- **Breastfeeding Women:**Small amount of drug presence in milk for dose up to 2000 mg. Until more information is available, vigabatrin therapy should be used with caution in breastfeeding women.

- **Pediatric Patients:**The clearance of vigabatrin is 5.1 and 5.8 L/hr for children (3 to 9 years of age) and adolescents (10 to 16 years of age), respectively. The clearance is about 7 L/hr for adults. It is recommended to use the lowest dose that can help achieve therapeutic objectives.

- **Geriatric Patients:**As per the manufacturer label, renal clearance of vigabatrin in healthy geriatric patients (age 65 years or older) was 36% less compared to healthy adults.