**Injection Sclerotherapy**

Utilizes chemical irritants to obliterate unwanted superficial veins. Sclerotherapy primarily applies to small nonaxial varicose veins with less than 6 mm diameter. For aesthetic reasons, sclerotherapy might be indicated in symptomatic and even asymptomatic varicose veins.

Recently, the cyanoacrylate glue application has been the popular and preferred way to treat chronic venous insufficiency with varicose veins. This technique has several advantages, including the short duration of a minimally-invasive procedure lack of need for anesthesia induction.

**Conservative Treatments**

Most patients obtain adequate symptom relief using long-term graduated compression stockings, leg elevation, and oral pain medications. For compression rates, the recommended graduation is 20-30 mmHg and, in more severe cases, can be elevated to 30-40 mmHg.

**Surgical Treatment**

Traditional surgical treatment consisted of ligation and stripping the greater saphenous vein with the avulsion of tributary veins.

Surgical techniques involve ligation and/or removal of the veins; however, the method selection is based on the location, size, and extent of the venous involvement with or without venous reflux. Unilateral surgery in bilateral limb involvement is recommended to avoid the risk of post-operative limitations and intolerance.

In the case of saphenous vein stripping, complete skin exposure and meticulous hygiene concerns are respected. The lower extremity is prepared and draped circumferentially from the anterior superior iliac spine to the ankle. Since several skin markings are needed, alcohol-containing skin preparation is discouraged. In the presence of venous ulceration, skin preparation for the skin overlying the ulcer should be undertaken in the last step. The ulcers should be excluded from the sterile surgical field with drapes. According to the potential for significant blood loss during the surgery, specifically in the large tortuous veins, tourniquet application has been recommended.

**Saphenous vein inversion and removal**A transverse incision of up to 2 cm is made over the saphenofemoral junction, preferably marked with a Duplex scan, 3 cm peripheral to the pubic tubercle.

Consequently, a retrograde vein stripper is passed caudally. Smooth passage regarding the incompetent venous valve is expected. The distal end of the vein stripper is pulled out adjacent to the patella, while the proximal end is secured in the groin. Mushroom tips are discouraged due to the potential for extensive tissue damage and bleeding. Venous marsupialization and removal would be followed consequently. The procedure is completed with the disruption of the tributary veins followed by precise hemostasis with direct pressure and groin incision closure in multiple layers. Inversion and removal are also indicated in the small saphenous varicose vein. However, potential neurovascular bundle complications during popliteal fossa dissection and sural nerve injury should be considered.

**High saphenous ligation**Albeit the ligation of the saphenous vein at the saphenofemoral junction is introduced, the technique is less encouraged due to the higher recurrence rate, persistent symptoms, and occurrence of distal superficial thrombophlebitis.

**Ambulatory Phlebectomy**

The procedure implies the excision and avulsion of the involved superficial vein with multiple skip incisions. Multiple options exist for managing varicose veins, including a combination of the procedure with saphenous inversion. Punctures are made with an 18 gauge needle or an 11-blade scalpel. Punctures are made adjacent to the target vein. Sequential venous sections are ligated and avulsed. Post-procedural hemorrhage is controlled with direct pressure application and limb elevation.

**Transilluminated Powered Phlebectomy**

The technique is less commonly used compared to the other minimally-invasive procedures for venous ablation. The procedure is undertaken in three discrete steps under general or regional anesthesia with a mixture of saline, lidocaine, and epinephrine. The procedure starts with hydrodissection of the involved veins, followed by the introduction of the illumination device and vein maceration and aspiration through the second incision. The procedure relies on applying a mechanical aspirator labeled transilluminated powered phlebectomy (TIPP).

**Endovascular Management**

Catheter-based endovenous ablations have been extensively used for EVTL, either via laser or radiofrequency. The procedure is preferably undertaken with local anesthetics. However, oral anxiolytics might be added for apprehensive patients. A catheter is introduced in an antegrade fashion for a few centimeters away from the saphenofemoral or saphenopopliteal junction. The catheter course within the saphenous vein is completely anesthetized. Next, the saphenous vein would be ablated by either heat energy or radiofrequency during the catheter withdrawal.