Exercise contributes significantly to maternal and fetal wellbeing during pregnancy. Traditionally women were advised to refrain from exercise during pregnancy, but newer evidence has shown this to be false. Theoretically, there were concerns about premature labor and the risks of delivering smaller infants to women who exercised during pregnancy. A recent meta-analysis that included over 2000 women showed that aerobic exercise and moderate-intensity strength/toning exercise performed 3 or 4 days per week throughout the pregnancy was not associated with an increased risk for preterm births or low birth weight infants for normal-weight women with singleton, uncomplicated pregnancies. Despite recommendations from physicians to begin or maintain an exercise program during pregnancy, only about 40% of the patients exercise. A pregnant patient can be easily motivated to improve her health and the health of her unborn child. Still, these recommendations need to be practical, with persistent follow-up by the physician. Physical exercise can help with some common discomforts and even prepare one's body for labor and delivery.

A sedentary lifestyle during pregnancy is associated with the significant health risk of deep venous thrombosis, which threatens the lives of the infant and mother. A sedentary lifestyle can lead to obesity or at least significantly contribute to persistent obesity. Obesity is of epidemic proportions in the U.S., and obesity during pregnancy carries elevated risks for major complications. Patients with obesity are also more likely to suffer spontaneous abortions. They also have a higher risk of neural tube defects, including cleft palate, spina bifida, and hydrocephalus. Obesity also puts the pregnant patient at risk for gestational diabetes, preeclampsia, sleep apnea, macrosomia, preterm birth, and even stillbirth.  The higher the women's BMI, the greater the risk of stillbirth. Exercise is safe in these women and is encouraged. Even the previously sedentary patient is encouraged to start an exercise program early in pregnancy. It is also considered safe in some high-risk pregnancies, such as those with chronic hypertension and gestational diabetes. Contraindications will be discussed later.