The evaluation of any trauma patient begins with evaluating the airway, accessing the breathing, and managing the circulation. The diagnosis of intra-abdominal injury following blunt trauma depends primarily on the hemodynamic status of the patient. If the patient is hemodynamically stable, CT scan is the ideal test to look for solid organ injury in the abdomen and pelvis. For unstable patients, one may perform an ultrasound (Extended Focused Assessment with Sonography for Trauma (EFAST)) or diagnostic peritoneal lavage, both of which are associated with a high rate of false negatives and false positives.

All indications for trauma ultrasound include blunt or penetrating trauma to the torso where there is a suspicion of intraperitoneal hemorrhage, pericardial tamponade, and hemothorax.

The****Extended Focused Assessment with Sonography for Trauma**(EFAST)**exam includes the following views:

1. **RUQ (right upper quadrant)**

- One should evaluate for free fluid in Morison's pouch or the hepatorenal space, the lower pole of the kidney and the space below the diaphragm on the right. In the supine patient, the hepatorenal space is the most dependent area and the least obstructed for fluid flow. Fluid in the abdomen can move freely to the right pericolic gutter into this space.

2. **Perisplenic space LUQ (left upper quadrant)**

- One should visualize the diaphragm and the entire spleen

- Check above the diaphragm for signs of free fluid in the left hemithorax. On the left, fluid flows preferentially into the subphrenic area and not into the splenorenal area,  which is important because the subphrenic area may be difficult to visualize due to bowel gas and splenic flexure gas.

3. **Pelvis (bladder)**

- One should visualize interface w/ the rectum, prostate, or uterus.

- Additionally, a second image can be viewed in a longitudinal plane.

- Fluid in the pelvic region flows to the microvesicular area in the male patient and the pouch of Douglas in the female patient because these areas are the most dependent areas of the pelvis.

4. **Cardiac view:**Subcostal or any other cardiac view. See below

5**. Normal Lung: **Lung sliding back and forth is normally secondary to the normal anatomy of the parietal and visceral pleural movement.  As well,  the pleura moves with respect to the ribs+Comet tail artifacts.

Pneumothorax: With a pneumothorax, there is NO lung sliding back and forth. you will note the pleura and ribs move together. There will be NO comet tail artifacts.

**CARDIAC**

**Subxiphoid four-chamber**

Both the anterior and posterior pericardium should be visualized for anterior or posterior fluid in the pericardium.

- Parasternal views should be attempted if the subxiphoid view is not adequate.

- Both the anterior and posterior pericardium should be visualized.

**Parasternal long axis (PSLA)**

- Both the anterior and posterior pericardium should be visualized.

- In the ideal plane, the mitral and aortic valves will be visible, as well as a long view of the left ventricle.

**Parasternal short axis (PSSA)**

- The left ventricle will appear as a ring, with the right ventricle more anterior.

**Apical Four-chamber**

- Though rarely useful in the emergency department, this view allows easy comparison of left and right ventricles.

- All four chambers should be visible in this plan.