# Introduction

Tetramethylenedisulfoteramine (tetramine) is a rodenticide that causes severe neurotoxicity. Though internationally banned, tetramine is still manufactured. There are numerous cases of poisoning, especially in rural areas. This agent is available through illicit markets in multiple countries and is relatively inexpensive.

Due to its chemical stability, ease of production, lack of taste or smell, and rapid onset of toxicity, tetramine has been discussed as a possible candidate for a chemical threat agent.

# Etiology

Tetramine is an inexpensive rodenticide frequently sold outside the United States, where it is manufactured. Due to the regulations around its manufacture, sale, and ownership, it is sometimes purchased from illegal vendors.

# Epidemiology

Tetramine synthesis was first documented in Germany in 1949. The substance's toxicity was discovered through occupational exposure to rayon fabric-impregnated flame retardants. Upholstery workers exposed to the fabric experienced multiple symptoms, including seizures. Further investigation confirmed that the flame retardant agents in the fabric (sulfamide and formaldehyde) reacted and formed tetramine.

Most documented cases are in China, with more than 14,000 instances reported between 1991 and 2010.

No intentional poisoning cases have been documented in the United States. A notable case in China occurred when a food vendor poisoned his competitor's food with a tetramine rodenticide. In all, 300 customers were poisoned, and 42 deaths occurred.

Due to its use in rural areas as an effective rodenticide, mass exposures are common in the countryside. In 2001, 200 individuals were exposed to tetramine in a rural area. In addition, due to the stability of tetramine in water for 6 weeks, there have been concerns that poisoned rats eaten by roaming dogs in rural areas may have toxic concentrations in their tissues through bioaccumulation.

# Pathophysiology

Tetramine is a noncompetitive GABAa channel antagonist, blocking this inhibitory chloride channel. Early studies noted similarities between tetramine and picrotoxin, another noncompetitive GABAa inhibitor. The chemical is classified as a cage convulsant based on its structure. The GABAa receptor is a pentameric structure composed of different subunits. Due to the potential variability in subunit composition and genetic variances within subunits, there is a large amount of heterogeneity in the subunit composition of the GABAa receptor in vertebrates.

Tetramine has a different affinity for different subunits, and further studies of this have noted that inhibition is incomplete, with a wide range of inhibition (46%-85%) dependent on the subunit makeup of the receptor it is inhibiting.

Tetramine also affects calcium dynamics in neurons and the frequency of spontaneous calcium oscillations.

# Toxicokinetics

Tetramine has the chemical formula C4H8NO4S2, and its chemical name is tetramethylenedisulfoteramine. Other names include TMDT, TETS, Dushuqiang (very strong rat poison), 4-2-4, and Sanbudado (takes 3 steps and keels over).

Tetramine is odorless, colorless, and persistent in the body and the environment.

Thus, symptom onset is rapid, with most cases showing toxicity within 30 minutes of ingestion.

# History and Physical

History should attempt to ascertain the amount of tetramine ingested and the time of ingestion. The possibility of co-ingestants should also be shown. The symptomatic onset is rapid. The physical exam should focus on the neurologic evaluation. Physical exam findings are generally nonspecific. Animal models suggest lethargy and tremor as early toxicity signs.

Common symptoms reported from minor toxicity include headache, nausea, vomiting, dizziness, and hallucinations.

Given the rapid nature of toxicity development, the patient may present in status epilepticus to the hospital setting, and other symptoms might not be prevalent by the time the patient arrives.

# Evaluation

Diagnosis is mainly clinical, and the primary managing team must maintain a high index of suspicion for tetramine toxicity. There are case reports of documented electroencephalography (EEG) changes, including diffuse slow waves, spike-and-slow waves, and sharp and slow waves in children.

Multiple studies describe diagnostic testing; however, these tests are not readily available, limiting their benefit in the clinical setting. Gas chromatography with nitrogen phosphorous detection is described as a sensitive technique to detect tetramine.

No pathognomonic findings are reported on CT imaging or MRI for tetramine toxicity.

Findings on autopsy note lung edema and congestion in all documented cases.

# Treatment / Management

Universal precautions are recommended to limit exposure to healthcare providers. As stated earlier, tetramine is unlikely to be absorbed through intact skin.

Treatment should be started as early as possible as tetramine is rapidly absorbed after oral ingestion, and neurotoxicity occurs suddenly.

**Gastric Decontamination**

In acute confirmed ingestions, it is reasonable to consider gastric decontamination. The LD50 of tetramine is such that decreasing absorption may mitigate toxicity. However, no robust data or human studies suggest mortality benefits. Regardless, gastric lavage has been reported as a recommended treatment by clinicians with experience treating tetramine poisoning.

An animal study on the effects of activated charcoal use in tetramine-poisoned rabbits demonstrated a decrease in the elimination half-life by 55% and a reduction in the area under the curve by 70%, indicating tetramine is readily bound by activated charcoal.

There are no studies on biliary recirculation, and the benefit of multi-dose activated charcoal is unclear.

**Pharmacologic Treatment**

A distinctive characteristic of tetramine toxicity is refractory seizures. Multiple classes of drugs have been studied in animals with variable effects. Aggressive and early escalating treatment is recommended regardless of the agents chosen to treat tetramine toxicity. In a case series of 15 patients with tetramine toxicity, the authors advocate for early mechanical ventilation to avoid any hesitancy in escalating treatment with benzodiazepines.

**Benzodiazepines**

Benzodiazepines are one of the more common agents used in reported cases. Molecular studies demonstrated midazolam had the best inhibition of tetramine binding to the GABA receptor compared to diazepam and phenobarbitol. However, this has not been studied in humans.

**Sedative Hypnotics**

Early animal studies suggest aggressive sedative therapy with an agent such as phenobarbital is beneficial.

Molecular studies suggested propofol appears to have similar efficacy as midazolam in blocking tetramine binding to the GABA receptor.

**NMDA Receptor Inhibitors**

Ketamine was studied in mice, and with higher doses (70 mg/kg intraperitoneal), convulsions decreased, and the 60-minute death rate was decreased.

**Adjuncts**

Where tetramine cases are more commonly seen, treatment adjuncts are used frequently. Randomized controlled trials in humans for these adjuncts are lacking, and reports of the effects are limited to animal studies and case reports/series.

**Pyridoxine**

Vitamin B6 has been reported as a helpful adjunct in cases of tetramine toxicity. Data is limited on efficacy, and the exact mechanism is unclear. As previously mentioned, tetramine is a noncompetitive inhibitor of the GABAa receptor. Pyridoxine is used in other poisons that cause neurotoxicity, such as gyromitra and isoniazid toxicity. These agents contribute to seizures by depleting the active form of pyridoxine, pyridoxal 5-phosphate, an essential cofactor in GABA formation. Animal studies have demonstrated that pyridoxine combined with sodium 2,3-dimercaptopropanesulfonate (DMPS) decreased convulsions.

**Sodium 2,3-dimercaptopropanesulfonate (DMPS)**

DMPS, a chelating agent for heavy metals, has been suggested as a treatment modality for tetramine-poisoned patients. In addition to being used as a combination treatment with pyridoxine, animal studies demonstrated the potential benefit of DMPS alone. Proposed mechanisms involve the sulfhydryl groups and their ability to modulate the function of various ion channels. Rat studies showed decreased convulsions with DMPS alone due to the potentiation of GABA at the receptor site.

**Medication Adjuncts Under Investigation**

**Neurosteroids**

Neurosteroids are another class of drugs undergoing research as a treatment for tetramine toxicity. Neurosteroids interact with GABAa receptors both in the synaptic cleft and at extrasynaptic GABAa receptors, the latter of which are not sensitive to benzodiazepines.

In addition to the modulating effects of neurosteroids, there appears to be a synergistic effect of benzodiazepines and neurosteroids. Combination therapy of diazepam and allopregnanolone (a neurosteroid used to treat postpartum depression) demonstrated normalization of tetramine-induced synchronous calcium oscillations in rodents and improved survival from ten percent to 90%.

**Extracorporeal Removal**

Extracorporeal removal of tetramine has been implemented in many instances of poisoning through various modalities, including plasma exchange, hemodialysis (HD), high volume hemofiltration (HVHF), continuous venovenous hemofiltration (CVVH), and charcoal hemoperfusion. There have not been large comparison studies in humans. Expert opinion on this as a treatment is mixed, and recommendations vary.

Charcoal hemoperfusion appears to be the more common modality, as studies have demonstrated that this method does remove tetramine from the body quickly. A two-hour session removed 1 mg of tetramine (measured from the perfusion device) when the initial plasma concentration was 100 mcg/L.

There are conflicting reports concerning extracorporeal removal. Some studies document pre-filtration and post-filtration concentrations in patients and note no significant change in concentration, bringing into question the efficacy of extracorporeal removal.

Given the distribution of tetramine throughout the body, this observation is thought to be more likely due to the redistribution of tetramine from body tissues into the serum, as studies have documented that tetramine is removed by charcoal hemoperfusion by directly analyzing the filter contents.

A case of a patient that received high-volume hemofiltration seven days after poisoning noted a decrease in tetramine concentration from 0.95 mcg/mL to 0.35 mcg/mL. The following day the serum concentration rebounded to 0.53 mcg/mL, and charcoal hemoperfusion was performed, lowering the concentration to 0.40 mcg/mL.

Serum rebound is frequently reported in published cases. Thus, additional sessions may be indicated. Eighteen patients received hemoperfusion followed by CVVH, which was more effective at removing tetramine.

**Extracorporeal Removal on Long-term Outcomes**

A case series of 17 children with an unintentional ingestion of tetramine compared outcome differences in those that received charcoal hemoperfusion and those that did not; the non-hemoperfusion group had a higher incidence of seizures.

EEG abnormalities were monitored at regular intervals, and the hemoperfusion group had a resolution of EEG abnormalities at six months, whereas the non-hemoperfusion group took a year to recover. This same study noted a quicker time to recovery in individuals that received multiple occurrences of hemoperfusion.

# Differential Diagnosis

- Sodium monofluoroacetate toxicity

- Stimulant abuse

- Isoniazid toxicity

- Organophosphate compound toxicity

- Serotonin toxicity

- Hydrazine toxicity

- Hypoglycemia

- Severe electrolyte derangements

# Prognosis

Left untreated, severe tetramine toxicity is invariably fatal. With rapid and aggressive escalating treatment, mortality is notably diminished. In an observational study of confirmed cases in China from 2000 to 2012, there were 3526 cases and 225 deaths (6%).

# Complications

Complications surrounding tetramine toxicity are neurological in nature. Pediatric studies have documented prolonged EEG changes after treatment.

Seizures are a common complication after the acute toxicity phase. A follow-up study of 370 previously healthy poisoning survivors noted that 55% had seizures at follow-up. Of those who were seizure-free at the follow-up, most had been placed on antiepileptic medication initially and were seizure-free off the drug by an average of 2.3 years. Of the remaining 195 patients with seizures, most experienced tonic-clonic seizures, while the minority (39) had partial seizures.

It should be noted that a small number of patients with minor toxicity experience long-term complications of seizures without having seizures at the initial presentation. At follow-up in the previous observational study, all of these patients continued to have seizures.

# Postoperative and Rehabilitation Care

After discharge from the hospital, patients will likely need close neurology follow-up and monitoring as they may continue to have seizures. Sodium valproate has been used in these patients. However, there has been no comparison study on antiepileptics to control the sequela of seizures in tetramine-poisoned patients.

# Consultations

Consultation with a medical toxicologist or the regional poison center is often necessary.

# Deterrence and Patient Education

Preventative education is critical to minimizing tetramine poisoning. This toxin's effectiveness, low cost, and stability make it an appealing rodenticide. However, safer, legal alternatives should be used.

# Enhancing Healthcare Team Outcomes

An interprofessional healthcare team, consisting of emergency department clinicians, toxicology specialists, and intensive care professionals, is crucial for the optimal management of tetramine poisoning. Early and aggressive treatment of seizures and appropriate sedation should be implemented. The long-term sequelae and multi-organ effects of tetramine poisoning are believed to be primarily associated with refractory seizures. While there have been case reports and promising results in animal models regarding the use of adjunct medications and elimination techniques, the lack of human data prevents routine recommendation of these interventions. Consulting a toxicologist or regional poison center is advised to consider these treatments.