Patients need to be informed about the procedure in detail in a separate clinic visit before the procedure. Details should include procedural steps, benefits of the procedure, contraindications and potential complications, and alternative therapies. All patients must discontinue anticoagulation for the appropriate length of time before the procedure.  Patients should be advised to visit a primary care provider to bridge to short-acting anticoagulants in more complex situations.

Procedural clearance should be obtained in patients with cardiovascular diseases. These patients should be advised not to eat for 6 to 8 hours prior to the clearance appointment. Diabetic patients may require dose adjustment for insulin and oral hypoglycemic medications. Accurate medication reconciliation, including allergies, should be performed before the procedure. Activities like driving or operating machinery should be avoided for at least 24 hours after the procedure. A detailed informed consent discussion between the patient and the attending physician should precede the procedure. Consent documentation should include the patient's name and identification, such as medical record number, age, and preferred gender. The procedure site should be marked. A technician should make sure the equipment is in proper working order. A time-out should be performed when the patient is on the procedure table, in the presence of all the involved personnel, to ascertain that the correct patient is undergoing the correct procedure in the correct location. Thorough aseptic precautions and the use of a sterile procedure tray are standard procedures.