What is the function of learning appropriate pain management in the context of diverse cultural care? Cultural beliefs regarding pain and death influence the patient and family’s preferences for palliative care. While there have been variations in defining “palliative care,” the Center to Advance Palliative Care (CAPC) offers the most structured definition: “Palliative care, and the medical subspecialty of palliative medicine is specialized medical care for people living with serious illness. It focuses on providing relief from the symptoms and stress of a serious illness. The goal is to improve the quality of life for both the patient and the family. Palliative care is provided by a team of palliative care doctors, nurses, social workers, and others who work together

**Quality-of-Care Issues**

In the ideal world, discussion of advance directives should take place with the patients when they are not in crisis. The early introduction of palliative care may help clarify the patient’s goals of care and pain/symptom management preferences.

**Barriers to Palliative Care Utilization**

- The lack of resources

- The lack of knowledge about existing resources, or the provider’s reluctance to refer

- Misunderstandings of the scope and value of palliative care

- Provider bias, which includes a reluctance to refer

- Patient or family barriers created by the reluctance

- Restrictive specialist palliative care service program eligibility criteria

The number of U.S. hospitals offering palliative care services has been proliferating for over a decade.

The 2015 report card shows an increase in the number of hospital palliative care teams in the United States, with 67% of U.S. hospitals (more than 50 beds) reporting palliative care teams, an increase of 10% from 53% of hospitals reporting the same in 2008.

**The Aging Population**

Greater than one-third of Medicare patients with advanced chronic illness experience four transitions in care during their last year of life. The majority of deaths are attributable to common diagnoses: congestive heart failure, chronic lung disease, cancer, coronary artery disease, renal failure, peripheral vascular disease, diabetes, chronic liver disease, and dementia. Their disease trajectory is chronic and progressive in the setting of advancing disease, which is incurable and will eventually reach a point of maximal medical therapies with little to no benefit and continued failure. Palliative care teams provide consultation services to help manage complicated patients in acute, sub-acute, and chronic illness settings. They focus on strong communication with the patient/family, primary and specialty teams, and the interprofessional team.

**Cultural Considerations**

The practitioner must be aware that it is considered inappropriate and culturally insensitive to discuss impending death in many cultures. Healthcare providers should consider the beliefs of the family and patients before approaching individuals with poor prognoses. While religion and spirituality have a tremendous influence on healthcare decisions made by patients, many health professionals may not consider this factor or the functional impact it may have on the evaluation and treatment of pain and palliative care.

Lack of understanding of the beliefs of patients and families can potentially damage the patient-provider relationship.

Many cultures also have distinct cultural beliefs regarding the meaning, origin, and role of pain, which can affect how a patient interprets and perceives pain.

- African, Asian, Chinese, East Indian, Hispanic, Indonesian, Japanese, Native American, and Vietnamese families may request providers not to disclose a terminal diagnosis as they want to avoid emotional suffering and preserve hope.

- For Christian Scientists, Hinduism, Jehovah’s Witnesses, Mormons, Muslims, and Seventh-day Adventists, it is considered contrary to the church’s teachings to euthanasia and possible use of drugs that may hasten death.

- Members of the Buddha religion may not want any drugs that cloud the mind near death.

- Taiwanese may believe that bad luck occurs if one discusses impending death out loud and, as a result, avoid discussing death to tempt fate.

Practitioners often describe a family’s reluctance to discuss palliative issues with patients as a barrier to appropriately managing pain in a dying patient. Further, health practitioners may misinterpret an unwillingness to discuss impending death as a refusal of appropriate pain management. Learning both proper pain management and cultural sensitivity goes a long way towards providing a more functional environment and better patient and family care at this most sensitive time.

**Cultural Pain Differences**

- Chinese people may believe pain results from an imbalance between yin and yang.

- Some cultures believe they should endure pain bravely and serve as a role model, perhaps to improve their standing in life after death.

- Some cultures may believe pain may be a sign of progress toward recovery.

- Some cultures, such as American Indian, Asian, Black, Hispanic, are very stoic regarding pain and may maintain a neutral facial expression despite being in severe pain.

- Some religions may believe pain is a part of God’s plan, a test of faith, or penance for past sins.

The net effect of cultural differences in pain response often results in over or underestimation of the severity of pain in some patient populations. In particular, a decreased pain expression by a patient may be viewed as an absence of pain by health professionals, resulting in the under-treatment of pain.