The normal esophagus has 3 primary areas of physiologic narrowing: the upper esophageal sphincter (UES) which includes the cricopharyngeus muscle, the middle esophagus where the esophagus crosses over the aortic arch, and the lower esophageal sphincter (LES). In children, approximately 74% of foreign bodies are entrapped at the UES level. In adults, approximately 68% of obstructions occur at the distal esophagus associated with pathologic abnormalities.

Possible complications include local injury to the mucosa, such as abrasion, lacerations, necrosis, and stricture formation. Other serious complications include injury beyond the esophagus, such as airway obstruction, esophageal perforation, tracheoesophageal fistula, vascular injury (e.g., aortoesophageal fistula), retropharyngeal abscess, mediastinitis, pericarditis, or vocal cord injury.

Three special types of foreign body ingestions with a higher risk of complications are button batteries (also called “disc” or “coin” batteries), multiple magnets, and sharp-pointed objects.

If a button battery becomes impacted in the esophagus, an electrical current is created between the positive and negative poles. This current can cause thermal injury plus produce hydroxide ions with a rapid rise in the local pH resulting in a caustic alkaline injury. Injury begins within 15 minutes and can lead to a perforation in hours. Complications can include localized esophageal mucosal necrosis and chronic stricture formation. More serious complications involve esophageal perforation and erosion into adjacent structures such as the mediastinum, trachea, or vascular structures. Leinwand et al. reported 13 cases of serious complications, including 30.8% perforation, 23.1% stricture formation, and 23.1% mortality from aortoesophageal fistula formation and exsanguination. More than 90% of serious complications occurred in children 5 years old or younger, with batteries 20-mm diameter and greater and impactions for prolonged periods.

While a single, small, smooth magnet will usually pass without complications, multiple magnets create complications. Tissue may become trapped between the magnets leading to pressure ischemia, perforation, fistula formation, obstruction, or volvulus.

Sharp-pointed objects stuck in the esophagus also have a higher risk of perforation and need urgent removal.