LT joint injury can present asymptomatically or with gross deformity. An asymptomatic injury usually involves only an isolated assault to the LT ligament, which is often missed. The most common presentation is ulnar-sided pain in the proximal wrist with provocation during pronation and ulnar deviation. Patients may also present with decreased grip strength and a clicking noise with movement. A clue in history gathering can be participation in impact sports (football, hockey, rugby) or high energy injury. Often the history of the injury can occur more than a few weeks before presentation. The pain described is often constant with increased pain on provocation.

Upon examination, it is important to investigate the hand and forearm to identify other potential causes of the pain or co-injuries. In general, a physical exam that shows increased mobility of triquetrum in comparison to the lunate will likely be positive for LT joint instability. Almost always there will be point tenderness over the lunotriquetral joint. There are numerous described specific tests to evaluate this mobility more carefully. An important step in all of these tests is testing the contralateral wrist for comparison.

The LT shuck test or ballottement test is one of the most commonly used for diagnosis. It is performed by grasping the lunate and triquetrum between both thumbs and index fingers and applying alternating palmar and dorsal loads repeatedly. A positive exam will elicit pain, potentially a clicking noise, increased laxity, or crepitus.

Kleinman’s shear test is similar to the LT shuck test where the grasping locations are the same, but the test is performed by loading the triquetrum dorsally.

The LT compression test is performed by grasping the triquetrum and deviating it radially and ulnarly.

The click provocation test is performed by pronating the wrist after which ulnar deviation is added, and an axial compression load is applied.

The ulnar snuffbox test is a more specific localization method by palpation for tenderness which involves pressure between the extensor carpi ulnaris and flexor carpi ulnaris tendons.

Intra-articular steroid injection to the location has also been described as a test helpful for diagnosis if the injection relieved the pain patients are experiencing.