Legal requirements for medical directors vary by state. In most states, however, EMS medical directors are required to ensure EMT and paramedic compliance with system clinical guidelines and protocols as routine quality assurance. This does not ensure continuous quality improvement. While compliance is critical to ensure baseline performance, these performance indicators will likely be indicative of any necessary changes to implement. Essentially, baseline protocol compliance and quality assurance can be paired with quality improvement projects and initiatives to improve clinical outcomes

Some organizations have organized large-scale databases that can be used for both research and large-scale quality improvement. A commonly cited example is the Cardiac Arrest Registry to Enhance Survival (CARES) database. This database is designed to collect data regarding cardiac arrest outcomes with the goal of improving cardiac arrest survival. Prehospital data is paired with hospital outcomes for review. This data can be used at an agency level or extrapolated to large scale initiatives at the regional or state level through an integrated QI program, [

Quality improvement may also result in better integration of care from the prehospital to the hospital environment by ensuring that appropriate treatments begin in appropriate patients and that the treatments are evidence-based.  Operational improvement projects may also result in improved response times, improved on-scene times when appropriate, and safer work environment for medics.