The density of the lipoproteins is directly proportional to the protein content. Chylomicrons mobilize dietary lipids from the intestine to other tissues. They are the largest in size among the lipoproteins, are the least dense, and comprise about 80% of triacylglycerols. They are assembled in the enterocytes and via lacteals enter the systemic circulation. The apolipoproteins of chylomicrons include apoB-48, apoE, and apoC-II. Chylomicrons carry dietary fatty acids to various tissues, where they will be used for energy or storage. The remnants of chylomicrons containing cholesterol, apoE, and apoB-48, are cleared by the liver via remnant receptors.

When there are excess fatty acids and cholesterol, they are converted to triacylglycerols and cholesteryl esters respectively in the liver and packaged with apolipoproteins into VLDL. Excess carbohydrates can also be converted to triacylglycerols and can be transported as VLDL. VLDL also contains apoB-100, apoC-I, apoC-II, apoC-III, and apoE. VLDL is transported from the liver to various tissues via capillaries. In the tissues, lipoprotein lipase (LPL), activated by apoC-II, catalyzes the release of free fatty acids from the triacylglycerols present in the VLDL like with chylomicrons. ApoC-III inhibits  LPL. The free fatty acids are taken up by the adipose tissues, where they get stored as triacylglycerols. After the partial removal of the triacylglycerol, VLDL remnants (IDL) are formed. Further removal of triacylglycerol produces LDL, the end-product of VLDL metabolism. LDL contains predominantly cholesteryl esters and apoB-100. LDL carries cholesterol to various tissues such as the adrenal gland, gonads, muscle, and adipose tissue. All these tissues have LDL receptors on their plasma membranes that recognize apoB-100. The LDL particle is taken up by receptor-mediated endocytosis, as classically described by Goldstein and Brown.

In the cells, free cholesterol regulates HMG-CoA reductase, which is the rate-limiting step in cholesterol biosynthesis. Also, excess cholesterol is esterified and stored in the cell. The expression of the LDL receptor is finely regulated by the level of intracellular cholesterol to prevent excess cholesterol deposition. Macrophages also take up the modified lipoproteins to become foam cells. However, in macrophages, the uptake is through the scavenger receptors, which, unlike the LDL receptor, are not under feedback control by cellular cholesterol. The LDL not taken up by the cells and tissues returns to the liver via LDL receptors present on the membranes of hepatocytes. In the liver, cholesterol may be converted to bile acids or neutral sterols or re-esterified and stored in the liver.

The LDL particles are cleared from serum through the interaction with the LDL receptor. The outer membrane of the LDL contains a phospholipid monolayer, unesterified cholesterol, and Apo-B protein, whereas the inner core contains a highly nonpolar CE. The cholesterol is transported via blood and endocytosed in the target tissues via LDL receptor-mediated endocytosis. When LDL binds with its receptor in plasma membranes, small invaginations called caveolae, consisting of caveolin and the receptor proteins, are formed and endocytosed via clathrin-coated pits and vesicles. Once endocytosed, the LDL receptor recycles to the coated pits while the cholesterol is transported to lysosomes, where the hydrolases degrade the apo-B protein to amino acids and cleave the CE to cholesterol and fatty acids. The cholesterol is either incorporated into the cell membrane or reesterified and stored as lipid droplets via the action of ACAT. When mutations are present in the LDL receptor, normal uptake of LDL by the liver is impeded, leading to familial hypercholesterolemia (FH) with markedly increased LDL cholesterol levels, whose inheritance is autosomal dominant.

Numerous studies have shown a positive link between LDL-cholesterol and the composition of the circulating LDL and the risk for atherosclerotic cardiovascular diseases (ASCVD). The large buoyant LDL (lbLDL) comprises LDL1 (large) and LDL II (intermediate), whereas the small dense LDL (sdLDL) comprises LDL III (small) and LDL IV (very small).  The half-life of small dense (sdLDL) is greater than the large buoyant LDL (lbLDL). The elevated levels of sdLDL have been considered as a risk factor for ASCVD. Also, increased susceptibility of sdLDL to oxidation could be due to its lipid composition and a decrease in antioxidant moieties. sdLDL has been shown to contain less sialic acid content compared to buoyant LDL. Desialylation of sdLDL may result in a higher affinity to proteoglycans present in the arterial wall. Hence LDL trapped by proteoglycans in the sub-endothelial space lead to the formation of atherosclerotic plaque. ApoB lipoprotein present in sdLDL is more prone to glycation compared to the one present in lbLDL.