The routine newborn/infant examination involves a neurological assessment of muscle tone. Head and neck control is a critical component of that examination. Mild head lag is a common finding in newborns and usually resolves by itself; however, the presence of severe persistent head lag beyond 3 to 4 months of age typically points to disorders related to hypotonia and muscle weakness in infancy.

Specific attention must be given to pregnancy, birth history, post-natal period, developmental milestones, and family history. Perinatal risk factors include low gestational age, polyhydramnios, breech presentation, parental age, drug or teratogen exposure, consanguinity, maternal diseases (epilepsy/diabetes), congenital infections (TORCHES), or post-natal insults (sepsis and prolonged NICU stay).

A complete physical examination is necessary to assess for potential syndromes and other associated causes of infantile hypotonia. Dysmorphic features increase the chances of CNS dysfunction as an explanation for hypotonia, and a finding of ptosis is suggestive of neuromuscular junction disorders.

When assessing tone, it helps to keep the child relaxed, not crying, and alert. Truncal and nuchal tone examination is done using vertical and horizontal suspension tests. On horizontal suspension, the infant should maintain a straight back with the head upright and limbs flexed. On vertical suspension, a vigorous infant should keep the head upright while sitting. The degree of head lag is measured by how far the head falls posteriorly behind the shoulders during the pull-to-sit test.****

Head lag can be divided into three categories based on severity. Mild head lag is when the infant tries to maintain his/her head when pulled forward to a sitting position. Moderate head lag occurred when no effort was made to keep the head in an upright position while being pulled forward, but he/she could maintain the head position while sitting. Severe head lag is when an infant cannot raise his head during the pull-to-sit maneuver and failed to hold his/her head upright while sitting.