Loop diuretics have been approved by the Food and Drug Administration (FDA) for treating conditions of edema associated with congestive heart failure, liver cirrhosis, and renal disease, including nephrotic syndrome.

According to the 2014 ACCF/AHA Guideline for the Management of Heart Failure, patients admitted with heart failure (Stage C) with signs of fluid overload should be treated with intravenous loop diuretics to reduce morbidity. The ACCF/AHA has given a Class I recommendation for the use of diuretics (including loop diuretics) as the first-line treatment of heart failure with reduced left ventricular ejection fraction (HFrEF) and volume overload.

The FDA has approved loop diuretics for treating hypertension alone or with the addition of other anti-hypertensives. However, loop diuretics alone are not used for first-line therapy. In 2014, the panel members of the Eighth Joint National Committee (JNC-8) released a report on the management of high blood pressure in adults. JNC-8 made a Grade B recommendation that first-line anti-hypertensives should include either ACE inhibitors, ARBs, CCBs, or thiazide diuretics in the general population. In several large randomized drug trials, loop diuretics did not provide better outcomes when compared with the first-line drugs.

In cases of hepatic cirrhosis with ascites that do not resolve initially with spironolactone, there is a grade A recommendation for the use of diuretics with dosing up to 160 mg/day. In these cases, diuretic administration should typically be in a hospital setting for close monitoring. With the alteration of fluids and electrolytes, the FDA recognizes the need for strict observation as these alterations may precipitate hepatic coma.