External and internal genitalia typically comprise the female genital tract. The external genitalia includes:

- Mons pubis: A rounded mass of fatty tissue lying over the joint of pubic bones.

- Labia majora: Two cutaneous folds extend from the mons pubis down to the perineum.

- Labia minora: The region of the female genital tract buried inside the labia majora.

- Bartholin gland: These are like bulbourethral glands in men and pour lubrication right at the entry of the vagina.

- Clitoris: The vagina's pea-sized, most heavily innervated organ that detects sensation and stimulation.

- Vulva: The collective term for women's external genitalia.

The female reproductive system's internal genitalia includes:

- Ovaries: Female reproductive organs which produce all the ova (eggs) during a normal menstrual cycle.

- Fallopian tubes: Also known as uterine tubes, these are responsible for the transportation of ova from the ovaries to the uterus. They are clinically important in abortion because they are the most common site of ectopic pregnancy (pregnancy outside the uterus).

- Uterus: The womb is a hormone-sensitive reproductive organ where a fertilized ovum implants. It is responsible for nurturing the fertilized ovum and stages of development inside the mother's body that take place in the uterus.

- Cervix: The lower part of the uterus, or the connection between the uterus and vagina.

- Vagina: The lowest part of the female genital tract, starting from an external orifice to the cervix.

Understanding the normal anatomy of the female genital tract helps manage complications of medication abortion and performing the aspiration or surgical abortion.