Sertoli cells play many roles and have many functions within the seminiferous tubules. One of the most important features is to secrete a compound called Mullerian Inhibiting Factor, which helps to prevent the development of female sex organs following the determining of the testes embryologically. Sertoli cells also secrete Inhibin B, which helps to regulate FSH by acting on the anterior pituitary. Sertoli cells aid in concentrating the testosterone available by secreting a substance called androgen binding protein. Sertoli cells also maintain optimal health conditions for the primary spermatogonia and spermatogenesis process by regulating the ions, amino acids, and ultimately “nursing” the spermatogonia. The Sertoli cell overall is paramount to the spermatogenesis process and regulates this process via FSH receptor stimulation from the anterior pituitary. In the final process of spermiogenesis, which is the last step of spermatid maturation, the Sertoli cells function to degrade residual cytoplasm after it is shed from the spermatid.

Structurally, the Sertoli cell has another outstanding job, which is to maintain the blood-testes-barrier. This barrier forms from tight junctions between adjacent Sertoli cells, which all sit on the basement membrane of the seminiferous tubules. This arrangement creates two useful layers of the seminiferous tubules. Interior to the tight junctions are the primary and secondary spermatogonia, as well as spermiogenesis. Exterior to the tight junction are germinal epithelial cells, and primitive spermatogonia. This barrier is also essential to allow for conditions to be capable of sequestering testosterone and increase local concentrations necessary for spermatogenesis. The blood-testes-barrier also serves to help evade auto-immune diseases or any surveillance by the body’s immune system.

A summarization of Sertoli cell function is as follows:

- They help in supporting, protecting and provide nutrition to spermatogenic cells

- Play a role in the paracrine and endocrine control of spermatogenesis

- Sertoli cells regulate cholesterol metabolism at the time of spermatogenesis.

- They help in the movement of spermatozoa by secreting fluids

- They phagocytose apoptotic cells, foreign bodies, etc.

- They secrete the androgen-binding protein under the influence of follicular stimulating hormone (FSH)

- Secret inhibin B hormone that suppresses the release of FSH

- Formation of a blood-testes barrier by tight junctions between them