The treatment approach for cutaneous endometriosis can be hormonal or surgical management. Pain management is another aspect, and nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) can be used. Hormonal treatment includes the use of gonadotropin-releasing hormonal agonists, danazol, and oral contraceptives. The main mechanism of the hormonal agent is to decrease the cyclical proliferation of the endometrial tissue.

Hormonal treatment is usually meant for reducing the size of the lesions and also provides symptomatic relief for patients before undergoing surgery. Before starting hormonal treatment, patients have to be counseled regarding the side effects, such as amenorrhea, with the use of danazol and leuprolide. In addition, the symptoms of the disease may return once the hormonal treatment is stopped. Danazol use is associated with side effects such as acne, weight gain, hirsutism, and deepening of the voice. Hormonal treatment serves as an alternative treatment for those who do not opt for surgical treatment and also for those with coexistent pelvic endometriosis. However, surgical excision of the lesion with a wide margin is the treatment of the choice.

The recurrence rate is very rare with complete surgical excision. Recurrence is seen if there is an incomplete excision. Regarding the perioperative management of the lesions, the recommendation varies on either performing the surgery at the end of the menstrual cycle, whereby the lesions are smaller in size, or initiating preoperative hormonal agents to reduce the size. Postoperative use of hormonal agents can also be done, and the goal is to prevent a recurrence.