Germinoma has an excellent prognosis with high cure rates. It is highly sensitive to radiotherapy (RT) and chemotherapy (CT), and the 5-year survival rates are estimated to be greater than 90%. Whole-ventricular RT or CT combined with reduced dose ventricular RT is the standard of care for germinoma.

**Radiotherapy**

Craniospinal irradiation (CSI) of 36 grays (Gy) followed by 50 to 54 Gy boost to the primary tumor was recommended initially for patients with localized pure germinoma. Due to the significant side effects of CSI, it is no longer used in localized germinoma. Current practice is whole ventricular irradiation of 21 to 24 Gy with a local boost of 40 to 45 Gy. Whole ventricular irradiation is found superior to localized RT with lower chances of recurrence.

**Chemotherapy**

CT permits lowering the dose of irradiation, thus reducing the toxicity. Platinum-based CT is quite effective, and different combinations (carboplatin, etoposide, and ifosfamide or cisplatin, vincristine, and cyclophosphamide) are administered before a low dose, low volume whole ventricular irradiation. CT alone is associated with a higher risk of relapse.

In cases of disseminated germinoma evidenced by MRI or positive CSF cytology, CSI is used. The current practice utilizes 30 Gy CSI with a 45 Gy local boost for an effective outcome.

**Surgery**

The role of surgical resection in germinoma is not well established because of the associated risks of damage to adjacent brain structures. Surgical interventions are mainly limited to obtain a tissue sample for histological diagnosis and obstructive hydrocephalus. Second look surgery is considered in patients to remove any residual tumor unresponsive to standard treatment protocols. However, this is more common in patients with non-germinomatous GCT.