It is imperative to have a multi-specialty interprofessional team approach to care for patients with Charcot-Bouchard aneurysms and intracerebral hemorrhage.

Optimizing management for hypertension and other risk factors by the primary care team is the first step, along with adequate patient education about the signs and symptoms of a stroke to encourage early presentation to the emergency department.

Next, the clinician must establish a baseline severity score in the emergency department for patients with spontaneous intracerebral hemorrhage followed by rapid neuroimaging with CT or MRI to distinguish between an ischemic and hemorrhagic stroke.

Initial management of patients with intracerebral hemorrhage must be in intensive care set up or stroke unit with neuroscience expertise amongst physicians and nursing staff.

**Hemostasis Management**

- Factor deficiency or thrombocytopenic patients should receive factors and platelets respectively.

- Pneumatic compression for lower extremities to prevent deep vein thrombosis (DVT) from day 1 of hospitalization

- Patients on vitamin K antagonists should have them held and have the INR normalized with intravenous vitamin K and replacement of vitamin K dependent factors.

Patients presenting with systolic blood pressure between 150 to 200 mm Hg and without contraindications to acutely lower blood pressure should have systolic blood pressure lowered to 140 mm Hg.

Monitoring of glucose to avoid hyper- or hypoglycemia, treatment of seizures, and assessment of dysphagia to prevent aspiration pneumonia should be performed in all patients.

All medications, including IV fluids, should have pharmacist feedback in the context of the patient's entire medication record, ruling out interactions, verifying dosing and administration, and consulting with the team in the event there are any issues in the regimen. Nursing needs to be aware of proper administration and the adverse events associated with the drugs given to alert the clinicians of any concerns. These interprofessional interactions can help drive improved patient outcomes. [Level 5]

Lastly, patients requiring surgical interventions due to neurological deterioration should receive a referral to neurosurgery as early as possible to improve results.

Patients with intracerebral hemorrhage must have access to interprofessional rehabilitation as an inpatient and have continued rehabilitation services available in the community and at home to promote recovery.