Other issues to remember:

- A stroke generally presents with an acute focal neurologic deficit with no pain.

- The most important part of the history is the time of onset of symptoms.

- Rapid evaluation and treatment are paramount for the best outcomes.

- The use of a stroke rating scale, preferably the NIHSS, is recommended and the AHA / ASA recommends that all clinicians who care for stroke patients should be NIH Stroke Scale certified.

- IV rtPA is approved for use up to 4.5 hours following symptom onset, but the earlier the rtPA is administered, the better the outcomes.

- At a minimum, a non-contrasted head CT should be obtained to rule out hemorrhage before administering IV rtPA.

- The only lab needed before administering rtPA is finger-stick serum glucose unless a bleeding diathesis or clinical situation warrants more labs.

- Endovascular or interventional therapy should be considered in patients who have significant deficits (NIHSS > 6) up to 6 hours following symptom onset if treatment can be initiated within 6 hours.

- The risk of intracranial hemorrhage in stroke mimics treated with IV rtPA is extremely low (~ 1%).

- For patients who do not qualify for rtPA, permissive hypertension is indicated for at least the first 24 hours, and blood pressure should not be lowered unless it exceeds 220/120.

- Before initiating rtPA, blood pressure should be gently lowered to a value below 185/110.

- After rtPA, blood pressure should be kept below 180/105 for 24 hours.

- For patients who do not receive rtPA, an antiplatelet agent and statin should be administered.