Atrial septation begins during the fourth week of gestation.

As the patent foramen ovale is a subclass of the ostium secundum defect, it is not a defect of the "true septum." The patent foramen ovale is the most common septal anomaly and occurs when ends the septum primum, and the septum secundum do not approximate and close the foramen ovale after the child breathes its first breath. The 4 types of atrial septal defects are

- Ostium secundum defect: This defect occurs when there is increased reabsorption of the septum primum in the atrium's roof, or the septum secundum does not occlude the ostium secundum. Ostium secundum defects are associated with pediatric syndromes such as Noonan, Treacher-Collins, and thrombocytopenia-absent radii syndrome.

- Ostium primum defect: The third most common defect of the atrial septum that occurs due to the failure of the septum primum to fuse with the endocardial cushions. Ostium primum defects result in atrioventricular communications and are best considered among the spectrum of atrioventricular septal defects.

- Sinus venosus defect: Superior and inferior defects occur, and neither involves the true membranous septum.

- Superior defect: This occurs when the orifice of the superior vena cava overrides the atrial septum above the oval fossa (the remnant of the foreman ovale) and drains both the left and right atria. The superior sinus venosus defect and a partial anomalous connection of the right superior pulmonary vein to the superior vena cava often occur together.
- Inferior defect: This occurs when the orifice of the inferior vena cava overrides both atria. The inferior sinus venosus defect and an anomalous connection of the right inferior pulmonary vein to the inferior vena cava can occur together.

- Coronary sinus defect: The coronary sinus is a vessel that runs along the groove between the left atrium and left ventricle and collects veins that represent the venous return of the heart muscle.  It normally drains into the floor of the right atrium above the septal leaflet of the tricuspid valve. A defect or hole in the common wall between the left atrium and the coronary sinus (called "unroofing" of the coronary sinus) creates a communication between the right and left atria.

Normally, the pressure in the right atrium is significantly lower than the left atrium; therefore, blood flows from the left atrium to the right atrium causing a left-to-right shunt. The size of the defect determines how significant the shunt is. Significant shunts have a ratio of pulmonary (Qp) to systemic flow (Qs) that is greater than 1.5:1 (Qp/Qs > 1.5).