Biometry is performed during the pre-operative assessment for all patients undergoing cataract surgery. The measurements obtained are used to calculate the appropriate intraocular lens for each patient. Since its inception, the formula for calculating lens power has evolved, with numerous proposed formulas. One classic formula is the SRK formula, which was developed by Sanders, Retzlaff, and Kraff.

- P = A – 0.9 K – 2.5 AL

A is the A constant, K is the average keratometry value in diopters, and the AL is the axial length in millimeters (mm).

The A-constant is a theoretical value that relates the lens power to the axial length and keratometry. It is a value specific to the lens manufacturer and type and varies depending on multiple factors, including refraction index and placement within the eye. The A-constant varies approximately in a 1-to-1 ratio with the power of the lens.

Keratometry is the measurement of the power of the cornea, which is based on the corneal curvature. This measurement (expressed in diopters) can be accomplished with either a manual or automated keratometer. In keratometry, the cornea is assumed to be a spherocylinder with a fixed ratio between the anterior and posterior corneal curvature.

Keratometers are limited in accurately measuring the power of the cornea because they do not directly measure the posterior corneal curvature, and they are not able to accurately measure the central zone of effective corneal power, which is of particular concern in patients who have undergone keratorefractive surgery.

The axial length, measured in millimeters, is defined as the distance from the anterior surface of the cornea to the retinal pigment epithelium. The axial length can be measured using either ultrasound biometry (accomplished via direct contact or immersion) or optical biometry.

The SRK formula is useful for illustrating the relationships of different variables that contribute to the refractive state. However, newer formulas have been developed to measure IOL power. These formulas consider additional variables such as anterior chamber depth and lens thickness to estimate the effective lens position (ELP), a parameter that leads to improved accuracy in IOL selection.

Accurately measuring the axial length is crucial, as a 1 mm error can change the IOL power by nearly 2.5 times. Two main methods are used to measure the axial length; ultrasound biometry and optical biometry.