Penicillin V and G can have adverse effects, including nausea, vomiting, diarrhea, rash, abdominal pain, and urticaria. In addition, Penicillin G can have other adverse reactions, including muscle spasms, fever, chills, muscle pain, headache, tachycardia, flushing, tachypnea, and hypotension.

- **Hypersensitivity Reactions:**The commonly encountered adverse drug reaction with penicillin is hypersensitivity of immediate onset or delayed onset.
- Immediate onset: This kind of reaction occurs within 20 minutes post-administration. It is characterized by urticaria, pruritis, edema, laryngospasm, bronchospasm, hypotension, vascular collapse, and death.
- Delayed onset: This reaction occurs within 1 to 2 weeks of treatment. It is rare and is characterized by fever, malaise, urticaria, myalgia, arthralgia, abdominal pain, and skin rashes.

- **Gastrointestinal System:**GI symptoms were the most common and were reported in over 1% of patients, including nausea, vomiting, stomatitis, which are commonly observed with oral administration. Pseudomembranous colitis is also observed during or after the treatment.

- **Hematologic Reactions:**If the dose is exceeded 10 million units/day and if a patient has received a higher dose previously, then those patients can precipitate Coombs positive hemolytic anemia and neutropenia, which is resolved when therapy is stopped.

- **Metabolic Reactions:**The salt form of penicillin G may cause electrolyte imbalances, i.e., hyperkalemia when given IV in a large dose.

- **Nervous System:**Neurological manifestations include hyperreflexia, myoclonic twitches, seizures, and coma after IV doses and are more likely in patients with impaired renal function.

- **Urogenital System:**Urological manifestations with large IV doses include renal tubular damage. The penicillins can also cause acute interstitial nephritis, a disease characterized by inflammation of the tubules and interstitium of the kidneys.

- **Other:**Jarisch- Herxheimer reaction is precipitated when penicillin is administered in patients with syphilis.

**Drug-Drug Interactions**

- Concurrent sulfonamides, erythromycin, chloramphenicol should be avoided due to antagonistic effects.

- Tubular secretion of penicillin G can be blocked by probenecid- higher and longer plasma concentrations are achieved. Probenecid also decreases the volume of distribution of penicillin.

- Drugs like aspirin, phenylbutazone, sulfonamides, indomethacin, thiazide, furosemide, and ethacrynic acid increase the half-life of penicillin by competing with tubular secretion.