# Continuing Education Activity

Montelukast and zafirlukast are cysteinyl leukotriene receptor antagonists indicated to prevent and treat chronic asthma. Leukotrienes are eicosanoid inflammatory mediators derived from arachidonic acid. Neither montelukast nor zafirlukast has a role as rescue medication during an acute asthmatic attack. This activity will highlight the mechanism of action, adverse event profile, and monitoring pertinent for interprofessional team members in managing patients with asthma and related conditions with leukotriene receptor antagonists.

**Objectives:**
- Explain the mechanism of action of leukotriene receptor antagonists.
- Describe the potential adverse effects of leukotriene receptor antagonists.
- Review the appropriate monitoring for patients using leukotriene receptor antagonists.
- Summarize interprofessional team strategies for improving care coordination and communication to advance the treatment of asthma with leukotriene receptor antagonists and improve outcomes.

# Indications

Montelukast and zafirlukast are cysteinyl leukotriene receptor antagonists.

Montelukast monotherapy is not recommended for first-line therapy for allergic rhinitis.

Parents of asthmatic children prefer montelukast because the once-a-day oral dosage is more convenient than inhaler use. It also avoids the clinical concerns regarding the side effects of long-term use of corticosteroids, such as growth retardation and metabolic abnormalities.

Zafirlukast indications include the prophylaxis and chronic treatment of asthma in children five years and older and adults. It is used off-label for allergic rhinitis and the prophylaxis of exercise-induced bronchospasm.

The first-line therapy for the prophylaxis of exercise-induced bronchospasm is inhaled short-acting beta-agonist such as albuterol. Daily use of inhaled corticosteroid or leukotriene receptor antagonists, such as montelukast and zafirlukast, is recommended in patients with exercise-induced bronchospasm who inhaled preventative short-acting beta-agonist but continue to have symptoms or who develop tolerance to continued usage of short-acting beta-agonist.

Both montelukast and zafirlukast have no role as rescue medication during an acute asthmatic attack.

# Mechanism of Action

The main indication for leukotriene receptor antagonists is in treating chronic asthma. Leukotrienes are synthesized from arachidonic acid by the action of 5-lipoxygenase in many inflammatory cells in the airways.

There are two groups of leukotrienes: one with and the other without amino acid moieties.

Asthma is the most common chronic lung disease characterized by reversible bronchoconstriction, inflammation, and airway remodeling that results in hyperresponsiveness. Sympathomimetic agents such as beta-adrenergic receptor agonists are the therapeutic choice for treating acute bronchoconstriction. They activate beta two adrenergic receptors and relax airway smooth muscle cells. Short-acting beta2-selective agonists include albuterol, levalbuterol, terbutaline, metaproterenol, and pirbuterol. They sustain bronchodilation for 3-4 hours. Long-acting beta2-selective agonists with 12-hour durations of action include salmeterol and formoterol. Ultra-long-acting beta-agonists such as indacaterol, olodaterol, and vilanterol patients should take bambuterol only once a day. Because beta-agonists do not inhibit inflammatory responses, they do not have a role as monotherapy for controlling persistent asthma. They are frequently a second agent added to inhaled corticosteroids.

Based on the inflammatory mechanism of asthma, several pharmacological agents with different modes of action have undergone development to treat this endotype of asthma. Exposure to allergen stimulates IgE synthesis driven by CD4+ T helper type 2 cells. The IgE antibodies bind to their receptors on the tissue mast cells and blood basophils.

Advances in understanding the molecular heterogeneity of asthma have revealed the importance of type 2 immune response mediated by T helper type 2 cells in the pathology of eosinophilic asthma.

# Administration

Montelukast administration is via the oral route, without regard to food or meals. It should be taken a single dose in the evening in patients with asthma and both asthma and allergic rhinitis. For the treatment of allergic rhinitis, administration can be either morning or evening. It should be taken at least two hours before exercise to prevent exercise-induced asthma. Patients should not take another dose within 24 hours.

Zafirlukast is administered orally. It should be taken 2 hours after or 1 hour before meals because food decreases bioavailability by 40%.

# Adverse Effects

Montelukast is relatively well-tolerated and generally safe.

Allergic granulomatous angiitis (Churg-Strauss syndrome) may also correlate with the use of montelukast, although there is not yet an established causal relationship.

Zafirlukast is generally well tolerated, and associated adverse events are minimal.

# Contraindications

Both montelukast and zafirlukast are contraindicated in patients with hypersensitivity to the drug or any component of their formulation.

Contraindications to zafirlukast also include patients with acute asthma or hepatic impairment.

Contraindications to montelukast include severe asthma. Caution is advised in PKU patients because there is a phenylalanine-containing form.

# Monitoring

Depression, aggression, and other behavioral changes have correlations with the leukotriene receptor antagonists. Careful monitoring is necessary for patients treated with leukotriene receptor antagonists.

Zafirlukast may cause severe but rare acute liver damage. It is a major substrate of the cytochrome P450 CYP2C9 enzyme. Patients receiving concomitant therapy with drugs such as alpelisib, dabrafenib, enzalutamide, erythromycin, loxapine, lumacaftor, rifapentine, terfenadine, and warfarin require monitoring for potential drug interactions.

# Toxicity

Both montelukast and zafirlukast have a wide margin of safety. Patients who took an overdose had no adverse symptoms, an uneventful course of recovery, or a rash and upset stomach.

When overdosed, remove unabsorbed drugs using active charcoal and institute supportive therapy, if needed.

# Enhancing Healthcare Team Outcomes

Several adverse drug reactions were reported to the Netherlands pharmacovigilance center Lareb and the WHO global individual case safety report database. The most common adverse effect in the whole population was depression, and in children under the age of 19 years, it was aggression.

Asthma is a chronic lung disease. Even in patients with a well-established medication regimen, acute asthma exacerbations may occur. Understanding the risk factors for exacerbation-prone asthma is critical for preventing potentially fatal acute asthma attacks.

Both African Americans and Hispanics have a higher incidence of exacerbations. Poor compliance with medication due to patients’ poor access to healthcare and inadequate education and knowledge about the disease put the patients at great risk of acute exacerbations. Other potentially modifiable risk factors include uncontrolled allergies, upper respiratory viral infections, obesity, smoking, and gastroesophageal reflux disease.