Drinking history is an essential component, which includes the number of drinks per day and the duration of drinking. Given the lack of a unique diagnostic test, the exclusion of other causes of liver injury is mandatory.

Personal and psychosocial factors are also important because excessive drinking is related to depression and other psychological diseases.

Patients should be asked about diet, alcohol consumption, caloric intake, risk factors for malnutrition, and risk factors for chronic liver diseases such as viral hepatitis.

Physicians should explore signs and symptoms, including:

- Nausea and vomiting

- Abdominal pain or discomfort

- Loss of appetite

- Weight loss or weight gain

- Increased thirst

- Yellowish discoloration of eyes

- Weakness

- Fever (in alcoholic hepatitis)

- Confusion

- Alteration of the sleep-wake cycle

- Mood swings

- Fainting

**Physical Examination**

The clinical definition of alcoholic hepatitis is a syndrome of liver failure where jaundice is a characteristic feature; fever and tender hepatomegaly are often present. The typical presentation age is between 40 and 50 yrs, and it occurs in the setting of heavy alcohol use. Patients often report a history of intake of at least 30 to 50 g alcohol/day though over 100 g/day is common. Patients may be abstinent for weeks before admission. The cardinal sign is the rapid onset of jaundice. Other signs and symptoms include fever, ascites (SAAG greater than 1.1), and proximal muscle loss. Patients presenting with severe alcoholic hepatitis may have encephalopathy. Typically, the liver is enlarged and tender.

General physical examination typically shows jaundice, hepatomegaly, splenomegaly, spider telangiectasias, Dupuytren contractures, testicular atrophy, decreased libido, parotid and lacrimal gland enlargement, white nails, Muecke lines, asterixis, and features of portal hypertension such as ascites, pedal edema, encephalopathy, and caput-medusae (distended and engorged superficial abdominal veins).

Abdominal paracentesis should be performed in all patients with newly identified ascites.