**Primary Graft Dysfunction**

The “ischemic time” defined from cross-clamping the donor heart to implantation in the recipient patient, subjects donor heart to various forms of insult. The effect of ischemic time on PGD depends on donor age

Secondary graft dysfunction resulting from hyperacute rejection is either due to ABO incompatibility or from pre-formed cytotoxic antibodies that direct their activities against significant histocompatibility (MHC) antigens on allograft.

**Acute Allograft Rejection (Cellular versus humoral mechanism)**

Acute Cellular Rejection (ACR): Major and minor histocompatibility antigens are not expressed equally among all individuals; this increases the potential of such proteins to act as alloantigens and activate alloimmunity by stimulating cytotoxic T cells. T cells respond to these donor antigens either directly or indirectly based on the method of antigen presentation. T cells can either directly recognize donor MHC molecules on allograft or target when presented indirectly by recipient antigen-presenting cells (APC).

**Acute Humoral/Antibody Rejection (AMR)**

Antibody-mediated humoral rejection is poorly understood. The antibody reacts to donor MHC antigens (HLA-I and II) leading to capillary endothelial changes. The deposition of immunoglobulin and complements within myocardial capillary bed are detectable by immunofluorescence.

**CAV**

Endothelial damage in CAV can be immune or non-immune mediated. Endothelial damage leads to mild intimal thickening before progressing to diffuse fibrous thickening of the intima.