When considering the pathophysiology of upper airway obstruction, it is imperative to understand the variations between adult and pediatric upper airway anatomy. Children have larger heads and a larger occiput, causing hyperflexion of the airway when lying flat and supine.

Children also have a larger tongue and smaller mandible compared with adults. Their epiglottis is floppy and can obscure the view of the larynx on laryngoscopy at intubation. A pediatric larynx sits higher than in adults and is shaped like a funnel. The cricoid is at C4 level at birth, dropping eventually to the C6 level at around age ten. Therefore, a cricothyroidotomy is not a viable procedure in a child younger than 10. Also, pediatric supraglottic cartilages are softer and more distensible than that of adults, leading at times to dynamic collapse, which is seen in laryngomalacia. It is crucial to remember also that babies are obligate nasal breathers from birth for the first few months of life. In terms of the lower airway physiology, children consume more oxygen at rest than adults, as their resting metabolic demand is 2 to 3 times that of an adult. They also have a lower functional residual capacity, which translates to a more precipitous onset of hypoxemia and hypercarbia during apnea.

Due to Poseuille’s Law, a small decrease in the diameter of a child’s airway can have a devastating effect. This can be caused by edema, stenosis, foreign body, or even mucus. Babies from 36 weeks onwards have mature alveoli; however, these continue to develop with septation and microvascular maturation from birth until around 8 years of age.

The most narrow region of the adult airway is at the level of the glottis. Given that the most common cause of upper airway obstruction in adults is OSA, it is important to understand the physiologic processes involved in this presentation. These patients are often obese. They usually have an element of pharyngeal collapse, which can also be associated with retrognathia and underlying conditions such as hypertension and diabetes mellitus.