Treatment of hypertyrosinemia depends upon the etiology and aims to limit tyrosine intake and block the formation of toxic tyrosine metabolites. Since untreated HT1 can have a fulminant course, delaying treatment until a confirmatory test is not advised, a diet low in protein, along with nitisinone, should be started as soon as possible. Nitisinone or NTBC (2-nitro-4-trifluoromethylbenzoyl 1,3-cyclohexanedione) is an FDA-approved drug for the treatment of HT1. It inhibits the HPD enzyme, thereby limiting the formation of toxic tyrosine metabolites.

Nitisinone increases blood tyrosine levels in patients with HT1 by blocking its catabolism. Excess tyrosine may deposit over the corneas causing corneal ulcerations. Therefore, it is important to restrict the dietary intake of tyrosine while patients are on nitisinone. Some patients on prolonged nitisinone therapy combined with dietary protein restriction may develop phenylalanine deficiency. This deficiency has been linked to neurodevelopmental issues in HT1 patients.

A recent study has reported positive long-term therapeutic and safety assessments.

Therefore, phenylalanine supplementation is recommended during nitisinone therapy. Few patients on nitisinone treatment may develop transient neutropenia and thrombocytopenia, the only known adverse drug reaction of this drug. Long-term monitoring of HT1 patients is done by serial measurement of plasma amino acids, SA levels, liver and kidney functions, serum AFP levels, complete blood count, and annual abdominal imaging. The small subset of patients who remain refractory to medical treatment and show signs of persistent liver failure or hepatocellular carcinoma would benefit from orthotopic liver transplantation.

Treatment of HT2 involves keeping serum tyrosine levels below 500 micromoles/L and is accomplished by dietary tyrosine and phenylalanine restriction. The skin and eye lesions respond dramatically and normalize completely within weeks of this therapy.