When a diagnosis of rabies is made, an interprofessional team is necessary as the repercussions of this infection go way beyond the acute infection.

Blood transfusions have not been documented to transmit rabies, though it has been suggested to hold donation for one year following exposure prophylaxis. If no exposure was noted, but vaccination occurred there is a recommendation to wait four weeks.

Since rabies is entrenched within the native animal population in the United States, there will continue to be human exposure to this fatal disease. Public health officials take a very active role in preventing rabies, both before exposures as well as after possible exposures.

Animal control has to be notified to determine if the domestic animals require vaccination. In addition, vaccination of workers who may be exposed to rabies may also be necessary.

Patients need to be educated on avoiding contact with wildlife, and if ever bitten, the area should be thoroughly washed to lower the risk of rabies transmission. All dead and sick animals should be handled with heavy gloves. If bitten by a wild animal, one should seek immediate medical assistance.

**Outcomes**

For those who develop symptoms of rabies, survival is rare. Only a handful of survivors exist in the USA after acquiring rabies. For those without symptoms but with rabies vaccine prophylaxis, survival is assured. Individuals who are bitten by a rabid animal need the rabies vaccine and immunoglobulin ASAP for survival- once the symptoms appear, death is inevitable.