Pressure control ventilation is a common modality in both adults and pediatrics. It is typically available in both pressure control-continuous mandatory ventilation (PC-CMV) as well as pressure control-intermittent mandatory ventilation (PC-IMV), which is also a feature of other commonly used modes. A clinician will set the driving pressure to aid in the distention of alveoli. However, the volume delivered may vary due to a patient’s intrinsic respiratory ability, thoracic compliance, airway resistance, and even other ventilator settings such as the I to E ratio and rise time.

While volume control is the more common mode of ventilation, patients may better tolerate pressure control ventilation. The critical difference in pressure control that may explain the difference in tolerance is the ability of the mode to maintain constant airway pressure by altering the inspiratory flow rates to meet the demand of the patient.

It bears mention that the waveforms on the ventilator screen are different than those seen in traditional volume control. In pressure control, the flow rate is dynamic and adjusts to the patient’s needs; however, the pressure will form a plateau. Figure 1 is an example of the standard waveforms of pressure control.

Although pressure control has demonstrated improved ventilator synchrony, some findings are observable on the ventilator display that indicates adjustments are necessary to continue to maintain optimum conditions

In contrast to insufficient inspiratory time, there is also the possibility of providing an excess of inspiratory time. In pressure control, the inspiratory time dictates how long a patient will remain at the pressure peak; this will generate a particular tidal volume. However, space within the lung is limited, and providing an excess of inspiratory time does not necessarily mean the gain of any further benefit. Figure 3 demonstrates waveform findings that would indicate there is excess inspiratory time, and adjustment of the I to E ratio can help improve the effectiveness of the ventilator. It is best represented by a flat component between the inhalation and exhalation dynamic phases of the flow waveform.

As previously mentioned, excess inspiratory time is not equivocal to insufficient expiratory time. As above, in the flow waveform, the expiratory component does return to zero liters per minute, indicating exhalation was permitted to occur until finished and not prematurely halted. Additionally, it is essential to note that the volume waveform does also return to its baseline, indicating that the volume provided was able to be fully exhaled, preventing the possible scenario of auto-PEEP. Figure 4 demonstrates an insufficient expiratory time. It is important to note that the flow and volume waveforms are interrupted, which can create a life-threatening situation and immediate adjustment of the I to E ratio or adjusting the volume provided by modifying the driving pressure.

The ability to have direct control of airway pressure will aid in the prevention of lung injury. Also, utilizing a pressure-based approach will encourage a full distribution of all lung units regarding ventilation. This full distribution may aid in V/Q mismatch in patients with poorly complaint lungs in conditions such as ARDS.