Many pathologies can present themselves acutely with symptoms and signs similar to that of acute ICH. The common symptoms of headache and nausea along with clinical manifestations of decreased consciousness, confusion, seizures, and focal neurological deficit are often seen with other intracranial hemorrhages, such as a subarachnoid hemorrhage (SAH) and a subdural hemorrhage (both acute and chronic), neoplasms (primary and secondary), and infection.

The primary feature of a SAH is the pathognomonic sudden onset, severe headache ‘like being hit at the back of the head.’ Apart from this feature, which may not always be expressed so eloquently, patients may present much the same way as those with acute ICH. In a SAH, an unenhanced CT Head would reveal blood within the subarachnoid space and ventricular cisterns rather than within the parenchyma, as seen in an ICH. An acute subdural hematoma may have similar symptoms. However, the key differentiating factor is a history of recent trauma preceding the presentation. Chronic subdural hemorrhages are most commonly seen in the elderly, particularly those on blood-thinning medication, and history is often of recurrent falls followed by a longer duration of headaches and/or confusion and/or focal neurological deficit. Both acute and chronic subdural hematomas can be differentiated on a plain CT head as a crescentic extra-axial collection- hypodense if the blood is chronic and hyperdense in the acute setting.

Brain tumors frequently present insidiously. Due to their gradual growth, most patients can compensate until the intracranial pressure is high enough to produce symptoms of headache, nausea, vomiting, seizures, and decreased GCS. On closer examination of the history, there is often evidence of a subtle progressive history, and contrasted CT imaging is often required to make a diagnosis. Patients with neoplastic lesions may present with hemorrhages into a primary or secondary brain tumor in some situations. This can cause diagnostic uncertainty that often requires delayed imaging, in the form of MR, to make a more accurate diagnosis of underlying pathology.

Lastly, infectious collections such as subdural empyema and abscesses can present similarly to acute ICH; however, patients commonly have a history of recent infections in the nasofacial region (ear, sinuses) and/or systemic symptoms of pyrexia and/or rigors. Once again, contrast-enhanced CT and MRI can assist in differentiating the pathology.