The short stature can either be due to an underlying medical condition or a standard variant of growth. FSS, CDGP, and ISS described below can be considered as normal variants of growth, while the rest are pathological causes-

**1. Familial Short Stature (FSS):**The child's genetic height potential can be measured by measuring the mid-parental height, which is a child's projected adult height based on parental height measurements. A positive family history, and the absence of underlying pathological etiologies of dwarfism, can be diagnosed as a case of familial short stature. This child has an expected growth velocity, and his bone age is consistent with the chronological age. X-Ray of the hand and wrist can establish the bone age and is a frequently used modality.

**2. Constitutional delay of growth and puberty (CDGP):**The child presents with short height in childhood, but attain their target height until adulthood, also known as a 'late bloomer'. They even enter puberty at later ages. Unlike in familial cases, these children have bone age lagging behind the chronological age. Malnutrition in gestational age or childhood, even genetics, could be the plausible cause for this short stature pattern.

**3. Idiopathic Short Stature (ISS):**Short stature is said to be idiopathic when no other etiology like endocrine/metabolic can be determined. With the advancements in genomic studies, it is found that many cases previously established as idiopathic can be explained by hundreds of genetic mutations with small or large effects. The role of epigenetics is also in discussion.

**4. Endocrine disorders:**Growth hormone deficiency is a frequent cause of dwarfism. The hypothalamic-pituitary axis maintains the levels of growth hormones in the body, which then directly or indirectly, through Insulin-like growth factor-1 (IGF-1), stimulates bone elongation, and growth of soft tissue and cartilage. Lower levels of IGF-1 are linked with short stature. Precocious puberty is defined as the attainment of puberty before the age of 8 years in girls and nine years in boys due to the premature release of gonadotropins centrally or peripherally. These gonadotropins lead to an initial growth spurt but also lead to the early maturation of the child's skeletal system resulting in short adult height.

**5. Genetic disorders**: Many genetic conditions that are associated with short stature are- Down's, Turner's, Noonan's, 3-M, Prader-Willi, Russell-Silver, Aarskog, and short stature homeobox gene deficiency syndrome. Short stature is one clinical manifestation among several others.

**6. Bone diseases:**The faulty formation of bone can also lead to short stature. The bone disorders linked to dwarfism are-

**Achondroplasia:**It is an autosomal dominant genetic condition due to the mutation in the Fibroblast growth factor receptor-3 ( FGFR-3) gene. This gene typically limits the conversion of cartilage to bone, particularly in the long bones. In achondroplasia, this gene becomes overactive and bone formation is severely impacted in the extremities. Another cause of short-limb dwarfism is diastrophic dysplasia.

**Spondyloepiphyseal dysplasia:**It is a cause of short-trunk dwarfism with the vertebrae's primary involvement and the proximal epiphyseal centers. Type-2 collagen matrix is abnormal, but it remains unclear how this abnormality spares the distal epiphysis, given that collagen is ubiquitous.

**7. Systemic disorders:**Other systemic diseases which have a secondary effect on growth are undernutrition, juvenile idiopathic arthritis, inflammatory bowel disease (IBD), celiac disease, chronic kidney disease (CKD), pulmonary/cardiac/immunologic/metabolic diseases, cancers, and glucocorticoid therapy.****Malnutrition can dampen the growth velocity and cause short stature. It can affect the baby in the gestational period, leading to underweight or small for gestational age (SGA) baby, or in childhood leading to stunted growth.