The wrist is a complex joint consisting of the distal radial and ulnar bones plus the eight carpal bones. The fibrocartilaginous complex is located between the carpal bones and the distal ulnar bone. Each of these structures has the propensity to get injured. The wrist can be injured during a fall, sporting activities, or from repetitive movements. Today, the use of a wrist splint has become invaluable for the treatment of many types of wrist injuries. The role of the wrist splints is to immobilize the wrist in a position to facilitate healing. This allows for edema to subside and the pain to decrease. There are many types of splining materials and pre-made splints on the market, each intended for a specific purpose.

Two common syndromes where a wrist splint is used are carpal tunnel syndrome and osteoarthritis (OA). The wrist splint is most commonly worn at night, but may also be worn during the day to improve the symptoms of the disorder. Many studies indicate that the use of a wrist splint for carpal tunnel syndrome can help decrease symptoms in just a few weeks. In OA, wearing a wrist splint at night showed reduced joint pain after 6 months of use.

Wrist splints can help correct minor orthopedic maladjustments through immobilization. These custom molded splints provide temporary alignment and allow swelling to subside prior to casting. There are a variety of materials and sizes that can be used and vary based on availability, cost, and/or personal preference. Common splint types include volar, dorsal, radial gutter (thumb spica), ulnar gutter, and sugar tong.

**Clinical Significance**

Wrist splints are widely used after surgery to decrease pain, promote proper healing, and ensure that the hardware or the reduced joint does not move. It is important to avoid wearing a wrist splint for prolonged periods as it can lead to a frozen joint.

No study has shown that one type of wrist splint is better than the other. It is all a matter of availability, affordability, and personal preference. After wearing a wrist splint, the joint does become stiff, and hence, some wrist exercise is recommended to regain the motion and strength. Individuals who have a wrist splint after surgery should speak to their physician before undertaking any exercise.