Universal precautions were introduced by the Centers for Disease Control (CDC) in 1985, mostly in response to the human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) epidemic.

- The following human body fluids: semen, vaginal secretions, cerebrospinal fluid, synovial fluid, pleural fluid, pericardial fluid, peritoneal fluid, amniotic fluid, saliva in dental procedures, any body fluid that is visibly contaminated with blood, and all body fluids in situations where it is difficult or impossible to differentiate between body fluids;

- Any unfixed tissue or organ (other than intact skin) from a human (living or dead); and

- HIV-containing cell or tissue cultures, organ cultures, and HIV- or HBV-containing culture medium or other solutions; blood, organs, or other tissues from experimental animals infected with HIV or HBV.

Universal precautions do not apply to sputum, feces, sweat, vomit, tears, urine, or nasal secretions unless they are visibly contaminated with blood because their transmission of Hepatitis B or HIV is extremely low or non-existent.

In 1987, the CDC introduced another set of guidelines termed Body Substance Isolation. These guidelines advocated avoiding direct physical contact with “all moist and potentially infectious body substances,” even if blood is not visible. A limitation of this guideline was that it emphasized handwashing after removing gloves only if the hands were visibly soiled.

In 1996, the CDC Guideline for Isolation Precautions in Hospitals, prepared by the Healthcare Infection Control Practices Advisory Committee (HICPAC), combined the major features for Universal Precaution and Body Substance Isolation into what is now referred to as Standard Precautions. These guidelines also introduced three transmission-based precautions: airborne, droplet, and contact. All transmission-based precautions are to be used in conjunction with standard precautions.