Bamlanivimab is authorized by FDA when administered as an infusion in combination with etesevimab. It should be administered using an aseptic technique by a qualified healthcare professional at an infusion center. The infusion center should have access to immediate care in case of an infusion-related adverse reaction. Each drug comes in individual single-dose vials, stored at a refrigerated temperature of 2 degrees C to 8 degrees C. FDA recommends confirming the shelf life of unopened vials at FDA website as they authorized an extension to the shelf-life.

Prior to preparation, the vials must be allowed to equilibrate to room temperature for approximately 20 minutes. Each vial is visually inspected for any discoloration or any particulate matter. The drugs should be clear to opalescent and colorless to slightly yellow in color. The drugs are mixed with prefilled 0.9% normal saline bag (50 ml, 100 ml, 150 ml, 250 ml) and should be used immediately for infusion. If the infusion mix cannot be used immediately, the bag can be stored at a refrigerated temperature for 24 hours and at room temperature for 7 hours.

The dose recommended for treatment and post-exposure prophylaxis is as follows;

- Adults(≥18 years) and pediatric patients(<18 years, at least 40 kgs)= Bamlanivimab 700 mg + Etesevimab 1400 mg

- Pediatric patients < 40 kgs based on body weight:

- >20 kg to < 40 kgs= Bamlanivimab 350 mg + Etesevimab 700 mg
- <12 kg to 20 kg: Bamlanivimab 175 mg + Etesevimab 350 mg
- 1 kg to 12 kg: Bamlanivimab 12 mg/kg+ Etesevimab 24 mg/kg; The dosing regimen for this group is predicted based on pharmacokinetic modeling and simulation. The pediatric clinical trial included age from 10 months and weighing 8.6 kgs.

For patients weighing ≥ 40 kgs and <50 kgs, extending the infusion time to at least 70 minutes is recommended to ensure safe use. For pediatric patients <18 years and weighing <40 kgs, FDA recommends using a syringe pump and weight-based maximum infusion rate as mentioned in their Fact Sheet. No dose adjustment is necessary for geriatric, renal, or hepatic conditions. FDA also recommends providing the patient with a fact sheet regarding the information on the drugs before the infusion