Enoxaparin has an advantage over heparin because of its bioavailability. Ninety percent of the drug is available when given in the subcutaneous form. Enoxaparin can also be administered in intravenous formulations.

**Venous Thromboembolism Prophylaxis:**Recommended dose of enoxaparin is 40 mg SC once daily, according to the ACCP(American College of Chest Physicians) clinical practice guidelines.

****Treatment of Acute Deep Vein Thrombosis with or without Pulmonary Embolism:********The recommended dose of enoxaparin is 1 mg/kg SC every 12 hours or 1.5 mg/kg SC daily. Anticoagulation should be started immediately in the case of suspected or proven pulmonary embolism. Patients with pulmonary embolism usually require inpatient therapy, according to the PERT Consortium.

**STEMI:**According to the ACCF/AHA (American College of Cardiology Foundation/American Heart Association) guidelines for ST-elevation myocardial infarction (STEMI), in patients treated with fibrinolytic therapy, doses are suggested according to age and renal function. If the age of patients <75 years, 30 mg IV bolus, followed in 15 minutes by 1 mg/kg SC every 12 hours, is recommended. If the age is ≥75 years, no IV bolus is recommended, and  0.75 mg/kg subcutaneously every 12 h (maximum 75 mg for the first two doses) is administered. For creatinine clearance is <30 mL/min, 1 mg/kg subcutaneously every 24 hours is recommended regardless of age.

**NSTEMI:**The suggested dose of enoxaparin in Non-ST-elevation myocardial infarction is 1 mg/kg SC every 12 hours. Guidelines suggest decreasing the dose of enoxaparin to 1 mg/kg SC once daily in patients with creatinine clearance <30 mL/min. Enoxaparin is continued for the duration of hospitalization or until percutaneous coronary intervention.

****Use in Specific Patient Populations****

****Patients with Hepatic Impairment:****A clinical trial demonstrated that enoxaparin decreased the rate of portal vein thrombosis and hepatic decompensation and increased the probability of survival by preventing microvascular thrombosis in patients with cirrhosis. An increased risk of bleeding on anticoagulation therapy is seen in patients with liver cirrhosis due to disequilibrium between procoagulant and anticoagulant states. In addition, older age, increased INR, female sex, prior history of bleeding, hypertension, peptic ulcer disease, active cancer, hypertension, prior stroke, renal impairment, and alcohol abuse augments the risk of bleeding in patients with cirrhosis. In liver cirrhosis, enoxaparin can increase the risk of bleeding; caution is required before initiating enoxaparin.

**Patients with Renal Impairment:**In patients with renal impairment, increased bleeding tendency is seen due to increased exposure to enoxaparin. Dose adjustment of enoxaparin is recommended in patients with severe renal impairment (creatinine clearance <30 mL/min), with 1 mg/kg once daily and simultaneous monitoring of factor anti-Xa activity. Usually, no dose adjustment is required if creatinine clearance is >30 mL/min.

**Pregnancy Considerations:**Pregnant women have a significantly increased risk of thromboembolism than nonpregnant women. Venous thromboembolism (VTE) is the major cause of maternal mortality in the United States. Enoxaparin doesn't cross the placenta and is considered safe in pregnancy. According to ACOG (American College of Obstetricians & Gynecologists) guidelines, enoxaparin, 40 mg SC once daily, is recommended for VTE prophylaxis. Therapeutic anticoagulation with enoxaparin, 1 mg/kg every 12 hours, is recommended for women with acute thromboembolism during the current pregnancy and women with a history of recurrent thrombosis.

**Breastfeeding Considerations:**Available evidence suggests that maternal enoxaparin in doses up to 40 mg daily does not cause adverse drug reactions in breastfed infants. Enoxaparin has a high molecular weight and is not expected to be excreted into breast milk or absorbed from the infant's gastrointestinal tract. Therefore, no special precautions are required.

**COVID-19 Considerations:**In 2022, the American Society of Hematology (ASH) guidelines advised using prophylactic intensity over therapeutic-intensity anticoagulation for patients with critical illness due to COVID-19 (who do not have suspected or confirmed venous thromboembolism). The guidelines suggested that higher intensity anticoagulation may be reasonable for patients evaluated to be at low bleeding risk and high thrombotic risk.