The differential diagnosis of jaw lesions can be divided into cystic, neoplastic, and vascular anomalies (least common). Proper clinical assessment along with radiographic and histological evaluation is the mainstay to differentiate between different lesions. A well-defined unilocular appearance is more suggestive of the cystic lesion.

**Examples of These Lesions**

- **Dentigerous cyst:**It usually presents as a unilocular translucent lesion that causes painless bony expansion around the impacted third molar tooth.

- **Traumatic bone cyst:**It usually presents as a unilocular translucent lesion affecting the mandibular molar and premolar region in young adults. It always spares the inferior alveolar canal.

- **Aneurysmal bone cyst:**It mainly affects the long bones and vertebral column of young adults rather than jaws. It can either present as unilocular or multilocular translucent lesions with marked cortical expansion and teeth displacement.

**Other Rare Conditions**

- **Intraosseous mucoepidermoid carcinoma:**The most common salivary gland tumor that may arise centrally within the jaw. It mainly affects the mandible of middle-aged patients. It can be either unilocular or multilocular.

- **Hyperparathyroidism (brown tumor):**These patients usually present with bone pains, abdominal groans, and renal stones. Renal dysfunction is the main cause of secondary hyperparathyroidism.

- **A****rteriovenous vascular malformations:**These patients are usually aged between 10 and 20 years of age, and the mandible is the most commonly affected site. Loose teeth, gingival bleeding, and audible bruit are the most common symptoms. It usually presents as a multilocular translucent lesion. Aspiration of all undiagnosed jaw lesions is mandatory to rule out the presence of arteriovenous malformation as it may lead to fatal hemorrhage.