All symptomatic popliteal artery aneurysms require repair because of an increased incidence of thrombosis or limb loss. Asymptomatic aneurysms with a diameter greater than 2 cm are considered an indication for an elective operation to avoid complications such as limb-threatening ischemia. Greater than 45 angulation in asymptomatic aneurysms warrants surgical intervention because they can produce acute limb ischemia secondary to kinking of the vessel.

**Conservative Management**

Asymptomatic aneurysms less than 2 cm are safely manageable via duplex surveillance.

**Open Surgical Approach**

Traditional open surgery involves ligation of the popliteal artery proximal (above the knee) and distal (below the knee) below the aneurysmal sac and bypassing the excluded segment using either reversed autologous vein graft (saphenous vein) or prosthetic graft. An alternative surgical approach is aneurysmectomy, followed by an interposition bypass with a prosthetic graft between the proximal and distal normal segments of the popliteal artery. However, the former method is more common.

**Endovascular Approach**

Recently, endovascular techniques have gained popularity in popliteal artery aneurysm repair as an alternative to the open surgical approach. This technique excludes the aneurysmal sac with stent-graft implantation. Recent studies show that popliteal artery stenting is a safe alternative technique for the treatment of popliteal artery aneurysms, especially in high-risk patients. The advantages of the endovascular technique include a shorter hospital stay and an abbreviated operative time when compared to open surgical intervention. Disadvantages include higher 30-day graft thrombosis rates (9% in the endovascular treatment group versus 2% in the open surgical treatment group) and higher 30-day re-intervention rates (9% in the endovascular treatment group versus 4% in the open surgical treatment group). There is no significant difference regarding the incidence of mortality or limb loss rates between the two repair groups.

**Management of Acutely Thrombosed Aneurysms**

Management of this will vary according to the presentation. Asymptomatic patients with completely thrombosed popliteal artery aneurysms and those who are non-ambulatory patients or have acutely thrombosed aneurysms with a poor runoff despite thrombolysis are not candidates for surgical intervention. Only patients with disabling symptoms or critical limb ischemia are treated with surgical bypass as the first line of therapy. Patients presenting with acute limb-threatening ischemia should receive urgent bypass. Acute thrombosis should be treated with intravenous heparin and continuous heparin infusion to limit the extension of the thrombus. However, some surgeons advise that threatening ischemia is better treated with thrombectomy, followed by bypass surgery.

**Intra-arterial Thrombolytic Therapy**

This method is indicated when angiography demonstrates no target vessel or there are multiple distal thrombi noted.

The decision analysis suggested that open repair with great saphenous vein (GSV) bypass might be considered as the preferred treatment for 65-year-old asymptomatic patients with popliteal artery aneurysm (PAAs). The incidence of PAAs in the general population is low, ranging from 0.1% to 2.8%. Therefore, according to their rarity, screening the unselected patients or even patients undergoing abdominal aorta aneurysm (AAA) has not been established to be cost-effective. Patients with a known PAA, however, have a significantly higher risk of having a contralateral PAA or an AAA.  The literature review suggests that younger age, the availability of a single-segment GSV, complicated runoff vessels, and lower operative risk favor the option of open surgical repair. However, with advancing age and insufficient GSV, the presence of satisfactory landing zones, tibial runoff, and higher operative risk might favor the endovascular options. Therefore, in patients with poor tibial or pedal runoff, OPAR with GSVis considered preferential for good-risk patients. High-risk patients, defined as those with high cardiovascular risk or adverse anatomic criteria such as severe venous stasis or lymphedema, pose a challenge. For** patients with a poor life expectancy and an asymptomatic PAA, conservative management is preferred. If treatment of a PAA is indicated for such patients, because endovascular treatment is less taxing and has limited postoperative complications, EPAR should be selected**.** The option is offered even regardless of the availability of the GSV or the quality of the runoff vessels.**Our literature review suggests that younger age, the availability of single-segment GSV, challenged runoff vessels, and lower operative risk favor the choice of OPAR.