The following outlines treatment of lower outlet tract obstruction, prostatic, and urethral causes:

As the patient with acute urinary retention is in discomfort, placement of a urinary catheter or suprapubic catheter (if the urethra is not accessible) should be done to decompress the bladder and relieve the lower tract obstruction.  Urethral catheterization is particularly useful in patients where the cause of urinary retention is temporary, such as infection or medication.  Urethral catheterization is contraindicated in patients with recent urologic surgery such as radical prostatectomy or urethral reconstruction. These patients should have suprapubic catheterization (SPC).

The urethral catheter should be 16 to 18 French as first-line therapy. If one suspects an enlarged prostate as the cause of the obstruction, then they may need a larger 20 to 22 French gauge catheter with a firm coude tip.  If stricture or prostatic scar is a concern, a smaller catheter 10 to 12 French may be an option.  If failure to pass the catheter happens, then urologic consultation may be required. The urologist may be able to perform bedside flexible cystoscopy with either dilatation of the stricture or passage of wire over which one may place a urinary catheter.

After initial decompression with a catheter, discussion with the patient to perform a clean intermittent catheterization versus short-term placement of a catheter with a later trial without catheterization. There are fewer complications with clean intermittent catheterization, and it correlates with an increased rate of spontaneous voiding and a reduction in urinary tract infections. Clean intermittent catheterization is often more acceptable to the patient if the nursing staff focuses on good instruction and placement of the catheter. Further outpatient support services may help. Patients are usually receptive to education.

Treatment of those with nontemporary (chronic) etiology of urinary retention: neurogenic, spinal, demyelination, and contraindication to Foley catheter placement

For patients who had to have a suprapubic catheter due to contraindications or failed urethral catheterization, the urologist usually places suprapubic catheters, but in emergent conditions where a urologist is not present, and the patient is in distress, suprapubic aspiration via a needle is an option. This procedure is performable with ultrasound guidance at the bedside. Some studies show patients with suprapubic catheters experience less discomfort. Placement of suprapubic catheters is not without risk, as bowel perforation and wound infection are possible.

The rate of bladder decompression through studies have shown that rapid, complete drainage is best. Clamping and partial drainage do not reduce the complications of hematuria, hypotension, and post-obstructive diuresis. The studies also showed that partial drainage and clamping increased the risk of urinary infection.

Overview of catheterization treatment:

The underlying etiology determines the duration of catheterization. In the patients where the underlying etiology is temporary, such as with medications or anesthetic should have a post-voiding trial as soon as possible, within 2 to 3 days. In patients with a spinal injury where urinary retention is not likely to resolve, catheterization may become chronic.  These patients are candidates for clean intermittent catheterization or suprapubic catheterization.

The underlying etiology, such as infection, should receive treatment. Medications causing urinary retention should be stopped.  Benign prostatic hyperplasia should receive medical treatment and evaluation for surgical intervention such as transurethral resection.

Patients who have urosepsis, have obstruction due to malignancy, or acute myelopathy should be admitted.

Most cases of acute urinary retention will be managed safely outpatient with a referral for further evaluation of etiology if not identified in the emergent setting.  Patients discharged need instruction in catheterization for intermittent catheterization, Foley catheter care, how to empty catheter bag, and monitoring their urine output.  Patients should not be placed on antibiotics unless a urinary infection is present. Prophylactic antibiotics have been shown not to prevent infection and may increase resistance.

Benign prostatic hyperplasia (BPH) is the most common etiology in men, especially over the age of 60; therefore, a focus of the treatment is medicine and referral to urology for further evaluation of the need for surgical treatment.  Medical treatment of BPH includes an alpha-1 adrenergic antagonist (alfuzosin 10 mg or tamsulosin 0.1 mg). Alpha-1 adrenergic antagonists work by relaxing the smooth muscle at the bladder neck and the capsule of the prostate. Other medications, such as 5-alpha reductase inhibitors, decrease the incidence of acute urinary retention in men with BPH. Patients need to be treated over one year to prevent acute urinary retention and reduce the need for surgery. Trial without catheter should be tried twice before considering surgical therapy. The studies have shown increased success with patients with following characteristics, age less than 65, detrusor pressure greater than 35 cm water, a drained volume of less than one liter at catheterization, and the identification of the precipitating event.

The duration of catheterization in men with BPH should not be over seven days. There has been a large observational study in which patients with medical treatment showed greater success with spontaneous voiding with catheterization of 3 days or fewer. For those men who have BPH and fail a second trial without a catheter, transurethral resection of the prostate (TURP) reduces the risk of developing acute urinary retention 85 to 90 percent.  The timing of surgery is to wait 30 days from the episode of acute urinary retention. Urologists usually perform urodynamic studies to assure the retention is directly related to outlet obstruction.