Much discussion is focused on the diagnosis and detection of **cardiomyopathy**, as it is a leading cause of cardiac arrest and death in young athletes. Hypertrophic subaortic stenosis and****cardiomyopathy can be very difficult to identify on clinical examination, particularly for sports physicians who may not be familiar with cardiac pathology and stethoscope examinations.

Thus, it is again of paramount importance that a physician knows the warning signs of such and never disregards a past history of difficulty breathing, loss of consciousness without head trauma, or a family history of cardiac abnormalities. Combined with abnormal findings or murmurs on an auscultation exam, such athletes should be restricted from play until an echocardiogram can be performed, and the athlete is examined by a component cardiologist or other heart specialist according to the guidelines proposed by the American College of Cardiology and the American Heart Association.

- **Etiology**
- Hypertrophic cardiomyopathy caused most frequently by an autosomal dominantly inherited mutation of the genes associated with myosin-binding protein C, or beta-myosin heavy chains leads to marked ventricular concentric hypertrophy with septal predominance. This leads to a diastolic dysfunction and outflow obstruction due to systolic anterior motion of the mitral valve, causing syncope and ventricular arrhythmias upon exertion.The decreased outflow tract caused by septal thickening leads to a systolic murmur that is best appreciated at the left sternal border. Thus increasing preload to the left ventricle widens the outflow tract and decreases the intensity of the murmur. Increasing afterload leads to a decrease in cardiac output, which also decreases the intensity of the murmur.

- **Physical examination findings**
- Patients with hypertrophic cardiomyopathy classically develop a systolic murmur related to left ventricular outflow obstruction and mitral regurgitation. Outflow obstructions caused by the characteristic septal hypertrophy and anterior motion of the mitral valve create a harsh crescendo-decrescendo systolic murmur that begins slightly after S1, heard best at the apex and lower left sternal border.  Increasing filling times decrease the intensity of the murmur due to a decreased preload, and conversely, increasing afterload will increase the intensity of the murmur.
- Echocardiograms should be performed to assess for septal thickening and can help to guide management.  Family members of those diagnosed with hypertrophic cardiomyopathy should undergo genetic testing to assess for abnormality. Drugs that increase filling times, such as beta-blockers, are typically the first-line treatment.