The EPS starts with the placement of bipolar or multipolar catheters in the heart for the acquisition of intracardiac electrical signals. These signals are properly amplified, filtered, digitized, and finally displayed along with standard ECG recordings. The intracardiac electrograms (EGMs) are broadly divided into two types: “unipolar” and “bipolar.” A unipolar signal is the recording of the voltage difference between an intracardiac (cathode, located at the tip of the catheter) and an extracardiac (anode, usually in the inferior vena cava located) electrode. On the contrary, bipolar signals are electrical activities recorded from one of the close-spaced (2 to 3 mm apart) electrode pairs of an electrophysiologic catheter within the heart cavity. In EPS, bipolar recordings are most commonly used because they are far less susceptible to the sensing of signals originating far away from the recording site (far-field signals) compared to unipolar recordings, which display a voltage difference over a large distance.

However, unipolar recordings are very useful when we want to accurately locate and ablate an arrhythmogenic focus. The reason is that a unipolar electrode records only one electrical impulse which passes through the point of contact with cardiac tissue, while a bipolar electrode displays the summation of two recordings each from the proximal and the distal pole of the of pair electrodes. Since a negative deflection is always inscribed when an electrical pulse is moving away from the recording electrode, a sharp negative unipolar signal denotes the point of origin of the impulse, which then spreads away to the rest of the myocardial tissue.

In a baseline EPS, the EGMs are usually obtained from catheters located in the following anatomical structures:

- High right atrium near the sinus node (HRA)

- His-bundle (His)

- Coronary sinus (CS)

- The apex of the right ventricle (RV)

The most common displayed format follows the sequence of the normal impulse during sinus rhythm and includes from top to bottom: two or three ECG leads (usually I, III and V1), HRA, His distal, His proximal, CS 1-10 and RV. (Figure 2)