# Continuing Education Activity

Succinic semialdehyde dehydrogenase (SSADH) deficiency is an autosomal recessive-inherited inborn error of metabolism with rare occurrence. Although it has been reported in over 450 instances, the neurological and behavioral complications may affect numerous individuals. This disorder may remain un- or underdiagnosed. This activity reviews the biochemical and clinical evaluation of SSADH deficiency and highlights the role of the interprofessional team in the care of patients with this disease.

**Objectives:**
- Describe the etiology of succinic semialdehyde dehydrogenase deficiency.
- Review the typical clinical presentations of succinic semialdehyde dehydrogenase deficiency.
- Explain the treatment and management options available for succinic semialdehyde dehydrogenase deficiency.
- Summarize the importance of collaboration and coordination amongst the interprofessional team to enhance care coordination for patients affected with succinic semialdehyde dehydrogenase deficiency.

# Introduction

Succinic semialdehyde dehydrogenase (SSADH) deficiency is a rare autosomal recessive disorder that affects the degradation of gamma-aminobutyric acid (GABA), a major inhibitory neurotransmitter of the brain.

The biochemical hallmark is the accumulation of gamma-aminobutyric acid in body fluids. The affected individuals present with non-specific and variable neurological features, and a high index of suspicion is required for diagnosis. However, the characteristic biochemical and neuroimaging findings often lead to diagnostic suspicion and facilitate targeted metabolic and genetic testing.

# Etiology

The etiology of SSADH deficiency is the absence of SSADH due to mutations in the gene ALDH5A1.

Studies analyzing the structural and functional consequences of some of these variants have shown a profound effect on SSADH enzyme activity. The mRNA expression has been identified in the brain, liver, and biliary system, as well as the reproductive system (Leydig cells, testicular interstitium), upper gastrointestinal tract (duodenum), and endocrine system (thyroid gland and parathyroid glands). The brain sites of SSADH expression include the hippocampus, cerebellum, cerebral cortex, and lateral ventricles.

# Epidemiology

Succinic semialdehyde dehydrogenase (SSADH) deficiency is a rare disorder. Approximately 450 patients are reported in the literature.

# Pathophysiology

The impairment of the function of the SSADH enzyme leads to a disruption of the metabolism of gamma-aminobutyric acid (GABA), which is a naturally occurring amino acid that functions as an inhibitory neurotransmitter in the brain. SSADH deficiency leads to an abnormal accumulation of the compound succinic semialdehyde, which in turn is converted to 4-hydroxybutyric acid (4-HBA), which is also known as gamma-hydroxybutyric (GHB). Both GABA and gamma-hydroxybutyric acid contribute to pathophysiology. However, the relative contribution of each of these compounds to the pathophysiology remains unknown.

Both experiments in murine knockout models and humans have suggested a role for down-regulated gamma-aminobutyric acid type-A receptor (GABAAR) and gamma-aminobutyrate type-B receptor (GABABR) function in epileptogenesis in SSADH deficiency.

In SSADH deficiency, mitochondrial dysfunction may take place as GABA degradation is coupled to the Krebs cycle. Thus, it is linked to the respiratory chain through succinate and alpha-ketoglutarate.

# Histopathology

Neuropathological findings in SSADH deficiency have been described in a single report.

The other findings included congestion of the vessels in the leptomeninges, globus pallidum, and superior colliculus. Granular perivascular calcifications were present in globus pallidi, cerebellar dentate nuclei, and hippocampus. They have been attributed to chronic progressive excitotoxic injury.

# Toxicokinetics

Lee et al. studied the SSADH in the rat brain.

The basal nuclei of Meynert are associated with Alzheimer disease. Finally, immunoreactivity was detected in raphe nuclei of the reticular formation of the midbrain, cerebellum, and inferior olivary nuclei of the medulla oblongata. Immunophenotypically reactive cells were markedly observed in the areas, which were linked with both the formatio reticularis and the limbic system of the rodent brain.

# History and Physical

The clinical features of SSADH deficiency are often non-specific and variable. SSADH deficiency typically presents in late infantile period and early childhood but may be diagnosed occasionally in adulthood. The disorder often has a slowly progressive or static course. The clinical features are characterized by developmental delay and later intellectual impairment, with prominent expressive language delays, hypotonia, ataxia, movement disorder, and seizures.

Neuropsychiatric features: Prominent neuropsychiatric symptoms occur, especially in the older age group, and are disabling. These include irritability, easy agitation, anxiety, hallucinations, disabling obsessive-compulsive disorder, inattention, hyperactive behavior, and autistic-like behavior.

Seizures are seen in approximately 50% of patients. Generalized seizures are commonly seen, of which generalized tonic-clonic seizures predominate, followed by myoclonic seizures and atypical absences.

Sleep disorders are common and increasingly seen as age advances. Excessive day time somnolence and other disorders of initiating or maintaining sleep have been reported.

Episodic deterioration or encephalopathy is generally not seen as it is in other metabolic disorders. However, a rare presentation with a metabolic stroke following diarrheal illness has been reported.

# Evaluation

The diagnosis of SSADH deficiency is initially made by the presence of 4-hydroxy butyric acid excretion in urine, which is identified by special ion monitoring gas chromatography-mass spectrometry. Magnetic resonance imaging of the brain shows bilateral symmetrical hyperintense signal changes in globus pallidum and often raises diagnostic suspicion of SSADH in an appropriate clinical setting.

Specialized magnetic resonance spectroscopy protocols that allow editing for small molecules have shown elevated levels of GABA and related compounds in patients with SSADH deficiency.

Electroencephalography shows background slowing and epileptiform abnormalities. The epileptiform abnormalities are usually generalized and sometimes multifocal. Rarely photo paroxysmal response and electrographic status epileptics of slow-wave sleep have been reported.

The diagnosis is established by the identification of biallelic pathogenic variations in ALDH5A1. The molecular testing approach could be either single-gene sequencing or multigene panel testing.

# Treatment / Management

Similar to other pediatric neurodegenerative disorders, there is no curative treatment for SSADH deficiency currently. However, there are some symptomatic and supportive management options

Anti-seizure medications: Broadspectrum anticonvulsants are advised though sodium valproate is contraindicated because of the inhibition of the SSADH enzyme.

Neuropsychiatric symptoms: Various antidepressants, anti-anxiety, and antipsychotic medications and cerebral stimulants have been used to treat behavioral symptoms in SSADH deficiency.

There are a number of pharmacological and enzyme replacement therapeutic options that are currently being evaluated, including GABA and GHB receptor antagonists and mTOR inhibitors.

# Differential Diagnosis

The differential diagnoses of SSADH deficiency include other disorders of GABA metabolism, which include GABA transaminase deficiency and homocarnosinosis. GABA transaminase deficiency results from mutations in the ABAT gene and the clinical features are characterized by developmental delay, hypotonia, hypersomnolence, movement disorder, and seizures.

Another important consideration is other disorders causing bilateral symmetrical signal changes in the globus pallidum. These disorders include organic acidemias, especially methylmalonic academia, mitochondrial disorders, pyruvate dehydrogenase deficiency, and pantothenate kinase-associated neurodegeneration. Late-onset isolated sulfite oxidase deficiency (ISOD) is another disorder with globus pallidus signal changes.

# Prognosis

SSADH deficiency is a lifelong disorder, and the clinical features evolve over time. Longitudinal studies have shown that compulsive behavior, sleep disturbances, and seizures are more commonly seen in adolescence or the adult age group compared to a lower proportion of those with hypotonia.

# Complications

The complications include progressive neurological disorder and neuropsychiatric problems, including seizures and a high incidence of SUDEP in adult patients.

# Deterrence and Patient Education

Patients, parents, and caregivers should be appropriately counseled regarding the diagnosis, prognosis, and anticipated complications in SSADH deficiency. Families should be counseled regarding the progression of neuropsychiatric symptoms into adulthood. Appropriate genetic counseling should be offered to those who are carriers and at risk of being carriers. In the Mendelian mode of inheritance, autosomal recessive disorders result when one copy of the abnormal gene for the same trait is inherited from each parent.

Thus, parents of an affected child with SSADH deficiency are obligate heterozygote carriers. Thus, two carriers (father and mother) have a 25% chance that their offspring shows the SSADH deficiency and 25% chance that their offspring is healthy, while half of their offspring (50%) may be carriers exactly like the parents. Heterozygotes or carriers are usually asymptomatic.

# Enhancing Healthcare Team Outcomes

An interprofessional team approach is essential for providing excellence in healthcare to individuals with SSADH deficiency. The composition of the team may target a unique holistic, and integrated approach with the aim of delivering excellent management to patients with SSADH deficiency. The role of the primary clinician and pediatric neurologist is crucial. The involvement of geneticist and genetic counselor is important for appropriate genetic counseling and testing the at-risk individuals in the family.

Management of neuropsychiatric symptoms requires the involvement of a pediatric psychiatrist and psychological medicine team. An allied health professional team should be involved in the management from the beginning to provide physiotherapy, occupational therapy, and speech therapy. Appropriate social support to the family should be provided, and support from the social worker and community nurses are pivotal for ongoing monitoring and to make appropriate and timely referrals as needed. The collaboration and shared decision making, as well as communication, are key elements for a good outcome.

The interprofessional care must use an integrated care pathway using preferably an electronic medical recording linked to an evidence-based medical avenue to planning and peruse of all arthro-skeletal activities. Of note is that the earlier the manifestations of SSADH deficiency are discovered, the better the outcome is with the potential avoidance of most SUDEP occurrences. [Level III]