Management can vary greatly from institution to institution. Almost all protocols recommend getting a sample of the affected healthcare worker's blood and as well as recommend getting a sample of blood from the source. Even though healthcare workers are aware of the need for testing, a majority will forego testing and start prophylactic treatment. Most find little value with regard to formal risk assessment and feel it adds little value in primary outcomes. Similar attitudes have been found in African counties as well.

As for management, if the source patient is known to be HIV positive, the post-exposure prophylaxis (PEP) regimen is started. Recommendations are that PEP should be started within 2 hours of exposure, for most high-risk exposures, PEP may be considered even after 72 hours of exposure. Treatment should be continued for four weeks. The CDC now recommends PEP with two nucleoside reverse transcriptase inhibitors (NRTIs) and a protease inhibitor (PI) for all exposures in which PEP is believed to be necessary.

If the source patient is HCV-positive, additional testing is carried out for up to 6 months depending on the scenario. HBV-positive source patients require testing of the healthcare worker's hepatitis B immunization status. If the healthcare worker is vaccinated in the past or had an HBV infection, nothing needs to be done acutely. Antibody titer for HBV surface antigen should be sent and urgent follow-up should be given. If the titers are less than 10mIU/mL, indicating that the vaccine was ineffective and the patient is not immune, then the patient should be given hepatitis B immunoglobulin and HBV revaccination series should be started.