Normal proliferative endometrium contains glands that are regularly spaced and that lie within stroma at a gland: stroma ratio of 1 to 1. Atrophic endometrial cells, on the other hand, are smaller and more cuboidal than proliferative endometrium. Because atrophic postmenopausal endometrium is no longer active, there are few or no mitotic cells. The glands become cystic, appearing large and round. The stroma between glands is inactive.

Chronic endometritis can be secondary to atrophy or infection. It is diagnosed traditionally on histology by plasma cell infiltration. On hysteroscopy, one can also grossly see endometrial hyperemia, edema, or micro-polyps (measuring less than 1 mm).

“Endometrial reactive changes” is terminology linked to a heterogeneous group of morphologies of the endometrium. These morphologies are associated with inciting events like infection, stromal breakdown, or recent instrumentation. They can also be seen with hormonal imbalance.

Endometrial hyperplasia demonstrates a widespread crowding of endometrial glands. Without atypia, gland cytology is normal, and only occasional mitotic figures are found. Suppose atypia is present, as, in endometrial intraepithelial neoplasia (EIN), both gland crowding and abnormal gland nuclei are seen. EIN is considered a cancer precursor.

Endometrial cancer can be type I or type II:

**Endometrioid Adenocarcinoma Type I:**This is the most common of the histologic types (more than 75% of endometrial cancers). On histology, one may see solid areas, maze-like glands, or appreciable cribiforming. Most are low-grade and are confined to the uterus at diagnosis. EIN is the precursor lesion for this type of endometrial cancer.

**Endometrioid Adenocarcinoma Type II:**These are considered to be high grade and include clear cell, carcinosarcoma, and papillary serous histologies. These cancers have a higher risk of extrauterine disease, and they have a worse prognosis than type I tumors. For example, 10% of uterine cancers are papillary serous, but they are responsible for nearly 40% of deaths.