If abusive head trauma is a consideration, a detailed diagnostic evaluation is necessary. Evaluation should include a comprehensive history, physical, laboratory testing, imaging, and consultation with specialists.

The evaluation should include a review of the timeline of the signs and symptoms leading up to the evaluation. Clinicians should ask open-ended questions that can minimize unintentional bias and allow the opportunity to learn alternative explanations for injuries. A history that does not include trauma or a fall from a low height is the most common in abusive head trauma cases. Caregivers of children injured accidentally will usually report a history of trauma. An inconsistent history or history that changes are suggestive of abusive head trauma and child abuse. The clinician should identify the development and progression of symptoms. Signs and symptoms of abusive head injury occur immediately in over 90% of infants who suffer shaking.

- Note when the child became symptomatic.

- A detailed description of the events

- If more than one caretaker was present, they should be interviewed separately.

- An inconsistent history is a red flag for abuse.

The physical exam should include a head-to-toe assessment. The neurological exam merits particular attention.

**Tests**

- Complete blood count (CBC) with platelets

- Chemistry panel

- Liver and pancreatic function

- Urinalysis

- CT/MRI/MRA

- Skeletal survey

**Imaging**

Imaging studies are the most likely test to confirm abusive head trauma. The clinician should initially obtain a skeletal survey and head CT scan.

CT Scan

The head CT is the most helpful test in the diagnosis of intracranial injury from abusive head trauma. While definitive, if positive, a CT may not detect edema, fractures, or shear injury. Often a head CT should be followed by an MRI.

MRI

An MRI can help distinguish a chronic subdural from subarachnoid collections, detect subacute and chronic subdural blood, and define the extent of a parenchymal injury. The use of diffusion MRI may further assist in obtaining an accurate diagnosis.

**Skeletal Survey**

A skeletal survey should be obtained in any child younger than two years of age with unexplained traumatic injuries.

A skeletal series consists of plain radiographs of the spine, skull, ribs, and long bones. They are commonly successful in identifying abuse. A “babygram,” which is a single image, should be avoided because of the poor detail it provides. Follow-up rib films should be considered 2 or 3 weeks after the initial skeletal survey to evaluate for healing fractures that were not seen in the acute phase.

**Bone Scans**

Bone scans are an alternative to skeletal surveys and are used if there is a high suspicion of fractures that did not show up on a skeletal survey. Bone scans are more expensive and difficult to perform. Also, bone scans expose the child to more radiation.

**Laboratory**

Laboratory studies should include complete blood cell count with platelet count, chemistry panel, prothrombin time, partial thromboplastin time, amylase, lipase, aspartate aminotransferase, alanine aminotransferase, and urinalysis. The laboratory evaluation may suggest abusive head trauma by uncovering additional injuries that support child abuse or finding an underlying disease that would be misdiagnosed as child abuse or abusive head trauma.