Classification of epithelial tissue is based on the shape of the cells and the number of cell layers. Cell shapes can be squamous (flat and thin), cuboidal (box-shaped), or columnar (rectangular). Additionally, there may be a single layer of cells, termed simple epithelium, or multiple layers of cells, termed stratified epithelium. There also exists pseudostratified epithelium, which describes a single layer of irregularly shaped cells that appear to be more than one layer. Transitional epithelium refers to a specialized form of stratified epithelium in which cell shape varies.

**Simple Epithelium (Single Layer of Epithelial Cells)**

- **Simple Squamous**
- Thin, flat, horizontal, and elliptical-shaped
- It makes up the endothelium lining the lymphatic and cardiovascular system, lung alveoli, kidney tubules, lining of capillaries, and mesothelium lining the serous surface of body cavities and internal organs.

- **Simple Cuboidal**
- A box-shaped cell with a round nucleus; actively absorbs and secretes molecules.
- Found in kidney tubules and gland ducts

- **Simple Columnar**
- Rectangular shaped with elongated nuclei at the basal end of the cells; absorbs and secretes molecules.
- Found in the digestive tract and female reproductive tract
- Ciliated simple columnar epithelial cells are found in the respiratory tract and fallopian tubes, aiding in the movement of mucous and other substances via the beating of their cilia.

- **Pseudostratified Columnar**
- Irregularly shaped with nuclei at different locations in the cell
- Pseudo = "false" - appears stratified but is a single layer of epithelial cells attached to the basal lamina

**Stratified Epithelium (Multiple Layers of Epithelial Cells)**

- **Stratified Squamous Epithelium**
- The most common type of stratified epithelium
- The basal layer is cuboidal or columnar, and apical layers are squamous
- The top layer may be dead cells filled with keratin
- Found in the skin (keratinized) and mouth (non-keratinized)

- **Stratified Cuboidal and Columnar Epithelium**
- Uncommon - found in ducts and glands

- **Transitional Epithelium (Urothelium)**
- Changes shape in response to stretch
- Found only in the bladder, ureters, and proximal urethra
- It appears cuboidal when relaxed and squamous when stretched