The patient usually presents with symptoms of rash, swelling of the lips/tongue, or collapsed. The review of the patient’s activity is vital in identifying the cause of the event or symptoms and the time of onset.  How the patient treated these symptoms if the symptoms resolved but returned, and if there had been other events. Often patients cannot identify the cause of the symptoms immediately, and input from others present is necessary. In patients presenting with progressive symptoms as listed below on a continuous spectrum, anaphylaxis should be a consideration.

Multisystem involvement:

- Skin: (pruritus’, cutaneous flushing, and urticaria),

- Mucosa: (swelling of lips, tongue, conjunctiva, the fullness of the throat or difficulty swallowing),

- Lung/respiratory: (chest tightness, shortness of breath, wheezing, hoarseness, stridor, rhinorrhea),

- Gastrointestinal: (chest spasms with nausea and gaging/ wrenching, vomiting, abdominal cramping, diarrhea),

- Cardiovascular: (tachycardia, with above symptoms, syncope, collapse, hypotension), chest pain, palpitations,

- CNS: dysthymia, altered mental status, apprehension, a sense of impending doom, seizures, headache)

- Ocular: (periorbital itching, erythema, and edema, tearing, conjunctival erythema)

- Urinary or sexual organs: (bladder cramping, uterine cramps)

Children may exhibit behavior changes such as clinging, crying, become irritable, and cease to play. They may exhibit stridor showing laryngeal airway problems. The patients may state they self-treated the itch with over-the-counter antihistamines it went away and now has returned. Prior exposure to the substance is not always necessary, and the patient being on a particular medication with no prior reaction should not mislead the clinician from suspecting the medication as a cause. An example of this is ACE inhibitors producing angioedema.

The clinician needs to be aware that anaphylaxis can have presentations of where the symptoms resolve, and then the patient develops a recurrence of symptoms with no additional exposure to the causative agent.; known as biphasic anaphylaxis. The patient can have a protracted anaphylactic reaction that lasts, hours, days, or weeks. Patients can also have delayed reactions from exposures where symptoms do not occur for hours. Reassessment and observation for 4 to 6hours is important as it allows for one to get pertinent history and physical assessment to determine the cause, prognosis, disposition, and needed education for the patient.