**CSF Production**

The brain is composed of three layers of meninges known as the dura mater, arachnoid mater, and the pia mater. The choroid plexus resides in the innermost layer of the meninges (pia mater) which is in close contact with the cerebral cortex and spinal cord. It is a highly organized tissue that lines all the ventricles of the brain except the frontal/occipital horn of the lateral ventricles and the cerebral aqueduct. The choroid plexus has a lining of specialized epithelial tissue known as ependyma. Ependymal cells are glial cells with a ciliated simple columnar form that line the ventricles and central canal of the spinal cord. Apical surfaces have a covering of hair-like projections known as cilia (which circulate CSF) and microvilli (which help in CSF absorption). Microvilli perform this function via their brush border, which significantly increases the surface area of the choroid plexus, permitting increased CSF absorption. Ependymal cells are essential in the production of CSF as the choroid plexus may secrete up to 500ml of CSF per day in the adult human brain.

**Blood-CSF Barrier**

The choroid plexus forms the blood-CSF barrier along with the arachnoid mater to create a pair of membranes that separate the blood from the CSF. This barrier is composed of a combination of ependymal (choroid epithelial) cells with tight junctions on its apical surface (the side facing the ventricles), and a core of fenestrated capillaries surrounded by connective tissue. Tight junctions consist of a network of claudins and proteins that serve as a checkpoint to limit the passage of substances between the cells. The blood-CSF barrier functions similarly to the blood-brain-barrier (BBB) in that it facilitates the exchange and removal of metabolites while simultaneously preventing the passage of blood-borne substances into the brain. However, the substances exchanged between each respective barrier differ significantly due to their distinct functions. For instance, the choroid plexus contains a fenestrated endothelium (BBB is non-fenestrated) which allows the rapid delivery of water to aid in CSF production. Within the choroid plexus reside microglia, white blood cells, macrophages, dendritic cells, and lymphocytes which all serve to prevent harmful pathogens from entering, this permits normal brain homeostasis via cytokines that the choroid plexus secretes to recruit these immune cells.