As in other parts of the body, angiography of the ankle can be performed by conventional angiography, CT angiography (CTA), or MR angiography (MRA). Conventional angiography using digital subtraction angiography (DSA) remains the gold standard for the evaluation of arterial anatomy. Conventional angiography is invasive, however, requiring direct arterial access. A benefit is using DSA is the real-time nature of the examination, allowing selective and sub-selective catheterization of distal arteries and the ability to intervene at the time of the examination. Additionally, DSA has the highest spatial resolution of these modalities, allowing for the detection of small arterial injuries below the limit of resolution of CT or MR.

The most common indication for these studies is vascular trauma and is most commonly performed with CT. CTA has been shown to have near 100% sensitivity and high specificity for vascular trauma to the ankle, which is less expensive and less time-consuming than conventional angiography and can be performed concomitantly with the trauma evaluation.

Vascular injuries may present as intraluminal thrombus, dissection flap, non-opacification of a vessel due to occlusion, or extravasation of contrast correlating with active hemorrhage from mural disruption. A dissection flap may be either linear or semilunar in the configuration. These must often be differentiated from nontraumatic findings such as calcified and noncalcified atheromatous plaque in the arterial wall. Abrupt vessel narrowing with distal vessel opacification may suggest either intimal injury, external compression, or vasospasm. Vessel narrowing may be subtle and difficult to differentiate from the normal tapering of distal vessels.

MRA is not indicated in the acute setting but is useful in the evaluation of chronic peripheral vascular disease such as in diabetes, especially in those patients for whom exposure to iodinated contrast or ionizing radiation is a concern. Numerous techniques have been investigated for MRA, including gadolinium-enhanced phase-contrast and non-contrast time-of-flight (TOF), flow-sensitive dephasing, and steady-state free precession techniques. Sensitivity and specificity for all of these techniques are high.