# Definition/Introduction

A pericardial rub is highly specific for acute pericarditis. It is generally heard over the left sternal border, it is often louder at inspiration but sometimes can be better heard on forced expiration while the patient bends forward. In most cases, the rub is triphasic (audible in atrial, ventricular systole, and ventricular diastole phases) and is of high frequency.

# Issues of Concern

The prevalence of a pericardial rub in pericarditis varies widely among studies and is anywhere between 35% and 85%,

# Clinical Significance

The presence and documentation of a pericardial rub are of extreme importance since it is one of the four criteria to diagnose acute pericarditis. According to the 2015 European Society of Cardiology Guidelines for the diagnosis and management of pericardial diseases, acute pericarditis is diagnosable in the presence of two out of the four criteria: typical pericarditis chest pain, pericardial rub, diffuse ST-elevation or PR-depression on electrocardiogram and a new or worsening pericardial effusion.

Thus, detection of pericardial rub along with a new pericardial effusion, for example, meets the criteria and the patient should be treated as acute pericarditis. An untreated episode of acute pericarditis increases the risk of complications including recurrent, chronic, and constrictive pericarditis.

A pericardial rub can also be indicative of left ventricular dilation after acute Q-wave anterior myocardial infarction since transmural infarct can irritate the pericardium (and cause pericarditis) and cause left ventricular failure.

# Nursing, Allied Health, and Interprofessional Team Interventions

Because of available technologies, expertise in bedside examination has declined among medical professionals. For every patient who presents with chest pain suspicious for acute pericarditis, the nursing and medical team should attentively try to identify a pericardial rub over the left sternal border at different times, since the presence of the rub is variable during the day. Its detection modifies the patient's management since the presence of a pericardial rub is very specific for acute pericarditis.