Quetiapine is FDA approved for schizophrenia, acute manic episodes, and adjunctive treatment for major depressive disorder. There is FDA indication through three 6-week trials and one 6-week trial for schizophrenia in adults and adolescents ages 13 to 17. The first trial showed that in adults, the maximal effect occurred at 300 mg per day. A mean of around 450 mg per day in the second trial showed superiority over placebo, and a mean of  500 mg per day in the third trial showed superiority over the group that received 50 mg a day. The researchers concluded that the effective range was from 150 mg to 750 mg for treating schizophrenia in adults. In the one six-week trial, the conclusion was that quetiapine, at an average dose of 400 mg/day to 800 mg/day, was superior to the placebo in adolescents. Two 12-week trials showed efficacy for mono-therapeutic effects.

Treatment for acute manic episodes associated with bipolar I disorder in adults with a majority at a dosing range of 400 mg/day to 800 mg/day. One three-week trial showed that quetiapine was effective as an adjunct treatment for acute manic episodes in bipolar I disorder to lithium or divalproex in adults. One three-week trial showed efficacy at 400 mg/day to 600 mg/day for mono-therapeutic treatment for bipolar I disorder for children and adolescents ages 10 to 17. Two trials showed effectiveness in the acute treatment of depressive episodes in bipolar I and II in adult patients. The drug showed efficacy at 300 mg/day, and no additional benefits were apparent at a high 600 mg/day dosage.

Quetiapine has uses in several non-FDA-approved indications, such as generalized anxiety disorder. Three randomized control trials have shown the efficacy of treatment in mono-therapeutic treatment over placebo. Research on other off-label uses has not been strong enough to advocate FDA approval, and more clinical trials are necessary.