Chloroprocaine causes reversible nerve conduction blockade by decreasing nerve membrane permeability to sodium.

All local anesthetics exhibit differential blockade—the observation that nerve fibers associated with different functions have dissimilar sensitivity to the sodium channel blocking properties of local anesthetics.

In general, the speed of onset for a local anesthetic is determined by its pKa (dissociation constant)—the pH at which half the drug is ionized (protonated) and half the drug is nonionized (uncharged).

Chloroprocaine is an exception to this rule. Chloroprocaine has a pKa (8.7) greater than lidocaine, ropivacaine, bupivacaine, and mepivacaine, yet it can provide faster onset epidural anesthesia.

The nerve membrane is heavily occupied by lipids. Accordingly, more lipophilic substances cross the nerve membrane more easily, which provides more molecules to block nerve conduction.  In this manner, lipid solubility is one of the main determinants of local anesthetic potency.

Local anesthetics that exhibit higher degrees of plasma protein binding generally have a longer duration of action.  This is because protein binding in plasma can be used as a surrogate for local anesthetic affinity for protein binding in the sodium channel.

Local anesthetics are not specific for peripheral nerves; nerves in the central nervous system and cardiac conduction system may also be blocked.  Because of this, severe symptoms involving the central nervous and cardiovascular system may result when large doses of local anesthetic are injected—a syndrome commonly referred to as local anesthetic systemic toxicity (LAST).