Due to the rarity of cardiac fibromas (1 in 280,000 births), the best clinical management is not yet well defined, and it presents as a challenging entity for pediatric cardiologists. Suggestions for different management strategies exist in the literature including surgical resection, single ventricle palliation, cardiac transplant, and even conservative treatment with antiarrhythmic medications.

Defibrillator placement to prevent malignant arrhythmia after cardiac arrest is associated with a high risk of complications in infants and should only be considered after exploring all options with the risks and benefits explained to the parents. One of the common strategies is to place an endocardial defibrillator lead around the back of the heart in the epicardial space and use epicardial pace/sense leads. Alternatively, use epicardial pace/sense leads and tunnel an endocardial defibrillator lead along the intercostal space is also a reported option. With epicardial defibrillator, the risk of lead fracture is high with a reported 5-year failure rate of 50%.

Medical management with amiodarone and beta-blockers seems to be effective. Small and apically located fibromas respond well to antiarrhythmic medications and are probably better managed without defibrillators. Surgical resection has shown to provide curative treatment, alleviating the need for a defibrillator and long-term antiarrhythmic medications. It is also a viable treatment for large fibromas with positive results. A significant hurdle is the rarity of cardiac centers with experience in removing these tumors. Optimal time reported for surgery is between 1 to 3 years. Factors like the severity of arrhythmias, medication tolerance, defibrillation lead integrity, and symptoms are often considerations and dictate the appropriate time for surgery. Location and size of the tumor can complicate surgery, but even for large fibromas operative morbidity and mortality are low. Given that there are a limited number of patients, it is difficult to test the comparative effectiveness of these treatments.

In patients with tumors not amenable to resection owing to its size and extensive involvement of cardiac structures, several reported cases of “single ventricle palliation” exist. In one case with a large right ventricle fibroma, single ventricle palliation was performed by doing balloon atrial septostomy, placement of a systemic-to-pulmonary shunt to allow an unobstructed venous return to the left atrium and left ventricle to support both systemic and pulmonary circulations. This and other methods of ventricle palliation provided a bridge to heart transplantation.