Although no intervention for preventing the infection is 100% effective, there are several different approaches available that can be used alone or in combination. Personal protective measures reduce the risk of exposure to infective mosquitoes, and chemoprophylaxis can aid in reducing the risk of a poor outcome if infected.****A common approach usually applied is an “ABCD” of malaria – A standing for awareness of the risk, B for bite avoidance, C for compliance with chemoprophylaxis, and D for diagnosis in case of fever. It is essential to consider traveler´s health (especially pregnancy, age, immunosuppression) when assessing the risk for developing severe malaria and choosing an appropriate antimalarial drug.

It is necessary to emphasize the importance of personal protective measures such as barrier clothing, insecticide-impregnated bed nets, application of effective mosquito repellent (higher percentage of active ingredient provides longer protection), and spraying the residence with insecticide. Products that contain 20%-40% of DEET (N, N-Diethyl-meta-toluamide), picaridin, oil of lemon eucalyptus or PMD (p-menthane-3,8-diol) and IR3535 are recommended. Behaviors to minimize exposure to mosquitos are also encouraged – for instance, staying indoors from dusk till dawn, choosing screened accommodations.Anopheles mosquitos.

A standard recommendation for all travelers to endemic areas is strict compliance with the antimalarial drug. There are several different drug choices, prescribed after assessing individual´s risk (level of local transmission, duration of exposure, rural vs. urban travel, type of travel and season), travelers health status, present contraindications, level of parasite drug resistance (mostly chloroquine and mefloquine resistance) and traveler’s preference based on schedule, cost and nature of possible side effects**.**There is an increasing problem with counterfeit and substandard medications being sold in several Sub-Saharan countries, and travelers should be advised to buy the needed medications before departure.****A complete list of recommendations for drug choice can be found on the CDCs website – Malaria Information by Country.

As pregnant women are at increased risk for severe malaria, the WHO and other organizations recommend not traveling to the endemic areas.

Travelers to the endemic areas, former residents of malaria-endemic areas and people diagnosed with malaria should be informed, as per Food and Drug Administration (FDA) recommendations, that they may not donate blood for 1 year after travel or 3 years after departing or revisiting the country or for 3 years after treatment, respectively.

Travelers should be informed that malaria can be fatal with delayed treatment, and one should, therefore, seek medical attention while abroad if symptoms of malaria develop and not fly back for treatment, as medical treatment may not be readily available on transit**.**