Proper palate formation in the developing fetus is essential for functional phonation and feeding after birth. The palate forms the roof of the mouth and separates the oral cavity from the nasal cavity. The palate undergoes complex morphological changes during embryogenesis to achieve its final form and divides into an anterior immobile hard bony segment and a posterior mobile soft palate that does not contain bone. The superior aspect of the palate forms the floor of the nasal cavities and has a lining of ciliated pseudostratified columnar epithelium (respiratory epithelium). The inferior aspect of the palate forms the roof of the oral cavity and is lined with stratified squamous epithelium (oral mucosa) that contains secretory salivary glands. The hard palate comprises about two-thirds of the total palate surface area, and its underlying bony structure consists of the palatine processes of the maxilla and the horizontal plates of the palatine bones. The soft palate is comprised of muscle fibers covered by a mucus membrane, specifically five muscles which have a functional role in breathing and swallowing:

- Levator veli palatini muscle: elevates the soft palate and is involved in swallowing.

- Musculus uvulae muscle: functions to shorten the uvula.

- Palatoglossus muscle: pulls the soft palate towards the tongue and is involved in swallowing.

- Palatopharyngeus muscle: tenses the soft palate and draws the pharynx anteriorly, involved in breathing.

- Tensor veli palatini muscle: tenses the soft palate and is involved in swallowing.