Bisphosphonates have a structure similar to native pyrophosphate and divide into two groups: nitrogen-containing and non-nitrogen-containing bisphosphonates. Nitrogen-containing bisphosphonates include alendronate, risedronate, ibandronate, pamidronate, and zoledronic acid. Non-nitrogen-containing bisphosphonates include etidronate, clodronate, and tiludronate. All bisphosphonates inhibit bone resorption by attaching to hydroxyapatite binding sites on the bone, particularly in areas with active resorption. As osteoclasts resorb bone, the bisphosphonate embedded in the bone is released and impairs the osteoclast’s ability to continue bone resorption.

**Nitrogen-containing bisphosphonates**work by inhibiting farnesyl pyrophosphate synthase, which is important in promoting attachment of the osteoclast to the bone. As a result, the osteoclast detaches from the bone surface, thus inhibiting bone resorption.

**Non-nitrogen-containing bisphosphonates**, on the other hand, are metabolized within the cell to substrates that replace the terminal pyrophosphate moiety of adenosine triphosphate, forming a nonfunctional molecule that competes with adenosine triphosphate in the energy metabolism of the cell. This situation initiates osteoclast apoptosis, which in turn leads to an overall decrease in bone breakdown.

Nitrogen-containing bisphosphonates are much more potent antiresorptive agents than non-nitrogen-containing bisphosphonates. Also, non-nitrogen-containing bisphosphonates are found to have a high potential to inhibit bone mineralization and can cause osteomalacia. For this reason, they are no longer in broad-based use.

**Efficacy Of Bisphosphonates**

All bisphosphonates improve bone mineral density in postmenopausal women with osteoporosis. Alendronate, risedronate, and zoledronic acid decrease the risk of spine, hips, and other nonvertebral fractures. Ibandronate has not consistently been shown to reduce the risk of hip fractures.

- Alendronate: Reduces vertebral fracture risk by about 50%, hip fractures, and other nonvertebral fractures by about 30%.

- Risedronate: Reduces vertebral and nonvertebral fractures by about 40%.

- Zoledronic acid: Reduces vertebral fracture risk by about 70%, hip fractures, and other nonvertebral fractures by about 35%.

- Ibandronate: Reduces vertebral fractures by about 50%. No reduction in risk of nonvertebral fractures.