Apart from the medical team caring for the patient, a multidisciplinary approach to management is key to improving outcomes. In patients with advanced pathologies and a relatively short life expectancy, early involvement of palliative care is important. Attempts should be made to document goals of care, and documentation from prior discussions should be easily available to medical professionals. A patient who has a do not resuscitate (DNR) order should have wrist bands alerting the team in case of arrest/demise. A medical order for a life-sustaining treatment (MOLST) form should be considered. This form is brightly colored and is designed to be easily seen amidst papers and clearly documents goals of care. An electronic version of this form is also available.

A team caring for a patient at the end of life should include the primary medical team, palliative medicine, and pain team if separate from the palliative team. If there are skin breaks or wounds, wound care should be consulted for advice regarding dressings and care. Wound care also specializes in detecting infections and can help fight painful infections of decubitus ulcers. Patients who are mechanically ventilated should have respiratory therapists performing frequent adjustments to the ventilator, changing the ventilatory circuit, and suction. Pulmonary medicine should be involved in abolishing ventilator-patient synchrony, which can cause severe distress. Nurses play the most important role in the team with constant pain assessments and delivering the pain medications. They should communicate the patient’s distress, if any, to the entire team.