Various experts have developed lipid screening guidelines that include the "lipid profile" to measure cholesterol and triglyceride levels. Guidelines differ as to what age primary providers should start screening and how often they should screen patients for hyperlipidemia. In general, it is advised that routine lipid screening should occur when a male turns 35 years of age (if no other cardiovascular risk factors) or 25 years of age (if the patient has other cardiovascular risk factors). It is also suggested that routine lipid screening be initiated in females at 45 years of age (if no other cardiovascular risk factors present) or 30 to 35 years of age (if the patient has other cardiovascular risk factors)

As stated above, the most valuable laboratory test to collect is checking fasting lipid profile, which routinely includes LDL, HDL, triglycerides, and total cholesterol. A v-LDL, total cholesterol: HDL, and LDL: HDL ratios can be added on for a more comprehensive test. It is necessary to not eat or drink anything besides water for 9 to 12 hours as not to skew the results of the lipid panel (mainly the triglyceride levels).

Before starting a statin for high LDL levels, it is important to obtain liver function tests to ensure there is no prior liver dysfunction, as statins may exacerbate this issue. For risk stratification purposes, a Hgb A1c level is necessary to screen for diabetes mellitus, and the clinician should always examine blood pressure measurements to ensure the patient does not have underlying hypertension. Additionally, a TSH should be ordered to rule out underlying thyroid abnormalities, and a simple urinalysis can be collected to screen for albuminuria. These tests are critical for risk-stratification of your patient to accurately assess the potential risks versus benefits of initiating medical therapy in a patient with hyperlipidemia.