The etiology of CSU is yet to be fully established. The prevailing hypothesis is that it relates to autoimmune dysfunction involving autoantibodies targeting IgE and/or IgE receptors to activate histamine release from basophils and mast cells. Up to 40% of patients with CSU demonstrate a positive autologous serum skin test (ASST), whereby the patient’s serum injected into the dermis can induce urticaria. One-third of patients with CSU also has a positive basophil histamine release assay (BHRA), which tests for anti-FceRIa (an IgE receptor) or anti-IgE autoantibodies in the serum.

Further support is lent by the increased prevalence of autoimmune disorders amongst CSU patients. Of these, autoimmune hypothyroidism is the most common, observed in up to 9.8%. Other associated conditions include rheumatoid arthritis, systemic lupus erythematosus, Sjogren syndrome, celiac disease, and type-1 diabetes mellitus.

Infections by a variety of organisms have also been associated with CSU. These include bacteria (Helicobacter pylori, Streptococci, Staphylococci, Yersinia, Mycoplasma pneumoniae), virus (Hepatitis virus, Norovirus, Parvovirus B19), and parasites (Giardia lamblia, Entamoeba spp., Anisakis simplex). Causality remains unproven but may involve infection-mediated autoimmune response and molecular mimicry.

Foods and additives, while implicated in acute IgE-mediated food allergy, are rarely the cause of CSU.

Evidence for the association between malignancy and CSU is conflicting as different studies, including retrospective studies and systematic reviews, demonstrate varying results.