Facial fractures in children are typically caused by blunt trauma such as falls, sports injuries, transportation incidents (including automobiles, bicycles, skateboards, etc.), assault, and child abuse. Penetrating facial injuries, while rare, may also occur.

The neonatal skull is proportionally much larger than the face, and the forehead protrudes over the face. As the child grows, the face expands to comprise a greater relative area of the head until adult proportions are reached in the teenage years.

Pediatric facial bones are more elastic and have more cartilage than adult bones; this allows more flexibility and compression. Given similar mechanisms to adult injuries, children have fewer relative facial fractures for this reason. When fractures occur, they are often minimally displaced and do not show the classic fracture patterns, such as Le Fort injuries described in adults.

Nasal fractures are the most common fracture overall due to the prominence of the nasal bridge and minimal surrounding structural support.

Fracture sites relate to age-dependent development of the sinuses and, to a lesser degree, the stage of dentition.

Until around seven years of age, there is some degree of maxillary sinus pneumatization occurring, with the midface subsequently being more elastic and thicker than the upper face. Thus blunt force to the mid-face in this age group is more likely to result in force transmission upward to the thinner frontal bone, leading to orbital roof fractures.

Above 12 years of age, the maxillary sinuses have fully pneumatized, and the midface bone has thinned with a less cartilaginous structure, while the frontal sinuses are in the process of thickening and developing.