Surgical resection should be performed as soon as possible following a diagnosis of IMSCT, as outcomes correlate with the preoperative neurologic conditions, and observation can lead to further neurologic deficits, some of which are irreversible. The goals of surgical resection are to obtain tissue diagnosis, maximize tumor resection, and improve neurologic functions. Intraoperative somatosensory and motor evoked potentials are used to monitor for changes in neurologic function and help guide resection. The extent of total resection is greatly dependent on the presence of a clear plane between tumor and normal spinal cord tissue. Astrocytomas are infiltrative nonencapsulated tumors that are challenging to resect. For low-grade astrocytoma, if a plane can be developed between the tumor and spinal cord, gross total resection is an option; however, for high-grade astrocytoma or low-grade astrocytoma with no definable plane of resection, biopsy plus limited resection is recommended, as aggressive resection can lead to significant neurologic deficits. Postoperative radiotherapy can be used for high-grade astrocytomas. Ependymomas are benign with a distinct tumor and normal spinal cord interface, making gross total resection an option for cure. The rate of recurrence is dependent on the extent of tumor resection, and with the presence of a discrete surgical plane, gross total resection is reported in more than 90% of cases of ependymomas. Similarly, hemangioblastomas also can be resected circumferentially, and preoperative embolization can attenuate their rich vascular supply. Complete excision is possible in 83% to 92% of patients with clinical improvements noted following resection. Generally, for IMSCT, better long-term outcomes are seen in patients with less preoperative deficits, and recurrence depends on the extent of resection and tumor histology. Adjuvant therapies, including radiotherapy and chemotherapy, are often reserved for tumor recurrence, high-grade lesions, or when there are contraindications to resection. Further research into novel treatment strategies is needed to improve outcomes, especially for astrocytomas with no clear surgical resection planes.