The evaluation of an acutely swollen knee must begin with a very thorough history and examination of the affected knee and contralateral knee. Important questions include mechanism of injury, duration, acuity of onset, previous history of the joint, aggravating symptoms, and any associated systemic symptoms. A knee effusion with a recent injury history may suggest an internal derangement such as a ligament or meniscal tear. In contrast, an atraumatic effusion would have a higher suspicion of infection or systemic disease. A history of previous surgery should be determined in every patient who presents with knee swelling. Patients commonly complain of swelling and stiffness with decreased range of motion.

**Red Flags**

Red flags include fever, non-weight bearing, loss of distal pulses, loss of sensation distal to the knee, open fractures, and cellulitis overlying the knee. These red flags typically need immediate evaluation.

**Exam**

A knee joint effusion will demonstrate swelling around the patella and distention of the suprapatellar bursa. Patients may have a restricted range of motion and pain with ambulation. The exam should include evaluation of the skin, observation of gait, palpation of the external knee structures, active and passive range of motion, joint line tenderness, and special testing. Special tests include the McMurray tests and Thessaly test for the medial and lateral meniscus, Lachman's and anterior drawer tests for an ACL tear, posterior drawer test for a PCL tear, and varus and valgus stress tests for LCL and MCL injuries, respectively. The patellofemoral joint test (compression test) indicates pathology in the patellofemoral compartment.

Both the ballottement test and bulge test are done to look for knee effusion. The ballottement test is done by pressing upward on the medial aspect of the knee 2 to 3 times, then tapping the lateral patella to see if it floats outward due to effusion. Always compare the exam with the unaffected knee. In septic arthritis, the following symptoms are the only ones to occur in more than 50% of patients: joint pain, a history of joint swelling, and fever.