Patient medical history is often a crucial step in evaluating patients. Information gathered by doing a thorough medical history can have life or death consequences. In less extreme cases medical history will often direct care. An example of a patient with a history of breast cancer on chemotherapeutic drugs with a cough may show a need for further workup of a patient with an immunocompromised state versus a healthy patient with no chronic disease.

Documenting the medical history can be lifesaving as well. An encounter with an awake patient who is able to answer all questions which are subsequently recorded on the electronic medical record, could prove to have vital information in the event the patient mental status changes, or during a later encounter if the patient is unable to give their history such as in a traumatic accident.

Those who gather medical history in the acute treatment setting may not have the time or opportunity to gain a complete medical history. In these cases focus should be primarily on the most relevant and pertinent history. If a patient requires emergent treatment such as threats to life, limb or sight, the physician may forgo asking questions about the medical history until after the immediate threats have been addressed and stabilized. Some instances may allow for a few questions, at which time, the 3 primary questions to ask the patient are about the patients general and brief medical history, allergies, and medications the patient is currently or recently has been taking. This information is the highest yield for potentially avoiding the medical error of giving the patient a medication they are allergic to or which may interact with a current medication the patient is taking. The complete medical history may be obtained after the patient has stabilized.

The family may be a potential source of information about a patient's medical history when the patient is unsure or unable to answer questions regarding their medical history. This information can generally be regarded as accurate, but you may have similar issues with the patient's family regarding health literacy and understanding.