The treatment of HIV requires the use of ART to suppress viral load and maintain CD4 counts.HIV–antiretroviral therapy activity.  Several infections or conditions have been described thus far in the reading; many of these conditions require medical or surgical management, very similar to that if the patient were not infected with HIV. Therefore, those specifics will not be reviewed here.  This piece will focus on the prophylaxis and treatment of opportunistic infections and disease states associated with long-term HIV infection or severe immunosuppression (AIDS.). A mainstay of the management of most of these specific HIV or AIDS-related conditions and infections is ART to decrease viral load and increase CD4 cell count.

Coverage for bacterial pneumonia should include typical and atypical antibiotic therapies, as is commonly done.  When PCP is diagnosed, or likely base on a CD4 count below 200, the treatment of choice is trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole (TMP-SMX) for 21 days.  Corticosteroids should be added for PCP if the PO is less than 70 mmHg on ABG analysis.

Oral thrush is treatable with nystatin swishes. Thrush in the otherwise healthy patient may be the only sign of acute HIV infection, and confirmatory diagnosis of HIV infection should be explored if there are risk factors for acquiring HIV. If the CD4 count is under 100 cells/µL, systemic treatment with an azole should be considered to prevent esophageal candidiasis.  Fluconazole is the preferred agent for esophagitis due to Candida.  Other causative agents would include HSV or CMV, and antiviral drugs such as acyclovir or ganciclovir may be required to treat these conditions, respectively. Analgesia, hydration, and electrolyte repletion may also be necessary for the patient with esophagitis suffering from pain or dehydration.  Several opportunistic infections occur in the GI tract, and antibiotic therapy should target organisms such as Clostridium difficile, Salmonella, Shigella, Campylobacter, and Yersinia.  A common antibiotic combination would be metronidazole and ciprofloxacin.  If suspicious of diarrhea due to Cryptosporidium, the antibiotic of choice is paromomycin.  CMV should be considered as a causative agent when the CD4 count is below 50 cells/µL, treatment with ganciclovir should be a consideration in severely immunosuppressed patients with diarrhea. TB may also cause gastrointestinal infection if the CD4 count is very low.

When meningitis is suspected, typical antibiotics should be administered to cover the common bacterial pathogens.  Coverage for HSV should also be considered until HSV-PCR testing is returned.  Cryptococcal meningitis commonly occurs when the CD4 count is less than 100 cells/uL. Recommended initial treatment is amphotericin B and flucytosine in an induction phase followed by consolidation with fluconazole.  If elevated intracranial pressure is present repeat lumbar punctures may be performed to help relieve the fluid.  Toxoplasmosis gondii may also cause CNS infection when the CD4 count falls below 100 cells/uL.  This condition is identified by ring-enhancing lesions on CT of the head and is treated with pyrimethamine and sulfadiazine.  If primary CNS lymphoma occurs from EBV infection, treatment is with ART and chemotherapy.  Progressive multifocal leukoencephalopathy is identified by demyelinating lesions in the brain caused by the JC virus and is treated mainly by raising CD4 counts with ART; there is no specific antiviral therapy.  CMV retinitis occurs when the CD4 count is less than 50 cells/µL and is treated with valganciclovir intraocular implant as well as oral administration.

Kaposi’s sarcoma is treated with cryotherapy, radiation, or infrared coagulation.  Systemic chemotherapy may also be required depending on the severity or location of Kaposi’s.  Disseminated fungal infection with cutaneous manifestations can be treated with systemic antifungals such as azoles.

Prophylaxis can be initiated to attempt the prevention of many of the common opportunistic infections described above.