In 1987 the North American Symptomatic Carotid Endarterectomy Trials (NASCET) began. Patients with moderate carotid stenosis (less than 70%) and severe carotid stenosis (greater than 70%) were randomly assigned to treatment groups, which included antithrombotic medication for a majority of patients. The study found that the benefit of surgery was significant for those with severe carotid stenosis and that patients with less than 50% stenosis gained no significant benefit from CEA. This important study forms the basis of current practice guidelines: patients with 50% or more stenosis of the carotid artery and history of ipsilateral stroke or TIA are recommended to have carotid endarterectomy.  Symptoms of TIA can include amaurosis fugax, a painless temporary loss of vision in one or both eyes often described as a "curtain falling down" over the visual field, hemiparesis, facial weakness, and speech loss.

A similarly important study examined asymptomatic patients with documented carotid disease. In the Asymptomatic Carotid Artery Stenosis (ACAS) trials for endarterectomy, it was shown that after the procedure there is a significant 5-year reduction in stroke risk in asymptomatic patients with severe stenosis. Asymptomatic patients with 70% or more narrowing, also are encouraged to undertake the surgery. As medical therapy has improved since the 1980s, the CREST-2 trial is currently underway and enrolling patients. The trial aims to provide data comparing intensive medical therapy versus surgery in patients with asymptomatic, high grade internal carotid stenosis.

It is possible to screen asymptomatic patients with the use of carotid duplex ultrasonography (CDU), which can assess the degree of carotid stenosis. The severity of the obstruction correlates with carotid flow velocity: according to Poiseuille's Law, the narrower the lumen of the vessel, the higher the flow rate will be through the stenotic segment. Inaccuracies can be shown if there are tortuosities in the vessel, which may cause elevated velocities. Although CDU is useful in detecting hemodynamically significant stenosis, it has relatively low specificity for those patients with 50% to 60% stenosis. Other forms of screening include computed tomography angiography (CTA), and contrast-enhanced magnetic resonance angiography (CE-MRA). These imaging modalities help to assess other variables that can impact an individual's risk including plaque morphology, intracranial collateralization, and brain perfusion. CTA or CE-MRA information can be used alongside CDU to help determine an individual patient's risk profile when contemplating surgery.

For patients with symptomatic carotid occlusion (50-99%), CEA must be performed shortly after the onset of symptoms to be beneficial. If CEA is performed within 2 weeks of symptom onset, the number needed to treat for preventing one stroke is 5 and is recommended. The number needed to treat increases to 125 if it has been more than 2 weeks from the onset of symptoms or if the patient has had a stroke (lasting neurologic deficit). CEA is beneficial in this group of patients if the symptoms are non-disabling, there are no tandem high-grade stenosis, though CEA can be deferred if the stroke area is large (risk of cerebral edema), if there is contralateral carotid occlusion, hemodynamic instability, and contralateral laryngeal palsy is a relative contraindication. There is more myocardial infarction associated with CEA in this setting.

Carotid artery stenting (CAS) is preferred in symptomatic carotid occlusion (50-99%) with multiple comorbidities, tracheostomy, patients with prior neck radiation or dissection. There is an increased peri-procedural risk of stroke after CAS due to the advancement of the stents and technique, otherwise, outcomes after CAS are comparable to CEA in most instances