Approximately 500,000 people present to the emergency department each year with a burn, but most of these patients do not require critical care.

Severely burned patients are a complex population that requires a multidisciplinary approach to their medical care. This population of patients can have multifaceted problems, including complicated airways, smoke inhalation injuries, and a unique approach to hemodynamic optimization considering the pathophysiology of burns. Interdisciplinary work between a myriad of services may be necessary to optimize the care of this complex population.

A retrospective study involving a Difficult Airway Response Team (DART) composed of anesthesiologists, otolaryngologists, and trauma surgeons as a multidisciplinary approach to difficult airways found that a team-based approach was able to secure the airway more often without the need for an emergency cricothyrotomy in a statistically significant manner.

The Parkland Formula can provide a valuable means of estimating the required amount of fluid resuscitation for a burn patient but is subject to human error when providers use this number as the sole number for calculating how much isotonic fluid to administer to the patient. Often, volumes of fluid from intravenous medications are accidentally forgotten to be included. Burn patients must receive the correct amount of fluid resuscitation as too little fluid is associated with increased morbidity and mortality. Too much fluid is associated with the phenomenon of fluid creep, which can lead to higher rates of infection and intubation.

Effective team communication can help prevent fluid creep and its associated issues. Nursing can ensure accurate intake and output recording and comment to physicians when a large volume of medications are being infused (i.e., antibiotics, sedation, electrolyte replacement, etc.), which are typically forgotten when clinicians calculate fluid resuscitation goals. It is the role of the anesthesiologist and critical care physician to work with the surgeons to make adjustments in the delivery of these fluids so surgical sites or respiratory function are not compromised. It is only through effective communication between team members that outcomes for this complex subset of patients can be improved without changing the current therapies available at hand.