**Complete Blood Count (CBC)**- can be done using automated hematology analyzers in the laboratory. However, Hb, mean corpuscular volume (MCV), and mean corpuscular Hb concentration (MCHC) cannot differentiate between the thalassemia trait and iron deficiency or between α- and β-thalassemia. Thalassemia, however, has no direct effect on the platelet count and WBC count.

**Iron Studies**- Serum ferritin levels, if normal or slightly increased, and almost normal transferrin levels, indicate thalassemia, which will be decreased and increased, respectively, in case of iron deficiency anemia.

**Peripheral Smear**- Peripheral smear studies show microcytic hypochromic anemia, target cells, teardrop cells, and cells with basophilic stippling. However, these findings are in common with iron deficiency anemia. The presence of ‘golf ball-like Hb inclusions indicates HbH disease.

**Hemoglobin Analysis**- Quantifying different types of Hb present in a patient’s blood can be done using HPLC or Electrophoresis techniques. These techniques can be applied to diagnose the type of thalassemia disease or carrier. The precision and reproducibility are also good with these techniques.

**Molecular Testing**– Alpha thalassemias are mainly caused by deletions of different lengths or point mutations. Point mutations are single-base substitutions or small insertions or deletions. These different types of mutations can be detected by allele-specific PCR, reverse dot blot (RDB) analysis, Gap-PCR, real-time PCR with melting curve analysis, and DNA sequencing. Primer sequences are published to diagnose several α+ or α° deletional mutations.