Healthcare workers, including clinicians (MDs, DOs, NPs, and PAs) who prescribe oxcarbazepine, should be aware of its indications and adverse effect profile. The drug is known to cause many CNS adverse effects, including sedation, dizziness, abnormal gait, headache, ataxia, fatigue, confusion, nausea, vomiting, abdominal pain, or rash. Hyponatremia and increased suicidal ideation are two of the most dangerous and life-threatening side effects patients may experience while taking oxcarbazepine. Weight gain and sedation can occur as well in a minority of patients. If side effects continue, physicians should consider switching to another agent because augmenting oxcarbazepine with another agent is usually unsuccessful. It is important to note that side effects may increase with higher doses of oxcarbazepine.

Nurses should actively participate in this monitoring since they often have more frequent contact with the patient. They can also assess treatment effectiveness during follow-up visits and monitor for adverse drug effects. They will report any issues to the physician and/or pharmacist. Pharmacists need to verify dosing and in cases of drugs like oxcarbazepine, checking for potential drug-drug interactions is crucial since they can impair the therapeutic effectiveness of oxcarbazepine. If any interactions are present, the pharmacist must contact the prescriber immediately. If the patient is receiving cognitive therapy as well from a different provider, that individual also needs to know about the patient's regimen so that they can monitor for adverse effects as well.

All medications require interprofessional coordination, but it may even be more crucial for drugs such as oxcarbazepine; all healthcare team members must participate, collaborate, and communicate to optimize results and minimize adverse effects. [Level 5]