The chronology of the presenting signs of NF1 are important to keep in mind, and for the pediatrician to suspect NF1, the physical examination is critical, especially for the cutaneous manifestations. The hallmark of NF1, and usually the first presenting signs, are the café-au-lait macules. These macules are common in the general population, but if a patient has 6 or more large café-au-lait macules, the clinician should actively seek for other criteria of NF1. At around 3-5 years of age, patients may develop and present with freckling, most commonly in the axillary and inguinal area, but also in the nape of a person’s neck and around the mouth. The benign tumors that give rise to the name of NF are neurofibromas. These are benign Schwann cell tumors of the nerve sheath. Young children with NF1 can have plexiform neurofibromas, most commonly in the regions of the eye, neck, or limbs. Dermal fibromas, which are smaller and can present in larger quantities, develop during puberty and onwards.

The non-cutaneous manifestations to look out for in NF1 include optic glioma, although these most commonly remain asymptomatic. If symptoms occur, they can cause loss of vision or disturbances of the hypothalamus, when the location of the tumor is in the vicinity of the optic chiasm. If an optic glioma develops, it most commonly will at around 2-6 years of age. The manifestation of NF1 in the eye itself are Lisch nodules, which are hamartomas in the iris. It is essential to realize though, that these usually present later in life, as the prevalence increases with age. Nearly all patients with NF1 will have Lisch nodules by 21 years of age. Another sign that could raise the concern of NF1 is tibial dysplasia, which is congenital, but the problem’s identification is possible only when the patient begins to stand.

NF2 is less common than NF1, and there are not as many dermatologic manifestations. The manifestations that define NF2 are tinnitus, hearing loss, loss of balance, and sometimes facial nerve paralysis, secondary to bilateral vestibular schwannomas. Patients can have café-au-lait macules, but it’s not as much of a hallmark of the syndrome as it is for NF1. Patients with NF2 have no freckling or cutaneous neurofibromas. They can, though, develop plaque-like skin growths called schwannomas.

As in neurofibromatosis, TSC has specific cutaneous manifestations that should prompt the clinician to think of this disorder. Patients will present with hypopigmented macules, frequently referred to as “ash-leaf” spots because of their shape. These macules are congenital, although they may not be visible or identifiable at birth, and are identifiable with a Wood’s lamp in a dark room. If three or more hypopigmented macules are present, the suspicion for TSC is high.

Similar to NF, it is important to understand the timeline of manifestations in TSC. Between four and six years of age, small red nodules over the nose and cheeks may appear, which are facial angiofibromas. On the lower back, there may be a rough and raised plaque with an orange peel-like surface, called a shagreen patch. Around 15-20% of patients with TSC will develop ungual fibromas around adolescence.

TSC also has non-cutaneous manifestations, including cardiac rhabdomyomas, which are congenital and are likely to regress spontaneously but may cause obstruction in the heart of a newborn. Other important manifestations are infantile spasms or seizures, which often start right before the patient’s second birthday. Early recognition and treatment are of utmost importance because its delay may lead to severe intellectual disability.