Pain, in both acute and chronic forms, remains a significant health problem both in the U.S. and worldwide. The aging of the world’s population has led to an increased number of individuals experiencing both acute injuries and chronic diseases.

Among the leading causes of years lost to disability worldwide, four of the top ten low-back pain, neck pain, migraine, and musculoskeletal disorders are pain-related.

Chronic pain has also been observed to have an increased frequency in women and older individuals.

Chronic pain is among the most prevalent reasons persons seek medical care, with chronic pain patients utilizing health care services almost five times more frequently than the rest of the population.

It is imperative to maintain a balance between the adequate treatment of pain and preventing opiate dependence in the population. Non-opiate analgesics are, therefore, increasingly important. Ketamine, as described above, has significant advantages over opiate use in this regard, as it can provide adequate analgesia without compromising the cardiorespiratory drive.

**Indications for Ketamine Use in Pain Management**

Ketamine is indicated for managing acute pain in patients with severe pain that is not responsive to standard opioid analgesics.

**Disadvantages and Adverse Side-effects of Ketamine Use**

Ketamine is a potent anesthetic and analgesic agent that does not affect cardiac output, mean arterial pressure, or respiratory drive when used within recommended doses. However, caution is advised as it causes sympathetic stimulation that leads to increased myocardial oxygen demand and elevated intracranial pressure. Another important adverse effect associated with this medication is psychotropic manifestations of hallucinations, dissociative experiences, and unpleasant recall. Ketamine overdose results in loss of consciousness, respiratory depression, tachycardia, hypertension, and severe psychotropic symptoms.