Buspirone is an anxiolytic first synthesized in 1968 and patented in 1975. Initially, the drug was being developed as an antipsychotic but was found ineffective for psychosis, but it had useful anxiolytic features. Buspirone has recently come back into favor. This return to favor is primarily due to its decreased side-effect profile compared to other anxiolytic treatments.

**FDA-approved Indication:**Management of anxiety disorders or the short-term relief of anxiety symptoms. The efficacy of buspirone has been demonstrated in controlled clinical trials of outpatients whose diagnosis corresponds to generalized anxiety disorder(GAD).

**Off-label Clinical Use:**Buspirone is used for the augmentation of unipolar depression. The Sequenced Treatment Alternatives to Relieve Depression (STAR*D) trial showed evidence suggesting that buspirone could be effective as augmentation, alongside SSRIs, for unipolar depression. Further studies have also found some utility in subduing the sexual side effects of SSRIs and use as a single agent for the treatment of depression. Although the FDA does not approve these uses, evidence supports that buspirone combined with melatonin can treat major depressive disorder (MDD) and promote neurogenesis.

It is essential to recognize that buspirone has no use in treating withdrawal symptoms from benzodiazepines, barbiturates, or alcohol. Again, this relates to the lack of GABA receptor activity. Furthermore, the effects of buspirone have been shown to diminish in patients who have had previous treatment with benzodiazepines.

A randomized controlled trial concluded that buspirone improves central apnea, apnoea-hypopnoea index, and oxygen saturation in patients with heart failure.