Diagnosis of exudative retinal detachment is mainly clinical, but to find out the exact etiology of exudative retinal detachment, further laboratory, radiographic, and other ancillary tests are required.

**Laboratory Investigations**

Blood pressure is one of the most important investigations for a patient with papilledema and exudative retinal detachment.

The workup should be individualized and may include a combination of complete blood cell count, differential leukocyte count, erythrocyte sedimentation rate, Mantoux test, chest X-ray, Quantiferon Gold (interferon-gamma release assay), VDRL (venereal disease research laboratory) test, and fluorescein treponema antibody (FTA-ABS) test, serum homocysteine levels, serum cortisol levels, renal function test, liver function test, Toxoplasma, Rubella, Cytomegalovirus, Herpes (TORCH) markers, prothrombin time, bleeding time, clotting time, diabetic profile including fasting blood sugar, postprandial blood sugar, glycosylated hemoglobin.

Amsler grid is a simple method for the detection of metamorphopsia and scotoma.

**Ocular****Imaging**

- **Optical coherence tomography (OCT) of the macula**- OCT scanning shows the macular serous detachment of the macula with or without septae. Enhanced depth imaging OCT shows increased choroidal thickness in VKH syndrome, posterior scleritis, uveal effusion syndrome, and central serous chorioretinopathy.

- Choroidal thickness decreases as the primary inflammatory insults subside with or without treatment.

In VKH, a thickened choroid is seen on OCT with enhanced depth imaging. There are multiple serous retinal detachments with septa. Choroidal undulation and inward bulging are seen in the acute stage.

In CSR on OCT, neurosensory detachment is seen. Hyperreflective dots [in Spectral Domain (SD)-OCT] are seen in the intraretinal and subretinal space.

In PCV, thumb-like or sharp-peaked pigmentary epithelial detachment (PED) is seen. It signifies the polypoidal lesion at the margin of the PED. Double-layer sign is also present. It is seen as two hyperreflective lines on SD-OCT representing shallow irregular RPE elevation and Bruch's membrane separation due to an abnormal vascular network.

- **Fundus fluorescein angiography (FFA) -**It****reveals areas of hyperfluorescence and hypofluorescence, multiple window defects, pooling of the dye in the areas of serous retinal detachment, and disc staining.

In VKH, FFA shows hypofluorescent dots in the early phase, followed by multiple focal areas of leakage and subretinal fluid accumulation in the late phase.

In CSR, an inkblot pattern is seen. There is pinpoint leakage that occurs in the early phase, which then concentrically enlarges in the late phase. In a smokestack pattern, the leakage starts as a pinpoint and gradually expands to form an umbrella-like (or tree-like) appearance.

In Posterior scleritis, FFA shows blocked fluorescence in the initial arteriovenous phase and diffuse hyperfluorescence in the late phase with no leak. Choroidal folds are seen as alternating hyperfluorescent and hypofluorescent bands.

In Uveal effusion syndrome, angiography shows hyperfluorescence in a leopard-spot pattern.

In APMPPE, hypofluorescence is seen in the early phase due to the blockage of choroidal fluorescence. Later in the angiogram, there is staining of the lesions. As the process becomes inactive, hyperfluorescence corresponding to window defects in the mottled RPE develops.

In BDUMP FFA early phase shows a reticular pattern of hypofluorescence surrounded by a background of choroidal hyperfluorescence.

- 
**Indocyanine green angiography (ICG)**

In CSR, ICG****shows hypocyanescence in the early phase implying choriocapillaris nonperfusion or delayed filling. In the mid-phase, hypercyanescence is seen, indicating choroidal vessel hyperpermeability. This hypercyanescence slowly fades in the late phase.

In VKH, ICG shows early hyperfluorescence and leakage and hypofluorescent dark dots at the level of the choroid.

In****IPCV, ICG shows interconnecting channels. An abnormal vascular network appears within 1 min of dye injection. The polyp and feeder vessel are seen.

In****APMPPE, acute lesions show early hypofluorescence. In the late phases, these lesions become more defined in shape. These areas are more than the placoid lesions seen clinically. As the lesions heal, the hypofluorescence in the late phases becomes small and ill-defined.

- **Ultrasonography (B- scan) -**Ultrasound is very useful for measuring the dimensions of tumors before and after treatment, measuring choroidal thickness, diagnosis of choroidal detachment, and T sign in posterior scleritis.

- 
**Autofluorescence (AF)**

Carcinoma Associated Retinopathy (CAR)- On AF, a parafoveal ring of hyper autofluorescence with normal autofluorescence within the ring and hypo autofluorescence outside the ring is seen.

BDUMP- Ultra-widefield color fundus photography shows greater pigmentary changes and lesions in the periphery. Ultra-widefield AF shows the characteristic 'giraffe-pattern' fundus changes.

CSCR- In acute cases, focal areas of hypo-autofluorescence are seen that may correspond to the leak on FFA. In chronic CSCR, hyper-autofluorescent tracks are present due to the accumulation of photoreceptor pigments.

Best disease- AF shows uniform hyper auto fluorescence of vitelliform lesions, while sub-RPE fibrosis or atrophy shows hypofluorescence.

- 
**Electrophysiological tests**

Full-field ERG in CAR shows attenuated or absent photopic and scotopic responses. In CAR, where only the cones are affected, full-field ERG could be normal, but multifocal ERG will be abnormal.