Oxcarbazepine is only available in the oral dosage form at this time; both tablets and liquid formulations are available. Oxcarbazepine shows rapid and nearly complete absorption after oral administration, at about 95%. The usual doses range for oxcarbazepine is 1200 to 2400 mg per day.

**Specific Dosing**

Partial seizures: 600 mg by mouth twice daily, starting at 300 mg twice daily; max 2400 mg daily. Recommendations include screening for the HLA-B*1502 allele prior to starting therapy for at-risk populations.

- Initial monotherapy: 600 mg orally twice daily, starting with 300 mg twice daily and increasing by 300 mg daily every three days to a maximum of 2400 mg daily.

- Conversion to monotherapy: 1200 mg by mouth twice daily, starting with 300 mg and increasing by 600 mg daily each week to a max of 2400 mg daily.

- Discontinue other anticonvulsants over a 3 to 6-week timeframe

When using oxcarbazepine with other sedating medications, the physician should slowly titrate the medication for the patient to best tolerate the sedating side effects of the medications.

The immediate-release dosage form should be taken two times a day with or without food. The patient may mix the liquid formulation with water for better tolerability.

The extended-release dosage form should be taken once a day. It is important to take the extended-release oxcarbazepine on an empty stomach and not cut or crush the medication before ingesting it.

It is essential to taper off oxcarbazepine slowly. If the patient discontinues oxcarbazepine suddenly, it may cause the epilepsy patient to seize or may cause a relapse of a bipolar patient.