HHS has similar pathophysiology to DKA but with some mild dissimilarities. The hallmark of both conditions is the deficiency of insulin. As a consequence of deficiency of this key hormone, there is a decrease in glucose utilization by the peripheral tissue causing hyperglycemia.

Compared to DKA, the production of ketone bodies is scant in HHS. As a result of the deficiency of insulin, there is increased lipolysis that causes an increased release of fatty acid as an alternative energy substrate for the peripheral tissues. Beta oxidation of fatty acids produces ketone bodies: acetone, acetoacetate, and beta oxybutyric acid. Accumulation of these substrates produces ketonemia and acidemia. Acidemia from ketone bodies stimulates the kidney to retain bicarbonate ions to neutralize the hydrogen ions. This accounts for the low serum bicarbonate level in DKA.

In HHS, however, because insulin is still being produced by the beta cells in the pancreas, the generation of ketone bodies is minimal. Insulin inhibits ketogenesis. That aside, in HHS, there is a higher level of insulin with an associated lower level of glucagon. Therefore, ketonemia and acidemia, if they happen, they are very mild in HHS.

The effect of the increased serum osmolarity on the brain can be very profound. To preserve the intracellular volume, the brain produces idiogenic osmoles. Idiogenic osmoles are substances that are osmotically active. The net effect of the production of these substances is to prevent fluid from moving from the intracellular space into the extracellular space and maintain a balanced equilibrium.

The risk of developing cerebral edema is mostly related to how fast the serum osmolarity is decreasing. If the decline is too rapid and the brain is not able to eliminate idiogenic osmoles at the same rate as the decline in serum osmolarity, then the chances of fluid moving into the brain cell and causing swelling are higher. Hence, in the treatment of HHS, the goal of treatment is a slow correction of hyperglycemia.