Chlorthalidone is a thiazide-like sulfonamide-derived diuretic that has been FDA approved since 1960 to manage hypertension.

It is also used in the treatment of edema.

Chlorthalidone's first indication was as an antihypertensive agent. It is effective in the management of blood pressure by decreasing intravascular volume through promoted diuresis. Per the 2017 guideline for the prevention, detection, evaluation, and management of high blood pressure, chlorthalidone can be used as a first-line age in the setting of hypertension when there are no contraindications or contributory comorbidities.

Of note, the ALLHAT (Antihypertensive and Lipid-Lowering Treatment to Prevent Heart Attack) trial compared other first-line antihypertensives such as calcium channel blockers and angiotensin-converting-enzyme-inhibitors(ACE-I) against chlorthalidone. ALLHAT concluded that thiazide-like diuretics should be considered in the first-line treatment in hypertensive patients as chlorthalidone had less association with stroke than ACE-I and less association with heart failure compared to calcium channel blockers. The results of this study were attributed to the earlier and more significant decrease in blood pressure, specifically systolic, from chlorthalidone compared to lisinopril and amlodipine.

**Thiazide-like Medication Versus Thiazide-type Diuretics**

Thiazide-type medications, most commonly hydrochlorothiazide (HCTZ), have been around longer than thiazide-like antihypertensives and were previously utilized more substantially. However, multiple studies have shown a preference for thiazide-like medications over their original counterparts. A 2015 systematic review showed that chlorthalidone alleviated hypertensive burden by about 5.1 mmHg of systolic blood pressure than HCTZ, finding chlorthalidone more potent than HCTZ.

In addition to potency, studies have demonstrated that chlorthalidone holds a longer duration of action than HCTZ, 24 hours with chlorthalidone versus 6 to 12 hours with HCTZ. This increased duration of action allows for the increased flexibility of dosing.

**Cardiovascular Outcomes**

With consideration of any antihypertensive medication, the effect of cardiovascular outcomes is of the highest priority. The ALLHAT trial showed a decreased risk of heart failure exacerbation and cerebral vascular accidents compared to amlodipine and lisinopril, respectively.