**Application to Systems-Based Practice Improvement**

Simulation program directors are frequently tasked with creating opportunities to test the many aspects of healthcare microsystems. Through the use of virtual patients, electronic health record efficiency and effectiveness can be evaluated and optimized. New clinical workspaces can be evaluated using low or high fidelity models to detect safety threats that are unable to be assessed through other approaches. Sentinel events can be re-created in a simulated setting to aid in the RCA process.

Simulation can be employed as a highly effective quality improvement approach to testing and implementing new processes as well. Through collaboration with senior leaders, frontline staff, and other stakeholders, simulation program directors work to assure that the chosen simulation modality and fidelity align with the objectives targeted by the process under evaluation for optimal participant engagement. The information elicited during the system-focused debriefing allows for process refinement and optimization. Subsequently, simulation leaders can develop targeted training curricula via learner-centered simulations to train the appropriate staff. As the system and process mature, best practices for escalation of care can be developed and fine-tuned using other targeted simulation methods. When these efforts are brought from large academic centers to community settings, content experts are available at the bedside to assist in troubleshooting the systems-testing process. This results in appreciation of resource utilization in other settings, collaborative sharing of best practices, improved inter-institutional relationships, and ultimately improved quality of care.