Routine testing of blood components before transfusion includes receipt of an appropriately labeled patient sample by the transfusion service, testing for ABO and Rh D, the presence of unexpected antibodies, and crossmatching red cell components with the patient sample.

**Positive patient identification:**To ensure safe blood transfusion, it is critical that a properly labeled blood sample for pretransfusion testing is collected from the correct patient. The person collecting the sample must identify the patient using the wristband, which contains two unique patient identifiers (usually the patient's full name and the hospital's unique registration number) and remains on the patient throughout the hospital stay and blood transfusion. The information on the requisition form must be compared with that on the wristband; blood samples should not be collected if there is a discrepancy.

**The request form:**This, either in paper or electronic form, for a transfusion must contain the following information:

- The patient's full name, including first and last (family and given) and gender

- A unique identifier like date of birth (DOB) or a hospital or health card number

- The recipient's address

- The required blood component/product with appropriate dose/volume

- The indication for transfusion

- History of previous transfusion or transfusion reactions

- Date and time of the order

- Identity of the qualified medical person ordering the blood products

- Date and time of the intended transfusion

- If any special requirements, like CMVnegative unit, leukoreduced, irradiated, washed, or reduced volume

**Blood Sample:**Pretransfusion testing requires a clotted sample from the recipient for serum and an EDTA sample for red cells and plasma. Hemolyzed or lipemic samples are unacceptable because it is difficult to visualize agglutination, the endpoint of pretransfusion testing. Institutional policies determine how far in advance a sample can be collected. For patients with negative antibody screening and no history of transfusion or pregnancy in the previous three months, samples can be collected up to one month before surgery. However, if the patient has been transfused or pregnant in the prior three months, or if this history is uncertain, a pre-transfusion sample is valid for only three days. For most hospitalized patients, a fresh sample must be taken every three days**.**

It is advisable to collect a clotted sample from the mother for pretransfusion testing in infants under four months of age.

**Labeling the sample:**It should contain the following information:

- Patient's full first and last names

- Patient's health care record number

- Date and time of specimen collection

- Initials (if collected by laboratory personnel) or signature (if collected by nonlaboratory personnel) of a phlebotomist,

- Possibly a unique blood bank number (found on a special blood bank identification band)

Samples not complying with any of the above information should be rejected except for minor inconsistencies like spelling mistakes of last name or short form of a full name like Jon for Jonathan. Strict adherence to the specimen-labeling policy decreases the error rate in reporting the patient's blood group. Accurate labeling of specimens is more critical in transfusion medicine, where specimen misidentification may result in the administration of incompatible blood components, leading to fatal acute hemolytic transfusion reactions. Specimens are to be labeled immediately after being drawn at the patient's bedside.

Table 2: Compatibility chart for choosing the blood products