Rickettsiae are obligate intracellular bacteria with tropism for vascular endothelial cells. The disease manifestations seen with rickettsial infections are owed to direct injury of these cells, as well as the release of prostaglandins from the cells that further increase vascular permeability. Due to the resulting hypovolemia, the antidiuretic hormone is released, resulting in increased sodium excretion and hyponatremia.

The Weil-Felix test is a nonspecific agglutination test that utilizes antigenic cross-reactivity between rickettsiae and certain non-motile Proteus serotypes to detect anti-rickettsial antibodies (so-called Weil-Felix antibodies) in a patient’s serum. Both rickettsial antigen and Proteus OX (O-specific polysaccharide chain of outer membrane lipopolysaccharide) antigens are recognized by anti-rickettsial antibodies in a patient’s serum; upon mixing serum that contains anti-rickettsial antibodies with OX antigen, the resulting reaction can indicate previous or current rickettsial infection.

The rickettsial target of these antibodies was determined to be the lipopolysaccharide (LPS) O-antigen, which is highly conserved across the rickettsiae groups.P. vulgaris OX19 and those in TG rickettsiae, suggesting a shared O-antigen as the mechanism of cross-reactivity. Cross-reactivity is seen between P. vulgaris OX19 and TG rickettsiae, between P. mirabilis OXK and STG rickettsiae, and between P. vulgaris OX2 and OX19 and SFG rickettsiae.

The test relies on the cross-reactive IgM antibodies produced in response to the infection. Unfortunately, these antibodies are not produced at sufficient levels to cause a positive test until 5 to 10 days after the onset of the disease. The serum concentration of the antibodies continues to rise, and a repeated titer 7-14 days after the original that shows a four-fold or greater increase in concentration may be used to confirm the diagnosis.