Because of the rarity of diagnosis, no randomized controlled trials are available, and expert opinion guides treatment. In general, antimicrobial and antithrombotic therapies are primary considerations.

Antimicrobial therapy includes an anti-staphylococcal agent (vancomycin if methicillin resistance is high, or nafcillin), a third-generation cephalosporin, and metronidazole (for anaerobic coverage) as well as antifungal therapy with amphotericin B. A prolonged duration of parenteral therapy, typically three to four weeks or at least two weeks beyond clinical resolution is suggested.

Most experts recommend anticoagulation, in the absence of strong contraindications, with either unfractionated heparin (UFH) or low molecular weight heparin (LMWH) for several weeks to several months. Though not supported by prospective clinical trials in cavernous sinus thrombosis, retrospective reviews suggest a possible decrease in mortality from 40% to 14% with UFH and reduction in neurologic morbidity, from 61% to 31% when anticoagulation is combined with antibiotics for septic cavernous sinus thrombosis. There does remain controversy with anticoagulation. The advantage would be to halt the progression of thrombosis, prevent clot propagation, and possibly allow penetration of antibiotics, whereas the risk would be systemic or intracranial bleeding or even dissemination of septic emboli. Although cavernous sinus thrombosis differs from cerebral venous and sinus thrombosis, the Cochrane Collaboration (Coutinho) suggests that anticoagulation for cerebral venous and sinus thrombosis appears safe, even in the presence of intracranial hemorrhage, and demonstrates a potentially important mortality reduction (though not statistically significant).  The European Federation of Neurological Societies (EFNS) recommends three months of anticoagulation in secondary cerebral venous and sinus thrombosis with a transient risk factor, six to 12 months for idiopathic cerebral venous and sinus thrombosis and those with mild thrombophilia and indefinitely if subsequent cerebral venous and sinus thrombosis or severe thrombophilia.

As in cerebral venous and sinus thrombosis, there is inadequate evidence to support thrombolysis in cavernous sinus thrombosis.

Corticosteroids are often given but without demonstrated efficacy. The potential benefit would be decreased inflammation and vasogenic edema surrounding cranial nerves and orbital structures.  Steroids are necessary, however, for cases of hypopituitarism. The International Study on Cerebral Veins and Dural Sinus Thrombosis (ISCVT) reported steroid use in 24% of cerebral thrombosis with no evidence of improvement.

No surgical interventions are recommended for the cavernous sinuses themselves. However, some patients might require sphenoidectomy, ethmoidectomy, maxillary antrostomy, mastoidectomy, abscess drainage, craniotomy (subdural empyema), orbital decompression, or ventricular shunt placement.

Patients should be followed closely even after the discontinuation of the antibiotics.