The inciting factor for NVG is retinal and/or ocular ischemia.

Retinal Ischemic Disease

Diabetic retinopathy

Central retinal vein occlusion

Central retinal artery occlusion

Branch retinal vein occlusion

Branch retinal artery occlusion

Retinal detachment

Retinopathy of prematurity

Sickle cell retinopathy

Hemorrhagic retinal disorders

Coat disease

Eales disease

Leber congenital amaurosis

Persistent hyperplastic primary vitreous

Retinoschisis

Syphilitic posterior uveitis and vasculitis

Inherited vitreoretinal degenerations

Optic nerve glioma and resulting venous stasis retinopathy



Irradiation

Photo-radiation

External beam radiation

Charged particle radiation: Proton, helium ion

Plaque brachytherapy

Tumors

Choroidal melanoma

Iris melanoma

Ciliary body melanoma

Retinoblastoma

Hyperviscosity syndromes

Myeloproliferative disorders

Inflammatory Diseases

Chronic uveitis

Chronic iridocyclitis

Behcet disease

Vogt-Koyanagi-Harada syndrome

Sympathetic ophthalmia

Endophthalmitis

Panophthalmitis

Crohn disease

Giant cell arteritis

Trauma

Surgical Causes

Carotid endarterectomy

Pars plana vitrectomy

Cataract extraction

Nd:YAG Capsulotomy

Laser pupiloplasty

Extravascular Disorders

Ocular ischemic syndrome

Carotid artery obstructive disease

Carotid-cavernous fistula



Table 1: Etiologies of neovascular glaucoma

Among the various causes of NVG, three diseases constitute the majority of the NVG cases encountered in the clinic. These diseases are diabetic retinopathy (33%), ischemic central retinal vein occlusion (33%), and ocular ischemic syndrome (13%).

Up to 60% of the eyes with ischemic CRVO develop neovascularization of the anterior segment of the eye within a few weeks to 2 years after the onset of CRVO.

Neovascularisation of iris occurs in 1% to 17% of eyes of diabetic retinopathy. This rate is particularly higher for proliferative diabetic retinopathy.

Ocular ischemic syndrome (OIS) is commonly unilateral, with 20% of cases being bilateral. Global ischemia causes both anterior segment and posterior segment neovascularization in OIS. Severe carotid artery occlusion and diabetic retinopathy are usually associated with OIS.