Except for post-renal AKI, most cases overlap between pre-renal and acute tubular necrosis type of AKI.

If hyperkalemia develops, it needs to be managed in a robust manner because, in AKI patients, it can be catastrophic. Approaches to lower potassium in the body include:

- Dietary restriction

- Insulin, IV dextrose and beta-agonists

- potassium-binding resins

- Calcium gluconate to stabilize cardiac membrane

- Dialysis for nonresponsive hyperkalemia

Some AKI patients tend to develop volume overload, which should be corrected as early as possible to avoid pulmonary and cardiac complications. Euvolemic state can be achieved with the help of furosemide, which is a cornerstone in managing such patients. Usually, high doses of IV furosemide are needed to correct volume overload in AKI patients; however, it plays no role in converting oliguric AKI to non-oliguric AKI.

Sometimes, AKI may need short-term renal replacement therapy until the kidney function recovers. Dialysis is usually required to manage the complications of AKI, such as severe and nonresponsive hyperkalemia, uremic pericarditis, and pulmonary edema. This is seen especially in the oliguric phase of acute tubular necrosis, where the patient is prone to develop multiple electrolyte and acid-base abnormalities as well as fluid overload.

Certain specific treatments are required for acute kidney injury in specific circumstances, such as administering vasoactive medications and colloids for treatment of hepatorenal syndrome and cautious diuresis in cardiorenal syndrome. Acute kidney injury from various glomerulonephritides may require immunosuppressive medications for treatment. Acute interstitial nephritis, which does not recover with supportive care, may benefit from a trial of steroids. Post renal obstruction may need to be relieved operatively in certain situations. For example, benign prostatic hypertrophy may require surgical relief of bladder outlet obstruction. Urethral calculi may require stenting and lithotripsy.

It is also important to note that in a certain situation, the risk of acute kidney injury may be decreased by taking some measures. For example, in high-risk patients such as those with compromised renal function at baseline, it may be beneficial to administer peri-procedure intravenous fluids to prevent contrast-induced nephropathy when performing cardiac catheterization.