**Neuroanatomical Considerations**

For the astute clinician to localize the area of involvement, knowledge of the basic neuroanatomy of the lumbar plexus is helpful so that the clinician may employ the necessary diagnostic and therapeutic procedures. It is also important for the clinician to distinguish plexus involvement from neoplastic epidural cord compression or meningeal involvement as both phenomena can have a similar presentation and may develop simultaneously.

A lumbar plexus is a group of nerves that provides innervation to the muscles of the back and legs. It is derived from the nerve roots of L1 to S5. The lumbosacral plexus is anatomically divided into upper lumbar (L1–L4) and lower lumbar/sacral (L5–S5) portions at the border of the true pelvis. These plexuses are connected by the lumbosacral trunk (from L4–L5), which courses over the sacral ala at the pelvic brim. The lumbar plexus forms within the iliacus muscle just lateral to the L1–L4 vertebral bodies, and lies in close proximity to pelvic organs.

**Upper Lumbar Plexus**

The iliohypogastric (L1), ilioinguinal (L1), and genitofemoral (L1, L2) nerves, which carry sensory fibers from the lower abdominal skin, lateral genitalia, and upper thigh are direct branches of the upper plexus. The L1–L4 roots join to form ventral (anterior) and dorsal (posterior) divisions.

The posterior division forms the lateral femoral cutaneous nerves of the thigh (L2–L3), which

provide sensation to the lateral hip and thigh, and the femoral nerve (from L2–L3), which supplies motor innervation of the iliopsoas and quadriceps muscles, and sensory innervation to the anterior thigh and medial upper foreleg (saphenous branch).

The anterior division forms the obturator nerve (from L2–L4), which supplies motor function to the adductors and gracilis muscles and sensory supply to the medial thigh.

**Lower Lumbar Plexus**

The posterior division of the lower plexus gives rise to the superior gluteal nerve (L4-S1) which supplies the gluteus medius, minimus, and tensor fascia lata, the inferior gluteal nerve (L5-S2) which supplies the gluteus maximus and the fibular portion of the sciatic nerve.

The anterior division forms the pudendal nerve (S2,3,4), posterior cutaneous nerve (S1,2,3), and the tibial portion of the sciatic nerve.