Regional nerve block of the inferior alveolar nerve through Halsted’s technique or ‘ lower trunk technique,’ is the anesthetic technique most frequently used in odontology and consists of inserting the point of the needle near to the mandibular foramen to anesthetize the posterior branches of the mandibular nerve, including the inferior alveolar and lingual nerves. This technique rarely causes the buccal nerve block, so an additional form of anesthetic is necessary for the buccal gingiva innervated by the buccal nerve.

Once the block of the inferior alveolar and lingual nerves has occurred through infiltration using one ampoule of anesthetic when the patient starts to feel the first signs of lip numbness, blockage of the buccal nerve can start using infiltration of another ampoule of anesthetic.

Because this nerve has a “c” shaped pathway from the area of the duct of Stenon, the trigone, and the deep vestibule, it is in one of those points that the anesthetic must be deposited. It is recommended to choose two of these points and place half an ampoule in each one of them, to minimize the chances of error in the anesthesia.

Another possible option is an inferior alveolar nerve block, using the so-called anterior technique, which involves anesthetizing the buccal nerve. This technique uses the injection of the anesthetic into the pterygomaxillary space in the area anterior to the mandibular foramen and only infiltrating one ampoule of anesthetic.

Buccal nerve block must occur in a manner complementary to the alveolar and lingual nerves in all those surgical procedures performed at the mandibular level: dental extractions, surgery of the third molar, and implant treatment. In cases of abscess drainage in the deep vestibule, or surgery for small tumors in the jugal mucosal area, no other type of nerve block is necessary.

The necessary instruments are those used for dental anesthesia: ampoule type syringes with short or long needles. The chosen local anesthetic will be an amide-type, preferably with a vasoconstrictor; this will extend the duration of the effect, diminish the incidence of adverse effects, and provide some degree of tissue ischemia. If the surgical procedure is going to be prolonged and postoperative pain is anticipated, anesthetics of medium to long duration, for example, articaine or bupivacaine, can be chosen. These give a more comfortable postoperative period for the patient and use less anesthetic.