an interprofessional approach to plantar fasciitis is necessary as no single treatment works in everyone. Even when a treatment works, symptoms often take weeks/months to subside.

Plantar fasciitis affects many people, usually young people and athletes. The condition can be disabling if not appropriately managed. The key is the education of the patient. The nurse, pharmacists, physical therapist and rehabilitation specialist play a vital role in the recurrence of symptoms. Patients need to be told that the symptoms may take weeks or months to improve. In addition, the patient may have to enroll in a physical therapy program and even wear a night splint. Patients have to be taught how to stretch the plantar fascia with basic home exercises. In addition, a podiatry consult may be required to get the appropriate shoes with adequate arch support. Patients should be educated on avoiding long periods of standing. Further, losing weight and stretching before starting an exercise program is important. Those with acute symptoms should be told to avoid walking barefoot and limit repetitive exercises that traumatize the heel. If all these maneuvers fail, the last resort is a referral to an orthopedic surgeon.

**Outcomes**

Plantar fasciitis may be a benign disorder but if not adequately managed can be disabling and associated with moderate to severe pain. About 70-80% of patients with plantar fasciitis see symptom reduction in 9-12 months, but at least 5-10% require surgical release of the plantar fascia. Plantar fasciitis in athletes is associated with high morbidity and even when managed appropriately recurrences are not uncommon. The morbidity of plantar fasciitis is due to pain in the foot, difficulty with ambulation, limitation in exercise and inability to weight bear. Sometimes, the uneven ambulation can also leas to an injury of the knee and hip joints. Among people who have to stand for long hours, plantar fasciitis is one of the most common causes of worker's compensation claims.