The invasion of the serous membrane lining the abdominal cavity, viscera, and coelom in amniotes by malignant cells is called peritoneal surface malignancy or peritoneal cancer (PC). It is divided into primary and secondary types. The de novo origin of cancer in the mesothelium of the abdomen causes primary mesothelioma. In contrast, the dissemination of tumor cells in the peritoneal cavity from other sites results in secondary peritoneal cancer. Primary cancer has been classified based on its histology by investigators. Extraovarian primary peritoneal carcinoma (EOPPC), serous surface papillary carcinoma, papillary serous carcinoma of the peritoneum, extra ovarian Mullerian adenocarcinoma, and normal-sized ovarian carcinoma syndrome all are different terms used for the first type.

Other types include malignant mesothelioma (MPM), multicystic mesothelioma, leiomyosarcomas, leiomyomatosis peritonealis disseminata, and desmoplastic small round cells tumor (DSRCT).

Primary cancer is classed as stage III or IV and metastasis as stage IV. The vague clinical presentation is responsible for late diagnosis and an overall decrease in survival. The surgical resection and intraperitoneal chemotherapy form hallmarks for disease eradication. However, a better understanding of peritoneum physiology and tumor seeding pathways combined with advancement in technologies has led to the development of effective treatment therapies. In the absence of extensive systemic disease, locoregional control of the disease can provide a promising role in the management of this late-stage cancer.