S. aureus infection can preclude patients to a wide range of infectious processes. Therefore, a thorough multisystem history and physical should be performed. When evaluating the need for hospitalization of the patient, care should be taken to assess the onset of symptoms, duration of symptoms, as well as associative symptoms of fever, chills, dyspnea, or productive cough. Eighty percent of patients with pneumonia can be febrile. However, this finding is less reliable in the elderly. Evaluation for sick contacts, recent travel, ongoing or recent infection with influenza can also help delineate those who may have a higher predisposition to developing S. aureus pneumonia. Employment status and recent hospitalizations can be ascertained to raise clinical suspicion for colonization with S. aureus, such as healthcare workers.

In the appropriate clinical scenario, evaluation for IV drug use should be ascertained as tricuspid valve endocarditis from IV drug use can lead to septic emboli to the lungs and cause S. aureus pneumonia. Physical exam should include a complete multisystem evaluation, but the focus should be given to the cardiopulmonary examination to assess for signs of valvular murmur, respiratory distress, tachypnea, or inspiratory crackles in a lobar pattern. Percussion and tactile fremitus can also be utilized if there is a concern for pleural effusion. Unfortunately, there is no specific constellation of history and physical exam findings that can effectively guarantee with certainty a diagnosis of pneumonia, but the above findings do further the clinical suspicion of this disease process.