To improve outcomes and provide clinically sound treatment, those tasked with assessing and evaluating children with RAD must be acquainted with the underpinnings of attachment theory,  understand the profound impact of maltreatment on behavior, cognition, and communication. Assessment of social interaction and developmental milestones should be completed following Centers for Disease Control (CDC) or World Health Organization (WHO) guidelines to ensure delays in meeting expected milestones are addressed as early as possible.  Developmental pediatricians, child psychologists, or child psychiatrists can complete comprehensive assessments to narrow the differential diagnosis. Caring for children with RAD requires an interprofessional "wrap around" approach incorporating behavioral health providers to address behavioral challenges, social workers and case managers to assist with resources and referral, speech and language pathologists to address social communication deficits, and rehabilitative services to address motor skill delays caused by severe neglect or abuse. Working together, school personnel and parents can develop an Individualized Education Plan which creates a safe, nurturing environment where affected students can rise to their full potential.

The American Academy of Child and Adolescent Psychiatry developed clinical standards (CS), clinical guidelines (CG), clinical options (OP), or not endorsed (NE). The following guide assessment and treatment of children with reactive attachment disorder.

Recommendation 1. "For young children with a history of foster care, adoption, or institutional rearing, clinicians should inquire routinely about a) whether the child demonstrates attachment behaviors and b) whether the child is reticent with strangers." (CS)

Recommendation 2. The Clinician conducting a diagnostic assessment of RAD and DSED should obtain direct evidence from both a history of the child's patterns of attachment behavior with his or her primary caregivers and observations of the child interacting with these caregivers. (CS)

Recommendation 3.  The clinician may be aided in making the diagnosis of RAD or DSED by a structured observational paradigm that compares the child's behavior with familiar and unfamiliar adults. (OP)

Recommendation 4.  Clinicians should perform a comprehensive psychiatric assessment of children with RAD or DSED to determine the presence of comorbid disorders (CS)

Recommendation 5. The Clinician should assess the safety of the current placement for previously maltreated children with negative behaviors who are at high risk of being re-traumatized. (CS)

Recommendation 6. The most important intervention for young children diagnosed with RAD or DSED is ensuring that they are provided with an emotionally available attachment figure. (CS)

Recommendation 7. For young children diagnosed with DSED, limiting contacts with non-caregiving adults may reduce signs of the disorder. (OP)

Recommendation 8. Clinicians should recommend adjunctive interventions for children who display aggressive and/or oppositional behavior that is comorbid with DSED. (CS)

Recommendation 9. Psychopharmacological interventions are not indicated for the core features or RAD or DSED. (NE)

Recommendation 10. Clinicians should not administer interventions designed to enhance attachment that involves noncontingent physical restraint or coercion (e.g., "therapeutic holding" or "compression holding"), ''reworking'' of trauma (e.g., "rebirthing therapy), or promotion of regression for "reattachment'' because they have no empirical support and have been associated with serious harm, including death. (NE)