**Indications.**The assessment of platelet function as well as its dysfunction has become vital in the current era in multiple clinical scenarios; several examples are:

- For patients with clotting or bleeding disorders

- For patients after cardiac stenting or stroke to monitor the activity of the antiplatelet agents

- For perioperative evaluation.

**Platelet Specific.**Various tests have undergone development for platelet testing; they include

- Bleeding time (BT)

- Light transmission platelet aggregation

- Impedance platelet aggregation

- Global thrombosis test

- PFA-100/200

- VerifyNow system

- Thromboelastography (TEG)

- Flow cytometric analysis of platelet function

**Coagulation Cascade Specific.**There has been the development of various tests that evaluate specific events in the coagulation cascade.

- They help in the determination of where the deficiency exists in the intrinsic, extrinsic, or the final common pathways as well as identification of qualitative or quantitative defects of the specific clotting factors.

- Prothrombin time, developed in 1935, assesses the extrinsic and common coagulation cascade function.

- Activated partial thromboplastin time assesses the intrinsic and the common pathways of coagulation.

- Thrombin time evaluates the formation of fibrin in the final common pathway of coagulation.

- The reptilase time and the various fibrinogen assays assess the fibrin formation step.

- Mixing studies, factor activity assays, and factor inhibitor assays are special tests for further evaluation of the presence of inhibitors or antibodies as well as deficiency of factors.