**Definitive**

The RTOG trials established the utility of platinum-based chemotherapy regimens. There is consistent overall survival, disease-free survival, and local control advantages compared to radiotherapy alone.

**Adjuvant**Chemoradiotherapy may be added after surgical resection should the patient have high-risk features (Please see the radiation oncology section for more details). An overall survival benefit and a progression-free survival benefit have been demonstrated with the addition of chemotherapy to radiotherapy in certain high-risk post-operative patients.

The use of adjuvant chemotherapy after definitive chemoradiation continues to be investigated in clinical trials. The results have been mixed. The addition of adjuvant carboplatin/taxol to chemoradiation for locally advanced cervical cancer resulted in higher rates of grade 3-5 toxicity and no difference in overall survival or progression-free survival. Another trial using concurrent and adjuvant cisplatin/gemcitabine demonstrated improved 3-year progression-free survival but markedly higher rates of grade 3-4 toxicity and hospitalizations.

**Recurrence and Metastasis**

In the recurrent and metastatic setting, patients that are not candidates for exenterative surgery or radiotherapy may receive systemic therapy alone. Many of these patients have received single-agent cisplatin-based therapy and therefore multidrug regimens are typically used. Cisplatin/paclitaxel has been shown to improve progression-free survival in patients with recurrent cervical cancer but no difference in median overall survival.

**Complications**

The most commonly used platinum drugs are cisplatin and carboplatin. Common side effects include neutropenia, thrombocytopenia, anemia, febrile, neutropenia, nephrotoxicity, neurotoxicity, and infection. While cisplatin is the drug of choice, carboplatin can be used in patients that may not tolerate cisplatin particularly if they already have underlying renal disease. Although thought to have lower efficacy, prospective data suggest non-inferiority in terms of efficacy and a statistically significant lower incidence of febrile neutropenia, neutropenia, and creatinine elevation (

Bevacizumab carried the risk of hypertension, hemorrhage, thromboembolic events (5% arterial and 11% venous), renal injury, and ovarian failure in pre-menopausal women. Pembrolizumab is known for precipitating autoimmune phenomena such as pneumonitis, colitis, hepatitis, nephritis, and endocrinopathies.