The diagnosis of Munchausen disorder falls within the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders (DSM-5) and requires certain criteria. This criterion includes evidence that the patient is taking steps to intentionally and falsely represent a psychiatric or general medical condition without evidence of malingering, and the behavior is independent of other medical or psychiatric conditions, such as schizophrenia and delusional disorder. Direct confrontation of the patient with suspected Munchausen disorder rarely results in acknowledgment of the illness and instead generally ends in denial and even hostility. Patients have been known to become upset, instigate lawsuits, leave against medical advice, and seek another care facility within a different hospital system. Instead, it can be more constructive for the physician to take an empathetic approach in which the patient is approached in a supportive manner. It is crucial to involve psychiatry (even if the patient opposes) to fully assess for any other psychiatric illnesses that may be present.

The standard therapy for all patients with suspected Munchausen is psychotherapy, though most patients refuse. It is not necessary for the patient to admit to their factitious disorder and, in fact, most patients rarely do. In certain cases, it may be helpful to target cognitive-behavioral therapy toward childhood trauma that could be the instigator for the disorder. It has also been concluded that various medical interventions such as anti-depressants and/or anti-psychotics showed no benefit in the disorder.

There have been reported instances of patients confronted with their diagnosis initiating litigation; this can stem from a feeling of bitterness and resentment as well as retaliation against the clinicians. It is also a way to continue their ruse in the courtroom after discharge from a care facility.