Keratoendotheliitis fugax hereditaria likely results from a missense mutation (c.61G>C) in the first exon of a gene named ‘nucleotide-binding domain, leucine-rich repeat family, pyrin domain-containing 3’ (NLRP3). This gene codes for a protein called NLRP3 or cryopyrin. The mutation results in a partially positively charged histidine, replacing a negatively charged aspartic acid at the genetic locus. As is the case in many mutations, this change likely alters protein folding and function and may cause aberrant activation or dysregulation; this may be problematic as NLRP3 combines with other protein molecules to assemble into inflammasomes, large complex structures that are involved, and upregulated in the process of inflammation.

All thirty cases that have undergone genetically sequencing to assess for the mutation showed to be heterozygotes for the mutant gene. This finding may indicate either that homozygosity may not be compatible with life or is too rare to have been observed and reported. Additionally, the severity and frequency of attacks have varied from generation to generation, indicating a potential for other genetic phenomena such as incomplete penetrance, which has yet to be elucidated in this disease.

There are no risk factors proven to evoke episodes of this sporadic disease, and seasonal changes have reportedly had no inciting effect on incident frequency. However, patients have anecdotally linked mild viral illnesses, cooler temperatures (i.e., “sitting in the draught”), and the relief of physical or mental stress to the recurrence of symptomatic attacks.

Additionally, several individuals in one pedigree were also affected by various collagen-based diseases. Since collagen and the neural crest cells from which the cornea derives are both mesodermal in origin, there may be an underlying association.