A history of recent surgical procedures or trauma increases the suspicion of venous gas embolism. It can be difficult to diagnose at times due to the similarity to various other causes for the patient's symptoms. Clinical manifestations of venous gas embolism include the following: Right heart strain on EKG, tachyarrhythmias, hypotension, dyspnea, chest pain, and coughing. If the patient is being monitored, one may see a decrease in end-tidal CO2 and hypercapnia. Increased pulmonary artery pressure may also be seen if invasive monitoring is established. If severe hypotension due to pulmonary artery hypertension and right heart strain is present, an altered mental status may also be seen. Arterial gas emboli will not be discussed here but can lead to stroke and myocardial infarction, among other sequelae.

Cardiac signs of venous air embolism include:

- A mill-wheel murmur which is loud and machinery like

- Tachy or bradyarrhythmias

- Elevation in jugular venous pressure

- Hypotension

- Myocardial ischemia

Pulmonary features include:

- Tachypnea

- Rales, wheezing

- Cyanosis

- Mild hemoptysis

- Apnea

CNS features include:

- Altered mental status

- Seizures

- Coma

- Transient focal neurological deficits

An eye examination may reveal air bubbles in the retinal vessels.

With massive air embolism, palpation of the skin may reveal crepitus over the superficial veins.

Because there are no specific signs and symptoms, a high index of suspicion is required to make the diagnosis and initiate treatment.