Differential diagnoses caused by clonal lymphocytosis include:

- 
**Prolymphocytic Leukemia**

- 
              
- The condition presents with lymphadenopathy and organomegaly. However, this condition differs from CLL as prolymphocytes in the smear differ from CLL cells.

- 
**Hairy Cell Leukemia (HCL)**

- 
              
- HCL can present with lymphocytosis, organomegaly, and cytopenias. However, HCL rarely presents with lymphadenopathy as opposed to CLL. Additionally, HCL immunophenotyping and smear will show distinct differences from CLL.

- 
**Follicular Lymphoma (FL)**

- 
              
- FL presents similarly to CLL, with both tumor cells being similar in size and having similar clinical findings such as waxing and waning diffuse painless lymphadenopathy. However, it differs from CLL as biopsy will show a nodular growth pattern usually not seen in CLL. In cases where CLL does have a similar growth pattern to FL, further examination of FL cells will reveal irregular nuclear centrocytes and larger centroblasts as opposed to CLL cells which have round to oval nuclei.

- 
**Lymphoplasmacytic Lymphoma (LPL)**

- 
              
-  LPL is a lymphoproliferative disorder that can present clinically similar to CLL.

- 
**Mantle Cell Lymphoma (MCL)**

- 
              
- MCL can share clinical and morphological features with CLL as both conditions present a leukemic phase, cells with nuclear irregularities, and positive CD5 and CD20 markers. However, both conditions differ, with CLL cells having negative cyclin D1 and a large portion positive for CD23, as opposed to MCL, which has the complete opposite.

- **Splenic Marginal Zone Lymphoma (SMZL)**

- 
              
- CLL and SMZL will both have peripheral smear lymphocytosis and share expression for CD5, CD43, CD23, and IgD. Additionally, both can also present with splenomegaly. However, SMZL can express CD20 and bright SmIg, both findings not seen in CLL.

Differential diagnoses caused by reactive lymphocytosis include infections. Infections in which lymphocytosis significantly occurs include pertussis, infectious mononucleosis, and toxoplasmosis. In viral infections, peripheral smear will show activated T cells as atypical lymphocytes, in which the cells have large cytoplasms containing azurophilic granules. However, lymphocytosis is non-clonal and transient for all these infections, with white blood cell (WBC) counts normalizing within weeks, unlike in CLL, where lymphocytosis is clonal and persists for over three months. Furthermore, due to the non-clonal causes of lymphocytosis, immunophenotyping through flow cytometry will fail to show the diagnostic findings required for CLL.