The first biomarker used to aid in the diagnosis of acute MI was aspartate aminotransferase (AST). In 1954, Ladue et al. proposed that AST released from cardiomyocytes undergoing necrosis would be useful in diagnosing acute MI.

After discovering that AST was released from ischemic cardiac myocytes, lactate dehydrogenase (LDH) emerged as another potential biomarker for detecting myocardial ischemia. LDH increases in the blood 6 to 12 hours after an acute MI, peaks within 24 to 72 hours and normalizes within 8 to 14 days. In the past, a ratio of LDH1 (an isoform found in the heart) to LDH2 greater than 1 was considered to be specific for an acute MI.

Myoglobin is a heme protein found in cardiac and skeletal muscle tissue. Due to its low molecular weight, myoglobin can be detected in the blood 1 hour after myocardial injury, peaks within 4 to 12 hours, and then immediately return to baseline levels.

Heart-type fatty acid-binding protein (H-FABP) is a protein involved in fatty acid metabolism in cardiac myocytes. In a study by Kabekkodu et al., the sensitivity of H-FABP in detecting acute MI in patients who present within 4 hours of the onset of symptoms was 60%, which was significantly higher than that of troponin (18.8%) and CK-MB (12.5%). The sensitivity of H-FABP in detecting acute MI between 4 to 12 hours after symptom onset was 86.96%, which was comparable to troponin (90.9%) and higher than CK-MB (77.3%).

CK-MB still holds some diagnostic value in cardiac and non-cardiac conditions. CK-MB is detected in the serum 4 hours after myocardial injury, peaks by 24 hours, and normalizes within 48 to 72 hours. CK-MB is a useful biomarker for detecting acute MI as it has a relative specificity for cardiac tissue but can still become elevated in non-cardiac conditions such as skeletal muscle injury, hypothyroidism, chronic renal failure, and severe exercise. The ratio of CK-MB2 to CK-MB1 greater than or equal to 1.5 and a CK-MB relative index (CK-MB/total CK x 100) greater than or equal to 2.5 improve specificity for cardiac tissue and are indicative of acute MI.

Cardiac troponin is currently the first-line test for evaluating patients with suspected acute MI. Troponin is a protein found in both cardiac and skeletal muscles that play a role in muscle contraction. It is comprised up of three subunits, troponin C, troponin I and troponin T. Troponin I and troponin T in the heart are structurally different than the ones found in skeletal muscle, making them specific and sensitive biomarkers of cardiac myocyte injury. As a result, the European Society of Cardiology and American College of Cardiology guidelines released in September 2000, defined acute MI as an elevation in serum troponin greater than the level that expected from the 99 percentile of a healthy reference population supported by signs and symptoms of cardiac ischemia.