In the development of professional health care delivery, the ability of interprofessional health care providers to work as a cohesive unit has been proven to increase the quality of patient care and increase positive prognostic outcomes. This paradigm is achieved through integrated patient-centered care, sharing of values, communication, and a clear definition of interprofessional responsibilities.

In the modern health care environment, patients rely on effective teamwork within a team of health professionals. This methodology should include primary care providers, oncologists, specialty care nurses, and oncologic pharmacists. Effective communication minimizes errors and potential adverse events. Various studies on effective leadership and team development have supported Tuckman’s stages of group development. In this model, a team undergoes four stages: forming, storming, norming, and performing. Passing through all of these stages is both necessary and inevitable for an effective team to form. Following this process, the members of the team are better able to assess their roles and the roles of others on the team. Each member possesses specialized skills and knowledge complementary to the others, allowing for heightened patient care.

This coordination is key in the appropriate use of cyclophosphamide. Adhering to the Team-Based Competencies set forth by the Interprofessional Education Collaborative, including honesty, discipline, and mutual goals, the healthcare team, is better able to assess the appropriate management of cyclophosphamide use. On an organizational level, enhanced teamwork can lead to reduced time and costs associated with hospitalizations, reduced unexpected admissions, and increased ease of access to services. From a patient’s perspective, effective teamwork means increased satisfaction with care, improved prognosis, and a reduction in medical error.

Interprofessional team dynamics in using cyclophosphamide include the prescriber deciding it is the appropriate agent for the patient, but that is only the beginning. A board-certified oncology pharmacist should be consulted regarding potential drug interactions, appropriate dosing, and have involvement in the ongoing monitoring of the patient. Once on the drug, oncology specialty nurses should have involvement in monitoring the patient for treatment progress as well as adverse drug reactions and can reach out to the oncology pharmacist and/or the oncologist as appropriate. These interprofessional examples will result in better outcomes with cyclophosphamide. [Level 5]