Treatment management should focus on the following aspects:

- Rhythm control

- Rate control

- Anticoagulation due to embolization risk

**1**.**Rhythm control**

Maintenance of the sinus rhythm or conversion of the sinus rhythm is essential.

Persistence of atrial flutter, can cause chronic remodeling of the atrium and make it more difficult to manage the rate and the conversion or maintenance of sinus rhythm.

There are different ways to achieve sinus rhythm: with electrical cardioversion, pharmacological cardioversion and ultimately with catheter ablation.

The rhythm strategy divides into acute and long term management.

In the acute setting, in patients with atrial flutter who are hemodynamically unstable, synchronized cardioversion is indicated for the conversion of sinus rhythm to stabilize the patient.

In stable patients, pharmacological cardioversion is achievable with different antiarrhythmics.  Antiarrhythmic drugs like amiodarone, class IA (procainamide, quinidine, and disopyramide) and IC drugs (flecainide and propafenone), calcium channel blockers (verapamil, diltiazem), and beta-blockers (metoprolol, carvedilol, esmolol) are some of the choices for pharmacological cardioversion.

Despite the multiple pharmacological options the control and conversion of atrial flutter to sinus rhythm is difficult. The mechanisms by which antiarrhythmic drugs maintain sinus rhythm is by prevention of premature beats that usually start the activation of the tachycardia circuit by a reentrant or an ectopic beat.

In the presence of a new diagnosis of atrial flutter, one should start the patient on anticoagulation. In the absence of intracardiac thrombus, electrical cardioversion in stable patients can be considered, especially to prevent persistence of the arrhythmia and further fibrosis that will perpetuate the presence of atrial flutter and more difficult to control or to convert to sinus rhythm.

In patients who have a contraindication to these drugs or do not tolerate them may consider catheter ablation of the atrial flutter circuit.

Radiofrequency catheter ablation of the CTI is the standard treatment for typical atrial flutter with a success rate of 95% with few complications post-procedure.

**2**.**Rate control**

Rate control is achievable with the use of atrioventricular nodal agents as calcium channel blockers (first line) or beta blockers.

Combination of these agents is an option.

Adequate control of the atrial flutter through AV nodal agents is difficult because atrial flutter continuously fires at the same rate to the AV node.

The heart rate goal should be below 110 beats per minute.

In patients who are intolerant of medications or have significant bradycardia due to rate control measures, a catheter ablation is an option.

**3**.**Anticoagulation due to the risk of embolic events:**

Patients with atrial flutter have a similar risk of strokes as those with atrial fibrillation.

Use of a scoring system to determine the annual risk of stroke must be used such as the CHADS2-Vasc.

Age more than 75 years old and a history of stroke are two additional points each.

The presence of one point can give the patient an annual risk of 1.3% of embolic stroke per year when two points the risk is 2.2%. In patients with two or more points, the use of anticoagulation is a strong recommendation. In patients with one point, one may use either aspirin or full anticoagulation.