A normal thromboelastogram is schematically represented in Figure 1. Prompt qualitative analysis of the TEG tracing can be performed during the test. The quantitative analysis of TEG includes the measurement of the 5 parameters listed and described in Table 1. The manufacturer has also suggested a coagulation index to assess the overall coagulation status. The coagulation index (CI) for whole blood may be calculated as follows:

- CI = -0.2454R+ 0.0184K + 0.1655MA - 0.0241a - 5.0220

Normal values of the coagulation index lie within -3.0 and +3.0, which is three standard deviations from the mean of zero. A hypercoagulable state is defined as CI greater than +3.0 and coagulopathy as CI less than -3.0. Previous studies demonstrated a significantly elevated CI in the postoperative period after general surgery and in cancer patients, suggesting a prothrombotic state.

Normal TEG values are presented in Table 2, although some patient-related factors may affect these values. Elderly patients tend towards more pro-coagulable TEG results, suggesting a need to correct these reference values in the elderly.

Deviation of each of these TEG parameters from the reference values suggests specific disturbances of hemostasis and coagulation. Prolongation of the R time reflects a quantitative or qualitative deficiency of coagulation factors that may be corrected by fresh frozen plasma (FFP) transfusion, prothrombin complex, or anticoagulant reversal. Prolongation of the K time, or a decrease of the alfa angle, suggests a deficiency of fibrinogen and may be corrected by cryoprecipitate or lyophilized fibrinogen concentrate. Low MA indicates a quantitative or functional deficiency of platelets and could be corrected by platelet concentrate transfusion or desmopressin. Finally, an increased LY value implies activated fibrinolysis that may be treated by fibrinolysis inhibitors (aminocaproic or tranexamic acid). The opposite changes in TEG parameters suggest a prothrombotic state. This interpretive approach represents a convenient but rather simplified view on disturbances of blood coagulation. It is important to remember that these TEG parameters are interrelated due to the complex nature of hemostasis.

A different nomenclature is used for RoTEM assays to define the same TEG parameters: clotting time (CT) instead of R, clot formation time (CFT) instead of K, maximum clot firmness (MCF) instead of MA, and CL instead of LY. Reference values for RoTEM have been established in a multicenter study on 500 healthy volunteers.