**Skin/Subcutaneous Tissue**

The eyelid skin is unique because it has no subcutaneous fat and is thus the thinnest layer of skin on the body. The skin overlying the tarsus tends to be firmly attached to the underlying tissue; whereas, the skin above the tarsal plate, in the upper lid, and below the tarsal plate, in the lower lid, overlying the orbital septum is loosely attached to underlying tissue giving rise to a potential space for fluid to collect in the setting of trauma or edema.

**Orbital Septum**

A thin, fibrous connective tissue layer separates anterior eyelid structures from intra-orbital structures. The superior orbital septum connects the periosteum of the superior orbital rim to the levator aponeurosis above the superior tarsal border (though this has racial variance). The inferior orbital septum connects the periosteum of the inferior orbital rim to the capsulopalpebral fascia just below the inferior tarsal border.

**Orbital Fat**

Orbital fat is located immediately posterior to the orbital septum and anterior to the levator aponeurosis in the upper lid and capsulopalpebral fascia of the lower lid. In the upper lid, there are two discrete nasal and central fat pads. In the lower eyelid, there are three fat pads: nasal, central, and temporal. Thin fibrous capsules surround the pads. The inferior oblique muscle runs in between the medial and central fat pad in the lower eyelid and is an important anatomical landmark during eyelid and orbital surgery.

**Tarsus**

The tarsal plates serve as the main structural component of the eyelids. They are made of dense connective tissue and contain the Meibomian glands and eyelash follicles. There are approximately 30 meibomian glands in the upper eyelid and 20 meibomian glands in the lower eyelid. There are approximately 100 eyelashes in the upper lid in 2 to 3 rows. There are approximately 50 eyelashes in the lower eyelid. The tarsal plate of the upper eyelid is 10 mm to 12 mm vertically in the center of the eyelid, and the tarsal plate of the lower eyelid is up to 4 mm vertically in the central eyelid. Both upper and lower tarsal plates are approximately 29 mm in horizontally length. Both tarsal plates have rigid attachments to the periosteum via the medial and lateral canthal tendons. Along with the Meibomian glands that run in a row parallel to the lid margin and posterior to the lash line, the glands of Zeis and Moll are associated with eyelash hair follicles and secrete lipid and modified sweat respectively.

**Conjunctiva**

This non-keratinizing squamous epithelium lines the inner surface of the eyelids and continues to cover the anterior surface of the globe where it terminates at the edge of the cornea. The conjunctiva contains mucin-secreting goblet cells and accessory lacrimal glands that assist in keeping ocular tissues lubricated.

In the nasolacrimal system (not represented in the illustration) both the upper eyelid and the lower eyelid have small openings on the surface of the eyelid margin near the medial canthus called puncta. The puncta lead to a drainage channel called the canaliculus, the superior and inferior of which merge medially to form the common canaliculus. The canaliculi travel 2 mm inferiorly (lower lid) or superiorly (upper lid) from the punctum, then turn 90 degrees medially and travel 8 mm to 10 mm before reaching the common canaliculus. The common canaliculus then drains into the lacrimal sac which in turn drains to the nose underneath the inferior turbinate via the nasolacrimal duct.