Hypertension, hypercholesterolemia, diabetes mellitus, and smoking are known risk factors of the cardiovascular disease frequently found in stroke patients. These underlie varied processes which ultimately result in atherosclerosis of large and small arteries. Atrial fibrillation is another significant risk factor, its frequency surpassing that of dyslipidemia among patients with ACA stroke in one study.

Atherosclerosis is a primary cause of ischemic stroke. One clinical imaging study of anterior cerebral artery infarction mechanisms concluded that atherosclerotic disease-related stroke mechanisms in the ACA were similar to those associated with middle cerebral artery (MCA) atherosclerosis. Atherosclerotic large vessel disease frequently results in stroke secondary to either local branch occlusion by plaque, artery-to-artery embolism, and in situ thrombosis, with the latter considered as being the most prevalent in ACA infarction.

Cardiac embolism from different sources, including atrial fibrillation, intracardiac thrombus, valve disease, and tumors are other significant causes of ACA infarction. Some reports suggest that cardiac emboli are more frequently the cause of ACA as compared to MCA and posterior cerebral artery (PCA) infarcts.

Another significant mechanism of ACA stroke is arterial dissection. While rarely reported on Western populations, other sources refer to a high prevalence among Japanese patients. Those with stroke secondary to arterial dissection also tend to be younger.

Less common mechanisms have been described, including vasculitis and coagulopathic states. Vasospasm is another cause. Reported triggers include subarachnoid hemorrhage and pituitary apoplexy. This mechanism has correlated with both unilateral and bilateral ACA infarcts. There are reported cases with unknown etiology in some case series.

Distal vessel occlusion secondary to lost or fragmented thrombi associated with the use of intravenous thrombolysis and mechanical thrombectomy is another potential mechanism of ACA stroke. One study evaluating the frequency of ACA embolism in 105 patients undergoing mechanical thrombectomy of occlusions of the M1 segment of the MCA identified 12 new ACA emboli (11.4% of studied cases). ACA infarcts were identified on follow-up imaging in 5.7% of patients. The significance of this particular mechanism of infarction lies in its potential for adverse outcomes secondary to distal occlusions after an otherwise effective recanalization of an affected vessel.