**History**

A detailed history is extremely vital in each case. There can be blunt or penetrating trauma. There can be a history of vegetative matter trauma, needle, fishhook, iron rod, caterpillar hair, stone, mud, clay, metal, and chestnut injury.

**Symptoms**

The patient can present with blepharospasm, swelling, pain, redness, defective vision, watering, photophobia, floaters, and flashes.

**Signs**

Anterior segment examination may reveal any of the signs such as conjunctival congestion, chemosis, subconjunctival hemorrhage, conjunctival tear, corneal lamellar tear, full thickness cornea tear, self-sealed corneal tear, corneal edema, anterior chamber hypopyon, cells and flare in the anterior chamber, exudates over the iris, iridodialysis, iris bombe, posterior synechiae, relative afferent pupillary defect, sluggish reacting pupil, lens neovascularization,  pus-filled lens, or lens abscess. Sometimes the lenticular opacity can take the appearance of yellow-white exudate.

The classic description of a lens abscess is whitish-yellow, dense, homogenous lenticular opacity which is well demarcated from the remaining lens. There can be an injury to the posterior capsule resulting posterior capsular tear. There can be associated vitritis, vitreous membranes, retinal injury, retinal tear, choroidal detachment, and exudates. There can be the associated presence of the foreign body in the anterior or posterior segment.

Intralenticular abscess after fungal infection is less common. In cases with lens abscess due to fungal etiology, the typical findings are uveitis, fungal balls, and fibrinous membrane over the pupil. Fungal lens abscess can also manifest as fungal endophthalmitis, a latency of weeks to months. The timing of symptoms can vary from 24 hours to 6 months post-trauma, with an average of 1.8 months after open globe injury. In fungal endophthalmitis, the symptoms are subacute, and they worsen gradually.

P.acne can also cause acute endophthalmitis, which can present as a full-blown acute infection or chronic low-grade smoldering infection. Chronic endophthalmitis has to be differentiated from phacoantigenic uveitis. In each case of lens abscess, it is essential to document the nature of trauma, presentation duration, onset and severity of symptoms, clinical findings, and visual acuity.