It is imperative to obtain a detailed history and perform a meticulous clinical examination to establish the diagnosis and determine the appropriate management.

**Hemangioma**

Hemangiomas are the most common vascular tumors of infancy and childhood, frequently affecting the head and neck region. They can be congenital or infantile (previously known as juvenile hemangioma).

Infantile hemangioma, the most common type, clinically arises in the first eight weeks and may be present at birth. The parents usually notice it later when the baby turns a few weeks old. A rapid proliferative phase ensues for 6 to 12 months, followed by an involuting, regressive phase lasting up to 5 to 9 years of age. During the proliferative phase, the tumor presents as a raised, rubbery, and red lesion, previously termed as “strawberry hemangioma.” The involuted phase is characterized by scarring, wrinkling, and telangiectasia.

Focal IHs are the most common variety presenting as a raised, localized lesion along the area of embryological fusion. On the other hand, segmental IHs appear as flat plaques in a specific geographical distribution.

Congenital hemangioma (CH) presents as full-blown lesions at birth with no proliferative phase. They are less likely to regress spontaneously. RICH, as the name suggests, undergoes a rapid phase of regression and disappears by 1 to 1.5 years of age. RICH may either present flat violaceous lesions or plaques with coarse telangiectasia or as raised greyish lesions, surrounded by a pale halo and multiple telangiectatic vessels. On the contrary, NICH doesn’t show regression and keeps growing in proportion to the child’s growth.

**Venous Malformations**

Orbital VMs can be distensible or non-distensible. Colletti G et al. in 2018, has re-classified OVMs into three subcategories:

Type 1 – It is a low-flow, non-distensible OVM, wrongly termed a “cavernous hemangioma.”

CVMs have a propensity to affect the middle third of the orbit and are primarily located in the intraconal space.

Gaze-evoked amaurosis (GEA) is one of the most unusual symptoms of orbital CVM, especially those occupying the extra- as well as the intra-conal spaces of the orbit. Axonal inhibition and optic nerve ischemia are the most probable factors resulting in GEA.

Type 2 – Previously known as “orbital varices” - these are low-flow, distensible venous malformations that typically present during the second to third decade of life. Although they result due to a congenital weakness in the wall of the veins leading to dilatation of the valveless veins of the orbit, they remain quiescent during childhood, which is then followed by growth around the pubertal period. The presenting clinical features include proptosis, diplopia, visual disturbances, or ecchymosis (due to hemorrhage or thrombosis). Almost 60% of distensible OVMs demonstrate distension on dependent position or Valsalva maneuver. The remaining 40% are usually the more posterior, deeper lesions and hence, show distensibility only on Valsalva-augmented imaging. Distensibility refers to an increase in proptosis due to increased intra-orbital venous pressure and the resultant expansion of the lesion. Hence, clinical evaluation in every suspected case is incomplete without examination at rest, in the dependent position, as well as with the Valsalva maneuver.

Type 3 – OVMs may be infiltrative, affecting the surrounding periorbital and the intracranial venous system. They classically present as enophthalmos a  rest. Significant proptosis results from straining, coughing, or performing Valsalva maneuver, with varying degrees of visual impairment.

**Lymphatic Malformations (LM)**

Pure lymphatic malformations of the orbit are rare, as a variable venous component often co-exists in the majority of the cases. They consist of dilated lymphatic channels lined by podoplanin-positive endothelium. LMs are present since birth and can be radiologically classified as microcystic (<2 cm), macrocystic (>2 cm), or mixed, based on the size of the cavity within the lesion. Pure LMs can manifest as isolated, irregular mass occupying the anterior portion of the orbit. They don’t distend on a Valsalva maneuver and cannot be compressed.

**Combined Venolymphatic Malformations**

As mentioned above, most lymphatic malformations either have a linked venous component or consist of arterioles and venules that run within the intercystic septa and hence, are often mixed. Studies have shown that the more the superficial location in the orbit, the more predominant will be the lymphatic component, and vice versa.

Microcystic LMs typically infiltrate the tissue and present as diffuse thickening of the eyelid, conjunctiva, or anterior orbit. They can also affect the posterior orbit, sometimes extending till the apex, and manifest as gradual-onset proptosis. Bleeding into the lymphatic channels may lead to the formation of “chocolate cysts,” thereby exerting a mass effect. Sudden worsening of proptosis may result from bleeding within the lesion or the presence of upper respiratory infection of viral etiology that upregulates the lymphatic system and, in turn, causes sudden expansion of the lymphatic plexus. Massive hemorrhage may lead to motility limitation and visual impairment. Macrocystic LMs are typically intraconal and unlike, microcystic LMs, are less prone to intralesional hemorrhage. Ocular complications include corneal exposure, astigmatism, strabismus, optic neuropathy, and secondary glaucoma.

Lymphangioma is incorrect terminology, often misused in everyday practice. Firstly, this term doesn’t represent the true histopathological nature of the lesion, which, besides lymphatic channels, also include venous components, smooth muscle fibers, blood products, and lymphocytic tissue. Secondly, unlike hemangioma, lymphangioma is not a proliferative neoplastic lesion.

**Arteriovenous Malformations**

These lesions are characterized by rapid arterial flow into the draining venous channels, thereby bypassing the entire vascular system of the orbit. Clinically, they present as pulsating proptosis. Thrombosis may manifest as an acute swelling, and hemorrhage may result in ecchymosis. AVMs may also elicit bruit and cause pain and discomfort either at rest or when distended on Valsalva maneuver or straining. Although rare, AVMs are invasive, depict an aggressive natural course, and tend to grow exponentially when treated inappropriately. Schobinger’s classification (as described above) not only provides insights into the clinical staging but also guides the management of these notorious lesions.

**Arteriovenous Fistulas (AVFs)**

Orbital AVFs, which are usually congenital arterio-venous connections fed by the branches of the ophthalmic artery with an absent intervening bed of capillaries, interspersed within a cellular stroma, clinically manifest as periocular swelling, dilated veins on the fundus, pulsations, and bruit which typically reduce on compressing the ipsilateral common carotid artery (CCA), glaucoma, and visual deficits. In acquired AVFs, the anomalous connection is either due to trauma or idiopathic. The most common periocular AVF is the carotid-cavernous fistula (CCF). It can be of two types: direct and indirect.

In direct CCF, trauma results in the formation of abnormal direct connections between the internal carotid artery (ICA) and the cavernous sinus. Other causes include Ehler-Danlos syndrome type IV, or iatrogenic procedures such as endarterectomy, trans-sphenoidal resection of the tumor in the pituitary region, percutaneous intervention in trigeminal neuralgia, and maxillofacial surgery. On the other hand, in indirect CCF (also known as a dural fistula), low-flow connections between the dural vein and internal or external carotid artery are formed due to an underlying systemic disease. The connections can involve the meningeal branch of the ICA, branches of the external carotid artery (ECA), or meningeal branches of both ICA and ECA.

Among the branches of ECA, the internal maxillary artery is the most implicated vessel. The natural clinical course is usually indolent in cases of dural fistulas and acute in high flow CCFs. The presenting features depend upon whether the fistula is high-flow or lo -flow. The presence of pulsating proptosis and an objective bruit is a more specific feature of high-flow CCFs. Other clinical features include arterialization of vessels, increased episcleral venous pressure, neurogenic strabismus, most commonly sixth nerve palsy, owing to the central location of the sixth nerve adjacent to ICA within the substance of cavernous sinus, optic neuropathy, conjunctival chemosis, congestion, etc.