After diagnosis of hypothermia is made, laboratory and possible imaging evaluation should take place to help identify potential comorbidities or medical events that may have led to the patient becoming hypothermic.  Standard laboratory evaluation should include finger-stick glucose, complete blood count, metabolic panel with basic serum electrolytes and BUN/Cr.  One may expect the hemoglobin/hematocrit to be increased in hypothermic patients due to cold diuresis.  No significant electrolyte abnormalities are consistent in hypothermia but rewarming can result in rapid changes in concentrations and it is recommended to reassess electrolytes approximately every 4 hours when resuscitating the moderate to severely hypothermic patient.  Glucose also does not follow a specific pattern but may be the earliest clue for a patient in DKA.

In moderate to severe hypothermic patients in whom invasive procedures may be performed reasonable to get a coagulation panel.  Despite the fact that the patient may have an obvious bleeding diathesis this test may return as normal as it is always performed at 37C.  If patient is in respiratory distress or intubated an ABG uncorrected for temperature to help guide resuscitation.  Under the right clinical settings may also consider serum lactate, creatinine kinase, troponin, TSH, cortisol, toxicology screen, fibrinogen, lipase, magnesium, and any other labs deemed necessary per the clinical scenario.

Imaging should be dictated by clinical scenario as some patients may have experienced trauma, cerebrovascular accident, or other events that led to prolonged cold exposure.  If CXR is obtained it is not uncommon for severely hypothermic patients to show signs of pulmonary edema.

Due to the different dysthymias often exhibited by hypothermic patients and ECG should be obtained. Hypothermia can cause slowed impulses conduction through potassium channels resulting in prolonged ECG intervals.  There may also be an elevated J point which can produce an Osborne or J wave.  The height of this wave is proportional to the degree of hypothermia and is most common in the precordial leads.  Any dysrhythmia is possible with atrial fibrillation being the most common.  Those with more moderate to severe hypothermia will likely exhibit bradycardia and are at increased risk for ventricular arrhythmias and care should be taken to not jostle the patient due to the increased irritability of the myocardium.