The etiology of obesity is multifactorial. Obesity originates from a complex interplay between genetic, biological, environmental, socioeconomic, and cultural factors. Genetics and biology are predetermined, but the remaining factors can be modified. These include the family's eating, sleeping, and exercise behaviors, access to healthy food at school and in the community, the availability of safe places for physical activity, and adverse childhood experiences.

When energy intake in calories exceeds energy expenditure, weight gain results, eventually leading to obesity.

A decline in physical activity and more screen time (smartphones, computers, televisions, and video games) contribute to the problem.

Feeding patterns are culturally driven, and children model their parents and families from a very young age. Studies demonstrate a positive influence of higher parental education and structured family meals on healthy food choices by children. Factors such as families eating together, exposing children to an array of nutritious food choices, and avoiding watching television during meals create a positive food environment that decreases the chance of developing obesity.

Other critical risk factors have been identified that may predispose to obesity. Perinatal and postnatal conditions that increase risk include elevated maternal BMI in pregnancy, large for gestational age birth weight, rapid weight gain in infancy and early childhood, and breastfeeding (protective) versus formula feeding. Environmental chemicals, microbiota and the early use of antibiotics, and adverse life experiences are also considered potential risk factors.

Polygenic obesity and monogenic obesity are both uncommon but merit consideration. The former results from the interaction of several polygenic variants with environmental factors that increases the likelihood of obesity. Further genetic and molecular studies are needed to determine the clinical significance of these genetic variations. Monogenic obesity is severe with an early onset, usually due to an autosomal recessive mutation in the leptin-melanocortin pathway. MC4R (Melanocortin 4 receptor) and proopiomelanocortin (POMC) deficiencies increase food-seeking behaviors in children. Leptin and leptin receptor deficiencies result in early-onset extreme obesity.

Secondary etiologies of obesity include endocrine, neurologic, psychologic, and drug-induced causes, which should be considered when obesity onset is sudden or unexpected. The mechanism is thought to result from hormonal imbalances affecting satiety and food-seeking behaviors.