Research has shown that riboflavin deficiency can alter iron absorption and cause anemia, which leads to fatigue. Riboflavin is involved in red blood cell production and transportation of oxygen to the cells. Improving the amount of riboflavin in the body can increase circulating hemoglobin levels and increase red cell production. Collagen is a protein found in most skin and hair, so riboflavin is necessary to maintain an adequate collagen level. Taking supplements of riboflavin is also a cure for migraines. Research showed that 400 mg of riboflavin a day had demonstrated efficacy in the prevention of migraine headaches in adults, but dosing must be for a minimum of 3 months for good results. This finding is most likely because mitochondrial dysfunction has been shown to play a role in migraines, and riboflavin is a precursor of flavin cofactors of the electron transport chain. According to research, riboflavin supplements can help with mitochondrial complex I deficiency by improving muscle strength, cardiomyopathy, and encephalopathy. A cataract is an eye disorder causing blurry lens, and taking riboflavin supplements can help prevent cataract.

Along with cataract, riboflavin can help other eye disorders such as glaucoma and keratoconus. Riboflavin drops are usually added to the patient’s corneal surface to increase the strength of the cornea. Taking riboflavin supplements can also reduce homocysteine levels and blood pressure. According to research, lowering homocysteine by 25% can lower the risk of coronary heart disease and stroke. Homocysteine is an amino acid that the body manufactures from methionine, obtained through nutritional factors.