Treatment of symptoms related to Euphorbia latex exposure is mainly supportive; there is no known antidote to Euphorbia latex.

For dermal exposures, oral antihistamines and analgesics may be used for pruritis and pain, respectively. Over-the-counter acetaminophen or nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) are likely adequate to control pain in most cases. Topical corticosteroids may ease local pruritis and inflammation; however, they also have the potential to delay healing.Euphorbia latex exposure, although they remain a standard treatment for most causes of irritant contact dermatitis.

After ocular exposure, ensure the patient has undergone adequate irrigation of the involved eye(s) and that the ocular pH is approximately 7. The treatment of corneal epithelial defects, keratouveitis, elevated IOP, and other ocular findings are not specific to Euphorbia latex exposure. Topical anesthetics such as ophthalmic tetracaine drops may be used for analgesia during evaluation but are not recommended long term and generally should not be prescribed on an outpatient basis due to the risk of corneal complications with prolonged use.

Artificial tears, oral NSAIDs, and acetaminophen may help provide pain relief for ocular symptoms. If a corneal epithelial defect is present, topical antibiotics are recommended to help prevent secondary bacterial infections. If the patient wears contact lenses, consider an antibiotic with Pseudomonas coverage such as ophthalmic ciprofloxacin or ofloxacin. Topical corticosteroids and cycloplegics may be indicated for cases of keratouveitis, and IOP-lowering medications may be used in cases of elevated IOP.

Some recommend treatment with topical corticosteroids if the patient presents within 24 hours of exposure; however, others have reported good outcomes without steroid application.

Euphorbia tirucalli ingestions usually only cause mild symptoms, and treatment is supportive.Euphorbia sap. However, it may be reasonable to administer in high plant ingestion cases that present within 1 hour, as long as the patient is otherwise an appropriate candidate for activated charcoal administration.

Anything that may induce vomiting should be avoided as this may re-expose and further damage the esophageal mucosa to the toxic latex. Gastric lavage is unnecessary for minor ingestions and may not effectively remove large plant particles if present. In the rare event of significant volume ingestion of Euphorbia plant material or isolated latex, whole bowel irrigation can be considered to expedite removing the toxin.