Managing opioid overdose such as tramadol requires an interprofessional team effort involving numerous specialties. Without proper management, an overdose of tramadol or other opioids can lead to death. The process of treating tramadol overdose or misuse starts prior to initial administration. The incorrect use of prescriptions is a significant contributor to opioid use disorder, so the proper administration of the drug can help prevent drug use disorder. Management of pain is vital in the treatment of patients, and tramadol can provide valuable relief for this population. Although tramadol has a comparatively low risk of misuse, there are still cases of patients with no history of opioid use disorder developing the condition while taking the medication.

Case managers, clinicians (including mid-level practitioners), pharmacists, and other healthcare team members are essential in preventing the abuse of prescriptions. Case managers and nurses are vital in helping prevent physicians from over-prescribing tramadol and other opioids. These functions are crucial in seeing the potential for use disorder in patients. They can help prevent opioid misuse by doing the following:

- Assess clinical need for medication

- Identify treatment and other resources.

- Provider education and support to the patient and their family

- Identifying drug-seeking habits

Pharmacists are also critical in the management of tramadol abuse. They can help prevent the misuse of prescriptions by:

- Providing education on how to take their medication

- Preventing prescription falsifications

- Recognizing problematic signs of drug use

Nursing staff are also integral in managing tramadol therapy, serving as initial points of contact for the prescribing clinician, and answering questions regarding dosing, administration, and adverse events.

With an interprofessional team approach, patients will have an increased chance of successful pain management with tramadol and be less apt to experience adverse effects. [Level 5]