Acute HAV infection is typically a self-limited illness characterized by nausea, vomiting, right upper quadrant abdominal discomfort, malaise, anorexia, myalgia, fatigue, and fever. Patients may develop dark urine and pale stools within a week, followed by jaundice, icteric (yellow-tinted) sclera, and pruritus. Patients usually have elevated levels of serum alanine aminotransferase, aspartate aminotransferase, bilirubin, alkaline phosphatase, and lambda-glutamyl transpeptidase. These lab abnormalities typically resolve within 1 to 6 weeks following the onset of symptoms. The incubation period usually ranges from 14 to 28 days but can last up to 50 days. The severity of symptoms varies with age and comorbidities, particularly underlying chronic liver disease. Most children with acute HAV infection are asymptomatic.

Extra-hepatic manifestations rarely occur but may include pancreatitis, rash, acute kidney injury with interstitial nephritis or glomerular nephritis, pneumonitis, pericarditis, hemolysis, and acute cholecystitis. Neurologic complications have also been reported such as mononeuritis, Guillan-Barre, encephalitis and central myelitis. There were two reported cases in 1991 of autoimmune hepatitis triggered by acute HAV infection. Lemon et al. describe five clinical patterns:

- Asymptomatic infection

- Symptomatic infection with jaundice, dark urine, and clay-colored stool

- Cholestatic hepatitis with prolonged alkaline phosphatase and bilirubin elevation and pruritus

- Relapsing infection

- Fulminant hepatitis.