Breast cancer is a common diagnosis, with 252710 new invasive cases and 63410 in situ cases diagnosed annually, according to the American Cancer Society data in 2017. Despite its incidence, it is commonly a treatable disease, with a 90% 5-year survival rate and an 83% 10-year survival rate.  Currently, 3 million women are living with the disease.  Mastectomy is the common measure for both the treatment and prophylaxis of breast cancer.

Although mastectomies have been performed for many years, reconstruction has only been a consideration more recently.  The first reported case of breast reconstruction was in 1887 when Aristide Verneuil used a pedicle-based off the opposite breast for reconstruction.  It was closely followed by Vincent Czerny who used a lipoma to reconstruct a lumpectomy defect.  Iginio Tansini first performed a latissimus dorsi flap in 1906, although most advocated against reconstruction during this period, as they felt it inhibited cancer care.  It wasn’t until the 1950s when breast reconstruction became an option again, with surgeons like Dr. Gilles performing tubed pedicled flaps.

Today, breast reconstructions are common operations, with 106294 operations done annually, according to the American Society of Plastic Surgery 2018 data.  However, most reconstructions are implant-based, and only 1316 were performed by autologous methods (TRAM, DIEP, latissimus dorsi, and other flaps).

Since there are so many survivors that go on to live a long life, quality of life issues are paramount. Plastic surgeons can contribute to the quality of life issues of these patients by performing breast reconstruction.  In addition, all insurance carriers have to cover breast reconstruction thanks to the Women’s Health and Cancer Rights Act in 1998.