Different pathologic conditions are associated with different joint types. Below is a review of the most common injuries that plague each histological class.

**Fibrous Joints**

Sutures, the immobile fibrous joints that bind the bony plates of the skull, can fuse too early in development, a condition termed craniosynostosis. The plates of the neonatal skull are not fused so as to permit space for the brain to grow in all planes; early fusion (synostosis) alters the shape of the head. For example, if the sagittal suture synostoses, the head will not develop width and will instead grow long and narrow (scaphocephaly). In addition to altered head shape, some children may experience symptoms secondary to high brain pressure due to more confined skull space. These include headaches, developmental delays, or problems with eyesight.

A syndesmosis joint, the slightly mobile fibrous joint that connects long bones with an interosseous membrane, can be sprained. For example, in the leg, excessive external rotation can push the fibula away from the tibia, causing injury to the distal tibiofibular syndesmosis; this is termed a “high ankle sprain.”

**Cartilaginous Joints**

Epiphyseal plates, an example of temporary synchondroses, are vulnerable to damage when there is an injury to the associated growing long bone. Such damage to the cartilage would stop bone lengthening and stunt bone growth.

**Synovial Joints**

Arthritis results in the destruction of the synovial joint. There are many types of arthritis, distinguished by different mechanisms of injury. The most common type of arthritis is osteoarthritis, which, by definition, is gradual damage to and subsequent thinning of the articular cartilage. This condition is considered a “wear and tear” injury and presents in older patients; it often correlates with prior injury to the joint and longstanding high-impact stress on the joint (due to sports or excessive body weight). Because the articular cartilage has no innervation, the degradation itself does not cause pain. Instead, as the articular cartilage becomes thinner, more pressure is placed on the bones. The joint responds by overproducing synovial fluid, which leads to swelling and inflammation that stretches the highly innervated articular capsule to cause pain and stiffness of the joint. The underlying bone also has a rich nerve supply that perceives pain.

Gout is another form of arthritis caused by the deposition of uric acid crystals within a joint. Uric acid causes gout when there is an excessive amount in the body, either due to over-production or improper excretion by the kidneys. The most commonly affected joint is the metatarsophalangeal (MTP) joint of the big toe. This condition is termed podagra.

Synovitis is inflammation of the synovial membrane that lines the articular capsule of synovial joints. The most common cause is the overuse of a synovial joint in an active, healthy person. Persistent synovitis in multiple joints can indicate rheumatoid arthritis, where the synovium is the target of the autoimmune attack. Patients with synovitis often present with pain out of proportion to examination; sometimes, the patient has pain without swelling or tenderness, or arthralgia.