Treatment ranges from physiological clearance, use of activated charcoal, or extracorporeal therapy such as hemodialysis or plasmapheresis. Activated charcoal binds to carbamazepine and prevents the absorption from the GI tract. It also enhances the elimination of carbamazepine by interrupting the enterohepatic circulation of the drug. Caution must be taken because of the risk of aspiration of charcoal associated with worsening mental status. Charcoal hemoperfusion is another technique shown to improve clinical outcome for carbamazepine overdose. Charcoal hemoperfusion has risks such as hypoglycemia, hypocalcemia, and thrombocytopenia. Charcoal will compete with plasma proteins for carbamazepine binding. In one treatment session, the blood compartment can be exposed to the hemoperfusion column many times. Successful treatment of carbamazepine toxicity with intravenous lipid emulsion (ILE) therapy also has been reported in the literature. Due to the risk of death in 13% of cases with significant toxicity, an aggressive treatment plan is required that includes hemoperfusion (HP), hemodialysis (HD), intravenous lipid emulsion (ILE), and multiple-dose activated charcoal (MDAC).

Pediatric populations are at greater risk for adverse effects and symptoms of toxicity at lower serum levels when compared to adults. Use of continuous venovenous hemodiafiltration (CVVHDF) has been reported. This technique uses both diffusion and convection which allows flexibility in enhancing clearance by increasing the volume of ultrafiltrate or the dialysate flow rates. This technique is superior over diffusive techniques alone because the convective transfer helps clear larger molecules such as drugs like carbamazepine. It is a good option for unstable patients, and this continuous procedure is controlled easily. Gastric lavage is useful if done within one hour of ingestion, but care must be taken due to anticholinergic characteristics of carbamazepine that slow down peristalsis and delay the processing of ingested medications. Whole bowel irrigation can be done safely only after securing the airway. As reported in the literature, whole body irrigation can be complicated with ileus and complete bowel obstruction that could require an ileostomy due to the anticholinergic effect of carbamazepine and its effect on peristalsis.