Fundus fluorescein angiography (FFA) demonstrates more severe fundus changes than routine slit-lamp examination. After fluorescein injection, the peaks fluoresce, and the troughs remain dark. The peaks and troughs can be better contrasted during the subsequent arterial and venous phases when they appear as alternating bright and dark lines, but there is no leakage.

FFA in cases of VKH disease shows pinpoints of hyperfluorescence, which in later stages of disease show pooling surrounded by a dark rim.

CSCR shows leakage in a characteristic inkblot or smokestack or diffuse leak pattern on FFA.

FFA in choroidal metastasis helps in assessing the size of the lesion and identifying flat lesions of choroidal invasion, which would have been missed on clinical examination. They are hyperfluorescent in the early phase, which becomes hyperfluorescent in the late phase. The tumor border shows dilated retinal capillaries with pinpoint leakage in many cases.

Indocyanine green angiography (ICGA) may help to examine the choroidal conditions associated with choroidal folds. VKH disease in its acute phase shows hyperfluorescent dark dots, early hyperfluorescent choroidal stromal vessels, and fuzzy stromal vessels. Central serous chorioretinopathy (CSCR) shows delayed choroidal filling along with hyperfluorescent areas in the early phase, choroidal hyperpermeability leading to geographic areas of hyperfluorescence in mid-phase with persistent hyperfluorescence or washout in the late phase.

Ultrasound B scan (USG) is a non-invasive technique that does not detect choroidal folds but demonstrates flattening and thickening of the posterior sclera and choroid.

USG is a very important tool in the diagnosis of posterior scleritis in which posterior coats of the eye appear thickened and flattened. Other common findings are retrobulbar edema, ‘T’ sign if the retrobulbar edema surrounds the optic nerve, retinal detachment, distension of optic nerve sheath, optic disc swelling, and scleral nodules.

Optical coherence tomography (OCT) shows the presence of undulating retinal pigment epithelium in cases of choroidal folds.

OCT angiography may help to find out the role of abnormal blood flow in the pathophysiology of choroidal folds.

Blood pressure should be measured in all cases of papilledema to rule out accelerated hypertension.

Radiological investigations like CT scans and MRIs may often be necessary to investigate an underlying condition. For example, idiopathic intracranial hypertension in cases of acquired hyperopia where variable enlargement of the optic nerve image, flattening of the posterior pole of affected eyes, and sometimes a discernible space between the nerve and its sheath is seen.

Invasive procedures like lumbar puncture may be required in selected cases. Uveal effusion may show an increase in the cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) protein level and increased CSF pressure without pleocytosis.

Since choroidal folds can be associated with thyroid orbitopathy, thyroid function tests can be done in suspected cases.