The diagnosis of notalgia paresthetica is accomplished primarily through history and physical. A thorough examination is essential to avoid excessive and unnecessary testing. Complaints suggestive of notalgia paresthetica can include long-standing, intermittent pruritus of variable intensity located medial to the lower two-thirds of the scapula contralateral to the dominant hand. Although most cases are unilateral, notalgia paresthetica can present bilaterally. Additionally, patients may claim sensations of pain, heat, cold, a foreign body, tingling, and numbness. Notalgia paresthetica is most commonly seen in middle-aged females, although males and patients in a wide range of ages have been reported. There is no racial or geographic preference.

Like other neuropathic causes of chronic pruritus, notalgia paresthetica lacks a primary cutaneous lesion. Secondary lesions, such as hyperpigmentation and lichenification, can be visualized in patients with long-standing pruritus. Deep excoriations are considered to be virtually pathognomonic for chronic pruritus of neuropathic origin. It is nearly impossible to resist scratching a severely pruritic lesion.

Patients may scratch the lesion while they are distracted or asleep, resulting in a worsening of symptoms. Because the pruritus is typically located on the lower two-thirds of the scapula contralateral to the dominant hand, Apley's scratch test is considered a rudimentary exam for notalgia paresthetica. Apley's scratch test is primarily used to evaluate the shoulder’s range of motion and contains three maneuvers.