Turner Syndrome

- The biochemical aspects of the genetics of Turner syndrome begin early on with X inactivation. X inactivation is the process in female somatic cells where one X chromosome is inactivated or shut off, and the genes of the active X chromosome remain under transcription and those of the inactive X chromosome do not. In this process, the X-inactive specific transcript (XIST) RNA produced from the X inactivation center coats one X chromosome by random selection and utilizes methylation and modification of histone proteins to repress euchromatin and inactivate the DNA of one X chromosome

- In Turner syndrome whether traditional 45, X, or one of the many mosaic forms, there is a decreased gene dosage since there is not a second X chromosome for genes to escape X inactivation from. The lack of these genes on a secondary X chromosome is believed to be a large part of what causes the stigmata of Turner syndrome

- Another gene linked to Turner syndrome is the RPS4Y/X gene that is thought to be part of the cause of lymphedema seen in Turner syndrome patients. RPS4Y/X codes for a small subunit ribosomal protein

- ASMTL is a gene also linked to Turner syndrome and is thought to play a role in DNA methylation

- Lastly, the PPP2R3B gene is thought to be involved in cell cycle regulation problems involved in Turner syndrome

46, XX Pure Gonadal Dysgenesis

- The cases of 46 XX gonadal dysgenesis related to congenital adrenal hyperplasia most often are caused by mutations in the gene for 21-hydroxylase. This enzyme typically catalyzes the hydroxylation of 17-hydroxyprogesterone to 11 deoxycortisol. When this enzyme is deficient, it decreases the production of cortisol which increases ACTH which then increases cholesterol uptake by cells and increases the production of pregnenolone. The increased steroid precursors shunt toward testosterone production leading to virilization

- Mutations in the gene for the FSH receptor of the ovary have also been implicated in certain cases of 46XX gonadal dysgenesis. Mutations in this G protein-coupled receptor leads to decreased or no signaling leading to decreased follicle formation in the ovary.

- Another gene, BMP15, is involved in XX gonadal dysgenesis; this gene codes for a transforming factor beta involved in folliculogenesis. The products of this gene also stimulate granulosa cell proliferation. The transforming factor beta proteins first become translated into pre-proteins with a single peptide, as well as a pro and mature region. The individual parts of the preprotein are required for proper posttranslational processing to produce active proteins. The lack of these active proteins is believed to have connections to decreased follicle production as well as depletion of ovarian follicles altogether.

46, XY Pure Gonadal Dysgenesis

- It is estimated that approximately 15% of all cases of 46 XY gonadal dysgenesis are due to mutations in the SRY gene. Mutations are often found in the high mobility group part of the DNA binding region. The SRY gene is expressed in the early Sertoli cells forming in the testes and assists in the coordination of events leading to sexual differentiation. Sertoli cells promote the development of Leydig cells which go on to produce androgens and insulin-like factor3 leading to the regression of Mullerian duct structures and differentiation of Wolffian duct structures

- Mutations on SRY tend to lead to completely dysgenic gonad or a streak gonad whereas when SRY is normal, and other genes are the cause of dysgenesis some immature seminiferous tubules are observable

- Research has also found links to the genes SOX9, GATA4, FOG2, NR5A1, and WT1, many of which code for transcription factors

NR5A1 Receptor

- Mutations in this gene are the only monogenic mutation associated with spermatogenic and ovarian failure in 46 XY and 46 XX gonadal dysgenesis. NR5A1 has a two-zinc finger DNA binding domain and a 12-helix structure comparable to other nuclear receptors