In a study performed by Palhares et al., the clinical markers of overweight and obese subjects (n=161) aged between 5 to 19 years were analyzed.

**Diabetes Mellitus**

Twenty years ago, the dominant type of pediatric diabetes cases was immune-mediated type 1 diabetes (T1DM). Due to a rising rate of childhood obesity, the number of type 2 diabetes (T2DM) cases has dramatically increased among children and adolescents. T2DM is responsible for almost 50 percent of all new diabetes cases among children.

Clinical signs and symptoms of children with T2DM may be difficult to distinguish from those of children with other types of DM, such as T1DM. T1DM is predominantly present in the White population, whereas T2DM predominates more in the Black, Hispanic, Asian, and Native American populations. B-cell autoantibodies are more commonly observed in T1DM than in T2DM pediatric populations. Ketoacidosis is more frequent in T1DM patients. Some of the associated disorders of T1DM are autoimmune diseases related to thyroid and adrenal glands. T1DM patients have low levels of insulin and C-peptide, whereas T2DM patients have high levels of insulin and C-peptide.

Hypertension and dyslipidemia are associated with insulin resistance and obesity, and thus commonly observed in pediatric patients with T2DM. Children who are obese often present with increased LDL cholesterol and triglycerides levels and decreased HDL cholesterol levels. Elevated LDL cholesterol may lead to atherosclerosis and trigger chronic inflammation. Abnormal lipid levels are present in 12 to 17% of children and adolescents who are overweight.

**Acanthosis Nigricans**

Patients with Acanthosis nigricans present with velvety hyperpigmented patches that are poorly demarcated on the skin. These dark patches, which may be itchy and odorous, can be commonly found in body folds of the neck, groin, and armpits. This condition occurs in up to 90 percent of children with T2DM.

**Polycystic Ovarian Syndrome (PCOS)**

PCOS is an endocrine disorder that presents with chronic anovulation and hyperandrogenism and may lead to infertility in women at their reproductive age. It is prevalent in 5 to 13% of women at reproductive age, and 70 to 80 % of women with PCOS are infertile.

Children and adolescents with T2DM are more likely to develop progressive complications at earlier ages than those diagnosed with the disease later in their adulthood. Some of these complications include stroke, myocardial infarction, renal insufficiency and chronic renal failure, neuropathy, and retinopathy that leads to blindness.

**Diabetic Retinopathy**

With the rising number of pediatric T1DM and T2DM cases, more children and adolescents have been at risk of developing diabetic retinopathy (DR) and experiencing visual impairment. Because DR may progress without any symptoms, conducting an annual retinal examination on diabetic children and adolescents and initiating appropriate ophthalmic therapy are crucial to prevent irreversible visual loss. Children and adolescents should get their first DR screening test when they are 10 to 12 years old or when it has been 2 to 5 years since being diagnosed with diabetes. Patients with prolonged DR may present with “hard exudates,” which are lipid deposits that look like dots on the fundus of the eye, in their retina. These deposits in the macula may lead to the development of diabetic maculopathy.