Three mechanisms contribute to Raynaud phenomena. These are decreased blood flow, blood vessels constriction, neurogenic responses, and inflammatory and immune responses.

The somatosensory system helps with temperature perception based on environmental stimuli. Afferent nerve fibers stimulated by cold temperatures activate A-delta and unmyelinated C-fibers. This eventually leads to activation of cold receptor TRPM8 (transient receptor potential ion channel) which monitors variations in cold temperatures. Activation of TRPM8 results in cutaneous vasoconstriction, thermogenesis, and avoidance of cold.

With cold temperatures, the sympathetic nervous system causes the release of vasoconstricting neuropeptides and norepinephrine leading to vasoconstriction of arteriole smooth muscle and decreased blood flood to the skin. Of note, in secondary Raynaud phenomena, endothelin-1 is released by endothelial cells which causes vasoconstriction.

In primary Raynaud phenomenon, an increase in alpha-2 adrenergic sensitivity in the digital and cutaneous vessels results in the vasoconstrictive response to cold temperatures and emotional stress. Alpha-2 adrenergic receptors are present on the distal arterial smooth muscles of the digits and affected by the sympathetic nervous system. Studies demonstrated that the use of alpha-2 adrenergic receptor inhibitors in patients with cold-induced attacks decreased the severity of the attack.

In secondary Raynaud phenomenon, the underlying disease is the factor that disrupts normal vessel reactivity to cold temperatures. Usually, the endothelial function of the digital and cutaneous vessels is compromised leading to eventual vasoconstriction with resulting tissue ischemia. For instance, fibrosis of the vascular system in systemic scleroderma leads to endothelial dysfunction followed by tissue ischemia.