# Introduction

Effective interprofessional teamwork and communication are integral to patient safety. The Institute of Medicine highlighted the effect of poor communication on deleterious healthcare outcomes in the 1990s.

The future of patient safety and avoidance of medical errors should be predicated upon systems based error prevention as opposed to sole reliance on a healthcare provider’s vigilance. Handoff periods are particularly vulnerable to deficiencies in verbal communication due to language impediments, misunderstandings, interruptions, and hesitation to speak up against authority.

# Function

The adoption of Crew Resource Management by the aviation industry has revolutionized safety and error prevention through the improvement of effective communication via standardized terminology and procedures.

In terms of simulation training in cases of emergency obstetric care, teams that utilized CO and CLC were more successful in completing critical tasks than teams with more complex communications. Teams that used CLC were quicker to administer a magnesium infusion to an eclamptic patient emergently.

# Issues of Concern

Trauma teams’ use of CO and CLC was found to be useful in goal-oriented task completion, and utilization was more common in providers with significant professional experience. CO encouraged team members to verbalize completed tasks or substantial changes in a patient’s condition. Complications can arise when there are too many CO’s being verbalized with no direct recipient, as these commands can lead to confusion instead of action. Siassakos et al. found that direct commands were more likely to be executed and lead to overt action as opposed to indirectly articulated commands.[17] Indirect commands were also likely to lead to task overload for resuscitation team members, thus having a detrimental impact on the teams’ performance.

Although communication overload is alarming, appropriate, and timely vocalization of concerns on behalf of the patient is integral to a successful interprofessional team. Egalitarian team leaders were more likely to encourage active team members who vocalized their concerns. Authoritarian leaders lead to the less frequent use of CLC in trauma teams. CLC utilizing effective and clear communication does not always come naturally for team members, which is why its use in simulation activities requires emphasis. Factors including time pressure, excessive workload, and organizational hierarchies can negatively impact the use of CLC. Although the risk of miscommunication in surgical teams becomes reduced with the use of CLC, repetitive practice via simulation is imperative to successful implementation.

# Curriculum Development

Salas et al. suggest utilizing the routine use of CLC because it can reduce tension between members of trauma teams.

Education is one of the most important means by which to arm faculty and trainees in terms of improvement in patient safety. As stated by the US Institute of Medicine (IOM), teams that work together should train together.

Immersive simulation scenarios allow for in-depth debriefing regarding roles, responsibilities, and information sharing as they relate to patient management. With proper debriefing, simulation provides insight into different interprofessional teams’ vantage points, allowing for an environment of mutual support. Culture change can occur in an environment where the patient is at the center of a shared mental model. interprofessional simulation allows for the development of mutual respect and trust via a team rather than an individual-oriented approach. The simulation, therefore, represents a safe environment for the deliberate practice of efficient communication strategies. Video recordings of participants during simulation activities can help facilitate learning along with a structured debrief. A meta-analysis of 609 studies suggests that simulation can aid in the augmentation of medical knowledge, time management skills, process, and procedure skills.

# Clinical Clerkships

Trainees (both team leaders and team members) must hone their CLC skills through simulation activities. Simulation continues to grow as an essential training modality in healthcare, while CRM is acknowledged as a foundation for improving healthcare teams’ collaboration and communication. CLC is an indispensable aspect of CRM and is utilized to ensure safe and secure team communication. These concepts are used in courses such as advanced trauma life support, advanced cardiac life support, and TeamSTEPPS training.

# Procedural Skills Assessment

An important technique for CLC instruction and refinement is blindfolding of the team leader, known as the blindfolded code training exercise. This method of instruction is cost-effective and requires the team leader to utilize critical thinking skills and a sound conceptual framework to organize the management of patient resuscitation. Trainees in emergency medicine, anesthesia, and critical care specialties need extensive training in leadership strategies and CRM to perform in high-acuity situations effectively. It is unclear how to teach techniques to improve real-time ineffectual behavior or bad habits that may persist despite structured learning in the simulation lab.

The theory of neuroplasticity, or the brain’s ability to evolve and reorganize neuronal activity over time, has been suggested as a means to improve communication in the field of medicine. After blindfold placement, other senses become heightened once the team leader loses his/her sense of sight, known as cross-modal neuroplasticity.  Functional magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of the brain has revealed augmentation of other senses when the examinee gets deprived of one. Researchers found that blind adults processed auditory and tactile stimuli in the visual cortex, as compared to patients with sight who did not experience this phenomenon. This suggests that deprived areas of the brain can become amenable to alternative sensory stimulation.

Medical education may not be taking full advantage of the concept of cross-modal neuroplasticity in regards to developing advanced means of communication amongst teams. The lack of visual cues in an arrest situation requires trainees to develop highly attuned communication skills. The blindfolded code training exercise exemplifies the importance of strong leadership skills during a team simulation, allowing trainees to integrate the leadership and communication training they have received. Closed-loop commands are useful in such a setting as members of the resuscitation team cannot perform maneuvers or initiate patient management without explicit orders from team leaders.

# Continuing Education

Medical errors and failure to rescue are commonly attributed to ineffective communication during operative care in “low frequency, high acuity” events, including trauma resuscitation and cardiac arrest situations.

# Clinical Significance

Modern healthcare is optimally delivered by multidisciplinary teams who should prioritize teamwork and communication to facilitate safe patient care. There is, however, an unacceptable incidence of preventable medical errors commonly attributed to communication failures between health professionals. Effective teams rely on a foundation of mutual respect and trust, shared mental models, and CLC for effective care delivery. Several challenges prevent the facilitation of such effective teams, including educational, organizational, and psychological challenges.

Medical professionals from multiple disciplines must effectively communicate and facilitate healthcare delivery via teams rather than individual providers. Failures of inter-professional teamwork and communication can lead directly to compromised patient care, medical errors, increased sentinel events, staff burnout, tension, and inefficiency.

# Enhancing Healthcare Team Outcomes

Despite widespread attempts at implementation of improved communication strategies with CLC, errors associated with ineffective communication are far too common. There has been a leap from problem recognition during operative training to solution implementation, failing to explore communication lapses among teams.

Salas et al. proposed a model for five elements of effective teams, including team leadership, mutual performance monitoring, backup behavior, flexibility, and team orientation, with a groundwork of mutual trust and CLC.[36] Strong leadership involves task coordination, team development, inspiring motivation, and fostering a positive environment. Performance monitoring requires enough knowledge of team members to allow identification of failures or task overload, while backup behavior requires supportive behavior from team members, including redistribution of workload and altered task delegation. Flexibility or team adaptability enables a team to acutely respond to changes in a dynamic clinical environment, while team orientation is the willingness to take the perspectives of others into account and the valuation of team goals over individual ones. Shared mental models lead to common situational awareness and an integrated treatment plan for the patient while taking into account the roles and tasks of individuals. This shared mental model allows for effective team-based problem solving and decision making.

A meta-analysis of 72 studies with 4795 teams across a range of industries revealed that successful information sharing predicted team performance.

One of the limitations to the enhancement of CLC among professionals is that different groups have different expectations regarding the content, timing, and generalized structure of information transfer, and may not grasp the roles and priorities of other groups.