As stated previously, the fastigial nucleus plays important roles in motor control by sending signals to the medial descending systems and eye movement nuclei and the maintenance of many activities within the human body, such as feeding, immune, and cardiovascular and respiratory functions. The caudal fastigial nucleus accepts inputs from the oculomotor vermis to predict the real-time motion of the eyes and transmits information to structures in the lower brainstem that are involved in saccades and smooth pursuit movements.

The fastigial nucleus is also involved in feeding control with the hypothalamus, as its stimulation can alter movements within the jejunum, ileum, and colon. Gastric control is also under the regulation of the fastigial nucleus through adrenergic, adrenal catecholamine, and vagal cholinergic release.

The fastigial nucleus has also been shown to regulate defecation and micturition functions. Stimulating the fastigial nucleus suppresses the defecation reflex and alters bladder motility in a bidirectional manner.

Fastigial nucleus lesions are related to many syndromes and disorders. For instance, previous studies have shown that patients with lesions after cerebellar tumor resections demonstrate gait and posture ataxia that often involve the fastigial nucleus. The fastigial nucleus is also related to the pathology of congenital central hypoventilation syndrome (CCHS). CCHS is a disorder that causes deficits in the ventilatory response to hypercarbia and hypoxemia. Patients with CCHS often have a defective fastigial nucleus and do not respond well to ventilatory or blood pressure changes. Moreover, stimulating the fastigial nucleus may result in a protective result toward gastric mucosal injury and acute myocardial infarction. Patients with autism and cerebellar cognitive affective syndrome have also been shown to have a dysfunctional fastigial nucleus.