CT is the modality of choice in evaluating mediastinal pathology. Multidetector CT chest is commonly used in the emergency department and inpatient settings. The sagittal and coronal reformats are widely used and extremely helpful in evaluating the mediastinal masses. 3-D reconstructions, including multiplanar reformation or reconstruction (MPR) and maximum intensity projections (MIPS) sequences, are also helpful in evaluating mediastinal lesions such as aneurysms. The associated radiation dose is, however, a disadvantage with this modality.

While evaluating mediastinal masses, a contrast-enhanced CT chest is usually performed. This allows for delineation between the vasculature and the adjacent structures such as lymph nodes, esophagus. CT allows for the evaluation of masses based on the anatomic location. The attenuation coefficient of the mass also helps in narrowing the differential. The presence of air within the mediastinum is consistent with pneumomediastinum. Pneumomediastinum can be spontaneous or secondary to trauma or nontraumatic causes. Nontraumatic causes include asthma and chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD). Iatrogenic causes like endoscopy procedures, central vascular access procedures are a frequent cause of pneumomediastinum.

Mediastinal masses, on the other hand, can be fluid, fat, or soft tissue in attenuation. In the anterior mediastinum, a fat-containing lesion is highly suggestive of a teratoma. The differential would, however, also include lipoma, thymolipoma. Thymolipoma is a well-encapsulated thymic tumor and can be seen in the cardiophrenic angle.

Soft tissue masses include the substernal extension of goiter in the anterior mediastinum, thymic hyperplasia, thymoma, thymic carcinoma, lymphoma, nonnecrotic metastatic lymph nodes, soft tissue masses arising from the trachea, esophagus and neurogenic tumors. Thymic hyperplasia or thymic rebound occurs as a result of contrast, chemotherapy. Thymic hyperplasia can be differentiated from thymic tumors as the triangular contour of the thymus is maintained. Thymoma accounts for 47% of tumors in the anterior mediastinum.

**Imaging for Acute Aortic Syndrome and Pulmonary Embolism**

An increase in aortic diameter greater than 4 cm in the ascending aorta is considered pathologic. An aortic aneurysm with an increase in the size of greater than 10 mm per year is considered unstable along with associated intramural hematoma or eccentric lumen.

Congenital abnormalities of the vasculature include a right-sided aortic arch, double aortic arch, aberrant right subclavian artery, and left superior vena cava. While these are uncommon, they have important clinical significance.

Pulmonary embolism, another life-threatening condition, can be assessed using CT pulmonary angiograms. Based on imaging features, pulmonary embolism can be further classified as acute or chronic based on the age of embolus. The difference between CT pulmonary angiograms and CT angiograms for dissection is that the region of interest, which triggers the scan in bolus dose triggering, is placed on the pulmonary artery in case of a CT pulmonary angiogram and usually in the ascending aorta on a CT angiogram for aortic dissection.

The advantage of CT pulmonary angiogram over the ventilation/perfusion (V/Q) scan is the simultaneous evaluation of the lungs for pulmonary infarction and assessment for right heart strain. However, CT is associated with higher radiation exposure. Dual-energy CT is a more recent technique used for better detection of pulmonary emboli.

Triple rule-out studies that evaluate for aortic dissection, pulmonary embolism, and coronary artery CT angiograms have been used in the emergency room to rule out all three causes of acute chest pain.