Prone CPR is indicated in patients with cardiac arrest while in the prone position for oxygenation, ventilation, or surgical procedures.

**Scientific Guideline Recommendations**

The 2010 AHA guidelines for CPR and ECC recommend that in hospitalized patients with an advanced airway, CPR in the prone position may be reasonable when the patient cannot be placed in the supine position.

The 2014 United Kingdom Resuscitation council guidelines recommend that chest compressions be started on patients with cardiac arrest during neurosurgery without changing their position from prone to supine. However, the patient should be turned supine if chest compressions are ineffective based on the ETCO2 and capnography waveforms.

The current COVID-19 pandemic has brought prone CPR to the front because many patients with COVID-19 ARDS require ventilation in the prone position and are at risk of cardiac arrest.

Several scientific societies released interim guidance and joint statements on prone CPR recommendations in COVID-19 patients. The AHA recommends resuscitation in the supine position for non-sedated COVID-19 patients with no advanced airway in a prone position (awake-prone ventilation). In patients with an advanced airway present before cardiac arrest, the AHA recommends that it may be reasonable to perform prone CPR unless able to turn the patient supine without the risk of aerosolization or disconnection from the mechanical ventilator and other equipment.

The European Resuscitation Council (ERC) has similar recommendations in its COVID-19 guidelines with additional suggestions to turn patients supine if unable to effectively perform chest compressions, presence of airway complications, or delay in achieving ROSC.

The Brazilian societies of cardiology, intensive care medicine, anesthesiology, and emergency medicine, in a joint position statement on resuscitation of COVID-19 patients, recommends turning patients into the supine position once it is safely possible due to limited evidence on prone CPR. Additionally, the effectiveness of CPR should be monitored using goal diastolic pressure > 20 mmHg and ETCO2 pressure  > 15 mmHg.