The diagnosis of migraine is based on patient history, physical examination, and fulfillment of the diagnostic criteria. The necessary information that has to be gathered consists of these simple questions:

- Demographic features of the patient: age, gender, race, profession

- When did the headache start?

- Where does it hurt? Location, irradiation.

- What is the intensity of the pain?

- How is the pain? Which are the qualitative characteristics of pain?

- How long does the pain last?

- At which moment of the day does the pain appear?

- How has it evolved since it started?

- What is the frequency of appearance?

- What are the triggering situations?

- Simultaneous symptoms?

- Is it related to sleep?

- How does it get better or worse?

- Which medications do you take to make it better? What is the frequency of this medication?

Patients should also be inquired about somatosensory disturbances, such as spreading unilateral numbness or tingling in the face and arm, as well as about disturbances in speech or thinking. Some aura symptoms, as described below, could indicate uncommon types of migraine:

- Motor weakness

- Dysarthria

- Hypacusis

- Diplopia

- Ataxia

- Vertigo

- Tinnitus

- Decreased level of consciousness

The International Classification of Headache Disorders (ICHD-3) describes these diagnostic criteria.

B1. Migraine without aura:

B1a. Headache attacks lasting 4 to 72 hours (untreated or unsuccessfully treated)

B1b. Headache has at least two of the following characteristics:

- Unilateral location

- Pulsating quality

- Moderate or severe pain intensity

- Aggravation by or causing avoidance of routine physical activity (walking or climbing stairs)

B1c. During a headache, at least one of the following:

- Nausea and vomiting

- Photophobia and phonophobia

B2. Migraine with aura:

B2a. One or more of the following fully reversible aura symptoms:

- Visual

- Sensory

- Speech and language

- Motor

- Brainstem

- Retinal

B2b. At least two of the following characteristics:

- At least one aura symptom spreads gradually over five or more minutes

- Two or more aura symptoms occur in succession

- Each aura symptom lasts 5 to 60 minutes

- At least one aura symptom is unilateral

- At least one aura symptom is positive

- The aura is accompanied, or followed within 60 minutes, by the headache.

C. On eight days or more per month for more than three months, fulfilling any of the following:

- Criteria B1b and B1c for migraine without aura

- Criteria B2a and B2b for migraine with aura

- It is believed by the patient to be migraine headaches at onset and relieved by a triptan or ergot derivative.

D. Not better accounted for by another ICHD-3 diagnosis

**The ICHD-3 Criteria for Migraine Without Aura**

- At least five attacks fulfilling criteria B to D (see below)

- Headache attacks that last 4 to 72 hours, untreated or unsuccessfully treated

- Headache that has at least two of the following criteria:

- Unilateral location
- Pulsating quality
- Moderate to severe pain intensity.
- Aggravation by or causing avoidance of routine physical activity (such as walking or climbing stairs)

- During headaches, at least one of the following:

- Nausea, vomiting, or both
- Photophobia and phonophobia

- Not better accounted for by another ICHD-3 diagnosis

**The ICHD-3 Criteria for Migraine With Aura**

- At least two attacks fulfilling criteria B to D

- One or more of the following fully reversible aura symptoms:

- Visual
- Sensory
- Speech and language
- Motor
- Brainstem
- Retinal

- At least three of the following six characters:

- At least one aura symptom spreads gradually over ≥5 minutes
- Two or more symptoms occur in succession
- Each aura symptom lasts 5 to 60 minutes
- At least one aura symptom is unilateral
- At least one aura symptom is positive
- The aura is accompanied, or followed within 60 minutes, by the headache

- It is not better accounted for by another ICHD-3 diagnosis

- Hemiplegic migraine is diagnosed when the aura consists of motor weakness.

- Migraine with brainstem aura (previously known as basilar artery migraine or basilar migraine) is diagnosed if the aura symptoms emerge from the brainstem (bilateral hemianopic visual disturbance, diplopia, vertigo, ataxia, dysarthria, tinnitus, hyperacusis, bilateral paresthesia, or numbness)

- Retinal migraine is diagnosed when the aura involves a monocular visual field defect.

**The ICHD-3 Criteria for Chronic Migraine**

- Headache (tension-type-like or migraine-like) on 15 or more days per month for more than three months and fulfilling criteria B and C

- It occurs in a patient who has had at least five attacks fulfilling the following criteria for migraine without aura (B1) or migraine with aura (B2)

Neuroimaging (computed tomographic scan, magnetic resonance imaging, magnetic resonance angiography, or magnetic resonance venography) is indicated in the following cases:

- Acute severe headache, especially if it is the first or worst episode (discard subarachnoid hemorrhage)

- Abnormal neurologic examination, especially if there are unexplained symptoms or signs (confusion, stiff neck, papilledema, epilepsy)

- Non-typical characteristics

- Changes in the patient's typical features or patterns

- New episodes in older (> 50 years of age) or immunosuppressed patients

- Systemic or meningeal signs or symptoms (fever, weight loss, fatigue)

- New neurological symptoms or signs on examination

- Headache not responding to treatment

- Headache lasting > 72 hours

- A significant change in the frequency, pattern, or severity of headaches

- Severe headache pain ("worst headache of life") or headache causing awakening from sleep

- New-onset headache in patients with HIV infection or cancer

- Associated symptoms or signs suggestive of meningitis or stroke

The commonly used acronym "SNOOP" can be used to aid in the determination of neuroimaging indications:

- "S" for systemic signs or symptoms and secondary risk factors

- "N" for neurologic signs or symptoms

- "O" for onset

- "O" for older

- "P" for position-dependent intensity changes, the prior pattern changes, papilledema, and precipitated by Valsalva maneuvers.

Cerebrospinal fluid analysis and electroencephalogram are not typically performed unless seizure activity of infectious etiology has to be excluded.