**Introduction and Obstetric Definitions**

Neonatal seizures or convulsions are epileptic events occurring from birth to the end of the neonatal period, which is about 28 days. The neonatal period is the most vulnerable period for the development of seizures, with an incidence of 80% in the first 24 to 48 hours of life. The corrected age should be calculated to interpret a neonatal EEG. Benign variants will be reported according to the corrected age and not the chronological age of the neonate. The first trimester runs from conception to about 12 weeks, the second trimester 13-26 weeks, and the third trimester 27 to 42 weeks.

Visual analysis inspects the background rhythm for continuity/discontinuity, symmetry, synchrony, amplitude, reactivity, and morphology.

**Classification**

A neonatal epilepsy disorder can point towards a more ominous sign of sustained and permanent brain damage. Early detection, management, and aggressive treatment of seizures and status epilepticus can prevent long term neurological sequela. About 3/1000 neonates will have a seizure disorder in the first two days of life in term babies and up to 132/1000 in pre-term infants. Neonatal seizures can be classified as subtle, tonic, clonic, generalized tonic-clonic, myoclonic, with behavioral features that can be paroxysmal, non-paroxysmal, repetitive, and stereotypical.

- **Subtle:**(approximately 50%) Difficult to detect clinically. It can consist of aleatory roving eye movements, including open fluttering and rolling up. Oral smacking or automatisms, pedal movements, staring/apneic events, repetitive sucking, chewing sounds, and tongue protrusion.

- **Clonic:**(approximately 25%)  Involuntary, rhythmic muscle contractions that are fast frequency.

- **Myoclonic:**(approximately 20%) Repetitive brief shock-like jerks of the limbs.

- **Tonic:**(approximately 5%) Repetitive and sustained tonic/stiffening flexion or extension of the limbs, with decerebrate and decorticate like posturing.

- **Generalized tonic-clonic:**Repetitive alternating tonic-clonic movements that represent a primary or secondarily generalized seizure associated with poor prognosis, but very rare.

**EEG Patterns**

EEG patterns can vary depending on the gestational and corrected age. Features to identify in the EEG include changes in posterior dominant rhythm, frequency, wave amplitude, synchrony of burst of activity, sleep wave activity, and percentage of non-REM/REM stages.

1. Clinical EEG on neonatal stages of sleep

- **Awake**
- Open eyes characterize it with rapid movements, irregular and active respiration, rapid startles, and gross appendicular movements. Normal behavior includes smiling, grimacing, sucking, vocalization such as crying, and startle.
- EEG shows fast frequency, continuous medium voltage (70-100 µV) wave morphology, with a narrow bandwidth on amplitude-integrated EEG.

- **Quiet Sleep**
- It is characterized by closed eyes, lack of eye movements, atonia, and regular respiration. May have normal rhythmic mouth movements. REM waves may or may not be seen depending on gestational age. EEG shows slow frequency, trace alternant, discontinuous, with medium/high voltage (30 to 200 µV) wave morphology, at times with a wide bandwidth on amplitude-integrated EEG.

- **Active Sleep**
- It is characterized by REM, atonia, occasional frowns, vocalizations, or sucking behavior while asleep.
- EEG may show continuous low voltage (30 to 70 µV) wave morphology, has a narrow bandwidth on amplitude-integrated EEG.

- **Transitional Sleep**
- Characterized by alternation between open eyes and closed eyes, slow eye movements, difficult to startle, at times grimacing, intermittent sucking, and increase sleep vocalizations may be present.
- EEG shows alternating continuous and discontinuous, high voltage (100 to 200 µV) wave morphology, at times with variable bandwidth on amplitude-integrated EEG.

2. EEG patterns per gestational age

- **24-28 weeks**
- Discontinuous background, monophasic or diphasic delta with superimposed theta frequency.
- Delta activity waves have a high amplitude (up to 300 µV) occurring in multiple cortical areas, sometimes excluding frontal areas.
- Theta bursts are frequent in bitemporal areas and become predominant at the end of this phase.
- Stimulation produces no reactivity.

- **28-31 weeks**
- Sleep stages become more defined and easier to differentiate by discontinuous and continuous rapid eye movements.
- Delta activity is focal, the synchronous frequency with localization to the central and occipital regions, and predominant in an awake state. It has a smaller amplitude (200 µV) with the presence of superimposed alpha or theta rhythms.
- Synchronized theta bursts occur in temporal-occipital areas in the quiet stage of sleep. Prominent delta brushes (delta waves with superimposed alpha or beta rhythms) are common.
- Stimulus induced reactivity and attenuation of the background can be elicited.

- **32-34 weeks**
- This age entirely defines sleep structures with a continuous wave morphology in wakefulness and active sleep, and discontinuous in quiet sleep.
- Increased delta burst duration and frequency, decreased inter-burst intervals (e.g., < 15 seconds at 32 weeks, and < 10 sec at 34 weeks respectively), and reduction in wave amplitude.
- Delta brush activity is localized to the occipital by 34 weeks.
- Theta activity may be seen but disappears at the end of this stage.
- Frontal sharp transients may be present.

- **35-36 weeks**
- Sleep structures are defined.

- Delta brushes are defined in the awake state. The appearance of discontinuous background activity characterizes quiet sleep, and REM is characterized by the appearance of continuous/low amplitude waveforms with theta wave activity.
- Background activity is continuous, bisynchronous, variable frequencies in active sleep, and asynchronous in quiet sleep.


- Continuous high amplitude, slow frequency (~1-3 Hz) delta bursts can be seen.

- **37-44 weeks**
- Sleep stages are defined.
- Background activity remains unchanged with variable frequencies, high amplitude, and evident changes by sleep stages, including trace alternant in quiet sleep.
- Localized occipital delta brushes until 40 weeks.
- Frontal sharp transients and anterior slow dysrhythmia began to disappear as the patient approaches 44 weeks.

- **44-46 weeks**
- Background activity is continuous in all states.
- Sleep spindles are seen.