The investigations that aid in diagnosis are as follows:

**Flexible fiberoptic laryngoscopy:**Is an essential part of the initial physical examination and is performed with the patient awake in the office to assess spontaneous and volitional vocal cord movement.

**Direct laryngoscopy and bronchoscopy:**If there is any question as to the status of the vocal cords or of the lower airway, this examination is indicated. This also allows palpation of the arytenoid joints to rule out fixation.

**Laryngeal electromyography:**This is performed with the patient awake in the office to determine the innervation status of the laryngeal muscles, which can elucidate the duration of the paralysis and recovery potential after a neurologic injury. For details of EMG interpretation, please see the StatPearls article entitled "electromyography."

**Imaging of the recurrent laryngeal nerve:**In a patient with new-onset, idiopathic bilateral vocal cord paralysis, the entire course of the RLNs must be imaged to rule out a tumor or CNS pathology. CT is the most commonly employed modality, though MRI can also be used. The area to be imaged is from the high brainstem (nuclei of the vagus nerve)  to the aorta (inferior-most course of the left RLN as it loops around the aortic arch).

**Lab tests:**There is no single lab test in bilateral vocal cord paralysis, and which investigations to consider will be guided by each patient's history and overall medical picture. Potassium, calcium, glucose, antineutrophil cytoplasmic antibody test, thyroid function tests, lyme disease titers, tuberculosis skin tests, uric acid levels, rheumatoid factor test, antinuclear antibody tests, and erythrocyte sedimentation rate can all be considered.