Haglund deformity is a bony exostosis that extends from the posterior superior calcaneus where the Achilles tendon attaches. The etiology of the condition is unknown. It most commonly presents in middle-aged individuals with bilateral pain, erythema, and other signs of inflammation. Treatment is usually conservative and involves non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs, Achilles stretching, heel lifts, appropriate footwear, and orthotics. Bone exostosis can be surgically excised in Haglund deformity cases where conservative therapy has failed.

Plantar fasciitis is a very prevalent disorder characterized by a non-inflammatory structural breakdown of the connective tissue that makes up the plantar aponeurosis or fascia of the foot. It mostly occurs as the result of the overuse in runners and presents with unilateral sharp pain and discomfort along the plantar surface of the foot. Treatment is primarily conservative with non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs, rest, stretching, physical therapy, steroid injections, and many other non-surgical approaches. The cases where conservative treatment is unsuccessful can have treated with surgical plantar fasciotomy. Besides, minimally invasive endoscopic approaches, which reportedly have yielded good results, have been introduced in the last decade.

Fractures of the calcaneus are relatively common and usually occur due to a fall from a height or a motor vehicle accident. Treatment depends on the extent and type of fracture. The Sanders classification system often allows the categorization of intraarticular fractures of the calcaneus into four types with the types II, III, and IV, usually requiring surgery. Fractures that are open, significantly displaced or comminuted also require surgical fixation. Regardless of the treatment, almost all calcaneal fractures initially receive treatment with a non-weight bearing status.