Disorders of the neurohypophysis have variable etiologies that affect different populations from a young age until late adulthood; the etiology influences the frequency of the condition. The prevalence of hypopituitarism is 29 to 45 per 100,000, with an incidence of 4.2 new cases per 100,000 per person per year with no gender predominance.

In central DI, the reported incidence after traumatic brain injury (TBI) is between 3 to 50%. Its frequency varies widely as the parameter established by each study for diagnosing DI might underestimate its actual incidence. Hyponatremia affects 15% of hospitalized patients. The SIADH secretion causing hyponatremia has been reported as the most common abnormality following a TBI in children and adults.

The neurohypophysis is a popular site for germinomas, which are most commonly found in the pineal region. Presentation at the neurohypophyseal/pineal area is common with germinomas. Half of the patients with a combined tumor at the pineal and pituitary gland are germinomas.

Pituitary stalk interruption syndrome presents with a triad that consists of the ectopic posterior pituitary, thin or absent pituitary stalk, and anterior pituitary hypoplasia. Central DI occurs in up to 10% of cases. It is more prevalent in males (2:1). In patients with hypopituitarism, it can be the etiology in 4-8% of the cases.

Granular cell tumors are the most common lesions to arise primarily in the neurohypophysis and have been discovered in 9% of routine neurohypophysis autopsy specimens.

Sheehan syndrome is more prevalent in developing countries and is estimated to occur in approximately 3.1% of parous women, more common with home delivery.