The methodology of SP training has been described since 1964, but only recently has there been interest in studying and standardizing the methodology of training.

Role portrayal seeks to ensure that performance between SPs is both consistent and accurate. Clinician involvement is required to review case content, but SPs are also called upon to display both physical and emotional vulnerability. Ensuring a safe psychological environment is a crucial component of training in accurate role portrayal.

Educators often receive training in providing feedback, but SPs fill a unique role. Being able to give feedback on emotional connection, trust, and communication, SPs offer a rare perspective to trainees before their clinical exposure. SP educators may provide specific models of feedback used by institutions or use scripting of oral or written feedback.

SPs may offer formative or summative assessments and are expected to use assessment tools, rubrics, and narrative feedback. Trainees and SPs should have transparency regarding the assessment tools used and should be encouraged to reflect on the process to improve the training for both groups.

Safety and Ethics of Standardized Patient Deployment

The safety and consent of all participants is the first concern in any standardized patient deployment. SPs should be counseled on the expectations of their role and allowed to ask questions and explore the problem space on their own terms. They must have the opportunity to refuse participation or disengage at any time; this is essential even for casual SPs, such as students and residents in "role-playing" scenarios.

Additional considerations abound for children, who are uniquely appealing when they can portray rare pathologies but are uniquely vulnerable. Some have suggested that very young children should not be used at all, though the exact age cutoff is debatable.