Ureterolithiasis management often involves the management of acute pain and medications to promote stone passage like tamsulosin. Tamsulosin is an alpha-adrenergic blocker. However, a double-blind placebo-controlled trial showed that tamsulosin did not show a statistically significant increase in stone passage compared to placebo.

In addition to medication therapy, active interventions to remove a stone are required, especially in the setting of obstructing or large stones. Two main active interventions exist shockwave lithotripsy (SWL) or ureteroscopy (URS). In a meta-analysis comparing resolution rates for proximal stones with shock wave lithotripsy vs. ureteroscopy saw no statistical difference between the two. However, for distal stones, ureteroscopy was found to be superior to shock wave therapy.

Comparing procedure-related complication rates, shock wave therapy has a lower complication rate and shorter hospital lengths, compared to ureteroscopy. However, overall, shock wave therapy has lower stone-free rates compared to ureteroscopy.

Additionally, other factors besides stone location affect the efficacies of interventions. These include stone composition, density, and skin to stone distance. For example, shock wave therapy has a higher failure rate for higher density stones (>1000 HU)

Staghorn renal calculi or infected stones usually require surgical intervention. In untreated staghorn calculi nephrectomy is needed in about half of all cases.

Treatments to prevent stone formation target urinary abnormalities and include dietary changes and/or medication management. Specific treatments or dietary modifications depend on calculi composition. Studies show that increasing fluid intake and calcium intake decreases the reoccurrence of renal calculi. In a randomized controlled trial (RCT) that randomized 199 patients who form calcium oxalate stones into either a high fluid regimen with a goal of 2 liters of urine output or more vs. a control group, the 5 years recurrence rate were less than half compared to the control group. Some cohort studies show that certain beverages such as orange juice, coffee, tea, wine, beer are associated with decreased renal calculi formation. Other beverages that were high in sugar contact are associated with increased renal calculi formation. Beverages high in citrate are thought to decrease stone formation, but study results are mixed.

Thiazide diuretics appear to be efficacious in reducing renal calculi formation, and this may not be limited to only the patients with hypercalciuria. In a meta-analysis study of 28 RCTs thiazides (RR 0.52), citrates (RR 0.25), and allopurinol (RR 0.59) reduced renal calculi reoccurrence.

Also, a 2009 prospective study shows the DASH diet may be associated with a decreased stone risk.

Reoccuring uric acid stones can be prevented with potassium citrate for urine alkalization as well as allopurinol.

Cystinuria is an inherited disorder causing reoccurring kidney stones starting in childhood. The long term management includes increasing fluid intake and restricting sodium intake.