The natural lens found in the human eye is what allows the eye to perform its function; just as with the convex lenses discussed above projecting real images onto a film or white background, the lens in the human eye (along with the cornea) projects real images onto the retina. Then, photoreceptor cells called "rods" and "cones" detect the focused light and send signals to the visual cortex of the brain.

There are two main points at which the human eye refracts light to focus it on the retina. Light is first refracted by the cornea, which performs the majority of the eye's total refraction. More technically, light is first refracted as it enters the tear film, the thin layer of moisture that rests on the outer surface of the cornea. Temporary insufficiency of this layer can lead to improper refraction of light and blurry vision, hence why patients should be instructed to blink often when measuring visual acuity.

The cornea has a convex shape, leading to tremendous convergence of the light that enters it. However, it should be noted that while the light that enters the eye does pass through various mediums, it does not pass through the air again at any point in its course toward the retina. Therefore, the cornea differs from lenses in that the medium occupying its posterior surface is not the same as the medium anterior to it.

The cornea provides about two-thirds of the eye's total optical power, while the natural lens provides the other third.

Cameras perform this same function but do so by moving lenses forwards and backward along the optical axis instead of changing shape. The ciliary muscle in the eye suspends the lens posterior to the pupil via ciliary zonules. It is this muscle that contracts and relaxes to make the lens more or less spherically shaped, respectively.

The human lens becomes more spherical when viewing images that are closer to the eye. For visualization of objects close to the eye, greater convergence of light is needed. This is because objects that are closer to the eye emit light rays that reach the eye's lens axis with greater angles of incidence than objects further from the cornea, as shown in Figure 6. By taking on a more spherical shape, the lens's focal length is reduced (its power increases), allowing for the increased convergence necessary. Likewise, when visualizing objects that are further from the eye, the lens takes on a less spherical shape, thus increasing its focal length and converging light less.

The change in the shape of the lens is accomplished by the action of the ciliary muscle, a circular muscle that forms a ring around the lens. The proposed mechanism that is currently most widely accepted is the theory of Helmholtz. This theory states that when the ciliary muscle relaxes, its diameter increases, causing it to pull on the zonules, which in turn pull on the outer rim of the lens to flatten it out. Then when the ciliary muscle contracts, its diameter decreases, which in turn decreases tension on the zonules and on the lens, allowing it to take on a more spherical shape.

Emmetropia occurs when the lens is shaped, so objects at an infinite distance are focused on the retina.

In the clinical setting, this phenomenon occurs for all objects located approximately two meters from the eye or further. That is to say, objects located as close as two meters from the eye are far enough away that all light rays that come off of them can be considered parallel. They come into focus on the retina when the focal length of the lens and cornea equals the axial length. This means that for patients with presbyopia, if the inverse of the lens power of the eye is equal to the axial length (which can be achieved naturally or with glasses, contact lenses, etc.), then all objects located two meters and further can be seen clearly, even though the lens no longer has the ability to change shape. It isn't until the patient attempts to visualize objects closer than two meters that their vision then comes out of focus. Emmetropia is typically the refractive goal for patients undergoing cataract surgery with the placement of an intraocular lens because it gives them the greatest depth of field. The depth of field is the range of different depths at which multiple objects can be in focus at once.

Myopia, or nearsightedness, results when the eye is unable to focus light rays from distant objects properly on the retina. Even with the lens at the flattest shape, it can assume the lens and cornea together still converge light excessively so that light rays from a single point of the object converge in front of the retina (Figure 7). By the time these light rays reach the retina, they are then scattered, creating dull images in various places on the retina instead of one sharp, focused image of their point of origin on the object being visualized. However, when viewing near objects, the eye is able to properly focus them on the retina since near objects require more convergence. This is why patients with myopia are able to see objects up close clearly but not objects at a distance (Figure 8).

Myopia can have various causes. It can be due to an axial length that is longer than normal, corneal power that is too great, or lenticular power (optical power of the lens) that is too great. Of these, the most common cause is an axial length that is too long.

Changes in the composition of the lens and, thus, its index of refraction explain the myopic shift sometimes seen with cataract development. Previously presbyopic patients will find that they start to get some of their near vision back as they develop cataracts. This results because cataractogenesis leads to an increased index of refraction of the lens, thus increasing its optical power and bringing near images into focus.

Since myopia occurs when light rays are converged excessively, it can be treated with concave lenses that diverge the light before it enters the eye (Figure 7).

Hyperopia, or farsightedness, is the opposite case of myopia. It results when the eye can clearly focus light rays from distant objects on the retina but not light rays from close objects. Even when the lens takes on its most spherical shape, the combined refractive power of the lens and cornea is still not enough to sufficiently converge light rays from close objects. Instead of light rays from near objects converging on the retina, they converge behind it (Figure 7).

Hyperopia can have various causes. It can be due to an axial length that is shorter than normal, corneal power that is too little, or lenticular power (optical power of the lens) that is too little. Of these, the most common cause is an axial length that is too short.

Since hyperopia occurs when light rays aren't converged enough, it can be treated with convex lenses that converge light before it enters the eye (Figure 7). In a similar fashion, contact lenses that give the cornea a steeper curvature increase the optical power of the cornea and are prescribed for hyperopia (Figure 7). As with myopia, procedures such as LASIK allow surgeons to use a laser to reconstruct the shape of the cornea, such that it can then converge light properly, just as it would when wearing contact lenses.

Presbyopia occurs when the lens hardens and loses its ability to change shape. This results in an ability to see objects clearly at some distances but not at others. Most often, the lens ends up stagnant in its less spherical form, allowing for distant objects to be seen clearly but not close objects. This loss of the lens' ability to change shape is not considered pathologic but rather a normal aging process.

Astigmatism occurs when the cornea (less commonly, the lens) has a steeper curvature in one meridian than in another.