Emergency management strategy includes an assessment of the airway, breathing, and circulation and taking appropriate measures accordingly. A lumbar puncture has to be followed in suspected cases if the brain imaging does not suggest evidence of intracranial hypertension or a space-occupying lesion. Intravenous (IV) acyclovir needs to be started in all adults with suspected or confirmed cases of HSE at the dose of 10 mg per Kg body weight every 8 hours. Children up to 11 years and neonates are treated with higher doses (15-20 mg per kg body weight). Ideal body weight is used for dose calculation in obese patients.

A large retrospective study showed a delay in initiating acyclovir for more than 48 hours as one of the factors associated with poor outcomes.

The dose of acyclovir is 10 mg per kg body weight every 8 hours and is usually given for 14 to 21 days in immunocompetent adults. Neonates and older children are treated with a higher dose of IV aciclovir for 21 days. Immunocompromised persons may require a higher dose with a longer duration. Oral acyclovir prophylaxis has been shown to reduce relapse in children after the initial treatment with IV acyclovir. In rare instances of IV acyclovir non-availability, IV ganciclovir could be used. Acyclovir resistance is usually managed with IV foscarnet or cidofovir. Acyclovir could be used in pregnant patients whenever the potential benefits of treatment outweigh the potential risks. A prospective registry on acyclovir use for 15 years showed no increased incidence of fetal malformations in the 756 women with first-trimester exposure.

Patients with airway, breathing, and hemodynamics issues need to be shifted to the intensive care unit (ICU) for further monitoring and management. Those with significantly impaired neurology need ICU admission for intubation to facilitate airway protection. Other indications for ICU admissions are persistent seizures or features of increased intracranial pressure (ICP), for which intubation and ventilation may be required. Seizures are initially treated with benzodiazepines, with longer-acting agents (for example, levetiracetam, carbamazepine, or fosphenytoin) added subsequently. Increased ICP is usually treated with head-end elevation and mannitol, frusemide, or hypertonic saline as per institutional protocol.

The use of adjuvant corticosteroids in HSE continues to be controversial. The potential benefit of corticosteroids in suppressing immune-mediated damage is questioned by their equal potential to cause enhanced viral replication due to the same immune suppression. Many authors reserve corticosteroids only for patients with significant edema with a mass effect. One nonrandomized trial showed outcome benefits in the corticosteroid group at three months.