Sometimes, instead of substitution, there can be insertion or deletion; this is where one base pair either gets inserted or deleted from the DNA sequence. These kinds of mutations will typically have an enormous impact on the resulting protein because the codons on the resulting mRNA are supposed to translate as groups of three nucleotides. If one of these is suddenly added or deleted, every single codon after this mutation will be altered, resulting in a considerable number of missense mutations, and most likely an eventual premature stop codon. These are called frameshift mutations because the entire reading frame of the genetic code gets shifted. Frameshift mutations almost always lead to a non-functional protein. Having established the extremely grave nature of genetic mutations, what are the factors that precipitate to these mutations?

The first real cause of mutations is called spontaneous mutation; this is when the cellular machinery makes a mistake on its own, as not even mother nature is perfect. Once in a while, a polymerase enzyme will cause an error during replication, placing the wrong base across from the template strand. Usually, it will correct itself, but sometimes it will leave the error in the sequence, like for example guanine across from thymine on the template strand. This mismatch is recognizable by one of a variety of DNA repair enzymes that scan DNA hunting for these kinds of errors and knows precisely which base to kick out and the base with which to replace it; this is called DNA mismatch repair.

But the chromosomes are so incredibly long that even these hard-working repair enzymes might miss an error. If the DNA molecule serves as a template for further replication, this strand will do just fine, since nothing happened to it. But when replicating this strand, the guanine was supposed to be adenine, so instead of coding for the thymine that is supposed to go across from it, it will code for cytosine instead. The GC pair that results won't look any different from any other GC pair in the molecule, so no repair enzyme can ever fix it. This type of spontaneous mutation will happen around once in every ten billion base pair, which while very high odds, and hopefully, when it occurs it will be in some random location in the chromosome that does not make a difference, but this is not always the case. It is not just the enzymes that are at fault; there are external causes of mutation too, called mutagens.