**Bilateral Anterior Thoracotomy Approach**

The surgeon uses a scalpel to make bilateral thoracostomies in the 5 intercostal spaces at the mid-axillary line. They then connect the thoracostomies with a deeper skin incision. Layers of the intercostal muscles and pleura are dissected as the surgeon advances towards the sternum. The surgeon then cuts through the sternum using heavy scissors, or a Gigli saw. Once they excise the sternum, they make an incision in the pericardium only if pericardial tamponade is suspected; otherwise, an intact pericardium is preferable to prevent inadvertent damage to the atria and ventricles if the heart is compressed inappropriately. The surgeon evacuates blood and any clots, if necessary, then accesses the heart.

Wise and colleagues

A single-hand technique can also be utilized if the provider’s hand is large enough; in this approach, the provider positions straight fingers at the posterior surface of the heart near the apex and applies the thumb to the anterior surface. It is paramount that the heart remains horizontal throughout internal cardiac massage as lifting the apex may prevent venous filling. Another assistant may compress the descending aorta to maximize blood flow to the coronaries arteries and cerebral vasculature.

Compression rate should adhere to the Advanced Cardiac Life Support guidelines with a rate of at least 100 beats per minute. If the return of spontaneous circulation is accomplished, sterile, saline-dampened gauze is applied to the incision, and antibiotics covering skin flora are administered. Definitive prompt surgical closure of thoracotomy, preferably by a cardiothoracic surgeon, is recommended.