The original 1970s data supporting the use of CABG was accrued before the maturation of minimally invasive catheter-based interventions. The American College of Cardiology (ACC) and the American Heart Association (AHA) published updated consensus guidelines in 2011 for which patients benefit most from CABG surgery versus PCI.

**Class I indications for CABG**

- Stenosis of the left main >50% without a patent bypass graft (unprotected left main disease)

- Stenosis of three vessels >70%

- Stenosis of two vessels >70% if one of the two vessels is the proximal LAD.

- Either CABG or PCI may be used to treat single vessel stenosis > 70% if the patient has unacceptable angina despite the best medical therapy.

- Either CABG or PCI might be used for survivors of sudden cardiac death if ventricular tachycardia was caused by a vessel with >70% stenosis.

- If the patient requires concomitant non-coronary cardiac surgery, and the left main is >50% stenosed, or any other vessel is 70% stenosed.

- Emergency CABG for a post-infarction complication such as ventricular septal rupture, acute mitral insufficiency from papillary muscle rupture, or free wall rupture

- Emergency CABG for failed PCI if substantial myocardium or hemodynamic stability is at risk

- Emergency CABG in cardiogenic shock with CABG amenable lesions, irrespective of the time of onset

- Heart Team approach (multidisciplinary review) is the recommendation for unprotected left main disease and complex coronary artery disease.

**Class II indications for CABG**

- CABG is preferred to PCI for complex three-vessel CAD with a medium risk Syntax score >22 (scoring system based on the angiographic appearance of coronary vessels).

- Multivessel stenosis >70% and ejection fraction (EF) 35 to 50%

- Two vessel disease, neither of which is proximal LAD, but ischemia is extensive or severe (>20% perfusion defect)

- Single vessel stenosis >70% in the proximal LAD with extensive ischemia.

- CABG is preferrable to PCI for multivessel disease if the patient has diabetes, and the surgeon uses a left internal mammary (LIMA) graft.