**Primarily Revisional Procedures**

Band revisions are utilized in patients who fail the band or health complications that necessitate removal. Options for a failed band procedure can include conversion to a Roux-en-Y gastric bypass, sleeve gastrectomy, or biliopancreatic diversion with a duodenal switch. The band can also be replaced. Revisional timing is important due to inflammation or fibrosis of gastric tissue due to the presence of the band. A staged approach can be utilized with the band being first removed and then, after an 8-to-12-week time, can be converted to another bariatric procedure.

Roux-en-Y gastric bypass revision may be required due to anatomical reasons postoperatively. When discussing the failure of this procedure, an anatomical reason may be due to enlargement of the gastric pouch and remnant stomach, which reduces the restrictive sense. A complication could also be the formation of a fistula between the remnant stomach and gastric pouch. Another factor to consider could be an enlargement of the created anastomosis between the Roux limb and gastric pouch. These could all serve as factors that would lead to weight recidivism secondary to an anatomical reason, other than just non-compliance of the patient to a healthier lifestyle.

The above-listed condition could indicate for the surgeon to recreate the gastrojejunal anastomosis and gastric pouch. The lengthening of the biliopancreatic limb via the process of "distalization" or revision of the jejunojejunostomy anastomosis has gained some traction if the gastric pouch is intact, but the patient has regained significant weight. This limb is lengthened without sacrificing too much of the common channel, which has positive results in renewed weight loss and comorbidity control. It is important to note that the indication to re-operate for weight regain still follows the same criteria as the initial procedure discussed above.

Sleeve gastrectomy has shown that the durability is not as good as a Roux-en-Y gastric bypass over five years. Theoretically, the sleeve could expand over time, thus losing the restrictive mechanism for weight loss. Although data support that sleeve gastrectomy is comparable to Roux-en-Y gastric bypass procedures at three years, sleeve revisions still are performed for patients suffering from intractable reflux disease amidst satisfactory weight loss progress.

Procedures that have been rarely performed or become obsolete include the laparoscopic adjustable gastric banding, jejunoileal bypass, vertical banded gastroplasty, and vagal blockade. Because these procedures are not utilized often or have more historical purposes, they will not be further discussed.

**Postoperative Metabolic Effects**

The metabolic effects of bariatric surgery are also well studied. The definition for metabolic syndrome is the concurrent risk factors for both cardiovascular diseases, including hyperglycemia, dyslipidemia, hypertension, and abdominal obesity, and the factor for type 2 diabetes. The usage of bariatric procedures induces a significant amount of durable weight loss and helps to alleviate metabolic syndrome in terms of hypertension, dyslipidemia, and hyperglycemia. These are known risk factors for cardiovascular disease; hence cardiovascular disease is reduced post-bariatric surgery. It is estimated that 85% of all patients with type 2 diabetes are overweight or obese. In these patients, failure to control with lifestyle management and medical therapy would make them more apt for surgical intervention as bariatric procedures are most effective in terms of treatment and long-term remission. Remission is reaching a hemoglobin A1c target at or below 6-6.5% without diabetic medications. This is all dependent on the duration of a patient's type 2 diabetes and the severity at baseline.

As discussed above, bariatric procedures can have glucose regulatory effects as well as neuroendocrine mechanisms. It is believed that gastrointestinal physiology is altered postoperatively as improvement in a patient's glycemic control is seen typically within days two weeks following their procedure. Of note, non-insulin-dependent patients with diabetes or those with a shorter duration or lower baseline hemoglobin A1c level have better outcomes post-bariatric surgery than those with a more advanced stage of diabetes. There is a notable association between hypertension development and obesity. An estimated 64% of adults categorized with severe obesity seeking bariatric procedures have been diagnosed with hypertension. Whether weight loss is achieved through lifestyle modifications or by bariatric surgery, this improves a patient's obesity-associated hypertension and can contribute to its remission. Dyslipidemia also has an association with obesity. Approximately 64% of adults categorized with severe obesity seeking bariatric procedures have dyslipidemia. This includes hypertriglyceridemia, increased low-density lipoprotein cholesterol particles, and even decreased high-density lipoprotein cholesterol levels.

Observational studies have been performed and demonstrate improved lipid profiles post-bariatric procedures. As the risk factors or associated comorbid illnesses with obesity are reduced, the overall cardiovascular risk is thus reduced with bariatric surgeries. This intervention reduces both the number of cardiovascular deaths and a lower incidence of cardiovascular events in adults with obesity.

**Postoperative Cancer Reduction**

There are known associations between obesity and certain cancers. These cancers include endometrial, renal, breast, and pancreatic cancer. Overall, obesity increases the likelihood of a worse oncologic outcome for a patient. A database study that included over 16,000 patients noted that patients who underwent a bariatric procedure were at a decreased risk of hormone-related cancers compared to patients who did not have bariatric surgery. These cancers include breast, endometrial, and prostate cancer. The Roux-en-Y gastric bypass had the largest risk reduction impact for hormone-related cancers but also had an associated elevated risk for colorectal cancer. Studies performed using a database known as the Swedish Obese Subjects Database had made an association between bariatric surgery with a lower risk of cancer over 20 years from 6% to 3.9%.

**Functional Outcomes**

Functional outcomes also are seen after bariatric surgery. Both the functionality and quality of life are improved in those patients who suffer from obesity-related conditions. The effects do vary depending on the individual condition and which bariatric surgery is performed. Obstructive sleep apnea has an increased prevalence in the obese population. Weight loss, whether by lifestyle modification or bariatric surgery, improves overall health and decreases the apnea-hypopnea index. This index is defined as the number of apneas and hypopneas per hour of sleep. The Roux-en-Y gastric bypass has shown greater weight loss and reduced apnea-hypopnea index.

Gastroesophageal reflux disease is also a risk factor for developing in an obese patient. Overall, a Roux-en-Y gastric bypass is an effective anti-reflux procedure in a patient who has obesity. The American College of Surgeons Bariatric Surgery Center's Network Data shows that approximately 70% of patients achieve improvement in symptomatology or even remission at the one-year mark following Roux-en-Y gastric bypass. There also appears to be a significant improvement in extraesophageal symptoms, the use of proton pump inhibitors, esophagitis, and decreased total acid exposure. Significant joint pain, as well as limitation of physical function, is also associated with severe obesity. Improvement in gait biomechanics and osteoarthritis postoperatively decreases pain and increases joint function. Intravertebral disc height on MRI has shown an increase by approximately 2 mm postoperatively, which would indicate improved inflammatory arthritis.

Obesity does induce a pro-inflammatory state, and postoperatively pro-inflammatory cytokines like C-reactive proteins and interleukin-6 have decreased. Polycystic ovarian syndrome is found in 30% to 70% of obese women in women in their reproductive years. This syndrome is associated with a higher risk of infertility. The hyperandrogenic symptoms, as well as the insulin resistance, can be improved with weight reduction. And women who underwent a Roux-en-Y gastric bypass within 3 to 4 months had improvement in and restoration of menstrual cycles as well as decreased signs of hirsutism. There was a noted increased ability for conception two years after surgery. Diabetes and hypertension, which are typically comorbidities of obesity, can induce renal dysfunction. As discussed above, these comorbidities can be improved secondary to bariatric surgery; thus, renal dysfunction also improves. Lab values such as creatinine and glomerular filtration rate improve one year postoperatively in each of the chronic kidney disease classes.

Obesity also serves as a risk for urinary incontinence secondary to increased intra-abdominal pressure and weakened pelvic floor muscles. Factors for the remission of this disorder include weight loss which could be secondary to bariatric surgery, inability to ambulate independently, and younger age. There is a strong association between the development of nonalcoholic fatty liver disease and obesity. There is an association with bariatric surgery and decreased hepatic inflammation, grade of steatosis, and fibrosis in a patient with nonalcoholic fatty liver disease and obesity.

**Psychological Impacts**

Psychological impacts are seen in patients with obesity. Mental health conditions associated with individuals who undergo bariatric surgery include depression in as high as 19% of patients and binge eating disorders in 17%. These are higher than the rates for the general population within the United States. Improvements in depression, eating disorders, quality of life, and body image have been seen postoperatively following a bariatric intervention. There is a noticeable increase in the prevalence of alcohol and substance abuse after bariatric interventions. Studies have shown that most of these patients have developed alcohol use disorder the second year postoperatively.

**Postoperative Nutritional Management**

Malnutrition can result after any bariatric procedure if the patient does not adhere to a proper diet. Bypass procedures such as the biliopancreatic diversion with duodenal switch or the Roux-en-Y gastric bypass are known causes for micronutrient malabsorption. Sleeve gastrectomy procedures do not lead to intestinal bypass but can have nutritional deficiencies. A staged approach is taken with a significant emphasis on nutritional needs at each stage of healing and weight loss. Texture and volume of food are given consideration. Early in the postoperative phase, a patient is given a diet of hydration and liquids. An emphasis is also placed on adequate protein intake. Stage one consists of a clear liquid diet with advancement to a full liquid diet and then to puréed foods, consumed for several weeks after the operation. The puréed diet is the stage two diet. The key reasons for an emphasis on hydration with adequate protein and carbohydrate consumption to meet metabolic needs are essential, and the stage two diet also aids in avoiding irritation to the surgical sites along the digestive tract.

Importantly, all patients should receive both preoperative education surrounding their surgery with an education that focuses on their nutritional needs in the postoperative phase. This would include consuming adequate amounts of both clear and full liquids daily to maintain proper hydration status and urinary output. Guidelines such as a shopping list and sample meals of when a patient should be consuming these liquids and the appropriate amount should be provided preoperatively. A stage three diet is also known as a soft solid food diet and tends to occur anywhere from 10 to 14 days postoperatively. This timeframe is approximately when the gastrointestinal tract is healing, and the patient can tolerate solid textured foods. Soft solid foods should include a good source of protein, some carbohydrates, and fruits and vegetables to provide fiber. Puréeing food is not required, but if a patient maintains difficulty chewing, they can continue with puréeing food.

Again, adequate fluid intake is encouraged to prevent dehydration. The patient should be counseled on eating during the stages. They should eat slowly, chew their food very extensively, stop eating once they reach the point of satiety, and avoid food and beverage intake at the same time. If a patient ingests food too rapidly or consumes more than the stomach pouch or sleeve has the capacity for, epigastric discomfort and vomiting typically occur.

With the progression of these dietary stages, guidance by the help of a bariatric registered dietitian is advised. The stage four diet consists of solid food, starting when a patient reaches their stable, maintenance weight. It tends to be unpredictable at what point a patient will reach the stage as there is variability in the rate of weight loss, the healing process, food tolerances, and the amount of food a patient can consume. The transition throughout these dietary stages is all based on individual tolerance levels. Supplementation for micronutrients is initially started upon hospital discharge with either chewable or liquid vitamins. At around the three-month mark, most patients can tolerate regular vitamin pills. These supplements should contain the recommended daily allowance amounts for biotin, zinc, vitamin B 12, Vitamin K, folic acid, copper, and iron.

After a Roux-en-Y gastric bypass, the patient may have food aversions when transitioning from the liquids to soft foods into a full diet. There is a loss of a variety of foods when progressing through this post-bariatric procedure diet. A patient after this procedure may have a degree of dumping syndrome, as discussed above. Food intolerance can also develop, especially with red meat. The sleeve gastrectomy procedure again involves resectioning the greater curvature of the stomach, including the fundus. This promotes rapid gastric emptying, accelerates the transit time of nutrients into the small intestine, and leads to favorable changes within the gut microbiome.

Patients undergoing a sleeve gastrectomy should be wary of acid reflux symptoms postoperatively. The stomach has a limited capacity as well as decreased motility of food particles through the sleeve during healing, with the preservation of stomach acid, which can lead to symptoms of acid reflux if ingesting food too fast or too much. The biliopancreatic diversion with duodenal switch is associated with a substantial amount of malabsorption of both micro and macronutrients. The malabsorption causes diarrhea and poses a risk for both protein-calorie malnutrition and severe deficiencies and micronutrients, like that of fat-soluble vitamins.

In bariatric patients, vitamins and mineral laboratory evaluation should be done annually for life. As with Roux-en-Y gastric bypass procedures, biliopancreatic diversion with a duodenal switch can lead to dumping syndrome. Osteoporosis is seen due to the malabsorption of vitamin D and calcium. With malabsorption of fat-soluble vitamins, like A, D, E, K as well as protein, fat, iron, and calcium, a patient can have foul-smelling stools and diarrhea. A potentially life-threatening diagnosis from protein malnutrition is known as kwashiorkor, which can be seen in the biliopancreatic diversion. The addition of duodenal switch with pancreatic diversion has reduced the rate of protein malabsorption from 11% to 3%. Overall, macronutrient and micronutrient goals and supplementation should be discussed and determined in the preoperative phase with a bariatric registered dietician to prevent deficiencies and subsequent symptomatology.

**Complications**

There are multiple complications to bariatric procedures. In sleeve gastrectomy, staple line leaks can be an early complication within the first few weeks in the postoperative period. The sleeve gastrectomy surgery creates a small volume stomach wedged between two sphincters, thus having high pressure. This can result in distention leading to ischemia and delayed healing along the staple or suture line. A patient may complain from mild or nagging abdominal discomfort to hemodynamic instability and peritonitis.

If a patient presents with fever, epigastric pain, tachycardia, or referred shoulder pain, a leak should be considered. Imaging should be performed with an abdominal CT with oral contrast; IV contrast may or may not be given. The second line imaging modality is an upper gastrointestinal series (GI) or even endoscopy. If a leak is detected within the first week postoperatively, a repair or revision surgically is the treatment of choice. Endoscopic repair is preferred after a week from surgery. In a stable patient, a percutaneous drain, as well as antibiotics and total parenteral nutrition (TPN) therapy, can be provided until the leak heals, thus avoiding surgical intervention. A gastric outlet obstruction can occur after a sleeve gastrectomy secondary to stenosis of the tubular stomach.

The most common sites for this would include the incisura angularis as well as the gastroesophageal junction. A patient will likely have symptoms such as reflux, nausea, vomiting, dysphagia, dehydration, and an inability to tolerate oral intake. An early cause associated with stenosis is oversewing of the staple line. This results in both edema and ischemia. Later, there can be fibrosis and kinking or rotation of the tubular-shaped gastric pouch. To identify sleeve gastrectomy stenosis, an abdominal CT with oral and IV contrast should be performed.

The literature recommends that a patient presenting more mildly with symptoms limited to dysphagia and reflux undergo an upper GI series instead. The upper GI series will demonstrate dilation and accumulation contrast proximal to the area of stenosis. Treatment modality includes endoscopic dilation of the stenotic area. A surgical revision or conversion may be appropriate if a stenosed area is too great in length. Other complications typically seen in less than one month postoperatively include abscess formation, fistula, or bleed.

Roux-en-Y gastric bypass has complications that should be recognized. An early complication within the first ten days of the postoperative period would include an anastomotic leak. This is like the staple line leak seen with sleeve gastrectomy. The most encountered site for an enteric leak is gastrojejunal anastomosis. Jejunojejunal anastomotic leaks can also occur in the early postoperative period. Presenting symptoms include fever, nausea, vomiting, tachycardia, oliguria, abdominal pain, and hypotension. The first line imaging choice would be a CT scan with oral and IV contrast. Pneumoperitoneum, contrast leak, abscess formation, or fat stranding may be visualized on the CT scan.

An upper GI series is the second line in terms of imaging modality. Once diagnosed with an anastomotic leak, broad-spectrum antibiotics should be initiated. If a patient has signs of peritonitis on physical examination or has hemodynamic instability, emergent surgery may be required for repair with aggressive fluid resuscitation. A stable patient in this circumstance may be able to avoid surgical intervention with admission for broad-spectrum antibiotics, percutaneous drainage, and TPN. About 6% of all gastric bypass patients suffer from anastomotic stenosis. The areas of stenosis typically occur at the gastrojejunal or jejunojejunal anastomosis.

In the first week of the postoperative period, jejunojejunal stenoses are more common, whereas gastrojejunal stenosis is typically seen several weeks to months later. These areas of stenosis occur when the stoma is narrow to less than 1 cm in diameter. This is likely secondary to ischemia and/or ulceration. Stenosis causes a bowel obstruction with the proximal backup of fluid. Patients with gastrojejunal stenosis will typically present with nausea, vomiting, reflux, epigastric pain, progressive dysphagia, and an inability to tolerate oral intake, even that of fluids. An upper GI series will show gastric dilation with a reduced flow of contrast through the anastomosis in gastrojejunal stenosis. Conversely, a jejunojejunal stenosis will show dilation of the stomach remnant and the biliopancreatic limb.

Ulceration around the anastomotic junction, typically the gastrojejunal junction can occur in a Roux-en-Y gastric bypass. This is known as a marginal ulcer. In the normal, non-surgically intervened GI tract, stomach acid is buffered by bilious secretions and pancreatic secretions within the duodenum.

Post-Roux-en-Y gastric bypass, the duodenal mucosa is exposed to buffered stomach acids, even with a smaller stomach area. This leads to mucosal breakdown as well as ulceration. Importantly, ulceration can also be due to other factors like ischemia due to tension at the anastomosis site, a helicobacter pylori infection, smoking, and nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory (NSAID) use. A patient with suspected ulceration typically presents with vague abdominal pain, nausea, vomiting, hematemesis, dysphagia, and GI bleeding. Diagnosis and management of marginal ulcers are performed via endoscopy, which allows for diagnosis, biopsy, and monitoring.

Upon discharge, a patient should have six weeks of a proton pump inhibitor, and sucralfate prescribed. Any NSAIDs should be discontinued, and counseling on smoking cessation should be provided. Surgical intervention may be necessary if a patient has gastric perforation or continues to re-bleed despite medical management. A complication of a Roux-en-Y gastric bypass that requires urgent evaluation includes small bowel obstruction and internal hernias. It is estimated that 60% of small bowel obstructions in a patient with Roux-en-Y gastric bypass are secondary to internal hernias, which can occur at any time in the postoperative period. The anatomical rearrangement, as well as the substantial weight loss post-procedure, leads to large potential spaces within the abdominal cavity for herniation.

The patient's symptomatology can vary from a diffuse vague abdominal pain with nausea and vomiting to peritonitis. Obstruction typically presents with intermittent distinct periods of abdominal discomfort in the same region. Typically, a patient with an internal hernia will have constant pain with incarceration or strangulation of the bowel loop. If a patient does have bilious emesis following this procedure, this indicates a common limb obstruction. This requires emergent surgical care due to the risk of distention of the biliopancreatic limb and stomach remnant rupture. Imaging of choice would be an abdominal CT scan with oral and IV contrast during a painful episode.

Dumping syndrome is a complication postoperatively secondary to rapid gastric emptying. The incidence of the syndrome is seen in nearly 75% of gastric bypass patients. This occurs as there is either bypass or removal of the stomach pylorus, which, in turn, causes rapid movement of stomach contents into the small intestine. When a high carbohydrate meal is ingested, this hyperosmolar food bolus enters the intestines and leads to bowel distention, fluid shifts across the intestinal wall, and causes GI hormone over secretion.

The patient may have early dumping syndrome, which demonstrates symptoms 30 minutes postprandial, or late dumping syndrome, which occurs 2 to 4 hours postprandial. Patients with early dumping syndrome tend to have dehydration, abdominal pain, diarrhea, nausea, tachycardia, dizziness, hypotension, and syncope. The late dumping syndrome is secondary to a postprandial insulin surge in response to a high carbohydrate intake, leading to hypoglycemia hours after a meal. Patients with a late dumping syndrome tend to have symptoms such as faintness, decreased concentration, altered mental status, and hyperhidrosis. Treatment for these patients is both fluid resuscitation and electrolyte repletion. Dietary modifications should be taken as well. Adequate counseling and discharge instructions should also be included. Patients are advised to eat smaller meals, avoid concentrated foods, and limit sugar and lactose intake. Early dumping syndrome tends to be self-limiting and resolves within the 7 to 12-week postoperative period.

Octreotide treatments can reduce symptoms by slowing the gastric emptying process in severe cases. As discussed above, metabolic derangements can occur after bariatric surgeries. In a patient who has undergone a Roux-en-Y gastric bypass, calcium and iron resorption in the duodenum is bypassed, which leads to deficiencies. The intraluminal pH within the duodenum is reconfigured, which leads to an inactive form of intrinsic factor. This impairs vitamin B12 absorption. Vitamin D absorption is also impaired, so supplementation should be provided to prevent early osteoporosis. Within most bariatric procedures, an early complication is vomiting and decreased oral intake, which predisposes a patient to thiamine deficiency.

Biliopancreatic diversion with a duodenal switch can also have complications. The most common major complication includes an anastomotic leak, anastomotic stenosis with an associated small bowel obstruction, and GI hemorrhage. Weight complications, as defined as greater than 30 days postoperatively, tend to involve a small bowel obstruction, incisional hernias, and malnutrition.

The malabsorption associated with this procedure causes mineral and vitamin derangement. These levels include that fat-soluble vitamins, zinc, selenium, iron, calcium, and magnesium. Notably, severe protein deficiency, described as an albumin level less than 30 g per liter, was only noted in approximately 1% of patients. To minimize these nutrient deficiencies, a patient undergoing this procedure requires a more intensive supplementation regimen in the postoperative period and monitoring their nutritional status closely for life.

Complications seen in the laparoscopic adjustable gastric band include band slippage, band erosion, and port site infection, which may require balloon deflation or removal. If a patient has peritonitis and or signs from a perforation, this may require surgical repair.

Overall, bariatric surgery is safe and effective in evaluating and treating obese patients, particularly severely obese patients. As discussed above, multiple surgical interventions can provide adequate results, but each of these options does have technical as well as metabolic issues that should be considered when determining a weight-loss surgery for each patient. Not only should a patient undergo an extensive preoperative assessment, but a postoperative plan which includes a discussion with the multi-disciplinary team should also be completed. The surgery with all associated risks, benefits, and alternatives to surgery should be discussed. Given the extent of the risk-to-benefit ratio which favors surgical intervention in severely obese patients, bariatric surgery can be a viable option for substantial and long-term weight loss as well as comorbidity control.