The diagnostic ability of TTEs is well known, widely accepted, and has been documented in a multitude of publications.

**Clinical Significance by Modality**

2D imaging evaluates the real-time structure and motion of the heart. M mode is a still image used to measure wall and chamber size. Doppler evaluates flow through the heart via valves, chambers.

- Color Doppler evaluates the direction of flow via red and blue.

- 
              
- Provides information on laminar vs turbulent flow through a valve or vessel.
              
              
- Utilized to diagnose vessel stenosis.

- Spectral doppler- Continuous and Pulse doppler evaluate intracardiac gradients.

- 
              
- Provides mean and peak gradients to evaluate valvular or septal defects.
              
              
- Utilized to diagnose valvular pathology and VSD/LVOT obstruction/cardiac output.

**Clinical Significance by View**

Parasternal Long Axis

- All four valve abnormalities

- RV and LV function and size

- PDA

- RVOT obstruction (tetralogy of Fallot)

Parasternal Short Axis

- TV abnormalities (Ebstein anomaly)

- Pulmonary arterial stenosis

- RVOT obstruction (double-chambered RV, tetralogy of Fallot)

- Branch and main pulmonary artery abnormalities

- Interventricular volume and pressure measurements (pulmonary hypertension)

- Coronary cusps (anomalous RCA, LCA)

Apical

- TV, MV, AV abnormalities (congenital bicuspid AV)

- Pulmonary vein abnormalities (total anomalous pulmonary venous return)

- RA and LA function and size

- LV size and function via Simpson biplane method for ejection fraction

Subcostal Short Axis

- SVC stenosis or narrowing

- IVC abnormalities

- Anomalous pulmonary venous drainage

- RV and LV dilation or hypertrophy

- PV stenosis etiology (dysplastic or hypoplastic valve)

Subcostal Long Axis

- Pulmonary venous return (partial and total anomalous pulmonary venous return)

- VSD [see figure]

- ASD (prefered view) [see figure]

- AV and aortic root abnormality

Suprasternal Notch

- Pulmonary venous return (partial and total anomalous pulmonary venous return)

- Aortic arch abnormalities (vascular ring)

- Ascending aorta abnormalities (aortic dilation)

- Descending aorta abnormalities (coarctation of the aorta [see figure])

- Head and neck vessel abnormalities (common brachiocephalic trunk)

- SVC abnormalities

- PDA [see figure]

**Clinical Significance of Recorded Values**

Multiple structural, functional, and hemodynamic values are required to perform a cTTE. With the most variation from typical Adult TTEs, the former require adjustment according to body surface area.

Listed below are the recommended measurements according to a report from the Task Force of the Pediatric Council of the American Society of Echocardiography and a report from the Task Force of a Standardized Echocardiography of the American Society of Echocardiography.

TV and MV:

- Valve annulus diameter during diastole, mean gradient, E wave velocity (peak velocity in early diastole), A wave velocity (peak velocity in late diastole), deceleration time, isovolumic relaxation time (IVRT); TV Regurgitant jet velocity.

Main Pulmonary Artery as well as Left and Right Pulmonary Arteries:

- Artery diameter during systole; left or right pulmonary artery mean and peak gradient, velocity-time interval (VTI).

PV, AV, RVOT, LVOT:

- Valve annulus diameter during systole, mean and peak gradients, VTI; PV regurgitant jet velocity, AV pressure half-time.

Aortic arch:

- Mean and peak gradient, VTI.

Aortic root, ascending aorta, transverse aorta arch, descending aorta (Aortic isthmus):

- Vessel diameter.

LV and RV:

- End diastolic volume, end-systolic volume, wall thickness, assessment of systolic function, assessment of diastolic function.

LA and RA:

- Size.

**Clinical Significance of fTTEs in Neonatal and Pediatric Intensive Care Units**

- Assessment of pulmonary hypertension

- Assessment of cardiac function

- Assessment of fluid responsiveness resuscitation

- Diagnosis and evaluation of hemodynamics in patent ductus arteriosus

- Diagnosis of pericardial effusion, pericardial tamponade

- Evaluation of hemodynamics in a shock patient

- Evaluation of central line placement, ECMO

- Evaluation of ventricular function in patients with hypoxic-ischemic encephalopathy