WPW pattern is a constellation of electrocardiographic findings, so initial evaluation relies on a surface electrocardiogram. The ECG will show a short PR interval (<120 ms), prolonged QRS complex (>120 ms), and a QRS morphology consisting of a slurred delta wave. The preexcitation of the ventricle causes this morphology through the accessory pathway that forms a fusion complex with the normal QRS complex arising from normal cardiac conduction. The absence of this pattern does not rule out the presence of an accessory pathway since some pathways are only capable of conducting impulses under certain conditions or in a retrograde direction. Such a pathway could only conduct from the ventricle to the atrium and would not cause ventricular preexcitation during normal sinus beats. This concealed accessory pathway will only be evident on ECG during an electrical impulse generated in the ventricle, such as a premature ventricular contraction or ventricular pacing.

Recommendations for further evaluation, risk stratification, electrophysiologic study, and accessory pathway ablation for asymptomatic patients with WPW pattern vary depending on age, risk factors, history of symptoms, comorbidities, baseline ECG pattern, as well as a personal and expert opinion. In general, young, healthy patients without comorbid conditions or significant risk factors who have the WPW pattern on ECG but are asymptomatic and without a history of suspected tachyarrhythmia are likely safe for watchful waiting with primary care and or cardiology follow up. Patients who are at higher risk for arrhythmia should be referred for close cardiology follow up for the discussion of risk stratification testing and/or electrophysiologic study with accessory pathway mapping and possible ablation.

Patients that present with a symptomatic tachyarrhythmia or an episode concerning recent arrhythmia will require an ECG to assess current cardiac rate, rhythm, and morphology but will also require further evaluation. The patient who presents with an acute tachyarrhythmia can be evaluated and managed following the "2010 American Heart Association guidelines for Cardiopulmonary Resuscitation and Emergency Cardiovascular Care." This evaluation involves assessing the appropriateness of the clinical condition while obtaining vital signs, including heart rate, blood pressure, pulse oximetry, and placing the patient on the cardiac monitor to assess the cardiac rhythm. If available, history and prior medical information should be obtained to assess for baseline ECG, prior episodes of tachyarrhythmias, and family members with WPW syndrome or sudden cardiac death. History of current symptoms, including ischemic chest discomfort and events leading up to arrhythmia, should be obtained. Mental status, cardiovascular, and pulmonary exams should be focused to assess for acute altered mental status, signs of shock, or acute heart failure, which would be concerning for hemodynamic instability; if identified, the patient should undergo electrical cardioversion. The hemodynamically stable patient should be further evaluated with 12 lead ECG to assess the cardiac rhythm. Imaging and laboratory evaluation should be tailored to the clinical situation and assess for concomitant or provocating clinical conditions and evidence of end-organ dysfunction as a result of the tachyarrhythmia. These studies may include chest radiography, echocardiography, complete blood count, basic metabolic panel, cardiac enzymes, BNP, thyroid function, venous or arterial blood gas as well as further testing to assess other metabolic or comorbid conditions based on the clinical setting.