Presbycusis is very common and can have profound consequences on the quality of life. Due to wide variations in presentation, diagnosis may be delayed if patients are not specifically screened for hearing loss. Collaboration in care is an integral component of delivering efficient and effective health care. While the responsibility for screening rests mainly among primary care providers, most do not consistently assess hearing due to various barriers such as lack of time and reimbursement and the onus to address more pressing health issues.

Prompt referral to an audiometrist or other care provider who can perform specific audiometric testing is warranted in patients who are suspected of having age-related hearing loss. Subspecialties in areas such as otolaryngology, neurology, and geriatrics also have an opportunity to screen for presbycusis. Additionally, nurses and other allied health professionals can help to screen older patients by asking about hearing problems during an encounter. Collaboration between audiologists and primary care providers has the potential to increase awareness of the prevalence of hearing loss and the importance of audiological rehabilitation.

Interprofessional communication remains important after the diagnosis of presbycusis is made. Aural rehabilitation is essential in the management of age-related hearing loss. Hearing aids require significant time and effort from the patient and continued encouragement by the primary care provider and audiometry team.