Tenosynovitis, or inflammation of the synovial tendon sheath that surrounds tendons, commonly occurs in the tendons contained in the first extensor compartment of the wrist, the abductor pollicis longus, and extensor pollicis brevis tendons. In patients who do not have rheumatoid arthritis, it is not commonly found in the other extensor compartments. However, there have been reports of patients developing tenosynovitis of the EPL synovial tendon sheath in the third extensor compartment. Patients often present with non-specific wrist pain after performing repetitive motions of their wrist/thumb and may have tenderness along Lister's tubercle and the EPL tendon. Patients can have pain with passive motion of the first digit IP joint. It might take months for the pain to localize to the third extensor compartment, so this diagnosis is a challenging one. In the limited number of case reports on this condition, it has been noted that all of the patients had an EPL musculotendinous junction that ended within the third extensor compartment, which may have made them more prone to tenosynovitis since there is a tighter compartment.

Distal radius fractures comprise one-sixth of all fractures treated in the emergency room. An uncommon yet documented complication of non-displaced distal radius fractures in adults is a rupture of the EPL several weeks following the fracture. Proposed mechanisms of the ruptured EPL include hematoma and callus formation from the fracture, which causes compression of the third extensor compartment, causing ischemia, irritation, and degeneration of the EPL, leading to rupture. When patients are diagnosed with a distal radius fracture and return a few weeks later complaining of an inability to actively initiate extension of the thumb at the MCP and IP joints but have a full passive range of motion, it is important to evaluate the integrity of their EPL. In general, when patients have limited active extension of the thumb at the MCP and IP joints but have a full passive range of motion with extension, it’s important to include EPL tendon rupture in the differential diagnosis. Patients may feel a popping sensation when the rupture occurred, and they may have tenderness over Lister’s tubercle.

In patients who have thumb muscle hypoplasia, which can present with the EPL tendon inserted on the radial aspect of the proximal phalanx of the thumb, it is important to rule out any general medical syndromes that the thumb hypoplasia can be associated with. Examples are Fanconi anemia, which also presents with pancytopenic anemia, Holt-Oram syndrome, which also presents with congenital heart defects; Cornelia de Lange syndrome, which also presents with dwarfism, Okihiro syndrome, which also presents with impaired eye movement and deafness, VACTERL, or thrombocytopenia with the absence of the radius.

Patients who sustain avulsion fractures of the two metacarpals at the insertion of the extensor carpi radialis longus tendon may experience a rupture of their EPL tendon by the avulsed fragment if it is not properly fixated. Therefore, internal fixation of fracture fragments is essential in patients who have avulsion fractures at the insertion of the extensor carpi radialis longus tendon to prevent complications.