Peptic ulcer disease (PUD) has various causes; however, Helicobacter pylori-associated PUD and NSAID-associated PUD account for the majority of the disease etiology.

**Causes of Peptic Ulcer Disease**

**Common**

- H. pylori infection

- NSAIDs

- Medications

**Rare**

- Zollinger-Ellison syndrome

- Malignancy (gastric/lung cancer, lymphomas)

- Stress (Acute illness, burns, head injury)

- Viral infection

- Vascular insufficiency

- Radiation therapy

- Crohn disease

- Chemotherapy

**Helicobacter Pylori-Associated PUD**

H. pylorus is a gram-negative bacillus that is found within the gastric epithelial cells. This bacterium is responsible for 90% of duodenal ulcers and 70% to 90% of gastric ulcers. H. pylori infection is more prevalent among those with lower socioeconomic status and is commonly acquired during childhood. The organism has a wide spectrum of virulence factors allowing it to adhere to and inflame the gastric mucosa. This results in hypochlorhydria or achlorhydria, leading to gastric ulceration.

Virulence Factors of  Helicobacter Pylori

- Urease: The secretion of urease breaks down urea into ammonia and protects the organism by neutralizing the acidic gastric environment.

- Toxins: CagA/VacA is associated with stomach mucosal inflammation and host tissue damage.

- Flagella: Provides motility and allows movement toward the gastric epithelium.

**NSAID-associated PUD**

Nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs use is the second most common cause of PUD after H. pylori infection.

**Medications**

Apart from NSAIDs, corticosteroids, bisphosphonates, potassium chloride, and fluorouracil have been implicated in the etiology of PUD.

Smoking also appears to play a role in duodenal ulcers, but the correlation is not linear. Alcohol can irritate the gastric mucosa and induce acidity.

Hypersecretory environment occurs in the following conditions.

- Zollinger Ellison syndrome

- Systemic mastocytosis

- Cystic fibrosis

- Hyperparathyroidism

- Antral G cell hyperplasia