The ossicles (malleus, incus, and stapes) are three bones in the middle ear that assist in the mechanical transduction of sound energy.  The sound energy is collected by the tympanic membrane, transmitted across the middle ear along with the three middle ear bones and into the fluid-filled cochlea.  Collectively, the middle ear bones are known as the ossicular chain.  Embryologically, the malleus and incus develop from Meckel’s cartilage of the first pharyngeal arch, the stapes from Reichert’s cartilage of the second pharyngeal arch, and the footplate and annular ligament from the otic capsule.

The malleus is divided into the head, neck, manubrium, anterior process, and lateral process. The incus is divided into the body, short crus, long crus, and lenticular process. The stapes is divided into the head (capitulum), neck, anterior crus, posterior crus, and footplate.

Medially, the stapes footplate is secured to the otic capsule by an annular ligament.  The intermediate-positioned incus is joined by the other two ossicles by the incudomalleolar joint and the incudostapedial joint, which are synovial diarthrodial joints.  When sound energy is transmitted across the ossicular chain, it results in vibratory motion of the stapes within the oval window to the cochlea. The classical description of the stapes movement is similar to a piston. However, other vibration patterns and characteristics have been described for the stapes footplate. The differential pressure and impedances at the oval and round windows are required for the movement of cochlear fluid, which forms the basis of neural stimulation for hearing.

The muscles of the middle ear include the tensor tympani and stapedius.  In addition to the suspensory and stabilization function, it provides to the ossicular chain, the muscles protect the inner ear from potentially injurious loud sound levels. The tensor tympani attaches to the manubrium of the malleus close to the neck and retracts it medially to stiffen the tympanic membrane.  In this manner, it can reduce vibratory transmission across the tympanic membrane.  The stapedius attaches to the posterior aspect of the stapes head adjacent to the neck and dampens vibrations into the oval window when the acoustic reflex is triggered by loud sounds.

If sound energy that travels in an air medium enters the external auditory canal directly to the stapes footplate in the absence of a tympanic membrane, middle ear, and ossicles, an impedance mismatch will occur with only 0.1% of acoustic energy reaching the inner ear.

The area effect is the difference between the surface area of the tympanic membrane relative to the surface area of the stapes footplate where sound must travel.  Sound is concentrated by a factor of 17 to 20-fold based on the ratio of surface areas of the recipient tympanic membrane to target stapes footplate (between 17 and 20 to 1).

When ossiculoplasty is performed, continuity of the ossicular chain may be surgically restored, but it is not possible to replicate the lever effect.