Neoadjuvant systemic therapy is utilized for those with potential resectable, unresectable, and recurrent disease. This is generally chemotherapy. However, immunotherapy and vascular epidermal growth factor (VEGF) tyrosine kinase inhibitors are utilized in thymic carcinomas that have been refractory to initial chemotherapeutic regimens. These include:

- Pembrolizumab is a checkpoint inhibitor that is used to treat thymic carcinoma refractory to initial chemotherapeutic regimens in patients with no history of autoimmune disorders.

- This indication is based on nonrandomized phase II data.
- Possible adverse effects include myocarditis, myasthenia gravis, and hepatitis.
- It is not offered to thymoma patients because they have shown a higher rate of adverse effects.

- Nivolumab has no role in the treatment of relapsed thymic carcinoma. The PRIMER trial has shown significant toxicity with this drug with no benefit.

- Sunitinib, which is a VEGF inhibitor that inhibits multiple tyrosine kinases included VEGF and c-kit, is utilized on thymic carcinomas that have progressed on both chemotherapy and immunotherapy.

- VEGF inhibitors are also used in more advanced thymomas and patients with a history of autoimmune disorders
- Sunitinib is given in 6-week cycles (4 weeks on and two weeks off)
- Its benefits were tested utilizing a phase II open-label single-arm trial.
- Its toxicities include lymphocytopenia, fatigue, mucositis, and decrease ventricular ejection fraction.

- Lenvatinib is used for thymic carcinoma refractory to initial chemotherapeutic regimens.

- Its benefits were examined in the REMORA trial that showed a 38% partial response and a 57% stable disease rate.
- Its adverse effects include hypertension, diarrhea, hand-foot syndrome, proteinuria, hypothyroidism, and thrombocytopenia.

There are quite a few initial chemotherapeutic regimens. They are described below:

- CAP (cyclophosphamide, doxorubicin, and cisplatin) given every three weeks.

- Studied in a U.S. intergroup trial
- Overall and complete response rate - 50 and 10%
- Median survival - 38 months

- PE (cisplatin and etoposide) is given every three weeks.

- EORTC (European Organization for Research and Treatment of Cancer) study
- Overall and complete response rate - 56% and 31%
- Median progression-free and overall survival - 2.2 and 4.3 years

- CAP with prednisone given every three weeks.

- Complete response rate - 77%

- Carboplatin and paclitaxel were given every three weeks.

- Studied in a prospective multicenter study in patients with advanced disease
- Overall response rate - 43% (thymoma) and 22% (thymic carcinoma)

- ADOC (cisplatin, doxorubicin, vincristine, and cyclophosphamide) given every three weeks.

- Studied in patients with advanced disease
- Overall and complete response rate - 92% and 43%
- Median survival - 15 months

- VIP (etoposide, ifosfamide, and cisplatin) given every three weeks.

- Studied in Intergroup trial - patients with advanced thymoma or thymic carcinoma.
- Only partial responses observed.

Often initial chemotherapy is insufficient, and the progression of the disease is seen. Therefore subsequent chemotherapeutic agents are needed. These include etoposide, ifosfamide, pemetrexed, octreotide, 5-FU and leucovorin, gemcitabine with or without capecitabine, and paclitaxel.