The diagnosis of anaphylaxis is a clinical diagnosis; thus, laboratory studies or other diagnostics are not necessary. Most anaphylactic deaths occur within the first hour after antigen exposure. Rapid recognition and action are imperative.

Consideration for anaphylaxis is appropriate in the presence of 2 or more involved systems, even in the absence of airway involvement or hypotension (see above). A consensus criterion has been constructed to improve clinical recognition to prevent delayed treatment, as this poses a great risk to patients.

**Clinical Criteria for Anaphylaxis (1 of the following with onset within minutes to hours)***

Unknown exposure to an antigen yet rapidly developing urticaria or other skin/mucosal layer symptoms associa
ted with any one of the following:

- Respiratory symptoms (dyspnea, wheezing, stridor, hypoxemia, inability to maintain patency; persistent cough and/or throat clearing can be heralding symptoms)

- Hypotension (systolic less than 90 mm Hg or a decrease of greater than 30% from baseline)

- Signs or symptoms of end-organ dysfunction, for example, hypotonia, syncope, incontinence

Likely exposure to an antigen and symptoms involving any 2 of the following body systems:

- Integumentary symptoms: Skin or mucosal layer (rash, pruritus, erythema, hives, swelling of the face, lips, tongue, or uvula)

- Respiratory symptoms: Dyspnea, wheeze, stridor, hypoxemia, inability to maintain patency; persistent cough and/or throat clearing can be heralding symptom

- Hypotension: Systolic less than 90 mm Hg or a decrease of greater than 30% from baseline

- Gastrointestinal symptoms: Persistent painful cramps or vomiting

Known exposure to an antigen and hypotension (systolic less than 90 mm Hg or a decrease of greater than 30% from baseline)

*Note: It is not required to meet these criteria to treat, only to serve as a guide for diagnosis

Angioedema can also mimic these symptoms. A key differentiation between angioedema and anaphylaxis is urticaria, the oral symptoms and need for airway control can otherwise mimic each other. When in doubt, treat aggressively.

Laboratory testing is of little to no use, as there is no accurate testing for diagnosis or confirmation. Serum histamine is of no use due to transient elevation and late presentation. Serum tryptase can be considered for confirmation of an anaphylactic episode as it remains elevated for several hours; however, as a diagnostic modality, this has low sensitivity.

Kounis syndrome (allergic angina): This is myocardial infarction or ischemia that can occur in the setting of anaphylaxis.