Statin medications can be taken with or without food. Grapefruit juice should be avoided with some statins to minimize CYP3A4 interactions that could increase serum concentrations. Due to the diurnal variation in hepatic cholesterol synthesis, synthesis is highest in the early morning hours. An evening dose of some statins is the recommended dosing approach (e.g., fluvastatin, lovastatin, pravastatin, and simvastatin).

According to AHA/ACC guidelines, based on estimated LDL level reductions, statins can be classified into high-intensity, moderate-intensity, and low-intensity statins.

- High-intensity statin(LDL-C lowering > 50%): rosuvastatin 20 mg, rosuvastatin 40 mg, atorvastatin 40 mg, atorvastatin 80 mg

- Moderate-intensity statin(LDL-C lowering 30% to 49%): atorvastatin 10 mg, atorvastatin 20 mg, pravastatin 40 mg, pravastatin 80 mg, lovastatin 40 mg, lovastatin 80 mg, fluvastatin XL 80 mg,  fluvastatin 40 mg BID, pitavastatin 1–4 mg

- Low-intensity statin(LDL-C lowering < 30%): simvastatin 10 mg,  pravastatin 20 mg, pravastatin 10 mg, lovastatin 20 mg, fluvastatin 20 mg, fluvastatin 40 mg.

Patients with severe primary hypercholesterolemia (LDL-C ≥ 190 mg/dL) have a high risk of atherosclerotic cardiovascular disease (ASCVD); high-intensity statin therapy is recommended.

For young adults between 20-39 years, consider statin therapy if only in high-risk patients (family history of premature CAD and very high LDL-C ≥160 mg/dL)

Patients between 40 to 75 years of age with diabetes are at intermediate or high risk of future ASCVD, and moderate-intensity statin is recommended.

Patients between 40 to 75 years of age with diabetes-specific risk factors(≥ 10 years for T2DM or ≥20 years for type 1 DM or albuminuria, retinopathy, neuropathy, eGFR<60 mL/min/1.73 m² or ankle-brachial index <0.9) high-intensity statin therapy is recommended.

Consider treatment with a high-intensity statin for patients between 40 to 75 years of age with ASCVD > 20%(high risk)over ten years.

Consider treatment with a moderate-intensity statin for patients between 40 to 75 years of age with ASCVD ≥ 7.5 to < 20%(moderate risk) over ten years.

Consider treatment with a moderate-intensity statin for patients between 40 to 75 years of age with ASCVD 5% to <7 .5%(high risk) over ten years if risk enhancers are present. Risk enhancers are a family history of premature ASCVD, persistently elevated LDL-C>160 mg/dl, metabolic syndrome, chronic kidney disease, chronic inflammatory conditions(psoriasis, RA, or HIV), history of premature menopause (before age 40 years), preeclampsia, high-risk race/ethnicity (e.g., south Asian ancestry), lipids/biomarkers(persistently elevated primary hypertriglyceridemia (≥ 175 mg/dL),hs-CRP (≥ 2.0 mg/L), Lp(a)≥5 0 mg/dL, apoB (≥130 mg/dL), ankle branchial index<0.9.

In adults with intermediate risk (≥ 7.5% to < 20%) or adults at borderline risk (5% to < 7.5%), measure coronary artery calcium (CAC) levels if:

- If CAC is 0 Agatston units, no statin is required unless there is a history of diabetes mellitus, a family history of premature CHD, or cigarette smoking is present.

- If CAC is 1 to 99 Agatston units, consider statin therapy, especially after the age of 55 years.

- If CAC is greater than 100 Agatston units, initiate statin therapy.

For young adults(20-39) years, consider statin therapy, if only in patients with a family history of premature CAD and very high LDL-C (≥160 mg/dL).

Secondary ASCVD prevention: According to AHA/ACC, the very high-risk category has been defined as a history of multiple major ASCVD events or one major ASCVD event and multiple high-risk conditions. Major ASCVD events are recent acute coronary syndrome(ACS) within the past 12 months, MI other than the ACS, ischemic stroke, and symptomatic peripheral arterial disease (ABI <0.85 or amputation or previous revascularization). High-risk conditions are age ≥65 years, prior PCI/CABG, heterozygous familial hypercholesterolemia, diabetes mellitus, hypertension, chronic kidney disease, current smoking, history of heart failure, and LDL-C ≥100 mg/dL.

- In patients ≤75 years of age with clinical ASCVD, high-intensity statin therapy should be started or continued with the goal of ≥50% reduction in LDL-C.

- For patients in the very high-risk category, if LDL-C is ≥70 mg/dL on a maximally tolerated statin therapy, clinicians should consider adding ezetimibe to statin therapy. If LDL-C is still ≥70 mg/dL or if non–HDL-C ≥100 mg/dL, clinicians should consider adding a PCSK9 inhibitor.

Homozygous familial hypercholesterolemia(HoFH): Statin therapy is recommended in combination with lipoprotein apheresis, PCSK9 inhibitors, and microsomal triglyceride transfer protein (MTP) inhibitor(lomitapide).

**Pediatric Considerations:**For patients with familial hypercholesterolemia, moderate to high-intensity statin therapy is recommended.

**Geriatric Considerations:**For patients >75 years of age, the clinician and patient should discuss the potential benefits of preventative therapies in the context of comorbidities and life expectancy.

**Patients with Hepatic Impairment:**All statins are contraindicated in active liver disease. Statins have been associated with mild-to-moderate serum aminotransferase elevations during therapy that is typically temporary, asymptomatic, and usually resolve even with continuation without dose adjustment. Statins with minimal hepatic metabolism, such as pravastatin and rosuvastatin, are preferred in chronic liver disease.

**Patients with Renal Impairment:**According to KDIGO(kidney disease improving global outcomes)guidelines, statin therapy is recommended for adults>50 years with CKD stages 1 and 2. For stage 3 to stage 5 CKD(not on HD), a statin+ezetemibe combination is recommended. Statin therapy is recommended for patients between 18 to 49 years(stage 1 to 5) of age with one risk factor (known coronary artery disease, diabetes mellitus, prior ischemic stroke, the estimated 10-year incidence of coronary death, or non-fatal MI >10%). In adult patients with dialysis-dependent CKD, statins should NOT be initiated; however, statins can be continued if the patient is already being administered statins at the time of dialysis initiation.

**Pregnancy Considerations:**Statins are typically contraindicated in pregnancy. In 2021, the FDA advised removing the contraindications of statin use during pregnancy for high-risk patients. Clinicians can consider the use of statins in pregnant patients at very high risk of cardiovascular events during pregnancy(patients with homozygous familial hypercholesterolemia and established cardiovascular disease).

**Breastfeeding Considerations:**The consensus is that statins should not be used during breastfeeding due to disruption in the infant's lipid metabolism. Other agents, such as cholestyramine, colesevelam, and colestipol, may be safe during breastfeeding.