A comprehensive history is essential in understanding postmenopausal bleeding. First, the menopausal status must be established. Questions regarding the last menstrual period, or surgical history in the case of patients who are menopausal secondary to oophorectomy, must be elicited. The patient may also have had testing at some point, such as a follicle-stimulating hormone level, that can help in establishing the diagnosis of menopause.

**History of Present Illness**

The nature of the patient’s prior menses and current bleeding are both essential historical elements. The previous history of heavy menses or another abnormal uterine bleeding may increase suspicion for either structural abnormalities, such as leiomyomas, or endometrial abnormalities like polyps, hyperplasia, or malignancy. Questions regarding when the patient notices her postmenopausal bleeding (in her clothing or on a pad, after intercourse, or when wiping, etc.) are important clues to the etiology of the bleeding. The heaviness of bleeding, the number of bleeding days, and the constancy or intermittent nature of bleeding are also essential.

**Past Medical History**

The patient’s past medical history may be helpful. For example, a history of obesity, polycystic ovarian syndrome or other anovulation, diabetes mellitus, or tamoxifen use may all increase suspicion for hyperplasia or malignancy. Knowing whether the patient has had a recent Pap test, normal or abnormal, may help to identify whether cervical etiologies may be of concern. Atypical glandular cells on a Pap test may indicate endometrial pathology. A history of radiation exposure is essential to elicit.

**Social History**

Cervicitis may also be considered, both from the nature of the bleeding (e.g., postcoital) or due to a history of infections or partner infidelity. Also, with regards to social history, cigarette smoking may increase the risk of bladder cancer (hematuria may be mistaken for vaginal bleeding) but decreases the risk of endometrial cancer.

**Family History**

A family history of breast, gynecologic, urologic, gastrointestinal, or other cancers may also be elicited.

**Medications**

Knowing a patient’s medications is important. Postmenopausal hormone therapy, depending on the regimen, may lead to bleeding. The use of certain herbal supplements may stimulate the endometrial lining.

**Physical Exam**

On physical exam, it is crucial to perform a thorough evaluation of the internal and external anatomy of the genital tract. A bleeding site may be identified. Lesions on the anus, urethra, vulva, vagina, or cervix may be noted. Lacerations may be found. The shape, size, and tenderness of the uterus can aid in narrowing the differential diagnosis.

Exam findings of atrophy classically include pale, dry vaginal epithelium that is shiny and smooth and lacking rugae. Signs of inflammation include erythema or redness, petechiae, friability, discharge, visible blood vessels through the thin epithelium, or bleeding. Lastly, a general systemic examination is essential to identify signs of chronic or severe illness.