FNA is a very common procedure done by the primary care provider, nurse practitioner, internist, radiologist, surgeon, and many others. The key is to know the anatomy and potential complications. It is also important to know that FNA has a low yield and thus a negative result should never be accepted if there is high suspicion of something more sinister. In such scenarios, it is important to communicate with other professionals on the best workup of the patient.

Performing a FNA requires an interprofessional approach. The nurse should be familiar with the procedure, preparation, and technique and should support the surgeon during the procedure making sure that sterile technique is maintained. Often surgeon may need assistance with positioning the patient or anatomical position of the breast for the procedure. In addition, films need to be available and often will require the nurse to assist in holding them during the procedure in locating the mass. After the procedure, the nurse must monitor the patient's vital signs and report back to the surgeon if any untoward complications develop. Further, on discharge, the nurse should provide instructions to the patient and if it is unclear the patient is not understanding the followup, the nurse should consult the surgeon to assist in educating the patient. The patient should be monitored by the nurse for signs of infection post-procedure and again the surgeon contacted if there are concerns. Only through an interprofessional approach to this procedure will optimal outcomes be achieved. [Level V]