A basic understanding of cardiac anatomy and coronary distribution is essential to understanding electrocardiographic findings.

The heart is a vital body organ and occupies space in the central chest between the lungs. Together with the blood vessels and blood, it constitutes the body's circulatory system. The heart is a muscular organ comprised of four chambers with two atria (right and left) opening into right and left ventricles via tricuspid and mitral valves, respectively. A wall of muscle called the septum separates all four chambers. The heart receives deoxygenated blood from the whole body via superior and inferior vena cava, which first enters the right atrium. From here, it transits through the right ventricle and then passes into the lungs via the right and left pulmonary arteries, where it is oxygenated. The oxygenated blood from the lungs pours into the left atrium through the right and left pulmonary veins, and from here, it is pumped by the left ventricle into the aorta to the rest of the body. The heart derives its blood supply from the coronary arteries that branch off the aorta.

The right and left coronary arteries lie on the surface of the heart. With considerable heterogeneity among the general population, different regions of the heart receive vascular supply from the various branches of the coronary arteries. This anatomic distribution is significant because a 12-lead ECG assesses these cardiac regions to help localize and diagnose ischemic or infarcted areas. Written below are the following regions supplied by the different coronary arteries.

- Inferior Wall - Right coronary artery

- Anteroseptal - Left anterior descending artery

- Anteroapical - Left anterior descending artery (distal)

- Anterolateral - Circumflex artery

- Posterior Wall - Right coronary artery

The heart is a mechanical pump whose activity is governed by the electrical conduction system.

Extensive branching of the cardiac muscle fibers and their end-to-end connection with each other through intercalated discs make them contract in a wave-like fashion. This mechanical work of pumping blood to the whole body occurs in a synchronized manner and is under the control of the cardiac conduction system. It is comprised of two types of cells, pacemaker and non-pacemaker cells. Pacemaker cells are located primarily in the SA and AV node, and it is the SA node that drives the rate and rhythm of the heart. The AV node gets suppressed by the more rapid pace of the SA node.

The specialized function associated with the pacemaker cells is their spontaneous depolarization with no true resting potential. When spontaneous depolarization reaches the threshold voltage, it triggers a rapid depolarization followed by repolarization. The non-pacemaker cells mainly comprise the atrial and ventricular cardiac muscle cells and Purkinje fibers of the conduction system. They consist of true resting membrane potential, and upon initiation of an action potential, rapid depolarization is triggered, followed by a plateau phase and subsequent repolarization. Action potentials are generated by ion conductance via the opening and closing of the ion channels. Knowing which ECG leads corresponds to specific arteries helps localize the obstruction in acute ST-elevation myocardial infarction or an age-indeterminate Q-wave infarction by observing predictable patterns on the ECG.