**Hypersomnia and Coma**

The reticular activating system is one of the major contributors to arousal and consciousness. A devastating consequence of increased intracranial pressure from numerous etiologies is the herniation of brain tissue inferiorly to compress brainstem structures. The degree of herniation determines the severity of impact on the arousal function of the reticular activating system, ranging from hypersomnolence to coma and potentially death. Hypersomnia is a common outcome post-stroke, and presentation correlates with stroke patients who have infarcts in the thalamus, hypothalamus, and pons. Other disturbances of the ascending reticular activating system, such as patients with narcolepsy post mild TBI and spontaneous subarachnoid hemorrhage, also showed hypersomnia as one of the associated symptoms.

**Schizophrenia**

Many symptoms of schizophrenia, particularly the positive symptoms, such as hallucinations, sensory gating abnormalities, and sleep-wake disturbances, which are hallmarks of the disease, are thought to be due to reticular activating system abnormalities. The sleep-wake disturbances that many patients with schizophrenia experience are reductions of slow-wave sleep duration and a decrease in REM latency. There is also speculation that hallucinations may be REM intrusion into a waking state, causing these visual and auditory phenomena. Post-mortem analyses found that patients with schizophrenia had a greater than 60% increase in the number of neurons in the pedunculopontine nucleus, part of the reticular formation in the posterior midbrain, compared to patients without the disorder. The pedunculopontine nucleus typically sends excitatory projections to the substantia nigra, which in turn sends dopaminergic projections to various regions of the striatum. The significant increase in cholinergic neurons in the pedunculopontine nucleus may explain the sleep-wake disturbances since the cholinergic output component of the reticular activating system would be increased. The increase in cholinergic neurons in the pedunculopontine nucleus could also lead to an increase in the excitation of the substantia nigra, leading to excess dopaminergic output from that system. The thought is that this increase in neuronal number in the pedunculopontine nucleus is due to the failure of appropriately programmed cell death during nervous system development.

**Post-Traumatic Stress Disorder**

Individuals with Post-Traumatic Stress Disorder (PTSD) often experience many symptoms related to hyperarousal, flashbacks, anxiety, and disturbances in sleep-wake cycles. Patients with PTSD experience an exaggerated startle response, often to non-harmful auditory stimuli, a phenomenon called sensory gating abnormalities. These patients also have increased REM drive and display many flashbacks and re-experiencing episodes, potentially progressing to hallucinations of past events. A study, including combat veterans with diagnosed PTSD, showed a decreased habituation of the P1 auditory evoked potential, and the degree of decreased habituation was associated with the severity of the patients’ flashback symptoms. Individuals who suffered from anxiety disorders comorbid with a diagnosis of PTSD showed a decrease of 50% of the neurons in the locus coeruleus, a part of the reticular activating system that responds to stress and panic with neurotransmission of norepinephrine. The locus coeruleus normally inhibits the pedunculopontine nucleus. Since patients with anxiety disorders and PTSD showed a significant reduction in neurons in the locus coeruleus, there may be disinhibition of the pedunculopontine nucleus, resulting in many of the symptoms of PTSD.

**Parkinson’s Disease**

Parkinson’s disease, a progressive neurodegenerative disorder that affects the dopaminergic neurons principally in the substantia nigra, leads to many disruptions in normal movement. These difficulties with movement are displayed by a resting tremor, typically a “pill-rolling” movement of the fingers, progressive stiffness, bradykinesia, cogwheel rigidity, and difficulty initiating or changing movements. In addition to the degeneration of the substantia nigra, individuals with Parkinson’s Disease also have locus coeruleus cell death. Similar to the findings in patients with PTSD, individuals with Parkinson disease display decreased habituation of the P1 auditory evoked potential, a finding which correlates with the severity of their Parkinsonian symptoms. Research also found that the pedunculopontine nucleus is overactive in late-stage Parkinson disease. As the disease progresses, patients typically begin showing decreased habituation of reflexes and symptoms of anxiety and depression, which is a pattern similar to PTSD and schizophrenia, as described above. Patients with Parkinson disease also report having sleep-wake disturbances and REM sleep behavior disorders common in patients with Parkinson disease. The loss of locus coeruleus neurons and the subsequent disinhibition of the pedunculopontine nucleus may explain many arousal and motor symptoms present in Parkinson disease.

**REM Behavior Disorder**

REM Behavior Disorder is a sleep disorder characterized by the patient acting out vivid, unpleasant, and often violent dreams. Normally during REM sleep, individuals cannot enact dreams due to muscle paralysis. In patients with REM Behavior Disorder, research showed a greater than 75% reduction in the number of neurons in the locus coeruleus. This reduction in neurons leads to a disinhibited pedunculopontine nucleus, which may offer insight as to why these patients can act out dreams. Approximately 40% of patients with REM behavior disorder receive a diagnosis with Parkinson disease ten years after the initial diagnosis of REM behavior disorder.

**Narcolepsy**

Disorders of the reticular activating system have implications in the pathophysiology of narcolepsy. The hallmarks of narcolepsy are the presence of excessive daytime sleepiness, fragmented sleep, and cataplexy, which is the phenomenon of frequent sleep attacks. Patients also often describe having sleep paralysis, hypnagogic or hypnopompic hallucinations, and nocturnal dyssomnia. The thinking is that the dysregulation of hypocretin/orexin signaling contributes to a large portion of cases of narcolepsy.

**Spinal Cord Injury**

Individuals who suffer from transverse injury to the spinal cord have dysfunction related to the longitudinal tracts relaying information to and from the cerebral cortices. Spinal cord injuries have the potential of damaging the reticular formation if they localize to the brainstem. If they do not directly injure the reticular formation, they disrupt the connection and thus the modulation between the reticular formation and the spinal motor neurons. The traditional signs of upper motor neuron injury, such as hyperreflexia and hypertonia, can be explained by this dysregulation between the reticular formation and motor neurons. Due to the lack of effective communication between the reticular formation and the spinal cord, the muscles below the spinal cord injury reflexively contract in response to peripheral stimuli due to spinal reflexes. Since there is no modulation and inhibition of contraction by the reticular formation, muscles inappropriately experience increased tone and spasticity. Individuals who have a spinal cord injury also have difficulties with autonomic functions, such as neurogenic bladder and dysfunction of the cardiorespiratory system.

**Developmental Influences**

Both preterm birth and prenatal exposure to cigarette smoking have correlations with abnormalities of the reticular formation. Individuals who are born preterm demonstrate disruptions of the pre-attentional, attentional, and cortical projections of the reticular activating system throughout their development into childhood and adolescence. Symptoms associated with abnormalities in arousal, difficulties with sleep-wake patterns, and delays in reaction time commonly present. Fetuses exposed to cigarette smoke demonstrate lasting deficits in arousal, attention, as well as many cognitive deficits, which may be explained by the presence of nicotinic receptors on neurons in the pedunculopontine nucleus, leading to hyperpolarization-activated cation currents. These deficits may lead to lasting attentional dysfunction later in life.