Simple Limbal Epithelial Transplantation (SLET)

In children, general anesthesia is advised. For adults, a local or topical anesthetic is administered to the donor eye, and a 2 to 3 mm length of the healthy limbus is excised, usually at the superior limbus. One millimeter peripheral to the superior limbus, Vannas scissors, is used to develop a flap of the conjunctiva and dissected to the limbus. A number 15 blade completes the dissection approximately 1mm into the clear peripheral cornea. This flap is excised and stored in a balanced salt solution (Fig. 1A). If a large symblepharon is present and removed from the diseased eye, more conjunctiva may be excised from the healthy eye to graft the site.

A 360° peritomy is performed on the diseased eye, and a keratectomy removes the fibrovascular pannus. Any normal healthy corneal and limbal epithelium present on the diseased eye is left untouched (Fig. 1B&C). An amniotic membrane is placed stroma side down and epithelial side up on the bare cornea. The membrane should cover the cornea and sclera up to the peritomy incision to be tucked below the conjunctival edge. The membrane is smoothed with surgical instruments, and fibrin glue allows the membrane to adhere to the optical surface (Fig. 1D).

Using Vannas scissor or a blade and cutting board, the limbal graft is cut into 10 to 12 equal-sized pieces (Fig. 1E). These pieces are transplanted onto the membrane just inside the underlying limbus (Fig. 1F). Whether or not maintaining the grafts’ original orientation is beneficial is not known, although some surgeons attempt to achieve original orientation using the limbal pigments as a guide. Fibrin glue is applied for graft adherence, and a bandage contact lens is applied, although cryopreserved amniotic membranes have also been employed.

If the corneal stroma under the pannus is too thin and perforates, penetrating keratoplasty may be performed. Penetrating keratoplasty has also been used simultaneously with SLET, but ideally, this is done electively at a later date as it increases the chance of graft failure.

The bandage contact lens is removed on the seventh postoperative day. If complete epithelial healing is not observed with fluorescein staining, a bandage contact lens is used for an additional week. Healing of the defect in the donor eye should also be monitored. While using the contact lens, topical ciprofloxacin 0.3% drops are instilled four times daily. Topical prednisolone acetate 1% drops six times daily is used for one week then tapered by one drop a day every week for six weeks for both eyes.

Allogenic SLET will require long-term oral or pulse intravenous immunosuppression regimens, or else the grafts will eventually reject. The pulse intravenous regimen starts with 500mg IV methylprednisolone on the day of surgery and repeat administration at one-week post-op. This is followed by injections every six weeks until six months post-op, then every two months until one-year post-op, then every three months until two years post-op, and finally,  every six months after that. Oral prednisone is started at 1mg/kg and tapered weekly to 5 mg/day. Patients will also require oral cyclosporine 5 to 7 mg/kg 48 hours pre-op and 1g IV for post-op days 0 to 3. Cyclosporine is then tapered to 1.5 to 2 mg/kg maintenance dose over 4 to 8 weeks, with 90mg of diltiazem hydrochloride to reduce the cost and increase serum cyclosporine levels. Regimens with mofetil and tacrolimus have also been successful.

**Other Surgical Techniques**

Other autologous limbal stem cell transplantation techniques that have successfully treated LSCD include conjunctival limbal autograft (CLAU), introduced in 1964 and further developed in 1989 by Kenyon and Tseng (Fig. 2) and cultivated limbal epithelial transplantation (CLET) introduced by Pellegrini et al. in 1997 (Fig. 3). These will be discussed briefly.

Conjunctival Limbal Autograft (CLAU)

CLAU is performed by removing the fibrovascular pannus from the diseased eye after a peritomy and superficial keratectomy (Fig. 2A, 2B). From the 12 and 6 o’clock positions, two limbal grafts 6 mm in length (approximately 3-hour sized quadrants) and 2 to 4 mm posteriorly into the conjunctiva and 1 mm anteriorly into the cornea is harvested (Fig. 2C) and stored in a balanced salt solution (Fig. 2D). Two 10-0 vicryl sutures are used to close the donor sites. The grafts are transplanted to the diseased eye near the limbal edge at the 12 and 6 o’clock position. The grafts are secured with 10-0 nylon interrupted sutures (Fig. 2E).

Cultivated Limbal Epithelial Transplantation (CLET)

CLET starts by harvesting a 2x2 mm biopsy from the corneoscleral limbus (Fig. 3A). The collected tissue is grown either by placing the whole biopsy on an amniotic membrane in a liquid culture medium or in a suspension culture that is later seeded onto an amniotic membrane or culture dish. A fibrin gel carrier may be used to transfer the epithelial sheet to the ocular surface. This ex-vivo expansion takes between 10-21 days to complete depending on the method (Fig. 3B). Once the cultivated tissue is sufficient for transplantation, a peritomy and keratectomy remove the fibrovascular pannus from the diseased eye (Fig. 3C, 3D). The graft is placed with cultured epithelium facing anteriorly and secured with 10-0 vicryl or nylon sutures (Fig. 3E).

Living-Related Conjunctival Limbal Allograft (LR-CLAL) and Keratolimbal Allograft (KLAL)

Living-related conjunctival limbal allograft (LR-CLAL) is a procedure that is similar to CLAU (Fig. 2) except that the limbal tissue source is from a living relative rather than the patient’s contralateral eye. Keratolimbal allograft (KLAL) a similar procedure except the limbal stem cell source is a cadaver, and the harvested grafts are much larger (Fig. 4). For KLAL, the corneoscleral rims of both cadaveric donor eyes are trephined, similar to routine penetrating keratoplasty (Fig. 4B). Next, the rims are cut in two and trimmed, leaving 2 to 3 mm of the sclera. Corneal stroma and extra sclera are excised using lamellar dissection techniques.

The result is three 6-hour long allograft lenticules (Fig. 4C). Pathologic epithelium is removed from the patient’s eye in the same fashion as other techniques (Fig. 4A). The grafts are sutured to the limbus with two 10-0 nylon, and excess graft is trimmed, such that there is no overlap. Finally, the base of each graft is secured with tissue glue (Fig. 4D). For severe cases of the conjunctival and limbal disease, a combined KLAL and LR-CLAL or CLAU procedure referred to as the “Cincinnati procedure” combines the benefits of a large conjunctival graft produced by LR-CLAL or CLAU and a large limbal graft produced by KLAL. These procedures may treat bilateral LSCD, but require long-term systemic immunosuppression because the allogenic grafts are at risk of rejection.