GI bleeding scan uses 99mTc-RBCs and 99mTc-sulfur colloids.

There are three ways of erythrocyte labeling with technetium 99m with different labeling efficiency.

**In vivo method:**

Involves injecting 1 mg of stannous pyrophosphate followed by intravenous injection of 555-1, 110 MBq of 99m Tc-pertechnetate. Labeling efficiency ranges from 75 to 80%. It is not recommended but can be helpful in those patients who do not want to receive blood products.

**Modified in vivo method:**

Similar to in vivo method with the exception that it entails mixing a vile of blood with 555-1, 110 MBq of 99m Tc-pertechnetate, wait for 10 minutes and then injecting into the patient. Labeling efficiency is around 85 to 90%.

**In vitro method:**

This method involves drawing blood from the patient and added to a vile containing stannous pyrophosphate. After 5 minutes, sodium hypochlorite is added and then mixed with citrate buffer. 555-1, 110 MBq of 99m Tc-pertechnetate is admitted to the mixture and incubated and injected into the patient; this is a method of choice with labeling efficiency greater than 97%. This method uses a commercially available kit.

**Recommended radionuclide dosage**

Adults: 15-30 mCiChildren

**Image acquisition:**

After injecting the patient with radiolabeled erythrocytes, imaging is acquired using a gamma camera with a 128 x 128 matrix. Dynamic images are obtained usually at 10 to 20 seconds/frame. A dual-head gamma camera increases sensitivity for localization. The imaging duration is variable but usually lasts 1 to 4 over. Initial imaging of a minimum of 60 minutes is the recommendation if no bleeding is detected.