Given the relatively nonspecific physical exam findings and the known high incidence in particular patient populations, if pars defect is suspected, additional workup ought to include appropriate imaging studies. There is no universally accepted imaging standard for the diagnosis of pars defect. Given the high-risk population includes children and adolescents, close attention to radiation exposure is warranted. With that in mind, initial workup generally begins with AP/lateral/oblique plain radiographs of the lumbar spine. AP/lateral radiograph is sufficient to detect most pars defects, though estimates are that 20% require oblique views to appreciate the lesion.

On oblique plain radiographs, the common descriptive term for a fracture to the pars interarticularis is as the “collar” on the “Scottie dog.” (figure 1).

Plain radiographs can miss some lesions, especially acute injury. Other useful imaging modalities include CT, MRI, and bone scan. A bone scan is the most sensitive modality, and best detects early pars defects. This test should be utilized when there is high clinical suspicion for pars lesion, and initial imaging studies are equivocal. After plain radiographs, the imaging modality of choice is either MRI without contrast or CT scan without contrast. CT scan is the best imaging tool for determining fracture size and extent and is the most appropriate modality for follow-up assessment of healing.  CT has the downside of additional radiation exposure, which is particularly concerning in the pediatric & adolescent population. Similar to a bone scan, MRI can be useful for early detection of acute lesions by the presence of bone marrow edema on T2 weighted sequences. Additionally,  MRI has the benefit of no radiation exposure. MRI is somewhat limited, though, in its ability to adequately depict the cortical integrity of incomplete fractures.