EBUS is indicated in the following scenarios:

- EBUS-TBNA is used as a first-line test for the diagnosis and staging of lung cancer.

- EBUS-TBNA sampling of perihilar and mediastinal lymph nodes may be used to diagnose the etiology of mediastinal lymphadenopathy. This is usually sarcoidosis but less commonly other granulomatous lung diseases, including tuberculous lymphadenitis.

- EBUS-TBNA is recommended in the United States as an initial diagnostic test for lymphoma, but this has yet to be taken up globally and is not currently recommended in the United Kingdom.

- EBUS is used as an adjunct to interventional bronchoscopy to guide the delivery of treatments used in the palliative management of primary lung malignancy. These include tumor debulking by means of applying heat (diathermy, cautery, argon plasma coagulation, and laser therapy) or cold (cryotherapy), as well as guiding bronchial stent placement and stereotactic radiosurgery.

- Radial EBUS is used in the diagnosis of peripheral lung lesions. It utilizes a 360-degree probe that is passed through a fibreoptic bronchoscope’s working channel. Although it can be passed much further through the bronchial tree than a convex EBUS scope, it cannot give real-time needle visualization.

Careful patient selection for the procedure should be undertaken by clinicians themselves experienced in performing EBUS. Review of the clinical history and relevant pre-procedure investigations such as computed tomography (CT) and positron-electron tomography-computed tomography (PET-CT) is important as the lesion size and the nodal station may suggest to the operator that a different diagnostic test would be preferable. These include ultrasound-guided fine-needle aspiration, endoscopic ultrasound, mediastinoscopy, or VATS.