**Observation**

Asymptomatic small-sized tumors, as well as patients with cavernous sinus meningiomas, can be followed up with close observation annually or biennially. The follow-up should include serial imaging, usually with brain MRI.

**Surgery**

Symptomatic lesions and those with accelerated growth are primarily treated with maximum gross total surgical resection. It can provide a 90% of 5-year progression-free survival rate. The degree of surgical resection of the tumor is a significant factor for recurrence.

**Radiation**

- External beam radiotherapy or brachytherapy after surgical resection can be used in grade II and III meningiomas. External beam radiation could improve the overall survival and progression-free survival rates in patients with meningioma.

- Stereotactic radiosurgery (SRS) is another therapeutic method that can be used for patients who are unfit for surgery. SRS can be used for meningiomas of the skull base, recurrent or incompletely resected meningiomas. It can be given using various radio-surgical technologies. The use of SRS is not recommended in the settings of venous sinus occlusion or involvement, peritumoral edema, large-sized meningiomas, and tumors very adjacent to the brainstem or cranial nerves as they are associated with more adverse outcomes.

**Chemotherapy**

Adjuvant therapies might be required to reduce the recurrence rate in incompletely removed meningiomas and atypical or malignant meningiomas. The use of bevacizumab, a type of chemotherapy to target molecular alterations of vascular endothelial growth factor in patients with anaplastic meningiomas after surgical resection and radiotherapy, had shown successful results of tumor regression.