The endocannabinoid system is very complex, and research is still ongoing and necessary for a continued understanding of its function. Cannabinoids, whether endogenous or exogenous, act on specific cannabinoid binding receptors (CB), cannabinoid binding receptor 1 (CB1) and cannabinoid binding receptor 2 (CB2). CB1 is primarily centrally located but is also present in the periphery, while the opposite is true for CB2, which is primarily peripherally located but also found centrally. CB1 receptors are mainly involved in the central effects of cannabinoids, which include consequences on learning, memory cognition, emotion, movement, sensory perception, and nausea, as well as the psychoactive properties associated with cannabinoids.

CB2 receptors are located peripherally and are thought to affect inflammation and immune system regulation. Cannabinoid receptors are G-protein linked receptors that inhibit adenylyl cyclase and thereby cyclic AMP, which affects calcium channels and potassium channels, leading to overall decreased intracellular calcium and extracellular potassium concentrations. This subsequently leads to decreased neurotransmission. However, depending on the specific location of the CB and specific G-protein involved, stimulation of CB1 may result in the inhibition or stimulation of various neurotransmitters, including acetylcholine, L-glutamate, γ-aminobutyric acid, dopamine, norepinephrine, and 5-hydroxytryptamine. This neurotransmitter modulation may contribute to the central and peripheral effects observed in cannabinoid toxicity.  The physiological effects of synthetic cannabinoids may vary based on the specific molecule in play, as many synthetic cannabinoids are continually being produced and often contaminated with other products. Chemically, synthetic cannabinoids and traditional cannabinoids like THC are vastly different. As opposed to THC, which is a partial agonist at the CB1 receptor, synthetic cannabinoids are full agonists. They exhibit a markedly higher affinity for CB receptors. As such, the effects of synthetic cannabinoids can be much more potent than THC thus increasing the effects seen physiologically and toxicologically.