Parents may seek medical attention for a child with DRS due to abnormal head posture, pseudoptosis when the affected eye adducts, limitation of eye movement, and abnormal eye movements. Clinical features of DRS include:

- Abduction limitation – One of the prominent features of DRS is due to subnormal innervation of the LR. The amount of abduction limitation is disproportionately larger than the amount of primary position deviation. This is most likely due to an underlying adduction deficit present in varying amounts in DRS. This helps distinguish it from sixth nerve palsy, where the abduction limitation and primary position deviation are in proportion to each other.

- Abnormal head posture (AHP) – Commonly seen in unilateral cases, the AHP aims to center, enlarge and maintain binocular single vision and compensate for the duction deficit. The head turn will be toward the side of the affected eye in esotropic DRS and away from the affected eye in exotropic DRS.

- Globe retraction - A characteristic feature of DRS and is usually accompanied by a narrowing of the palpebral fissure on adduction. According to Jampolsky, in some patients, globe retraction is replaced by retraction escapes or equivalents. Examples are 1) knife-edge LR/globe slip with upshoot or downshoot, 2) deficient inward rotation in opposite gaze, and 3) exotropic DRS with the “splits.”

- Upshoots and downshoots - As aforementioned, shoots may be mechanical or innervational. While mechanical shoots are characterized by a sudden abrupt movement following a small vertical movement in adduction, innervational shoots are characterized by gradual elevation or depression of the eye as it adducts. Mechanical shoots usually do not have a primary gaze vertical tropia, whereas innervational shoots may be associated with vertical tropia in the primary position.

- Alphabet patterns – Alphabet patterns are due to the co-contraction of the vertical and lateral recti when the patient is looking toward the affected field of gaze. V pattern is the most common, while A and no pattern are found less frequently.

- Strabismus – Last but not least, patients of DRS may present with esotropia, orthotropia, or exotropia. This is discussed further in subsequent sections.