As alluded to earlier, one of the main principles of the management of Rh incompatibility is the prevention of maternal sensitization. Rh D immunoglobulin (RhIg) has made a significant impact on preventing Rh disease. RhIg consists of anti-Rh D antibodies that target Rh-positive erythrocytes to prevent maternal sensitization. It has reduced the rate of alloimmunization from 16% to less than 1%. Furthermore, RhIg immunoprophylaxis has decreased the prevalence of HDN attributed to anti-D antibodies to less than 1%.

If a mother has the potential to have Rh incompatibility during pregnancy, prophylactic RhIg should be administered to unsensitized Rh-negative women at 28 weeks gestation. If the neonate is found to be Rh-positive after delivery, those same unsensitized Rh-negative women should be given RhIg within 72 hours of delivery. The suggested RhIg dose in the United States is 300 mcg, which should be sufficient in covering up to 15 mL of Rh-positive erythrocytes (i.e., 30 mL of whole fetal blood). In addition,****the American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists (ACOG) recommends that all Rh-negative women giving birth to Rh-positive infants should initially undergo a qualitative screening test (rosette assay) and if indicated proceed with quantitative testing (KB test) to determine the correct number of doses of immune globulin required.

The same principle of RhIg immunoprophylaxis can be applied to Rh-negative mothers who have had high-risk events that could have potentially led to fetomaternal hemorrhage as previously discussed. The recommendations of ACOG for the dosing of RhIg vary depending on the scenario of potential fetomaternal hemorrhage. Smaller doses are considered for events that occur earlier in the pregnancy since the total fetal-placental blood volume is 3 mL (1.5 mL of fetal erythrocytes) at 12 weeks; therefore, at least 50 mcg should be considered for first-trimester events and 300 mcg if after 12 weeks.