Epidural steroid injections may be classified by location (cervical, thoracic, or lumbar) and by the path of the needle (interlaminar, transforaminal, or caudal). In this discussion, we will review the different techniques for interlaminar (between the lamina), transforaminal (across the foramen), and caudal (via the sacrum) epidural steroid injections.

**Interlaminar Epidural Steroid Injection (medial approach)**

With the patient lying prepped and in a prone position, the interlaminar space between two contiguous vertebrae is identified via an anteroposterior (AP) view on fluoroscopic x-ray. Next, the skin and underlying tissue are injected with local anesthetic (e.g., lidocaine or bupivacaine). Using a midline or paramedian approach between the spinous processes, an epidural spinal needle is inserted into the intended injection site. From superficial to deep, the needle penetrates the skin, subcutaneous tissue, supraspinous ligament (median approach) or paraspinal muscles (paramedian approach), and the ligamentum flavum. A lateral view with the fluoroscopic x-ray is then obtained to confirm the position of the needle. The needle is then advanced using a loss of resistance syringe filled with 1ml of air or normal saline. As the needle passes the ligamentum flavum and enters the posterior epidural space, a sudden loss of resistance will occur allowing the syringe to inject a minimal amount of air or normal saline into epidural space due to the change in pressure. The loss of resistance syringe is then replaced with a syringe filled with the contrast solution, which is then injected to confirm placement of the needle in the epidural space. Once spread of contrast is confirmed in AP and lateral views, steroid (e.g., methylprednisolone, triamcinolone, betamethasone or dexamethasone) with or without local anesthetic is injected into epidural space. Finally, the needle is then withdrawn, and pressure is maintained at the injection site to prevent bleeding.

**Transforaminal Epidural Steroid Injection (lateral approach)**

With the patient lying prepped and in a prone position, the lateral foraminal space between two contiguous vertebrae is identified via an oblique view on fluoroscopic x-ray. This view displays the classic “Scottie dog,” an anatomical landmark used for needle guidance. Once proper injection site is identified, the skin and underlying tissue are injected with local anesthetic (e.g., lidocaine or bupivacaine). An epidural spinal needle is then inserted and directed under the pedicle of the superior vertebrae. A lateral view on x-ray is obtained to determine needle depth and to prevent damage to the nerve root. The needle is then advanced until it reaches the outer intervertebral foramen. Contrast injection confirms needle position in both lateral and AP views displaying epidural spread. Steroid (e.g., dexamethasone) with or without local anesthetic is then injected into the epidural space. Finally, the needle is withdrawn, and pressure is maintained at the injection site to prevent bleeding.

**Caudal Epidural Steroid Injection**

With the patient lying prepped and in a prone position, the sacral hiatus is identified via an AP view on fluoroscopic x-ray. Once proper injection site is identified, the skin and underlying tissue are injected with local anesthetic (e.g., lidocaine or bupivacaine). An epidural spinal needle is then inserted and directed through the sacral hiatus. A lateral view on x-ray is obtained to determine needle depth. Needle placement below the S2-3 intervertebral disc space will decrease the risk of dural puncture. Contrast injection confirms needle position in both lateral and AP views displaying epidural spread. The steroid is then injected into the epidural space. Finally, the needle is withdrawn, and pressure is maintained at the injection site to prevent bleeding.