Job Basedow syndrome is a rare disorder, but it can present suddenly in both inpatients and outpatients who receive agents containing iodide. It can lead to thyroid storm and serious cardiac complications, including arrhythmias and heart failure; thus, its diagnosis and management require an interprofessional team approach.

Medical providers looking into ordering radiologic imaging with ICM should perform a thorough patient history before ordering the test. Any prior history of thyroid or renal disease should be considered seriously, as these conditions increase the risk for iodine-induced hyperthyroidism. If the imaging is still deemed to be worth the risk, the ordering clinicians should communicate their concerns with the radiology department as well as the primary clinical team so that the patient can be watched closely for adverse reactions during and following the imaging procedure. Additionally, if iodine-induced hyperthyroidism develops, this should be clearly stated in the patient's medical record to help prepare appropriate treatment and prevent similar complications in the future whenever ICM use is considered necessary.

In our era and more frequently in recent years, a significant number of people consume all types of supplements, including isolated iodide and other substances that might contain iodine, so there is always the potential risk of the Jod Basedow reaction. Hence, pharmacists, nurse practitioners, and primary care providers should educate their patients on the risks associated with supplements and what to do when symptoms appear.

Acute symptoms of Jod Basedow syndrome usually require management in the emergency department, and in that case, the triage nurses should be familiar with this endocrine emergency and communicate their findings to the healthcare team. Patients need to be quickly evaluated, admitted, resuscitated, stabilized, and have their symptoms treated by the interprofessional team that should include the emergency department physician, an endocrinologist, and a pharmacist.

If hyperthyroid symptoms become permanent, the patient may benefit from a specialized endocrinology consultation. Rare complications, such as atrial fibrillation and heart failure, may need to be managed by cardiology. Obstetrics and pediatrics teams should be involved in cases of gestational exposure to ICM as well as the presentation of the syndrome in younger children and teenagers.

**Outcomes**

Because the condition is rare, long-term outcomes remain unknown. However, the patients who receive appropriate treatment usually have very good outcomes. Occasionally, some patients may need long-term treatment with antithyroid drugs and beta-blockers.

The interprofessional healthcare team must function to treat iodine-induced hyperthyroidism and engage actively in prophylaxis. Managing clinicians must carefully weigh the benefits versus the risks of iodine contrast diagnostic procedures. They will also need to coordinate the patient's care with specialists, as listed above, if necessary. Nursing staff must perform a thorough medication and supplement history to discern if a potential problem exists and communicate these findings to the managing clinician. They should also coordinate this type of activity with a pharmacist. If medication therapy is needed (e.g., beta-blockers or methimazole), the pharmacist should perform medication reconciliation and report any issues to the other healthcare team members. Nursing staff can also monitor for adverse effects or worsening of the condition. Only through this type of interprofessional collaboration can patient outcomes be driven to the most successful possible results. [Level 5]