It is important to remember that the adequacy of oxygen delivery to maintain the organ function is more relevant than the absolute level of hypoxemia. The strategies aimed at improving refractory hypoxemia include lung recruiting ventilatory maneuvers to decrease further damage to the collapsed alveoli while increasing the recruitment of remaining unaffected alveoli to improve gas exchange. Common recruitment strategies include increasing PEEP to 30 to 50 cm H2O for 20 to 30 seconds or/and sustaining high pressure with a PEEP of 25 to 30 cm H2O to reach peak inspiratory airway pressure of 40 to 45 cm H2O for 2 minutes. Staircase recruitment maneuvers include increasing PEEP from baseline to 20, 30, and 40 cm H2O every 2 minutes and then decreasing at 3-minute intervals slowly to identify the PEEP level that is needed to maintain adequate oxygenation is an alternative approach.

A single recruitment maneuver might not be enough, although it can be repeated if a response is observed with the first one. The optimal timing and frequency of recruitment maneuvers are also unknown. Though recruitment maneuvers attempt to improve gas exchange by increasing the amount of aerated lung tissue, they may expose regions of healthy lung tissue to increased pressure and the risk of overdistention and sometimes cause hypotension and hypoxemia. Sometimes the role of recruitment maneuvers might be limited just as a bridging option to rescue therapy to treat life-threatening hypoxemia.

Different ventilator modes such as pressure-controlled ventilation, inverse ratio ventilation, high-frequency oscillatory ventilation, high-frequency percussive ventilation, and airway pressure release ventilation have been proposed but no evidence that one mode of ventilation is better than the other. If hypoxemia persists despite the application of lung-protective ventilation with low tidal volume ventilation and recruitment maneuvers with different ventilator strategies, then the following additional therapies can be considered. Therapeutic options include prone positioning, use of pulmonary vasodilators such as nitric oxide and prostacyclins, neuromuscular blockade to reduce patient-ventilatory dyssynchrony, corticosteroid therapy, conservative fluid management, maintaining negative fluid balance, and ECMO. There are no studies so far comparing the efficacy of one therapy over the other.

Neuromuscular blocking agents (NMBAs) improve patient-ventilator synchrony by eliminating the inspiratory and expiratory efforts of patients leading to more uniform lung recruitment and improved gas exchange and systemic oxygenation. Meta-analysis comparing all the randomized controlled trials of adults with ARDS treated with NMBAs demonstrated lower mortality and fewer days of mechanical ventilation and lower episodes of barotrauma.

A systematic review and network meta-analysis examined different interventions in patients with moderate to severe ARDS who were already on low tidal volume ventilation and found out that only prone positioning and ECMO were associated with lower 28-day mortality.

Both the prone positioning and neuromuscular blockade have shown a reduction in the harmful effects of mechanical ventilation with improvement in oxygenation when evaluated separately in different studies if combined could have a synergistic effect in improving the oxygenation.

ECMO or extracorporeal life support (ECLS) is an advanced therapy that utilizes prolonged cardiopulmonary bypass to treat patients in acute respiratory failure with refractory hypoxemia. ECMO is recommended as a last resort rescue therapy for severe hypoxemia when PaO2/FiO2 <50 with FiO2 of 100% or OI>40 who have failed or not suitable for prone ventilation, high PEEP/recruitment strategies, inhaled pulmonary vasodilators, and neuromuscular blockade. ECMO is similar in principle to cardiac bypass for open-heart surgery and is performed at a patient's bedside in the intensive care units, which can run for prolonged periods sometimes several weeks. The benefit of ECMO in the ARDS-refractory hypoxemia population is that the lung-protective ventilatory setting can be continued while the patient is adequately oxygenated by the ECMO support. The initial applications of ECMO in patients with severe hypoxemia did not show any benefit, and later studies found a significant decrease in mortality ranging between 21% and 50%. A systematic review and meta-analysis described a 60-day mortality rate of only 34% in the patients with severe refractory hypoxemia treated with ECMO compared to 47% in the group managed by conventional therapies.

ECMO support can be performed in two manners venovenous (VV) or venoarterial (VA). VV ECMO can be used to treat patients in severe respiratory failure with severe hypoxemia, provided they have adequate heart function. In contrast, VA ECMO provides support for patients with severe respiratory and cardiac failure. Here we will be discussing VV ECMO as a rescue for patients with refractory hypoxemia from severe acute respiratory failure. During VV ECMO blood is extracted from the vena cava or right atrium and returned to the right atrium. The patient will be anticoagulated with intravenous heparin before the cannulae are inserted. The drainage venous cannulae are usually placed with the tip near the junction of vena cava and right atrium and the infusion or return cannula in the right internal jugular vein. The following cannulation and connecting to the ECMO circuit where all the venous blood from the patient will go through an oxygenator and carbon dioxide removed and returned to the patient's return cannula using a centrifugal pump.

Then the blood flow will be increased to achieve acceptable respiratory parameters and maintained at that rate. There will be continuous venous oximetry measuring the oxyhemoglobin saturation of blood in the venous limb, which assists for frequent assessment and adjustments. Target venous oxyhemoglobin saturation should be 20% to 25% lower than the arterial saturation. Factors that determine the oxygen saturation during VV ECMO include pump flow, degree of recirculation, hemoglobin concentration, residual lung function, and patient's systemic venous return and its oxygen saturation**.******Anticoagulation is maintained during ECMO, with a continuous infusion of heparin titrated to an activated clotting time of 180 to 210 seconds. Platelets are consumed heavily during ECMO due to activation by exposure to foreign body i.e., circuit and might need frequent platelet transfusions. In VV ECMO, the blood returned to the patient from the ECMO circuit will still traverse the pulmonary vascular bed, and so moderate ventilator settings must be maintained to provide adequate oxygenation as supposed to VA ECMO where the ventilator settings can be decreased to minimal settings.

If hypoxemia persists despite ECMO initiation, strategies to increase the oxygen saturations include increasing ECMO blood flow, improve oxygen-carrying capacity in the blood by increasing hemoglobin concentration and cardiac output, reduce oxygen consumption by using sedation, neuromuscular blockade and therapeutic hypothermia and finally importantly reducing recirculation. Recirculation occurs when well-oxygenated blood from the return cannula gets "sucked in" by the venous drainage cannula rather than going through the pulmonary circulation. Maximum flow rates are usually needed to optimize oxygen delivery in patients on VV ECMO contrast to VA ECMO.

Weaning from ECMO can be initiated when improvement on chest X-ray, lung compliance, and arterial oxyhemoglobin concentration is noted. ECMO trials are done by removing all the countercurrent sweep gas through the oxygenator but keeping blood flow constant with no gas exchange. This will be done for several hours, where the patient's ventilator settings are adjusted to maintain oxygenation and ventilation off ECMO. Absolute contraindications for ECMO rescue therapy include a preexisting condition not compatible with recovery (end-stage malignancy, severe neurological injury), and some of the relative contraindications include uncontrollable bleeding and very poor prognosis of the primary condition.