Neurokinin-1 (NK-1) receptor antagonists are a class of antiemetic drugs that possess unique anxiolytic, antidepressant, and antiemetic properties. The discovery of neurokinin-1 (NK-1) receptor blockers was crucial in preventing emesis associated with cancer chemotherapy.

The neurokinin-1 receptor inhibitor class is one of the seven classes of drugs used to suppress nausea and vomiting in patients associated with cancer chemotherapy. The classes of antiemetic drugs are serotonin (5-HT) receptor antagonists, dopamine (D) receptor antagonists, histamine (H) receptor antagonists, neurokinin-1 receptor (NK-1) antagonists, antimuscarinics, cannabinoids, and corticosteroids. Patients’ development of nausea, vomiting, and vertigo may be due to pregnancy, during cancer chemotherapy, and motion sickness in a car, boat, or ship cruise. Some examples of the neurokinin-1 receptor inhibitors are aprepitant, rolapitant, casopitant, netupitant, maropitant, and fosaprepitant. A new, highly selective NK-1 receptor antagonist, rolapitant, has an exceptionally long plasma half-life, T1/2 (180 hours), and it was FDA approved in September 2015 for the prevention of chemotherapy-induced delayed emesis.

**Clinical Uses of Neurokinin-1 Receptor Antagonists**

Neurokinin-1 receptor (NK-1) antagonists such as aprepitant, rolapitant, casopitant, fosaprepitant, netupitant, and maropitant are effective to treat postsurgical nausea and vomiting and cancer chemotherapy-induced nausea and vomiting. Fosaprepitant administration is via an intravenous (IV) formulation that is converted within 30 minutes to aprepitant after infusion. Aprepitant is available for administration orally or IV in multiple strengths. There is a combination of netupitant/palonosetron in an oral formulation. Casopitant is an investigational medication in development. Maropitant is an antiemetic for use in dogs and cats in the United States.

**Off-Label Uses of Neurokinin-1 Receptor Antagonists**

There are currently no off-label uses for neurokinin-1 receptor antagonists reported.