History taking plays a major role in the diagnosis of pancreatic abscess. A pancreatic abscess usually occurs in patients with a history of pancreatitis or in patients prone to develop pancreatitis. Patients with pancreatitis usually present with abdominal pain, located in the epigastric region radiating to the back, that gets worse after consumption of a meal. They may present with nausea and vomiting as well. Keeping in mind the different causes of pancreatitis will guide the history.

Causes of pancreatitis include:

- Idiopathic

- Gallstones

- Ethanol

- Trauma

- Steroids

- Mumps

- Autoimmune pancreatitis

- Hypercalcemia

- Hypertrygliceredemia

- Post-ERCP (endoscopic retrograde cholangiopancreatography)

- Medications (ACE inhibitors, macrolides, mesalamine, fibrates, etc.)

Persistent fevers, worsening abdominal pain, and failure to improve despite appropriate initial management may all be suggestive of superimposed infection of the pancreas. Infection should be suspected in patients who do not improve after 7 to 10 days of hospitalization and supportive care, and in those who rapidly deteriorate. Although the development of systemic inflammatory response syndrome can be attributed to pancreatitis itself, a superimposed infection should be suspected.

Physical examination findings in patients with pancreatic infections generally mimic the symptoms of acute pancreatitis but are usually more severe and often occur after 7 to 10 days of hospitalization. Abdominal pain is located in the mid-epigastric region. An associated mass may or may not be palpable. In severe pancreatitis, patients are often dehydrated on presentation. Hypotension and hypoxia may indicate progression to shock. Fevers can result from underlying infection but also occur in the setting of ongoing pancreatic inflammation.