**Acute Mesenteric Ischemia**

Due to high mortality rates in patients with AMI, it is essential for urgent medical treatment. Initial treatments include maintenance of adequate oxygen saturation, hemodynamic stability, and correction of electrolyte abnormalities. Typically, 2 to 4 units of blood products should be made available. Vasopressors should be avoided. Broad-spectrum antibiotic therapy with coverage of colonic flora is the recommended intervention to prevent and treat sepsis. Bladder catheterization, nasogastric tube decompression, correction of acid/base abnormalities, and intravenous fluid administration are implemented preoperatively. The patient's pain should be controlled, preferably by using parenteral opioids.

**Endovascular Intervention Versus Surgical**

The data indicate that in patients with acute mesenteric arterial occlusion, an endovascular intervention can be as effective as traditional surgical.

****Endovascular Intervention****

- 
**Pharmacologic or Mechanical Thrombectomy**

(1) Mechanical thrombectomy

Access to SMA can is possible through the femoral or brachial artery (antegrade approach). Despite the antegrade approach, in a retrograde approach, the device exposed SMA distal to the obstruction at the time of laparotomy.

(2) Catheter-directed thrombolysis

Catheter-directed thrombolysis is indicated in patients with distal mesenteric embolization or incomplete aspiration embolectomy.

- 
**Balloon Angioplasty**

Mesenteric artery angioplasty is usually followed by stenting, which may be appropriate in select patients. Based on device insertion, it can be classified in 2 fashions.

**2-Surgical**

- 
**Abdominal Exploration and Damage Control**

Regardless of the etiology of intestinal ischemia, in patients suspected of intestinal infarction or perforation based on clinical, radiographic, or laboratory tests, exploratory laparotomy should not be delayed.

-  **Revascularization**

(1) Embolectomy

Open superior mesenteric artery embolectomy is a good option in patients with indications for open surgical intervention. After midline abdominal incision, the proximal superior mesenteric artery can be visible and palpable. Then with a transverse arteriotomy, the clot can be extracted by a Fogarty embolectomy catheter.

(2) Mesenteric bypass

Although SMA revascularization can be performed in several ways, superior mesenteric artery bypass is the common method in acute mesenteric arterial occlusion. Mesenteric bypass perfuses the blood from inflow vessel (such as an iliac artery, aorta, etc.) to the distal of occlusion lesion.

A second-look laparotomy is needed for most patients after mesenteric revascularization for acute mesenteric arterial occlusion to reevaluate the bowel 24 to 48 hours after the initial operation.

**NOMI or Colonic Ischemia**

Usually, the treatment of NOMI or colonic ischemia focuses on removing insulting factors (vasoconstrictive medications), hemodynamic support and monitoring, treating the underlying cause (sepsis, heart failure), and the administration of intra-arterial vasodilation medications. However, selected patients may require exploratory laparotomy. The colonic ischemia divided into three groups: mild, moderate, and severe ischemia according to the hemodynamic parameters, presence of risk factors, laboratory test results, radiological and colonoscopic findings to guide the treatment.