When a Lisfranc injury is suspected, anteroposterior, 30-degree oblique and lateral weight-bearing radiographs should initially be obtained. Compliance with weight-bearing films is as difficult as it is essential. Both the patient and radiography technician should be educated on the importance. While more obvious in boney injuries, in purely ligamentous injuries, an axial force during the radiograph is needed to illustrate the injury better. Radiographic findings of a Lisfranc injury or dislocation typically show misalignment of the lateral margin of the first metatarsal base with the lateral edge of the medial cuneiform, misalignment of the medial aspect of the second metatarsal base with the medial edge of the middle cuneiform, and/or small avulsion fragments a one of metatarsal or cuneiform bones. In these instances, the finding of avulsion fractures are commonly referred to as a “fleck sign” and suggest a Lisfranc injury. Displacement of more than 2 mm between the first and second metatarsal bases is considered a positive radiographic finding and is strongly suggestive of a Lisfranc injury as well. On oblique view radiographs, the medial aspect of the cuboid should line up with the medial aspect of the fourth metatarsal base. The dorsal cortex of the first metatarsal and medial cuneiform should be aligned on the lateral weight-bearing radiographs.

Whenever in doubt a CT scan is more diagnostic as they may reveal small avulsion fractures that may be otherwise missed. CT scan may also be helpful for surgical planning. MRI may be helpful in evaluating the extent of the ligamentous injury.