Stroke centers were born from a consensus statement in the Journal of the American Medical Association in 2000. The Brain Attack Coalition (BAC) was a coalition of professional stroke societies and regulatory agencies that helped craft this important landmark consensus in stroke care. As treatment has evolved, further consensus statements have been published describing both the need for and capabilities of different levels of stroke centers and their corresponding levels of treatment. The objective of these centers is to improve the quality and organization of acute stroke care., Certifying organizations have the authority to reward designated facilities for following the evidence-based guidelines and having the ability to have basic and advanced levels of care. Some of these organizations include The Joint Commission (TJC), the Healthcare Facilities Accreditation Program (HFAP), and DNV GL Healthcare. Each agency has different outcome measures including healthcare team experience, patient volume, research, and survey frequency.

**Stroke Center Classification**

The most basic stroke center certification level is the acute stroke-ready hospital (ASRH). These hospitals perform appropriate clinical rapid stroke assessment, stabilization, and protocols for safe administration of tPA. They tend to be in areas without nearby primary stroke centers. After administration and stabilization, they are transferred to a higher-level stroke center for admission and advanced workup, as needed. ASRHs increase the availability of initial stroke care in areas with fewer resources and allow patients to be rapidly integrated into the greater stroke system.

The third level of centers is called thrombectomy capable stroke centers (TSC), which have facilities that have an on-call neurovascular and neuro-interventional team that is able to provide 24/7 care to AIS and can monitor for complications of MT in a dedicated neurological ICU. First certified by TJC in 2018, these facilities are PSCs that are able to perform mechanical thrombectomy without all the requirements to be a comprehensive center. These centers have to perform a minimum of mechanical thrombectomies per year. The development of TSCs is an example of rapid adaptation within a larger and more defined stroke center framework.

The comprehensive stroke center (CSC) is the highest level of stroke care with a comprehensive team of vascular neurologists, neurosurgeons, vascular surgeons who perform cutting edge acute chemical treatments with tPA for AIS with stringent time-saving protocols related to administration and door-needle times for MT, advanced imaging (e.g. CT perfusion, magnetic resonance imaging with diffusion, magnetic resonance angiography, etc), and other more complex measures making it an all-in-one shop for acute stroke patients. Collaboration between many departments and access to the most advanced instrumentation is key to achieve this level.