No curative treatment options are currently available for this disease—the focus in the enhancement of the quality of life by focusing on symptom management. Symptomatic supportive care is needed to address to neurocognitive and neuropsychiatric disturbances, seizures, dystonias, spasticity, feeding problems, and constipation.

**Symptomatic Treatment**

- Seizures - broad spectrum anti-epileptics such as levetiracetam, zonisamide, lacosamide, and valproic acid

- Spasticity - baclofen, cyclobenzaprine, botox toxin A

- Dystonia - botox toxin A

- Dysautonomia (drooling, orthostasis) - anticholinergic therapy, oral midodrine or fludrocortisone,

- Pain - NSAIDs, gabapentin, pregabalin, serotonin-norepinephrine reuptake inhibitors (SNRIs), etc

- Nutrition and GI issues - percutaneous feeding tubes, famotidine or pantoprazole, bowel regimen (docusate, senna)

- Insomnia/mood issues - SNRI such as mirtazapine, tricyclic anti-depressants (TCAs), serotonin reuptake inhibitors (SSRI), etc

- Arthralgias/myalgias, mobility, functional impairments in activities of daily living - physical, occupational, cognitive, and gait therapy

**Genetic Counseling**

MLD is inherited in an autosomal recessive manner. At conception, each sib of an affected individual has a 25% chance of being affected, a 50% chance of being an asymptomatic carrier, and a 25% chance of being unaffected and not a carrier. Carrier testing of at-risk family members and prenatal testing for a pregnancy at increased risk are possible if both ARSA pathogenic variants have been identified in an affected family member.

**Experimental and emerging therapies:**

- **A combination of gene therapy and hematopoietic stem cell transplantation (HSCT)**- Offers the most promise at this time. The benefits may be more apparent in the asymptomatic or early symptomatic juvenile-onset disease. HSCT is not recommended for individuals with symptomatic, late-infantile form. Studies show that patients with juvenile disease may have a 5-year survival of approximately 59%. However, many patients decline post-transplant (based on measures such as imaging, gross motor function, cognitive skills, nerve conduction velocities, and other metrics). Therefore, the neurocognitive function may be stabilized by bone marrow transplantation; however, there is still a progressive loss of the motor function. In late juvenile and adult-onset forms, bone marrow transplantation may slow the disease progression.
- **Phase I/II clinical trial gene therapy (using retroviral vector technology) plus autologous hematopoietic stem cell transplantation: A**study of asymptomatic late-onset infantile disease, juvenile disease, and early-onset juvenile disease that showed delayed onset of MRI abnormalities and recovery of some gross motor function and cognition.

- **Gene therapy, enzyme replacement, and small molecule therapy**(e.g., substrate reduction and chaperone therapies)

Hence, preliminary evidence suggests that gene therapy and hematopoietic stem cell transplantation combined with gene therapy are promising treatment options.