The main indication for leukotriene receptor antagonists is in treating chronic asthma. Leukotrienes are synthesized from arachidonic acid by the action of 5-lipoxygenase in many inflammatory cells in the airways.

There are two groups of leukotrienes: one with and the other without amino acid moieties.

Asthma is the most common chronic lung disease characterized by reversible bronchoconstriction, inflammation, and airway remodeling that results in hyperresponsiveness. Sympathomimetic agents such as beta-adrenergic receptor agonists are the therapeutic choice for treating acute bronchoconstriction. They activate beta two adrenergic receptors and relax airway smooth muscle cells. Short-acting beta2-selective agonists include albuterol, levalbuterol, terbutaline, metaproterenol, and pirbuterol. They sustain bronchodilation for 3-4 hours. Long-acting beta2-selective agonists with 12-hour durations of action include salmeterol and formoterol. Ultra-long-acting beta-agonists such as indacaterol, olodaterol, and vilanterol patients should take bambuterol only once a day. Because beta-agonists do not inhibit inflammatory responses, they do not have a role as monotherapy for controlling persistent asthma. They are frequently a second agent added to inhaled corticosteroids.

Based on the inflammatory mechanism of asthma, several pharmacological agents with different modes of action have undergone development to treat this endotype of asthma. Exposure to allergen stimulates IgE synthesis driven by CD4+ T helper type 2 cells. The IgE antibodies bind to their receptors on the tissue mast cells and blood basophils.

Advances in understanding the molecular heterogeneity of asthma have revealed the importance of type 2 immune response mediated by T helper type 2 cells in the pathology of eosinophilic asthma.