Most arthropod bites and stings can are manageable with simple supportive care measures consisting of local wound care by cleaning the area with soap and water, updating tetanus status as needed, applying ice compresses, elevating the area if there is edema present, and treating pain with acetaminophen or NSAIDs. Pruritus is one of the most common manifestations of bites and stings and can be treated with calamine lotion or intermediate potency topical corticosteroids.  For moderate or severe pruritus, a short course of systemic corticosteroids and oral antihistamines, including both H1 and H2 blockers, are often beneficial. If a secondary infection is present, treatment should initiate with appropriate antibiotics.

Anaphylaxis must be managed immediately with intramuscular epinephrine, which may be repeated every 5 to 15 minutes. Adjunctive treatments such as systemic corticosteroids, albuterol, and antihistamines are often utilized but should never delay the administration of epinephrine. Antivenom is available for some arthropod envenomations but should be administered only after consultation with a poison control center. Poison control centers are staffed 24-hours a day and can be reached at 1-800-222-1222.

Another important consideration in the management of arthropod bites and stings is to evaluate for vector-borne diseases and administer appropriate antimicrobial therapy when indicated.

**Prevention of Arthropod Bites and Stings**

The most important step towards reducing the clinical impacts of arthropod bites and stings is to prevent them from occurring in the first place. Prevention is especially critical in reducing a patient's likelihood of contracting serious, and sometimes, life-threatening vector-borne diseases.

Most available methods focus on the prevention of bites from mosquitoes and ticks, which transmit the vast majority of vector-borne pathogens to humans. The cornerstone of prevention efforts involves the use of effective insect repellents which can significantly reduce the likelihood of bites from mosquitoes and ticks but have no effect on other arthropods such as bees, spiders, fleas, ants, scorpions, and lice. DEET (N, N-diethyl-meta-toluamide) is the most well studied, and most effective, broad-spectrum repellent against biting arthropods. The World Health Organization and the CDC recognize DEET as the gold standard insect repellent and is the agent against which other repellents are measured.

Removal of ticks within 24 hours of their attachment may also decrease the risk of tick-borne diseases. Thus, the recommendation is for daily checks for any attached ticks when traveling in tick-endemic habitats.