The pathophysiology of encapsulating peritoneal sclerosis is multifactorial and not fully understood. Long-term peritoneal dialysis is a significant risk factor, and patients that require treatment will experience adverse cellular changes to the peritoneal membrane due to exposure to bioincompatible peritoneal dialysis fluids. Approximately 50 to 80% of all patients on peritoneal dialysis will experience progressive sclerosis of the peritoneal membrane within one to two years of initiating treatment. The chemical composition of the solutions used in peritoneal dialysis causes oxidative stress, which damages the peritoneal membrane. The acidic pH, elevated osmolarity, and increased glucose concentration cause fibrosis, vasculopathy, and loss of peritoneal ultrafiltration.

Peritoneal dialysis solutions undergo heat sterilization processes which eventually form glucose degradation products. Glucose degradation products and the increased glucose concentration are then exposed to the peritoneal membrane when the fluid is used in dialysis. Glucose degradation products then undergo another chemical reaction, forming irreversible reactive molecules known as advanced glycation end products. The advance glycation end products slowly accumulate in the peritoneal membrane after multiple rounds of dialysis that can cause peritoneal cell injury via several mechanisms. Advanced glycation end products can cause morphological changes to intracellular proteins and modify the existing structure of extracellular matrix components and receptors within peritoneal cells. Lastly, advanced glycation end products can modify proteins tightly binding to specific multi-ligand transmembrane receptors on endothelial cells and macrophages. This adverse binding can activate free radicals, pro-inflammatory cytokines, and growth factors like vascular endothelial growth factors that can lead to abnormal transcription of DNA and subsequent apoptosis. This binding can further upgrade the production of additional advanced glycation end products, potentially leading to further damage.

The increased glucose-oxidation metabolism is also how glycation end products and advanced glycation end products trigger the creation of reactive oxidative species. When the fluid, high in glucose concentration, enters the peritoneal cells, it increases glucose catabolism, leading to an overproduction of electron donors to compensate. The overproduction can eventually overwhelm the cell's capacity to neutralize the reactive oxidative species, leading to a higher formation of reactive oxidative species. These reactive oxidative species lead to an increase in fibrinogenesis and endothelial permeability. Even peritoneal fluids which have a significant reduction in glucose degradation products and glucose with a neutral pH can have the slow progressive development of reactive oxidative specifies that subsequently form fibrosis that later becomes sclerotic.

Peritonitis can also be a major risk factor for EPS, particularly Staphylococcus aureus, Pseudomonas, Mycobacterium tuberculosis, and fungal infections. Inflammation that occurs in the setting of peritonitis can accelerate the peritoneal transformation process and form fibrosis. One study found that peritoneal inflammation was common after dialysis catheter removal for refractory bacterial peritonitis, and these patients had a 31% likelihood of developing EPS with a mortality rate of 36%.