**Management strategies**

- Surgery as a primary option

- Surgery as a secondary option after failed initial non-operative management

- Surgery involving the C1 level, with the main indication being a concomitant cervical spine fracture

- Non-operative strategy.

The indication for surgery is mostly dictated by the concomitant subaxial cervical injuries.****

Gehweiler type 1, type 2, 3b, or type 5 are stable and managed non-surgically with the Minerva cast/Halo brace or collar for an average period of 8.5 weeks.

Progressive diastasis at the fracture segment, as well as articular subluxation due to the lengthening of the transverse ligament (TAL), can occur.****

To distinguish between stable and unstable type 3 injuries, it is necessary to evaluate the integrity of the transverse atlantal ligament (TAL) with magnetic resonance imaging.

Unstable atlas fractures (type 3b) with a moderately dislocated ligamentous bony avulsion of the TAL and sagittal split type 4 fractures may be treated by atlas osteosynthesis only.

C1 and subaxial instrumentations can be done through:

- Lateral mass

- C2 pars screw (less risk of vertebral injury)

- Transarticular (Magerl)

- Transpedicular/Pars(Harms and Goel)

- Translaminar screws placements

C1 lateral mass-C2 translaminar and C1 lateral mass-C2/3 transarticular (C1LM-C2TL and C1LM-C2/3TACL) fixation resulted in satisfactory atlantoaxial stabilization compared with C1LM-C2 pedicular screw (Goel-Harms technique) are not feasible due to anatomical constraints.

Sectioning or neurectomy of the C2 root provides better as well as minimizes operative time and blood. The subsequent occipital numbness has not been shown to significantly hinder the quality of life.

The key anatomic landmark for C1 lateral mass screw placement:

- Harms - at the inferior border of the posterior arch of C1 and the midpoint of the C1 lateral mass.

- Goel - at the center of the posterior surface of the lateral mass, 1 to 2 mm cranial to the C1-C2 facet.

The screws are angled approximately 15 degrees medially and approximately 30 degrees cranially in Goel’s method. Harms method requires no angulation.****

Navigation facilitates accuracy and minimizes radiation exposure. However, the navigation system is costly; there is a learning curve associated with the setup and utilization.

CT evaluation of the accuracy of free-hand C-1 lateral mass screws placement

- Type I (ideal)-screw threads completely within the bone

- Type II (safe)-less than half the diameter of the screw violates the surrounding cortex, and

- Type III (unacceptable)-a clear violation of transverse foramen or spinal canal.****

97.2% of screws were rated Type I or II in one study.

Anatomical landmarks, ideal trajectories, and screw lengths are the most important determinants for accurate instrumentation.

The posterior atlantoaxial or occipitocervical fusion is supposed to be the main surgical method, but it will result in a limited range of motion of the upper cervical spine.

The primary indication for the JeRP system is an unstable C1 fracture (Gehweiler type I/III) with or without TAL injury (Dickman type II).