Since mixed venous measurement reflects the balance between oxygen delivery (DO2 ) and consumption (VO2 ), factors that affect its measurement include:

- Cardiac output (cardiac output = heart rate x stroke volume; can change with cardiogenic shock, congestive heart failure, left ventricular failure, valvular heart disease, arrhythmia, pacing, hypovolemia, sepsis-induced cardiac dysfunction, etc.)

- Hemoglobin (bleeding, hemorrhagic shock)

- Oxygenation (fraction of inspired oxygen, ventilatory mechanics, ARDS, etc.)

- Oxygen consumption (increased requirement from sepsis, shivering, burns, fever, pain, anxiety, increased work of breathing, etc.)

The benefits of mixed venous oxygen saturation (SvO2) and central venous oxygen saturation (ScvO2) monitoring have shown mixed results from different randomized controlled trials (RCTs) and meta-analyses. The following include areas of continued research.

In sepsis, ScvO2 less than 70% or SvO2 lower than 65% correlate with poor prognosis.

Contradicting these results attempts to use ScvO2 as part of early goal-directed therapy (EGDT) in septic shock, as seen in the PROCESS trials, have not demonstrated benefit. TIn this s demonstrated no difference in all-cause mortality compared between protocol-based EGDT, which monitored ScvO2, and standard therapy, which monitored systolic blood pressure and shock index in patients with sepsis. Also, mixed venous oxygen saturation is an extremely broad parameter in that faulty oxygen utilization can stem from any level of failure from macro-circulatory to micro-circulatory to mitochondrial. Studies have shown that normal to higher levels of mixed venous oxygen saturation in patients with clinically worsening sepsis do not rule out tissue hypoxia due to the inability to utilize O2.

Low ScvO2 has associations with increased morbidity in the perioperative setting as well.

In the ICU, lower ScvO2 is heavily correlated with higher mortality than normoxic values of ScvO2. However, hemodynamic therapy aimed to normalize such values did not show to reduce morbidity or mortality.

In heart failure cases, pump failure reduces oxygen delivery and increases tissue oxygen extraction. Therefore, continuous ScvO2 has been seen to guide treatment in patients with acute decompensation of heart failure.