There are several different treatment options available, but ultimately management depends on the patient's age, menopausal status, the size of the cyst, and whether the cyst has characteristics suspicious of malignancy. Unilocular cysts less than 10 cm are usually benign regardless of patient age; therefore, if the patient is asymptomatic, she can be monitored conservatively with serial transvaginal ultrasound since the majority of cysts resolve spontaneously without intervention. If a cyst does not resolve after several menstrual cycles, it is unlikely to be a functional cyst, and further workup is indicated.

Fetal ovarian cysts are caused by hormonal stimulation. Also, an association between fetal ovarian cysts and maternal diabetes and fetal hypothyroidism has been found. Most fetal ovarian cysts are usually small and involute during the first few months of life and are of no significance. These cysts are diagnosed in the third trimester of pregnancy, and most tend to resolve at 2 to 10 weeks postnatally.

Most pregnancy-associated cysts, both corpus luteal and follicular, resolve spontaneously by 14 to 16 weeks of gestation, allowing conservative management.

In women of all ages, endometriomas should have followed up sonograms 6 to 12 weeks after initial imaging, then yearly until surgically removed. Dermoid cysts should also have a yearly follow-up with ultrasound until surgical removal.

Surgical indications include suspected ovarian torsion, persistent adnexal mass, acute abdominal pain, and suspected malignancy. Surgery in pre-menopausal women prioritizes fertility preservation, and every attempt is made to remove minimal ovarian tissue. Pregnant patients can have cysts that may require surgical management. Although laparoscopy is safe in all trimesters of pregnancy, ideally, it is recommended to perform surgery in the second trimester.