The consequences of penetrating head injury depend on the following factors:

- **Intracranial path and location:**High mortality resulting from those that cross the midline, pass through the ventricles, or come to rest in the posterior fossa

- **Energy and speed of entry:**These factors depend on the properties of the weapon or missile. They result from energy being transferred from an object to the human skull and the underlying brain tissue. There is a high mortality rate associated with high-velocity projectiles. The kinetic energy involved is related to the square of the velocity. Three mechanisms of injuries have been reported.

- Laceration and crushing

- Cavitation

- Shockwaves

- **Size and type of the penetrating object:**Usually, large missiles or missiles that fragment within the cranial vault cause more fatalities

- 
**Circumstances or events surrounding the injury**

- 
**Other associated injuries**

Primary injuries occur immediately. Secondary injuries occur following the time of the injury. The final neurologic outcome is influenced by the extent and degree of secondary brain injury. Therefore, the primary goal in the emergency department is to prevent or reduce conditions that can worsen outcomes, such as hypotension, hypoxia, anemia, and hyperpyrexia.

The amount of damage to the brain depends on the kinetic energy imparted to the brain tissue. This, in turn, depends on the following factors:

- Trajectories of both the missile and the bone fragments through the brain

- Changes in intracranial pressure at the time of impact.