**Legg-Calve-Perthes Disease**

This is idiopathic osteonecrosis of the proximal femoral epiphysis in children. The blood supply to the femoral head is disrupted followed by revascularization which takes approximately 2 to 5 years. History is typical of young caucasian males (males: females = 5:1) with lower socioeconomic class living in a higher latitude presenting with a painless limp with hip stiffness. It is bilateral in 12% of the cases and affects 1:10,000 children. Risk factors include positive family history, low birth weight, abnormal birth presentation, and second-hand smoke. Prognosis is good with an onset of less than 6 years of age, the sphericity of the femoral head, minimal lateral pillar involvement, and congruency of skeletal maturity. These patients are at an increased risk to develop premature osteoarthritis secondary to an abnormally shaped femoral head. Goals of treatment include resolution of symptoms with analgesics, traction, and crutches, to maintain/obtain the full range of motion through physical therapy and to contain the femoral head through bracing/surgery depending on the severity, so it maintains a good position within the acetabulum.

**Slipped Capital Femoral Epiphysis (SCFE)**

A disorder of the proximal femoral epiphysis “slipping” through the proximal physis. History is typical for an obese non-caucasian male (male: female = 2:1.4) during a period of rapid growth (age 10-16) presenting with groin, and thigh pain decreased the range of motion of the hip, limp, and less commonly, knee pain for several months. It is the most common disorder affecting adolescent hips found in 10:100,000 children. Risk factors include obesity, endocrine disorders, acetabular retroversion, femoral retroversion, and radiation therapy. It is graded on the percent of epiphysis slippage:

- Grade I: 0% to 33%

- Grade II: 34% to 50%

- Grade III: Greater than 50%.

Treatment includes percutaneous in situ screw fixation for both stable and unstable slips. One cannulated screw is considered the gold standard. Two-screw constructs are more biomechanically stable but face a greater risk of screw-related complications. Contralateral hip prophylactic fixation is also considered for high-risk patients but remains controversial. Open epiphyseal reduction and fixation, osteochondroplasty, and proximal femoral osteotomy also remain viable options depending on the severity of the slippage.

**Femoral Head Fractures**

This is a rare fracture pattern that is almost always associated with hip dislocations. History is typical of a patient experiencing impaction, avulsion, or shear forces including motor vehicle accidents, falls, and sports injuries are presenting with localized hip pain inability to bear weight. The physical exam is significant for a flexed, shortened lower limb with either adduction and internal rotation with a posterior dislocation or abduction and external rotation with an anterior dislocation. They are classified by the Pipkin classification

- Type I: Hip dislocation with fracture of femoral head inferior to the fovea (does not involve the weight-bearing portion of the femoral head)

- Type II: Hip dislocation with femoral head fracture superior to fovea (involves the weight-bearing portion of the femoral head)

- Type III: Type I or II + fracture of the femoral neck (high risk of avascular necrosis)

- Type IV: Type I or II + fracture of the acetabular rim

These patients are at high risk for femoral head osteonecrosis and posttraumatic arthritis (posterior wall fracture is most commonly associated).

Nonoperative treatment of femoral head fractures includes hip reduction within 6 hours to reduce the risk of neurovascular and soft tissue injury. In pipkin I or pipkin II with less than 1 mm step off, the patient can undergo conservative treatment of touch down weight bearing with restricted range of motion in adduction and internal rotation for 4 to 6 weeks. The patient is to undergo serial radiographs to ensure adequate healing and maintained reduction

Operative treatment of open reduction internal fixation with headless compression screws is primarily considered with pipkin II with greater than 1 mm step off, type III, and type IV. Patients may also consider reconstruction plates and bioabsorbable screws