Barium swallow studies are used to define the structure and, to a much lesser extent, the function of the esophagus. Pathologies typically seen with barium swallow include esophageal perforations, neoplasms, hiatal hernias, and diverticula. Some motility disorders are also readily diagnosed with barium swallow due to the secondary effects they have on esophageal morphology, though most functional esophageal swallowing pathologies will require a formal modified barium swallow evaluation. This includes achalasia, which is characterized famously by a "bird beak" appearance and a dilated, tortuous, proximal esophagus.

Effects or changes in chemical esophageal injury can be studied with barium sallow. In the long term after injury, contrast may be used to identify strictures or sometimes more subtle findings such as ulceration in conjunction with endoscopy. It is important not to obtain barium contrast studies in the acute setting of chemical esophageal injury as it can exacerbate the injury.

A further consideration regarding the choice of swallowed contrast agent in the setting of trauma. For the purposes of this section, trauma will be defined as injury resultant from non-iatrogenic causes such as gunshot wound. Guidelines for nontraumatic esophageal perforation investigations often involve the use of  Gastrografin/diatrizoate (water-soluble) contrast swallow studies initially, followed by a thinned barium swallow study if the study is negative in the face of significant clinical suspicion. This is because barium extravasation into the mediastinum carries a risk of resultant inflammation and is more difficult to wash out than Gastrografin/diatrizoate during surgical exploration. However, a barium contrast study has better sensitivity than that of Gastrografin/diatrizoate in the detection of perforation. In such clinical situations, timeliness of diagnosis is important, and surgical exploration may be likely on a positive swallow study or even already warranted due to other criteria. This would allow for a washout of extravasated contrast, thus minimizing the risks associated with barium while maximizing sensitivity during an urgent workup. Additionally, aspiration of Gastrografin/diatrizoate is known to cause severe pneumonitis.