Chlorhexidine may cause a severe allergic reaction. Symptoms may include wheezing, rash, facial swelling, and anaphylactic shock. Use is contraindicated in patients with a history of allergy to chlorhexidine.

Povidone-iodine in individuals known to be allergic to iodine or product ingredients is contraindicated.

Isopropyl alcohol: In June 2020, the FDA issued warnings about methanol or 1-propanol contaminated hand sanitizer brands. Exposure to methanol, including dermally, can cause kidney damage, blindness, and death. Exposure to 1-propanol can cause severe acidosis and death. Chronic exposure may be more likely due to increased hand sanitizer use in 2020. In addition, FDA is warning that symptoms such as dizziness, nausea, headache, and nausea may occur after using alcohol-based hand sanitizers, likely due to breathing in the vapors. Hence always use hand sanitizer in a well-ventilated area.

Hexachlorophene: The Code of Federal Regulations (CFR-21) FDA (Revised 2022) states that hexachlorophene is contraindicated on burned or denuded skin or mucous membranes and as an agent for prophylactic total body bathing. Additionally, FDA noted that although hexachlorophene is a useful bacteriostatic agent, safety concerns have been reported, such as Letterer–Siwe disease, neurotoxicity, and death. Hence, hexachlorophene-containing products will be considered misbranded and subject to regulatory proceedings.

Clinical Studies and regulatory agencies, including the FDA and EMA, agree that benzalkonium chloride is not innocuous, even when used in small concentrations.