The calcaneus is a roughly rectangular prism-shaped bone located inferior to the talus and posterior to the midfoot. The long axis of the prism extends approximately along the mid-line of the foot. To understand the calcaneus structure, it is necessary to examine its six surfaces separately.

The posterior surface of the calcaneus has a circular convex structure with three distinct facets. The middle facet serves as the attachment site for the calcaneal tendon (Achilles tendon), while the superior facet is separated from the calcaneal tendon by the retrocalcaneal bursa. The inferior facet bends towards the lower calcaneal surface to form the calcaneal tuberosity, the lowest part of the posterior calcaneal surface. The lower calcaneal surface or plantar surface forms from the forward protrusion of the calcaneal tuberosity, which leads to the formation of medial and lateral processes on both sides, and the calcaneal tubercle in the front.

The lateral calcaneal surface is a wide, flat surface, except for the two bony protrusions on it. The protrusion in the front is the peroneal tubercle (fibular trochlea) above and below which the tendons of the fibularis brevis and fibularis longus muscles pass, respectively. The protrusion in the back is a small bony elevation that gives attachment to the calcaneofibular ligament. The medial calcaneal surface is home to a bone protrusion, called sustentaculum tali, which carries the middle talar articular facet (one of the three talocalcaneal joint facets). And in the inferior aspect of the sustentaculum tali, there exists a groove that houses the flexor hallucis longus tendon.

The superior calcaneal surface hosts the anterior and posterior talar articular facets. The groove between these two facets so-called the calcaneal sulcus, and the corresponding talar sulcus join together to form the tarsal sinus (sinus tarsi). The tarsal sinus is a quite large space located between the anterior portions of the calcaneus and talus, and it contains several neurovascular structures and ligaments, some portions of the subtalar joint capsule, and fat. The anterior calcaneal surface is the smallest face that has an articular facet for the calcaneocuboid joint.

The calcaneus articulates with talus through the talocalcaneal joint in which the contact between the two bones derives from the anterior, middle, and posterior facets. The talocalcaneal joint, also known as the subtalar joint, allows for essential foot motions such as inversion, eversion, dorsiflexion, and plantarflexion of the foot. Besides, the calcaneus serves as an attachment point for the Achilles tendon, which produces aids in plantar flexion of the foot vital for standing, walking, running, and jumping. The calcaneus serves as an attachment point also for muscles that move the toes. The bone has several joint stabilizing ligaments attached to it, such as the calcaneofibular, talocalcaneal, calcaneocuboid, and calcaneonavicular ligaments. The plantar aponeurosis and long plantar ligament support the arch of the foot and attach to the calcaneus as well.