It is available in four formulations:

- As a solution for injection, as phosphate: 30 mg/ml

- As an oral solution, as phosphate: 25 mg/ml

- As a controlled-release tablet: 50 mg, 100 mg, 150 mg and 200 mg

- As an immediate-release tablet, codeine sulfate: 15mg, 30mg, 60 mg

Initial dosing and titration can be individualized depending on the patient's health status, previous opioid exposure, attainment of therapeutic outcomes, and predicted or observed adverse events. In patients who are on around-the-clock continuous codeine with breakthrough pain, short-acting opioids may be an option.

**Use in Specific Patient Populations**

**Patients with Hepatic Impairment:**According to manufacturer labeling, no studies have been conducted on patients with hepatic impairment. Hence clinicians should prescribe codeine at a lower dose in these patients.

**Patients with Renal Impairment:**The kidney is the major route of elimination, so pharmacokinetics is altered in the patients with renal impairment. Consequently, clinicians should prescribe codeine at a lower than normal dose or with longer dosing intervals.

**Pregnancy Considerations:**When used in pregnancy, unfavorable newborn outcomes such as premature birth, low birth weight, hypoxic-ischemic brain injury, and neonatal death may occur. Newborns may also develop neonatal abstinence syndrome. If codeine use is required for a long time in a pregnant woman, counsel the patient on the risk of neonatal opioid withdrawal syndrome (Boxed Warning) and ensure adequate management.

**Breastfeeding Considerations**: Maternal use of codeine during breastfeeding can cause infant drowsiness, central nervous system depression, and death. If the newborn shows sedation, problems in breastfeeding, or breathing difficulties, the mother should contact the clinician immediately. Neonates seem especially susceptible to the effects of even small dosages of codeine. Hence, professional organizations and regulatory agencies advise against using codeine completely during breastfeeding. Hence, it is reasonable to provide analgesia to the mother with non-narcotic agents.

**Pharmacogenomic Considerations (Boxed Warning):**Patients who are ultra-rapid metabolizers of codeine due to a CYP2D6 polymorphism gene (ultrarapid metabolizers) can metabolize codeine to morphine rapidly. Consequently, even with standard doses of codeine, these patients may experience the symptoms of opioid overdose. Hence the FDA drug label for codeine reports that individuals who are ultrarapid metabolizers may have life-threatening or fatal respiratory depression at a therapeutic dose.