Diagnostic evaluation either when the infant presents in extremis or due to respiratory distress. A chest X-ray would show increased pulmonary vascular markings with mild to moderate cardiomegaly. The absence of the aortic knuckle and prominence of the main pulmonary segment may explain other subtle findings on chest X-ray. The electrocardiogram is very non-specific and may show deep Q waves in lateral precordial leads owing to increased pulmonary blood flow.

The echocardiogram is diagnostic of the AP window and also can identify associated anomalies. A 2D-echocardiography can detect the lack of wall or fallout between the aorta and pulmonary artery best visualized in subcostal and short-axis parasternal views (Video 1,2). The differentiating feature from truncus arteriosus is that the AP window has two well-formed semi-lunar valves. Due to volume overload to the main pulmonary artery, the left atrium and left ventricle may be enlarged. The descending aorta shows a diastolic reversal of flow due to run off into pulmonary arteries. Additional abnormalities such as coarctation of aorta and origins of branch pulmonary arteries require evaluation. Ventricular septal defects may be present in rare instances in addition to the AP window. In the late presentation of the AP window, echocardiographic features of elevated pulmonary vascular resistance can be appreciated.

A diagnostic cardiac catheterization should be performed to assess for pulmonary vascular reactivity in late presentations of the AP window. Cardiac catheterization would reveal equal systemic pressures both in the aorta and pulmonary artery. Left atrial pressures would appear elevated, and there would be an increase in pulmonary blood flow.