Sensorineural hearing loss results from damage to the hair cells within the inner ear, the vestibulocochlear nerve, or the brain's central processing centers. This differs from a conductive hearing loss, which results from the inability of sound waves to reach the inner ear.

The ear consists of

- External ear – pinna, external auditory meatus, and canal

- Middle ear – tympanic membrane, ossicles, Eustachian tube opening, oval and round windows

- Inner ear – cochlea and part of the auditory nerve

Each of the above components is important for the conduction of sound waves, but in SNHL, we are concerned with pathology in the inner ear that leads to hearing loss. The interface between the stapes and the oval window delivers sound transmission to the cochlea. Sound which reaches the cochlea undergoes first amplification by the outer hair cells and then electrochemical transduction by the inner hair cells. The cochlea receives an acoustic signal, and a traveling wave is generated, which traverses the basilar membrane of the cochlea stimulating outer hair cells (OHCs), which act as a biological amplifier/compressor and modifies the signal. The basilar membrane of the cochlea is highly frequency-specific and tonotopically organized. The base of the basilar membrane responds to higher-frequency sounds, while the apex responds to lo frequencies.

There are several pathophysiological mechanisms by which damage to the inner ear results in SNHL.

- **Structural abnormality of cochlear components**: e.g., trauma or congenital conditions.

- **Aberrant metabolic activity**: Cochlear function is determined by the transport of ions. Genetic or acquired conditions that interfere with this transport can lead to changes in the endolymph and affect hearing.

- **Vascular**: Interference with the vascular supply to the cochlea can occur in conditions such as noise trauma, ototoxicity, and systemic vascular events, which will affect the function of the stria vascularis.

- **Overcrowding of the basilar membrane**preventing OHCs motility and IHCs transduction capabilities: Prevalent in conditions such as diabetes and autoimmune pathology.

- **Noise trauma**: With noise trauma, the vibrational shift between the tectorial and basilar membranes increases, and this shift can damage the stereocilia of the OHCs. In turn, the stiffness of the organ of Corti decreases.

According to Schuknecht's classification in presbycusis, three major cochlear structures can independently degenerate and influence the degree of hearing loss; afferent neurons, the organ of Corti, and stria vascularis.

- **Sensory**- steep high-frequency hearing loss with preserved speech perception - degeneration of the organ of Corti

- **Neural**- downsloping high-frequency hearing loss with a disproportionate loss of speech perception - degeneration of spiral ganglion cells

- **Strial/metabolic**- a flat SNHL with preserved speech perception - degeneration of stria vascularis

- **Cochlear conductive**- progressive downsloping high-frequency SNHL - increased stiffness of the basilar membrane