**Onychomycosis**

Topical clotrimazole is not effective for onychomycosis. Therefore, fungal nail infections usually require treatment with an oral (systemic) antifungal drug.

**Pregnancy**

Clotrimazole demonstrates poor absorption after dermal or intravaginal administration. Only topical preparations are recommended in pregnancy.

Clotrimazole is not known to cross the placenta.

**Breast-feeding**

The use of clotrimazole during breastfeeding has not been studied. No data is available about the excretion of clotrimazole in breast milk. Topical clotrimazole poses little risk to nursing infants as topical clotrimazole is not expected to result in significant maternal absorption.

**Contraceptive Devices, Menstruation**

Patients should abstain from sexual intercourse during the treatment course. With intravaginal clotrimazole preparations, contraceptive failures can occur during the treatment due to the damage of contraceptive devices such as diaphragms, condoms, and cervical caps. In addition, tampon use is not advisable while using clotrimazole during menstruation.

**Azole Antifungals Hypersensitivity**

Patients with azole antifungals hypersensitivity should avoid using clotrimazole. Hypersensitivity reactions commonly occur due to the components in the formulation present in different clotrimazole preparations.

**Ocular Exposure, Ophthalmic Administration**

If eye contact with clotrimazole occurs, treat immediately by flushing the affected eye with cool, clean water. Contact an ophthalmologist if eye irritation persists.

**Drug-drug Interactions**

Clotrimazole therapy may result in a significant rise in tacrolimus levels, leading to tacrolimus-associated toxicities. Hence caution should be exercised.