# Continuing Education Activity

Laryngeal cancers are one of the most common head and neck malignancies. Glottic cancers arise from true vocal cords and similarly to other laryngeal cancers linked with poorer outcomes to smoking and alcohol abuse. Management and involvement of a multi-disciplinary team can vary depending on the stage of the disease. This activity outlines the etiology, clinical history, and prognosis of glottic cancer, and highlights the role of the interprofessional healthcare team in investigating and managing patients with this condition.

**Objectives:**
- Identify the etiology of glottic cancer with related medical conditions and emergencies.
- Describe the appropriate evaluation of glottic cancer.
- Review the management options available for glottic cancer.
- Summarize the interprofessional team strategies for improving care coordination and communication to advance Glottic cancer and improve outcomes.

# Introduction

Laryngeal cancers are one of the most common head and neck malignancies and thought to make up 1% of all cancers worldwide. Glottic cancer is defined as a malignancy arising from the true vocal cords and the anterior and posterior commissure of the larynx. Like other laryngeal cancers, smoking and alcohol abuse typically causes glottic cancer; however, tumors from this subsite have a better prognosis than other laryngeal cancers due to its reduced rate of local, nodal and distant invasion. The management of glottic cancers can vary significantly, from single modality transoral laser surgery or radiotherapy in early disease, through to chemoradiotherapy or total laryngectomy for more advanced disease. Providers, therefore, must have a thorough understanding of the anatomy and staging of glottic cancer to facilitate the most appropriate management plan for this disease.

# Etiology

There has long been an association between the consumption of smoking and excessive alcohol consumption and the occurrence of glottic and laryngeal squamous cell carcinoma. Rates of laryngeal cancer are 15-30 times higher in smokers than non-smokers

Other proposed risk factors include gastroesophageal reflux, low socioeconomic status, opium use, red meat, and occupational exposure, with a healthy diet thought to have a minor protective effect.

# Epidemiology

Primary laryngeal and glottic cancers are uncommon, representing approximately 1% of all male and 0.3% of female cancers worldwide. The American Cancer Society estimates the diagnosis of 12370 new cases of laryngeal carcinoma in 2020, with approximately 60% arising primarily from the glottis. Of these new cases, 9820 will occur in men, and 3750 will die from the disease with a male to female ratio of 4 to 1. Reassuringly, these figures follow a 2 to 3% year on year reduction in overall cases. Rates of laryngeal cancer vary significantly with specific patient characteristics as male, low-income, and African-American patients have shown to present with higher rates of advanced disease.

# Pathophysiology

Squamous cell carcinoma composes over 90% of all laryngeal malignancies. It is slow-growing and can appear as an exophytic or endophytic lesion. Glottic tumors typically arise from the free margin of the anterior 1/3rd of the vocal cords. Numerous anatomical boundaries can contain the lesion within the Reinke space for a significant period. Spread may occur locally across the anterior commissure (although the anterior commissure ligament provides a resilient barrier to the invasion) or posteriorly to the arytenoid cartilages.

Cancers may eventually breach the glottis through a direct invasion of the vocal ligament and vocalis muscles, causing vocal cord fixation via involvement of the thyroarytenoid muscle. From here, tumors gain access to the paraglottic space, facilitating cranial and caudal spread. Laryngeal cartilage is relatively resistant to direct tumor invasion, although invasion of the thyroid cartilage will often occur in advanced T4a disease. While supraglottic cancers often exhibit early bilateral nodal metastasis and subglottic cancers invade paratracheal and mediastinal nodes, carcinomas of the glottis have a low rate of lymphatic spread, attributed to an inadequate submucosal lymphatic supply. Nodal metastasis tends to occur when the tumor breaches the anterior commissure or invades another laryngeal subsite, most often spreading to levels 2, 3, 4, and 6.

Lymphoma is the second most common laryngeal malignancy; however, only thought to represent less than 1% of all cancers in this region. Nevertheless, it remains an important differential diagnosis, as it rarely requires surgical intervention beyond initial biopsy or tracheostomy in acute airway obstruction. It has a good prognosis when managed with chemoradiotherapy.

# History and Physical

Glottic cancers often present early, as even small lesions of the glottis can result in significant hoarseness. Resultantly, current American and British guidelines advise urgent referral to an otolaryngologist for persistent hoarseness lasting 4 and 6 weeks, respectively. However, there have been suggestions for referrals as early as three weeks from the onset of hoarseness.

Patients require a full ear, nose, and throat examination by an experienced otolaryngologist, including palpation of the neck for cervical lymphadenopathy, as well as close inspection of the oral cavity and oropharynx to exclude an oropharyngeal malignancy and assess dentition. Flexible nasal endoscopy in the outpatient clinic is essential to evaluate the glottis with particular attention paid to the involvement of one or more cords, cord mobility, and invasion to other subsites in the supraglottis and subglottis. To assess subtle vocal cord immobility, video-stroboscopic equipment is available.

# Evaluation

The initial investigation of choice for glottic cancer is a CT scan of neck and thorax to accurately assess local invasion, nodal disease, and distant metastasis. However, CT scans are unlikely to be of any diagnostic benefit in early T1 cancers that do not involve the anterior commissure, as both local and nodal disease in these cancers is exceedingly uncommon.

A definitive diagnosis is achieved with direct laryngoscopy and biopsy under general anesthetic. Assessment with 0, 30, and 70-degree rigid endoscopes can provide the most detailed evaluation of the primary tumor and its extension to other laryngeal subsites.

# Treatment / Management

**Early T1-T2a Glottic Cancers**

Given the low incidence of nodal metastasis and the small, slow-growing nature of the primary lesion, early T1-2 glottic cancers can be managed very successfully with single-modality treatment. Transoral laser microsurgery (TLM) and radiotherapy are the most commonly employed treatments for early glottic cancer. Although there is no direct comparison in a randomized controlled trial, a Cochrane review has noted equivalent survival outcomes and local disease control in both methods.

The fundamental principles of transoral laser microsurgery are the preservation of the cricoid cartilage and of at least a single crico-arytenoid joint, failure of which can result in a narrowed airway and a non-functional larynx respectively.

Radiotherapy regimes for glottic cancers vary between centers. Usually, they range from 50–52 Gy in 16 fractions or 53–55 Gy in 20 fractions over three to four weeks, with a higher dose per fraction resulting in improved locoregional control for both T1 and T2 lesions.

Partial laryngectomy is less commonly performed for primary early glottic cancers but offers a viable alternative to radiotherapy and TLM in experienced centers. Systematic reviews have demonstrated comparable oncological outcomes in both de novo and radio-recurrent cancers to radiotherapy and TLM.

**Moderately Advanced T2b-T3 Glottic Cancers**

At present, UK and US guidelines advise organ preservation therapy for moderately advanced glottic cancer in the form of chemoradiotherapy.

Furthermore, a 10-year follow-up study confirmed the long term survival benefits of the concurrent chemotherapy group but did note a higher rate of non-cancer deaths in this treatment arm.

**Advanced T4 Glottic Cancer**

Chemoradiotherapy may be used effectively in some advanced T4 cancers; however, the high rate of the thyroid cartilage and neck soft tissue invasion means many patients will be unsuitable for laryngeal preservation and will require surgery in the form of total laryngectomy. The Veterans affairs study noted T4 laryngeal tumors had a reduced response to chemotherapy and a higher rate of salvage surgery, suggesting organ preservation is not effective in advanced laryngeal cancer.

**Postoperative Treatment**

Postoperative radiotherapy can improve locoregional outcomes in advanced head and neck cancer, and is therefore recommended in any T4 tumors, T2-3 lesions with significant nodal disease, and any patient with positive margins or extra-nodal extension.

**Treatment of Nodal Disease**

The rate of nodal disease in glottic cancer is considerably lower than the supraglottic disease, where bilateral elective neck dissection or nodal irradiation is advised even in clinically N0 necks.

In patients undergoing total laryngectomy, elective bilateral neck dissection for staging purposes is essential, which may prevent the need for postoperative radiotherapy if no positive nodes are present. In patients who have failed to show a complete response following completion of treatment, or before chemoradiotherapy in patients with significant volume neck disease that are less likely to respond to primary oncological treatment, neck dissection is considered.

# Differential Diagnosis

The differential diagnosis of glottic cancer includes:

- Supraglottic, subglottic and transglottic laryngeal cancers

- Other head and neck cancers, including hypopharyngeal and upper esophageal

- Pre-malignant glottic lesions (leukoplakia, low and high-grade dysplasia)

- Vocal cord immobility

- Benign laryngeal lesions such as laryngeal papillomatosis, Reinke edema, vocal cord polyps, cysts, and nodules, granuloma, chronic laryngitis, hyperkeratosis, and functional dysphonia

# Staging

The staging of glottic and other laryngeal cancers is according to the 2016 eighth edition of the AJCC TNM classification of malignant tumors. Unlike oral and oropharyngeal cancers, depth of invasion and p16 status does not have a role in staging glottic tumors. The extra-nodal extension is one of the most important predictors of clinical outcomes in head and neck cancers. To reflect this, TNM8 introduced the presence of extra-nodal extension into all laryngeal cancer staging, with its presence immediately classifying a patient as N3b regardless of nodal size, quantity, or location; to accurately reflect the negative impact this finding can have on prognosis.

The TMN8 Tumour (T) staging is as follows:

- Tx: primary tumor cannot be assessed

- Tis: carcinoma in situ

- T1: tumor limited to the vocal cords (including the anterior and posterior commissure) with normal mobility

- T1a: tumor limited to one vocal cord
- T1b: tumor involving both vocal cords

- T2:

- T2a: tumor extends to supraglottis and/or subglottis with normal vocal fold mobility
- T2b: tumor extends to the supraglottis and/or subglottis, or with impaired vocal cord mobility

- T3: tumor limited to the larynx with vocal cord fixation or invasion of the paraglottic space or inner cortex of the thyroid cartilage

- T4: advanced disease

- T4a: tumor invades through the outer cortex of the thyroid cartilage and/or invades tissues beyond the larynx (trachea, cricoid cartilage, tongue muscles, strap muscles, thyroid, or esophagus)
- T4b: tumor invades prevertebral space, encases carotid artery, or invades mediastinal structures

The TNM 8 nodal (N) staging is as follows:

- Nx: nodes unable to be assessed

- N0: no regional lymph nodes

- N1: single ipsilateral lymph node ≤3cm and no extra-nodal extension

- N2

- N2a: single ipsilateral lymph node >3cm but <6 cm in greatest dimension and no extra-nodal extension
- N2b: multiple ipsilateral lymph nodes, none >6cm in greatest dimension and no extra-nodal extension
- N2c: bilateral or contralateral lymph nodes, none >6cm in greatest dimension and extra-nodal extension

- N3

- N3a: any lymph node >6cm and no-extra-nodal extension
- N3b: any nodes with clinically overt extra-nodal extension

The TNM8 metastasis (M) staging is as follows:

- M0: no distant metastasis

- M1: distant metastasis

# Prognosis

Overall, early laryngeal cancer carries a good prognosis, with 5-year survival outcomes, approximately 90% for stage 1 and 80% for stage 2 cancers when managed with single modality radiotherapy or laryngeal preserving surgery.

# Complications

**Complications of Glottic Cancer**

Compared to other laryngeal cancers, glottic cancer has a reduced propensity for regional and distant spread, but may still cause significant complications when left untreated. Dysphonia may occur through the direct invasion of the thyroarytenoid muscle and vocal ligament, progressing to dyspnoea, aspiration pneumonia, stridor, and acute airway emergencies necessitating tracheostomy in severe cases. Invasion of adjacent structures in the larynx and pharynx may also result in dysphagia and weight loss requiring nasogastric or gastrostomy feeding. The advanced local disease may encase and erode into the internal jugular vein and carotid artery, with the latter resulting in a carotid blowout and fatal hemorrhage.

**Complications of Chemoradiotherapy**

Despite its proven efficacy in the management of moderately advanced laryngeal cancer, chemoradiotherapy has a high rate of highly debilitating side effects and complications. Most commonly, patients will have complaints of xerostomia, mucositis, pain, and swallowing difficulty. These may manifest as late toxicity, resulting in gastrostomy support for nutritional intake in 13 to 14% of patients 1 to 2 years post-treatment.

**Complications of Surgery**

Complications following transoral laser surgery are not infrequent, but are often minor and result in minimal morbidity for a patient. These can include local infection and bleeding, perforation and surgical emphysema, cutaneous fistula, dyspnoea, swallowing difficulties, and aspiration pneumonia.

In more advanced cases, laryngectomy has a high rate of postoperative complications, with this rising further in salvage cases in previously irradiated patients. Pharyngocutaneous fistula remains one of the most common and challenging postoperative complications, frequently prolonging inpatient stay and delaying a return to an oral diet. Other potential complications include localized wound and lower respiratory tract infections, bleeding, damage to nerves (including the accessory, marginal mandibular and hypoglossal), and embolism.

# Consultations

Management of glottic tumors requires the support of an interprofessional team. This team includes the following specialties:

- Otolaryngologists

- Maxillofacial and plastic surgeons

- Oncologists

- Radiologists

- Restorative dentists/oral surgeons

- Clinical nurse specialists

- Dieticians

- Speech and language therapists

- Palliative care

# Deterrence and Patient Education

Excessive alcohol consumption and cigarette smoking are intrinsic to the development of glottic cancers, with the continuation of smoking resulting in poorer functional outcomes, reduced survival, and a higher rate of recurrence. Moreover, cessation of smoking after 1 to 4 years can result in a significant risk reduction in developing laryngeal cancer, reaching the level of never-smokers after 20 years.

# Enhancing Healthcare Team Outcomes

The variance in surgical and oncological management of glottic cancer across TNM stages highlights the importance of the multidisciplinary team. Invariably, there is an importance in performing an initial outpatient history and examination by an otolaryngologist. Subsequent initial investigations, including cross-sectional imaging and biopsy, radiologists, and pathologists, are essential in achieving definitive diagnosis and staging. Depending on the required treatment, otolaryngologists, and oncologists with a specialist interest in head and neck, cancer will be responsible for the provision of surgical, chemotherapy, and radiotherapy interventions. Given the myriad of complications and the often life-changing nature of these treatments, early involvement of associated specialists such as speech and language therapists, nurse specialists, dieticians and psychologists are essential in maintaining patients' quality of life and providing a patient-centered care approach.