The balance within the respiratory system depends primarily on the supply of oxygen and removal of carbon dioxide, thus regulating the body’s pH. Under normal physiologic conditions, the minute ventilation, or the liters per minute of air exchanged in the lungs, is primarily controlled by the partial pressure of arterial carbon dioxide (PaCO2). The minute ventilation is used routinely as a surrogate for alveolar ventilation. It is with alveolar ventilation that the gases, including PaCO2, are exchanged.

The method that PaCO2 is involved in the regulation of minute ventilation is by bodily pH. Carbon dioxide is involved in the bicarbonate buffer system. In the presence of an excess of CO2, there will be a shift to carbonic acid, ultimately causing the generation of hydrogen cations and bicarbonate anions. It is with this increased production of hydrogen ions that bodily pH will begin to decrease, causing acidosis from acidemia. Both peripheral and central chemoreceptors will respond to this acidemia and attempt to remove the excess hydrogen ion. Both systems work in conjunction. However, central chemoreceptors do maintain the vast majority of minute ventilation as they are more rapid and allow for less change in pH than the carotid bodies, which only account for approximately 15% of minute ventilation. These chemoreceptors sense changes in local pH as well as increases or decreases in local PaCO2. The cerebrospinal fluid within the brain is also able to regulate minute ventilation by sensing pH changes. While the CNS response is not as fast as local chemoreceptors, it also can adjust minute ventilation over time.

Probably the most common usage of PCO2 is the measuring of PaCO2 from arterial blood or PvCO2 from venous blood.  The physiology behind the regulation of minute ventilation above states that as PaCO2 increases, or PvCO2, the bicarbonate buffer system will attempt compensation by generating bicarbonate ions in addition to hydrogen ions. These hydrogen ions will lower systemic pH creating acidemia. It is the change in local PaCO2 as well as the change in pH that causes a change in minute ventilation. Under normal physiologic conditions, an increase in PCO2 causes a decrease in pH, which will increase minute ventilation and therefore increase alveolar ventilation to attempt to reach homeostasis. The higher the minute ventilation, the more exchange and loss of PCO2 will occur inversely. The opposite is also true; a decrease in PCO2 will increase pH, which will decrease minute ventilation and decrease alveolar ventilation; this is an example of the necessary evaluations of blood gas in the setting of acid-base disorders.

Acid-base disorders can be simple or mixed. The Henderson-Hasselbalch equation demonstrates that the governing of pH is not only by bicarbonate but also by PCO2. As discussed above, while PCO2 is mainly under the regulation of minute ventilation and respiratory mechanics, it is the kidney and the bicarbonate buffer system that regulate bicarbonate. Therefore, acid-base disorders can be either respiratory, pertaining to PCO2, or metabolic, resulting from bicarbonate.  In a simple respiratory acidosis, the PCO2 will elevate above normal, and the normal physiologic response will be to increase minute ventilation to shift the PCO2 and pH back to homeostasis. In a simple respiratory alkalosis, the PCO2 decreases from normal, and the normal response is to decrease minute ventilation to allow PCO2 to rise again to normal.

There are differences in the acute and chronic stages of respiratory acidosis or alkalosis. Acute respiratory acidosis from increased PCO2 will result in immediate changes to serum bicarbonate levels due to the bicarbonate buffer system; however, this is limited in its ability to achieve homeostasis. The kidney will gradually increase the serum bicarbonate levels in chronic cases. Chronic respiratory acidosis is when the acidemia exists for 3 to 5 days, which is approximately how long it will take the kidney to buffer the acidemia. In acute respiratory acidosis, normally, the serum bicarbonate will increase by 1 mEq/L for every 10 mmHg increase in PCO2. For chronic respiratory acidosis, the serum bicarbonate will increase by 4 to 5 mEq/L for every 10 mmHg rise in PCO2.

The regulation of PCO2 is also involved in metabolic acidosis and alkalosis, as well. In metabolic acidosis, for every 1 mEq/L drop of bicarbonate, there will be a decrease in PCO2 by 1.2 mmHg.