Costocervical trunk Pseudoaneurysms

Costocervical trunk pseudoaneurysms are extremely rare. They can be the result of bullectomy with pleural abrasion, blind cannulation of the jugular vein, secondary to infection like in the case of pulmonary tuberculosis, atherosclerosis of the costocervical trunk, trauma to the neck, or certain vasculitides (e.g., Takayasu arteritis).

Takayasu arteritis

Takayasu arteritis, which can go by many other names like occlusive thromboaortopathy, pulseless disease, and Martorell syndrome, is inflammatory arteritis of the large blood vessels that involves the aorta and its major branches including the subclavian artery and the costocervical trunk. The condition can be detected clinically by the presence of bruits in the upper lateral anterior thorax or lower neck and the absence of a radial pulse. It can be accompanied by ischemic changes that involve the upper extremities and head and neck. The arteries supplying blood to the brain can undergo degenerative changes or form aneurysms that could eventually result in strokes. The reported presence of hypertension was in 33 to 83% of patients, Diminished or absent pulses in 84 to 96%, Takayasu retinopathy 37%.

Perforation of the costocervical trunk

A transradial arterial approach to coronary angiography is associated with decreased vascular complications compared to a transfemoral arterial approach. It also allows for the early mobilization of patients. However, in rare cases, perforation of the costocervical trunk can take place shortly after a percutaneous transradial coronary intervention, which can result in a rapidly expanding cervical hematoma that presses on the airway and cause several breathing problems. This condition requires emergency intubation to preserve the patency of the airways.

Collateral circulation

The first and second intercostal spaces are typically supplied with blood by the superior intercostal artery, which is of great clinical importance if the anterior intercostal or internal thoracic arteries become compromised. Moreover, the superior intercostal artery may supply blood to the descending aorta in the case of coarctation of the aorta through mediastinal collateral branches that bypass the coarctation.