HPV is known to cause lesions of the mucous membranes and skin. There are over 100 subtypes of HPV, and some are associated with an increased risk of malignancy. HPV diagnosis and treatment is best done with an interprofessional team.

For the most part, HPV is sexually acquired, and one of the best ways to decrease the morbidity of this infection is the patient's education. Both the nurse and the pharmacist are in a prime position to educate patients about safe sex, the use of condoms, and avoidance of multiple sex partners.

The pharmacist should provide information on the different treatments for warts, their benefits, and adverse effects. The pharmacist should also encourage the patients to be vaccinated against HPV.

Further, the primary care provider should encourage these women to undergo the Pap smear to screen for cervical dysplasia and the presence of HPV. More importantly, patients should be told that if they have genital warts, sexual activity should be avoided until the lesions have been treated or have resolved.

Finally, patients need to be educated that if they have HPV, they should be screened for other sexually transmitted infections. The sex partner's evaluation is vital if the cycle of spread is to be broken.

**Outcomes**

Once HPV is acquired, recurrences are common. However, for most patients with genital warts, there are treatments. In about 60% of cases, genital warts resolve spontaneously. Irrespective of the treatment of genital warts, the risk of cervical cancer is not altered.

The biggest concern with genital warts is the risk of cervical cancer. HPV is also known to be associated with anal and head and neck cancers. Individuals who are immunocompromised are also at risk for developing dysplasia or cancer of the vagina and vulva.

Finally, in at least one-third of patients with HPV, there is the presence of other sexually transmitted infections.