# Continuing Education Activity

Labyrinthine fistula is an abnormal communication between the inner ear and the surrounding structures. It can be caused by mechanical insults or congenital anomalies. To avoid the complications of labyrinthine fistula, it is important that it be correctly diagnosed and treated effectively. This activity describes the evaluation and management of labyrinthine fistula and reviews the role of the interprofessional team in the care of patients with this condition.

**Objectives:**
- Identify the etiology of labyrinthine fistula.
- Review the appropriate history, physical, and evaluation of labyrinthine fistula.
- Outline the management options for labyrinthine fistula.
- Summarize interprofessional team strategies for improving care coordination and communication to advance the care of labyrinthine fistula and improve outcomes.

# Introduction

Labyrinthine fistula is an abnormal communication between the inner ear and the surrounding structures. Labyrinthine fistulas are formed most commonly between the inner ear (round window or oval window) at the fissula ante fenestrum and surrounding structures, causing perilymph leakage. The first report of a non-surgical 'spontaneous perilymphatic fistula' was identified in four patients, in 1970 by Stroud and Calcettera.

Prior to this in 1962, after stapedectomy/stapes mobilization, the polyethylene strut would sometimes slip and enter the inner ear leading to perilymph accumulation in the inner ear, escaping through the strut. This was termed as "slipped strut problem." Symptoms associated with "slipped strut problem" were hearing fluctuations, aural fullness, vertigo, tinnitus, and imbalance.

# Etiology

Labyrinthine fistulas can be a consequence of a congenital otologic disorder, acquired by physical injury or from an iatrogenic cause. The most common causes are head injuries from trauma, labor, coughing, sneezing, pathologies that lead to increased intracranial pressure, blast injuries, diving, and flying barotrauma. Unique causes that have been reported included lightning strikes, airbag trauma, and acoustic trauma from the sirens of fire engines and other loud modalities.

Cholesteatomas caused by chronic otitis media are another cause of perilymphatic fistulas. The reported incidence of cholesteatoma-induced perilymphatic fistula varies from 4% to 15%.

# Epidemiology

Labyrinthine fistulas are rare, and the prevalence/incidence generally has not been well reported. The incidence of cholesteatoma-induced fistulas from chronic otitis media has been reported to be between 4% to 15%.

# Pathophysiology

The exact mechanism and pathophysiology are not well defined. In animal models, it was associated with air bubbles that lead to profound sensorineural hearing loss by the disruptions of the propagation of the acoustic waves traveling in the basilar membrane.

The pneumolabyrinth itself may cause severe irritation leading to severe rotational vertigo. Because the labyrinth is connected to the cochlea, fistula formation can lead to sensorineural loss and vertigo. Additionally, those fistulas that arise with cholesteatoma can cause erosion of the endochondral bone that overlies the labyrinth leading to fistulas.

# History and Physical

A careful history and physical is necessary, as a labyrinthine fistula can easily be missed or misdiagnosed. A labyrinthine fistula should be suspected in patients that sustain a temporal bone fracture or membranous labyrinthine rupture from head trauma, which includes implosive (Valsalva, blowing nose) and explosive (increased intracranial pressure from sneezing, coughing, weight lifting, and blast injuries). The primary symptoms of a traumatic labyrinthine fistula are sensorineural hearing loss and dizziness following the trauma.

A labyrinthine fistula should also be suspected if a patient has vestibular disturbances and/or hearing loss after a stapedectomy. The artificial prosthesis can become dislodged, leading to perilymph leakage. Finally, a labyrinthine fistula should be suspected in those who have chronic otitis media. Cholesteatomas often form in these individuals, which can lead to erosion of the petrous bone that surrounds the labyrinth causing a fistula. Barotrauma is a possible cause, such as from diving or flying.

Important exam findings include the positive fistula test, where air is insufflated in the ear, causing nystagmus. A cholesteatoma may also be seen with the otoscopic evaluation.

Another important exam finding is Tullio’s phenomenon, where dizziness occurs after introduction to sound. The patient may have a hearing loss that may be sensorineural, conductive, or a combination of the two.

The Fukuda/Unterberger test determines postural instability from vestibular hypofunction.

# Evaluation

Diagnosing labyrinthine fistulas can be difficult. Diagnostic criteria are not well established. There are criteria suggested by the Intractable Hearing Loss Research Committee of the Ministry of Health and Welfare (revised 2016).

- Symptoms - Tinnitus, aural fullness, hearing impairment, and vestibular symptoms that are associated with pre-existing or coexisting middle ear or inner ear disease/surgery

- Lab findings - Biochemical tests, microscopic/endoscopic inspection

- References - Cochlin-tomoprotein detection test, beta2 transferrin, idiopathic

- Differential diagnosis - other known causes of inner ear diseases

- Definite diagnosis - Perilymph-specific protein detection, explorative tympanotomy (ET)

A complete assessment of auditory acuity, including auditory brainstem response (ABR), emission testing, and pure tone audiometry should be done to assess hearing loss.

# Treatment / Management

There is currently no consensus on optimal surgical management of labyrinthine fistulas.

Because of a lack of definitive diagnostic criteria, conservative management is preferred initially with head elevation, bed rest, and avoiding activities that would increase intracranial pressure and straining. If symptoms persist or are recurrent, exploratory tympanotomy is the next step. Surgery has been shown to often improve dizziness and vertigo, but rarely improved hearing loss with increased risk of iatrogenic sensorineural hearing loss.

Management of labyrinthine fistulas induced by cholesteatomas includes complete removal of the cholesteatoma matrix from the fistula and subsequent closure of the fistula.

# Differential Diagnosis

Differential diagnoses include:

- Meniere syndrome (primary endolymphatic hydrops) - Meniere's disease is much more common than perilymphatic fistula and can present with all the symptoms of perilymphatic fistula.

- Secondary endolymphatic hydrops - can occur from head trauma, allergies, or underlying issues such as an autoimmune disorder.

- Acoustic neuromas

- Hemorrhagic stroke

- Superior semicircular canal dehiscence

# Prognosis

Surgical intervention has been shown to improve symptoms of vertigo and dizziness the most. If hearing loss is present, surgical intervention may or may not improve hearing function.

# Complications

The most common complications of a labyrinthine fistula are hearing loss and vertigo. Complications are also seen in post-surgical fistula repairs. These include tympanic membrane ruptures, postoperative hearing loss, and chorda tympani injuries.

Superior canal dehiscence syndrome can also arise as a complication, which is believed to be a variant of the fistula, but not caused by a true fistula (rather a communication between the superior bony canal and middle cranial fossa), may cause some unique phenomena, such as hearing one’s own voice, heartbeat, and eye movements. Pressure changes induced by performing a Valsalva maneuver with pinched nostrils (or otherwise straining) may provoke nystagmus and/or oscillopsia and vertigo.

# Deterrence and Patient Education

Patients who are diagnosed with a labyrinthine fistula should avoid environments and exposures that instigate symptoms. These include movements like straining and heavy lifting, increased pressure changes like air travel, popping ears, forceful blowing of the nose, scuba diving, and environments with loud noises. If it is necessary to be in one of these situations, the patient should be encouraged to seek the assistance of someone else to help if imbalance or dizziness occurs. It is important to avoid activities at night or in dark environments such as driving.

# Enhancing Healthcare Team Outcomes

Labyrinthine fistulas are difficult to diagnose and are best managed by an interprofessional team approach. The most common presenting symptoms are hearing loss and vertigo, which can easily be misdiagnosed. It is important for the primary healthcare professional to get a detailed history and physical exam in order to properly differentiate a perilymph fistula from other similar diagnoses.

Otolaryngologists should be consulted on all suspected cases and be involved earlier in the disease process and assessment, especially when hearing loss is involved. If a neurotologist is available, they would be able to assess the candidacy of the patient for surgical intervention. If symptoms present in the hospital, nurses can be vigilant on whether the patient has an altered gait or if the patient has difficulty hearing or understanding what is being said to them. Although perilymph fistulas lead to increased mortality, prompt diagnoses of and proper treatment would improve morbidity and overall quality of life of the patient.