# Continuing Education Activity

Herpes simplex virus (HSV) infections in the neonatal period continue to be troublesome for practitioners. In the 1970s, the drug vidarabine was introduced, but it was extremely toxic to the neonate, and there was little improvement in outcomes. The development of acyclovir in the 1980s led to significant improvements in the survival of infected infants. Mortality of infants with the disseminated disease has decreased from 85 percent to 29 percent, and patients with central nervous system (CNS) disease has decreased from 50 percent to roughly 4 percent in industrialized countries. This activity reviews the evaluation, and management of neonatal herpes and stresses the role of the interprofessional team in the care of affected patients.

**Objectives:**
- Identify the etiology of neonatal herpes.
- Describe the evaluation of neonatal herpes.
- Outline the treatment options available for neonatal herpes.
- Explain interprofessional team strategies for improving care coordination to advance outcomes for patients with neonatal herpes.

# Introduction

With the development of acyclovir in the 1980s, there was a vast improvement in the overall survival of these infected infants. At present, the mortality of infants with the disseminated disease has decreased from 85% to 29%, and patients with central nervous system (CNS) disease has decreased from 50% to roughly 4% in industrialized countries. Unfortunately, it remains elevated in developing nations.

# Etiology

There are 8 herpes viruses,  herpes simplex virus type 1 (HSV-1), herpes simplex virus type 2 (HSV-2), cytomegalovirus (CMV), Epstein-Barr virus (EBV), varicella-zoster, human herpesvirus 6 (HHV-6), human herpesvirus 7 (HHV-7), and human herpesvirus 8 (HHV-8). Herpes simplex neonatorum is the transmission of either HSV-1 or HSV-2 from the mother to child during gestation via the placenta, during delivery via vaginal secretions, or perinatally via direct contact with active lesions.

# Epidemiology



# Pathophysiology

The HSV is a double-stranded DNA virus that is large and has a surrounding lipid envelope. The DNA in HSV-1 and HSV-2 have many similarities, thus causing much cross-reactivity in antibody production. The virus enters the body through epithelial cells or the mucous membranes. When it has replicated within the nucleus of the cells, it travels down the axon to the neurons where it can establish a latent infection.

# History and Physical



# Evaluation



# Treatment / Management



# Differential Diagnosis

- Neonatal sepsis

- Pediatric aphthous ulcers

- Pediatric chickenpox

- Pediatric cytomegalovirus infection

- Pediatric enteroviral infections

- Pediatric erythema toxicum

- Pediatric sepsis

- Zoster

# Pearls and Other Issues

All infants born to mothers with a history of genital HSV have surface and mucosal cultures performed at 24 hours of life and also a blood HSV PCR. If these studies are negative, and the infant is asymptomatic, the infant may be discharged with the mother. Infants born to mothers with active genital lesions and having a prior history of HSV, whether it be C-section or vaginal delivery, are to be screened with mucosal  HSV cultures, blood for HSV PCR.

# Enhancing Healthcare Team Outcomes

An interprofessional team can improve outcomes for infants with disseminated HSV. The involvement of primary care providers, neonatologists, infectious disease, specialty trained nurses, and pharmacists is recommended. Prompt recognition and treatment are imperative. Nurses administer treatment, monitor patients, and keep the team apprised of patient status. Infectious disease or pediatric pharmacists review medications and check doses. [Level 5]