Differential diagnosis of toxocariasis includes retinoblastoma, endophthalmitis, retinopathy of prematurity (ROP), toxoplasmosis, panuveitis, Coats disease, persistent hyperplastic primary vitreous (PHPV), familial exudative vitreoretinopathy (FEVR), combined hamartoma of the retina, and retinal pigment epithelium (CHRRPE), and seasonal hyperacute panuveitis (SHAPU).

Retinoblastoma is the most common intraocular malignancy of childhood.

Coats disease is generally seen in males. It is a unilateral condition and presents with retinal exudation, aneurysmal dilatation, telangiectasia, and occasional neovascularization.

ROP usually presents within two months of birth.

PHPV is a congenital condition usually diagnosed in the first month of life. It presents with leukocoria, cataract, and a fibrovascular stalk extending from the optic disc to the posterior lens surface. The involved eye is usually microphthalmic with prominent ciliary processes.

FEVR is a congenital condition that presents with straightening of the retinal vessel, retinal detachment, and peripheral avascular retina.

Endophthalmitis presents with lid edema, conjunctival congestion, discharge, hazy cornea, and vitreous exudates.

Toxoplasmosis causes a focal necrotizing retinochoroiditis which appears as a yellowish elevated lesion at the posterior pole.

CHRRPE is a hamartomatous malformation involving the retina, retina pigment epithelium, and vitreoretinal interface.

SHAPU is a unilateral childhood ocular inflammatory disease reported only from Nepal since 1975. Initially, it occurred every two years, but recent reports have described it to occur annually during the summer or autumn months. It occurs suddenly in a healthy child. The child presents with complaints of sudden onset of redness, decreased vision, white pupillary reflex, and minimal pain. On examination, circumciliary congestion, fibrinous anterior chamber reaction, hypopyon, and shallow anterior chamber are present. The eyeball is soft (malignant hypotension). "White pupillary reflex in red-eye" and minimal pain is the hallmark of the disease. The cause is unknown though some studies have linked it to exposure to moths.

It is treated with injectable methylprednisolone for three days followed by oral steroids, topical antibiotics, steroids, and cycloplegic. Early core vitrectomy has shown promising results.