Arthropod venom is often a complex mixture of proteins, and other biochemical mediators and the clinical effects vary significantly depending on its specific composition.

Centipedes

The primary components of centipede venom include histamine, serotonin, enzymes, acid and alkaline phosphatase, and the amino acid naphthylamidase. Envenomation most commonly results in intense localized pain, erythema, and edema.

Millipedes

Millipedes secrete a toxin through their body segments which contains hydrogen cyanide, organic acids, cresols, phenol, benzoquinones, and hydroquinones.  The toxin produces a localized caustic-like effect to the tissues it contacts resulting in an intense burning accompanied by erythema and occasionally vesicle formation.

Hymenoptera

Hymenoptera possesses venom with many of the same components, so cross-sensitization to venom may occur across species. The venom constituents bradykinin, acetylcholine, histamine and serotonin are likely responsible for most of the clinical toxicity.

Scorpions

Bark scorpion venom contains several biologically active substances including serotonin, acetylcholinesterase, histamine, phospholipase, and hyaluronidase. The venom is neurotoxic and can open neuronal sodium channels and create prolonged and excessive neuronal depolarization resulting in neuromuscular and autonomic hyperactivity.

Brown Recluse

Brown recluse venom causes tissue destruction and necrosis via hemolytic enzymes and dermonecrotic factors such as Sphingomyelinase D and a levarterenol-like substance that induces vasoconstriction.

Black Widow

The venom of the black widow spider is most notable for the potent neurotoxin, alpha-latrotoxin which causes the release of excessive amounts of neurotransmitters, including acetylcholine, norepinephrine, glutamate, and dopamine from presynaptic nerve terminals. Unlike the brown recluse, the venom of the black widow does not cause local necrosis.