Initial management of LAST should be focused on airway management, circulatory support, and reduction of systemic side effects. Immediate ventilation and oxygenation to prevent hypoxia and acidosis can facilitate resuscitation and reduce the likelihood of progression to seizures or cardiovascular collapse. If seizures do occur, immediate administration of benzodiazepines is recommended, to prevent injury and acidosis. Propofol or thiopental can be used if benzodiazepines are unavailable. However, these agents may worsen any associated hypotension or cardiac depression. If these medications are unable to control tonic-clonic seizure movements, small doses of succinylcholine should be intermittently administered to stop muscular activity, and further acidosis.

Management of local anesthetic-induced cardiac arrest is focused on restoring cardiac output. This is done to re-establish tissue perfusion, and in turn, prevent and treat any underlying acidosis. Standard ACLS guidelines are recommended in this situation, with a few adjustments. Small doses of epinephrine (less than 1 microgram/kg) are preferred. Vasopressin should be avoided, as it can result in pulmonary hemorrhage. Additionally, calcium-channel blockers and B-adrenergic-receptor blockers are not recommended. If ventricular arrhythmias do in fact occur, amiodarone is the preferred pharmacotherapy, as local anesthetics and procainamide can exacerbate the existing toxicity.

Recent case studies support the use of lipid emulsion therapy as soon as prolonged seizure activity or local anesthetic-induced arrhythmias are suspected. Theories suggest that it improves cardiac conduction, contractility, and coronary perfusion by drawing the lipid-soluble local anesthetic out of the cardiac tissue. A bolus of 1.5 mL/kg of 20% lipid emulsion and subsequent infusion of 0.25 ml/kg per minute should be given. The infusion should be continued for 10 minutes after hemodynamic stability is attained. An additional bolus and an increase of the infusion rate to 0.5 mL/kg per minute can be administered if stability is not achieved. The maximum recommended dose for initial administration is approximately 10 mL/kg for 30 minutes.

If cardiac stability has not been achieved following the modified ACLS guidelines, and subsequent lipid emulsion therapy, then cardiopulmonary bypass is recommended until the local anesthetic has cleared.