# Introduction

The diving reflex commonly referred to as the mammalian dive reflex, diving bradycardia, and the diving response is a protective, multifaceted physiologic reaction that occurs in mammals including humans in response to water submersion.  Aspects of the dive reflex were first described in 1786 by Edmund Goodwyn; however, it would take until an 1870 publication by Paul Bert for the physiologic adaptations to be recognized. The dive reflex is believed to aid in the conservation of oxygen stores in mammals by initiating several specific physiologic changes during aquatic immersion.  When a human holds their breath and submerges in water, the face and nose become wet which in turn causes bradycardia, apnea, and increased peripheral vascular resistance; these three main physiologic changes are collectively referred to as the diving reflex. The cause of increased peripheral resistance is thought to redistribute blood to the vital organs while limiting oxygen consumption by non-essential muscle groups.  In addition to vascular resistance, bradycardia is initiated to decrease the work of the heart and further limit unnecessary oxygen consumption. Overall, the dive reflex is an innate multi-system physiologic response present in all vertebrates that functions to preserve oxygen stores during times of water immersion.

# Issues of Concern

The dive reflex has been shown to be an effective means by which to treat paroxysmal supraventricular tachycardia (PSVT). Current medical literature supports several techniques that can trigger the dive response, the most common being a cold application to the face to increase vagal tone. However, at this present time, there is no data or studies that support a best practice approach in terms of equipment to use, duration of application, or optimal temperature range for therapeutically treating PSVT. Thus, further studies and research must be conducted to provide evidence-based information that reveals the optimal methods of inducing the dive reflex to alleviate PSVT.

In addition to further research needed to determine the most effective maneuver in the clinical setting to elicit the dive response, there are other limitations of study for the dive reflex. Although there have been significant advancements in current research equipment and technology the dive reflex has proven difficult to study in its entirety due to the aquatic conditions a subject must be present in to trigger the response. Specifically, cardiovascular adaptations in mammals during water submersion are only moderately understood due to the technical difficulty of studying mammals while completely submerged in water.

# Cellular Level

The cellular response that takes place during the dive reflex is vast; however, the primary cellular mechanisms responsible for the reflex involve afferent and efferent neuron tracts along with carotid chemoreceptors. The dive response activates with the immersion of the face in water which triggers a neuronal afferent response via the trigeminal nerve.  Nerve fibers innervating the anterior nasal mucosa and paranasal region are essential in triggering this autonomic reflex. However, at this present time, it is not entirely clear what stimulus activates these specific nerve fibers, but chemesthetic trigeminal chemoreceptors are believed to play a role.

In addition to neural tracts, the chemoreceptors located in the carotid bodies contribute to the induction of bradycardia and peripheral vascular changes.  When a human holds their breath underwater, oxygen gets consumed, and carbon dioxide is produced; a decrease in oxygen of 60mm Hg or less activates the chemoreceptor.  Studies have observed that when divers hold their breath for an extended period a robust chemoreflex activation aids in triggering additional sympathetic peripheral vasoconstriction activity.  Widespread peripheral vasoconstriction is believed to help maintain proper oxygen stores to fundamental organ systems during times of prolonged water submersion.

# Development

The diving response exists in all mammals including humans, and it is hypothesized to aid in the preservation of oxygen stores for key organ systems during times of asphyxia.  Interestingly, the reflex is found to be present in human infants as well.

# Organ Systems Involved

Mammals maintain physiologic homeostasis largely due to the nervous system responses that regulate heart rate, breathing, and blood pressure. However, when a mammal dives below the water, these physiologic checks and balances are effectively modified. During submersion the mammal holds its breath, the heart rate slows down, and their peripheral vascular system constricts. These unique but separate physiologic changes are prompted by triggering peripheral receptors, and they work together to preserve the mammal’s oxygen levels.

Through activation of the peripheral receptors involving the nervous system impact two distinct organ groups: the pulmonary and cardiovascular system.  Keeping in mind the cause and effect relationship of these systems at work the following list outlines the major contributors to this physiologic reflex:

- Nervous system

- Pulmonary system

- Cardiovascular system

# Function

The dive reflex has been described as a series of physiological changes that take place in the body in response to a mammal holding its breath while submerged in water. The answer as to why this complicated dynamic reflex takes place is quite simple: to preserve life. The diving response demonstrates a cessation of breathing, decreased heart rate, and an increase in peripheral vascular resistance leading to a redistribution of blood flow to adequately perfuse the brain and heart while limiting flow to non-essential muscles.

# Mechanism

The dive reflex is a vast physiologic process, but its main mechanisms involve peripheral receptors, neuronal pathways, and chemoreceptors.  Once a mammal holds it's breath and submerges under water two things occur: the face gets wet and the oxygen content in the lungs becomes fixed.  When mammals dive under water, sensory information from the nasal region is relayed to the brainstem, making up the afferent tract of the diving reflex neural pathway.

The neuronal pathways previously described are not the only mechanism associated with the diving response, chemoreceptors in the carotid bodies and aorta also play a role in the active physiologic changes as well.  The carotid bodies sense regulation of partial pressure of oxygen in the lungs.  When oxygen drops below a certain threshold, the carotid bodies send out an afferent signal to the brainstem that travels on the glossopharyngeal nerve.  The resultant efferent signal from the brainstem travels on a number of sympathetic nerves that cause a marked increase in peripheral vasoconstriction that further save blood for vital organs including the brain and heart.  A synergistic relationship exists in the human body to properly activate and achieve the dive reflex.  The overarching goal of the detailed mechanism previously explained is to conserve oxygen while maintaining homeostasis within the body that is suitable for sustaining life.

# Related Testing

Several tests have proven beneficial to objectively record the changes observed during the dive reflex.  In particular, the cardiovascular component of the dive reflex has been the subject of intensive study.  A common trend in research is to take recordings of vitals before and after water submersion. A list of the commonly tested physiologic parameters are listed below:

- Blood pressure

- Heart rate

- Hemoglobin oxygen saturation

- Muscle sympathetic nerve activity

- Vascular resistance

In addition to the tests mentioned there has been current advancements in field devices that have allowed the obtaining more vitals and data.  The recent development of a submersible echocardiograph has allowed a viable assessment of cardiac function and anatomy during a real-time dive.

# Pathophysiology

Though the dive reflex is a remarkable physiological adaptation that has been studied and cited throughout scientific literature, there is a more serious medical syndrome potentially associated with it.  The mechanism of the dive response is one of the most frequently considered reflex-etiologies related to sudden infant death syndrome (SIDS).

Several studies suggest that diving reflex hyperreactivity could potentially be the principal cause of SIDS due to its ability to trigger bradycardia and apnea.

# Clinical Significance

The dive reflex can be used to manage and treat paroxysmal supraventricular tachycardia (PSVT).  Though the therapeutic benefit of this reflex has been a known fact since the early 1970s, it is now starting to be used in prehospital settings, offering a simple management option for individuals with regular narrow complex tachyarrhythmias.  When triggering the dive reflex in humans with cold water facial immersion, the primary result is a reflex bradycardia response.  The resultant bradycardia and a related increase in myocardial refractoriness is useful as a non-invasive maneuver for the cessation of PSVT.