Delirium is a potential indicator of a life-threatening illness, and every episode of delirium should be appropriately evaluated. The evaluation involves taking a thorough history, a complete physical exam, laboratory tests, and possible imaging. The test selections should be based on information obtained from the history and physical examination, keeping in mind that delirium is often multifactorial in etiology and can be influenced by a number of predisposing factors, precipitating factors, or both.

Delirium is often referred to in 3 main manifestations.

1) Hyperactive Delirium: Patients present with increased agitation and sympathetic activity. They can present with hallucinations, delusions, and occasionally combative or uncooperative behavior.

2) Hypoactive Delirium: Patients have increased somnolence and decreased arousal. Hypoactive delirium is dangerous as it is often unrecognized or mistaken for fatigue or depression. It is associated with higher rates of morbidity and mortality.

3) Mixed Presentation: Patients can fluctuate between Hyperactive and Hypoactive presentations.

Two additional manifestations can be further delineated due to their unique treatment requirements.

1) Delirium at the End of Life: Also referred to as terminal delirium, it occurs in the final hours to days of life.

2) Delirium secondary to substance intoxication or withdrawal. For example, delirium is associated with alcohol withdrawal.

Delirium is defined by the DSM-5 (Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders Fifth Edition) and includes the presence of all of the following criteria:

- Disturbance in attention and awareness develops acutely and tends to fluctuate in severity.

- At least one additional disturbance in cognition

- Disturbances are not better explained by preexisting dementia.

- Disturbances do not occur in the context of a severely reduced level of arousal or coma.

- Evidence of an underlying organic cause or causes.

Other features include alterations in the sleep-wake cycle, perceptual disturbances, delusions, inappropriate or unsafe behavior, and emotional lability.

When evaluating a patient with delirium, it is crucial to speak with caregivers or other people who know the patient well. Many patients with delirium have underlying dementia, and knowing the baseline functional status of a patient is critical to knowing if acute changes have occurred. Other important questions to ask while taking the history include:

Have there been any changes to medications? Drug-related causes account for up to 39% of delirium cases.

Have there been any new symptoms such as cough, fever, headache, dysuria, expressions of pain, change in eating, or bowel and urinary habits?

Has there been any sleep deprivation or changes to their environment?

Have there been any falls? This may prompt the need for brain imaging, particularly in patients that are anticoagulated or have head trauma related to the fall. It may also suggest the need for X-rays to evaluate for bone fractures.

It is also imperative to carefully review recent and current medications. If possible, avoid drugs known to precipitate and perpetuate delirium, including psychoactive or anticholinergic medications.

A head-to-toe physical examination should be performed, including but not limited to a cardiac, pulmonary, neurological, mental status, abdominal, musculoskeletal, and skin exam. Vital signs should be evaluated. It is advised to take a targeted approach in the assessment, letting the physical exam findings and medical history inform the type of evaluation performed.