The diagnosis of chancroid based on clinical findings is made challenging by its potential similarities to lesions associated with other more common causes of genital ulcer disease such as syphilis and herpes infections. Because of this confounding presentation, diagnostic testing for both syphilis and herpes should also be done in these patients.

Gram stain of the exudate may show the typical "school of fish" findings of gram-negative rods, but the sensitivity and specificity of such testing have been found to be poor and unreliable.

As such, the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention has put forward recommendations in consideration of a diagnosis of chancroid. A definitive diagnosis requires identification of H. ducreyi on special culture media. This culture media is neither widely nor consistently available to general public health entities and when used, has a sensitivity of less than 80% when compared to PCR. H. ducreyi, leaving individual laboratories with the task of developing their own CLIA verified PCR studies.

Instead of laboratory diagnosis, a presumptive clinical diagnosis can be made if all of the following are present:

- One or more painful genital ulcers.

- Clinical findings, the appearance of genital ulcers, and any presenting regional lymphadenopathy are consistent with chancroid.

- No evidence of Treponema pallidum infection by darkfield microscopy of the exudate or by a serologic test performed at least 7 days after the onset of ulcers.

- A Herpes simplex virus PCR test or culture performed on the exudate is negative.