The recommendations for dietary calcium intake are established by the Institute of Medicine of the National Academies. They released the most current recommendations in 2010 and based on high-quality research studies and information from the decade prior.

- **1 to 3 years old:**700 mg/daily

- **4 to 8 years old:**1,000 mg/daily

- **9 to 13 years old:**1,300 mg/daily

- **14 to 18 years old:**1,300 mg/daily

- **19 to 30 years old:**1,000 mg/daily

- **31 to 50 years old:**1,000 mg/daily

- **51 to 70-year-old males:**1,000 mg/daily

- **51 to 70-year-old females:**1,200 mg/daily

- **Over 70 years old:**1200 mg/daily

- **14 to 18 years old females (pregnant/lactating):**1,300 mg/daily

- **19 to 50 years old females (pregnant/lactating):**1,000 mg/daily

The FDA acknowledges that an inadequate intake of calcium and/or vitamin D can contribute to low peak bone mass, which is an identifiable risk factor of osteoporosis. The official FDA statement is that "adequate calcium and vitamin D as part of a healthful diet, along with physical activity, may reduce the risk of osteoporosis in later life." However, there is no specific discussion regarding calcium supplementation. The FDA does provide daily values (DV) on food products to educate consumers on the calcium content within the context of a recommended diet. The most recent daily value for calcium is 1,300 mg for adults and children older than four years of age. Sufficient calcium intake is achievable from a well-balanced diet, but many patients do not eat a well-balanced diet.

Calcium supplementation is indicated when dietary calcium intake may be insufficient; the clinician can determine this by a patient's dietary history.  In general, obtaining calcium through a well-balanced diet is preferred to supplementation with other products. Other potential indications for calcium supplementation include osteoporosis, osteomalacia, hypocalcemic rickets, hypoparathyroidism, and hypocalcemia from chronic kidney disease (CKD).

The most common indication for calcium supplementation is to prevent or slow the progression of osteoporosis. Several randomized prospective clinical trials have demonstrated that daily calcium and vitamin D supplementation improves bone density in postmenopausal women and older men.

It is important to consider a patient's renal function when considering calcium supplementation. Studies reveal that the majority of patients with CKD will not have symptomatic hypocalcemia, although certain medications like bisphosphonates and denosumab may increase this risk.