One particular issue of concern with the Amsel criteria is that, although the required microscopy is less complicated, it does still require the competent use of a microscope to identify clue cells. While most diagnosticians should be able to perform basic microscopic exams without much difficulty, those who have visual limitations or little/distant experience in using microscopy may be at a disadvantage. Those without microscopes entirely are unable to perform this test.

Additionally, the Amsel criteria do require the retrieval of vaginal discharge sampling. While this generally can be done without much patient discomfort, some providers may feel inclined to accept the patient’s report of symptoms such as discharge or fish smell as a positive criterion without collecting physical samples instead. It is important to note that in the context of the Amsel criteria, the “whiff test” is only considered positive after applying potassium hydroxide solution to the vaginal sample on a wet mount. Patient report of fish smelling discharge does not constitute a positive whiff test, and therefore may not be considered a positive criterion.

Moreover, as mentioned above, it has been suggested that the Amsel criteria, while an improvement on Nugent scoring, should be further simplified to require only two out of four criteria to be considered a positive test. One study, in particular, found that using a combination of any two positive Amsel criteria had 99 to 100% specificity - and, in fact, the presence of clue cells on their own was 98% specific and 89.9% sensitive for bacterial vaginosis.

Conversely, it is essential to note that while the specificity of the Amsel criteria has general regard for achieving the 99th percentile, reports of sensitivity vary widely, with some studies reporting a sensitivity of only 37%.