A comprehensive history and physical examination should be performed in any and all patients.  The elderly (>65 years old) often present status post a low-energy fall with the arm outstretched in an attempt to brace the fall.  Younger patients often present following an MVA.

Most cases present in the acute setting. Pertinent questions include:

- mechanism of injury

- description of pain intensity and quality

- presence of radiating pain or pain anywhere else about the ipsilateral limb

- clinicians should note that other ipsilateral upper extremity injuries should be ruled out

- any previous injuries to the shoulder girdle or ipsilateral limb

- any previous surgeries or current/previous implants to the ipsilateral limb

- hand dominance

- social/living situation

- particularly pertinent in elderly patients living alone or at home with minimal if any support

**Physical examination**

Inspection is assessing for signs of open fracture, ecchymosis that may extend to the chest, arm, and forearm. Crepitus and pain are often present over the fracture site.  Loss of deltoid contour suggests concomitant dislocation of shoulder suggesting a higher-energy mechanism.  The examiner should determine if any associated neurovascular injury is present.  A comprehensive neurovascular examination should also be performed.  Examiners should maintain a heightened clinical suspicion for associated nerve injury (most commonly a transient neuropraxia to the axillary nerve) especially in the setting of a fracture-dislocation pattern.  Arterial compromise is much less common and can occur even in the setting of intact distal pulses palpated on exam secondary to extensive collateral blood supply.