Topiramate is available for the adult and pediatric populations in two oral preparations, immediate-release (taken twice daily) and extended-release (taken once daily). Patients should not crush the tablets since there is a bitter taste. There is a sprinkle capsule formulation that the patient may add to a small amount of soft food; topiramate administration may be without regard to meals. Alcohol should be avoided 6 hours before and after the administration of topiramate.

**Monotherapy for partial onset seizures, primary generalized tonic-clonic seizures:**The suggested dose for topiramate in adults and pediatric patients ten years and older is 400 mg/day in two divided doses. A slow titration schedule of 25 to 50 mg/day weekly increments is preferred to decrease the frequency of adverse effects.****

**Adjunctive therapy for primary generalized tonic-clonic seizures, partial onset seizures, or Lennox-Gastaut Syndrome:**The suggested total daily dose of topiramate as an adjunctive treatment in adults with partial onset seizures is 200 to 400 mg/day & 400 mg/day in two divided doses with primary generalized tonic-clonic seizures. It is suggested that treatment be initiated at a lower dose(25 to 50 mg/day) followed by an up-titration of 25 to 50 mg/day every week.

**Migraine Prevention:**According to American Academy of Neurology guidelines, topiramate is an effective therapy for migraine prevention (level A), significantly decreasing migraine attack frequency and severity. The recommended dose range is 25-50 mg. Patients with a favorable response to topiramate pharmacotherapy within 4 to 8 weeks should continue treatment for at least six months to acquire maximum benefit. Dose escalation up to 200 mg may be required in selected patients.

**Use in Specific Patient Population**

**Patients with Hepatic Impairment:**Topiramate plasma concentrations may be increased in patients with hepatic impairment. However, the increase in plasma concentration is not significant, and no dose adjustment is generally suggested.

**Patients with Renal Impairment:******Half of the usual dose is suggested for moderate to severe renal impairment and ESRD. As topiramate is removed by dialysis, a supplemental dose may be required during hemodialysis.

**Pregnancy Considerations: A topiramate**dose of less than 200 mg daily does not affect the pharmacokinetic levels of oral contraceptive pills that contain 35 micrograms of ethinyl estradiol. The dose of topiramate used for migraine prevention (25–50 mg) is not supposed to reduce contraceptive efficacy. (ACOG 2020)

**Breastfeeding Considerations:**Maternal doses of topiramate up to 200 mg daily produce a low concentration in infant serum. Sedation and diarrhea have been reported in breastfed infants, but most infants tolerate the drug in milk well. Monitor the infant for diarrhea, drowsiness, irritability, weight gain, and developmental milestones. Caution is required in exclusively breastfed infants and simultaneous use of antiepileptics or psychotropic drugs.