Asbestosis has no specific treatment, so supportive care is the only available option. Therefore, prevention is the best management. Monitoring the occupational environment and minimizing asbestos exposure have a significant role in asbestosis control.

**Drug Therapy**

The goal of corticosteroid therapy is to suppress the acute and chronic inflammatory process, thereby reducing lung damage, but the success rate is low. Steroids suppress the release of reactive species and mediators in the ongoing inflammatory process. Because of the lack of placebo-controlled trials, there is no direct evidence of the benefits of steroids in improving the survival of life. The proper dose and length of therapy of steroids are not known.

Patient with asbestosis sometimes has also a history of smoking and they develop chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD). In such cases, inhalers containing long-acting beta 2 agonists, inhaled corticosteroids, or long-acting muscarinic antagonists are also prescribed. Smoking cessation is also advised.

**Oxygenation**

Patients with hypoxemia (Pao2 less than 55 mmHg) at rest or on exertion should be supplemented with oxygen. Pulmonary rehabilitation and management of cor pulmonale have been shown to improve the quality of life as the disease progresses.

**Surgery**

Decortication of subpleural fibrosis by thoracotomy improves atelectasis. Pleurectomy can be performed in pleural fibrosis.

**Lung Transplantation**

This is the ultimate treatment in severe asbestosis, where all other therapies have failed in the case of chronic and irreversible fibrosis.