The use of beta-blockers, noninvasive monitoring, restriction of vigorous physical exercise, and elective repair of the aorta has a greatly improved prognosis. In 1968, Bentall and De Bono introduced the Bentall procedure as the standard surgical approach for patients with MFS. A polyethylene conduit is attached to a mechanical aortic valve, which then replaces the dilated ascending aorta and aortic root.

Patients require lifelong anticoagulation secondary to mechanical valve replacement. For patients in whom anticoagulation is not the recommendation, valve-sparing techniques have been adopted, including the Yacoub technique and the valve reimplantation or David technique. With the Yacoub technique, the sinuses of Valsalva undergo resection and replacement with a vascular graft and coronary artery reimplantation; optimal patients have sinus or aortic dilation without annular dilation. The David technique involves reimplantation of the native aortic valve into the graft and is for patients with annular involvement.

The 2010 ACC/AHA/AATS guidelines for the thoracic aortic disease include recommendations for MFS. Patients should have echocardiography performed at the time of diagnosis and six months later to determine aortic root and ascending aortic diameters, as well as their rate of growth.

Transthoracic echocardiography (TTE) is the primary modality in the diagnosis of MFS, although transesophageal echocardiography (TEE) is utilized in situations of suspected dissection to measure the maximal dimension of the aortic root with the parasternal long-axis view. The leading-edge-to-leading-edge technique in diastole is implemented in adults, while the inner-edge-to-inner-edge technique in systole, is utilized among pediatric cardiologists. For MFS, aortic diameter at the sinuses of Valsalva is the key measurement since this is at greatest risk for aortic dissection, and monitoring is via echocardiography. A greater length of aortic dilation is associated with a worse prognosis.

In a retrospective analysis of 140 patients with MFS with FBN1 mutations who had undergone routine thoracoabdominal CT or MRI as part of their follow-up, about one-third had incidental findings of peripheral vascular aneurysms, with 55% of these patients requiring intervention.

When ascending aortic dimensions are stable, and there is no identified aortic disease, cross-sectional imaging is repeated every three to five years and prior to elective operation, and annually if the aortic diameter is less than 45 mm. However, if the aortic diameter is 45 mm or is enlarging, more frequent imaging is suggested, up to twice annually, and may indicate the need for surgery. More frequent imaging is also prudent if the aortic diameter shows a rapid change (equal to 0.5 cm per year) or if the heart or valve function is circumspect.

As noted in the 2010 American College of Cardiology/American Heart Association/American Association for Thoracic Surgery (ACC/AHA/AATS) thoracic aorta guidelines, beta-blockers are recommended in adults with MFS and aortic aneurysm to lower the rate of aortic dilatation.

Beta-blocker therapy is also recommended for children with MFS and aortic aneurysm, though data in children is inconclusive. In an observational study, 44 children and adolescents with MFS were followed for almost four years.

While data are limited, the addition of an angiotensin 2 receptor blocker as tolerated to beta-blocker therapy may slow the rate of aortic root dilation in patients with MFS, as evidenced in the 2010 ACC/AHA/AATS guidelines. Renin-angiotensin system blockers may alleviate the clinical manifestations of MFS by blocking TGF-beta signaling.

A randomized trial comparing losartan with atenolol in 608 children and adults with MFS and aortic Z-scores greater than 3.0 found no significant difference in the rate of aortic root dilation between the two treatment groups over three years.

Both animal and human data suggest that calcium channel blocker therapy may increase the risk of aortic complications.****Marfan mice treated with calcium channel blockers demonstrated aneurysm expansion, rupture, and premature death. Patients with Marfan syndrome and other forms of thoracic aortic aneurysm taking calcium channel blockers have an increased risk of aortic dissection and the need for aortic surgery.

Elective replacement of aortic root disease in advance of critical enlargement has been shown to be integral as illustrated in a series of 675 patients with MFS from Johns Hopkins in which the 30-day mortality for elective, urgent (within 7 days of surgical consultation), or emergency repair (within 24 hours of consultation) was 1.5%, 2.6%, and 11.7%, respectively.

There is conflicting data on the safety profile of pregnant women with MFS. The 2010 thoracic aortic disease guidelines urge pregnancy avoidance if the aortic root diameter exceeds 40 mm and further recommend prophylactic aortic root replacement in women who will attempt pregnancy. The European and Canadian guidelines report an aortic root diameter of 45 mm to be considered safe. In a 2012 study, there was a significantly higher rate of aortic growth documented during pregnancy than at baseline.