A transient lung dysfunction leading to atelectasis caused by general anesthesia generally resolves itself within 24 hours. Unfortunately, some patients may develop significant respiratory complications resulting in increased morbidity and mortality without treatment.  Prevention of atelectasis is achieved through the avoidance of general anesthesia, early mobility, adequate pain treatment including minimization of parenteral opioid use.  When general anesthesia is required, steps should be taken to prevent the development of atelectasis such as: using continuous positive airway pressure (CPAP),  using the lowest possible FiO2 during anesthesia administration, use of PEEP (positive end-expiratory pressure), engaging in lung recruitment maneuvers, and using low tidal volumes.

Sitting upright increases functional residual capacity (FRC)  decreasing atelectasis.

Mucolytic agents (acetylcysteine) and recombinant human DNase (dornase alpha) are pharmacologic agents which may be of some benefit in patients with cystic fibrosis, as mucous plugs are often seen in this patient population.

Bronchoscopy may be used to manage atelectasis. In one study, bronchoscopy resulted in improved lung function reversing atelectasis 76% of the time.  Bronchoscopy should be used when mechanical obstruction of the bronchus is suspected and coughing or suctioning has not been successful. Bronchoscopy should also be considered when early ambulation, incentive spirometry, bronchodilators, and humidity,  have not been successful after 24 hours of use.

Engaging in preventative strategies early and promptly recognizing atelectasis will improve patient outcomes and significantly decrease cost.