**Proximal biceps (long head of the biceps tendon) Surgical Considerations**

In the setting of advanced tendinopathy affecting the long head of the biceps tendon and in the setting of persistent, debilitating symptoms despite exhausting all nonoperative treatment options, two common procedures can be performed.

**Biceps Tenotomy**

Arthroscopic inspection of the tendon allows for estimation of the relative percentage of the long head of the biceps tendon that is compromised.  A popular classification system utilized for the intra-operative grade corresponding to the degree of the long head of the biceps tendon macroscopic pathology is the Lafosse grading scale.

- Grade 0: Normal tendon

- Grade 1: Minor lesion (partial, localized areas of tendon erosion/fraying, focal areas affect <50% of the tendon width)

- Grade 2: Major lesion (extensive tendon loss, compromising more than 50% of the tendon width)

Some surgeons solely debride the tendon in the setting of over 25% to 50% tendinous compromise.  Arthroscopic biceps tenotomy is performed by releasing the tendon as close as possible to the superior labrum.  As long as the tendon is free from intimate soft tissue adhesions to surrounding structures, the tendon should retract distally toward the bicipital groove.  If adhesions are present, all efforts should be made to mobilize the tendon in order to allow for retraction following the tenotomy.  In cases where the long head of the biceps tendon is particularly hypertrophic and scarred to other soft tissue structures in the joint, this is a potential source of postoperative pain.

**Biceps Tenodesis**

- This procedure is recommended over tenotomy in the setting of long head of the biceps tendon instability.

- Biceps tenodesis is the preferred technique in younger patients, athletes, laborers, and those patients specifically concerned with postoperative cosmetic (“popeye”) deformity.

- Optimizes the length-tension relationship of the biceps muscle; mitigates the postoperative risk of muscle atrophy, fatigue, and cramping.