Radiation esophagitis is a common problem in patients who receive upper-body radiation. The patient is often unable to eat solids and/or liquids. In addition, eating and swallowing are often associated with pain. The management of this condition is best accomplished with an interprofessional team approach. The nurse plays a vital role in educating the patient prior to radiation about this complication. Further, the nurse is responsible for monitoring the amount of food intake and weight gain/loss. The pharmacist can help lower the pain and the discomfort by providing viscous lidocaine and proton pump inhibitors/sucralfate. Because the patients are also prone to fungal esophagitis, the pharmacist must be proactive and encourage starting the patient on nystatin. Finally, the dietitian is vital as many patients may have difficulty eating. The dietitian can assess the calorie requirements and suggest alternative ways of delivering the calories. [Level 3]

**Outcomes**

Despite advances in delivering radiation, esophagitis still continues to occur and carries high morbidity. The actual outcomes of patients with radiation esophagitis are not accurately reported but the numbers are not minuscule.

However, the prognosis of radiation esophagitis is good. This disease process is an adverse effect of radiation therapy, and symptoms usually resolve within 2 to 4 weeks after radiation therapy has been completed. In some cases, with high dosage radiation, long-term complications include stricture formation or perforation. Emami et al. estimated that 5% of patients who received radiation therapy at 60 Gy developed late complications.

Patients who underwent radiation and developed radiation esophagitis have a 5- to 10-fold increased risk of developing esophageal squamous cell carcinoma. Adequate long-term follow-up is needed. [Level 3]