**COC:**The Patients should be counseled thoroughly on potential adverse reactions before initiating hormone contraceptive pills and informed to report signs and symptoms of serious adverse reactions to achieve better adherence and treatment outcomes. A healthy woman taking COCs should have an annual visit with her primary care provider for a blood pressure check and routine medical care. Monitor blood pressure in women with well-controlled hypertension being managed medically. Monitor prediabetic and diabetic women periodically as hormone contraceptives may impair glucose intolerance and is usually dose-dependent.

**POP:**Prescribers should monitor baseline weight and BMI before initiating the POP.

**Drospirenone:**It****has an anti-mineralocorticoid activity which might cause hyperkalemia in high-risk patients (3 mg drospirenone has comparable anti-mineralocorticoid activity as 25 mg dose of spironolactone), so women with diseases which predispose to hyperkalemia or who are taking medications that increase serum potassium concentration should be monitored for serum potassium level in the first treatment cycle. Medicines that may increase serum potassium levels include potassium supplementation, potassium-sparing diuretics, angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitors, angiotensin-II receptor antagonists, aldosterone antagonists, heparin, and non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs. In addition, long-term users of CYP3A4 inhibitor concomitantly administered with OC should be monitored for serum potassium levels. Strong CYP3A4 inhibitors include protease inhibitors (e.g., indinavir, boceprevir), azole antifungals (e.g., ketoconazole, voriconazole, itraconazole), and clarithromycin.