Because of the difficulties in the diagnosis and recognition of HCM, estimates of its exact prevalence and incidence are widely variable. The reported numbers are also dependent on whether the cohorts are population-based, primary care-based, or subspecialty clinic-based, as well as whether the analysis is restricted to adults or include pediatric populations.

It generally accepted that iatrogenic Cushing syndrome (ICS) is by far the most prevalent form of HCM. There is some suggestion with more recent data that SCS may be more commonplace than previously presumed. Estimates from one Danish series suggested that during an 11-yr period, the incidence of Cushing syndrome was 1.2 to 1.7/million person-years (Cushing disease), 0.6/million person-years (adrenal adenoma) and 0.2/million person-years (adrenal carcinoma).

Other cohorts report widely variable incidence rates of Cushing disease (the most prevalent form of endogenous CS) ranging between 1.2 to up to 25 million.

There is some suggestion that ectopic Cushing syndrome (EcCS) is more common than reported, but most series suggest a prevalence of approximately 10-15% of all CS patients. Small cell lung cancer is the most common etiologic cause of this form of CS. Only 1% of patients with small-cell lung cancer have EcCS suggesting an incidence of approximately 300 new cases annually in the United States.

Adrenal mass lesions causing ACTH independent CS is assuming greater importance as far as prevalence and incidence. Adrenal incidentalomas have become more prevalent with the more widespread use of powerful imaging modalities like CT and MRI scans for the evaluation of various non-specific abdominal complaints. Depending on whether radiologic or autopsy based data are used, adrenal incidentalomas have a prevalence of approximately 1.3 to 8.7%.

All the other etiologic causes, including macronodular adrenal hyperplasia, micronodular adrenal hyperplasia (including primary pigmented nodular adrenocortical disease; PPNAD), ectopic CRH syndrome are rare, but the clinician needs to be aware of their existence as diagnostic considerations in unusual clinical presentation scenarios.

Overall, CS is more prevalent in women (3 to 8 times more frequent); this applies to both pituitary and adrenal based CS as well as both benign and malignant etiologies. The one subgroup in which men have typically had a greater prevalence is with EcCS, and this appears to be due to the greater incidence of tobacco abuse and consequently increased small cell lung cancer in men compared to women. As smoking among women has risen while declining among men, the prevalence disparity of EcCS among the sexes has also declined compared to findings from a series of over three decades ago.

Cushing disease (CD) most common age bracket of diagnosis is 25 to 45 years while that for EcCS is greater than 50 years. CS is less common in pediatric populations, and CD appears to constitute approximately 30% of CS in pediatric cohorts, which are significantly less than in adult cohorts. Also, small pediatric series suggest that in prepubertal children with CS, boys are more commonly afflicted than girls, while in adolescents, the female preponderance seen in adults is also apparent.

Adrenal neoplastic causes of CS have a bimodal age distribution pattern. There is one peak in the first decade of life and a second more significant peak at approximately age 40 years for adrenal carcinomas and around age 50 years for adrenal adenomas.