Most cases of TEN are drug-induced, and it usually occurs within 1 to 3 weeks of initiation of treatment. Therefore, a detailed medication history, especially one recently started, is a pivotal part of the patient’s history. Nevertheless, around 5% of reported cases show no history of recent drug utilization.

Most patients report a prodrome of influenza-like symptoms (fever, malaise, arthralgia, rhinitis, and headache), which may last between 1 to 21 days. Then, cutaneous eruption ensues as an ill-defined dusky erythematous macular rash and bullae, which then coalesces to form sheet-like blisters. These blisters can easily slough, leaving a characteristic moist denuded dermis. They usually start in the face, presternal area before affecting the whole torso. However, the scalp area remains spared in almost all cases. The pain usually precedes the vesicular eruption. Applying slight pressure on the epidermis leads to epidermal detachment from the underlying surface (positive Nikolsky sign). This is not characteristic for TEN cases as it can occur with other exfoliative skin conditions, e.g., autoimmune bullous skin diseases. The progression of the cutaneous eruption is highly variable. In most patients, it occurs over a period of 2 weeks. However, it can abruptly evolve to affect the whole body within 24 hours. In severe cases, it may also occur in areas of reepithelialization. Evaluation of the surface area of the affected skin is important to differentiate TEN from SJS. It is essential to emphasize that only detached skin (i.e., blisters or erosions) or the potentially detachable skin (Positive Nikolsky sign) should be included when calculating the affected body surface area.

Mucosal affection (erythema and erosion) occurs in 90% of cases and generally precedes skin eruption by 1 to 3 days. The oropharynx, eye, and genitalia are the most frequently affected mucosal membranes. However, other areas have been reported, including the respiratory tract and gastrointestinal tract.