Management of patients with prelabor rupture of membranes is determined by gestational age.

- Early term and term patients (37 0/7 weeks of gestation or more): proceed to delivery and Group B Streptococcus prophylaxis should be administered as indicated

- Late Preterm (34 0/7- 36 6/7 weeks of gestation): same for early term and term

- Preterm (24 0/7 – 33 6/7 weeks of gestation): expectant management, latency antibiotics, single course of corticosteroids, GBS prophylaxis as indicated

- Less than 24 weeks of gestation: patient counseling, expectant management or induction of labor, antibiotics can be considered as early as 20 0/7 weeks of gestation, GBS prophylaxis/corticosteroids/tocolysis/magnesium sulfate are not recommended before viability

Nonreassuring fetal status and chorioamnionitis are indications for delivery. If the patient presents with vaginal bleeding, there may be a concern for a placental abruption and delivery should be considered. The decision for delivery should be made based on fetal status, amount of bleeding, the stability of mother, and gestational age. In a term patient, if spontaneous labor does not occur near the time of presentation, labor should be induced.

Generally, patients with preterm PROM should be admitted to hospital with periodic assessment for infection, placental abruption, umbilical cord compression, fetal well-being, and labor. Periodic ultrasound evaluation should be performed to monitor fetal growth as well as periodic fetal heart rate monitoring. Vital signs should be monitored and a rise in maternal temperature should raise suspicion for an intrauterine infection. Serial monitoring of leukocytes and inflammatory markers have not proved to be useful in diagnosing infection as they are found to be nonspecific if there is no clinical evidence of infection. Administration of corticosteroids will also cause a transient leukocytosis.

The use of tocolytics on patients with preterm PROM is controversial. Prophylactic tocolytics may be associated with a longer latency period and a lower risk of delivery within 48 hours. However, it is also associated with a higher risk of chorioamnionitis in pregnancies before 34 weeks of gestation. No significant maternal or neonatal benefit has been shown with the use of tocolytics

Antenatal corticosteroids after preterm PROM have been shown to reduce neonatal mortality, respiratory distress syndrome, necrotizing enterocolitis, and intraventricular hemorrhage. A single course of corticosteroids is recommended for all pregnant women between 24 0/7 weeks and 34 0/7 weeks of gestation if there is a risk of delivery in the next 7 days.

The administration of magnesium sulfate should be used when delivery is anticipated before 32 0/7 weeks of gestation in order to reduce the risk of cerebral palsy

Antibiotics have been shown to prolong pregnancy, reduce maternal and neonatal infections, and reduce fetal morbidity. A seven day course of therapy is recommended in women with preterm PROM who are at less than 34 weeks of gestation. The recommended regimen is intravenous ampicillin (2g every 6 hours) and erythromycin (250 mg every 6 hours) for 48 hours, followed by oral amoxicillin (250 mg every 8 hours) and erythromycin base (333 mg every 8 hours). A seven day course should be completed. Amoxicillin-clavulanic acid is not recommended due to increased rates of necrotizing enterocolitis. If the patient is a candidate for GBS prophylaxis, she should receive antibiotics to prevent vertical transmission of GBS

Women with a history of preterm PROM have a higher risk of recurrent PROM and preterm birth. Progesterone supplementation should be offered to reduce the risk of spontaneous preterm birth.