Wrist fractures are complex because of the number of anatomical structures that may be involved. The majority of these patients have their initial encounter with the nurse practitioner or emergency department physician. Once the diagnosis of wrist fracture is made, an orthopedic or hand surgery consult is usually the next step. Poorly managed wrist fractures demonstrate enormous morbidity and often lead to limited use of the hand. Asides from pain control and stabilization, these patients should receive a referral to a hand or orthopedic surgeon. Mild fractures may undergo management with closed reduction, but severely displaced fractures may require ORIF.

Once the wrist fracture is managed, the primary care clinicians should follow the patient for pain management, which can be significant. Before recommending the patient back to work, the orthopedic surgeon should re-examine the patient. Long term monitoring is necessary because even surgery has its complications, and not everyone obtains the desired result. Communication between the team members should be open to ensure that the patient receives the optimal level of care. Nursing will play a pivotal role in either surgical or conservative management, but monitoring on followup visits, checking progress and coordinating with any physical or occupational therapy. This type of interprofessional coordination is necessary to achieve optimal outcomes and minimize morbidity.

The outlook for most patients is fair, but a significant number do have chronic pain and limited range of motion after treatment. Physical therapy is a must to regain muscle function and strength.