# Continuing Education Activity

Pulsus alternans is an arterial pulse with alternating strong and weak beats. It is found in the setting of severe ventricular dysfunction and other forms of cardiac pathology. The treatment and clinical outcomes for pulsus alternans vary depending upon the underlying causative etiology, though its presence generally suggests a poor prognostic outlook. This activity reviews the evaluation and treatment of pulsus alternans and highlights the role of the interprofessional team in evaluating and treating patients with this condition.

**Objectives:**
- Describe the pathophysiology of pulsus alternans.
- Review the common findings associated with pulsus alternans.
- Outline the treatment considerations for patients with pulsus alternans.
- Explain the importance of collaboration and communication among the interprofessional team to enhance the delivery of care for patients with pulsus alternans.

# Introduction

Pulsus alternans (PA), not to be confused with pulsus paradoxus or electrical alternans, is an arterial pulse with alternating strong and weak beats. It is a hemodynamic phenomenon marked by a beat-to-beat alternation in the amplitude of the pulse resulting in a clinically identifiable pulse half of the electrical rate. In 1872, Ludwig Traube first described this phenomenon.

Pulsus alternans usually occurs in association with severe heart disease and can eventually lead to pulseless electrical activity.

# Etiology

Pulsus alternans occurs as a result of underlying cardiac distress and dysfunction. Pulsus alternans has been identified as left ventricular, right ventricular, or biventricular, and the etiology of pulsus alternans varies depending on the causative pathology. Left ventricular alternans occurs in the setting of severe left ventricular dysfunction. This includes cardiomyopathy, aortic stenosis, and coronary artery disease. Right ventricular alternans occurs as a result of right ventricular strain, often precipitated by a pulmonary embolus or pulmonary hypertension. Other potential etiologies of right ventricular alternans include reactive airway disease, mitral stenosis, or left-sided heart failure.

Another possible etiology for PA is pericardial effusion. Different mechanisms may provoke PA, such as hemodynamic and inotropic impairment.

# Epidemiology

The patient population in which pulsus alternans occurs is reflected by the underlying pathophysiology. While pulsus alternans is a relatively rare documented occurrence, it is most commonly associated with left ventricular dysfunction.

# Pathophysiology

The exact mechanism of pulsus alternans has never been clearly determined. However, two different mechanisms have been theorized to explain the pathophysiology. The first involves the Frank-Starling curve, where the alternating contractile force is a result of the variation of the end-diastolic volume.

# History and Physical

A thorough cardiovascular exam should be completed for all patients identified as having pulsus alternans. Given the common underlying etiologies, patients with pulsus alternans will often present with overt signs of decompensated heart failure. This includes elevated jugular venous pressure, bibasilar rales, and peripheral edema. Depending upon the degree of cardiac decompensation, the patient may also be tachycardic, tachypneic, or hypotensive. The presence of an aortic stenosis murmur, S3, or S4, is another exam finding for which one should look. A more specific physical exam finding classically associated with pulsus alternans would be alternating strong and soft pulses of the radial artery.

Pulsus alternans can be identified by palpating the artery, using a sphygmomanometer, and examining arterial and plethysmographic waveforms.

# Evaluation

Whenever pulsus alternans is suspected, the appropriate cardiac workup should be completed, including laboratory work, chest X-ray, electrocardiogram, and echocardiogram. Objective laboratory findings include elevated pro-BNP and pulmonary vascular congestion on chest X-ray. Electrocardiogram will often show normal sinus rhythm or sinus tachycardia.

Timing of events and the series of occurrences are important details one should pay attention to. Rarely, there can be a discrepancy between the electrical and mechanical activities of the heart, and echocardiography is an important tool to identify such inconsistency. Furthermore, there may be a discrepancy between the efficiency of the heart and the mechanical activation of the heart, the production of cardiac output, and in such cases, echocardiography can play a crucial role in diagnosing such a condition. Combining information from 2D and tissue Doppler evaluation of contractility, ECG tracing, and spectral tracing across the left ventricular outflow tract can provide an assessment of the mechanical activation of the heart, electrical activation of the heart muscle, and the resulting “success” of these efforts in producing cardiac output.

# Treatment / Management

As pulsus alternans is a sign of underlying cardiac dysfunction or disease, treatment involves the management of the underlying pathology. Treatment modalities for left ventricular alternans may include diuresis (for left-sided heart failure) or replacement of the aortic valve (for severe aortic stenosis).

# Differential Diagnosis

The differential diagnosis for pulsus alternans is varied depending upon the potential underlying etiology. Pulsus alternans of the left ventricle should raise concern for reduced ejection fraction, cardiomyopathy, aortic stenosis, coronary artery disease, or cardiac ischemia. Pulsus alternans of the right ventricle should raise concern for pulmonary embolus, pulmonary hypertension, reactive airway disease, or mitral stenosis.

# Prognosis

The prognosis for a patient with pulsus alternans will vary dependent upon the underlying etiology. However, the presence of pulsus alternans is generally considered a poor prognostic sign, as pulsus alternans is a feature of severe ventricular dysfunction.

# Complications

Potential complications in the setting of pulsus alternans are varied. Of chief concern are life-threatening cardiac complications, including myocardial infarction and ventricular arrhythmias. While the risk for developing ventricular arrhythmias in the setting of pulsus alternans is unknown, there is theoretically increased risk due to potential changes in cardiac conduction.

# Deterrence and Patient Education

Pulsus alternans indicate cardiac pathology, particularly left ventricular dysfunction, and is considered a poor prognostic indicator. When identified, pulsus alternans should elicit prompt treatment of the underlying causative process.

# Pearls and Other Issues

Pulsus alternans is not to be confused with electrical alternans or pulsus paradoxus. Pulsus alternans is beat-to-beat variability of the arterial pressure waveform as identified on physical exam and echocardiogram. Electrical alternans is beat-to-beat variability of the QRS complex on electrocardiogram, often found in the setting of pericardial effusion.

# Enhancing Healthcare Team Outcomes

Management of pulsus alternans secondary to underlying cardiac pathology will require an interprofessional approach. Prompt evaluation with cardiology should be an important component of any initial assessment for pulsus alternans. If the patient has associated respiratory distress, coordination with respiratory therapy will be necessary for the treatment plan. Nursing staff will need to closely monitor the patient’s vitals and perform strict monitoring of the patient’s intake and output. If ischemic heart disease or severe valvulopathy is suspected, consultation with interventional cardiology would also be warranted. If a large pulmonary embolism is identified, coordination with interventional radiology for catheter-directed anticoagulation may be considered. Depending on the degree of cardiac dysfunction, a surveillance echocardiogram may be a consideration. Given the cardiac dysfunction associated with pulsus alternans, a multidisciplinary approach is of great importance to monitor and treat patients with complex cardiac disease.