The goal of therapy in acute ischemic stroke is to preserve tissue in areas where perfusion is decreased but sufficient to avoid infarction. Tissue in this area of oligemia is preserved by restoring blood flow to the compromised regions and improving collateral flow. Recanalization strategies include recombinant tissue-type plasminogen activator. Restoring blood flow can minimize the effects of ischemia only if performed quickly.

Endovascular techniques have been used in the treatment of acute ischemic stroke. Carotid endarterectomy has been but there is no evidence that supports its use in acute ischemic stroke. Another consideration is neuroprotective agents but none so far have been shown to improve clinical outcomes.

The following may be considered:

**Alteplase**

The AHA/ASA recommends intravenous (IV) alteplase for patients who satisfy inclusion criteria and have symptom onset or last known baseline within 3 hours. IV alteplase is 0.9 mg/kg, with a maximum dose of 90 mg. The first 10% of the dose is given over the first minute as a bolus, and the remainder of the dose is given over the next 60 minutes. The time has been extended to 4.5 hours for selected candidates.

Inclusion criteria include diagnosis of ischemic stroke with “measurable neurological deficit,” symptom onset within 3 hours before treatment, and age 18 years or older.

A review of the exclusion criteria for thrombolytics should be performed before administering alteplase. According to the Food and Drug Administration, the contraindications to intravenous thrombolysis include active internal bleeding, recent intracranial surgery or serious head trauma, intracranial conditions that may increase the risk of bleeding, bleeding diathesis, severe uncontrolled hypertension, current intracranial hemorrhage, subarachnoid hemorrhage, and a history of a recent stroke.

For patients that present between 3 and 4.5 hours from symptoms onset, the treatment benefits and risks must be considered. Additional relative exclusion criteria for this patient category include age more than 80 years, NIHSS greater than 25, oral anticoagulant use, and a history of both diabetes and prior ischemic stroke.

Orolingual angioedema is a potential side effect of IV alteplase. If angioedema should occur, the management of the airway is a priority. Endotracheal intubation or awake fiberoptic intubation may be necessary to secure the airway. If there is suspected angioedema, hold IV alteplase and ACE inhibitors. Administer methylprednisolone, diphenhydramine, and ranitidine or famotidine. Epinephrine may be considered if the previous therapies do not alleviate signs and symptoms. Icatibant or C1 esterase inhibitor may be considered for the treatment of hereditary angioedema and ACE inhibitor angioedema.

Other fibrinolytic agents, such as tenecteplase, may be considered as an alternative to alteplase. In one study, tenecteplase appeared to have similar efficacy and safety profiles in a mild stroke but did not demonstrate superiority when compared to alteplase

**Mechanical Thrombectomy**

The use of mechanical thrombectomy should be considered in all patients, even in those who received fibrinolytic therapy. The AHA/ASA guidelines do not recommend observation for a response after IV alteplase in patients who are being considered for mechanical thrombectomy.

In recent years there are significant advancements in acute stroke care. Multiple stroke trials in 2015 showed that endovascular thrombectomy in the first six hours is much better than standard medical care in patients with large vessel occlusion in the arteries of the proximal anterior circulation. These benefits are sustained irrespective of geographical location and patient characteristics.

Again in 2018, a significant paradigm shift happened in stroke care. DAWN trial showed significant benefits of endovascular thrombectomy in patients with large vessel occlusion in the arteries of the proximal anterior circulation. This trial extended the stroke window up to 24 hours in selected patients using perfusion imaging. Subsequently, now more patients can be treated, even up to 24 hours.

The current recommendation in selected patients with large vessel occlusion with acute ischemic stroke in the anterior circulation and who also meet other DAWN and DEFUSE 3 criteria, mechanical thrombectomy is recommended within the time frame of 6 to 16 hours of last known normal. In selected patients who meet the DAWN criteria, mechanical thrombectomy is reasonable within 24 hours of the last known normal

**Blood Pressure**

The guidelines suggest blood pressure management of less than 180/105 mm Hg for the first 24 hours after IV alteplase. A new recommendation is lowering BP initially by 15% in patients with comorbid conditions such as acute heart failure or aortic dissection. There is no benefit of antihypertensive management to prevent death or dependency in patients with BP less than 220/120 mm Hg, who did not receive IV alteplase and have no comorbid conditions requiring blood pressure reduction. This applies to the first 48 to 72 hours after an acute ischemic stroke. For patients with greater than or equal to 220/120 mm Hg who did not receive IV alteplase, the guideline suggests it may be reasonable to reduce BP by 15% in the first 24 hours, although the benefit is uncertain.

Antihypertensive options include:

- IV labetalol 10 to 20 mg

- IV nicardipine 5 mg per hour. Increase 2.5 mg per hour every 5 to 15 minutes. The maximum dose is 15 mg per hour

- Clevidipine 1 to 2 mg per hour IV. Double dose every 15 minutes. Maximum 21 mg per hour

- Hydralazine, and enalaprilat may be considered

Hypotension and hypovolemia should be avoided because the cerebral perfusion pressure is dependent on the maintenance of elevated MAP as ICP increases due to an ischemic event.

**Temperature**

Hyperthermia of greater than 38 C should be avoided and treated appropriately. Antipyretics such as acetaminophen may be used. Common sources of infection should be ruled out, such as pneumonia and urinary tract infections. There is insufficient data to support therapeutic hypothermia in acute ischemic strokes currently. A retrospective study recently demonstrated an association between a peak temperature in the first 24 hours of greater than 39 C (100.4 F) and an increased risk of in-hospital mortality.

**Glucose**

Maintain glucose in the range of 140 to 180 in the first 24 hours. Hypoglycemic patients less than 60 mg/dL should be treated to achieve normoglycemia. The brain is dependent on oxidative pathways that require glucose for metabolism, and the metabolic demand of the brain is high; therefore, episodes of hypoglycemia can decrease the repair of the brain. However, hyperglycemia is hypothesized to decrease reperfusion due to oxidation of nitric oxide-dependent mechanisms and subsequent loss of vascular tone. Moreover, increased acidosis also plays a part, possibly due to injury to lactic acid-sensing channels. Capes et al. showed that hyperglycemia in ischemic stroke patients increases 30-day mortality and is an independent risk factor for hemorrhagic stroke conversion

**Nutrition**

Early enteric feeding should be encouraged. For patients with dysphagia, use a nasogastric tube to promote enteric feeding. If there is concern that the patient may have swallowing difficulties for a prolonged period (more than 2 to 3 weeks), placing a percutaneous gastrostomy tube is recommended. Early feeding has been demonstrated to have an absolute reduction in the risk of death

**DVT Prophylaxis**

Intermittent pneumatic compression is recommended for all immobile patients unless there are contraindications. Although prophylactic heparin is often used for immobile patients, the benefit is not clear in stroke patients

**Depression Screening**

Screening for depression should be considered; however, the optimal timing is unclear.

**Cerebellar/Cerebral Edema**

Cerebellar edema complicates cerebellar infarctions, and clinicians must be aware that these patients can rapidly decompensate. Cerebellar swelling is thought to be due to cytotoxic and vasogenic edema. The increased intracranial pressure can cause obstructing hydrocephalus on the fourth ventricle, or cause transtentorial herniation of the superior vermis and downward cerebellar tonsillar herniation. Signs include change or worsening mental status, decreased level of consciousness, respiratory abnormalities, change in pupillary size, posturing, and death.

Obtain neurosurgical consult early. A ventriculostomy is indicated in the setting of obstructive hydrocephalus after cerebellar infarct. In cases of cerebral edema with mass effect, a decompressive suboccipital craniectomy is highly recommended.

**Seizures**

If patients experience recurrent seizures, anti-epileptic drugs are recommended. However, the routine prophylactic use of anti-epileptic drugs is not recommended.

**Cardiac Evaluation**

Cardiac monitoring for atrial fibrillation or other arrhythmias is recommended in the first 24 hours. The benefit of further monitoring is unclear.

An initial troponin is recommended because there is an association between stroke and coronary artery disease.

**Antiplatelet Treatment**

Aspirin is recommended within 24 to 48 hours of symptom onset. A Cochrane review concluded that aspirin given within 48 hours of symptom onset for ischemic strokes prevented the recurrence of ischemic strokes and improved long-term outcomes. There was no major risk of early intracranial hemorrhage with aspirin

**Antithrombotic Treatment**

The use of warfarin in secondary stroke prevention is not recommended.

In patients with atrial fibrillation, the guidelines state it is reasonable to initiate oral anticoagulation within 4 to 14 days after neurological symptoms onset.

**Statins**

High-intensity statins (atorvastatin 80 mg daily or rosuvastatin 20 mg daily) are recommended for patients who are 75 years old or younger and who have clinical atherosclerotic cardiovascular disease. In addition, patients may be continued on statins if they were on them prior to the ischemic stroke.

When to start anticoagulation in patients with atrial fibrillation after acute stroke is always a dilemma. Usually, it depends on various factors like the size of the stroke and other comorbidities. Usually, if the size of the stroke is smaller to moderate, we start anticoagulation in 7-14 days.

Sometimes there are patients with small hemorrhagic transformation after acute stroke, and in this scenario, it is better to wait for anticoagulation for a couple of weeks. This delay is not associated with excessive stroke recurrence.