SSc is a multisystemic disorder, with significant variation in clinical presentation among affected individuals. In general, Diffuse cutaneous SSc (DcSSc) is more severe and has higher mortality than Limited cutaneous SSc (LcSSc), with more common and more severe internal organ involvement. Further, SSc tends to be more severe in males, African-Americans, and with a later age of onset.

**Raynaud Phenomenon**

Raynaud phenomenon is an early feature of SSc and is seen in more than 95% of patients with SSc. Vasospasm on exposure to cold leading to triphasic color change can be seen in the digits, more commonly in the upper extremities. These changes can also be seen in the ear, nose, or tongue. Vasospasm leads to initial pallor with well-demarcated white discoloration, followed by ischemic changes with dusky bluish discoloration, followed by reactive hyperemia with red discoloration. Not all patients will report all three colors. Raynaud can precede the visceral involvement by several years, especially in Limited cutaneous SSc (LcSSc), although in Diffuse cutaneous SSc (DcSSc), Raynauds may occur simultaneously or shortly after the skin changes. It must be noted that Raynaud phenomenon occurs in up to 15% of the general population without underlying SSc or connective tissue diseases. This is termed primary Raynaud and is associated with a female predominance (4:1), early age of onset (usually less than 20 years), symmetrical mild clinical features, normal nail fold capillaries, negative ANA, and is benign without ischemic complications. However, secondary Raynaud, as seen in SSc, can be associated with severe complications. In SSc, the vasospastic insult caused by Raynaud is complicated by the underlying nonvasculitic vasculopathy (intimal hyperplasia, fibrosis) and abnormal regulation of local vasomotor control, which leads to loss of vessel flexibility. Digital pitting, digital ulcers, and loss of fingertip tissue are common in SSc and can lead to digital ischemia and dry gangrene, leading to autoamputation. Superimposed infections are common. Raynaud phenomenon in SSc is also associated with an abnormal nail fold capillary exam which reveals capillary dilation, hemorrhages, and drop-out.

**Cutaneous Manifestations**

Skin involvement is the most overt feature of SSc and is present in almost all patients with SSc with varying degrees and severity. The classification of SSc into LcSSc and DcSSc is based on the extent of cutaneous involvement. Skin involvement distal to elbows and knees with sparing of the trunk is classified as LcSSc, while skin involvement proximal to elbows or knees and/or trunk involvement is classified as DsSSc. The face may be involved in both LcSSc and DcSSc.

The initial "puffy finger phase" is associated with inflammation and non-pitting edema of hands and may last several months. Pruritis, burning pain, and erythema are common. The edema can lead to compression of underlying structures, and compression neuropathies such as carpal tunnel syndrome are common. Loss of skin appendages causes dry, uncomfortable skin. Skin thickening and fibrosis begin to develop during this initial phase, which is then followed by the fibrotic phase.

During this second prolonged fibrotic phase, skin fibrosis and thickening begins distal to the metacarpophalangeal joints (sclerodactyly) and progresses proximally. The thick leather-like skin and fibrosis of deeper subcutaneous structures lead to permanent contractures and decreased mobility of the peripheral joints. There is further loss of skin appendages and subcutaneous adipose tissue (lipodystrophy). Facial involvement causes small oral aperture (fish-mouth or masked facies). Skin ulcers may develop at sites of trauma such as extensor surfaces of metacarpophalangeal, interphalangeal, or elbow joints. A salt-and-pepper-like appearance due to areas of depigmentation among normally pigmented skin can be seen.

The final skin-softening phase may be occasionally seen and usually occurs many years after the initial presentation. During this phase, the skin, especially on the trunk and upper arms, may begin to soften and return to clinically normal skin, although the underlying subcutaneous tissue is still fibrotic.

Telangiectasias can be seen in SSc due to dilatation of capillaries, and are common on the hands, face, mucosal surfaces, and sometimes on the trunk. Telangiectasias blanch on applying pressure. They can increase over time and are considered to be associated with an increased risk of pulmonary hypertension.

Subcutaneous calcinosis can be seen in both DcSSc and LcSSc, although it is more common in LcSSc and patients with a positive anti-centromere antibody. Calcinosis is due to clusters of subcutaneous deposition of calcium hydroxyapatite and is most frequently seen over areas of trauma such as finger pads and extensor surfaces of elbows. Calcinosis can lead to skin ulceration and secondary infection.

**Musculoskeletal Manifestations**

Musculoskeletal symptoms are seen in almost all patients with SSc. Arthralgia and myalgia are commonly present. True synovitis and inflammatory arthritis can also be seen and can have a rheumatoid arthritis-like pattern with the involvement of metacarpophalangeal, proximal interphalangeal, wrist, and ankle joints. Erosions are, however, rare but can be seen in association with periarticular calcinosis. Large joint involvement is rare but can be seen in DcSSc. Overlap of SSc with RA can be seen in up to 5% of cases.

Muscle involvement or myopathy in SSc can be multifactorial. An inflammatory myopathy or myositis similar to polymyositis can be seen in up to 10% of patients with SSc and is associated with rapidly progressive proximal muscle weakness, elevated muscle enzymes, and biopsy with inflammatory myositis. Further, patients with SSc can experience decreased muscle strength due to malnutrition or due to deconditioning due to joint disease and skin fibrosis. A fibrosing myopathy can also be seen due to direct muscle involvement in SSc, leading to muscle fibrosis and atrophy. These patients may have mildly elevated muscle enzymes, and biopsy shows fibrosis and atrophy with little or no inflammation. They usually do not respond to anti-inflammatory agents, which are usually effective in inflammatory myopathies. Myopathy in SSc is also associated with a poor overall prognosis.

**Gastrointestinal M**anifestations****

Gastrointestinal involvement is also almost universal in SSc, both DcSSc and LcSSc. Symptoms may be mild to severe, and any segment gastrointestinal tract can be involved. Oropharyngeal involvement includes perioral skin tightening and decreased oral aperture, periodontitis, and gingivitis. Dry mouth can be seen due to salivary gland fibrosis due to SSc or due to inflammatory infiltrate due to secondary Sjögren syndrome. Esophageal dysmotility due to esophageal fibrosis, especially involving the distal two-thirds of the esophagus leading to dysphagia and heartburn, is seen in up to 90% of patients with SSc. The lower esophageal sphincter becomes hypotonic, which worsens reflux symptoms. Complications of esophageal dysmotility can include esophagitis, esophageal strictures, Barrett’s esophagus, and even bleeding. Gastric involvement can include delayed gastric emptying (gastroparesis) that can lead to early satiety, bloating, nausea, emesis, and anorexia, which can cause malnutrition and weight loss. Gastric antral vascular ectasia (GAVE), also known as "watermelon stomach," is the result of gastric telangiectasias and can lead to occult or large amounts of gastrointestinal bleeding. Intestinal dysmotility can cause diarrhea, constipation, and intestinal bacterial overgrowth. Mucosal telangiectasias can cause occult gastrointestinal bleeding. Intestinal dysmotility can lead to pseudo-obstruction that can be serious. Wide-mouthed diverticula due to intestinal mucosal muscular atrophy are unique to SSc. Reduced anal sphincter tone can lead to rectal prolapse and incontinence. Hepatic involvement is not seen in SSc, although SSc has been associated with primary biliary cirrhosis.

**Pulmonary M**anifestations****

Pulmonary disease is the leading cause of mortality in patients with SSc. The characteristic pulmonary involvement includes interstitial lung disease (ILD) and/or pulmonary hypertension (PAH). Less common pulmonary manifestations include pleuritis, obstructive airway disease, aspiration pneumonia, pulmonary hemorrhage, and cryptogenic organizing pneumonia. Pulmonary disease in SSc can range from clinically asymptomatic disease to progressive respiratory failure with severe morbidity.

ILD is seen as bibasilar pulmonary fibrosis and is more common and more severe in DcSSc, African-Americans, males, and in those with anti–topoisomerase I antibody. Clinically significant ILD can be seen in 50% of SSc, although it can be asymptomatic, and postmortem examinations revealed ILD in 80% of patients with SSc.

PAH is the other common pulmonary manifestation and can range from asymptomatic disease to severe PAH with right heart failure. PAH usually occurs late in the disease, usually more than 10 years after SSc diagnosis. PAH can be seen in SSc is between 30% and 50%, more commonly in LcSSc. PAH risk is higher with the late age of diagnosis of SSc, multiple telangiectasias, and presence of anti-U3-RNP antibody. Symptoms include dyspnea initially, and chest pain, lower extremity swelling, lightheadedness, and syncope later in the disease. Accentuated P component of the second heart sound (S2) can be present. PFT show isolated reduction in diffusion capacity (DLCO). NT-proBNP blood levels may be increased. An echocardiogram can show elevated peak right ventricular systolic pressure (RVSP). When suspected, a right heart catheterization shall be performed to confirm the diagnosis of PAH and to rule out other etiologies. Elevation in mean pulmonary arterial pressure to 25mmHg or more, with a normal pulmonary capillary wedge pressure, is considered diagnostic of PAH.

**Cardiac M**anifestations****

Cardiac manifestations include pericarditis, pericardial effusion, dilated cardiomyopathy, and arrhythmias. Left ventricular diastolic dysfunction can occur secondary to PAH. Cardiac involvement is associated with a poor prognosis. Pericardial effusions are usually small, exudative and tamponade is uncommon. Pericardial effusions are more common in DcSSc and are predictive for scleroderma renal crisis. Dilated cardiomyopathy occurs due to patchy myocardial fibrosis. Conduction pathway fibrosis can lead to arrhythmias, with the most common finding being premature ventricular contractions, although heart block, intraventricular conduction delays, and supraventricular tachycardia have been reported.

**Renal M**anifestations****

Scleroderma renal crisis (SRC) was almost always fatal and was the leading cause of mortality in SSc before the discovery of the angiotensin-converting enzyme (ACE) inhibitors. SRC is seen in about 10% of patients with SSc, almost exclusively in DcSSc, and is usually seen within 3 years of diagnosis. Risk factors for SRC development include African-American race, pericardial effusion, tendon friction rubs, new-onset anemia, DcSSc, anti–RNA polymerase III antibody, and use of high dose (or even chronic low-dose) corticosteroids. Indicators for poor outcomes in SRC include male sex, older age of onset, and serum creatinine of more than 3 mg/dL. The pathology of SRC is that of vasculopathy as seen in other vessels in SSc and not glomerulonephritis. Clinical features include new-onset hypertension or malignant hypertension, along with renal insufficiency. Due to the associated microangiopathy, hemolytic anemia and thrombocytopenia are frequently seen. Proteinuria, if seen, is usually mild. Microscopic hematuria is frequently present.

**Other Manifestations**

Hypothyroidism is seen in up to 15% of patients with SSc (especially LcSSc) and can be due to fibrosis of the thyroid gland. Further, autoimmune thyroid diseases (Hashimoto thyroiditis and Graves disease) are more common in patients with SSc. Patients with SSc are at increased risk for other autoimmune diseases such as primary biliary cirrhosis and secondary Sjögren syndrome. Overlap syndromes are common and can include an overlap of SSc with rheumatoid arthritis and polymyositis. Patients with SSc are also at increased risk of psychological disorders such as depression which is seen in up to 50% of patients with SSc. Systemic sclerosis sine scleroderma is a variant of SSc characterized by several internal organ manifestations of SSc (especially pulmonary and gastrointestinal) without skin thickening. These patients almost always have Raynaud phenomenon with an abnormal nail fold capillary exam and a positive ANA.

**Classification Criteria**

In 2013, the American College of Rheumatology published the updated classification criteria for systemic sclerosis

- Bilateral skin thickening proximal to metacarpophalangeal joints: 9

- Skin thickening of fingers (count only higher score)

- Between distal and proximal interphalangeal joints: 4
- Puffy fingers: 2

- Fingertip lesions (count only higher score)

- Fingertip pitting scars: 3
- Digital tip ulcers: 2

- Telangiectasia: 2

- Abnormal nail fold capillaries: 2

- Raynaud phenomenon: 3

- Lung disease (maximum score of 2)

- ILD: 2
- PAH: 2

- Positive SSc-specific antibodies (anticentromere, anti–Scl-70, Anti–RNA polymerase III): 3