Brief interventions on admission to the hospital include assessment of tobacco use; offering nicotine replacement while hospitalized, assessing if a patient is interested in cessation and referring them to counselling if needed.   Special attention must be paid to pregant women who use tobacco products.

Smokers who are addicted to nicotine will have withdrawal symptoms if not allowed to use tobacco products while hospitalized, including anxiety, vertigo, mood swings, and a general feeling of uneasiness.  There may be standing orders for nicotine replacement therapy; or nurses should ask the provider for an order for nicotine replacement, such as a nicotine patch, gum, or lozenges.

Formal cessation classes may be offered in the community.  Nurses who work in community health settings should conduct or arrange cessation classes that are low cost or free of charge to aid smokers to quit using tobacco. Quitlines, cessation aids that are available via phone, are readily accessible throughout the United States. New technology includes social media apps downloaded to electronic devices to provide cessation programs.   Apps and quitlines are convenient for a tobacco user because they can be used at any time and have been shown to be effective at assisting with cessation. _

Nurses, especially nurses in Community Health should be involved in tobacco control, including prevention, second hand smoke avoidance, and advocacy.  Preventing children and adolescents from using tobacco is a primary duty of school nurses because most tobacco users begin smoking prior to the age of 18, leading to a lifetime of nicotine addiction. There are school based programs with various degress of success that have been used in school settings to help children decide not to use nicotine products.   Second hand smoke efforts to restrict public use of tobacco have been largely successful, smoking is no longer allowed in most public venues due to laws restricting exposure to second hand smoke.  On an individual level, parents who smoke must be made aware that they should not smoke in the presence of their children or in closed areas where children are present, such as in a house or motor vehicle.  Advocacy, including public awareness and advocating for anti-tobacco legislation, has been successful in changing attitudes toward tobacco use.  Social acceptance of tobacco use is decreasing through laws requiring a minimum age for purchase of tobacco products and by raising prices of tobacco products through taxation thus creating difficulty for adolescents to aquire tobacco.  Healthy People 2020 and 2030 have declared tobacco use one of the leading health indicators in the United States, with a goal of decreasing tobacco use in the next ten years.