Oligodendrocytes have small nuclei that are surrounded by rings of cytoplasm. They have long cytoplasmic projections that extend from the soma. The cytoplasm is notable for an abundance of polyribosomes and granular endoplasmic reticulum. Interfascicular oligodendrocytes are those between myelinated axons, and satellite oligodendrocytes are prevalent in gray matter and are those adjacent to cell bodies.

Schwann cells are the equivalent of oligodendrocytes in the peripheral nervous system. Unlike oligodendrocytes, each Schwann cell is only capable of myelinating a single axon. Schwann cells have elongated nuclei and exhibit an elongated, tubular shape. Schwann cells wrap closely around axons as the axons pass through the Schwann cell cytoplasm.

Astrocytes are star-shaped glial cells that have numerous processes extending from them. Their foot processes are an important component of the blood-brain barrier. The branching of astrocytic processes enables their contact with many neuronal soma, dendrites, and axons simultaneously. Protoplasmic astrocytes are found primarily in the gray matter and are involved in synaptic processes and neurotransmitter transport. The branches of protoplasmic astrocytes largely associate with the terminal parts of axons, as well as synapses and dendrites. Protoplasmic astrocytes exhibit a profusion of potassium channels that are involved in the diffusion of electrical signal spread to neighboring neurons. Fibrous astrocytes are more prevalent in the white matter. They are the type of astrocytes that contain large amounts of cytoplasmic GFAP in non-pathological conditions.

Microglia are small, relatively sparse cells, and are difficult to observe in microscopy. They exhibit elongated nuclei with little cytoplasm. Microglia are of monocyte origin and fill a role as immune effector cells in the central nervous system (CNS).

Ependymal cells are epithelial cells that line the ventricular system. They may exhibit either simple cuboidal or simple columnar morphology (the distinction between the two is quite subjective). Choroidal epithelial cells are involved in the regulation of cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) contents. Ependymocytes are relatively abundant and are involved in the connection between the CSF and nervous tissue. Tanycytes are most prevalent along the floor of the third ventricle.