**Conservative Measures**

The mainstays of management and treatment involve addressing the underlying speech and swallow abnormalities and preventing further insults. The patient’s diet should be adjusted to match the foods and liquids most tolerable based on the diagnostics. Other conservative measures, such as continued direct observation, adjusting the size of intake, thickening feeds, and drinking water during and after meals to clear residual pharyngeal secretions, can effectively reduce aspiration risk and improve outcomes.

One of the most important causes of aspiration-related mortality is aspiration-related pneumonia. Improving oral care is a simple but effective measure to decrease aspiration-related mortality. Regular oral care has been shown to reduce the bacterial count in the oral cavity.

**Pneumonia Management**

If the aspiration leads to pneumonia, bacterial cultures should be obtained, and a beta-lactam/lactamase inhibitor combination, clindamycin, or carbapenem should be initiated. The current Infectious Disease Society of America guidelines as of 2019 do not recommend empirically treating gram-negative gut flora unless cultures indicate involvement. If blood cultures are negative and the suspicion is higher for aspiration pneumonitis, antibiotics should be stopped, and appropriate supportive treatment and aspiration prevention should be initiated. This includes oxygen supplementation, intermittent suctioning, elevated head of the bed, small or intermittent feedings or temporary tube placement, and intubation if necessary. In ventilated patients, subglottic secretion drainage effectively reduced the incidence and morbidity associated with early and late-onset ventilator-associated pneumonia.

Data does not support using prophylactic antibiotics to treat recurrent aspiration pneumonia.

**Feeding Tubes**

If a patient fails to progress after multiple attempts or if a patient’s nutritional status is in question, a feeding tube can be considered. The options range from a naso- or orogastric feeding tube to a surgically-placed percutaneous gastrostomy or jejunostomy tube. Importantly in infants, those who were fed thickened oral liquids before surgical interventions had half the number of hospital admissions and less than a tenth of hospital days compared to their counterparts. It is important to note that all types of feeding tubes can be placed temporarily in both infants and adults until a more formal evaluation has been conducted. More definitive surgical options exist for those who fail conservative management. These are often performed by an experienced otorhinolaryngologist or general surgeon. While feeding tubes are an option to fulfill the nutritional needs of a patient who has dysphagia or is chronically aspirating, there are concerns for aspiration even after temporary feeding tubes or surgical feeding tubes are placed; thus, that should be kept in consideration and carefully evaluated.

**Surgical Approaches**

Laryngeal suspension. It is sometimes combined with an upper esophageal sphincter myotomy and concerns surgically positioning the larynx under the tongue for increased protection. The procedure usually shows good efficacy in reducing the risk in chronically aspirating patients by reducing penetration. It also allows for easier swallowing while protecting normal respiration and speaking function.

Unilateral Vocal cord medialization. It should be considered if there is unilateral vocal cord immobility and the cord does not approximate fully or is relaxed or paralyzed for any reason during the swallowing process. In the procedure, the affected vocal cord is brought medially, either surgically or by the injection of material into the vocal cord itself, in an attempt to restore glottic and subglottic pressure during swallowing. This operation can improve speech, swallowing, and pulmonary function.

Laryngectomy. A final consideration is a laryngectomy, which removes the larynx entirely and reattaches the airway through the neck. This procedure is a last resort because it removes the patient’s ability to speak. It is only used when a life-threatening aspiration risk is present and refractory to all other previous management.