There is no perfect screening test, but looking at a questionable screening test and a reasonable screening test is helpful for understanding the issues.

First, consider a questionable (bad) screening test. Many patients get an annual (or periodic) complete blood count (CBC) and comprehensive metabolic panel (CMP). Doctors do this to identify some asymptomatic disease (screening for anemia or hypokalemia). Is there any scientific support for this? No. There is none. It is a shot in the dark. The patient in question is a healthy asymptomatic adult, not a hypertensive patient in whom we are following serum chemistry or a patient with menorrhagia in whom we are following a CBC. There's no evidence that a routine CBC or CMP in a healthy, asymptomatic adult is useful, reasonable, or cost-effective. However, doctors order these tests. The reason (not without some basis in reality) that they are more likely to be criticized (or sued) for doing too little rather than too much, so they err on the side of doing too much. Moreover, they may rationalize that at least they are not ordering a total body CT scan for screening. Multiply one CBC or CMP by thousands or millions of patients per year. By eliminating these unnecessary tests, we can pay for thousands or millions of rational screening tests per year.

Then, consider a reasonable ("good") screening test.  Checking a blood type on a woman early in her pregnancy has become standard of care in the US since the 1970s.  It is done as a screening test primarily to identify women with Rh-negative blood type.  Why?  Because if Rh incompatibility is present, antenatal and postnatal RhoGAM given to the mother dramatically reduces the incidence of the problems that can result.  (The problems occur when a woman is Rh-negative, and her baby is Rh-positive, and they mainly affect the baby.  If untreated, the problems get worse with subsequent pregnancies.)  Because checking the mother's blood type in pregnancy is now almost universal, and most Rh-negative women receive RhoGAM, most younger US physicians have never seen a case of severe hemolytic disease of the fetus or newborn.  A simple, inexpensive, and readily available screening blood test, with appropriate follow-up treatment when indicated, has virtually eliminated what used to be a common and potentially fatal consequence of Rh incompatibility.