Management of chloramphenicol toxicity centers primarily around supportive care. The general approach to the ashen-gray hemodynamically unstable neonate starts with aggressive resuscitation and an early call to the pediatric intensive care unit or extracorporeal life support team, as some of these patients may be ideal candidates. These patients should be hemodynamically stabilized, appropriately oxygenated and ventilated, and intubated early. Checking a core temperature is critical as hypothermia is common in the gray neonate. Aggressive rewarming should be considered. A point-of-care glucose should also be checked, and hypoglycemia should be reversed if present. The differential diagnosis for an ashen-gray, cyanotic neonate should include chloramphenicol toxicity, congenital heart disease, adrenal insufficiency/hypothyroidism, inborn errors of metabolism, trauma, seizures, and of course, sepsis. Empiric administration of broad-spectrum antibiotics such as vancomycin, ampicillin (targeting Listeria), and a third-generation cephalosporin such as ceftriaxone or cefotaxime is recommended. Additional consideration should also be given to empiric prostaglandin administration in gray/cyanotic neonates, especially if a duct-dependent congenital cardiac lesion is present.

Modalities that have been used for the treatment of gray-baby syndrome are primarily aimed towards direct removal of the parent chloramphenicol molecule. This has been achieved through charcoal hemoperfusion and exchange transfusion. There have also been reports of phenobarbital being used for induction of the UDP-glucuronyltransferase enzyme. Consideration for cardiopulmonary bypass including extracorporeal membrane oxygenation may also be considered.