Bacterial endophthalmitis frequently poses a diagnostic dilemma. These patients may exhibit non-specific signs and symptoms such as blurry vision, eye pain, or leukocytosis. Bacterial endophthalmitis may be due to either endogenous or, more commonly, exogenous causes, such as traumatic or surgical. Although the slit-lamp exam may reveal that the patient has endophthalmitis, the etiology is difficult to ascertain without proper diagnostic studies. While the ophthalmologist is almost always involved in the care of patients with bacterial endophthalmitis, it is essential to consult with an interprofessional team of specialists and other providers that include infectious disease, pharmacology, and the patient's primary care provider.

Nurses are also vital members of the interprofessional group, as they will monitor the patient's status. The pharmacist will ensure that the patient receives the right antibiotics as well as cycloplegic and steroid eye drops and perform dose checking and medication reconciliation, reporting any issues to the interprofessional team. Nursing can counsel on the appropriate dosing and administration of medications and answer patient questions, as well as charting treatment progress and reporting any issues to the clinician managing the case. Without providing a proper history, the ophthalmologist may not be sure what to look for or what additional diagnostic exams may be needed. This problem gets even more complicated when immunocompromised patients present with bacterial endophthalmitis. The outcomes of bacterial endophthalmitis depend on the cause. However, to improve outcomes, prompt consultation with an interprofessional group of specialists is recommended. [Level V]