The definitive diagnosis of traumatic diaphragm injury is one of both inclusion and exclusion. There are no specific laboratory finding which directly diagnoses this entity. Basic chemistries, hepatic panel, and pancreatic enzymes can help to rule out injuries to the liver or pancreas. Unfortunately, these numbers are not directly helpful nor reliable in acute trauma patients.

In a stable patient without an indication for emergent operative intervention, imaging studies are obtained secondary to the physical exam. Typically, a chest x-ray is the initial preferred study.

Although chest x-ray is the most common initial test in the workup for traumatic diaphragmatic hernias, computerized tomography (CT) is the gold standard.

Direct signs include diaphragmatic discontinuity, intrathoracic visceral herniation, collar sign, dependent viscera sign, diaphragm thickening, and dangling sign. Diaphragm discontinuity is the loss of diaphragm integrity on imaging in the presence of surrounding muscle thickening (Fig 2). This sign is highly sensitive but not very specific (86% and 68%, respectively), and it can be falsely positive when intra-abdominal or retroperitoneal hematomas are present. An intrathoracic visceral herniation is the most sensitive and specific of all direct signs. However, it only encompasses a very small subset of patients as most patients do not present with frank organ herniation. Collar sign is defined as a waist-like constriction of the herniated viscera at the site of injury. This produces an appearance of severe compression (Fig 3).

According to Bocchini et al., indirect signs associated with TDIs include elevated hemidiaphragm, high ISS (injury severity score) and AIS (abbreviated injury severity) scores, associated injuries, and peri-diaphragmatic bleeding. An elevated hemidiaphragm may be appreciated without the presence of a TDI, especially when intra-abdominal bleeding is present. It may also be a normal variant in some patients where congenital diaphragmatic anomalies exist. Associated injuries such as rib fractures, hemothorax, pneumothorax, pulmonary contusions, atelectasis, and pleural effusions should allude to the possibility of a TDI, but depending on the severity of additional injuries, this may not be the case. Injuries such as internal bleeding, traumatic brain injury, or pelvic fractures tend to take precedence, as these patients are typically unstable. When this is the case, the potential for a diaphragm rupture becomes an afterthought. Contrast extravasation at the level of the diaphragm should always suggest further evaluation into a traumatic diaphragm injury. These signs, both direct and indirect, are traditional teaching in the radiographic diagnosis of traumatic diaphragm injury.

Although ultrasound and magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) may help diagnose diaphragm injuries, they are often not clinically feasible in the poly-traumatized patient.

Invasive approaches to evaluate for diaphragm injury include diagnostic peritoneal lavage, laparoscopy, laparotomy, thoracotomy, and video-assisted thoracoscopic surgery (VATS).