Atrial fibrillation is a chronic disorder that can seriously affect the quality of life and costs healthcare billions of dollars each year. Each year, thousands of patients develop stroke and other embolic phenomena, leading to significant disability. The disorder is best managed by an interprofessional team to improve outcomes.

A nurse should be dedicated to monitoring the anticoagulation profile and ensuring the INR is within the therapeutic range. In addition, the nurse should immediately communicate with the team if there are signs of a stroke or other embolic phenomenon. The nurse has to educate the patient on medication compliance for hypertension and coronary disease and ensure follow-up at regular intervals. Finally, the patient should be educated about the symptoms of a stroke and when to return to the emergency department.

The pharmacist should inform the patient of the different anticoagulants, their benefits, and the adverse risk profile. Besides, the pharmacist should also ensure that the patient is compliant with the medications.

While cardiologists treat the disorder, the role of the pharmacist is critical. Many of these patients are on multiple medications, including antiarrhythmic agents and anticoagulants. In addition, there is some evidence indicating that the use of angiotensin receptor blockers and statins may lower the frequency of atrial fibrillation and increase the probability of successful cardioversion. Thus, the pharmacist has to make sure that the patient's medication doses are therapeutic, there are no drug interactions, and that the patient has therapeutic anticoagulation to prevent a stroke.

**Outcomes**

Atrial fibrillation prevalence has been on the rise. The risk of stroke is 5-times higher in a patient with known atrial fibrillation compared to the general public. It is estimated that 19.6% of patients over the age of 65 will have apparent atrial fibrillation by 2030. The most feared side effect of atrial fibrillation is an acute stroke, which can lead to severe morbidity and mortality. It has been shown that 60% of strokes secondary to atrial fibrillation can be avoided with the use of anticoagulants. Using the CHADs-2-VASc score to evaluate patients with atrial fibrillation is a helpful guide for the management of these patients with the ultimate goal of preventing stroke. Proper risk factor stratification and medical/surgical therapy can decrease the risk of stroke and heart failure significantly.