History and physical examination guide the evaluation. The House-Brackmann Facial Nerve Grading System can be used to describe the degree of facial nerve weakness. This grading system goes from a grade of I (no weakness) to VI (complete weakness). If the presentation is consistent with BP, there are no required lab or radiographic tests. If there are atypical features, patients may need to be evaluated for a central cause of their symptoms. Likewise, Lyme disease testing is based on a history of possible tick-borne illnesses. The routine testing for Lyme disease is not recommended without other findings of the disease such as a history of a tick bite, skin rash or arthritis. Diabetic testing should not be performed as facial nerve palsy is not considered diabetic neuropathy. There is no consensus on the optimal timing of imaging for Lyme disease, but most sources recommend after 2 months of no improvement of the facial palsy. Magnetic Resonance Imaging (MRI) is the imaging modality of choice. MRI can detect facial nerve inflammation as well as ruling out other conditions such as schwannoma, hemangioma or a space-occupying lesion.

Nerve conduction studies and Electromyography (EMG) may help determine outcomes in patients with severe BP.

Electroneurgraphy uses EMG to monitor the difference in potentials generated by the facial muscles on both sides.

If hearing loss is suspected than auditory evoked potentials and audiography should be performed.

There is a grading system for clinical evaluation of BP. The grading system ranges from mild to severe dysfunction.

Other tests include testing for saliva flow, tear function, and nerve excitability.