# Introduction

The anterior inferior cerebellar artery (AICA) is one of the lateral branches of the basilar artery which supplies various structures of the posterior cranial fossa, most importantly the cerebellum and pons.

# Structure and Function

The anterior inferior cerebellar artery is commonly the most caudal branch of and arises from the lateral wall of the lower or middle third of the basilar artery. Infrequently, however, the AICA originates from the distal vertebral artery. Anterior inferior cerebellar artery usually originates as a single trunk but duplication of the main trunk is a well-known variation. The AICA exists in hemodynamic balance with the other cerebellar arteries, namely, the superior cerebellar (SCA) and posterior inferior cerebellar (PICA), the sizes of these vessels being highly variable depending on which is the dominant arterial supply to the cerebellar cortex.

After originating from the lateral wall of basilar artery it courses posterolaterally, ventral to the pons in the prepontine cistern, then enters the cerebellopontine angle and continues along the anterior cerebellar surface. The main trunk bifurcates into the superior and inferior trunks at the pontomedullary junction adjacent to the exit of facial and vestibulocochlear nerves from the brain stem.

The anterior inferior cerebellar artery can be divided into four segments including the anterior pontine (close to the abducent nerve), lateral pontine (close to the facial and vestibulocochlear nerves), flocculopeduncular, and cortical segments. The lateral pontine segment can be further divided into pre-meatal, meatal, and postmeatal segments based on their relationship with the internal auditory meatus.

The labyrinthine artery, also called the internal auditory artery is in most cases a branch of the anterior inferior cerebellar artery, less commonly it arises directly from the basilar artery.

The anterior inferior cerebellar artery supplies the middle cerebellar peduncle, lower lateral pons, anteroinferior surface of the cerebellum, flocculus and the choroid plexus of the lateral ventricle.

The labyrinthine artery supplies labyrinth and cochlea of the inner ear along with facial (CN VII) and vestibulocochlear (CN VIII) nerves.

# Embryology

The process of angiogenesis for all blood vessels begins with the angioblast, which arises from the mesoderm.

The vertebral arteries, which give rise to the basilar artery, are a derivative from connections of the lateral branches of the dorsal intersegmental arteries. These are paired embryonic branches of the aorta part of which later become cervical intersegmental. The lateral branches of the cervical intersegmental join to become vertebral arteries.

The AICA develops as a branch of the longitudinal neural system.

# Physiologic Variants

With advancements in Computed Tomography (CT) technology, it has become easier to more accurately visualize the vascularization of small vessels, making it simpler to note variations that were typically seen only during an autopsy.

# Surgical Considerations

Surgical procedures in the arteries of the posterior fossa require a great fund of anatomical knowledge. Understanding anatomical variations are the first step in carrying out successful procedures. For example, the position (proximal or distal anterior inferior cerebellar artery) and nature of an aneurysm (ability to maneuver micro-catheter into an aneurysm) are important factors that determine if surgery or endovascular treatment will be used. With a proximal anterior inferior cerebellar artery aneurysms, a skull base surgery is mostly used with an aneurysm being clipped or trapped and resected.

Endovascular treatment is mostly used in distal anterior inferior cerebellar artery aneurysms and has been discouraged in proximal anterior inferior cerebellar artery aneurysms.

# Clinical Significance

Clinical syndromes associated with the anterior inferior cerebellar artery may be secondary to an infarction in its vascular territory, aneurysmal subarachnoid hemorrhage, or, infrequently, mass effect on adjacent structures from an aneurysm.

AICA infarction may be of cardio-embolic or athero-embolic origin (rupture of atherosclerotic/arteriosclerotic plaque). Patients present with a lateral pontine syndrome, also known as the AICA syndrome and have a sudden onset of severe vertigo, nausea, vomiting, nystagmus (vestibular nuclei),  ipsilateral hemiataxia (middle cerebellar peduncle), ipsilateral, lower motor neuron facial weakness, ipsilateral loss of lacrimation and salivation, ipsilateral loss of taste from anterior 2/3rd of tongue and loss of corneal reflex (CN VII nucleus and nerve), ipsilateral loss of pain and temperature from the face (spinal trigeminal nucleus),  ipsilateral hearing loss and tinnitus (cochlear nuclei) and ipsilateral Horner's syndrome (descending sympathetic tracts). There is a contralateral loss of pain and temperature sensation from the body (lateral spinothalamic tract). It is important to distinguish the AICA syndrome from lateral medullary syndrome caused by infarction in the distribution of the PICA which presents with severe dysphagia, dysarthria, and dysphonia and also does not have lower motor facial paralysis, loss of lacrimation and taste which are prominent features of the AICA syndrome.

As reported in the literature, aneurysms of the posterior fossa account for 8% to 12% of all cerebral aneurysms, with aneurysms of anterior inferior cerebellar artery accounting for about 1% to 2% of all aneurysms.

In very rare case reports, aneurysms have been noted in the distal anterior inferior cerebellar artery with the aneurysms mainly being dissecting or fusiform and rarely associated with bifurcation with about 55.5% located near the meatal loop.