Difficult catheterizations and repeat attempts at Foley placement cause patients substantial pain, anxiety, and possible long-term complications. Instrumentation and trauma to the urethra can increase the risk of post-instrumentation infection. If continued pressure is placed when resistance is encountered during urinary catheterization, the urinary catheter can cause a false urethral passage, undermine the bladder neck, or perforate the urethra or bladder. Trauma to the urethra, prostate, or bladder neck can lead to hematuria, infection, and scarring. In the setting of prior surgeries or radiation, rectal perforation has also been seen. In poorly mobile or immunocompromised patients, trauma from unsuccessful catheterizations can contribute to urinary tract infections, Fournier gangrene, or peri-urethral abscess formation.

In the longer term, urethral trauma from instrumentation may lead to permanent or long-lasting urethral stricture disease.

Patients who are confused, have dementia, or have a brain injury may seek to traumatically remove their Foley catheters by pulling on them. If the balloons are removed intact, this will obviously cause possibly significant traumatic injury to the urethra with bleeding, pain, possible infection, and the potential development of further scarring and strictures. If the balloon is not intact, if pieces are missing, or if the catheter cannot be found at all, a cystoscopy is recommended to make sure that no balloon fragments are left behind in the bladder, where they can calcify and form bladder stones.