The AC joint is just one of the complex structures that makes up the shoulder girdle. The acromion, which originates from the spine of the scapula, meets with the lateral aspect of the clavicle to form the AC joint. The clavicle and the acromion of the scapula have a flat articular surface, with an oval contour; the clavicular facet turns outwards and downwards, the acromial facet looks medially and upwards. Between the articular surfaces, there is a fibrocartilaginous disc with variable development; it is rarely complete. It is stabilized with the deltoid and trapezius muscles, as well as the AC ligament and coracoclavicular ligaments. The coracoclavicular ligament consists of the conoid and trapezoid ligaments, which provides vertical stability, whereas the AC ligament provides horizontal stability.

The AC joint is a synovial joint (arthrodial joint) that only allows gliding motion. It assists in abduction and flexion of the shoulder. The AC joint receives blood supply from the suprascapular and thoracoacromial arteries, along with innervation from the suprascapular, axillary, and lateral thoracic nerves.

The SC joint is also a synovial joint that articulates with the manubrium of the sternum and the first costal cartilage. The SC joint is tough to injure due to the amount of stabilizing structures that surrounds it. These include the anterior and posterior sternoclavicular ligaments, interclavicular ligaments, costoclavicular ligaments, as well as the subclavius muscle. The SC joint is diarthrodial (saddle-shaped), and communication from the shoulder can dictate its movement. The SC joint functionally allows for motion of the shoulder in various planes, including horizontal, coronal, and anteroposterior planes. Blood supply to this joint comes from the internal thoracic and suprascapular arteries, and it receives innervation from the medial supraclavicular and subclavius nerves. As mentioned, posterior dislocations of the SC joint can result in significant complications due to the crucial anatomy posterior to this joint. Structures such as the brachiocephalic trunk, internal jugular vein, common carotid artery, trachea, esophagus, and vagus nerve are all vulnerable to a posteriorly dislocated SC joint.

The physiology underlying the muscle energy technique is not fully understood. It appears to be due to neurophysiologic responses that cause inhibition of neural responses allowing muscular relaxation, as well as an alteration in pain modulation.