Klebsiella pneumoniae belongs to the Enterobacteriaceae family and is described as a gram-negative, encapsulate, and non-motile bacterium. Virulence of the bacterium is provided by a wide array of factors that can lead to infection and antibiotic resistance. The polysaccharide capsule of the organism is the most important virulence factor and allows the bacteria to evade opsonophagocytosis and serum killing by the host organism. To date, 77 different capsular types have been studied, and those Klebsiella species without a capsule tend to be less virulent. A second virulence factor is lipopolysaccharides that coat the outer surface of a gram-negative bacteria. The sensing of lipopolysaccharides releases an inflammatory cascade in the host organism and has been a major culprit of the sequela in sepsis and septic shock. Another virulence factor, fimbriae, allows the organism to attach itself to host cells. Siderophores are another virulence factor that is needed by the organism to cause infection in hosts. Siderophores acquire iron from the host to allow propagation of the infecting organism.

Klebsiella pneumoniae is one of a handful of bacteria that are now experiencing a high rate of antibiotic resistance secondary to alterations in the core genome of the organism. Alexander Fleming first discovered resistance to beta-lactam antibiotics in 1929 in gram-negative organisms. Since that time, K. pneumoniae has been well studied and has been shown to produce a beta-lactamase that causes hydrolysis of the beta-lactam ring in antibiotics. Extended-spectrum beta-lactamase (ESBL) K. pneumoniae was seen in Europe in 1983 and the United States in 1989. ESBLs can hydrolyze oxyimino cephalosporins rending third-generation cephalosporins ineffective against treatment. Due to this resistance, carbapenems became a treatment option for ESBL. However, of the 9000 infections reported to the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) due to carbapenem-resistant Enterobacteriaceae in 2013, approximately 80% were due to K. pneumoniae. Carbapenem resistance has been linked to an up-regulation in efflux pumps, alteration of the outer membrane, and increased production of ESBL enzymes in the organism.