Obtaining a complete history and performing an in-depth physical exam is crucial to diagnosing mechanical back strains. The goal of evaluation in the acute setting is to ensure no red flags warrant more advanced imaging and surgical consultation. These red flag symptoms include fevers, involuntary weight loss, night sweats, bladder or bowel incontinence, significant trauma, frequent falls, history of cancer, anticoagulant use, chronic systemic steroid use, intravenous drug abuse, or an immunocompromised state. Physical exam red flags compromise assessing focal neurologic deficits, including weakness, ataxia, saddle anesthesia, decreased deep tendon reflexes, and diminished rectal tone.

Acute mechanical back strains may be triggered by physical or non-physical activity, with lifting being the most commonly recalled event. However, one-third of patients may not necessarily remember an inciting incident. More specific spinal pathology may have classically associated symptoms. For example, herniated discs will present with radicular pain that radiates from the lower back in L4 to S1 distribution, and pain may be reproducible to the affected side on straight leg raise. Spinal stenosis may demonstrate back pain and bilateral posterior leg pain that worsens with ambulation and spine extension but is relieved by rest and spine flexion. Patients on chronic steroids or at risk for osteoporosis are at increased risk for vertebral compression fractures even after seemingly minor trauma. Compression fractures tend to be focally tender on palpation.