Clinical presentation of HT1 may mimic neonatal sepsis, liver failure from any other etiology, cystinosis, Lowe syndrome, or hereditary fructose intolerance.

The nephropathic form of cystinosis typically presents within the infantile period with features of Fanconi syndrome, hypophosphatemic rickets, hyperpigmentation, and deposits over the cornea seen on slit-lamp examination. Diagnosis of cystinosis is usually made by demonstrating elevated cysteine levels in leukocytes or fibroblasts. Lowe syndrome, also known as the oculocerebrorenal syndrome, is an X-linked recessive disorder and presents during the first year of life with bilateral congenital cataracts, hypotonia, and renal Fanconi syndrome in male probands.

Lastly, hereditary fructose intolerance can also present with renal Fanconi syndrome. Still, it can easily be differentiated from HT1 by the temporal association of symptoms with the introduction of fructose or sucrose in the diet. Diagnosis can be confirmed by sequencing the Aldolase B gene.

HT2 patients present with corneal ulcerations and dermal keratosis and can be confused with other causes of corneal ulcerations in infancy, especially in regions where NBS for this disease is unavailable. Infectious causes (both bacterial and viral) can cause corneal ulcers in infants. Patients with infectious causes usually have other signs and symptoms of sepsis and will respond to appropriate antimicrobial agents. Differential diagnosis of HT3 includes causes of ataxia, seizures, and psychomotor retardation. A careful history, physical exam, and detection of elevated tyrosine levels will aid in the diagnosis of HT3 in doubtful cases.