The process of transcription and translation has some similarities and differences between eukaryotes and prokaryotes. This section will only focus on eukaryotic molecular mechanisms.

**Transcription**

Transcription begins in the nucleus with the formation of the pre-initiation complex. First, transcription factor II D (TFIID) binds to the TATA box through the TATA-binding protein (TBP). Then five other transcription factors (TFIIA, TFIIB, TFIIE, TFIIF, AND TFIIH), along with RNA polymerase II, combine through a series of stages to form the pre-initiation complex. Specifically, TFIIH has a role in nucleotide excision repair and separating the opposing strands of double-stranded DNA.

With regards to protein-encoding genes, elongation continues until the polymerase transcribes the AAUAAA and GU-rich sequence. Once both sequences have been transcribed, cleavage-polyadenylation specificity factor (CPSF) and cleavage stimulatory factor (CstF) bind to the AAUAAA and GU-rich sequences, respectively. Poly(A) Polymerase forms a complex with CPSF, CstF, nuclear poly(A) binding protein (PABP), and a few other proteins to catalyze the addition of the 3’ poly-A tail of the pre-mRNA strand.

This newly synthesized pre-mRNA strand undergoes post-translational modifications to prevent degradation while exiting the nucleus to enter the cytoplasm. At the 5’ end of the pre-mRNA strand, the 7-methylguanosine cap is added by guanyl transferase.

**Splicing and Pre-mRNA Modifications**

Splicing occurs within the nucleus. Several steps are catalyzed by large (60S) molecules called spliceosomes composed of small ribonucleoproteins (snRNPs) and splicing factors. These enzymes excise the introns out of the mRNA transcript while leaving exons in the transcript alone. Spliceosomes shuffle around these exons, depending on the type of protein that needs to be synthesized.

After splicing, the 5′ and 3′ tails are modified to help the translation process. At the 5′ end of the pre-mRNA molecule, GTP reacts with the first nucleotide in the triphosphate group on the 5′ ribose's carbon and form a 5′–5′ triphosphate linkage; the nitrogen-7 of guanine is then methylated to form the 5 ′ caps of the mRNA. At the 3′ end, the sequence AAUAAA is cleaved by an endonuclease so that a Poly(A)-polymerase can add the adenylate residues.

After all the necessary modifications are made, the mRNA strand is considered mature and is then translocated to the cytoplasm to begin translation.

**Translation**

Translation of mRNA normally occurs in the cytoplasm or the rough endoplasmic reticulum. However, it can happen in any compartment of the cell that has ribosomes. The process of initiating eukaryotic translation begins with the formation of the 80S initiation complex. The eukaryotic initiation factor 4F (eIF4F) protein complex initially recognizes the 5’-cap structure of the mRNA molecule.

Sometimes, eIF4F can recognize mRNA at an internal ribosome entry site (IRES), which drives translation independently of the 5’-cap structure. Then eIF4f recruits the pre-initiation complex, including the 40S subunits and another complex comprised of GTP, eukaryotic initiation factor 2 (eIF2), and the initiator met-tRNA. eIF2 binds to the initiator met-tRNA (by hydrolyzing GTP to GDP) to create the final initiation complex. The initiation complex scans the mRNA until initiator met-tRNA recognizes the start codon AUG and binds to the P site. Hydrolysis of GTP gives the energy needed to release eIF2 from the complex, subsequently allowing the 60S and 40S ribosomal subunits to assemble into a function 80S ribosome.

Elongation occurs as the ribosome reads in the mRNA strand 5’-3’ direction through an open reading frame (ORF). The ORF is a continuous stretch of codons that begins with the AUG start codon and ends at one of three termination codons (UAG, UAA, or UGA), which are not associated with any amino acid. The ribosome moves one triplet at a time along the mRNA. An aminoacyl-tRNA, complexed with eukaryotic elongation factor 1 (eEF1), hydrolyzes GTP to release eEF1. Thus, providing energy for the aminoacyl-tRNA (with the appropriate anticodon to match the mRNA codon) to bind to the A site.

Elongation of the polypeptide occurs through the stepwise addition of amino acids, bound by peptide bonds, between the amino acids (attached to the tRNA) bound to the A site and P site. The tRNA molecule bound on the P site is called the peptidyl-tRNA since it bears the polypeptide chain. For clarification, the aminoacyl-tRNA only holds a new single amino acid (at the A site) to be added to the growing polypeptide chain. Translocation of tRNA molecules from the A site to the P site occurs through GTP hydrolysis catalyzed by eukaryotic elongation factor 2 (eEF2). As this shift moves the tRNA from the A site to the P site, the tRNA already on the P site moves to the E site, where it is now called the unloaded tRNA. From here, the unloaded tRNA is released from the E site.

Termination of translation happens eukaryotic translation termination factor 1 (eRF1) recognizes one of the stop codons in the mRNA transcript.

**Post-Translational Modifications**

These types of modifications can occur during any step of the protein’s life. Some modifications occur right after transcription, while other modifications occur after protein folding by chaperones. Below is a list of some modifications that can be added to the side chains of amino acids in the polypeptide chain:

- Glycosylation- attachment of a carbohydrate group through N-glycosidic or O-glycosidic bonds

- Lipid Anchors- includes acylation (linking with long-chain fatty acids), isoprenylation (linkage of polyisoprene), and GPI anchor (linkage with glycosylphosphatidylinositol, GPI)

- Acetylation- attachment of acetyl groups (-COCH3)

- Methylation- attachment of methyl groups (-CH3)

- Carboxylation- attachment of carboxylic acid groups (-COOH)

- Hydroxylation- attachment of hydroxy groups (-OH)

- Phosphorylation- attachment of phosphate residues (-OPO2)