**Fluoroscopic Guidance**

According to the practice guidelines from the International Spine Intervention Society (ISIS), a patient is prepped and placed in a prone position, and a pillow is placed under the abdomen at the level of the iliac crests. To visualize the inferior portion of the SI joint, the C-arm is initially placed in anterior-posterior (AP) view and maybe adjusted laterally or medially until the optimal image is obtained. When the bony planes of the inferior portion of the joints are parallel, the image is considered ideal.

The aforementioned identified area is then marked and sterilized and draped. With intermittent fluoroscopy, the spinal needle is advanced to the inferior part of the SI joint. Once the needle reaches the joint, a distinct popping sensation can be felt by the physician. Once optimal needle position is achieved within the inferior portion of the SI joint, 0.3 to 0.5 ml of contrast is injected into the joint. If the contrast material outlines the SI joint, the placement of the needle is confirmed. There is controversy on the maximum volume of injectate to be used; however, as a rule of thumb, the injectate should be used until there is a firm end-point, extra-capsular escape, or a maximum volume of 2.5 ml is reached.

**CT Guidance**

CT guidance is also performed with the patient in a prone position. An initial CT scan is performed and the most direct route to the SI joints bilaterally is identified. The overlying skin is marked. The skin is prepped and draped in a sterile fashion. Local anesthesia with approximately 5 mL of 1% lidocaine is administered. Using CT guidance, a 22 gauge spinal needle is inserted into the lower posterior aspect of the SI joints. After confirming the satisfactory placement of the spinal needles, 0.5 mL of Kenalog 40 (20 mg) mixed with 0.5 mL of 0.25% bupivacaine is injected into each SI joint. The needles were removed and hemostasis is achieved with compression.