# Definition/Introduction

Patient mobility is an important aspect of patient care, particularly in the setting of major surgery or severe chronic illnesses that require prolonged immobilization in bed. Deep venous thrombosis, pressure ulcers, muscular atrophy, pulmonary embolism, and bone demineralization are potential complications of inadequate immobilization, and active intervention is necessary to optimize patient outcomes.

Appropriate mobilization of patients is important to minimize physical complications, but also to improve the social and emotional well-being of patients. Therefore barriers to effective patient care must be identified and addressed.

# Issues of Concern

Barriers to effective patient mobility protocols may be patient-related or caused by administrative or healthcare practitioner deficiency.

# Clinical Significance

Patients who are not adequately mobilized demonstrate a significant incidence of complications. These complications range from deep venous thrombosis, pulmonary embolism, muscle atrophy, pressure ulcers, and chronic bone demineralization.

# Nursing, Allied Health, and Interprofessional Team Interventions

Assisting patients with mobilization is an essential aspect of health care facilities. Practitioners should focus on a patient-centered approach and should include proper coordination between physicians, nurses, physical therapists, and the patient himself. Therefore, a multi-disciplinary approach is imperative to optimize patient management.

# Nursing, Allied Health, and Interprofessional Team Monitoring

An interprofessional team involving physicians, nurses, and physical therapists that provides a holistic and integrated approach to patient care can help to achieve the best possible outcomes and patient safety while minimizing complications.