Acute symptomatic posterior vitreous detachment without vitreous hemorrhage and peripheral retinal breaks should be followed up at 2-4 weeks for precise peripheral retinal examination with scleral indentation. A patient complaining of floaters is conservatively managed. Patients are reassured that adaptation will develop to the visual symptoms overtime, or the floaters may resolve. However, in many cases, floaters may persist beyond six months to one year. The vitreous hemorrhage associated with acute PVD is usually mild, with a blob of hemorrhage just in front of the posterior pole. There may be intraretinal hemorrhage near the optic disc. Usually, a circular circumferential attachment of the vitreous to the retina is noted around the equator with some preretinal bleed settled inferiorly just behind the posterior vitreous face. Most associated breaks lie in the superior retina. In case of vitreous hemorrhage precluding the complete examination, the patient is advised a propped up position, bed rest, and bilateral eye patching is an option in such cases.

In cases with highly symptomatic floaters that are clinically significant and persistent and impact the quality of life, the interventional options are as follows.

**Vitrectomy**

The psychological implications of floaters may be huge, with some patients even having suicidal thoughts due to floaters.

**Nd YAG Laser Vitreolysis**

Nd: YAG laser fires short, strong pulses and builds energy to vaporize the vitreous opacities to plasma. This is done by increasing the regional temperature to above 1000  Kelvin (726.85**°**C) at a confined spot.

**Vitreolysis by Drugs**

Vitreolytic agents are classified as enzymatic or non-enzymatic agents. Mostly the enzymatic agents are used. They include tissue plasminogen activator (tPA), plasmin, microplasmin, nattokinase, chondroitinase, and hyaluronidase.

Management guidelines for posterior vitreous detachment associated with retinal tears depend on the type of tear. Operculated tears (symptomatic or asymptomatic) may not need treatment.

- **Laser Retinopexy:**This procedure is performed under topical anesthesia. Two to three rows of confluent burns are applied around the lesion.

- **Cryo-retinopexy:**This procedure is performed under regional or subconjunctival anesthesia. If the lesion is beyond the equator, a subconjunctival incision may be given in order to get clear access. Using a binocular indirect ophthalmoscope, the lesion is carefully indented, and the cryoprobe is activated until the whitening of the retina is seen. The probe should not be removed from the operated site until thawing occurs (2-3s), As this might lead to subretinal hemorrhage.

After laser or cryo-retinopexy, the patient should be advised to take rest and avoid strenuous exercise to ensure proper adhesion of the tear. Laser retinopexy is superior to cryo-retinopexy as it is more precise and causes less collateral retinal damage.