Initial laboratory work can show leukocytosis, but it's not always present. Arterial blood gas may appear normal and not reflect the hypoxia; therefore, the diagnosis is made through radiologic imaging.

An X-ray can show worsening consolidation, and sometimes abruption of the pulmonary artery may be seen. Anatomic abnormalities and pulmonary opacities can also be seen in X-ray imaging. Serial X-rays can show consolidation progression, especially if pneumonia is superimposing on lung torsion.

Bronchoscopy can also reveal findings indicating lung torsion. In previous case studies, bronchoscopy revealed obstruction where the bronchoscope could not advance into the bronchus due to the narrowing of the passageway. The bronchial stenosis and a "fish mouth" orifice could be seen through bronchoscopy. Bronchoscopy does not always reveal narrowing or diagnose lung torsion; therefore, a computed tomography (CT) scan is required to confirm the diagnosis.

CT scan can show obstruction of bronchial arteries, lobar opacification, or atelectasis and lobular collapse. Vascular and bronchial structures can appear to be stenosed, blocked, or inverted on imaging and may be seen as the "antler sign". Obstruction in the airway can reveal tracheobronchial tree narrowing of the affected bronchus. Rotation of the lung can occur at a variety of angles; however, one case series has shown that in most cases, the lobe was rotated about 180 degrees. Follow up CT scans can show a change in the position of the lesions as the lung torsion progresses.

CT angiography can show abrupt truncation and pulmonary artery obstruction. These images have also revealed interlobular septal thickening in the displaced lobe along with venous congestion. Sometimes abnormal lobe displacement can reveal a fissure. If the lung tissue has already become necrotic, imaging will reveal the loss of parenchymal and pulmonary vascular sites.