Multiple myeloma (MM) is a malignant disorder of B cells that involves the proliferation of abnormal monoclonal plasma cells in the bone marrow and/or extramedullary sites; it is the second most common hematological malignancy associated with significant morbidity and mortality by causing end-organ damage. Over the last few decades, MM survival rates have been prolonged due to recent advancements by the advent of novel therapies. Targeted agents and combination therapies have resulted in better outcomes, but most MM patients eventually relapse, including those who achieved remission.

Patients who fail to achieve at least minimal response on initial therapy and progress while on treatment are termed "primary refractory." According to the criteria developed by the International Myeloma Working Group (IMWG), relapsed refractory MM (RRMM) is defined as a progressive disease, poor response despite treatment, progression within 60 days of the most recent treatment in a patient who had achieved remission, the absence of at least minimal response (MR), or primary refractory MM.

IMWG defines progressive disease as at least a 25% increase in serum or urine paraprotein from nadir, or elevations in the monoclonal protein of free light chains (FLC) or the appearance of any of the CRAB feature even in the absence of biochemical progression.

MM is considered "double refractory" if the disease has progressed during or after treatment with a protease inhibitor and an immunomodulatory agent. If the patient is also resistant to the addition of monoclonal antibodies, it is considered a "triple-class" refractory disease, which confers a poor prognosis.

During the treatment course, most MM patients will have several cycles of remissions and relapse, necessitating multiple lines of combination therapies. Various patient, disease, and treatment-related factors have created many challenges in devising the most effective anti-myeloma strategies for RRMM patients.