Complications of osteochondroma can range from simple cosmetic concern to serious neurological complications and malignant transformation. Complications fall under three categories, including cosmetic deformity, mechanical effect, and malignant transformation.

**Cosmetic deformity:**

Painless swelling is the most common complaint that triggers patients to seek medical advice due. The osseous deformity is often more severe in HME than solitary osteochondroma.

**Mechanical effect:**

An osteochondroma can result in various complications either due to impingement and compression to adjacent neurovascular structures causing neuropathy and vascular insufficiency or due to irritation to adjacent soft tissue leading to the formation of a bursa that could be inflamed and causes pain. Neurological impingement by osteochondroma can have a wide variety of clinical presentations ranging from peripheral neurological symptoms and radiculopathy due to nerve root compression to more serious myelopathy and spinal stenosis depending on the site of the lesion. The presence of osteochondroma can compromise the blood supply to the tissues either by the formation of pseudoaneurysm or by direct compression of the adjacent blood vessels interfering with blood flow. Pseudoaneurysm formation results from the chronic repetitive mechanical compression and friction of the blood vessels by osteochondroma. Not surprisingly since the knee is the most common location of osteochondroma, popliteal pseudoaneurysm and peroneal nerve entrapment are the most common neurovascular complications. Restriction of joint motion, premature osteoarthritis, and osseous deformities affecting ADLs are other possible mechanical complications.

**Malignant transformation:**

Malignant transformation is estimated to be 1% in solitary lesions and up to 3 to 5% in HME. An increase in size or change of radiographic appearance as previously described should raise the suspicion of malignancy. Suspicious signs of malignancy on radiograph include surface irregularity, areas of lucency and heterogeneous mineralization, and thick cartilage cap (greater than 2 cm). Chondrosarcoma is the most common form of malignant transformation. However, osteosarcoma has also been reported.