Vecuronium bromide is an FDA approved peripherally acting, monoquarternary, steroidal, non-depolarizing neuromuscular blocker with an intermediate duration of action used during general anesthesia to facilitate endotracheal intubation, to aid in surgical relaxation, and, less commonly, in the intensive care setting to achieve paralysis to facilitate mechanical ventilation for appropriately sedated patients. This neuromuscular blocking agent is often used to facilitate endotracheal intubation and surgical relaxation in patients under general anesthesia. It is structurally similar to pancuronium, differing only by the lack of a quaternizing methyl group in the 2-piperidino substitution; this results in a slight decrease in potency and an elimination of the vagolytic properties when compared to pancuronium. Vecuronium also has higher lipid solubility, which results in a higher amount of biliary elimination.

The liver chiefly eliminates vecuronium due to its higher lipid solubility. Poor liver function can cause prolonged effects. Vecuronium has three possible metabolites. The 3-hydroxy metabolite has 80% of the neuromuscular blocking potency of vecuronium. Therefore, prolonged use of vecuronium can result in the accumulation of this metabolite and significantly prolonged neuromuscular blocking effects. Renal excretion accounts for only about 30% of the elimination of vecuronium.

Vecuronium has rarely seen off-label use to control refractory shivering in sedated patients during the administration of post-cardiac arrest therapeutic hypothermia. However, in this setting, the duration of action is prolonged, and it may mask seizure activity.