Insulin glargine is a synthetic version of human insulin that is FDA approved to treat adults and children with type 1 diabetes and adults with type 2 diabetes to improve and maintain glycemic control. Insulin glargine is a long-acting insulin injected once daily and provides a basal insulin level throughout the day. Regimens often combine it with rapid-acting insulin to obtain optimal glycemic control. The insulin should not be used to treat diabetic ketoacidosis, as short-acting insulin is preferred.

In type 1 diabetes, both long-acting and short-acting insulins are often necessary at the onset of the disease. In type 1 diabetes, the body lacks the ability to produce insulin from the pancreas due to autoimmune-mediated beta cell destruction, with a resulting rapid loss of regulation of blood glucose levels. Insulin glargine functions as basal glycemic control due to its 24-hour duration of action, while rapid-acting insulin works as coverage of elevated blood glucose and carbohydrate intake due to its quick onset and short duration of action.

In adults with type 2 diabetes, insulin glargine, or another long-acting insulin, should be initiated for glycemic control after 2 or 3 oral antidiabetic medications have failed to attain glycemic control or in patients with a hemoglobin A1c value higher than 9% who are experiencing symptoms. Insulin glargine may be used alone in individual patients or with rapid-acting insulin and/or oral medication(s) for diabetes management. Insulin glargine does not have approval for children with type 2 diabetes.

Insulin glargine is not FDA-approved in pregnancy, although studies have not shown contraindications to its use or adverse fetal outcomes. It is considered a first-line treatment for gestational diabetes after lifestyle modifications have proven insufficient.