The diagnosis of solar urticaria is suspected on anamnesis (transient urticarial lesions occurring a few minutes after exposure to sunlight), while the physical examination is normal in the absence of sun exposure.

Symptoms and distribution of solar urticaria can mimic other acquired photodermatoses. Differential diagnosis includes polymorphous light eruption, lupus erythematosus, drug-induced photosensitivity, and photo contact dermatitis. However, solar urticaria may be associated with other photodermatoses, such as polymorphous light eruption and porphyria cutanea tarda.

The diagnosis of solar urticaria is confirmed by photo testing using UVA, UVB, and visible light sources. Sometimes natural light is also used. The aim of photo testing is to determine the spectrum of action (the triggering wavelengths) and the minimal urticarial dose (the minimal dose inducing an urticarial reaction). Determining the spectrum of action is also important for subsequent management so that the patients take precautions to avoid the triggering wavelengths.

The light sources are placed 10 centimeters to 15 centimeters from the back of the patient, and different doses of radiation are delivered. Clinical response is assessed every 10 minutes for an hour. Erythema and wheal occur immediately after photo testing and fade a few minutes after radiation cessation. However, in many cases, photo testing with artificial light sources is not contributive, as it may fail to induce cutaneous lesions, which may be triggered only by natural sunlight exposure. In some cases, repeating photo testing may help to obtain positive results.

A histopathological examination may be performed to rule out other photodermatoses. In solar urticaria, it shows typical features of urticaria which are endothelial swelling and dermal neutrophil, monocyte, and eosinophil infiltration.

Photopatch testing may be beneficial to rule out drug-induced photosensitivity or photo contact dermatitis.