Lupus nephritis is a type-3 hypersensitivity reaction. This occurs when immune complexes are formed. Autoimmunity plays a significant role in the development of lupus nephritis leading to the production of autoantibodies that are directed against nuclear elements. The characteristics of these autoantibodies in relevance to lupus nephritis are:

- Anti-dsDNA antibodies may cross-react with the glomerular basement membrane

- Higher-affinity autoantibodies may result in intravascular immune complexes that get deposited in glomeruli

- Cationic autoantibodies have a greater affinity for the anionic basement membrane

-  Activation of complements by autoantibodies of certain isotypes

These autoantibodies make immune complexes within the vessels that are deposited in glomeruli. Alternatively, autoantibodies may form immune complexes in situ by binding to antigens that are already located in the glomerular basement membrane. Immune complexes induce an inflammatory response by the activation of the complement system and recruitment of inflammatory cells. Glomerular thrombosis is another phenomenon that plays a part in the pathogenesis of lupus nephritis particularly in patients with antiphospholipid syndrome and is believed to be the result of an interaction between antibodies and negatively charged phospholipid-proteins.

Azzouz and colleagues analyzed that specific strains of a gut commensal may add to the pathogenesis of lupus nephritis. When patients with SLE were stratified according to organ involvement, ones with a history of renal impairment showed a great number of RG-specific amplicon sequence variants as opposed to those who had no renal disease.