**Granulation (secondary intention)**

This technique requires moist wound care. Application of moist, emollient, non-stick dressings to the wound. The dressings need regular changing. The use of antibiotic creams/ointments should be avoided due to the risk of allergic contact dermatitis, and instead, gentle cleaning and bathing of the area are advisable. The healing process normally takes anywhere from 2 to 8 weeks to occur depending on the depth of the wound. Beyond the scope of this article is management through a negative pressure wound-vac system.

**Primary closure**

Layered closure with appropriate wound tension. The wound should be elliptical with a length-to-width ratio of 3 to 1. Where possible the wound should be along relaxed skin tension lines and should be undermined to reduce wound closure tension and facilitate wound eversion. Appropriate strength and sized sutures should be placed both deep and superficially. Sutures should be removed at 7 to 10 days if using non-resorbable sutures. Proper wound care is necessary.

**Advancement Flap**

Unilateral advancement flaps are normally used in small wounds. Use the neighboring area with the most redundant skin and try and respect the cosmetic subunits. A pedicle feeds the mobilized tissue; the ratio should not exceed 3 to 1. The wound edges may develop 'dog ears' that need correction. There are many types of advancement flaps including island pedicle, V-Y,

**Rotational Flap**

Rotational flaps are so named as the primary movement is to rotate nearby redundant skin into the skin defect. These flaps can be single, bilateral or multiple types. Because the neighboring redundant skin rotates into the defect generally the shape of this flap is an arc of a circle (see figures below a-b = pre-op, c-d = intra-op, e = 4 months post-op). A pedicle feeds the flap and not exceeding the 3 to 1 rule still applies. This technique can allow multiple rotational flaps to be raised creating a local tissue reservoir. The same rules for sutures and post-operative wound care applications. Flap designs and more advanced techniques are beyond the scope of this article.

****Transpositional flap****

Transpositional flaps have this name because the movement is the mobilize non-adjacent skin and transposition the skin over intervening skin into the defect. The most commonly used flaps are the rhomboid and bilobed flaps.

******Skin Grafts******

- 
**Split-thickness skin grafts (STSG)**

This variety is a graft of epidermis or partial thickness dermis. Usually, it merits consideration when the defect is large and other forms of reconstruction are not suitable. STSG harvesting is normally with a manual or powered dermatome under local or general anesthetic. Typical thickness is of the range 0.30 to 0.45mm.

STSG usually have better take success rates, and can generally cover a larger surface than FTSG, due to the STSG being thin and have reduced metabolic requirements. Meshing can be performed to the graft to allow greater wound coverage and fluid egress, helping prevent a fluid build up that can inhibit imbibition. STSG leaves a donor site that needs a dressing but no surgical closure. The main disadvantage of STSG is that they often leave a white, patch-like appearance, which can have a poor cosmetic match for the grafted scalp area. See FTSG for improving the graft take rate.

- 
**Full-thickness skin grafts (FTSG)**

FTSG are grafts of the epidermis and complete dermis with or without subcutaneous fat. Harvesting comes from an appropriate area using routine surgical equipment, e.g., neck skin (dermatome not required). Commonly a precise template is made of the wound, and the donor site will require primary closure. FTSG is thicker and has higher metabolic demand; thus they have a higher rate of failure, though that is often dependant on the surgeon and their particular skill set as well as the patient and their co-morbidities. Persistent oozing or bleeding from the wound can lead to hematoma or seroma which can cause the graft not to take. Manually fenestrating the graft can allow the blood/serum to drain. A bolster dressing is applied to the wound with silk tie-over sutures to encourage the graft to sit flush and to take. Over time plasmatic imbibition, revascularization, and contraction occur.