Clinical features of the disease follow 2-pronged themes of eosinophilic tissue infiltration or small and medium vessel vasculitis.

The clinical course is characterized by 3 phases, which do not necessarily always present in every patient. They may even overlap in the natural history of an individual’s disease.

In the initial prodromal phase, nonspecific symptoms of malaise, fever, migrating polyarthralgia, and weight loss are common, along with a severe adult-onset form of asthma that is refractory to conventional treatment. Diffuse myalgia and polyarthralgia have been reported in 37% to 57% of CSS patients, particularly at the onset of disease. Upper respiratory symptoms are more common with chronic rhinosinusitis (47% to 93%) and nasal polyps (62% to 77%). However, nasal granulomas, erosion, and crusting or epistaxis, as seen in GPA, are absent.

The second phase is characterized by eosinophilic infiltrates in end organs along with peripheral eosinophilia. Patchy peripheral nodular pulmonary infiltrates, eosinophilic gastroenteritis, serosal effusion, are common.

An onset of vasculitis characterizes the third phase, and it may take anywhere between 3 to 9 years since the onset of asthma. Neurological symptoms are a hallmark of this phase.

**Organ System Involvement**

**Respiratory and Pulmonary Manifestations**

However, variable the clinical manifestations may be, asthma in the prodromal phase seems nearly ubiquitous, reported in 96% to 100% of patients. The mean age of onset of asthma is 35 to 50 years, and it precedes the onset of vasculitis by 3 to 9 years.

There has been some debate about certain asthma medications like leukotriene receptor antagonists, montelukast, and omalizumab precipitating the onset of CSS. However, others believe that they simply help steroid-dependent patients taper off steroids, thereby unmasking the underlying vasculitides successfully.

Patients with Churg-Strauss syndrome tend to present with adult-onset asthma with an eosinophilic phenotype. It is accompanied by rhinitis, sinusitis, and nasal polyposis more often. Chronic rhinitis is the most common extrathoracic manifestation occurring in about 75% of cases.

Asthma is progressive and often ends up being steroid-dependent asthma. Up to 75% of patients require systemic corticosteroid therapy for asthma control before a diagnosis of EGPA is achieved.

Even when other systemic manifestations of the disease are brought under control with therapy, asthma tends to remain uncontrolled, thus detrimentally affecting the quality of life. Apart from upper airway allergic manifestations and eosinophilic asthma, pulmonary manifestations of the disease can also be related to parenchymal eosinophilic infiltration as well as the vasculitic process. During the first 2 clinical phases described, transient pulmonary infiltrates and eosinophilia is common, whereas, in the vasculitic phase, necrotizing vasculitis and granuloma are more common. Alveolar hemorrhage is reported more often in ANCA positive subset, although its incidence is lower than in GPA patients.

**Cardiac Disease**

Cardiac involvement may be present in 62% of cases, although it is symptomatically manifest in only 26%. It is caused by both mediators released from activated eosinophils and vasculitis lesions in the myocardium and coronary arteries. Myocarditis, in turn, leads to post-inflammatory fibrosis and restrictive cardiomyopathy, followed by congestive cardiac failure. The spectrum of clinical manifestations varies from coronary artery disease, primary arrhythmias, cardiomyopathy, acute constrictive pericarditis and myocarditis, and eosinophilic pericardial effusion. The absence of ANCA and eosinophilia correlates better with cardiac disease.

The use of echocardiography and cardiac MRI has helped detect cardiac abnormalities even beyond an active phase of the disease like nonreversible chronic fibrosis and cardiomyopathy.

Cardiac changes are associated with poor prognosis and high mortality if left untreated.

**Gastrointestinal Involvement**

Eosinophilic gastroenteritis and mesenteric vasculitis often seem to coincide as far as gastrointestinal tract involvement is concerned. They result in nonspecific symptoms of abdominal pain, nausea, vomiting, and diarrhea to more severe complications like bleeding or intestinal obstruction caused by submucosal nodular masses. Mesenteric vasculitis predisposes to ischemic bowel, mucosal ulceration, and even perforation necessitating exploratory laparotomy. Serosal involvement can cause eosinophilic ascites and peritonitis. Rare manifestations include necrotizing acalculous cholecystitis, pancreatitis, and eosinophilic liver disease.

**Renal Involvement**

Renal involvement is seen in 25% of patients and is less common than other medium vessel vasculitides like GPA.

Hypertension is seen in 10% to 30% of patients with EGPA, and its presence, many reflect the renal involvement.

**Neurologic Involvement**

A wrist or a foot drop resulting from mononeuritis multiplex or mixed sensorimotor peripheral neuropathy is reported. Common peroneal and internal popliteal nerves are most commonly involved. Radial and ulnar nerves in the upper limbs may also be involved.

Cranial nerve palsies are uncommon, but the involvement of cranial nerves 2, 3, 6, and 8 have been described. Ischemic optic neuritis is the most common cranial neuropathy.

Autonomic neuropathies have also been proposed to be the root cause of cardiac dysrhythmia in EGPA patients

Apart from CNC vasculitis, most neurologic symptoms tend to reverse well to standard therapy.

**Other Organs**

Dermatological manifestations are present in half to two-thirds of patients.

Extravascular granulomas are seen in the skin, as are changes consistent with leukocytoclastic vasculitis. Nonthrombocytopenic palpable purpura is the most common skin manifestation, along with scalp nodules, urticarial rashes, skin infarcts, and livedo reticularis.

Among other less common organ system involvements, central retinal artery and venous occlusion, thromboembolic disease, salivary gland involvement, or vasculitis involvement of breasts have also been seen.