The burden of VTE is a growing public health concern. Underscoring this concern is the fact that the majority of these cases are hospital-acquired. The treatment of VTE is of extended duration and has associated complications as well. Ensuring proper prophylaxis, diagnosis, and subsequent compliance with adverse effect monitoring is essential in improving patient outcomes. Effective protocols for VTE prophylaxis need to be developed by hospital administrators and implemented efficiently to decrease the incidence of VTE.

An interprofessional approach to the development of effective prophylaxis protocols and their implementation is crucial. Clinical providers, nurses, administrators, and pharmacists should develop these protocols together to ensure the provision of appropriate prophylaxis and treatment. Almost all hospitals have DVT prophylaxis protocols for surgery patients, and these require close adherence. The role of the clinician rests primarily in identifying those at risk for the development of VTE and in the proper treatment for those diagnosed with it. The pharmacist's role is critical in maintaining adequate dosing, prevention of drug interactions, and ensuring compliance by the patient for the duration of VTE treatment. Specialty nurses are needed to provide patient education not only to ensure the proper compliance but also for appropriate monitoring of complications of VTE or the adverse effects of the treatment itself. An integrated interprofessional team can significantly reduce the incidence of VTE and improve outcomes in patients diagnosed with the disease. [Level 5]