After performing a proper history and physical along with obtaining signed informed consent, it has been recommended by the AAO-HNFS, that a CT scan of the sinuses is necessary before the procedure.

The procedural steps below are the general steps leading up to the procedure. To the authors' knowledge, many variations of procedural steps and technique exist between physician providers, since there is no universal protocol for this procedure.

- In regards to balloon sinuplasty in the setting of the operating room:

The patient lies supine on the operating table for either general anesthesia or conscious sedation performed by the anesthesia team. The patient then gets draped according to physician preference in a sterile fashion. A topical nasal decongestant, most commonly oxymetazoline, is then typically applied to the affected nasal cavity to promote vasoconstriction and improve intraoperative hemostasis. Subsequently, the physician injects their preferential local anesthetic (lidocaine with or without epinephrine) into various points in the nasal anatomy, which can include the middle turbinate, inferior turbinate, or uncinate among others.

- In regards to the preparation of balloon sinuplasty in-office:

The patient remains seated in a standard office reclining exam chair. Topical nasal decongestant and nebulized anesthetic spray are then applied to the affected nasal cavity, and ten minutes is allowed for local absorption. Following this, cotton pledgets soaked in lidocaine or tetracaine are applied directly to the nasal cavity and remain in place for ten more minutes. After removing the packing, the physician will inject their preferential local anesthetic (+/- epinephrine) into selected areas within the nasal mucosa.