# Continuing Education Activity

Trisomy 13 is a chromosomal aneuploidy characterized by meiotic nondisjunction. The phenotypic holoprosencephaly and midline fusion aberrancies are related to a defective fusion of the prechordal mesoderm. Patau syndrome has a mortality of over 95%. This activity addresses this condition and provides clinicians with the information to evaluate and manage this condition when it presents.

**Objectives:**
- Identify the etiology and epidemiology of trisomy 13.
- Review the factors relating to the prenatal diagnosis of trisomy 13.
- Summarize the management options available for trisomy 13.
- Describe some interprofessional team strategies for improving care coordination and communication in the diagnosis of trisomy 13.

# Introduction

Trisomy 13 is a chromosomal aneuploidy****originally described by Patau et al. in 1960.

Trisomy 13 arises from the nondisjunction of germ cells during meiosis I or II of either parental cells.

Phenotypic findings in trisomy 13 are associated with patterns of congenital anomalies and mental disabilities incompatible with life.

# Etiology

Trisomy 13 results from the nondisjunction of homologous chromosomes during gametogenesis, characterized by three copies of chromosome 13 in somatic and germ cell lines.

A less phenotypically challenging trisomy can occur in a translocation. These translocations originate from two acrocentric breaks in the juxtacentromeric regions (usually chromosomes 13 and 14). The phenotypic expression will depend on the balance of the translocation. Balanced Robertsonian translocations will be less severe than those with an altered genetic quantity, as seen in unbalanced translocations.

# Epidemiology

Trisomy 13 is the third most common trisomy, occurring in 1 in 10,000 to 20,000 live births. The antenatal mortality represents the majority of deaths, with a postnatal survival rate of 6 to 12% beyond the first year of life.

# Pathophysiology

The meiotic nondisjunction in trisomy 13 causes a series of genetic aberrancies related to defects in prechordal mesoderm fusion.

# Histopathology

The anatomic-histological classification of trisomy 13 was described in 1966 by Snodgrass et al. as two categories based on the presence or absence of holoprosencephaly.

# History and Physical

The typical findings in trisomy 13 include holoprosencephaly, Dandy-Walker malformation, aplasia cutis, cleft lip-palate, postaxial polydactyly, congenital heart disease, polycystic kidney disease, urogenital anomalies, and gynecological dysgenesis.

# Evaluation

The initial evaluation of trisomy 13 starts with fetal nuchal translucency (FNT) which, is done in weeks 11 to 14 of gestation. As with other trisomies, the measurement typically appears greater or equal to 3.5mm.

Non-invasive prenatal testing (NIPT ) is possible using cell-free DNA in maternal plasma to differentiate trisomy 18 and 21 from 13; nonetheless, cost per value continues to support the use of invasive techniques.

# Treatment / Management

Historical evidence suggested that the syndromic presence of multiple organ dysfunctions in trisomy 13 and 18 were incompatible with life. Nonetheless, the growing communication in society has portrayed anecdotal evidence of survivors from these conditions leading guidelines and decision making into a moral gray zone.

The current approach focuses on creating a communicative relationship between the parents and physicians informing them about the quality of life and the treatment options specific to their child's abnormalities.

# Differential Diagnosis

The differential diagnosis of trisomy 13 should include Edwards syndrome due to its similarities during the initial gestational screening.

# Prognosis

Evidence suggests that postnatal mortality is approximately 50% during the first month and up to 90% during the first year.

# Complications

Maternal complications are associated with trisomy 13, concurring in an increase in mortality for both the mother and the fetus. Data suggest that a trisomy 13 gestation is related to an increased prevalence of preeclampsia and early delivery.

# Deterrence and Patient Education

Antenatal integration of a multidisciplinary team should merit consideration to improve outcomes on both integral maternal health and the viability of the gestation. The evaluation team should include an obstetrician, fetal concerns center nurse, genetic counselor, neonatologist, and social worker.

# Pearls and Other Issues

Trisomy 13 is the third most common nondisjunction meiotic triploidy followed by Edwards and Down syndrome.

# Enhancing Healthcare Team Outcomes

Nondisjunction defects during miosis are related to increased maternal age, especially those above 35 years. Evidence suggests that maternal history of a previous trisomy increases the risk of a subsequent one.