For evaluation of a patient with CB, complete blood count with ESR (erythrocyte sedimentation rate), metabolic profile, electrocardiogram, neuroimaging, automated perimetry, and visual evoked potential should be done. Regarding neuroimaging, a plain CT (compute tomography) scan of the brain is the initial investigation because of its easy availability, but CT scan can miss an early stroke and small strokes. MRI brain is superior to the CT of the brain in diagnosing stroke, but it is not easily available in all health care facilities.

Humphrey visual field (HVF) shows homonymous hemianopia. A more posterior lesion causes more congruity (similarity of the HVFs of both eyes) of the HVF defect. Lesion of the temporal lobe (temporal optic radiation) causes homonymous quadrantanopia of the opposite upper side (pie in the sky) (e.g., right temporal lobe damage will cause left upper visual field defect in both eyes). Lesion of the anterior parietal lobe (anterior parietal radiations) causes homonymous quadrantanopia of the opposite lower side (pie in the floor) (e.g., right parietal lobe damage will cause left lower visual field defect in both eyes).

Damage of the main optic radiation (deep inside the parietal lobe external to the trigone and occipital horn of the lateral ventricle) causes complete contralateral homonymous hemianopia. Anterior visual cortex lesions (usually due to PCA stroke) cause contralateral congruous homonymous hemianopia with macular sparing (because the tip of the occipital cortex responsible for the macular vision is supplied by MCA which is spared in PCA stroke). Lesion at the tip of the occipital cortex (usually due to trauma) causes contralateral congruous homonymous hemianopia involving the contralateral half of macular vision.

Though in most cases of cortical blindness, bilateral visual field defect is noted, unilateral visual field defect may be noted in lesions of the anteriormost part of the calcarine cortex, which is responsible for the extreme temporal visual field of the contralateral eye. Such lesions cause a temporal crescent-like visual defect in the contralateral eye alone.