Principles of therapy include supportive and specific therapies.

Supportive therapy involves control of infection (especially Pneumocystis jiroveci (PCP) infection with trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole or atovaquone), control of volume status (providing dialysis if required), and smoking cessation.

Specific therapy involves induction and maintenance of remission.**Induction of Remission**

The initial therapy is to induce remission which typically consists of glucocorticoids and cyclophosphamide administration, which induces 85% to 90% of patients in 2 to 6 months, with about 75% achieving complete remission. Recently, rituximab proved a comparable substitution for cyclophosphamide in RAVE and RITUXIVAS trials, and it may be used in patients who cannot take or refuse to take cyclophosphamide. At present, the mainstay of therapy remains cyclophosphamide and steroids for induction of remission, with an option to consider rituximab in select patients. Plasma exchange is useful in patients with advanced renal failure (serum creatinine greater than 500 micromol/L or requiring dialysis), in patients with severe pulmonary hemorrhage, and when associated with anti-glomerular basement membrane antibody disease. Although short-term results with plasma exchange are encouraging, the long-term benefits remain unclear, and the PEXIVAS (Plasma Exchange in Vasculitis) trial finding presented at the ERDA Meeting in the summer of 2018 (publication pending) showed no benefit of Plasma exchange in patients with ANCA vasculitis.

**Maintenance of Remission**

It is important to prevent relapse, as relapses are common, especially in granulomatosis with polyangiitis and microscopic polyangiitis. Continue with immunosuppressive therapy, using less toxic agents, to maintain remission and to prevent relapse. Either azathioprine or methotrexate usually is used for maintenance therapy to reduce the risk of relapse. In a recent study by the French Vasculitis Study Group in the MAINRISTAN trial, rituximab 500 mg every 6 months showed an exceptional reduction in the relapse rate with rituximab versus azathioprine at 28 months (5% versus 25%).