Diagnosis and management of migratory thrombophlebitis require an interprofessional team of health care professionals, including primary care provider, dermatologist, pharmacist, nurse practitioner, vascular surgeon, ultrasound technician, and hematology-oncologist working together collaboratively to achieve better patient outcomes.

The majority of patients with thrombophlebitis first present to the primary care providers, including nurse practitioners. These clinicians should order a duplex ultrasound to rule out a blood clot. If the phlebitis is recurrent and migratory, the onus is on the clinicians to search for malignancy. A referral to the internist or oncologist is recommended. While the patient is being worked up, the pharmacist should educate the patient on the need for medication compliance if the clinician discovered a clot in the deep veins. The pharmacist should also verify dosing and administration with anticoagulant therapy, and report any concerns to the prescriber. Also, the nurse should educate the patient on the importance of wearing compression stockings to prevent the post-phlebitic syndrome, and evaluate therapeutic results at each follow-up visit. Even when the primary cause of thrombophlebitis gets diagnosed and treated, phlebitis itself also requires treatment. Failing to administer anticoagulation for deep vein thrombosis can result in pulmonary embolism and medical malpractice. The entire interprofessional healthcare team must collaborate and communicate in looking after the patient to obtain the best outcomes. [Level 5]