Ocular toxocariasis generally affects young children. A history of close contact with a dog, cat, or soil contamination is usually present. The average age of presentation is eight years.

Most of the time, the children do not complain. The parents notice ocular changes, including a deviation of the eye (squinting), white (leukocoria), and redness. Children may present with unilateral loss of vision, redness, and pain. Vision may range from 20/80 to perception of light (PL).

Retinal findings can manifest in 3 forms. The patient can present with any manifestation.

- **Peripheral granuloma**presents as an elevated white mass in the periphery with surrounding vitreal membranes, pigmentation, and tractional detachment. The usual age of onset is 6 to 40 years. A fold of membrane may extend from the peripheral granuloma to the posterior pole.

- **Posterior granuloma**presents as a solitary elevated yellow-white mass at the posterior pole (at macula or around the optic disc) ranging from 0.5 to 3 disc diameter. The patients are usually 6 to 14 years old. Usually, the intraocular inflammation is absent or minimal. Generally, it is well defined and lies in the subretinal space.

- **Endophthalmitis:**The usual age at presentation is 2 to 9 years. Patients present with signs of severe inflammation, pain, redness, watering, and photophobia.

The diagnosis of ocular Toxocara is mainly clinical, supported by antibody testing to Toxocara. The disease, if untreated, can cause complications like cataracts, glaucoma, tractional retinal detachment, macular scarring, and phthisis bulbi.