The first step to diagnose polymyositis in the early stage is to get a detailed history, including family history, medication history, and any antecedent infections. Polymyositis is a relatively challenging diagnosis due to the absence of dermatological findings when compared to dermatomyositis. The following points should be asked in detail to make an accurate diagnosis.

- Gradual onset of myopathy with or without associated myalgia

- Presence of joint pains to rule out other autoimmune disorders

- The pelvic girdle is involved more commonly as compared to the shoulder muscles, so inquire about the difficulty in standing up from the sitting posture. Patients with upper body involvement can have difficulty in hair combing, inability to raise arms above head, and holding the neck in an upright posture.

- Patients having the systematic spread can complain of dysphagia due to pharyngeal or esophageal muscle involvement, breathing difficulty, or chest tightness due to infiltrative cardiomyopathy or pericarditis, etc.

Presenting features

The hallmark of polymyositis is a progressive disease with symmetric involvement of proximal girdle muscles (shoulder and pelvis muscles) and neck flexors that can be painful at times.

The physical examination must include a complete motor and sensory examination of affected muscles. Though the sensory examination is usually normal in these patients, motor examination reveals a decrease in power in the affected portion depending on disease severity with lost tendon reflexes in severe muscular atrophy. Patients with restrictive polymyositis can present with limited mobility of truncal muscles, especially abnormal flexion that is called camptocormia.