# Continuing Education Activity

Although not often performed, the gold standard for the diagnosis of neuromuscular disorders remains electrodiagnostic testing, which includes nerve conduction studies, needle electromyography, and repetitive nerve stimulation. This activity describes the invaluable electrodiagnostic findings of nerve conduction studies, needle electromyography, and repetitive nerve stimulation and highlights the role of the interprofessional team.

**Objectives:**
- Identify the indications for electrodiagnostic testing in a patient with a neuromuscular disorder.
- Describe the nerve conduction study findings in a patient with a neuromuscular disorder.
- Review the electromyographic findings in a patient with neuromuscular disorders.
- Outline the importance of communication among the interprofessional team to enhance the delivery of care for patients with neuromuscular disorders.

# Introduction

Neuromuscular junction disorders are a group of conditions that cause muscle weakness. Their etiology can be autoimmune, congenital, metabolic, or toxic mediated. The three most common neuromuscular junction disorders are Myasthenia gravis (MG), Lambert-Eaton myasthenic syndrome (LEMS), and botulism. The primary pathology is impaired neurotransmission at the interface (synapse) between the nerve ending and the skeletal muscle fiber. In Myasthenia gravis, pathology occurs at the postsynaptic membrane.

Neuromuscular Junction disorders patients present with complaints of muscle fatigue and weakness that fluctuate with episodes of worsening after activity. The sensory system is not affected, as sensory nerves do not have a neuromuscular junction. Patients present with proximal greater than distal muscle weakness. It is common to receive complaints related to bulbar or extraocular muscle weakness as well. Myasthenia gravis patients frequently present with bulbar weakness and limb weakness. It is important to investigate if the patient has a history of thymoma.

LEMS patients less commonly present with bulbar weakness but have diffuse proximal limb weakness. LEMS has a strong correlation with small cell carcinoma.

# Indications

The diagnosis of the neuromuscular junction disorder derives from a thorough history and physical examination, in addition to electrodiagnostic studies with repetitive nerve stimulation RNS) with exercise testing and single-fiber EMG (SFEMG).

# Contraindications

There are few absolute contraindications in performing electrodiagnostic studies in neuromuscular junction disorder. Needle EMG is contraindicated in those with severe bleeding disorders.

# Technique or Treatment

Before performing any diagnostic study, a comprehensive review of the patient’s history and clinical course, as well as a complete physical examination, are necessary. The diagnostician will inform the patient of the indications and overview of the studies which they will be performing. The diagnostician must thoroughly explain the risks and benefits of the exam to the patient and also obtain informed consent.

Routine motor and sensory nerve conduction study should first take place to make sure no other nerve pathology exists, and the clinician can interpret the repetitive nerve stimulation (RNS) results.

Repetitive nerve stimulation (RNS) involves supramaximal stimulation of a motor nerve 5-10 times at a frequency of 3 Hz to determine compound muscle action potential (CMAP) amplitude decrement. The 4th CMAP amplitude is compared with the first. A decrement of >10% is significant. RNS study should ideally be performed on the proximal and most affected muscle to increase sensitivity. However, this may not be possible or easily accomplished because of limitations in the immobilizing of the recording electrodes and the tested muscle. Limb and muscle movement during the test can alter the recording electrode leading to inaccurate results. Limb temperature should be kept warm at 32 degrees celsius. Colder temperature leads to increased amplitudes, prolonged latencies, slowed conduction velocities on NCS, and decrease CMAP decrement on RNS, leading to inaccuracy.

Exercise testing is part of the RNS study routine to determine post-exercise facilitation and exhaustion. If no significant decrement is observed (>10%) with baseline test, a 1-minute exercise follows, and RNS is repeated at 1-minute intervals for 3 to 4 minutes to look for decrement due to post-exercise exhaustion. The patient is finally instructed to perform maximal isometric contraction of the tested muscle for 10 seconds, and RNS is then performed at a 1-minute interval for five minutes to look for amplitude increment due to post-exercise facilitation and exhaustion.

Single-fiber EMG is the most sensitive test for a patient suspected with neuromuscular junction disorder. The exam is proven to be safe, however, technically challenging for both the patient and the physician performing it. It requires experience and technical knowledge.

To perform a single fiber EMG (SFEMG), you need a contracted single fiber electromyography needle or a facial concentric needle with a small recording surface.

# Complications

Complications in performing electrodiagnostic studies are uncommon when observing proper precautions. There is a small risk of bleeding and infection with needle studies.

# Clinical Significance

**Motor Nerve Conduction Studies**

Since the myelin is not affected in an NMJ disorder, motor nerve conduction velocities are normal. However, amplitudes may be affected, and they can assist differentiating myasthenia gravis from Lambert-Eaton myasthenic syndrome. In the patient with Lambert-Eaton, compound muscle action potential (CMAP) decreases. Meanwhile, in myasthenia gravis, compound muscle action potential (CMAP) is within normal limits.

**Sensory Nerve Conduction Studies**

The neuromuscular junction is not present in sensory nerves, and therefore the sensory nerve conduction study is normal.

**Repetitive Nerve Stimulation/Exercise Testing**

There is no amplitude decrement between the first and the succeeding CMAP in normal subjects. However, in patients with neuromuscular junction disorder, a decrement of more than 10% between the first and the fourth stimulation can be appreciated.

In Myasthenia Gravis (MG), the baseline CMAP amplitude decrement is observed more than 70% of the time with RNS in generalized MG. Not uncommonly, no decrement is appreciated on RNS of distal muscles. However, a significant decrement is observable after a 1-minute exercise. Post-exercise repair or facilitation is also observable following a brief 10-second maximum isometric contraction, followed by a decrement in two to five minutes post-exercise due to post-exercise exhaustion.

On the other hand, with Lambert-Eaton myasthenia syndrome, baseline CMAP amplitude decrement is usually noted. After a brief 10-second maximum isometric muscle contraction, post-exercise facilitation of up to 200% increase in CMAP amplitude is typical. In two to five minutes, the clinician should note post-exercise exhaustion.

Other neurologic disorders that can also show CMAP decrement on RNS include motor neuron disease, conditions where on-going denervation and reinnervation result in immature nerve endings/neuromuscular junction, and myopathies.

**Single Fiber EMG**

Single-fiber EMG reveals increased jitter and blocking in neuromuscular junction disorder. There is marked prolongation in jitter value, with MCD of more than 100 microseconds.

**Late Responses**

H-reflexes and F-reflex are not routinely part of the process in a neuromuscular junction study as it does not provide additional useful information.

**Needle EMG**

For a neuromuscular junction study, all muscles that are weak in the patient should be examined in the needle EMG portion of the test. During the exam, the diagnostician may notice unstable MUAPs with normal recruitment. Most Neuromuscular junction disorders will not show abnormal spontaneous activity except for in botulism.

# Enhancing Healthcare Team Outcomes

Neuromuscular junction disorders is a condition often seen in the outpatient setting. Patients frequently come with complaints of muscular proximal weakness in the extremities with/without bulbar and extraocular findings. Electrodiagnostic studies should follow a comprehensive history and a physical exam. It is essential to take an interprofessional team, including a team of physicians, physical therapists, occupational therapists, social workers, and case managers who can work together to provide aggressive multifaceted rehabilitation care to improve a patient's functional status.