An understanding of the pressure gradients across the pulmonary circuit is important in realizing that minor derangements in these pressures can lead to adverse outcomes such as pulmonary edema and respiratory shunts.

The pressure gradients can be summarized as follows:

**Chamber/Vessel/P****ressure Gradient (systolic/diastolic) (in mmHg)**

- Right ventricle - 25/0

- Pulmonary artery - 25/8

- Pulmonary capillaries - 7/0

- Left atrium/wedge pressure - 5/0

It is important to note that low pressures in the pulmonary capillaries allow for easy exchange of gases in the lung alveoli. The pressure in the left atrium is difficult to measure directly, and a surrogate pressure, known as the pulmonary capillary wedge pressure (PWP), is often used. PWP can differentiate between primary and secondary pulmonary hypertension. A high PWP suggests a cardiac origin, whereas a low PWP suggests a pulmonary origin.

At the time of exercise, there is a markedly increased blood flow which is accommodated by the pulmonary circulation in the following ways:

- Recruiting and opening new capillary beds

- Dilating existing vessels to up to twice their original diameter (recall that the pulmonary vessels are highly compliant) as well as increasing blood flow rate

- Finally, increasing the pulmonary arterial pressure. The first two mechanisms compensate well enough such that in practice, the pulmonary artery pressure remains unchanged at times of increased blood flow.

**Zones of Pulmonary Blood Flow**

A hydrostatic pressure gradient exists, by virtue of gravity, from the apex of the lung to the base: 23 mmHg (distributed as -15 mmHg from the level of the heart to the apex of the lung and +8 mmHg from the level of the heart to the base of the lung). This results in a 5-fold greater blood flow at the base of the lung as compared to the apex of the lung. Three zones of pulmonary blood flow can be delineated based on the pulmonary capillary pressure (Pcp)and the pulmonary alveolar air pressure (Ppac).

Zone 1: The Pcp is always less than the Ppac here, and there is no blood flow in the pulmonary capillary bed during any phase of the cardiac cycle. Zone 1 circuits are not seen in the normal lung and are only seen in certain conditions, such as after massive blood loss or if a person is breathing against a positive airway pressure (PEEP). PEEP, in basic terms, overventilates the lung and increases alveolar pressures in order to improve alveolar ventilation in an unhealthy lung.

Zone 2: Here the Pcp rises above the Ppac only during systolic blood flow, and so gas exchange occurs only during systole and not in diastole. Zone 2 blood flow is seen at the apices of the normal lung.

Zone 3: Here the Pcp remains greater than the Ppac in all phases of the cardiac cycle, allowing for an efficient exchange of gases. At the time of exercise, the pulmonary blood flow increases and all Zone 3 lung converts to Zone 2.