Based on the type of tumor, molecular biomarkers, extent of the disease, treatment modalities performed, the prognosis of lung metastasis varies greatly.

Colorectal cancer: Without treatment, median survival is eight months, and 1-year survival is 30%.

Hepatocellular carcinoma: In the unresectable groups, the median survival was 7.46 months, and the one, three, five, and 10-year survival rates were and 34.1%, 8.1%, 3.5%, and 2.1%.

Renal cell cancer: The median survival duration is only 8 to 12 months, and the 5-year survival rate is only 2 to 3%.

Chondrosarcoma: 3 and 5 yrs survival after lung metastasis is 51.5 % and 45.7%.

Breast cancer: The median survival of patients with lung metastases was 21 months, while those with metastases confined to lungs had a median survival of 25 months. In another study, the median overall survival was 22.5 months for breast cancer patients with metastases confined to lungs treated with systemic chemotherapy. However, patients with metastases confined to lungs undergoing pulmonary metastasectomy had a median survival of 35 to 75.6 months with a 5-year overall survival rate of 38% to 54%. Survival analysis showed that the aged, black race, HR−/HER2+, triple-negative subtype, higher grade were the independent risk factor for BCLM patients’ survival, while HR+/HER2+ subtype, insured status, and married status suggested a better prognosis.

Melanoma: The mean survival of metastatic melanoma is only 6 to 8 months, and the 5-year survival rate is about 5%. The most common metastatic organ is the lung in 40% of cases. Complete resection is beneficial and associated with a 5-year survival rate as high as 39%, compared to a 3% to 5% 5-year survival rate for systemic therapy patients.

Non-seminomatous germ cell tumors: Overall median survival after postchemotherapy surgical removal was 23.4 years. Tumors included teratoma (52.7%), persistent NSGCT (15.0%), and degenerative non-germ cell cancer (10.1%).

Ovarian cancer: In a study on 357 patients, thoracic involvement by tumor was present in 169 patients (44.5%), and 5.6% were alive after five years compared with 49% of patients with no evidence of thoracic involvement. Another study in 255 patients with ovarian epithelial carcinoma showed that 38% had distant metastasis with a median survival from the time of diagnosis of the effusion being six months. Parenchymal lung metastases were present in 7.1% of patients with median survival, eight months.