Proper administration of methacholine challenge testing requires an interprofessional team approach, beginning with the physician prescribing the test based on clinical history with failure to establish or eliminate the diagnosis after careful consideration of contraindications. Optimal performance during testing is reliant upon proper assistance and coaching of patient breathing maneuvers by registered respiratory therapists. Nursing staff may assist in preparing the patient for the test as well as counseling them on what to expect with the respiratory therapist, as dealt with in further detail in the following sections. Additionally, pharmacist preparation of varying concentrations of methacholine is needed to ensure accurate data. Although the test is low risk with the proper exclusion of contraindicated patient populations with diminished baseline FEV1, assessment of vital signs and patient symptoms is also essential to prevent and recognize wheezing or bronchospasm. Health care professionals should assess the need for bronchodilators for the treatment of severe bronchospasm. Resuscitation equipment and personnel should be readily available. Guidelines provided by the American Thoracic Society established in 1999 outline step-by-step protocols, safety measures, patient preparation and procedures, and cohesion between care team members is required to safely and accurately assess patients.

All these factors combine to demonstrate that the methacholine challenge test is most effective when part of an interprofessional healthcare team approach, where multiple disciplines (clinicians, specialists, nursing, respiratory therapists) collaborate to administer testing and use the results to direct patient management most effectively. [Level 5]