**Drugs**

Three drugs: morphine, ziconotide, and baclofen, are currently approved by the US Food and Drug Administration (FDA) for intrathecal administration. However, several other opioids such as hydromorphone, fentanyl, sufentanil, and non-opioid (bupivacaine, clonidine) used alone or in combination also have indications for intrathecal administration by the Polyanalgesic Consensus Conference (PACC) recommendations for intrathecal analgesia.

**Morphine**

Morphine-targeted opioid receptors are present in high density within the dorsal horn of the spinal cord. This opioid binds to receptors on primary afferent fibers (pre-synaptic) and postsynaptic neurons in the dorsal horn of the spinal cord (hyperpolarization). This binding inhibits the release of neurotransmitters such as substance P and the calcitonin gene-related peptide (CGRP), finally causing the inhibition of nociceptive transmission. Intrathecal morphine, when compared with systemic morphine, has a better analgesic effect and causes fewer side effects. Compared to lipophilic opioids (e.g., fentanyl), due to its hydrophilic nature, morphine remains localized in the intrathecal space, spreading to different levels of the spinal cord. These pharmacokinetic features lead to better pain control combined with a significant reduction in drug toxicity. Moreover, the continuous intrathecal infusion allows the drug to reach and maintain a steady-state, which results in a better therapeutic effect. In contrast, patients taking oral opioids usually experience fluctuations in the plasma level of opioids, with potential peaks in the toxic range and lowering of concentrations that lead to increased pain. Consequently, intrathecal therapy should lead to better results in terms of pain relief.

Because the dose of opioids and the occurrence of adverse events are directly related, according to the paradigm 'start slow and go slow,' the doses of morphine must be kept as low as possible. The dosing of intrathecal morphine is obtainable based on the test dose (see dose titration). However, the recommended doses correspond to 1/300th of the dose of oral morphine (oral morphine equivalent dose, MED),

Morphine-induced side effects include respiratory depression, pruritus (due to histamine release), nausea and vomiting (due to effect on chemoreceptor trigger zone in the fourth ventricle), sedation (effect on the thalamus, limbic system). Compared to the parenteral route, the intrathecal administration of morphine can lead to an increased occurrence of urinary retention due to inhibition of the sacral parasympathetic system and, in turn, relaxation of the detrusor muscle. Although in some cases, urinary catheterization is necessary, urinary retention often resolves with the cessation of the infusion (24-hour half-life) and with the administration of naloxone.

The association of local anesthetics with opioids can potentiate the analgesic effect of morphine, also reducing its consumption. Furthermore, bupivacaine-induced side effects, such as hypotension and muscle weakness are rarely observable. Thus, it is possible to obtain good pain control through a synergistic effect of the two drugs (bupivacaine and morphine) with minimal side effects through careful patient selection, combinations of drugs for intrathecal infusion, and their dosage. Although the mechanisms of synergism remain somewhat unclear, the hypothesis is that it is due to the modulation of the electrochemical gradients of sodium and potassium and, therefore, to the subsequent release of neurotransmitters in the spinal cord with consequent improvement of cholinergic transmission in the nociceptive system. Nevertheless, the clinical effect of the association and the role of the local anesthetic infusion alone requires additional investigation. A recent randomized, double-blind, cross-over trial, indeed, demonstrated that in cancer pain, the continuous intrathecal administration of the bupivacaine alone could lead to better analgesia than the association of the local anesthetic with morphine.

**Ziconotide**

Ziconotide is a non-opioid analgesic that selectively binds to N-type voltage-sensitive calcium channels (Cav2.2) and causes analgesia by blocking the release of pro-nociceptive neurotransmitters from nociceptive afferent nerves in the spinal cord dorsal horn. It is a peptide composed of 25 amino acids derived from the omega-conotoxin of the marine gastropod Conus magus. This medication was approved for analgesic use through intrathecal administration by the US FDA in December 2004 and, later on, the 2012 PACC guidelines recommend it as first-line intrathecal therapy for neuropathic and nociceptive pain.

Because ziconotide has a narrow therapeutic window, the dose titration must be accurate. The dose of ziconotide administered continuously should start with less than or equal to 1.2 mcg/day, followed by a slow upward titration with dose increases of less than or equal to 0.5 mcg/day every 4 to 7 days up to a dose maximum of 19.2 mcg/day to minimize the occurrence of adverse events.

The most frequent side effects  (greater than or equal to 25%) of ziconotide are dizziness, nausea, confusion, nystagmus. Less often (less than 5%) it is possible to observe urinary retention, vision blurred, diplopia, gastrointestinal disorders (diarrhea, vomiting, constipation), pain in limb, muscle spasm, general disorders (pyrexia, asthenia, anorexia) as well as nervous system disorders (ataxia, anorexia, drowsiness, tremor, dysgeusia), and psychiatric/psychological manifestations such as anxiety, insomnia, depression, depression aggravated, and rarely psychosis with hallucination and paranoia. There have been reports of acute renal failure, atrial fibrillation, and convulsions in approximately 2%, and suicide attempts in less than 1% of patients. If side effects occur, it is advisable to reduce the dose by half.

Morphine and ziconotide are both recommended in intrathecal monotherapy against neuropathic and nociceptive pain. The choice of one rather than the other must take into consideration the characteristics of the patient as well as the advantages and disadvantages of each drug. For instance, ziconotide can be used in patients with opioid hyperalgesia or patients with obstructive sleep apnea.

**Baclofen**

Baclofen (beta-[4-chlorophenyl]-GABA) is a muscle relaxant and antispasmodic drug, it was introduced initially as an anticonvulsant drug, in 1962. Subsequently, its use was abandoned due to adverse effects. It is an analog of gamma-aminobutyric acid (GABA) and acts as an agonist at the GABA-B neurons at the spinal cord level and brain. In turn, the effect is the inhibition of stretch reflexes and a decreased muscle tone.

Since when baclofen is administered orally only a limited fraction of the original dose crosses the BBB and acts on receptors in the CNS, research has demonstrated that about 25 to 30% of patients with spasticity due to SCI and MS fail to respond to therapy.

Intrathecal administration of baclofen usually initiates through dose titration. The patient receives a single dose (e.g., 50 mcg baclofen) and is evaluated for 5 to 10 hours to assess its efficacy. The testing dose that allows obtaining a positive response for almost 24 hours will then double. Moreover, daily dose adjustments are usually made by increments of 10 to 30% for spasticity of spinal cord origin and 5 to 15% for spasticity of cerebral origin until achieving the optimum daily dose.

The main adverse effects of baclofen include sedation, excessive muscle weakening, nausea, dizziness, mental confusion, and drowsiness, although they are less clear with intrathecal administration.

**Device**

- Programmable pump. It contains and infuses the drug. Through a dedicated software and algorithm, it stores all patient and system data

- Catheter. Positioned in the intrathecal space of the spinal cord

- External device (programmer). It allows an extra dosage of medication when needed

The pump is a mechanical pump with adjustable flow, powered by a lithium battery that has an average life of 5 to 7 years, and comes equipped with an antenna that allows communication via computer with the programmer. The pump contains the drug reservoir, which has a capacity of 20 to 40 ml. The reservoir is refillable with a thin needle introduced through the skin. According to the FDA recommendations, the reservoir should be refilled every 6 months. However, the interval varies depending on the type of disease and the drug and dose used.

The pump allows different infusion modes:

1) Continuous (fixed) infusion mode. It will enable administering the drug continuously throughout the 24 hours.

2) Flexible infusion mode. It permits the clinician to change the daily dosage of the drug; increasing or decreasing it at any time during the 24 hours, to deliver variable quantities at different times of the day, to customize the therapy based on the patient's needs.

3) Patient-controlled analgesia (PCA) infusion mode. It allows, in addition to continuous administration, the administration of prefixed doses "on-demand" by the patient, such as in case of incident pain (e.g., breakthrough cancer pain).