Clinically, monitoring pupil dilation is intrinsic to the management of opioid overdose. According to the CDC’s 2018 Annual Surveillance Report of Drug-Related Risks and Outcomes, although opioid prescribing has continued to decrease through 2017, drug overdose deaths in the United States reached a record high in 2016 of 63,632.

Opioids are parasympathomimetics that act predominantly on mu receptors to produce feelings of euphoria, analgesia, and sedation. In toxic doses, opioids cause depressed mental status, respiratory depression (<12/min), decreased tidal volume, and pupillary constriction, or miosis. Due to respiratory depression, initial management should focus on airway and breathing, with preparation to mechanically ventilate if it becomes necessary. These measures are closely followed by the administration of naloxone, ideally via the intravenous route, which is a short-acting pure opioid antagonist.

Naloxone has a duration of approximately two hours, and repeat administration may be necessary if respiratory depression and coma return, especially if the patient ingested a long-acting opioid. Since naloxone reverses pupillary constriction, administration via injection can continue until pupillary dilation takes place. Similarly, the clinical team can monitor the size of the patient’s pupils to assess whether a subsequent dose is necessary, although monitoring of pupils should take place in conjunction with observation for the return of respiratory depression. Of note, naloxone is available OTC in many states, and expanded access to naloxone is essential for reducing opioid overdose morbidity and mortality.

Another common clinical scenario associated with pupillary dilation is an uncal brain herniation, a complication of high intracranial pressure in which a portion of the temporal lobe herniates over the tentorium and places pressure on the midbrain. However, the associated pupillary dilation is not from the activation of the pupillary dilation pathway. Instead, it is from compression of the oculomotor nerve, which causes altered parasympathetic input to the ipsilateral eye.

Additionally, pupillary dilation as an adaptation to low levels of light is due to the pupillary light reflex, in which varying intensities of light fall on the retinal ganglion cells and cause pupillary constriction or dilation; this is a separate pathway from the pupillary dilation pathway.