**Arterial Blood Supply**

The blood supply of the somatosensory cortex arises primarily from the anterior cerebral artery (ACA) and the middle cerebral artery (MCA). Both the anterior cerebral artery and the middle cerebral artery arise from the bifurcation of the internal carotid artery. The anterior cerebral artery supplies most of the medial part of the frontal lobe between the hemispheres. The middle cerebral artery supplies the largest portion of the brain compared to the other cerebral arteries and supplies the lateral sides of the cerebral hemispheres. The anterior cerebral artery supplies the superomedial part of the primary sensory cortex, while the inferolateral part receives supply from the middle cerebral artery - this is because the ACA moves upward between the hemispheres while the MCA courses between the temporal and frontal lobes. An area between the ACA and MCA on either side of the midline is known as the watershed region and tends to experience infarction during global cerebral ischemia. The ACA and the MCA supplying the somatosensory cortex arise from the circle of Willis, which involves both the ACAs, both internal carotid arteries, both posterior cerebral arteries, both posterior communicating arteries, and the anterior communicating artery.

**Venous Blood Supply**

The venous drainage from the somatosensory cortex enters the venous sinus system contained within the dura. The adjacent arachnoid mater contains granulations that are outlets for cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) from the subarachnoid space. Cerebral veins and anastomosing veins drain deoxygenated blood, waste, and metabolites into the superior sagittal sinus, which drains towards the confluence of sinuses towards the occipital pole. From there, the blood moves down the transverse sinus, sigmoid sinus, then leaves the cranial vault via the internal jugular vein through the jugular foramen. Eventually, the internal jugular carries the blood back to the superior vena cava and back to the right heart via the subclavian and brachiocephalic veins.

**Lymphatics**

Despite previous suggestions that the brain did not contain the lymphatic flow, a recent paradigm shift used MRI to suggest that the lymphatic vessels exist within the dura mater. The lymphatic circulation serves to drain the subarachnoid space CSF and interstitial fluid within the brain using aquaporins.