The history and physical examination are the first steps in identifying the etiology of vestibular dysfunction, narrowing the differential diagnosis based on time course, symptomatology, and clinical signs. The history and physical will also determine the need for diagnostic testing. History taking should focus on clarifying the timing of symptomatic episodes. It is also important to differentiate dizziness or vertigo from syncope or presyncope. Open-ended questions that give the patient the ability to describe their symptoms are helpful, although some patients will require redirection with more specific "yes or no" questions to avoid lengthy but clinically irrelevant monologues. Each symptom revealed by the history should be detailed with respect to time course, severity, and exacerbation or alleviation, with the goal of separating peripheral vestibular from central nervous system pathology.

Elucidating the progression of symptoms over time is essential as well. Vertigo is usually not continuous and chronic with a vestibular etiology because the CNS compensates and causes the feeling of vertigo to subside over days or weeks. If the patient recounts a history of constant vertigo or dizziness that has lasted for months, the cause is almost certainly not peripheral. On the other hand, a history of tinnitus may indicate a peripheral cause that affects both the hearing and balance organs, such as Ménière disease.length of the symptomatic episodes, determining which will differentiate peripheral from central causes and potentially indicate the most likely peripheral cause.

Recurrent episodes lasting under one minute are usually BPPV. A single episode of vertigo lasting several minutes to hours may be due to a vestibular migraine or a TIA that is related to the vascular areas of the labyrinth or brainstem. Recurrent episodes that last minutes to hours are associated with Ménière disease, particularly when accompanied by roaring tinnitus and hearing loss. Vertiginous episodes that last for days can occur with vestibular neuronitis, labyrinthitis, multiple sclerosis, and infection or infarction of the brainstem or cerebellum.

A history of aggravating and provoking factors must be obtained. Vertigo that worsens with head motion implies vestibular causes. Aggravating symptoms of coughing, sneezing, exertion, or loud noises raise the suspicion of perilymphatic fistula or a "third window" effect. Perilymphatic fistula is a defect between the middle ear and the perilymphatic space of the inner ear that may allow changes in middle ear pressure to affect hearing and the vestibular system; these are potentially caused by trauma, iatrogenic injury, or cholesteatoma. A "third window" effect is caused by a defect in the bone surrounding the labyrinth, such as with superior semicircular canal dehiscence, and also causes vertigo with pressure changes in the middle ear or the cerebrospinal fluid space. The condition is called "third window" because the vestibular system only has two natural openings: the round and oval windows. Patients at high risk of perilymphatic fistula include those with a history of a traumatic event from diving or flying, vestibular surgery, or weight lifting. They often note symptoms worsening with straining, heavy lifting, or bowel movements. A history of hyperextension injury of the neck points to vertebral artery dissection, which presents with persistent neck pain. A recent viral illness or symptoms can help identify vestibular neuronitis as the etiology.

Symptoms associated with vertigo are also helpful in identifying etiology. Patients presenting with vertigo, diplopia, dysarthria, weakness, or numbness should be evaluated for central nervous system etiologies like acute ischemic stroke and demyelinating disorders like multiple sclerosis. These neurologic symptoms may precede, accompany, or follow the onset of vertigo. Ménière disease is often accompanied by low-frequency sensorineural hearing loss and a tinnitus which is described as a "roaring" or "whooshing" sound in addition to a sensation of pressure in the ear. Headache, photophobia, and phonophobia suggest migraines with vertigo.

The patient's past medical history may also provide a clue as to the identity of the pathology—vasculopathy risk factors such as hypertension, diabetes mellitus, and smoking increase the likelihood of stroke. Patients with vertigo and two or more of these risk factors have an 8% 2-year stroke risk. Patients with three or more risk factors and vertigo have a 14% 2-year risk of suffering a stroke. A prior history of migraine headaches increases the chance that vertigo is a result of vestibular migraines, and head trauma can be a cause of BPPV or perilymphatic fistula. Medications such as aminoglycosides and chemotherapeutic agents like cisplatin can cause vestibular toxicity. Long-term use of seizure medications like phenytoin and carbamazepine can affect the cerebellum and also cause dysequilibrium.

Commonly, patients who present with vertigo will also demonstrate nystagmus on physical examination. The severity of nystagmus and the pattern can help differentiate peripheral from central disorders. Some patients will present with tilt illusion, which is a feeling of leaning or even being upside down, related to otolithic organ dysfunction. This peripheral dysfunction may also cause lateral propulsion, which tends to fall to the side of the lesion. Patients with nystagmus may describe oscillopsia, the visual illusion of a to and fro motion with poor visual fixation when the head is moving due to impairment of the VOR, particularly when there is a bilateral vestibular weakness.

There are many types of nystagmus. Spontaneous nystagmus is a slow drift of the eyes away from the target in one direction followed by a fast corrective movement in the reverse direction. By convention, nystagmus is named for its fast component, e.g., a "right beating" nystagmus drifts slowly to the left and then corrects rapidly back to the right. The nystagmus continues until the peripheral vestibular function returns to normal or the CNS adapts to the vestibular lesion. Nystagmus can be classified as either physiologic or pathological. Physiologic nystagmus is a form of involuntary eye movement. It is part of the VOR, characterized by smooth eye movements in one direction alternating with saccadic movement in the other direction, generally horizontally. Pathological nystagmus, on the other hand, is produced by an abnormality of the central or peripheral components of the VOR. It can also be the result of VOR activation from a stimulus other than the motion of the head, such as caloric water stimulation.

Any clinically apparent nystagmus should be examined in detail because it can provide important diagnostic information about whether the etiology is a peripheral pathology located in the vestibular apparatus or in the CNS, as well as indicate the laterality. Additionally, specific physical exam maneuvers such as Dix-Hallpike and head impulse testing, skew deviation, HINTS examination, and observation of the ocular tilt reaction and visual fixation should be performed. These tests help to differentiate peripheral from central etiologies. Horizontal nystagmus results from a horizontal semicircular canal lesion, and torsional nystagmus results from superior or posterior semicircular canal involvement (down-beating and up-beating, respectively). A mixed horizontal-torsional nystagmus results if a peripheral lesion affects all three semicircular canals on one side. Visual fixation, however, should suppress nystagmus if it is due to a peripheral lesion but not a central lesion.

The following tests are important, and clinicians must know how to perform and interpret them.

Rinne and Weber tests: The Rinne and Weber tests are used to evaluate conductive and sensorineural hearing using a tuning fork, usually vibrating at 512 HZ, and are performed at the bedside. The Weber test is normal when the sound of the tuning fork placed on the glabella, rhinion, or central maxillary incisors is heard equally in both ears. In the presence of a sensorineural hearing loss, the sound should lateralize to the better-hearing ear. With conductive hearing deficits, the sound lateralizes to the affected ear.

Dix-Hallpike-maneuver: The Dix-Hallpike maneuver is the use of a positional change to reproduce vertigo and demonstrate nystagmus in patients with positional dizziness. The test is most appropriate for patients who are not dizzy or vertiginous at rest. It is designed to identify benign paroxysmal positional vertigo by evaluating for posterior semicircular canal dysfunction in the dependent ear. When the patient is laid back with the dysfunctional ear in the dependent position, geotropic nystagmus and vertigo will often appear within 30 to 60 seconds, particularly if Frenzel lenses are worn to inhibit visual fixation and magnify the eyes for the examiner. The nystagmus and vertigo typically disappear after a short period, although it may be intense within that brief interval, and patients may vomit during the examination. After the patient sits up, the nystagmus will reverse direction. The maneuver is repeated on the same side, and each time the intensity and duration of nystagmus diminish. The delayed onset of nystagmus, transient and diminishing response with repetition and the geotropic nature of the nystagmus are indicative of posterior semicircular canal BPPV. If the dysfunction is located in the horizontal canal rather than the posterior canal, nystagmus may not be evoked by the Dix-Hallpike test, and if the debris is located on the cupula rather than within the canal, the nystagmus may rotate in the opposite direction, apogeotropically. The sensitivity of the Dix-Hallpike test for identifying BPPV is in the range of 88%.

Head impulse test (HIT): HIT is for differentiating vestibular dysfunction from non-vestibular dizziness.

Head shaking nystagmus testing is also used to test for unilateral vestibular lesions. The patient is instructed to shake the head from side to side with eyes closed for 15-40 seconds, causing stimulation of the horizontal semicircular canals of both sides. When instructed, the patient stops shaking, opens their eyes, and looks straight ahead. If both sides were equally stimulated, the response is balanced, leaving the eyes still. If there is unilateral or asymmetric vestibular damage, there will be nystagmus that beats away from the damaged side. The test can, however, appear normal in patients with bilateral, symmetric injury. Reported sensitivity and specificity are 46% and 75%, respectively.

Skew deviation: This is a test designed to identify lesions in the brainstem. A red lens is placed over one eye, and a white point of light is shined at the patient, who is asked to note the relative position of the red spot to the white point of light. The examiner then moves the white point of light to see how the separation changes with a lateral and vertical gaze. With skew deviation due to a central lesion, gaze direction has little effect on the distance between images, known as commitment. If commitment changes with gaze direction, a cranial nerve palsy affecting ocular motility may be to blame.

A specific type of skew deviation is the ocular tilt reaction, in which the patient has a triad of skew deviation, head tilt in the direction of the lower eye, and bilateral ocular torsion in the direction of the head tilt. The ocular tilt reaction can occur with acute peripheral lesions or central lesions involving the cerebellum or brainstem vestibular pathway. Besides the ocular tilt test and skew, a tilt of the subjective visual vertical plane is a sensitive sign of static vestibular imbalance, which can be due to either peripheral or central pathology.

HINTS examination: The HINTS examination is an exam combining the Head Impulse test (HIT) with the skew test. The presence of normal HIT and skew deviation suggests central rather than peripheral vertigo.