Dolder et al. analyzed the pharmacokinetics and pharmacodynamics of LSD in a study first published in 2017. The analysis occurred in two studies: in one newly performed study, 100-micrograms of LSD were dosed orally to 24 healthy subjects; in the other study, which was a retrospective analysis, 16 subjects received 200-micrograms orally. Blood sampling was performed, and analysis of plasma LSD concentrations, subjective moods of the subjects, and vital signs was also done. Mean peak plasma concentrations of 1.3 ng/mL were observed 1.4 hours after administering the 100-microgram dose was administered, and a mean Cmax value of 3.1 ng/mL was attained 1.5 hours after administration of the 200-microgram dose. The present study showed that the plasma half-life of LSD was 2.9 hours, comparable to the result after IV administration of 2mcg/kg found in a separate study. In the-100 microgram dose group, the researchers found the time of onset to be 0.8 +/- 0.4 hours (range 0.1 to 1.7 hours) and 9.0 ± 2.0 hours (range 6.1 to 14.5 hours); the mean effect duration was measured as 8.2 +/- 2.1 h (range 5 to 14 hours); time to peak drug effect was 2.8 +/- 0.8 hours (range 1.2 to 4.6 hours). For the 200-microgram dose group, the following values were obtained: for the time of onset and offset, 0.4 +/- 0.3 h (range 0.04 to 1.2 hours) and 11.6 +/- 4.2 hours (range 7.0 to 19.5 hours); mean effect duration was 11.2 +/- 4.2 hours (range 6.4 to 19.3 hours), and time to peak effects was 2.5 +/- 1.2 hours (range 0.8 to 4.4 hours). The researchers found vitals such as systolic blood pressure, heart rate, and core body temperature to be elevated after LSD administration in both groups.