ERAS pathways are evidence-based approaches critical to providing safe care and improving patient mortality, morbidity, and satisfaction in the perioperative period. These interventions optimize care in the perioperative period. Components of ERAS pathways can be subdivided into the preoperative, intraoperative, and postoperative periods.

The preoperative period allows medical personnel to evaluate the patient to determine whether or not the patient is stable enough for surgery, the type of surgery, the type of anesthetic, and the anticipation of postoperative location.

A big part of preoperative management also includes optimizing the patient before surgery, including managing their comorbidities, i.e., diabetes mellitus, hypertension, CAD, anemia, COPD, etc. Patients are also educated regarding their smoking use and alcohol consumption. ERAS protocols also focus on various strategies to optimize the patient, including providing education about sleep hygiene, relaxation strategies to reduce anxiety, and dietary modifications.

Intraoperative ERAS protocols include providing multimodal non-opioid analgesics and antiemetics, incorporating regional anesthesia, antibiotic prophylaxis, normothermia, lung-protective mechanical ventilation, euvolemia, and minimizing drains and tubes such as early removal of foley catheters, surgical drains, and nasogastric tubes. Integration of prevention of surgical site infections and thromboembolic prophylaxis measures are already instituted at many hospitals across the country and have been incorporated into ERAS protocols. Preventative measures of surgical site infections include the use of chlorhexidine alcohol skin wipes, glove/instrument change with antibiotic irrigation before closure, intravenous antibiotics before incision, and providing antibiotics with bowel prep.

Anesthetic management in the perioperative period plays a critical role in the ERAS system implementation. By facilitating the implementation of these protocols through communication and collaboration between personnel in the different perioperative periods, the anesthesiology team significantly improves patient satisfaction with their smooth transition from the preoperative to intraoperative to the postoperative period. In addition, the anesthesia team can profoundly impact patients' recovery postoperatively by choosing shorter-acting premedications and using reduced levels of volatile anesthetics, or using total intravenous anesthesia (TIVA), minimizing the use of opioids and adequate pain management, maintaining euvolemia, normothermia, and administering prophylactic antiemetics.

PONV is one of the most significant incapacitating factors concerning anesthesia. PONV is a common reason for a prolonged length of hospital stay as well as patient dissatisfaction. The administration of prophylactic antibiotics during preoperative and intraoperative periods was found to be very effective against PONV. Certain risk factors include younger age, female gender, prior history of postoperative nausea and vomiting, non-smokers, and history of motion sickness.

Adequate analgesia is another factor that can be debilitating to the postoperative patient. Multimodal analgesia is encouraged in the ERAS protocols, use of drugs such as acetaminophen, nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs), and gabapentinoids when indicated, during the preoperative period for pain prophylaxis. Limiting the amount of opioid use to prevent postoperative ileus. In addition, surgical field block and regional anesthesia can be used as adjuncts for pain relief in the intraoperative and postoperative periods. Regional anesthesia methods include continuous or single-shot peripheral nerve blocks or neuraxial anesthesia such as epidural catheter placement, intraoperative and postoperative use of medications like magnesium, dexmedetomidine,  ketamine, and lidocaine infusion when indicated. Multiple factors are considered when developing a multimodal pain management plan, including patients' medical history and comorbidities, type of surgery and anticipated postoperative pain, emotional and psychological status, baseline pain tolerance, and the risk-benefit of the various medications.

Temperature monitoring and maintaining normothermia during the intraoperative and postoperative periods is another important element of the ERAS protocol. Hypothermia is associated with adverse effects such as delayed wound healing, increased wound infection, increased blood loss, cortisol levels, and significantly increased oxygen consumption which could precipitate cardiac events.

Monitoring and maintenance of intravascular volume status are crucial. The main goal of fluid management in ERAS protocols is to maintain euvolemia and avoid excess water and salt. Maintaining a euvolemic state allows for an accelerated return to bowel function, reduces urinary tract and surgical site infections, and decreases renal and pulmonary complications.

Glycemic control is a vital component of the ERAS pathway, the prevalence of diabetes in surgical patients is 10 to 40%.

Postoperative interventions in the postoperative protocol include early mobilization/ambulation, early oral intake, and the use of multimodal non-opioid analgesics. In recent studies, it has been shown that the postoperative period plays the most critical role in expediting the recovery of the post-surgical patient. Early oral intake improves wound healing, decreases infection, improves insulin resistance, and allows for faster return of muscle function.