Below is the staging of carcinoma of the breast, primarily based on the axillary lymph nodes' involvement.

- Stage O: No involvement of axillary lymph nodes. Few cancer cells are present in breast ductules or lobules.

- Stage 1A: No involvement of axillary lymph nodes. Tumor size in the breast is less than 2 cm.

- Stage 1B: Very few lymph nodes are involved, but their size is less than 2mm (micrometastases). The tumor might or might not be present in the breast. If present, it will be less than 2 cm in size.

- Stage 2A: 1 to 3 axillary lymph nodes show cancer cells and are larger than 2mm with tumor size in breast less than 2cm. Or the size of the tumor in the breast is less than 5 cm without the involvement of lymph nodes.

- Stage 2B: 1 to 3 axillary lymph nodes involved with a tumor less than 5 cm. Or the tumor is larger than 5 cm in size with no lymph node involvement.

- Stage 3A: 4 to 9 axillary lymph nodes are seen with a tumor less than 5 cm. Or 1 to 9 axillary lymph nodes are involved with the tumor being bigger than 5 cm.

- Stage 3B: Involvement of up to 9 axillary lymph nodes with tumor involving surrounding muscles and skin of the breast.

- Stage 3C: Here ten or more axillary lymph nodes are involved with also the involvement of the surrounding lymph nodes (like infraclavicular, internal mammary, or supraclavicular lymph nodes)

- Stage 4: Involvement of almost all axillary lymph nodes with distant metastatic spread to organs like lungs, liver, bone, brain, etc.