The treatment of toxoplasmosis in HIV-infected patients includes:

- Antimicrobial therapy directed against T. gondii

- Antiretroviral therapy for immune recovery

Pyrimethamine and sulfadiazine are most commonly employed in treatment. Both agents synergistically and sequentially block folic acid metabolism which is necessary for the development of the parasite. Folinic acid (leucovorin) is often added to replace folate stores which are non-selectively depleted. Initial treatment is typically for six weeks.

Initial therapy is followed by secondary prophylaxis or maintenance therapy which is continued until CD4 plus T-lymphocyte counts are over 200 cells/microliters for more than three months. In addition to awaiting immune recovery, secondary prophylaxis provides continuous therapy against dormant cystic forms which may rupture and reinitiate the infectious process at any time. Maintenance therapy, therefore, is necessary to prevent relapse.

In patients who are allergic to sulfonamides, treatment options include any of the following: clindamycin; trimethoprim/sulfamethoxazole; pyrimethamine plus atovaquone plus folinic acid; pyrimethamine plus azithromycin plus folinic acid; and atovaquone alone (if unable to tolerate sulfur drugs or pyrimethamine).

Spiramycin is the drug of choice in the first trimester of pregnancy as pyrimethamine may be teratogenic.

Most clinicians often employ the use of steroids (when edema is present), but studies have shown its use to be neither beneficial or harmful. The use of steroids in cerebral toxoplasmosis should probably be limited to impending brain herniation as the diagnosis may be clouded once steroid is started before a definitive diagnosis is made.

Treatment course is often dramatic with half the cases showing neurological improvement by day three and in most cases by day seven of treatment commencement. If there is no significant improvement or worsening symptoms by days ten to 14 of therapy, repeat imaging and possibly brain biopsy should be considered. Persistent neurologic sequelae may remain in 37% of survivors and death rate at one year could vary from 10% to 60%.

An integral part of therapy is starting antiretroviral (ART) agents as soon as feasible, usually within 2 weeks of starting anti-toxoplasma therapy. Immune reconstitution inflammatory syndrome (IRIS) which can present as paradoxical worsening of symptoms as immunity recovers is rarer with toxoplasmosis compared to mycobacterial and cryptococcal infections. Even though there are no studies about the optimal timing of ART in toxoplasmosis, early ART has clear benefits and should not necessarily be delayed beyond 2 weeks.