**Glipizide**is a 2.5 mg to 10 mg tablet, taken as a single dose or in two divided doses, 30 minutes before breakfast. Glimepiride is available as 1 mg, 2 mg, or 4 mg tablets, taken once a day with breakfast or twice a day with meals. For patients at increased risk for hypoglycemia, such as older patients or those with chronic kidney disease, the initial dose could be as low as 0.5 mg daily. Glyburide is available as 1.25 mg, 2.5 mg, or 5 mg tablets, taken as a single dose or two divided doses.

**Repaglinide**is available as 0.5 mg, 1 mg, or 2 mg tablets, taken orally in two to three divided doses per day.

**Metformin**is the initial drug of choice in patients with type 2 diabetes mellitus. It is given orally in 500 to 1000 mg tablets twice a day.

**Alpha-glucosidase inhibitors**are available as 25 mg, 50 mg, or 100 mg tablets, given three times a day just before meals.

**Pioglitazone**is given as 15 mg, 30 mg, or 45 mg tablets daily. Rosiglitazone, while rarely used, is given as 2 mg, 4 mg, or 8 mg daily.

Among the **DPP- 4 inhibitors**, linagliptin is available as 5 mg daily. Vildagliptin is given as 50 mg once or twice weekly, Sitagliptin as 25 mg, 50 mg, or 100 mg once daily, and Saxagliptin as 2.5 mg or 5 mg once daily.

Among the**SGLT2 inhibitors**, canagliflozin is initially given as 100 mg daily, which is gradually increased to 300 mg daily, dapagliflozin as 5 mg or 10 mg daily, and empagliflozin as 10 mg or 25 mg daily.

**Cycloset**has an initial dose of 0.8 mg once daily, which is gradually increased to the usual dose of 1.6 mg to 4.8 mg once daily.