**Traumatic Dental Emergencies**

Generally, tooth fractures are accurately diagnosed with a detailed clinical history, physical exam, and radiographic evaluation. However, marked tenderness with manipulation of the tooth or the surrounding structures may indicate the presence of a simultaneous tooth luxation or root fracture.

The differential diagnosis of tooth luxations includes all categories of luxations (i.e., complete tooth intrusion, subluxation, and lateral luxation) in addition to tooth avulsion. Similarly, all tooth luxations should be considered in the differential diagnosis of a tooth avulsion.

**Infectious Dental Emergencies**

Oncologic etiology can sometimes mimic the appearance of dental infections. Squamous cell carcinoma can contribute to bone loss and be misdiagnosed as periodontal disease.

The limited extent of a localized dental infection must be ensured so as not to miss a more life-threatening related complication such as a deep space neck infection or facial abscess.

**Post-procedural Dental Emergencies**

**Post-operative Bleeding**

Traumatic extractions with or without oral lacerations affecting vessels should be considered in the differential diagnosis of post-extraction bleeding and post-operative bleeding. Congenital coagulopathies should be considered in the profusely bleeding dental patient as they may not have been previously diagnosed. Systemic illnesses, such as cirrhosis or end-stage renal disease, or the use of anticoagulants should be considered in bleeding patients when little is known about their medical history.

**Alveolar Osteitis**

While the diagnosis of alveolar osteitis is straightforward in the setting of an appropriate history and physical exam, if the pain is severe or occurring for longer than one week post exodontia, a broader differential diagnosis should be considered.

In these situations, infectious etiology should be considered, especially if there are signs of tissue abnormalities extending beyond the extraction soc et. Differential diagnoses that should be considered are mandibular or maxilla osteomyelitis, subperiosteal infection, and boney sequestrum.