Patient or parents/family education is critical in the management of adrenal hypoplasia irrespective of the cause. They should be aware of the clinical picture of any impending crisis. Patients and caregivers should seek immediate medical attention if symptoms develop. Prevention is imperative, and patients and their families should be taught parenteral glucocorticoid self-administration to prevent an emerging crisis. The pharmacist should educate the patient and family about the importance of medication compliance. Prior to any procedure, the parent should ask for a booster dose of the corticosteroid. They should be informed about a low threshold to administer hydrocortisone emergency injection. The objective is to achieve that patients can acquire competencies to protect themselves from the life-threatening situations associated with the disease.

The pharmacist should also make the parents aware of the potential adverse effects of long-term corticosteroids. Regular screening for bone density is another recommendation. Nursing staff should work closely with the family to answer questions, verify compliance with therapeutic measures, and inform the treating clinician on any concerns or issues. All patients should be urged to wear an ID bracelet indicating their medical condition. All clinicians who manage these patients should communicate with each other to ensure that the patient receives the current standard of care treatment. This type of interprofessional team approach is crucial to the successful management of the patient with adrenal hypoplasia. [Level 5]