The uterus is affected by a variety of gynecologic disorders, including prolapse, fibroids, polyps, infections, cancer, malformations, and adhesions. Hysterectomy is the second most common surgical procedure performed on women in the United States (cesarean section is the most common). The following are the most common uterine pathologies.

- Polyp: It is a well-circumscribed collection of endometrial tissue within the uterine wall. It has smooth muscle cells, and it can extend into the endometrium cavity in the form of a polyp. It can be asymptomatic or present with painless abnormal uterine bleeding.

- Leiomyoma (fibroid): It is the most common benign tumor in females and often presents with multiple discrete tumors in the uterine cavity. It is more common in African-American ethnicity. It is a benign smooth muscle tumor, but it can rarely transform into malignant leiomyosarcoma. It is estrogen-sensitive, and its size increases in pregnancy and decreases after menopause. It may cause abnormal uterine bleeding and result in miscarriage. Severe bleeding in young females may cause iron deficiency anemia.

- Endometrial hyperplasia: Excess estrogen stimulation cause abnormal endometrial gland proliferation. It is usually associated with an increased risk of endometrial carcinoma.

- Adenomyosis: It is an extension of endometrial tissue (glandular) into uterine myometrium caused by hyperplasia of the basal layer of the endometrium. It usually presents with dysmenorrhea and menorrhagia. Morphologically it is an enlarged, uniform, and globular uterus.

- Endometritis: It is an inflammation of the endometrium associated with retained products of conception following delivery, miscarriage, abortion, or with a foreign body—retained material in the uterus promotes infection by bacterial flora from the vagina or intestinal tract.

- Endometriosis: It is a condition in which non-neoplastic endometrial glands or stroma are present outside of the endometrial cavity. It can occur anywhere, but the most common sites are the ovary, pelvis, and peritoneum. In the ovary, it appears as an endometrioma (Blood filled chocolate cyst). Evidence suggests that it is due to the retrograde flow of menstrual blood.

Uterine cancer is the most common gynecologic cancer in developed countries and is associated with excess estrogen. Exogenous sources of estrogen include tamoxifen use or unopposed estrogen replacement therapy. Tamoxifen increases endometrial cancer risk due to its ability to stimulate the estrogen receptors found in the endometrium. Endogenous sources of estrogen include polycystic ovary syndrome,  obesity, and estrogen-secreting tumors such as granulosa cell tumors. The majority of women with endometrial cancer will present with abnormal vaginal bleeding or postmenopausal vaginal bleeding. Less commonly, they may present with abdominal pain, change in bowel habits, weight loss, and bloat.