It is essential to diagnose brachial neuritis because it can mimic many other diagnoses, such as rotator cuff, cervical cord compression, or nerve entrapment. If brachial neuritis is mistaken for one of these conditions, the patient may undergo unnecessary surgery. Although obtaining a good and thorough history and physical will usually be enough to diagnose brachial neuritis, the use of imaging is helpful to support the diagnose of this condition as well as ruling out other conditions. The use of an MRI of the shoulder with a special focus on the brachial plexus should be used to rule out musculoskeletal disorders.

Other workups such as CBC and ESR will usually be normal while other labs such as LFTs and ANA will be abnormal but are inconclusive. Other diagnostic modalities such as plain radiographs and CSF analysis will usually be normal. Further workup includes tests for Epstein Barr virus, Varicella-zoster, dengue, and Hepatitis E. Obtaining a detailed history from the patient regarding recent surgery, childbirth, infection, tetanus vaccine, influenza vaccine, and recently prescribed medications such as antivirals, antiepileptic, or botulinum toxins is important as well.

Nerve conduction/EMG is also crucial in the evaluation of these patients. Electrophysiology studies will show different findings depending on the time of the study and the underlying pathology. For example, if demyelination is the main pathophysiology, then one will see a conduction block, demyelination, or Wallerian degeneration that may occur in varying combinations. Since brachial neuritis is an axonal disorder, nerve conduction velocities and distal latencies are usually normal while there will be reduced amplitudes. In early findings such as 3 to 4 weeks after symptoms, the EMG will usually show acute denervation with fibrillation potentials as well as positive sharp waves for nerve roots and peripheral nerves. In later stages (3-4 months after symptoms) the EMG will show chronic denervation and polyphasic motor unit potentials with early reinnervation.  A 1996 study by Fibuch et al. showed that 25% of patients had a recent viral illness before the symptoms of brachial neuritis.