# Continuing Education Activity

Tear gas and pepper spray are lay terms to describe a group of agents used to subdue combative persons in a non-lethal manner. The three most commonly used in this category are o-chlorobenzylidenemalononitrile (CS), chloroacetophenone (CN), and oleoresin capsicum (OC). This activity reviews the evaluation and management of these common agents and reviews the role of the interprofessional team in evaluating, treating, and improving care for patients with this condition.

**Objectives:**
- Identify the pathophysiology of tear gas and pepper spray exposure and associated medical conditions and emergencies.
- Explain the clinical evaluation of exposure to tear gas and pepper spray.
- Outline the treatment and management options available for tear gas and pepper spray exposure.
- Review interprofessional team strategies for improving care coordination and communication to address and treat tear gas and pepper spray exposure and improve outcomes.

# Introduction

Tear gas and pepper spray are a group of heterogeneous agents known under broader categories as riot control agents, harassing agents, incapacitating agents, or lacrimators. Although initially utilized by the military in World War I, they are now used for personal protection or by law enforcement agencies as a non-lethal option for subduing combative subjects as well as crowd control.

The prototypical tear gasses are o-chlorobenzylidenemalononitrile (CS), chloroacetophenone (CN), and dibenzoxazepine (CR). CN was initially developed at the end of the first world war, although it did not get used during combat. After this time, CN was primarily utilized by military and law enforcement agencies until the development of CS, which is more potent and less toxic.

Pepper spray was created in the late 1970s and found use by law enforcement agencies in the early 1980s.Capsicum, more commonly referred to as the chili pepper.

# Etiology

Typically, these agents are deployed in an aerosol or liquid form. In law enforcement or military settings, grenades or canisters can be thrown or shot into an area. Additionally, the dispersion can be through handheld spray devices.

Though colloquially referred to as “tear gas,” the CN, CS, and OC compounds are not actually gases but solids at room temperature.

# Epidemiology

These agents were initially developed for military use. For example, the US military used CS during the Vietnam War to clear tunnels and for crowd control. Though initially developed by the military, these agents have been banned for use in warfare since 1995.

In the United States, the National Poison Data System (NPDS) data from 2017 reported 4,007 total exposures to lacrimators. Of these, 83% of cases were from OC, 12% CN, 0.2% CS, and 4% other or unknown.

# Pathophysiology

The different formulations of tear gases were all found to act on transient receptor potential (TRP) channels. One TRP subtype is TRPA1, which is heavily expressed in nociceptors. Stimulation of TRPA1 causes a sensation of scalding heat and pain, which is why it is thought to help detect body temperature.

Capsaicin is the active component in pepper spray. Similar to traditional riot control agents, capsaicin’s target is a vanilloid TRP target called TRPV1.

In addition to pain, the TRPA1 and TRPV1 receptors are common pathways for inflammatory signaling. When the TRPV1 receptors become activated by OC gas, this leads to an increased release of substance P at the terminals of the C and special A fibers peripherally and centrally in the spinal cord, causing increased pain and inflammation.

# Toxicokinetics

**CS (o-chlorobenzylidenemalononitrile)**

CS has been an object of study in multiple animal studies. Systemic absorption of CS is primarily through the respiratory tract. After exposure to radiolabeled CS in rats, the tracer was seen mainly in the gastrointestinal tract, urinary bladder, mouth, and esophagus at one-hour post-exposure. By 24 hours, most of the residual radioactivity presented at the mouth, salivary glands, gastrointestinal tract, and urinary bladder.

**CN (chloroacetophenone)**

There is very little data on the kinetics of CN. The metabolism of CN has not received thorough study. Though it is known that CN is eventually converted to an electrophilic metabolite. It can act as an SN2 alkylating agent and will react with the SH groups and nucleophilic sites of macromolecules, which can result in the disruption of cellular processes.

**OC (Oleoresin Capsicum)**

The gastrointestinal tract readily absorbs capsaicin. Intravenous infusion of capsaicin in animals resulted in rapid central nervous system uptake. Subcutaneous administration resulted in a slow diffusion from the site of administration. Metabolism of capsaicin occurs mostly within the liver, with a small contribution by the kidney, lungs, and small intestine.

# History and Physical

Patients exposed to riot control agents often present reporting exposure to a noxious gas or spray. Symptom onset occurs within 20 to 60 seconds of exposure, usually beginning with ocular and respiratory symptoms.

Physical findings of the eyes may include lacrimation, conjunctival injection, blepharospasm, photophobia, conjunctivitis, and periorbital edema. Riot control agents typically do not cause significant ocular injury, but they can occur.

In most cases, symptoms are self-limited and resolve spontaneously within 10 to 30 minutes after removal from the source.

# Evaluation

Hazardous materials management principles apply with initial decontamination by copious irrigation first to both treat the victim and prevent responders and healthcare professionals from becoming contaminated. It is unlikely but possible depending on the setting that workers could be exposed to riot control agents and become symptomatic. Providers will need to exercise reasonable judgment unless other traumatic injuries demand immediate resuscitation, the patient needs decontamination before entering the healthcare environment. After initial stabilization, decontamination may be considered depending on the setting; this can initially start in the field if a patient is presenting via EMS. Aerosolized gases are heavier than the surrounding air, which is why an incapacitated patient should get lifted off of the ground, EMS vehicles should also try to park in higher areas than where the dispersion of gases occurred. Initial on-scene irrigation of the eyes especially is important. The use of topical ophthalmic anesthetic drops, such as proparacaine, helps with the ability to perform adequate eye irrigation.

Hospital workers can use customary personal protective equipment. Removal of contaminated clothing and prompt decontamination may be performed, including flushing the eyes and skin with copious amounts of water. If explosive devices were used to disperse agents, a close inspection of the skin and eyes should be performed to evaluate for foreign bodies, lesions, and shrapnel. Depending on the extent of ocular symptoms, a more detailed ophthalmologic exam with corneal fluorescein staining could be an option.

# Treatment / Management

Management of patients exposed to riot control agents should begin with the customary resuscitative priorities of securing the airway, ensuring adequate oxygenation and ventilation, and supporting hemodynamics. The face should be wiped with a moist towel to remove any particles before being washed. Copious water irrigation with soap should be used to remove contaminants. If there is significant skin breakdown, saline irrigation is the best choice.

Management of ocular exposures involves copious irrigation with water or saline. Irrigation should occur for at least 10 to 20 minutes but can continue longer if the patient continues to have ocular symptoms. Remove contact lenses before irrigation. A topical anesthetic should be used to reduce pain and blepharospasm, and improve irrigation.

The majority of respiratory symptoms following exposure to these agents are mild and self-limited, most resolve within 10 to 20 minutes after removal from exposure. Management of respiratory symptoms is largely supportive. Suctioning is an option for patients with copious secretions. If bronchospasm is present, beta-agonists and steroids can be administered. Patients with asthma, emphysema, or bronchitis may present with an acute exacerbation. Very rarely, these agents can precipitate laryngospasm, causing respiratory failure, requiring intubation and mechanical ventilation. Late findings are rare but may include reactive airway dysfunction and pulmonary edema. Treatment of acute lung injury is supportive and may include supplemental oxygen, non-invasive ventilation, or mechanical ventilation depending on the severity.

Gastrointestinal symptoms are uncommon, but some patients will have nausea and vomiting. If oral exposure to the spray occurred this may increase the likelihood of gastrointestinal symptoms. Symptomatic treatment with intravenous rehydration, antiemetic agents, and electrolyte replacement is generally adequate. Given that the gastrointestinal symptoms are typically minor and self-limited, decontamination techniques including gastric lavage or activated charcoal are not necessary.

In law enforcement or military training environments, amphoteric chelating irrigation fluid may be useful as pre-treatment. In one study, police officers prophylactically exposed to the solution had less facial pain after entering a CS cloud and returned to action sooner.

# Differential Diagnosis

Most exposures to either pepper spray or tear gas will present with a history of exposure to one of these agents and will have typical symptoms. Unknown exposures will be much less likely. Other agents that may have similar presenting symptoms could include cholinergic toxins, pulmonary irritants, or aerosolized caustics.

# Prognosis

Tear gas and pepper spray usually are nonlethal agents and therefore typically have an excellent prognosis. In the vast majority of cases after removal from the exposure, resolution of symptoms will occur within 10 to 20 minutes. In some cases of prolonged exposures, patients can have more serious injuries and respiratory complications. In most of these cases, patients typically improve relatively quickly. Patients repeatedly exposed to these agents may develop slightly diminished lung function by formal pulmonary testing.

Death after exposure is extremely rare, but reports do exist. Post-mortem findings in patients examined after prolonged exposure to lacrimator agents included pulmonary edema, focal intra-alveolar hemorrhage, and necrosis of the respiratory mucosa with pseudomembrane formation, early bronchopneumonia, serosal petechiae, cerebral edema, and hepatic fatty metamorphosis.

# Complications

The majority of exposures to lachrymator agents are benign with their irritant effects revolving within 30 minutes.

# Consultations

Consultation with a medical toxicologist and/ or regional poison center.

# Deterrence and Patient Education

While the use of lacrimator agents has been banned in warfare for many years, they are still in use by law enforcement and civilians for personal protection.

# Enhancing Healthcare Team Outcomes

Most exposures will be clinically stable and can undergo decontamination via first responders prior to direct medical treatment. Recognizing the excellent prognosis of most lacrimator exposures may help emergency departments, poison control, nurses, and pharmacists deal with mass casualty events. All these various disciplines need to collaborate across interprofessional lines to deliver optimal care. [Level 5] The majority of patients will have self-limited symptoms; however, those with persistent respiratory or ocular symptoms will need further evaluation and treatment. [Level 5]