The main important factor before evaluating a pancreatic fistula is to make sure the patient is stable. Once stabilized, imaging is important to help differentiate the cause of abdominal pain or dyspnea. A chest x-ray is quick and will provide information to any condition involving the chest and its structures. Computerized tomography (CT) will be an essential imaging modality to evaluate the cause of abdominal pain, which will be able to find pathologies such as fluid collections and changes in the pancreas. However, CT would not be able to visualize and evaluate the pancreatic fistula properly.

Other modalities are available to assess the fistula and pancreatic duct. These include magnetic resonance cholangiopancreatography (MRCP), endoscopic retrograde cholangiopancreatography (ERCP), or fistulography. With MRCP, it provides a more precise picture of the pancreatic duct. ERCP will yield better pancreatic duct anatomy and identify any site of disruption. Also, ERCP can be used for therapeutic interventions when needed. With fistulography, the location of the fistula site and the surrounding anatomic structures are visible.

In addition to imaging, labs should be drawn for better evaluation of patients. These include analyzing any fluid sample collected via thoracentesis, paracentesis, or from an external fistula. Patients' blood should be sent to the lab for complete blood count, complete metabolic panel, lipase, and amylase. The complete metabolic panel includes electrolytes, aspartate aminotransferase, alanine aminotransferase, bilirubin, calcium, and albumin. Fluid samples should always be collected and analyzed for better characterization of its etiology. In patients with pleural effusion, thoracentesis is necessary.

The fluid sample should be analyzed for amylase levels. Other studies to send to the lab for further analysis of the pleural fluid include pleural fluid protein, albumin, glucose, lactate dehydrogenase, cytology, gram stain, culture, cell count and differential, and adenosine deaminase. Patients with ascites will need paracentesis. The ascitic fluid will be sent to the lab for gram stain, culture, cell count and differential, cytology, albumin, total protein, and amylase. The pleural and ascitic fluid amylase levels will be very elevated, usually more than 1000 U/dL.