Vasodilators can be administered in a variety of ways, including sublingual, IV, oral.

Depending on the clinical setting, some routes of administration can be more beneficial than others. For example, in the setting of acute myocardial infarction (MI), patients will more likely benefit from sublingual nitroglycerin, as it is absorbed much faster by the sublingual route and allows the patient to feel more comfortable and often reduces the chest pain.

Nitrovasodilators such as nitroprusside and nitroglycerin are frequently used in hypertensive emergencies. Sodium nitroprusside administration is via the intravenous route in such conditions. It starts blood pressure-lowering action within one minute or less, and these effects disappear within 10 minutes after discontinuation. Frequent clinical monitoring is necessary during the administration of this medication.

Similar to nitroprusside, nitroglycerin can be used intravenously in certain conditions. It has very similar kinetic, but it produces greater venodilation compared to arteriolar dilation. Extended used is generally avoided due to concerns of tachyphylaxis.

Severe hypertension during labor should be treated with intravenous labetalol/hydralazine or oral nifedipine to prevent intracranial hemorrhage or eclampsia.

Calcium channel blockers such as clevidipine and nicardipine can be used intravenously in hypertensive emergencies while amlodipine, nifedipine are oral formulations that are used in routine hypertension management.

Nebivolol and carvedilol are taken orally to treat hypertension.