# Introduction

Immunoglobulin E is one of the five classes of immunoglobulins (IgM, IgG, IgD, IgA, IgE). IgE has a unique chemical structure and an array of physiological functions, such as Type I hypersensitivity reactions, parasitic infections, autoimmune processes, and venom protection.

# Molecular Level

All immunoglobulin molecules have a common structural framework characterized by two identical small polypeptide chains (light chains) and two identical large polypeptide chains (heavy chains). The Fc region of the antibody is comprised solely of the two heavy chains and is responsible for binding to cellular receptors. The Fab region of the antibody is where antigen recognition and binding occur and is made up of two heavy chains continuous with the Fc region and two light chains. These chains also have variable and constant regions. At the antigen binding sites, both polypeptide chains contain variable regions whose amino acid sequences can be altered for affinity maturation to occur for a given antigen. The variable heavy and light chains are organized into layers of antiparallel B-pleated sheets, allowing the antigen to bind between these three-dimensional immunoglobulin folds. The rest of the polypeptide regions are known as constant regions, and they are held together by strong dipeptide bonds to stabilize the two chains.

Some antibodies, like IgM, can have five duplicates of the structure above to form a pentamer capable of binding up to ten antigens. However, IgE is a monomer composed of two epsilon-heavy chains and two light chains, thus capable of binding a total of two antigens, which occurs through the variable regions of the light and heavy chains that create unique antigen-specific binding sites. The C-terminal regions of the heavy chains are composed of four C-epsilon dimers, C-epsilon 1-4.

# Function

The biochemical considerations mentioned determine the structure of IgE and drive the function of allowing IgE to bind to given antigens and IgE-specific cellular receptors. For Immunoglobulin E to accomplish its function, the Fc portion of the antibody must bind to a given cellular receptor located on a particular type of cell, such as a mast cell, eosinophil, etc. Although many cellular receptors have been identified and studied, the main ones are Fc-epsilon-RI and Fc-epsilon-RII, or CD23.

# Pathophysiology

The role of Immunoglobulin E is central in allergy sensitization and atopic disorders such as allergic rhinitis, asthma, and atopic dermatitis. These disorders manifest due to Type I hypersensitivity reactions involving IgE and other immune cells to produce the clinical symptoms seen in those disorders ultimately. It starts with an initial exposure to an antigen or allergen, which is taken up and processed by a dendritic cell or macrophage, which presents the antigen to a T cell. In the presence of cytokine mediators IL-4 and IL-13, these T cells are induced to differentiate into TH2 helper T cells capable of presenting the antigen to B-cells.

Once initial exposure to an antigen has occurred, and an immune response has been activated, antigen-specific IgE will remain bound via the Fc-epsilon RI receptor to mast cells and basophils. It has been shown that binding alone of IgE to that receptor cause IgE-dependent upregulation of mast cell Fc-epsilon RI receptor expression, which allows these cells to bind more IgE antibodies.

# Clinical Significance

It is essential to note that not everyone exposed to environmental antigens will generate a strong immune reaction described above. Certain people, known as ‘atopics,’ have a genetic predisposition for developing type one hypersensitivity responses to antigens in the environment. Clinically, the manifestations of this type one hypersensitivity reaction are usually due to the actions of the released chemical mediators such as histamine, leukotrienes, and other cytokines. Histamine release causes increased vascular permeability, smooth muscle constriction, and mucus secretion. Leukotrienes B4, C4, D4, and E4 are also often secreted and responsible for chemotaxis, inflammation, and anaphylaxis. Furthermore, if in enough quantity, histamine and other mediators can cause systemic vascular effects such as vasodilation and increased vessel permeability, causing hypotension and edema.

The manifestations can occur in many different areas of the body. Involvement of the upper airway can cause many patients to suffer from mild seasonal allergies or allergic rhinitis. Due to repeated inhalation exposure to pollen and other outdoor antigens, type one hypersensitivity occurs, and mast cell degranulation causes epiphora, rhinorrhea, cough, and other symptoms. Additionally, the involvement of the lower airway in patients with atopic asthma experiences an immune response to aeroallergens resulting in airway smooth muscle constriction, increased mucus production and inflammation that manifests as obstructive lung disease. The skin can often be involved, and due to vasodilation and dermal edema, urticaria or ‘wheals’ can be evident.

Immunoglobulin E has also been implicated in the defense against parasitic organisms such as helminths. Helminthic infections are usually the result of soil transmission and infect up to one-third of people worldwide.

As depicted in this article, Immunoglobulin E has a specific biochemical structure and function that guides its unique role in disease processes such as Type I hypersensitivity reactions, helminthic infections, and more. The research in the past 50 years regarding IgE has established a better idea of its role in disease. Not only has this aided in a more in-depth clinical understanding of IgE-related health disorders, but it has even spurred novel treatment modalities. A humanized monoclonal antibody named omalizumab has been engineered, which targets the IgE antibody, thus rendering it ineffective in producing associated symptoms. This drug has been shown to provide benefits and relief in patients with moderate to severe asthma and intermittent and persistent allergic rhinitis.