Parasites are microorganisms that live on or inside another organism known as the host organism and benefit at the expense of their host organism. Parasites are responsible for billions of human infections, including malaria. Parasitic infections are especially prevalent in tropical areas, but they also occur in subtropical and temperate regions, where they tend to infect immigrants and travelers. While parasites can include a diverse array of microorganisms, including fungi and bacteria, medically-relevant parasites known to cause disease in humans are protozoa, helminths, and ectoparasites.

**Protozoa**

These unicellular organisms demonstrate a particularly high propensity to infect immunocompromised patients such as those with acquired immune deficiency syndrome (AIDS). Infections range in their presentation from asymptomatic to fatal. Protozoa further sub-categorized by phylum and subphylum based on its main mode of movement.

- Sarcodina: Utilize pseudopodia for movement. Includes amoebas such as Entamoeba (dysenteric liver abscess), Dientamoeba (colitis), Naegleria, and Acanthamoeba (central nervous system and corneal ulcers).

- Mastigophora: Utilize flagella for movement, and include Giardia (diarrhea), Trypanosoma (sleeping sickness and Chagas disease), Leishmania (visceral, cutaneous and mucocutaneous leishmaniasis), and Trichomonas (trichomoniasis, a sexually transmitted infection).

- Apicomplexa: Use an apical complex to move. Includes Babesia (babesiosis), Plasmodium (malaria), Toxoplasma (Toxoplasmosis), Isospora, Sarcocystis, and Cryptosporidium, which cause diarrhea.

- Ciliophora: These move with cilia and include Balanidium (dysentery)

**Helminths**

This term describes parasitic worms. They transmit via accidental ingestion, skin penetration, a vector bite, or consumption of the host as food. Transmission is highly dependent on climate, hygiene, and exposure to vectors. Helminths classify as follows:

- Trematodes: These are also called flukes and are flatworms responsible for many human diseases. Common diseases caused by trematodes include schistosomiasis, fascioliasis, clonorchiasis, and paragonimiasis.

- Cestodes: These are also called tapeworms and cause diseases such as cysticercosis, echinococcosis (hydatid disease), diphyllobothriasis, and hymenolepiasis.

- Nematodes: These are also called roundworms and cause a variety of diseases in humans, which may be intestinal or may attack specific tissues directly. Intestinal diseases caused by roundworms include enterobiasis, ascariasis, ancylostomiasis, strongyloidiasis, and trichinosis. Infections that directly attack the tissues include loiasis, onchocerciasis (river blindness), lymphatic filariasis, and toxocariasis.

**Ectoparasites**

These are organisms that live externally on the skin of hosts. They include mites, fleas, ticks, lice and bedbugs, and infest the skin and its appendages, causing symptoms such as intense pruritis. Diseases caused by ectoparasites include myiasis, pediculosis, scabies, and trombiculosis.

Antiparasitic drugs are used to manage infections caused by various protozoa, helminths, and ectoparasites. Treatment options vary, depending on the specific causative organism within each group.

**INDICATIONS**

**Antiprotozoal Agents**

- Antimalarials:

The drug of choice to treat malaria is dependent on the Plasmodium species, the geographic region of the infecting species, and the severity of the patient’s infection.Plasmodium species (P. vivax, P. malariae, P. ovale, and P. knowlesi) except P. falciparum, which has become increasingly resistant.P. falciparum.P.
falciparum. In pregnancy, oral quinine is indicated, and parenteral quinine(discontinued in USA) is useful for the treatment of severe malaria. Primaquine, mefloquine, atovaquone-proguanil, and doxycycline are indicated for chemoprophylaxis.

- Antibabesial agents:

Babesiosis is similar to malaria, and the parasites Babesia divergens, and Babesia microti get transmitted via tick bite. Babesiosis management uses atovaquone and azithromycin or clindamycin plus quinine in severe disease.

- Antiamoebic agents:

Antiamoebic drugs are useful in the management of amoebiasis caused by Entamoeba histolytica. This infection may present asymptomatically, with amoebic colitis, or with extraintestinal manifestations. The presentation determines what antiamoebic therapy. Antiamoebic drugs can classify into luminal, tissue, systemic, or mixed amoebicides. Luminal amoebicides act on parasites in the lumen and include iodoquinol (discontinued in USA), paromomycin sulfate, and diloxanide furoate (discontinued in USA). Systemic amebicides like metronidazole, tinidazole, and emetine (discontinued in USA) have therapeutic use in managing extraintestinal diseases such as hepatic abscesses; chloroquine is an adjunct therapy to emetine for the management of hepatic abscesses. Metronidazole and tinidazole also serve as mixed amoebicides.

- Antigiardial agents:

Giardia lamblia causes giardiasis and is managed using metronidazole. Alternative medications for giardiasis include tinidazole, furazolidone (discontinued in USA), and albendazole.

- Trypanocidal agents:

American trypanosomiasis, also called Chagas disease, is caused by the parasite Trypanosoma cruzi. Nifurtimox or benznidazole are used to manage the symptoms of Chagas disease. African trypanosomiasis (sleeping sickness) results from infection by the West African T. brucei gambiense and management is with pentamidine in the early stages of the disease, and eflornithine for central nervous system (CNS) manifestations. T. Rhodesiense is the East African parasite, which causes a more aggressive form of sleeping sickness, and suramin is the drug used for early-onset disease and melarsoprol for CNS involvement.

- Antileishmanial agents:

Leishmaniasis is among the neglected tropical diseases (NTD) and results from infection by Leishmania parasites. Infections manifest as visceral, cutaneous, or mucocutaneous leishmaniasis. Sodium stibogluconate is the agent of choice for the management of visceral and cutaneous leishmaniasis and other drugs such as meglumine antimoniate (not available in USA), pentamidine, or amphotericin B are acceptable alternatives.

- Anti-toxoplasma agents:

Toxoplasma gondii causes congenital disease and central nervous system disease in immunocompromised patients. Sulfadiazine combined with pyrimethamine is the first-line therapy for the management of toxoplasmosis. Other alternative sulfonamides used in the treatment are sulfamethazine, and sulfamerazine which are not available in the USA.

- Antitrichomoniasis agents:

Trichomoniasis results from Trichomonas vaginalis, and metronidazole is the drug of choice for its management.

**Antihelminthic Agents**

Anthelminthic drugs act against parasitic worms as either vermicides or vermifuges. Vermicides act by killing the worms, whereas vermifuges help expel the worms, usually in their live state. The ideal anthelminthic drug would have a broad therapeutic index to ensure it is more toxic to the parasitic worm than the host. Antihelminthic drugs can be grouped based on the class of parasitic worms they act on and also based on the chemical structure of the drug.

Anticestodal drugs: Praziquantel is a broad-spectrum vermicide that is used to manage infection caused by cestodes (tapeworms) such as Taenia saginata, Diphyllobothrium latum, and Taenia solium. Alternatively, niclosamide (discontinued in USA) can be used to manage the above infections. Praziquantel is also effective in infections caused by Hymenolepis nana. Albendazole is another broad-spectrum anthelmintic drug and is the first choice for the management of hydatid disease and cysticercosis.

Antinematodal drugs: Praziquantel is also essential in managing infections caused by trematodes (flukes) and is the drug of choice for management for Schistosoma sp., Clonorchis sinensis, and Paragonimus westermani infections. Alternative medications include metrifonate, oxamniquine, and bithionol which are not available in the USA.

Antinematodal drugs: Albendazole is also used to manage most infections caused by nematodes (roundworms) and is the drug of choice for ascariasis, trichuriasis, trichinosis, cutaneous larva migrans, hookworm, and pinworm infections. Diethylcarbamazine (available thru CDC Drug Service) is the drug of choice for filariasis, loiasis, and tropical eosinophilia, and ivermectin is the drug of choice for onchocerciasis.

**Ectoparasiticides**

The most common human ectoparasites include head lice, pubic lice, and scabies mites.

Antiscabietic agents:

Scabies is a highly contagious pruritic disease caused by Sarcoptes scabiei. Management of scabies is achieved using lindane, permethrin, benzyl benzoate (discontinued in USA), or ivermectin. Resistance to lindane and permethrin have increased over the years, and combination permethrin and oral ivermectin, topical ivermectin, and synergized pyrethrins have led to the highest cure rates.

Pediculicides:

Head lice caused by Pediculus humanus
capitis is the most common human ectoparasitic infection. It is managed using permethrin and pyrethrins. With concerns for resistance rising, alternative management is achieved using malathion or ivermectin. Pediculosis pubis (pubic lice) is also managed using permethrins or pyrethrins, with malathion or ivermectin serving as alternatives.