The combination of a good history and an awareness of the characteristic presentations of avulsion fractures should lead to consistent diagnostic accuracy.

Knowledge of developmental bone anatomy and physeal closure sequences is very important when evaluating bony injuries in the pediatric or adolescent population.

At the time of initial evaluation, the first imaging study should include plain radiographs.

In some circumstances, gravity-assisted, stress tests, or weight-bearing radiographs can help with a diagnosis of stability, or additional capsuloligamentous or muscle injuries.

Radiographic features alone can provide a wealth of knowledge in injuries involving avulsion fractures. By the anatomic location, fracture pattern, orientation, displacement, and amount of comminution, one can often derive the mechanism, as well as predict additional ligamentous or other common associated soft tissue injuries that are encountered with each avulsion injury.

General radiographic features of acute avulsion fractures often involve small bony fragments with irregular or sharply defined non-sclerotic, non-corticated edges, with the fragment in close proximity to a known soft tissue attachment site.

It is important to note that spontaneous reduction of a traumatically dislocated joint may occur in any joint. This must be taken into consideration whenever there is an avulsion fracture near a joint, which clinically and radiographically appears located on the initial presentation. In these patients, if there is a painful joint with a lack of complete congruity of the joint, spontaneous reduction with interposition within the joint should be suspected. There are certain common avulsion fracture injuries, such as the patella dislocation-relocation injury, in which the patella rarely remains dislocated at the time of initial imaging.

The only other radiographic finding, in addition to the avulsion fracture, is often a joint effusion or soft tissue swelling. Since these are common findings present after minor trauma,  this can wrongfully lead a provider to disregard the injury.

Many injuries may require an additional computed tomography (CT) scan to assess comminution, displacement, and assist with operative planning.

Each avulsion fracture site typically has a common fracture pattern, but also a common pattern of injury or associated injuries. Thus, identification is crucial so that patients may be worked up appropriately, including consultation with an orthopedic surgeon and additional imaging as circumstances dictate.

An example of how radiographic patterns can help determine the diagnosis or inciting factor is a radiographic clue sometimes seen with avulsion injuries associated with chronic overuse of calcifications within, or near attachment sites of a tendon.

The avulsion fracture itself can be subtle, and diagnosis may be difficult, missed, or delayed.

Clinical suspicion that an avulsion fracture is present but not visualized on plain radiograph should lead to further workup, including advanced imaging such as CT, MRI, or ultrasound.

Another scenario in which one should consider a more advanced workup is in the patient presentation with suggestive radiographs, but history and exam that does not match up with a clear mechanism or history of injury. In this case, one must rule out other bone lesions or underlying pathologies, including cancer and infection.

Lastly, if a patient presents with a grossly dislocated joint that requires reduction, post-reduction imaging must be obtained. Attention to any widening of the joint space, or a nonconcentric reduction may indicate a trapped osteochondral fragment or may indicate significant instability.