Didanosine has been demonstrated as an effective monotherapy in both adults and children; however, to prevent drug resistance, combination therapy is preferred. Due to the reduction of bioavailability by 20 to 25% when administered with food,  it is recommended to administer the drug on an empty stomach 30 minutes before ingestion. Dosage, weight depended, is currently 200 mg for patients with body weight over 60 kg orally, twice daily.  In adults under 60kg of body weight, the dosage should be reduced to 125 mg orally, twice daily.

For adults, pediatric powder formulation requires administration with an antacid. The recommended dose, 120 mg twice daily with 12-hour intervals, should be adjusted in a patient with impaired kidney functions.

**Dual Combination Therapy with Nucleoside Reverse Transcriptase Inhibitor(NRTI)**

The combination of zidovudine (200 mg, orally, three times a day) plus didanosine (200 mg, orally, twice daily) should be taken 30 minutes before ingestion.

This combination therapy showed an increase in CD4 cells and a decrease in HIV-1 RNA serum concentrations compared to zidovudine monotherapy. Additionally, delays in AIDS-defining events were significantly prolonged.

**Triple Combination Therapy with Non-nucleoside Reverse Transcriptase Inhibitors (NNRTI) and Nucleoside Reverse Transcriptase Inhibitors(NRTI)**

This triple therapy consists of nevirapine (200 mg, orally, once daily first two weeks and then 200 mg, orally, twice daily ) plus zidovudine (200 mg, orally, three times a day) plus didanosine (200 mg, orally, twice daily for the patients with body weight over 60 kg).

Patients on triple therapy had an 18% higher mean CD cell count compared to zidovudine and didanosine dual therapy. Severe rashes, however, were observed in patients receiving triple therapy.  For these patients, dual therapy is a preferable option.

**Dual combination with DNA synthesis inhibitors.**

The combination dosage is as follows: hydroxyurea (500 mg orally, twice daily plus didanosine (200 mg, orally, twice daily). A combination of hydroxyurea and didanosine against HIV-1 has demonstrated the suppression of several resistant-prone strains.